
1. BMB Rep. 2016 Mar 14. pii: 3488. [Epub ahead of print]

GATA4 negatively regulates bone sialoprotein expression in osteoblasts.

Song I, Jeong BC, Choi YJ, Chung YS, Kim N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Department of Biomedical Sciences, Chonnam
National University Medical School, Gwangju 61469, Korea.

GATA4 has been reported to act as a negative regulator in osteoblast
differentiation by inhibiting Dlx5 transactivation of Runx2 via the attenuation
of the binding ability of Dlx5 to the Runx2 promoter region. Herein, we determine
the role of GATA4 in the regulation of bone sialoprotein (Bsp) in osteoblasts.
Overexpression of Runx2 or Sox9 induced Bsp expression in osteoblastic cells.
Silencing GATA4 further enhanced Runx2- and Sox9-mediated Bsp promoter activity, 
whereas GATA4 overexpression down-regulated Bsp promoter activity mediated by
Runx2 and Sox9. GATA4 interacted with Runx2 and Sox9. GATA4 attenuated the
binding ability of Runx2 and Sox9 to Bsp promoter region. Our data suggest that
GATA4 acts as a negative regulator of Bsp expression in osteoblasts.

PMID: 26973342  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Schizophr Res. 2016 Mar 10. pii: S0920-9964(16)30094-9. doi:
10.1016/j.schres.2016.03.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Altered expression of developmental regulators of parvalbumin and somatostatin
neurons in the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia.

Volk DW(1), Edelson JR(2), Lewis DA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213,
United States. Electronic address: volkdw@upmc.edu. (2)Department of Psychiatry, 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, United States. (3)Department of
Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, United States;
Department of Neuroscience, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213,
United States.

Dysfunction of prefrontal cortex (PFC) inhibitory neurons that express the
calcium-binding protein parvalbumin or the neuropeptide somatostatin in
schizophrenia may be related to disturbances in the migration, phenotypic
specification, and/or maturation of these neurons. These pre- and postnatal
developmental stages are regulated in a cell type-specific manner by various
transcription factors and co-activators, fibroblast growth factor receptors
(FgfR), and other molecular markers. Consequently, we used quantitative PCR to
quantify mRNA levels for these developmental regulators in the PFC of 62
schizophrenia subjects in whom parvalbumin and somatostatin neuron disturbances
were previously reported, and in antipsychotic-exposed monkeys. Relative to
unaffected comparison subjects, subjects with schizophrenia exhibited elevated
mRNA levels for 1) the transcription factor MafB, which is expressed by
parvalbumin and somatostatin neurons as they migrate from the medial ganglionic
eminence to the cortex, 2) the transcriptional coactivator PGC-1a, which is
expressed postnatally by parvalbumin neurons to maintain parvalbumin levels and
inhibitory function, and 3) FgfR1, which is required for the migration and
phenotypic specification of parvalbumin and somatostatin neurons. Elevations in
these markers were most prominent in younger schizophrenia subjects and were not 
present in antipsychotic-exposed monkeys. Finally, expression levels of other
important developmental regulators (i.e. Dlx1, Dlx5, Dlx6, SATB1, Sip1/Zeb2,
ST8SIA4, cMaf, Nkx6.2, and Arx) were not altered in schizophrenia. The
over-expression of a subset of molecular markers with distinct roles in the pre- 
and postnatal development of parvalbumin and somatostatin neurons might reflect
compensatory mechanisms to sustain the development of these neurons in the face
of other insults.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26972474  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Genesis. 2016 Mar 8. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22934. [Epub ahead of print]

Direct evidence of allele equivalency at the Dlx5/6 locus.

Bendall AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario, N1G 2W1, Canada.

The retention of paralogous regulatory genes is a vertebrate hallmark and likely 
underpinned vertebrate origins. Dlx genes belong to a family of paralogous
transcription factors whose evolutionary history of gene expansion and divergence
is apparent from the gene synteny, shared exon-intron structure, and coding
sequence homology found in extant vertebrate genomes. Dlx genes are expressed in 
a nested combination within the first pharyngeal arch and knockout studies in
mice clearly point to a "Dlx code" that operates to define maxillary and
mandibular position in the first arch. The nature of that code is not yet clear; 
an important goal for understanding Dlx gene function in both patterning and
differentiation lies in distinguishing functional inputs that are
paralogue-specific (a qualitative model) versus Dlx family-generic (a
quantitative model) and, in the latter case, the relative contribution made by
each paralogue. Here, we have identified developmental deficiencies in
derivatives of the first pharyngeal arch in neonatal Dlx5/6(+/-) mice that
resemble those seen in either paralogue-specific null mutants, clearly
demonstrating a substantial degree of allele equivalency and supporting a
quantitative model of Dlx function during craniofacial morphogenesis. This
article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26953501  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. J Cell Physiol. 2016 Mar 4. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25366. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterization of Notch Signaling During Osteogenic Differentiation in Human
Osteosarcoma Cell Line MG63.

Ongaro A(1), Pellati A(1), Bagheri L(1), Rizzo P(1), Caliceti C(2), Massari L(1),
De Mattei M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, University of
Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (2)Department of Chemistry "Giacomo Ciamician", Alma
Mater Studiorum, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Osteogenic differentiation is a multi-step process controlled by a complex
molecular framework. Notch is an evolutionarily conserved intercellular signaling
pathway playing a prominent role in cell fate and differentiation, although the
mechanisms by which this pathway regulates osteogenesis remain controversial.
This study aimed to investigate, in vitro, the involvement of Notch pathway
during all the developmental stages of osteogenic differentiation in human
osteosarcoma cell line MG63. Cells were cultured in basal condition (control) and
in osteoinductive medium (OM). Notch inhibitors were also added in OM to block
Notch pathway. During osteogenic differentiation, early (alkaline phosphatase
activity and collagen type I) and late osteogenic markers (osteocalcin levels and
matrix mineralization), as well as the gene expression of the main osteogenic
transcription factors (Runx2, Osterix and Dlx5) increased. Time dependent changes
in the expression of specific Notch receptors were identified in OM versus
control with a significant reduction in the expression of Notch1 and Notch3
receptors in the early phase of differentiation, and an increase of Notch2 and
Notch4 receptors in the late phase. Among Notch nuclear target genes, Hey1
expression was significantly higher in OM than control, whilst Hes5 expression
decreased. Osteogenic markers were reduced and Hey1 was significantly inhibited
by Notch inhibitors, suggesting a role for Notch through the canonical pathway.
In conclusion, Notch pathway might be involved with a dual role in osteogenesis
of MG63, through the activation of Notch2, Notch4 and Hey1, inducing osteoblast
differentiation and the depression of Notch1, Notch3 and Hes5, maintaining an
undifferentiated status. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26946465  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Hum Genet. 2016 Mar;135(3):345-57. doi: 10.1007/s00439-016-1635-0. Epub 2016 Feb 
2.

Phenotypic subregions within the split-hand/foot malformation 1 locus.

Rasmussen MB(1), Kreiborg S(2), Jensen P(3), Bak M(1), Mang Y(1), Lodahl M(1),
Budtz-Jørgensen E(1), Tommerup N(1), Tranebjærg L(1,)(4,)(5), Rendtorff
ND(6,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, The Panum Institute, University
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)Departments of Paediatric Dentistry and
Clinical Genetics, School of Dentistry, The Panum Institute, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)Mental Health Centre Ballerup, Capital Region
Mental Health, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (4)Department of
ORL, H & N Surgery and Audiology, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (5)Clinical Genetic Clinic, Kennedy Center, Rigshospitalet, 
University of Copenhagen, 2600, Glostrup, Denmark. (6)Department of Cellular and 
Molecular Medicine, The Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark. nanna.dahl.rendtorff@regionh.dk. (7)Department of ORL, H & N Surgery and
Audiology, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
nanna.dahl.rendtorff@regionh.dk. (8)Clinical Genetic Clinic, Kennedy Center,
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, 2600, Glostrup, Denmark.
nanna.dahl.rendtorff@regionh.dk.

Split-hand/foot malformation 1 (SHFM1) is caused by chromosomal aberrations
involving the region 7q21.3, DLX5 mutation, and dysregulation of DLX5/DLX6
expression by long-range position effects. SHFM1 can be isolated or syndromic
with incomplete penetrance and a highly variable clinical expression, possibly
influenced by sex and imprinting. We report on a new family with five affected
individuals with syndromic SHFM1 that includes split-hand/foot malformations,
hearing loss, and craniofacial anomalies, and an inv(7)(q21.3q35) present both in
the proband and her affected son. The proximal inversion breakpoint, identified
by next generation mate-pair sequencing, truncates the SHFM1 locus within the
regulatory region of DLX5/6 expression. Through genotype-phenotype correlations
of 100 patients with molecularly characterized chromosomal aberrations from 32
SHFM1 families, our findings suggest three phenotypic subregions within the SHFM1
locus associated with (1) isolated SHFM, (2) SHFM and hearing loss, and (3) SHFM,
hearing loss, and craniofacial anomalies, respectively (ranked for increasing
proximity to DLX5/6), and encompassing previously reported tissue-specific
enhancers for DLX5/6. This uniquely well-characterized cohort of SHFM1 patients
allowed us to systematically analyze the recently suggested hypothesis of skewed 
transmission and to confirm a higher penetrance in males vs. females in a
subgroup of patients with isolated SHFM.

PMID: 26839112  [PubMed - in process]


6. J Mol Biol. 2016 Jan 29. pii: S0022-2836(16)00042-5. doi:
10.1016/j.jmb.2016.01.023. [Epub ahead of print]

Dlx5 Homeodomain:DNA Complex: Structure, Binding and Effect of Mutations Related 
to Split Hand and Foot Malformation Syndrome.

Proudfoot A(1), Axelrod HL(2), Geralt M(1), Fletterick RJ(3), Yumoto F(3), Deacon
AM(2), Elsliger MA(1), Wilson IA(1), Wüthrich K(4), Serrano P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps
Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(2)Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National Accelerator
Laboratory, 2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California San Francisco, 600 16th
Street, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (4)Department of Integrative Structural and
Computational Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines
Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The Scripps
Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA;
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, ETH Zürich, CH 8093, Zürich,
Switzerland. (5)Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology,
The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA. Electronic address: serrano@scripps.edu.

The Dlx5 homeodomain is a transcription factor related to the Drosophila
distal-less gene that is associated with breast and lung cancer, lymphoma, Rett
syndrome and osteoporosis in humans. Mutations in the DLX5 gene have been linked 
to deficiencies in craniofacial and limb development in higher eukaryotes,
including split hand and foot malformation 1 in humans. Our characterization of a
Dlx5 homeodomain:(CGACTAATTAGTCG)2 complex by NMR spectroscopy paved the way for 
determination of its crystal structure at 1.85Å resolution that enabled
rationalization of the effects of disease-related mutations on the protein
function. A Q186H mutation linked to split hand and foot malformation 1 likely
affects affinity of DNA binding by disrupting water-mediated interactions with
the DNA major groove. A more subtle effect is implicated for the Q178P mutation, 
which is not in direct contact with the DNA. Our data indicate that these
mutations diminish the ability of the Dlx5 homeodomain to recognize and bind
target DNAs, and they likely destabilize the formation of functional complexes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26829219  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Dev Biol. 2016 Mar 15;411(2):294-300. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.034. Epub 2016
Jan 28.

The epigenetic modifier DNMT3A is necessary for proper otic placode formation.

Roellig D(1), Bronner ME(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA. Electronic address: roellig@caltech.edu.
(2)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA. Electronic address: mbronner@caltech.edu.

Cranial placodes are thickenings in the ectoderm that give rise to sensory organs
and peripheral ganglia of the vertebrate head. At gastrula and neurula stages,
placodal precursors are intermingled in the neural plate border with future
neural and neural crest cells. Here, we show that the epigenetic modifier, DNA
methyl transferase (DNMT) 3A, expressed in the neural plate border region,
influences development of the otic placode which will contribute to the ear.
DNMT3A is expressed in the presumptive otic region at gastrula through neurula
stages and later in the otic placode itself. Whereas neural plate border and
non-neural ectoderm markers Erni, Dlx5, Msx1 and Six1 are unaltered, DNMT3A loss 
of function leads to early reduction in the expression of the key otic placode
specifier genes Pax2 and Gbx2 and later otic markers Sox10 and Soho1. Reduction
of Gbx2 was first observed at HH7, well before loss of other otic markers. Later,
this translates to significant reduction in the size of the otic vesicle. Based
on these results, we propose that DNMT3A is important for enabling the activation
of Gbx2 expression, necessary for normal development of the inner ear.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4783191 [Available on 2017-03-15]
PMID: 26826496  [PubMed - in process]


8. Epigenetics. 2016 Jan 2;11(1):74-84. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2016.1138195. Epub
2016 Jan 19.

Genome-wide methylation profiling identifies novel methylated genes in
neuroblastoma tumors.

Olsson M(1), Beck S(2), Kogner P(3), Martinsson T(4), Carén H(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Sahlgrenska Cancer Center , Department of Pathology , Institute of
Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg , Sweden. (2)b
Department of Cancer Biology , UCL Cancer Institute, University College London , 
UK. (3)c Childhood Cancer Research Unit , Department of Woman and Child Health , 
Karolinska Institute, Karolinska Hospital , Sweden. (4)d Department of Clinical
Genetics , Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg , Sweden.

Neuroblastoma is a very heterogeneous tumor of childhood. The clinical spectra
range from very aggressive metastatic disease to spontaneous regression, even
without therapy. Aberrant DNA methylation pattern is a common feature of most
cancers. For neuroblastoma, it has been demonstrated both for single genes as
well as genome-wide, where a so-called methylator phenotype has been described.
Here, we present a study using Illumina 450K methylation arrays on 60
neuroblastoma tumors. We show that aggressive tumors, characterized by
International Neuroblastoma Risk Group (INRG) as stage M, are hypermethylated
compared to low-grade tumors. On the contrary, INRG stage L tumors display more
non-CpG methylation. The genes with the highest number of hypermethylated CpG
sites in INRG M tumors are TERT, PCDHGA4, DLX5, and DLX6-AS1. Gene ontology
analysis showed a representation of neuronal tumor relevant gene functions among 
the differentially methylated genes. For validation, we used a set of independent
tumors previously analyzed with the Illumina 27K methylation arrays, which
confirmed the differentially methylated sites. Top candidate genes with aberrant 
methylation were analyzed for altered gene expression through the R2 platform (
http://r2.amc.nl ), and for correlations between methylation and gene expression 
in a public dataset. Altered expression in nonsurvivors was found for the genes
B3GALT4 and KIAA1949, CLIC5, DLX6-AS, TERT, and PIRT, and strongest correlations 
were found for TRIM36, KIAA0513, and PIRT. Our data indicate that methylation
profiling can be used for patient stratification and informs on epigenetically
deregulated genes with the potential of increasing our knowledge about the
underlying mechanisms of tumor development.

PMID: 26786290  [PubMed - in process]


9. Gene. 2016 May 1;581(2):95-106. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.01.015. Epub 2016 Jan
13.

Osteogenic potential of human adipose-tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells
cultured on 3D-printed porous structured titanium.

Lewallen EA(1), Jones DL(2), Dudakovic A(1), Thaler R(1), Paradise CR(1), Kremers
HM(3), Abdel MP(1), Kakar S(1), Dietz AB(4), Cohen RC(5), Lewallen DG(6), van
Wijnen AJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN
55905, USA. (2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering and Physiology,
Mayo Graduate School, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(3)Department of Health Sciences Research, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 200 
First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (5)Stryker
Orthopedics, 325 Corporate Drive, Mahwah, NJ 07430, USA. (6)Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
Electronic address: lewallen.david@mayo.edu. (7)Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Biomedical
Engineering and Physiology, Mayo Graduate School, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo 
Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. Electronic address:
vanwijnen.andre@mayo.edu.

Integration of porous metal prosthetics, which restore form and function of
irreversibly damaged joints, into remaining healthy bone is critical for implant 
success. We investigated the biological properties of adipose-tissue-derived
mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (AMSCs) and addressed their potential to alter the
in vitro microenvironment of implants. We employed human AMSCs as a practical
source for musculoskeletal applications because these cells can be obtained in
large quantities, are multipotent, and have trophic paracrine functions. AMSCs
were cultured on surgical-grade porous titanium disks as a model for orthopedic
implants. We monitored cell/substrate attachment, cell proliferation,
multipotency, and differentiation phenotypes of AMSCs upon osteogenic induction. 
High-resolution scanning electron microscopy and histology revealed that AMSCs
adhere to the porous metallic surface. Compared to standard tissue culture
plastic, AMSCs grown in the porous titanium microenvironment showed differences
in temporal expression for genes involved in cell cycle progression (CCNB2,
HIST2H4), extracellular matrix production (COL1A1, COL3A1), mesenchymal lineage
identity (ACTA2, CD248, CD44), osteoblastic transcription factors (DLX3, DLX5,
ID3), and epigenetic regulators (EZH1, EZH2). We conclude that metal orthopedic
implants can be effectively seeded with clinical-grade stem/stromal cells to
create a pre-conditioned implant.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26774799  [PubMed - in process]


10. J Cell Mol Med. 2016 Apr;20(4):655-65. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12752. Epub 2016 Jan 16.

CD200 expression in human cultured bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells is induced 
by pro-osteogenic and pro-inflammatory cues.

Pontikoglou C(1,)(2), Langonné A(3), Ba MA(4), Varin A(4), Rosset P(5), Charbord 
P(6), Sensébé L(4), Deschaseaux F(4).

Author information: 
(1)EA3855, Université François Rabelais, Tours, France. (2)Department of
Hematology, University Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion, Greece. (3)Etablissement
Français du sang Centre-Atlantique, Tours, France. (4)Stromalab Université de
Toulouse, UMR/CNRS 5273, U1031 Inserm, EFS-Pyrénées-Méditerranée, UPS, Toulouse, 
France. (5)Service d'orthopédie et traumatologie, CHU Trousseau,
Chambray-lès-Tours, France. (6)Inserm U972 and Université Paris XI, Villejuif
Cedex, France.

Similar to other adult tissue stem/progenitor cells, bone marrow mesenchymal
stem/stromal cells (BM MSCs) exhibit heterogeneity at the phenotypic level and in
terms of proliferation and differentiation potential. In this study such a
heterogeneity was reflected by the CD200 protein. We thus characterized
CD200(pos) cells sorted from whole BM MSC cultures and we investigated the
molecular mechanisms regulating CD200 expression. After sorting, measurement of
lineage markers showed that the osteoblastic genes RUNX2 and DLX5 were
up-regulated in CD200(pos) cells compared to CD200(neg) fraction. At the
functional level, CD200(pos) cells were prone to mineralize the extra-cellular
matrix in vitro after sole addition of phosphates. In addition, osteogenic cues
generated by bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) or BMP7 strongly induced CD200
expression. These data suggest that CD200 expression is related to
commitment/differentiation towards the osteoblastic lineage. Immunohistochemistry
of trephine bone marrow biopsies further corroborates the osteoblastic fate of
CD200(pos) cells. However, when dexamethasone was used to direct osteogenic
differentiation in vitro, CD200 was consistently down-regulated. As dexamethasone
has anti-inflammatory properties, we assessed the effects of different
immunological stimuli on CD200 expression. The pro-inflammatory cytokines
interleukin-1ß and tumour necrosis factor-a increased CD200 membrane expression
but down-regulated osteoblastic gene expression suggesting an additional
regulatory pathway of CD200 expression. Surprisingly, whatever the context, i.e. 
pro-inflammatory or pro-osteogenic, CD200 expression was down-regulated when
nuclear-factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B was inhibited by chemical or adenoviral agents. In
conclusion, CD200 expression by cultured BM MSCs can be induced by both
osteogenic and pro-inflammatory cytokines through the same pathway: NF-<U+03BA>B.

© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMID: 26773707  [PubMed - in process]


11. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 14;6:19296. doi: 10.1038/srep19296.

Cysteine Dioxygenase Type 1 Inhibits Osteogenesis by Regulating Wnt Signaling in 
Primary Mouse Bone Marrow Stromal Cells.

Zhao X(1,)(2), Deng P(1), Feng J(1,)(2), Wang Z(1,)(2), Xiang Z(1,)(2), Han
X(1,)(2), Bai D(1,)(2), Pae EK(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, China. (2)Department of Orthodontics, West China Hospital of 
Stomatology, Sichuan University, China. (3)Department of Orthodontics and
Pediatric Dentistry, University of Maryland, School of Dentistry, Baltimore, MD, 
USA.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent cells, which can give rise to
variety of cell types, including adipocytes and osteoblasts. Previously, we have 
shown that cysteine dioxygenase type 1 (Cdo1) promoted adipogenesis of primary
mouse bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) and 3T3-L1 pre-adipocytes via interaction
with Ppar<U+03B3>. However, the role of Cdo1 in osteogenesis remains unclear. Here, we
demonstrated that expression of Cdo1 was elevated during osteoblastic
differentiation of BMSCs in vitro. Interestingly, knockdown of Cdo1 by siRNA led 
to an increased expression of osteogenic related genes, elevated alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) activity, and enhanced mineralization. Overexpression of Cdo1
in BMSCs inversely suppressed the osteogenesis. Furthermore, we found that
overexpression of Cdo1 impaired Wnt signaling and restricted the Wnt3a induced
expression of osteogenic transcriptional factors, such as Runx2 and Dlx5.
Collectively, our findings indicate Cdo1 suppresses osteogenic differentiation of
BMSCs, through a potential mechanism which involves in Wnt signaling reduction
concomitantly.

PMCID: PMC4725904
PMID: 26763277  [PubMed - in process]


12. Int J Mol Med. 2016 Jan;37(1):115-25. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2413. Epub 2015 Nov 
19.

Comparison of molecular profiles of human mesenchymal stem cells derived from
bone marrow, umbilical cord blood, placenta and adipose tissue.

Heo JS(1), Choi Y(1), Kim HS(2), Kim HO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Therapy Center, Severance Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Institute for Bio-Medical Convergence, Catholic Kwandong University, Incheon, 
Republic of Korea.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are clinically useful due to their capacity for
self-renewal, their immunomodulatory properties and tissue regenerative
potential. These cells can be isolated from various tissues and exhibit different
potential for clinical applications according to their origin, and thus
comparative studies on MSCs from different tissues are essential. In this study, 
we investigated the immunophenotype, proliferative potential, multilineage
differentiation and immunomodulatory capacity of MSCs derived from different
tissue sources, namely bone marrow, adipose tissue, the placenta and umbilical
cord blood. The gene expression profiles of stemness-related
genes [octamer-binding transcription factor 4 (OCT4), sex determining
region Y-box (SOX)2, MYC, Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), NANOG, LIN28 and REX1]
and lineage-related and differentiation stage-related genes [B4GALNT1 (GM2/GS2
synthase), inhibin, beta A (INHBA), distal-less homeobox 5 (DLX5), runt-related
transcription factor 2 (RUNX2), proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG),
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBPA), bone morphogenetic
protein 7 (BMP7) and SOX9] were compared using RT-PCR. No significant differences
in growth rate, colony-forming efficiency and immunophenotype were observed. Our 
results demonstrated that MSCs derived from bone marrow and adipose tissue shared
not only in vitro tri-lineage differentiation potential, but also gene expression
profiles. While there was considerable inter-donor variation in DLX5 expression
between MSCs derived from different tissues, its expression appears to be
associated with the osteogenic potential of MSCs. Bone marrow-derived
MSCs (BM-MSCs) significantly inhibited allogeneic T cell proliferation possibly
via the high levels of the immunosuppressive cytokines, IL10 and TGFB1. Although 
MSCs derived from different tissues and fibroblasts share many characteristics,
some of the marker genes, such as B4GALNT1 and DLX5 may be useful for the
characterization of MSCs derived from different tissue sources. Collectively, our
results suggest that, based on their tri-lineage differentiation potential and
immunomodulatory effects, BM-MSCs and adipose tissue-derived MSCs (A-MSCs)
represent the optimal stem cell source for tissue engineering and regenerative
medicine.

PMCID: PMC4687432
PMID: 26719857  [PubMed - in process]


13. Cell Biol Int. 2016 Mar;40(3):329-40. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10573. Epub 2016 Jan 12.

Expression of osteoclastogenic factor transcripts in osteoblast-like UMR-106
cells after exposure to FGF-23 or FGF-23 combined with parathyroid hormone.

Teerapornpuntakit J(1,)(2), Wongdee K(1,)(3), Krishnamra N(1,)(4), Charoenphandhu
N(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Calcium and Bone Research (COCAB), Faculty of Science, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand. (2)Microarray Laboratory, National Center for
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National Science and Technology
Development Agency (NSTDA), Pathum Thani, Thailand. (3)Office of Academic
Management, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Burapha University, Chonburi,
Thailand. (4)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand.

As a bone-derived hormone, fibroblast growth factor-23 (FGF-23) negatively
regulates phosphate and calcium metabolism, while retaining growth-promoting
action for mesenchymal cell differentiation. Elevated FGF-23 levels, together
with hyperparathyroidism, are often observed in chronic kidney disease, which is 
associated with impaired bone mineralization and enhanced bone resorption.
Although overexpression of osteoblast-derived osteoclastogenic cytokines might
contribute to this metabolic bone disease, whether FGF-23 alone and FGF-23 plus
parathyroid hormone (PTH) directly modulated the expression of osteoblast-derived
osteoclastogenic genes remained elusive. Herein, we demonstrated the direct
effects of FGF-23 on proliferation and mRNA expression of osteoblast-specific
differentiation and osteoclastogenic markers in rat osteoblast-like UMR-106 cells
in the presence or absence of PTH. FGF-23 was found to suppress UMR-106 cell
proliferation, while increasing FGF-23 expression, the latter of which suggested 
the presence of positive feedback regulation of FGF-23 expression in osteoblasts.
FGF-23 also upregulated the mRNA expression of osteoblast differentiation markers
(e.g., Runx2, osterix, AJ18, Dlx5, alkaline phosphatase, and osteopontin),
osteoclastogenic factors (e.g., MCSF, MCP-1, IL-6, and TNF-a), and bone
resorption regulators (RANKL and osteoprotegerin). However, combined PTH and
FGF-23 exposure did not alter the levels of FGF-23-induced transcripts,
suggesting that both hormones had no additive effect. In conclusion, FGF-23
directly suppressed osteoblast proliferation, while inducing osteoclastogenic
gene expression in UMR-106 cells, and the FGF-23-induced transcripts were not
altered by long-standing PTH exposure.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 26694880  [PubMed - in process]


14. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Feb 15;25(4):740-54. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv514. Epub 2015 Dec
18.

The apical ectodermal ridge of the mouse model of ectrodactyly Dlx5;Dlx6-/- shows
altered stratification and cell polarity, which are restored by exogenous Wnt5a
ligand.

Conte D(1), Garaffo G(1), Lo Iacono N(2), Mantero S(2), Piccolo S(3), Cordenonsi 
M(3), Perez-Morga D(4), Orecchia V(1), Poli V(1), Merlo GR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of
Torino, Torino, Italy. (2)Human Genome Department, Istituto Tecnologie
Biomediche, CNR Milano, Italy. (3)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of
Padova, Padova, Italy and. (4)Laboratoire de Parasitologie Moléculaire, IBMM-DBM,
Université Libre de Bruxelles, B-6041 Gosselies, Belgium. (5)Department of
Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy,
giorgioroberto.merlo@unito.it.

The congenital malformation split hand/foot (SHFM) is characterized by missing
central fingers and dysmorphology or fusion of the remaining ones. Type-1 SHFM is
linked to deletions/rearrangements of the DLX5-DLX6 locus and point mutations in 
the DLX5 gene. The ectrodactyly phenotype is reproduced in mice by the double
knockout (DKO) of Dlx5 and Dlx6. During limb development, the apical ectodermal
ridge (AER) is a key-signaling center responsible for early proximal-distal
growth and patterning. In Dlx5;6 DKO hindlimbs, the central wedge of the AER
loses multilayered organization and shows down-regulation of FGF8 and Dlx2. In
search for the mechanism, we examined the non-canonical Wnt signaling,
considering that Dwnt-5 is a target of distalless in Drosophila and the knockout 
of Wnt5, Ryk, Ror2 and Vangl2 in the mouse causes severe limb malformations. We
found that in Dlx5;6 DKO limbs, the AER expresses lower levels of Wnt5a, shows
scattered ß-catenin responsive cells and altered basolateral and planar cell
polarity (PCP). The addition of Wnt5a to cultured embryonic limbs restored the
expression of AER markers and its stratification. Conversely, the inhibition of
the PCP molecule c-jun N-terminal kinase caused a loss of AER marker expression. 
In vitro, the addition of Wnt5a on mixed primary cultures of embryonic ectoderm
and mesenchyme was able to confer re-polarization. We conclude that the
Dlx-related ectrodactyly defect is associated with the loss of basoapical and
PCP, due to reduced Wnt5a expression and that the restoration of the Wnt5a level 
is sufficient to partially reverts AER misorganization and dysmorphology.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4743692
PMID: 26685160  [PubMed - in process]


15. Int J Oral Sci. 2015 Dec 18;7(4):213-9. doi: 10.1038/ijos.2015.42.

Characterization of the osteogenic potential of mesenchymal stem cells from human
periodontal ligament based on cell surface markers.

Alvarez R(1), Lee HL(1), Wang CY(1), Hong C(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Biology and Medicine, School of Dentistry, University of
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, USA. (2)Section of Orthodontics, School
of Dentistry, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, USA.

Mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)-mediated therapy has been shown to be clinically
effective in regenerating tissue defects. For improved regenerative therapy, it
is critical to isolate homogenous populations of MSCs with high capacity to
differentiate into appropriate tissues. The utilization of stem cell surface
antigens provides a means to identify MSCs from various tissues. However, few
surface markers that consistently isolate highly regenerative MSCs have been
validated, making it challenging for routine clinical applications and making it 
all the more imperative to identify reliable surface markers. In this study, we
used three surface marker combinations: CD51/CD140a, CD271, and STRO-1/CD146 for 
the isolation of homogenous populations of dental mesenchymal stem cells (DMSCs) 
from heterogeneous periodontal ligament cells (PDLCs). Fluorescence-activated
cell sorting analysis revealed that 24% of PDLCs were CD51(+)/CD140a(+), 0.8%
were CD271(+), and 2.4% were STRO-1(+)/CD146(+). Sorted cell populations were
further assessed for their multipotent properties by inducing osteogenic and
chondrogenic differentiation. All three subsets of isolated DMSCs exhibited
differentiation capacity into osteogenic and chondrogenic lineages but with
varying degrees. CD271(+) DMSCs demonstrated the greatest osteogenic potential
with strong induction of osteogenic markers such as DLX5, RUNX2, and BGLAP. Our
study provides evidence that surface marker combinations used in this study are
sufficient markers for the isolation of DMSCs from PDLCs. These results provide
important insight into using specific surface markers for identifying homogenous 
populations of DMSCs for their improved utilization in regenerative medicine.

PMID: 26674423  [PubMed - in process]


16. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Nov 29. pii: bhv297. [Epub ahead of print]

Impaired Interneuron Development after Foxg1 Disruption.

Yang Y(1), Shen W(1), Ni Y(1), Su Y(1), Yang Z(2), Zhao C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, MOE, Department of
Anatomy and Neuroscience, School of Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing
210009, China. (2)Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China. (3)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, MOE,
Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, School of Medicine, Southeast University,
Nanjing 210009, China Center of Depression, Beijing Institute for Brain
Disorders, Beijing 100069, China.

Interneurons play pivotal roles in the modulation of cortical function; however, 
the mechanisms that control interneuron development remain unclear. This study
aimed to explore a new role for Foxg1 in interneuron development. By crossing
Foxg1(fl/fl) mice with a Dlx5/6-Cre line, we determined that conditional
disruption of Foxg1 in the subpallium results in defects in interneuron
development. In developing interneurons, the expression levels of several
receptors, including roundabout-1, Eph receptor A4, and C-X-C motif receptor 4/7,
were strongly downregulated, which led to migration defects after Foxg1 ablation.
The transcription factors Dlx1/2 and Mash1, which have been reported to be
involved in interneuron development, were significantly upregulated at the mRNA
levels. Foxg1 mutant cells developed shorter neurites and fewer branches and
displayed severe migration defects in vitro. Notably, Prox1, which is a
transcription factor that functions as a key regulator in the development of
excitatory neurons, was also dramatically upregulated at both the mRNA and
protein levels, suggesting that Prox1 is also important for interneuron
development. Our work demonstrates that Foxg1 may act as a critical upstream
regulator of Dlx1/2, Mash1, and Prox1 to control interneuron development. These
findings will further our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of
interneuron development.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26620267  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;37(6):2194-208. doi: 10.1159/000438576. Epub 2015 Nov 
27.

MicroRNA-10a Influences Osteoblast Differentiation and Angiogenesis by Regulating
ß-Catenin Expression.

Li J, Zhang Y, Zhao Q, Wang J, He X.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Elucidation of the molecular mechanisms governing osteoblast
differentiation and angiogenesis are of great importance for improving the
treatment of bone-related diseases. In this study, we examined the role of
microRNA (miR)-10a in the differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells and pro angiogenic
activity of mouse umbilical vein endothelial cells (MUVECs).
METHODS: The murine pre-osteoblast cell line MC3T3-E1 and MUVECs were used in the
experiment. After transfected with miR-10a mimics or inhibitors, with or without 
LiCl pretreatment, the miR-10a, ALP, Runx2, Osx, OC and Dlx5 expression were
assessed by RT-PCR. MC3T3-E1 cells were cultured with BMP2 to differentiate into 
bone cells, osteogenic differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells were detected by ALP and
ARS staining. Cell viability were analyzed by MTT and the protein expression of
ß-catenin, LEF1, cyclinD1, MMP2, and VEGF were detected by Western blotting; VEGF
and VE-cadherin release were assessed by ELISA, and the migration of MUVECs, as
well as tube formation were also detected.
RESULTS: MiR-10a expression was obviously down-regulated during osteogenic
differentiation. Overexpression of miR-10a inhibited osteogenic differentiation
of MC3T3-E1 cells, effectively decreasing MUVECs proliferation, migration, VEGF
expression, VE-cadherin concentrations, and tube formation in vitro, whereas
miR-10a silence enhanced those processes. Further mechanism assays demonstrated
that overexpression of miR-10a reduced the ß-catenin at both protein and
transcription level, while pretreatment with Wnt signaling activator Licl
partially attenuated the suppression effects of miR-10a overexpression on
osteoblast differentiation and angiogenesis.
CONCLUSION: Our findings imply that miR-10a plays a suppressive role in
osteoblast differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells and pro angiogenic activity of
MUVECs by regulating the ß-catenin expression, representing a novel and potential
therapeutic target for the treatment of bone regeneration-related diseases.

© 2015 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26610149  [PubMed - in process]


18. Biomed Mater. 2015 Nov 20;10(6):065011. doi: 10.1088/1748-6041/10/6/065011.

Bioactive borate glass promotes the repair of radius segmental bone defects by
enhancing the osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs.

Zhang J(1), Guan J, Zhang C, Wang H, Huang W, Guo S, Niu X, Xie Z, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microsurgery on Extremities, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai 200233, People's Republic of China. 
Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth
People's Hospital, Shanghai 200233, People's Republic of China. These authors
contributed equally.

Bioactive borate glass (BG) has emerged as a promising alternative for bone
regeneration due to its high osteoinductivity, osteoconductivity, compressive
strength, and biocompatibility. However, the role of BG in large segmental bone
repair is unclear and little is known about the underlying mechanism of BG's
osteoinductivity. In this study, we demonstrated that BG possessed pro-osteogenic
effects in an experimental model of critical-sized radius defects. Transplanting 
BG to radius defects resulted in better repair of bone defects as compared to
widely used ß-TCP. Histological and morphological analysis indicated that BG
significantly enhanced new bone formation. Furthermore, the degradation rate of
the BG was faster than that of ß-TCP, which matched the higher bone regeneration 
rate. In addition, ions from BG enhanced cell viability, ALP activity, and
osteogenic-related genes expression. Mechanistically, the critical genes Smad1/5 
and Dlx5 in the BMP pathway and p-Smad1/5 proteins were significantly elevated
after BG transplantation, and these effects could be blocked by the BMP/Smad
specific inhibitor. Taken together, our findings suggest that BG could repair
large segmental bone defects through activating the BMP/Smad pathway and
osteogenic differentiation in BMSCs.

PMID: 26586668  [PubMed - in process]


19. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2015 Oct 21;2:15039. doi: 10.1038/mtm.2015.39.
eCollection 2015.

Highly efficient in vitro and in vivo delivery of functional RNAs using new
versatile MS2-chimeric retrovirus-like particles.

Prel A(1), Caval V(2), Gayon R(3), Ravassard P(4), Duthoit C(3), Payen E(5),
Maouche-Chretien L(5), Creneguy A(6), Nguyen TH(6), Martin N(3), Piver E(7),
Sevrain R(3), Lamouroux L(3), Leboulch P(5), Deschaseaux F(8), Bouillé P(3),
Sensébé L(8), Pagès JC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Université François Rabelais de Tours, INSERM UMR 966 , Tours, France ; UMR
UPS/CNRS 5273, EFS-PM, INSERM U1031 , Toulouse, France. (2)Université François
Rabelais de Tours, INSERM UMR 966 , Tours, France. (3)Vectalys, Bâtiment Canal
Biotech 2, Parc Technologique du Canal 3 , Toulouse, France. (4)Institut du
Cerveau et de la Moelle (ICM), Université Pierre et Marie Curie, CNRS UMR7225;
INSERM U1127, Biotechnologies and Biothérapies Team , Paris, France.
(5)CEA/Université Paris Sud (UMR-E 007), Institut of Emerging Diseases and
Innovative Therapies (iMETI), CEA de Fontenay aux Roses , Fontenay aux Roses,
France. (6)INSERM UMRS 1064, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) Hôtel Dieu , 
Nantes, France ; Institut de Transplantation Urologie Néphrologie (ITUN),
Université de Nantes , Nantes, France. (7)Université François Rabelais de Tours, 
INSERM UMR 966 , Tours, France ; CHRU de Tours, Laboratoire de biochimie et
biologie moléculaire , Tours, France. (8)UMR UPS/CNRS 5273, EFS-PM, INSERM U1031 
, Toulouse, France.

RNA delivery is an attractive strategy to achieve transient gene expression in
research projects and in cell- or gene-based therapies. Despite significant
efforts investigating vector-directed RNA transfer, there is still a requirement 
for better efficiency of delivery to primary cells and in vivo. Retroviral
platforms drive RNA delivery, yet retrovirus RNA-packaging constraints limit gene
transfer to two genome-molecules per viral particle. To improve retroviral
transfer, we designed a dimerization-independent MS2-driven RNA packaging system 
using MS2-Coat-retrovirus chimeras. The engineered chimeric particles promoted
effective packaging of several types of RNAs and enabled efficient transfer of
biologically active RNAs in various cell types, including human CD34(+) and iPS
cells. Systemic injection of high-titer particles led to gene expression in mouse
liver and transferring Cre-recombinase mRNA in muscle permitted widespread
editing at the ROSA26 locus. We could further show that the VLPs were able to
activate an osteoblast differentiation pathway by delivering RUNX2- or DLX5-mRNA 
into primary human bone-marrow mesenchymal-stem cells. Thus, the novel chimeric
MS2-lentiviral particles are a versatile tool for a wide range of applications
including cellular-programming or genome-editing.

PMCID: PMC4613645
PMID: 26528487  [PubMed]


20. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Dec 3;17(6):719-34. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.09.002. Epub
2015 Oct 29.

Rapid Conversion of Fibroblasts into Functional Forebrain GABAergic Interneurons 
by Direct Genetic Reprogramming.

Colasante G(1), Lignani G(2), Rubio A(1), Medrihan L(2), Yekhlef L(3), Sessa
A(1), Massimino L(1), Giannelli SG(1), Sacchetti S(2), Caiazzo M(1), Leo D(2),
Alexopoulou D(4), Dell'Anno MT(1), Ciabatti E(1), Orlando M(2), Studer M(5), Dahl
A(4), Gainetdinov RR(6), Taverna S(3), Benfenati F(2), Broccoli V(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Ospedale San Raffaele, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia, 16163 Genoa, Italy. (3)Department of Neuroscience and Brain
Technologies, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, 16163 Genoa, Italy;
Neuroimmunology Unit, Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific
Institute, Milan 20132, Italy. (4)Deep Sequencing Group, Biotechnology Center TU 
Dresden, Fetscherstrasse 105, 01307 Dresden, Germany. (5)University of
Nice-Sophia Antipolis, 06108 Nice, France; INSERM, iBV, UMR 1091, 06108 Nice,
France. (6)Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Istituto Italiano
di Tecnologia, 16163 Genoa, Italy; Institute of Translational Biomedicine, St.
Petersburg State University, 199034 St. Petersburg, Russia. (7)Division of
Neuroscience, Ospedale San Raffaele, 20132 Milan, Italy; CNR Institute of
Neuroscience, 20129 Milan, Italy. Electronic address: broccoli.vania@hsr.it.

Transplantation of GABAergic interneurons (INs) can provide long-term functional 
benefits in animal models of epilepsy and other neurological disorders. Whereas
GABAergic INs can be differentiated from embryonic stem cells, alternative
sources of GABAergic INs may be more tractable for disease modeling and
transplantation. We identified five factors (Foxg1, Sox2, Ascl1, Dlx5, and Lhx6) 
that convert mouse fibroblasts into induced GABAergic INs (iGABA-INs) possessing 
molecular signatures of telencephalic INs. Factor overexpression activates
transcriptional networks required for GABAergic fate specification. iGABA-INs
display progressively maturing firing patterns comparable to cortical INs, form
functional synapses, and release GABA. Importantly, iGABA-INs survive and mature 
upon being grafted into mouse hippocampus. Optogenetic stimulation demonstrated
functional integration of grafted iGABA-INs into host circuitry, triggering
inhibition of host granule neuron activity. These five factors also converted
human cells into functional GABAergic INs. These properties suggest that
iGABA-INs have potential for disease modeling and cell-based therapeutic
approaches to neurological disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26526726  [PubMed - in process]


21. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Jan 1;25(1):97-108. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv452. Epub 2015 Oct
28.

Dlx5 and Dlx6 control uterine adenogenesis during post-natal maturation: possible
consequences for endometriosis.

Bellessort B(1), Le Cardinal M(1), Bachelot A(2), Narboux-Nême N(1), Garagnani
P(3), Pirazzini C(3), Barbieri O(4), Mastracci L(5), Jonchere V(1),
Duvernois-Berthet E(6), Fontaine A(1), Alfama G(1), Levi G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Évolution des Régulations Endocriniennes, CNRS UMR 7221, Muséum Nationale
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris 75005, France. (2)Évolution des Régulations
Endocriniennes, CNRS UMR 7221, Muséum Nationale d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris
75005, France, AP-HP, Department of Endocrinology and Reproductive Medicine,
Centre de Référence des Maladies Endocriniennes Rares de la Croissance,
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital (Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière), Université
Pierre et Marie Curie, Site Pitié, 75013 Paris, France. (3)Department of
Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, Alma Mater Studiorum-University 
of Bologna, Bologna 40138, Italy, Interdepartmental Center 'L. Galvani',
University of Bologna, Bologna 40126, Italy. (4)Department of Experimental
Medicine (DIMES) and, IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST, National Institute for Cancer
Research, Genova, Italy and. (5)Department of Experimental Medicine and Center of
Excellence for Biomedical Research, Division of Anatomic Pathology, Department of
Surgical Science and Integrated Diagnostics (DISC), University of Genoa, Genova, 
Italy. (6)Department of Régulations, Développement et Diversité Moléculaire,
Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris 75005, France. (7)Évolution des
Régulations Endocriniennes, CNRS UMR 7221, Muséum Nationale d'Histoire Naturelle,
Paris 75005, France, glevi@mnhn.fr.

Dlx5 and Dlx6 are two closely associated homeobox genes which code for
transcription factors involved in the control of steroidogenesis and
reproduction. Inactivation of Dlx5/6 in the mouse results in a Leydig cell defect
in the male and in ovarian insufficiency in the female. DLX5/6 are also strongly 
expressed by the human endometrium but their function in the uterus is unknown.
The involvement of DLX5/6 in human uterine pathology is suggested by their strong
downregulation in endometriotic lesions and upregulation in endometrioïd
adenocarcinomas. We first show that Dlx5/6 expression begins in Müllerian ducts
epithelia and persists then in the uterine luminal and glandular epithelia
throughout post-natal maturation and in the adult. We then use a new mouse model 
in which Dlx5 and Dlx6 can be simultaneously inactivated in the endometrium using
a Pgr(cre/+) allele. Post-natal inactivation of Dlx5/6 in the uterus results in
sterility without any obvious ovarian involvement. The uteri of Pgr(cre/+);
Dlx5/6(flox/flox) mice present very few uterine glands and numerous abnormally
large and branched invaginations of the uterine lumen. In Dlx5/6 mutant uteri,
the expression of genes involved in gland formation (Foxa2) and in epithelial
remodelling during implantation (Msx1) is significantly reduced. Furthermore, we 
show that DLX5 is highly expressed in human endometrial glandular epithelium and 
that its expression is affected in endometriosis. We conclude that Dlx5 and Dlx6 
expression determines uterine architecture and adenogenesis and is needed for
implantation. Given their importance for female reproduction, DLX5 and DLX6 must 
be regarded as interesting targets for future clinical research.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26512061  [PubMed - in process]


22. Eur J Pharmacol. 2015 Nov 15;767:30-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2015.09.048. Epub
2015 Oct 8.

In vitro vitamin K(2) and 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) combination enhances
osteoblasts anabolism of diabetic mice.

Poon CC(1), Li RW(2), Seto SW(3), Kong SK(4), Ho HP(5), Hoi MP(6), Lee SM(6),
Ngai SM(4), Chan SW(7), Leung GP(8), Kwan YW(9).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong. (2)School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong; Department of Pharmacology and
Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(3)National Institute of Complementary Medicine, School of Science and Health,
University of Western Sydney, Locked Bag 1797, Penrith, NSW 2751, Australia.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong. (5)Department of Electronic Engineering, Faculty of Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. (6)Institute of Chinese Medical
Sciences, The University of Macau, Macau, China. (7)State Key Laboratory of
Chinese Medicine and Molecular Pharmacology, Department of Applied Biology and
Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong.
(8)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, The University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. Electronic address: gphleung@hku.hk. (9)School of
Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong. Electronic address: yiuwakwan@cuhk.edu.hk.

In this study, we evaluated the anabolic effect and the underlying cellular
mechanisms involved of vitamin K2 (10 nM) and 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
(1,25(OH)2D3) (10 nM), alone and in combination, on primary osteoblasts harvested
from the iliac crests of C57BL/KsJ lean (+/+) and obese/diabetic (db/db) mice. A 
lower alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity plus a reduced expression of bone
anabolic markers and bone formation transcription factors (osteocalcin, Runx2,
Dlx5, ATF4 and OSX) were consistently detected in osteoblasts of db/db mice
compared to lean mice. A significantly higher calcium deposits formation in
osteoblasts was observed in lean mice when compared to db/db mice.
Co-administration of vitamin K2 (10 nM) and 1,25(OH)2D3 (10 nM) caused an
enhancement of calcium deposits in osteoblasts in both strains of mice. Vitamins 
K2 and 1,25(OH)2D3 co-administration time-dependently (7, 14 and 21 days)
increased the levels of bone anabolic markers and bone formation transcription
factors, with a greater magnitude of increase observed in osteoblasts of db/db
mice. Combined vitamins K2 plus 1,25(OH)2D3 treatment significantly enhanced
migration and the re-appearance of surface microvilli and ruffles of osteoblasts 
of db/db mice. Thus, our results illustrate that vitamins K2 plus D3 combination 
could be a novel therapeutic strategy in treating diabetes-associated
osteoporosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26452518  [PubMed - in process]


23. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 2;10(9):e0136951. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136951.
eCollection 2015.

Altered FGF Signaling Pathways Impair Cell Proliferation and Elevation of Palate 
Shelves.

Wu W(1), Gu S(2), Sun C(2), He W(3), Xie X(4), Li X(5), Ye W(2), Qin C(6), Chen
Y(2), Xiao J(7), Liu C(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, Shanghai Zhongshan Hospital, Shanghai, China;
Department of Cell & Molecular Biology, Sciences and Engineering School, Tulane
University, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America. (2)Department of
Cell & Molecular Biology, Sciences and Engineering School, Tulane University, New
Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America. (3)Department of Cell & Molecular
Biology, Sciences and Engineering School, Tulane University, New Orleans,
Louisiana, United States of America; Department of Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgery, Affiliated Stomatological Hospital, Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi,
China. (4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Baylor College of Dentistry, Texas
A&M Health Sciences Center, Dallas, Texas, United States of America; Department
of Endodontics, Institute of Hard Tissue Development and Regeneration, the 2nd
Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China. (5)Department of
Cell & Molecular Biology, Sciences and Engineering School, Tulane University, New
Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America; Academy of Integrative Medicine,
Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, China. (6)Department
of Biomedical Sciences, Baylor College of Dentistry, Texas A&M Health Sciences
Center, Dallas, Texas, United States of America. (7)Department of Oral Biology,
College of Stomatology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China. (8)Department
of Cell & Molecular Biology, Sciences and Engineering School, Tulane University, 
New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America; Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Baylor College of Dentistry, Texas A&M Health Sciences Center, Dallas, 
Texas, United States of America; Department of Oral Biology, College of
Stomatology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China.

In palatogenesis, palatal shelves are patterned along the mediolateral axis as
well as the anteroposterior axis before the onset of palatal fusion. Fgf10
specifically expressed in lateral mesenchyme of palate maintains Shh
transcription in lateral epithelium, while Fgf7 activated in medial mesenchyme by
Dlx5, suppressed the expansion of Shh expression to medial epithelium. How FGF
signaling pathways regulate the cell behaviors of developing palate remains
elusive. In our study, we found that when Fgf8 is ectopically expressed in the
embryonic palatal mesenchyme, the elevation of palatal shelves is impaired and
the posterior palatal shelves are enlarged, especially in the medial side. The
palatal deformity results from the drastic increase of cell proliferation in
posterior mesenchyme and decrease of cell proliferation in epithelium. The
expression of mesenchymal Fgf10 and epithelial Shh in the lateral palate, as well
as the Dlx5 and Fgf7 transcription in the medial mesenchyme are all interrupted, 
indicating that the epithelial-mesenchymal interactions during palatogenesis are 
disrupted by the ectopic activation of mesenchymal Fgf8. Besides the altered
Fgf7, Fgf10, Dlx5 and Shh expression pattern, the reduced Osr2 expression domain 
in the lateral mesenchyme also suggests an impaired mediolateral patterning of
posterior palate. Moreover, the ectopic Fgf8 expression up-regulates pJak1
throughout the palatal mesenchyme and pErk in the medial mesenchyme, but
down-regulates pJak2 in the epithelium, suggesting that during normal
palatogenesis, the medial mesenchymal cell proliferation is stimulated by FGF/Erk
pathway, while the epithelial cell proliferation is maintained through FGF/Jak2
pathway.

PMCID: PMC4558018
PMID: 26332583  [PubMed - in process]


24. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2015 Oct;43(8):1487-93. doi: 10.1016/j.jcms.2015.07.030.
Epub 2015 Aug 3.

Pilot investigation of the molecular discrimination of human osteoblasts from
different bone entities.

Wein M(1), Fretwurst T(2), Nahles S(3), Duttenhoefer F(2), Tomakidi P(4),
Steinberg T(4), Nelson K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biotechnology, University Medical Center Freiburg,
Hugstetter Str. 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany; Faculty of Biology, University of
Freiburg, Schaenzlestraße 1, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address:
martin.wein@uniklinik-freiburg.de. (2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgery, University Medical Center Freiburg, Hugstetter Str. 55, 79106 Freiburg, 
Germany. (3)Department of Oral- and Maxillofacial Surgery, Charité Campus
Virchow, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin, Germany. (4)Department of Oral
Biotechnology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Hugstetter Str. 55, 79106
Freiburg, Germany.

In oral and maxillofacial surgery, autologous grafts from the iliac crest remain 
the 'gold standard' for alveolar ridge reconstruction, whereas intraoral bone
grafts are considered in smaller defects. To date, a comparison of the osteogenic
potential of osteoblasts with regard to their tissue origin is missing. Primary
osteoblasts have proven useful for the investigation of the tissue-specific
osteogenic properties. The present study compares primary human alveolar (aHOBs) 
and iliac osteoblasts (iHOBs) derived from three female patients undergoing
routine intraoral bone grafting. Proliferation potential of the osteoblasts was
evaluated using real-time impedance monitoring. Relative gene expression of bone 
specific biomarkers was analyzed and quantified using quantitative polymerase
chain reactions (qPCR). Immunohistochemistry and phase contrast microscopy were
performed, as well as alkaline phosphatase assay and alizarin red staining to
visualize morphology and mineralization capacity. A twofold faster proliferation 
rate of aHOBs compared with iHOBs (130 h vs. 80 h) was observed. Alkaline
phosphatase activity and alizarin red staining in both HOBs indicated similar
mineralization capacity. Gene expression of seven genes (BMP1, CSF-1, TGFBR1,
ICAM1, VCAM1, SPP1 and DLX5) was significantly higher in iHOB than in aHOB
samples. These data suggest a higher osteogenic potential of osteoblasts derived 
from the iliac crest compared with primary osteoblasts from the alveolar bone and
may lead to a better understanding of the molecular impact of bone cells from
different bone entities on bone regeneration in alveolar ridge reconstructions.

Copyright © 2015 European Association for Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26315276  [PubMed - in process]


25. Biotechnol Lett. 2015 Nov;37(11):2349-55. doi: 10.1007/s10529-015-1921-2. Epub
2015 Jul 22.

Improved properties of bone and cartilage tissue from 3D inkjet-bioprinted human 
mesenchymal stem cells by simultaneous deposition and photocrosslinking in
PEG-GelMA.

Gao G(1,)(2), Schilling AF(3), Hubbell K(2), Yonezawa T(4,)(5), Truong D(6), Hong
Y(6), Dai G(7), Cui X(8,)(9,)(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Life Sciences, Wuhan University 
of Technology, 122 Luoshi Road, Wuhan, China. (2)Stemorgan Therapeutics, Albany, 
NY, USA. (3)Clinic for Plastic Surgery and Hand Surgery, Klinikum Rechts der
Isar, Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany. (4)Department of Molecular
and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, San Diego, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutic Innovation, Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan. (6)Department of
Bioengineering, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, USA. (7)Center
for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, Troy, NY, USA. (8)School of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Life
Sciences, Wuhan University of Technology, 122 Luoshi Road, Wuhan, China.
xfc.cui@gmail.com. (9)Stemorgan Therapeutics, Albany, NY, USA. xfc.cui@gmail.com.
(10)Clinic for Plastic Surgery and Hand Surgery, Klinikum Rechts der Isar,
Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany. xfc.cui@gmail.com. (11)Center for
Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
Troy, NY, USA. xfc.cui@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVES: Bioprinting of bone and cartilage suffers from low mechanical
properties. Here we have developed a unique inkjet bioprinting approach of
creating mechanically strong bone and cartilage tissue constructs using
poly(ethylene glycol) dimethacrylate, gelatin methacrylate, and human MSCs.
RESULTS: The printed hMSCs were evenly distributed in the polymerized PEG-GelMA
scaffold during layer-by-layer assembly. The procedure showed a good
biocompatibility with >80% of the cells surviving the printing process and the
resulting constructs provided strong mechanical support to the embedded cells.
The printed mesenchymal stem cells showed an excellent osteogenic and
chondrogenic differentiation capacity. Both osteogenic and chondrogenic
differentiation as determined by specific gene and protein expression analysis
(RUNX2, SP7, DLX5, ALPL, Col1A1, IBSP, BGLAP, SPP1, Col10A1, MMP13, SOX9, Col2A1,
ACAN) was improved by PEG-GelMA in comparison to PEG alone. These observations
were consistent with the histological evaluation.
CONCLUSIONS: Inkjet bioprinted-hMSCs in simultaneously photocrosslinked PEG-GelMA
hydrogel scaffolds demonstrated an improvement of mechanical properties and
osteogenic and chondrogenic differentiation, suggesting its promising potential
for usage in bone and cartilage tissue engineering.

PMID: 26198849  [PubMed - in process]


26. Epigenetics. 2015;10(9):834-41. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1073880. Epub 2015 Jul
22.

Expression of imprinted genes in placenta is associated with infant
neurobehavioral development.

Green BB(1), Kappil M, Lambertini L, Armstrong DA, Guerin DJ, Sharp AJ, Lester
BM, Chen J, Marsit CJ.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Epidemiology and Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology ;
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth College ; Hanover , NH USA.

Genomic imprinting disorders often exhibit delayed neurobehavioral development,
suggesting this unique mechanism of epigenetic regulation plays a role in mental 
and neurological health. While major errors in imprinting have been linked to
adverse health outcomes, there has been little research conducted on how moderate
variability in imprinted gene expression within a population contributes to
differences in neurobehavioral outcomes, particularly at birth. Here, we profiled
the expression of 108 known and putative imprinted genes in human placenta
samples from 615 infants assessed by the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU)
Network Neurobehavioral Scales (NNNS). Data reduction identified 10 genes (DLX5, 
DHCR24, VTRNA2-1, PHLDA2, NPAP1, FAM50B, GNAS-AS1, PAX8-AS1, SHANK2, and
COPG2IT1) whose expression could distinguish between newborn neurobehavioral
profiles derived from the NNNS. Clustering infants based on the expression
pattern of these genes identified 2 groups of infants characterized by reduced
quality of movement, increased signs of asymmetrical and non-optimal reflexes,
and increased odds of demonstrating increased signs of physiologic stress and
abstinence. Overall, these results suggest that common variation in placental
imprinted gene expression is linked to suboptimal performance on scales of
neurological functioning as well as with increased signs of physiologic stress,
highlighting the central importance of the control of expression of these genes
in the placenta for neurobehavioral development.

PMCID: PMC4623032 [Available on 2016-07-22]
PMID: 26198301  [PubMed - in process]


27. Brain Struct Funct. 2015 Jul 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Radial and tangential migration of telencephalic somatostatin neurons originated 
from the mouse diagonal area.

Puelles L(1), Morales-Delgado N, Merchán P, Castro-Robles B, Martínez-de-la-Torre
M, Díaz C, Ferran JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology, School of Medicine, University 
of Murcia, Murcia, E30071, Spain, puelles@um.es.

The telencephalic subpallium is the source of various GABAergic interneuron
cohorts that invade the pallium via tangential migration. Based on
genoarchitectonic studies, the subpallium has been subdivided into four major
domains: striatum, pallidum, diagonal area and preoptic area (Puelles et al.
2013; Allen Developing Mouse Brain Atlas), and a larger set of molecularly
distinct progenitor areas (Flames et al. 2007). Fate mapping, genetic
lineage-tracing studies, and other approaches have suggested that each subpallial
subdivision produces specific sorts of inhibitory interneurons, distinguished by 
differential peptidic content, which are distributed tangentially to pallial and 
subpallial target territories (e.g., olfactory bulb, isocortex, hippocampus,
pallial and subpallial amygdala, striatum, pallidum, septum). In this report, we 
map descriptively the early differentiation and apparent migratory dispersion of 
mouse subpallial somatostatin-expressing (Sst) cells from E10.5 onward, comparing
their topography with the expression patterns of the genes Dlx5, Gbx2, Lhx7-8,
Nkx2.1, Nkx5.1 (Hmx3), and Shh, which variously label parts of the subpallium.
Whereas some experimental results suggest that Sst cells are pallidal, our data
reveal that many, if not most, telencephalic Sst cells derive from de diagonal
area (Dg). Sst-positive cells initially only present at the embryonic Dg
selectively populate radially the medial part of the bed nucleus striae
terminalis (from paraseptal to amygdaloid regions) and part of the central
amygdala; they also invade tangentially the striatum, while eschewing the globus 
pallidum and the preoptic area, and integrate within most cortical and nuclear
pallial areas between E10.5 and E16.5.

PMID: 26189100  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


28. Arch Med Sci. 2015 Jun 19;11(3):628-37. doi: 10.5114/aoms.2015.52369.

Angiotensin II suppresses osteoblastic differentiation and mineralized nodule
formation via AT1 receptor in ROS17/2.8 cells.

Nakai K(1), Kawato T(2), Morita T(3), Yamazaki Y(4), Tanaka H(2), Tonogi M(5),
Oki H(6), Maeno M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Health Sciences, Nihon University Graduate School of
Dentistry, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Oral Health Sciences, Nihon University 
School of Dentistry, Tokyo, Japan ; Division of Functional Morphology, Dental
Research Center, Nihon University School of Dentistry, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Oral Health Sciences, Nihon University School of Dentistry,
Tokyo, Japan ; The Lion Foundation for Dental Health, Tokyo, Japan. (4)The Lion
Foundation for Dental Health, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgery, Nihon University School of Dentistry, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nihon University School of
Dentistry, Tokyo, Japan ; Division of Immunology and Pathobiology, Dental
Research Center, Nihon University School of Dentistry, Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Angiotensin II (Ang II) not only regulates systemic blood pressure 
through a vasoconstrictive effect, but also promotes bone resorption. We recently
reported that Ang II (10(-6) M) stimulated the production of matrix
metalloproteinases via the AT1 receptor in osteoblastic ROS17/2.8 cells, but
suppressed alkaline phosphatase activity. However, the roles of Ang II in
osteoblastic differentiation and the function of osteogenesis in osteoblasts are 
unclear. Therefore, we examined the effect of Ang II on the expression of
osteogenesis-related transcription factors and extracellular matrix (ECM)
proteins, as well as mineralized nodule formation in ROS17/2.8 cells.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: ROS17/2.8 cells were cultured with 0 (control) or 10(-6) M 
Ang II in the presence or absence of the AT1 receptor blocker losartan.
Mineralized nodule formation was detected by Alizarin Red staining. Gene and
protein expression levels of transcription factors and ECM proteins were
determined using real-time PCR and Western blotting, respectively.
RESULTS: Runx2, Msx2, and osteocalcin expression significantly decreased with Ang
II compared to the control, whereas AJ18 expression significantly increased.
Osterix, Dlx5, type I collagen, bone sialoprotein, and osteopontin expression was
unaffected. Mineralized nodule formation and calcium content in mineralized
nodules decreased with Ang II. Losartan blocked suppressive or stimulatory
effects of Ang II on Runx2, Msx2, osteocalcin, and AJ18 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that Ang II suppresses osteoblastic
differentiation by altering the expression of osteogenesis-related transcription 
factors via the AT1 receptor and the function of osteogenesis in ROS17/2.8 cells.

PMCID: PMC4495158
PMID: 26170858  [PubMed]


29. J Dent Res. 2015 Sep;94(9):1251-8. doi: 10.1177/0022034515592867. Epub 2015 Jun
29.

Effect of Alendronate on Bone Formation during Tooth Extraction Wound Healing.

Tanoue R(1), Koi K(2), Yamashita J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Prosthodontics, Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences,
University of Michigan School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, MI, USA Dental and Oral
Medical Center, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan. (2)Division 
of Prosthodontics, Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences, University of
Michigan School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (3)Division of Prosthodontics, 
Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences, University of Michigan School of
Dentistry, Ann Arbor, MI, USA yamashit@umich.edu.

Alendronate (ALN) is an antiresorptive agent widely used for the treatment of
osteoporosis. Its suppressive effect on osteoclasts has been extensively studied.
However, the effect of ALN on bone formation is not as clear as its effect on
resorption. The objective was to determine the effect of short-term ALN on bone
formation and tooth extraction wound healing. Molar tooth extractions were
performed in mice. ALN, parathyroid hormone (PTH), or saline (vehicle control)
was administered. PTH was used as the bone anabolic control. Mice were euthanized
at 3, 5, 7, 10, and 21 d after extractions. Hard tissue healing was determined
histomorphometrically. Neutrophils and lymphatic and blood vessels were
quantified to evaluate soft tissue healing. Gene expression in the wounds was
assessed at the RNA level. Furthermore, the vossicle bone transplant system was
used to verify findings from extraction wound analysis. Alkaline phosphatase
(ALP) was visualized in the vossicles to assess osteoblast activity. ALN
exhibited no negative effect on bone formation. In intact tibiae, ALN increased
bone mass significantly more than PTH did. Consistently, significantly elevated
osteoblast numbers were noted. In the extraction sockets, bone fill in the
ALN-treated mice was equivalent to the control. Genes associated with bone
morphogenetic protein signaling, such as bmp2, nog, and dlx5, were activated in
the extraction wounds of the ALN-treated animals. Bone formation in vossicles was
significantly enhanced in the ALN versus PTH group. In agreement with this, ALN
upregulated ALP activity considerably in vossicles. Neutrophil aggregation and
suppressed lymphangiogenesis were evident in the soft tissue at 21 d after
extraction, although gross healing of extraction wounds was uneventful. Bone
formation was not impeded by short-term ALN treatment. Rather, short-term ALN
treatment enhanced bone formation. ALN did not alter bone fill in extraction
sockets.

© International & American Associations for Dental Research 2015.

PMCID: PMC4547318 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26124220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Cytogenet. 2015 Jun 13;8:37. doi: 10.1186/s13039-015-0139-2. eCollection
2015.

7q21.3 Deletion involving enhancer sequences within the gene DYNC1I1 presents
with intellectual disability and split hand-split foot malformation with
decreased penetrance.

Delgado S(1), Velinov M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center, New York, Bronx. (2)Bronx-Lebanon Hospital
Center, New York, Bronx ; Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, Bronx ; 
Department of Human Genetics, New York State Institute for Basic Research in
Developmental Disabilities, 1050 Forest Hill Rd, Staten Island, 10314 New York.

Split hand-split food malformation (SHFM) is a congenital defect of limb
development that involves the central rays of the autopod and presents with
median clefts of the hands and feet. It often includes syndactyly and
aplasia/hypoplasia of the phalanges. SHFM is a genetic condition with high
genetic heterogeneity, with at least 6 associated chromosomal loci. A locus in
chromosomal region 7q21.3, associated with SHFM is referred to as SHFM1. Genes
considered to be associated with SHFM1 are DLX5 and DLX6. These two genes
participate in the Wnt pathway that has a role in limb development. The gene
DYNC1I1, located proximally (centromeric) to the SHFM1 locus was recently
reported to include enhancer sequences involved in limb development in its exons 
15 and 17. These sequences were shown to cis-regulate the function of the
adjacent SHFM associated genes. We report a family, in which the father and three
of his sons carry an approximately 1 Mb deletion in this chromosomal region,
arr[hg19]7q21.3(94,769,383-95,801,045)x1. The deleted region is located
proximally (centromerically) adjacent to the SHFM region at 7q21.3. It does not
include the SHFM candidate genes DLX5 and DLX6, but includes the enhancer
sequences within DYNC111 and six other genes centromeric to DYNC1I1. All deletion
carriers have various degrees of intellectual disability while two of them have
SHFM. This family is the eighth reported family where a chromosome 7q21.3
deletion co-segregating with SHFM involves the enhancer regions within gene
DYNC111, but does not involve the genes DLX5 and DLX 6. This is also the third
family where decreased penetrance of enhancer-associated SHFM is demonstrated.
Intellectual disability was not observed in the previously reported families and 
may be associated with deficiency of one or more of the 6 genes included in the
reported deletion centromeric to DYNC1I1.

PMCID: PMC4465478
PMID: 26075025  [PubMed]


31. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;36(2):517-30. doi: 10.1159/000430117. Epub 2015 May
11.

Mechanical Tension Promotes the Osteogenic Differentiation of Rat Tendon-derived 
Stem Cells Through the Wnt5a/Wnt5b/JNK Signaling Pathway.

Liu X(1), Chen W, Zhou Y, Tang K, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Tendinopathy is a common sports injury that is manifested by the
heterotopic ossification of tendon tissue. Tendon stem cells (TSCs) are prone to 
osteogenic differentiation under excessive tension. The underlying mechanisms
remain poorly understood.
METHODS: Uniaxial mechanical tension (UMT) served to stretch rat tendon-derived
stem cells (rTDSCs) at 8% elongation (frequency: 1 Hz; 48, 60, or 72 hours).
RESULTS: The osteogenic differentiation of rTDSCs appeared after UMT along with
increased mRNA expression of the osteogenic genes Runx2, Dlx5, Alpl, and Col1a1
and increased Runx2 protein expression. Wnt5a, Wnt5b and P-JNK protein levels
were also upregulated after UMT stimulation. The inhibition of JNK expression by 
SP600125 and JNK1-shRNA decreased UMT-induced Runx2 protein expression, and the
activation of JNK expression by anisomycin and JNK1-cDNA increased UMT-induced
Runx2 protein expression. When shRNA knocked down Wnt5a and Wnt5b expression in
rTDSCs, the induction of Runx2 and P-JNK expression by UMT was reduced. The
inhibition of Runx2 expression could be rescued by the activation of JNK
expression by anisomycin.
CONCLUSION: UMT induced the osteogenic differentiation of rTDSCs via the
Wnt5a/Wnt5b/JNK signaling pathway. Accordingly, this pathway may influence the
heterotopic ossification of tendon tissue subjected to excessive tension.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25966835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Aug 1;24(15):4340-52. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv167. Epub 2015 May 
7.

DLX4 is associated with orofacial clefting and abnormal jaw development.

Wu D(1), Mandal S(1), Choi A(1), Anderson A(1), Prochazkova M(2), Perry H(3),
Gil-Da-Silva-Lopes VL(4), Lao R(5), Wan E(5), Tang PL(5), Kwok PY(6), Klein O(7),
Zhuan B(8), Slavotinek AM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Division of Craniofacial Anomalies, Department of
Orofacial Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA,
USA, Laboratory of Transgenic Models of Diseases, Institute of Molecular Genetics
of the ASCR, v. v.i., Prague, Czech Republic, Program in Craniofacial Biology,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94114, USA.
(3)Division of Craniofacial Anomalies, Department of Orofacial Sciences,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (4)Department of
Medical Genetics, University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (5)Cardiovascular
Research Institute, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, USA
and. (6)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, USA and Institute for Human Genetics, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (7)Department of Pediatrics,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA, Division
of Craniofacial Anomalies, Department of Orofacial Sciences, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA, Institute for Human Genetics, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA, Program in
Craniofacial Biology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
94114, USA. (8)Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine, Ministry of Education, School 
and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, China. (9)Department of
Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143,
USA, Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA, slavotia@ucsf.edu.

Cleft lip and/or palate (CL/P) are common structural birth defects in humans. We 
used exome sequencing to study a patient with bilateral CL/P and identified a
single nucleotide deletion in the patient and her similarly affected
sonc.546_546delG, predicting p.Gln183Argfs*57 in the Distal-less 4 (DLX4) gene. 
The sequence variant was absent from databases, predicted to be deleterious and
was verified by Sanger sequencing. In mammals, there are three Dlx homeobox
clusters with closely located gene pairs (Dlx1/Dlx2, Dlx3/Dlx4, Dlx5/Dlx6). In
situ hybridization showed that Dlx4 was expressed in the mesenchyme of the murine
palatal shelves at E12.5, prior to palate closure. Wild-type human DLX4, but not 
mutant DLX4_c.546delG, could activate two murine Dlx conserved regulatory
elements, implying that the mutation caused haploinsufficiency. We showed that
reduced DLX4 expression after short interfering RNA treatment in a human cell
line resulted in significant up-regulation of DLX3, DLX5 and DLX6, with reduced
expression of DLX2 and significant up-regulation of BMP4, although the increased 
BMP4 expression was demonstrated only in HeLa cells. We used antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides to target the orthologous Danio rerio gene, dlx4b, and found
reduced cranial size and abnormal cartilaginous elements. We sequenced DLX4 in
155 patients with non-syndromic CL/P and CP, but observed no sequence variants.
From the published literature, Dlx1/Dlx2 double homozygous null mice and Dlx5
homozygous null mice both have clefts of the secondary palate. This first finding
of a DLX4 mutation in a family with CL/P establishes DLX4 as a potential cause of
human clefts.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4492397 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25954033  [PubMed - in process]


33. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2015 Sep;68:103-19. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2015.04.007. Epub 2015 
Apr 30.

The Dlx5 and Foxg1 transcription factors, linked via miRNA-9 and -200, are
required for the development of the olfactory and GnRH system.

Garaffo G(1), Conte D(1), Provero P(1), Tomaiuolo D(1), Luo Z(1), Pinciroli P(2),
Peano C(3), D'Atri I(1), Gitton Y(4), Etzion T(5), Gothilf Y(5), Gays D(1),
Santoro MM(6), Merlo GR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of Torino,
Italy. (2)Doctorate School in Molecular Medicine, Dept. Medical Biotechnology
Translational Medicine (BIOMETRA), University of Milano, Italy. (3)Inst. of
Biomedical Technology, National Research Council, ITB-CNR Segrate (MI) Italy.
(4)UMR7221 CNRS/MNHN - Evolution des régulations endocriniennes - Paris, France. 
(5)Dept. Neurobiology, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel-Aviv
University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel; VIB, Vesalius Research Center, KU Leuven,
Belgium. (6)Dept. Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of
Torino, Italy; Dept. Neurobiology, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences,
Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel; VIB, Vesalius Research Center, KU
Leuven, Belgium. (7)Dept. Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University
of Torino, Italy. Electronic address: giorgioroberto.merlo@unito.it.

During neuronal development and maturation, microRNAs (miRs) play diverse
functions ranging from early patterning, proliferation and commitment to
differentiation, survival, homeostasis, activity and plasticity of more mature
and adult neurons. The role of miRs in the differentiation of olfactory receptor 
neurons (ORNs) is emerging from the conditional inactivation of Dicer in immature
ORN, and the depletion of all mature miRs in this system. Here, we identify
specific miRs involved in olfactory development, by focusing on mice null for
Dlx5, a homeogene essential for both ORN differentiation and axon guidance and
connectivity. Analysis of miR expression in Dlx5(-/-) olfactory epithelium
pointed to reduced levels of miR-9, miR-376a and four miRs of the -200 class in
the absence of Dlx5. To functionally examine the role of these miRs, we depleted 
miR-9 and miR-200 class in reporter zebrafish embryos and observed delayed ORN
differentiation, altered axonal trajectory/targeting, and altered genesis and
position of olfactory-associated GnRH neurons, i.e. a phenotype known as Kallmann
syndrome in humans. miR-9 and miR-200-class negatively control Foxg1 mRNA, a
fork-head transcription factor essential for development of the olfactory
epithelium and of the forebrain, known to maintain progenitors in a stem state.
Increased levels of z-foxg1 mRNA resulted in delayed ORN differentiation and
altered axon trajectory, in zebrafish embryos. This work describes for the first 
time the role of specific miR (-9 and -200) in olfactory/GnRH development, and
uncovers a Dlx5-Foxg1 regulation whose alteration affects receptor neuron
differentiation, axonal targeting, GnRH neuron development, the hallmarks of the 
Kallmann syndrome.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4604252
PMID: 25937343  [PubMed - in process]


34. Bone. 2016 Jan;82:93-100. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.04.026. Epub 2015 Apr 23.

Effects of diabetes drugs on the skeleton.

Meier C(1), Schwartz AV(2), Egger A(3), Lecka-Czernik B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, University Hospital,
Basel, Switzerland. Electronic address: christian.meier@unibas.ch. (2)Department 
of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco, CA,
USA. (3)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, University Hospital, 
Basel, Switzerland. (4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Center for Diabetes and 
Endocrine Research, University of Toledo College of Medicine, Toledo, OH, USA;
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Center for Diabetes and Endocrine
Research, University of Toledo College of Medicine, Toledo, OH, USA.

Type 2 diabetes is associated with increased fracture risk and the mechanisms
underlying the detrimental effects of diabetes on skeletal health are only
partially understood. Antidiabetic drugs are indispensable for glycemic control
in most type 2 diabetics, however, they may, at least in part, modulate fracture 
risk in exposed patients. Preclinical and clinical data clearly demonstrate an
unfavorable effect of thiazolidinediones on the skeleton with impaired osteoblast
function and activated osteoclastogenesis. The negative effect of
thiazolidinediones on osteoblastogenesis includes decreased activity of
osteoblast-specific transcription factors (e.g. Runx2, Dlx5, osterix) and
decreased activity of osteoblast-specific signaling pathways (e.g. Wnt,
TGF-ß/BMP, IGF-1). In contrast, metformin has a positive effect on osteoblast
differentiation due to increased activity of Runx2 via the AMPK/USF-1/SHP
regulatory cascade resulting in a neutral or potentially protective effect on
bone. Recently marketed antidiabetic drugs include incretin-based therapies
(GLP-1 receptor agonists, DPP-4 inhibitors) and sodium-glucose co-transporter 2
(SGLT2)-inhibitors. Preclinical studies indicate that incretins (GIP, GLP-1, and 
GLP-2) play an important role in the regulation of bone turnover. Clinical safety
data are limited, however, meta-analyses of trials investigating the
glycemic-lowering effect of both, GLP-1 receptor agonists and DPP4-inhibitors,
suggest a neutral effect of incretin-based therapies on fracture risk. For
SGLT2-inhibitors recent data indicate that due to their mode of action they may
alter calcium and phosphate homeostasis (secondary hyperparathyroidism induced by
increased phosphate reabsorption) and thereby potentially affect bone mass and
fracture risk. Clinical studies are needed to elucidate the effect of
SGLT2-inhibitors on bone metabolism. Meanwhile SGLT2-inhibitors should be used
with caution in patients with high fracture risk, which is specifically true for 
the use of thiazolidinediones.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25913633  [PubMed - in process]


35. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 22;6:6853. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7853.

Developmental genetic bases behind the independent origin of the tympanic
membrane in mammals and diapsids.

Kitazawa T(1), Takechi M(2), Hirasawa T(3), Adachi N(3), Narboux-Nême N(4), Kume 
H(5), Maeda K(6), Hirai T(3), Miyagawa-Tomita S(6), Kurihara Y(1), Hitomi J(7),
Levi G(4), Kuratani S(3), Kurihara H(8).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Physiological Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
[2] Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), Japan Science
and Technology Agency (JST), Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan. (2)1]
Evolutionary Morphology Laboratory, RIKEN, 2-2-3 Minatojimaminami-machi, Chuo-ku,
Kobe 650-0047, Japan [2] Division of Human Embryology, Department of Anatomy,
Iwate Medical University, 2-1-1 Nishitokuta, Yahaba-cho, Shiwa-gun, Iwate
028-3694, Japan. (3)Evolutionary Morphology Laboratory, RIKEN, 2-2-3
Minatojimaminami-machi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan. (4)volution des
Régulations Endocriniennes, CNRS UMR 7221, Muséum National, d'Histoire Naturelle,
Paris, Cedex 05 75231, France. (5)Department of Physiological Chemistry and
Metabolism, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. (6)Division of Cardiovascular Development and
Differentiation, Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Medical Research Institute, 
Tokyo Women's Medical University, 8-1 Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666,
Japan. (7)Division of Human Embryology, Department of Anatomy, Iwate Medical
University, 2-1-1 Nishitokuta, Yahaba-cho, Shiwa-gun, Iwate 028-3694, Japan.
(8)1] Department of Physiological Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
[2] Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), Japan Science
and Technology Agency (JST), Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan [3] Institute for 
Biology and Mathematics of Dynamical Cell Processes (iBMath), The University of
Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Tokyo 153-8914, Japan.

The amniote middle ear is a classical example of the evolutionary novelty.
Although paleontological evidence supports the view that mammals and diapsids
(modern reptiles and birds) independently acquired the middle ear after
divergence from their common ancestor, the developmental bases of these
transformations remain unknown. Here we show that lower-to-upper jaw
transformation induced by inactivation of the Endothelin1-Dlx5/6 cascade
involving Goosecoid results in loss of the tympanic membrane in mouse, but causes
duplication of the tympanic membrane in chicken. Detailed anatomical analysis
indicates that the relative positions of the primary jaw joint and first
pharyngeal pouch led to the coupling of tympanic membrane formation with the
lower jaw in mammals, but with the upper jaw in diapsids. We propose that
differences in connection and release by various pharyngeal skeletal elements
resulted in structural diversity, leading to the acquisition of the tympanic
membrane in two distinct manners during amniote evolution.

PMCID: PMC4423235
PMID: 25902370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Odontology. 2015 Apr 21. [Epub ahead of print]

Insulin-like growth factor-II regulates bone sialoprotein gene transcription.

Choe J(1), Sasaki Y, Zhou L, Takai H, Nakayama Y, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba, 271-8587, Japan.

Insulin-like growth factor-I and -II (IGF-I and IGF-II) have been found in bone
extracts of several different species, and IGF-II is the most abundant growth
factor stored in bone. Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is a noncollagenous extracellular 
matrix glycoprotein associated with mineralized connective tissues. In this
study, we have investigated the regulation of BSP transcription by IGF-II in rat 
osteoblast-like ROS17/2.8 cells. IGF-II (50 ng/ml) increased BSP mRNA and protein
levels after 6-h stimulation, and enhanced luciferase activities of the
constructs pLUC3 (-116 to +60), pLUC4 (-425 to +60), pLUC5 (-801 to +60) and
pLUC6 (-938 to +60). Effects of IGF-II were inhibited by tyrosine kinase,
extracellular signal-regulated kinase1/2 and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
inhibitors, and abrogated by 2-bp mutations in cAMP response element (CRE), FGF2 
response element (FRE) and homeodomain protein-binding site (HOX). The results of
gel shift assays showed that nuclear proteins binding to CRE, FRE and HOX sites
were increased by IGF-II (50 ng/ml) at 3 and 6 h. CREB1, phospho-CREB1, c-Fos and
c-Jun antibodies disrupted the formation of the CRE-protein complexes. Dlx5 and
Runx2 antibodies disrupted the FRE- and HOX-protein complex formations. These
studies therefore demonstrated that IGF-II increased BSP transcription by
targeting CRE, FRE and HOX elements in the proximal promoter of the rat BSP gene.
Moreover, phospho-CREB1, c-Fos, c-Jun, Dlx5 and Runx2 transcription factors
appear to be key regulators of IGF-II effects on BSP transcription.

PMID: 25895664  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


37. Dev Biol. 2015 Jun 15;402(2):162-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.04.007. Epub 2015 
Apr 16.

Distinct effects of Hoxa2 overexpression in cranial neural crest populations
reveal that the mammalian hyomandibular-ceratohyal boundary maps within the
styloid process.

Kitazawa T(1), Fujisawa K(2), Narboux-Nême N(3), Arima Y(2), Kawamura Y(1), Inoue
T(4), Wada Y(5), Kohro T(6), Aburatani H(7), Kodama T(5), Kim KS(2), Sato T(2),
Uchijima Y(1), Maeda K(8), Miyagawa-Tomita S(8), Minoux M(9), Rijli FM(10), Levi 
G(3), Kurihara Y(1), Kurihara H(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan;
Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), Japan Science and
Technology Agency (JST), Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan. (2)Department of
Physiological Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. (3)Evolution 
des Régulations Endocriniennes, CNRS, UMR7221, Muséum National d'Histoire
Naturelle, 7 rue Cuvier, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France. (4)Laboratory for Systems 
Biology and Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro, Tokyo
153-8904, Japan; Department of Nephrology and Endocrinology, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
(5)Laboratory for Systems Biology and Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1
Komaba, Meguro, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan. (6)Laboratory for Systems Biology and
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan;
Department of Translational Research for Healthcare and Clinical Science,
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. (7)Division of Genome Science, Research Center for
Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro,
Tokyo 153-8904, Japan. (8)Division of Cardiovascular Development and
Differentiation, Medical Research Institute, Department of Pediatric Cardiology, 
Tokyo Women's Medical University, 8-1 Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666,
Japan. (9)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Maulbeerstrasse
66, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland; Faculté de chirurgie dentaire, 1, place de
l'hôpital, 67 000 Strasbourg, France. (10)Friedrich Miescher Institute for
Biomedical Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland; University
of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland. (11)Department of Physiological Chemistry
and Metabolism, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan; Core Research for Evolutional Science
and Technology (CREST), Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Chiyoda-ku,
Tokyo 102-0076, Japan; Institute for Biology and Mathematics of Dynamical Cell
Processes (iBMath), The University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Tokyo 153-8914, Japan.
Electronic address: kuri-tky@umin.net.

Most gnathostomata craniofacial structures derive from pharyngeal arches (PAs),
which are colonized by cranial neural crest cells (CNCCs). The anteroposterior
and dorsoventral identities of CNCCs are defined by the combinatorial expression 
of Hox and Dlx genes. The mechanisms associating characteristic Hox/Dlx
expression patterns with the topology and morphology of PAs derivatives are only 
partially known; a better knowledge of these processes might lead to new concepts
on the origin of taxon-specific craniofacial morphologies and of certain
craniofacial malformations. Here we show that ectopic expression of Hoxa2 in
Hox-negative CNCCs results in distinct phenotypes in different CNCC
subpopulations. Namely, while ectopic Hoxa2 expression is sufficient for the
morphological and molecular transformation of the first PA (PA1) CNCC derivatives
into the second PA (PA2)-like structures, this same genetic alteration does not
provoke the transformation of derivatives of other CNCC subpopulations, but
severely impairs their development. Ectopic Hoxa2 expression results in the
transformation of the proximal Meckel's cartilage and of the malleus, two ventral
PA1 CNCCs derivatives, into a supernumerary styloid process (SP), a PA2-derived
mammalian-specific skeletal structure. These results, together with experiments
to inactivate and ectopically activate the Edn1-Dlx5/6 pathway, indicate a
dorsoventral PA2 (hyomandibular/ceratohyal) boundary passing through the middle
of the SP. The present findings suggest context-dependent function of Hoxa2 in
CNCC regional specification and morphogenesis, and provide novel insights into
the evolution of taxa-specific patterning of PA-derived structures.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25889273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Neurosci. 2015 Apr 15;35(15):6209-20. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4624-14.2015.

MeCP2 in the rostral striatum maintains local dopamine content critical for
psychomotor control.

Su SH(1), Kao FC(1), Huang YB(1), Liao W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and. (2)Institute of Neuroscience and Research
Center for Mind, Brain, and Learning, National Cheng-Chi University, Taipei
11605, Taiwan wlliao@nccu.edu.tw.

Methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2) is a chromatin regulator highly expressed in
mature neurons. Mutations of MECP2 gene cause >90% cases of Rett syndrome, a
neurodevelopmental disorder featured by striking psychomotor dysfunction. In
Mecp2-null mice, the motor deficits are associated with reduction of dopamine
content in the striatum, the input nucleus of basal ganglia mostly composed of
GABAergic neurons. Here we investigated the causal role of MeCP2 in modulation of
striatal dopamine content and psychomotor function. We found that mice with
selective removal of MeCP2 in forebrain GABAergic neurons, predominantly in the
striatum, phenocopied Mecp2-null mice in dopamine deregulation and motor
dysfunction. Selective expression of MeCP2 in the striatum preserved dopamine
content and psychomotor function in both males and females. Notably, the dopamine
deregulation was primarily confined to the rostral striatum, and focal deletion
or reactivation of MeCP2 expression in the rostral striatum through
adeno-associated virus effectively disrupted or restored dopamine content and
locomotor activity, respectively. Together, these findings demonstrate that
striatal MeCP2 maintains local dopamine content in a non-cell autonomous manner
in the rostral striatum and that is critical for psychomotor control.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/356209-12$15.00/0.

PMID: 25878291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cell J. 2015 Spring;17(1):71-82. Epub 2015 Apr 8.

Different Methylation Patterns of RUNX2, OSX, DLX5 and BSP in Osteoblastic
Differentiation of Mesenchymal Stem Cells.

Farshdousti Hagh M(1), Noruzinia M(2), Mortazavi Y(3), Soleimani M(4), Kaviani
S(4), Abroun S(4), Dehghani Fard A(5), Mahmoodinia M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran ;
Hematology and Oncology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences,
Tabriz, Iran. (2)Department of Hematology, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran,
Iran ; Department of Medical Genetics, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran ;
Sarem Cell Research Center (SCRC), Sarem Women's Hospital, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Hematology, Zanjan University of Medical Science, Zanjan, Iran. 
(4)Department of Hematology, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran. (5)Sarem
Cell Research Center (SCRC), Sarem Women's Hospital, Tehran, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: Runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) and osterix (OSX) as two
specific osteoblast transcription factors and distal-less homeobox 5 (DLX5) as a 
non-specific one are of paramount importance in regulating osteoblast related
genes including osteocalcin, bone sialoprotein (BSP), osteopontin and collagen
type Ia1. The present study sets out to investigate whether epigenetic regulation
of these genes is important in osteoblastic differentiation of mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this experimental study, MSCs were differentiated to
osteoblasts under the influence of the osteogenic differentiation medium. DNA and
RNA were extracted at days 0, 7, 14 and 21 from MSCs differentiating to
osteoblasts. Promoter regions of RUNX2, OSX, DLX5 and BSP were analyzed by
methylation-specific PCR (MSP). Gene expression was analyzed during osteoblastic 
differentiation by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
RESULTS: MSP analysis revealed that promoter methylation status did not change in
RUNX2, DLX5 and BSP during MSC osteoblastic differentiation. In contrast, OSX
promoter showed a dynamic change in methylation pattern. Moreover, RUNX2, OSX,
DLX5 and BSP promoter regions showed three different methylation patterns during 
MSC differentiation. Gene expression analyses confirmed these results.
CONCLUSION: The results show that in differentiation of MSCs to osteoblasts,
epigenetic regulation of OSX may play a leading role.

PMCID: PMC4393674
PMID: 25870836  [PubMed]


40. Cancer Biol Ther. 2015;16(4):580-8. doi: 10.1080/15384047.2015.1018495. Epub 2015
Mar 20.

Co-targeting of Akt and Myc inhibits viability of lymphoma cells from Lck-Dlx5
mice.

Tan Y(1), Sementino E, Pei J, Kadariya Y, Ito TK, Testa JR.

Author information: 
(1)a Cancer Biology Program; Fox Chase Cancer Center ; Philadelphia , PA USA.

Constitutive activation of AKT is a frequent occurrence in the development of
human T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia/lymphomas (T-ALLs), due largely to
inactivation of PTEN. Up regulation of MYC is also commonly observed in human
T-ALLs. We previously demonstrated that expression of a constitutively active
form of Lck-Akt2 alone is sufficient to initiate T-cell lymphoma in mice, and
that tumor formation typically requires up regulation of Myc or Dlx5 caused by
specific chromosomal rearrangements. Furthermore, Lck-Dlx5 mice develop T-ALLs
that consistently acquire overexpression of Myc and activation of Akt, the latter
due to loss of Pten expression. Proliferation of T-ALL cells from Lck-Dlx5 mice
was found to be highly sensitive to the Akt pathway inhibitors BEZ235 and RAD001,
as well as to JQ1, an inhibitor of bromodomain proteins, one of which (BRD4)
regulates Myc transcription. Additionally, low concentrations of BEZ235 were
found to cooperate with JQ1 to enhance cell cycle arrest. Higher concentrations
of BEZ235 (=0.5 µM) promoted cell death, although the addition of JQ1 did not
result in a further increase in apoptosis. In contrast, the specific Myc
inhibitor 10058-F4 caused apoptosis, and when combined with BEZ235 (=0.5 µM), an 
enhanced effect on apoptosis was consistently observed. In addition, BEZ235 and
RAD001 potentiated vincristine-induced apoptosis when the cells were treated with
both drugs simultaneously, whereas pretreatment with BEZ235 antagonized the
cell-killing effect of vincristine. Collectively, these experimental findings
provide rationale for the design of novel combination therapies for T-ALL that
includes targeting of AKT and MYC.

PMCID: PMC4622865
PMID: 25793663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Neuron. 2015 Mar 18;85(6):1332-43. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.02.019. Epub 2015
Mar 5.

Gamma rhythms link prefrontal interneuron dysfunction with cognitive
inflexibility in Dlx5/6(+/-) mice.

Cho KK(1), Hoch R(2), Lee AT(1), Patel T(1), Rubenstein JL(2), Sohal VS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Center for Integrative Neuroscience, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Sloan-Swartz Center for 
Theoretical Neurobiology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA 94143, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (3)Department of Psychiatry, University 
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Center for
Integrative Neuroscience, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA 94143, USA; Sloan-Swartz Center for Theoretical Neurobiology, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Electronic address:
vikaas.sohal@ucsf.edu.

Abnormalities in GABAergic interneurons, particularly fast-spiking interneurons
(FSINs) that generate gamma (<U+03B3>; ~30-120 Hz) oscillations, are hypothesized to
disrupt prefrontal cortex (PFC)-dependent cognition in schizophrenia. Although <U+03B3> 
rhythms are abnormal in schizophrenia, it remains unclear whether they directly
influence cognition. Mechanisms underlying schizophrenia's typical
post-adolescent onset also remain elusive. We addressed these issues using mice
heterozygous for Dlx5/6, which regulate GABAergic interneuron development. In
Dlx5/6(+/-) mice, FSINs become abnormal following adolescence, coinciding with
the onset of cognitive inflexibility and deficient task-evoked <U+03B3> oscillations.
Inhibiting PFC interneurons in control mice reproduced these deficits, whereas
stimulating them at <U+03B3>-frequencies restored cognitive flexibility in adult
Dlx5/6(+/-) mice. These pro-cognitive effects were frequency specific and
persistent. These findings elucidate a mechanism whereby abnormal FSIN
development may contribute to the post-adolescent onset of schizophrenia
endophenotypes. Furthermore, they demonstrate a causal, potentially therapeutic, 
role for PFC interneuron-driven <U+03B3> oscillations in cognitive domains at the core
of schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4503262
PMID: 25754826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Nov;230(11):2671-82. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24983.

Cross-Talk Between VEGF and BMP-6 Pathways Accelerates Osteogenic Differentiation
of Human Adipose-Derived Stem Cells.

Li CJ(1), Madhu V(1), Balian G(1), Dighe AS(1), Cui Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Research Laboratories, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.

Deficiency in vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) or bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMPs) results in fracture non-unions. Therefore, it is indispensable to
comprehend the combined effect of VEGF and BMPs on the osteogenic differentiation
of osteoprogenitor mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) that are either naturally
occurring at the fracture repair site or exogenously added to enhance the bone
repair. We found that the combination of VEGF and BMP-6 enhanced COL1A2
expression, which correlated with upregulated expression of osterix, Dlx5, and
Msx2 in human adipose-derived stem cells (hADSCs). Cross-talk between VEGF and
BMP-6 pathways upregulated activation of p38 mitogen-activated kinase (p38 MAPK) 
and inhibited activation of protein kinase B (PKB, also known as Akt), whereas
phosphorylation of "mothers against decapentaplegic" homologs 1/5/8 (Smads 1/5/8)
and extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK 1/2) was not affected.
Consistent with these findings, p38 inhibitor SB203580, or siRNA knockdown of
osterix, abrogated crosstalk between the VEGF and BMP-6 pathways and
significantly reduced the observed upregulation of COL1A2. Nuclear translocation 
of the phosphorylated form of osterix was also inhibited by SB203580. Although
crosstalk between the VEGF-BMP-6 pathways did not show an effect on the extent of
mineralization, inhibition of any one of the three components that were
upregulated through the cross-talk, i.e., osterix, Dlx5, and p38 activation, led 
to a complete inhibition of mineralization. Inhibition of PKB/Akt activation,
which is attenuated through the cross-talk, significantly enhanced ALP gene
expression. These observations imply that crosstalk between the VEGF and BMP-6
signaling pathways enhances osteogenic differentiation of MSCs.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25753222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Endod. 2015 May;41(5):640-5. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2014.12.006. Epub 2015 Jan 30.

Effect of 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine on odontogenic differentiation of human dental
pulp cells.

Zhang D(1), Li Q(1), Rao L(1), Yi B(1), Xu Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Guanghua School of Stomatology and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Guanghua School of
Stomatology and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: xqiong@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

INTRODUCTION: Human dental pulp cells (hDPCs) comprise a heterogeneous cell
population that possesses the capacity to differentiate into osteoblasts and
plays an important role in reparative dentinogenesis. 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(5-Aza-CdR), a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, is known to be involved in cell
differentiation. However, its role in the differentiation program of hDPCs
remains unknown. The purpose of this study was to explore the role of 5-Aza-CdR
in the regulation of odontogenic growth and differentiation of hDPCs.
METHODS: hDPCs were treated with 1 µmol/L 5-Aza-CdR for 24 hours before being
incubated in odontogenic medium for 2 weeks. To identify the effect of 5-Aza-CdR 
on proliferation and the odontogenic differentiation potential of hDPCs, the cell
growth was measured using the Cell Counting Kit-8 assay (Dojindo, Kumamoto,
Japan). The expression levels of the odontogenic markers, dentin
sialophosphoprotein (DSPP), dentin matrix protein 1, (DMP1) and transcription
factors, runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2), distal-less homeobox 5
(DLX5), osterix (OSX) were analyzed. The activity of alkaline phosphatase was
determined, and the formation of mineralized nodules was assessed using alizarin 
red S staining.
RESULTS: After treatment with 5-Aza-CdR, the proliferation capacity of hDPCs was 
suppressed (n = 3, P < .05). 5-Aza-CdR up-regulated the expression of DSPP,
DMP-1, OSX, RUNX2, and DLX5; increased the level of alkaline phosphatase
activity; and accelerated the formation of calcified nodules (n = 3, P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-Aza-CdR significantly inhibits the
proliferation and enhances the capability of odontogenic differentiation of
hDPCs, suggesting that DNA methylation may play an important role in reparative
dentinogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25649298  [PubMed - in process]


44. Dev Dyn. 2015 Apr;244(4):564-76. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24256. Epub 2015 Mar 13.

Sonic hedgehog from pharyngeal arch 1 epithelium is necessary for early
mandibular arch cell survival and later cartilage condensation differentiation.

Billmyre KK(1), Klingensmith J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina.

BACKGROUND: Morphogenesis of vertebrate craniofacial skeletal elements is
dependent on a key cell population, the cranial neural crest cells (NCC). Cranial
NCC are formed dorsally in the cranial neural tube and migrate ventrally to form 
craniofacial skeletal elements as well as other tissues. Multiple extracellular
signaling pathways regulate the migration, survival, proliferation, and
differentiation of NCC.
RESULTS: In this study, we demonstrate that Shh expression in the oral ectoderm
and pharyngeal endoderm is essential for mandibular development. We show that a
loss of Shh in these domains results in increased mesenchymal cell death in
pharyngeal arch 1 (PA1) after NCC migration. This increased cell death can be
rescued in utero by pharmacological inhibition of p53. Furthermore, we show that 
epithelial SHH is necessary for the early differentiation of mandibular cartilage
condensations and, therefore, the subsequent development of Meckel's cartilage,
around which the dentary bone forms. Nonetheless, a rescue of the cell death
phenotype does not rescue the defect in cartilage condensation formation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that SHH produced by the PA1 epithelium is
necessary for the survival of post-migratory NCC, and suggests a key role in the 
subsequent differentiation of chondrocytes to form Meckel's cartilage.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25626636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Dev Biol. 2015 Feb 15;398(2):280-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.12.003. Epub 2014 
Dec 12.

Ascl1 and Helt act combinatorially to specify thalamic neuronal identity by
repressing Dlxs activation.

Song H(1), Lee B(1), Pyun D(1), Guimera J(2), Son Y(1), Yoon J(1), Baek K(1),
Wurst W(2), Jeong Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, College of Life Sciences and Graduate
School of Biotechnology, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si 446-701, Republic of
Korea. (2)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Developmental Genetics, D-85764
Neuherberg, Germany. (3)Department of Genetic Engineering, College of Life
Sciences and Graduate School of Biotechnology, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si
446-701, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: yongsu@khu.ac.kr.

The mammalian thalamus is an essential diencephalic derivative that plays unique 
roles in processing and relaying sensory and motor information to and from the
cerebral cortex. The profile of transcription factors and lineage tracing
experiments revealed a spatiotemporal relationship between diencephalic
progenitor domains and discrete differentiated neurons contributing to thalamic
nuclei. However, the precise molecular mechanisms by which heterogeneous thalamic
neurons become specified and assemble into distinct thalamic nuclei are still
poorly understood. Here, we show that a combinatorial interaction between the
bHLH transcription factors Ascl1 and Helt is required for acquiring thalamic
progenitor identity. Surprisingly, in the combined absence of Ascl1 and Helt,
rostral thalamic progenitors (TH-R) adopt a molecular profile of a more rostral
diencephalic derivative, the prethalamus. Furthermore, we show that the
prethalamic factors Dlxs upregulated by Ascl1/Helt deficiency play unique roles
in regulating thalamic progenitor specification, and that derepression of Dlx2
and Dlx5 suppress generation of TH-R neurons. Taken together, our results suggest
a model whereby the combined activity of two distinct bHLH factors plays a key
role in the development of discrete classes of thalamic interneurons.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25512300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2014 Dec;42(8):2002-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jcms.2014.09.006. 
Epub 2014 Nov 6.

Optimizing the osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stromal cells by
the synergistic action of growth factors.

Açil Y(1), Ghoniem AA(1), Wiltfang J(1), Gierloff M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, Christian-Albrechts-University,
Kiel, Germany. (2)Department of Plastic Surgery, University of Lübeck, Lübeck,
Germany. Electronic address: matthias_gierloff@icloud.com.

A variety of different growth factors, most notably bone morphogenetic proteins
(BMPs), have been shown to stimulate the osteogenic differentiation of
mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) in vitro. Yet, due to the lack of comparative
studies it remains unclear which protocol is the most effective in the induction 
of osteogenesis in MSC cultures. The aim of this study was to compare the most
potent growth factors in regard to their osteoinductive potential. Human MSCs
were cultured for 10 days in the presence of BMP-2, BMP-6, BMP-9 + IGF-2 and
BMP-2, -6, -9 (day 1 + 2: 50 ng/ml; days 3-6: 100 ng/ml; days 7-10: 200 ng/ml).
The formation of the osteoblast phenotype was assessed by quantification of
osteoblast-related marker genes using reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) staining. Matrix mineralization 
was assessed by alizarin red S and von Kossa staining. Statistical analysis was
carried out using the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Scheffe's 
post hoc procedure. Among the tested growth factors the combination of BMP-2 +
BMP-6 + BMP-9 most effectively induced the upregulation of collagen type I,
collagen type V, osteocalcin, alkaline phosphatase, RUNX2, BMP-2, osteonectin and
DLX5 (p < 0.01) and resulted in a consistent matrix mineralization. The findings 
suggest the combined addition of BMP-2, BMP-6 and BMP-9 to the osteoinductive
culture medium containing dexamethasone, ß-glycerophosphate and
ascorbate-2-phosphate produces more potent osteoblast differentiation of human
MSCs in vitro.

Copyright © 2014 European Association for Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25458345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jan 2;456(1):1-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.10.128. Epub 2014 Nov 15.

Osteocytes up-regulate the terminal differentiation of pre-osteoblasts via gap
junctions.

Nishikawa Y(1), Akiyama Y(2), Yamamoto K(3), Kobayashi M(3), Watanabe E(4),
Watanabe N(4), Shimizu N(2), Mikami Y(1), Komiyama K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nihon University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13
Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8310, Japan. (2)Department of
Orthodontics, Nihon University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13 Kanda-Surugadai,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8310, Japan. (3)Department of Pharmacology, Nihon
University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13 Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo
101-8310, Japan. (4)Clinical FACS Core Laboratory, The Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, 
Japan. (5)Department of Pathology, Nihon University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13
Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8310, Japan. Electronic address:
komiyama.kazuo@nihon-u.ac.jp.

We examined cell-to-cell interaction between pre-osteoblasts and osteocytes using
MC3T3-E1 and MLO-Y4, respectively. First, GFP expressing MC3T3-E1 (E1-GFP) cells 
were generated to isolate the cells from co-culture with MLO-Y4. No changes were 
observed in the expression of osteogenic transcription factors Runx2, Osterix,
Dlx5 and Msx2, but expression of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and bone sialoprotein
(BSP) in E1-GFP co-cultured with MLO-Y4 was 300-400-fold greater than that in
mono-cultured E1-GFP. In addition, mineralized nodule formation was drastically
increased in co-cultured E1-GFP cells compared to mono-cultured cells. Patch
clamp assay showed the presence of gap junctions between E1-GFP and MLO-Y4.
Furthermore, when the gap junction inhibitor carbenoxolone (CBX) was added to the
culture, increased expression of ALP and BSP in E1-GFP co-cultured with MLO-Y4
was suppressed. These results suggest that gap junction detected between
pre-osteoblasts and osteocytes plays an important role on the terminal
differentiation of pre-osteoblasts.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25450679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Biol Psychiatry. 2015 Feb 15;77(4):404-15. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.07.033.
Epub 2014 Aug 27.

A novel anxiogenic role for the delta opioid receptor expressed in GABAergic
forebrain neurons.

Chu Sin Chung P(1), Keyworth HL(2), Martin-Garcia E(3), Charbogne P(1), Darcq
E(4), Bailey A(2), Filliol D(1), Matifas A(1), Scherrer G(5), Ouagazzal AM(1),
Gaveriaux-Ruff C(1), Befort K(1), Maldonado R(3), Kitchen I(2), Kieffer BL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France. (2)Department of 
Biochemistry and Physiology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Institute of
Biosciences and Medicine, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, United
Kingdom. (3)Departament de Ciencies Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Douglas Hospital Research Center, Department
of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 
(5)Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Department of
Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford
Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California. (6)Institut 
de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.; Douglas Hospital Research 
Center, Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.. Electronic address:
brigitte.kieffer@douglas.mcgill.ca.

BACKGROUND: The delta opioid receptor (DOR) is broadly expressed throughout the
nervous system; it regulates chronic pain, emotional responses, motivation, and
memory. Neural circuits underlying DOR activities have been poorly explored by
genetic approaches. We used conditional mouse mutagenesis to elucidate receptor
function in GABAergic neurons of the forebrain.
METHODS: We characterized DOR distribution in the brain of
Dlx5/6-CreXOprd1(fl/fl) (Dlx-DOR) mice and tested main central DOR functions
through behavioral testing.
RESULTS: The DOR proteins were strongly deleted in olfactory bulb and striatum
and remained intact in cortex and basolateral amygdala. Olfactory perception,
circadian activity, and despair-like behaviors were unchanged. In contrast,
locomotor stimulant effects of SNC80 (DOR agonist) and SKF81297 (D1 agonist) were
abolished and increased, respectively. The Dlx-DOR mice showed lower levels of
anxiety in the elevated plus maze, opposing the known high anxiety in
constitutive DOR knockout animals. Also, Dlx-DOR mice reached the food more
rapidly in a novelty suppressed feeding task, despite their lower motivation for 
food reward observed in an operant paradigm. Finally, c-fos protein staining
after novelty suppressed feeding was strongly reduced in amygdala, concordant
with the low anxiety phenotype of Dlx-DOR mice.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that DORs expressed in the forebrain mediate the
described locomotor effect of SNC80 and inhibit D1-stimulated hyperactivity. Our 
data also reveal an unanticipated anxiogenic role for this particular DOR
subpopulation, with a potential novel adaptive role. In emotional responses, DORs
exert dual anxiolytic and anxiogenic roles, both of which may have implications
in the area of anxiety disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4297504
PMID: 25444168  [PubMed - in process]


49. J Cell Biochem. 2015 May;116(5):730-42. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25026.

miR-124 negatively regulates osteogenic differentiation and in vivo bone
formation of mesenchymal stem cells.

Qadir AS(1), Um S, Lee H, Baek K, Seo BM, Lee G, Kim GS, Woo KM, Ryoo HM, Baek
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, School of Dentistry and Dental Research
Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, 110-744, Korea.

MicroRNAs are novel key regulators of cellular differentiation. Dlx transcription
factors play an important role in osteoblast differentiation, and Dlx5 and Dlx2
are known targets of miR-124. Therefore, in the present study, we investigated
the regulatory effects of miR-124 on the osteogenic differentiation and in vivo
bone formation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). During osteogenic induction by
BMP2, the expression levels of miR-124 were inversely correlated with those of
osteogenic differentiation marker genes in human and mouse bone marrow-derived
MSCs, MC3T3-E1 cells and C2C12 cells. The overexpression of a miR-124 mimic
significantly decreased the expression levels of Dlx5, Dlx3, and Dlx2, whereas
the silencing of miR-124 with hairpin inhibitors significantly increased the
expression of these Dlx genes. Luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that
miR-124 directly targets the 3'UTRs of Dlx3, Dlx5, and Dlx2. The overexpression
of a miR-124 mimic suppressed the osteogenic marker gene expression levels,
alkaline phosphatase activity and matrix mineralization, which were all
significantly increased by the overexpression of a miR-124 inhibitor. When
ectopic bone formation was induced by the subcutaneous transplantation of human
bone marrow-derived MSCs in nude mice, MSCs overexpressing a miR-124 inhibitor
significantly enhanced woven bone formation compared with control MSCs. However, 
MSCs overexpressing a miR-124 mimic exhibited increased adipocyte differentiation
at the expense of ectopic bone formation. These results suggest that miR-124 is a
negative regulator of osteogenic differentiation and in vivo bone formation and
that the targeting of Dlx5, Dlx3, and Dlx2 genes partly contributes to this
inhibitory effect exerted by miR-124.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25424317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 20;9(11):e113606. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113606.
eCollection 2014.

Early growth response 4 is involved in cell proliferation of small cell lung
cancer through transcriptional activation of its downstream genes.

Matsuo T(1), Dat le T(2), Komatsu M(1), Yoshimaru T(1), Daizumoto K(1), Sone
S(3), Nishioka Y(3), Katagiri T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genome Medicine, Institute for Genome Research, The University of 
Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan. (2)Division of Genome Medicine, Institute for Genome
Research, The University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan; Department of Medical
Oncology, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of Tokushima,
Tokushima, Japan. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Institute of Health
Biosciences, The University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan.

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is aggressive, with rapid growth and frequent bone 
metastasis; however, its detailed molecular mechanism remains poorly understood. 
Here, we report the critical role of early growth factor 4 (EGR4), a DNA-binding,
zinc-finger transcription factor, in cell proliferation of SCLC. EGR4
overexpression in HEK293T cells conferred significant upregulation of specific
splice variants of the parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) gene,
resulting in enhancement of the secretion of PTHrP protein, a known mediator of
osteolytic bone metastasis. More importantly, depletion of EGR4 expression by
siRNA significantly suppressed growth of the SCLC cell lines, SBC-5, SBC-3 and
NCI-H1048. On the other hand, introduction of EGR4 into NIH3T3 cells
significantly enhanced cell growth. We identified four EGR4 target genes, SAMD5, 
RAB15, SYNPO and DLX5, which were the most significantly downregulated genes upon
depletion of EGR4 expression in all of the SCLC cells examined, and demonstrated 
the direct recruitment of EGR4 to their promoters by ChIP and luciferase reporter
analysis. Notably, knockdown of the expression of these genes by siRNA remarkably
suppressed the growth of all the SCLC cells. Taken together, our findings suggest
that EGR4 likely regulates the bone metastasis and proliferation of SCLC cells
via transcriptional regulation of several target genes, and may therefore be a
promising target for the development of anticancer drugs for SCLC patients.

PMCID: PMC4239076
PMID: 25411851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Med Genet. 2014 Dec;51(12):817-23. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102576. Epub
2014 Oct 20.

Absent expression of the osteoblast-specific maternally imprinted genes, DLX5 and
DLX6, causes split hand/split foot malformation type I.

Rattanasopha S(1), Tongkobpetch S(2), Srichomthong C(2), Kitidumrongsook P(3),
Suphapeetiporn K(2), Shotelersuk V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Doctor of Philosophy Program in Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Center 
of Excellence for Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, Thailand Excellence Center for Medical Genetics, King
Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, The Thai Red Cross Society, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Split hand/split foot malformation (SHFM) type 1 is characterised by 
missing central digital rays with clefts of the hands and/or feet, which was
linked to chromosome 7q21.3. While double knockout of Dlx5 and Dlx6 resulted in
limb defects in mice, the majority of patients with SHFM1 had only heterozygous
chromosomal abnormalities.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical and molecular features of a large family
with SHFM1.
METHODS: Blood samples of family members were investigated by linkage analysis,
array comparative genomic hybridisation, exome sequencing and PCR-Sanger
sequencing. Cultures from bone specimens obtained from the proband and an
unrelated unaffected individual were established and subjected to quantitative
real-time PCR, reverse-transcribed PCR, Western blot and imprinting analysis.
RESULTS: We report a large pedigree of SHFM1 with 10 members having a
heterozygous 103 kb deletion, the smallest one ever reported to be associated
with SHFM1. Of these 10, two had no limb anomalies, making a penetrance of 80%.
The deletion encompassed exons 15 and 17 of DYNC1I1, which are known enhancers of
two downstream genes, DLX5 and DLX6. Surprisingly, DLX5 and DLX6 RNA and proteins
in our proband's cultured osteoblasts, instead of 50% decrease, were absent.
Allelic expression studies in cultured osteoblasts of the unaffected individual
showed that DSS1, DLX6 and DLX5 expressed only paternal alleles. These lines of
evidence indicate that DSS1, DLX6 and DLX5 were maternally imprinted in
osteoblasts.
CONCLUSIONS: SHFM1 in our family is caused by a heterozygous paternal deletion of
enhancers of the osteoblast-specific maternally imprinted DLX6 and DLX5 genes,
leading to the absence of their proteins.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25332435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2014 Jul 29;9:108. doi: 10.1186/s13023-014-0108-6.

Deletions of exons with regulatory activity at the DYNC1I1 locus are associated
with split-hand/split-foot malformation: array CGH screening of 134 unrelated
families.

Tayebi N, Jamsheer A, Flöttmann R, Sowinska-Seidler A, Doelken SC,
Oehl-Jaschkowitz B, Hülsemann W, Habenicht R, Klopocki E, Mundlos S, Spielmann M.

BACKGROUND: A growing number of non-coding regulatory mutations are being
identified in congenital disease. Very recently also some exons of protein coding
genes have been identified to act as tissue specific enhancer elements and were
therefore termed exonic enhancers or "eExons".
METHODS: We screened a cohort of 134 unrelated families with
split-hand/split-foot malformation (SHFM) with high resolution array CGH for CNVs
with regulatory potential.
RESULTS: In three families with an autosomal dominant non-syndromic SHFM
phenotype we detected microdeletions encompassing the exonic enhancer (eExons) 15
and 17 of DYNC1I1. In a fourth family, who had hearing loss in addition to SHFM, 
we found a larger deletion of 510 kb including the eExons of DYNC1I1 and, in
addition, the human brain enhancer hs1642. Exons 15 and 17 of DYNC1I1 are known
to act as tissue specific limb enhancers of DLX5/6, two genes that have been
shown to be associated with SHFM in mice. In our cohort of 134 unrelated families
with SHFM, deletions of the eExons of DYNC1I1 account for approximately 3% of the
cases, while 17p13.3 duplications were identified in 13% of the families, 10q24
duplications in 12%, and TP63 mutations were detected in 4%.
CONCLUSIONS: We reduce the minimal critical region for SHFM1 to 78 kb. Hearing
loss, however, appears to be associated with deletions of a more telomeric region
encompassing the brain enhancer element hs1642. Thus, SHFM1 as well as hearing
loss at the same locus are caused by deletion of regulatory elements. Deletions
of the exons with regulatory potential of DYNC1I1 are an example of the emerging 
role of exonic enhancer elements and their implications in congenital
malformation syndromes.

PMCID: PMC4237947
PMID: 25231166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2014 Oct;100(10):764-71. doi:
10.1002/bdra.23298. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

Heterozygous DLX5 nonsense mutation associated with isolated split-hand/foot
malformation with reduced penetrance and variable expressivity in two unrelated
families.

Sowinska-Seidler A(1), Badura-Stronka M, Latos-Bielenska A, Stronka M, Jamsheer
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM) is a clinically and genetically
heterogeneous limb abnormality characterized by the absence or hypoplasia of the 
central rays of the autopod. SHFM1, which is one out of seven known SHFM loci,
maps to 7q21.2-q21.3. SHFM1 is usually inherited as an autosomal dominant trait
with reduced penetrance, although recessive inheritance has been described for a 
single family carrying a homozygous DLX5 missense variant. In most cases, SHFM1
results from heterozygous deletions encompassing DLX5/DLX6 genes or from
inversions and translocations separating the genes from their limb specific
enhancers. Recently, a single Chinese family with dominant SHFM1 was shown to
result from a heterozygous DLX5 missense mutation.
METHODS: In this study, we report on four male individuals from two unrelated
Polish families (one sporadic and one familial case) presenting with isolated
SHFM. We tested both probands for known molecular causes of SHFM, including TP63,
WNT10B, DLX5 mutations and copy number changes using 1.4 M array CGH.
RESULTS: Sanger sequencing of DLX5 revealed a novel heterozygous nonsense
mutation c.G115T(p.E39X) in both index patients. Segregation studies demonstrated
that the variant was present in all affected family members but also in three
apparently healthy relatives (two females and one male).
CONCLUSION: This is the first report of a heterozygous DLX5 nonsense mutation
resulting in incompletely penetrant autosomal dominant isolated SHFM1. Data shown
here provides further evidence for the contribution of DLX5 point mutations to
the development of ectrodactyly and suggest the possibility of sex-related
segregation distortion with an excess of affected males.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25196357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Vis Exp. 2014 Aug 18;(90):e51518. doi: 10.3791/51518.

Subtype-selective electroporation of cortical interneurons.

De Marco Garcia NV(1), Fishell G(2).

Author information: 
(1)NYU Neuroscience Institute, New York University School of Medicine; Brain and 
Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College;
natalia.demarcogarcia@nyumc.org. (2)NYU Neuroscience Institute, New York
University School of Medicine.

The study of central nervous system (CNS) maturation relies on genetic targeting 
of neuronal populations. However, the task of restricting the expression of genes
of interest to specific neuronal subtypes has proven remarkably challenging due
to the relative scarcity of specific promoter elements. GABAergic interneurons
constitute a neuronal population with extensive genetic and morphological
diversity. Indeed, more than 11 different subtypes of GABAergic interneurons have
been characterized in the mouse cortex. Here we present an adapted protocol for
selective targeting of GABAergic populations. We achieved subtype selective
targeting of GABAergic interneurons by using the enhancer element of the homeobox
transcription factors Dlx5 and Dlx6, homologues of the Drosophila distal-less
(Dll) gene, to drive the expression of specific genes through in utero
electroporation.

PMCID: PMC4243608
PMID: 25177832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2014 Aug 28;5(4):105. doi: 10.1186/scrt493.

Novel daidzein analogs enhance osteogenic activity of bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells and adipose-derived stromal/stem cells through estrogen
receptor dependent and independent mechanisms.

Strong AL(1), Ohlstein JF(2), Jiang Q(3), Zhang Q(4), Zheng S(5), Boue SM(6),
Elliott S(7), Gimble JM(8), Burow ME(9), Wang G(10), Bunnell BA(11).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, Tulane University
School of Medicine, 1430 Tulane Avenue, SL-99, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.
alin1@tulane.edu. (2)Center for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine,
Tulane University School of Medicine, 1430 Tulane Avenue, SL-99, New Orleans, LA,
70112, USA. johlstei@tulane.edu. (3)Department of Chemistry and RCMI Cancer
Research Program, Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, LA, 70125, USA.
qjiang1@my.uno.edu. (4)Department of Chemistry and RCMI Cancer Research Program, 
Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, LA, 70125, USA. qzhang1@xula.edu.
(5)Department of Chemistry and RCMI Cancer Research Program, Xavier University of
Louisiana, New Orleans, LA, 70125, USA. szheng@xula.edu. (6)US Department of
Agriculture, Southern Regional Research Center, 1100 Robert E. Lee Blvd, New
Orleans, LA, 70124, USA. steve.boue@ars.usda.gov. (7)Department of Medicine,
Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.
selliot@tulane.edu. (8)Center for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine,
Tulane University School of Medicine, 1430 Tulane Avenue, SL-99, New Orleans, LA,
70112, USA. jgimble@tulane.edu. (9)Department of Medicine, Tulane University
School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. mburow@tulane.edu.
(10)Department of Chemistry and RCMI Cancer Research Program, Xavier University
of Louisiana, New Orleans, LA, 70125, USA. gwang@xula.edu. (11)Center for Stem
Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, Tulane University School of Medicine,
1430 Tulane Avenue, SL-99, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. bbunell@tulane.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Osteoporosis is a disease characterized by low bone mineral density
(BMD) and increased risk of fractures. Studies have demonstrated the use of
phytoestrogens, or plant-derived estrogens, such as genistein and daidzein, to
effectively increase osteogenic activity of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem 
cells (BMSCs). Herein, the effects of daidzein analogs on the osteogenic
differentiation efficiency of human BMSC and adipose-derived stromal/stem cells
(ASC) were explored.
METHODS: BMSCs and ASCs underwent osteogenic differentiation in the presence of
vehicle, 17ß-estradiol (E2), phytoestrogens, or daidzein analogs. Cells were
stained for alkaline phosphatase (ALP) enzymatic activity, calcium deposition by 
alizarin red s, and phosphate mineralization by silver nitrate. Gene expression
analysis was conducted on cells treated with daidzein analogs.
RESULTS: Cells treated with E2, daidzein, or genistein increased calcium
deposition by 1.6-, 1.5-, and 1.4-fold, respectively, relative to vehicle-treated
BMSCs and 1.6-, 1.7-, and 1.4-fold relative to vehicle-treated ASCs,
respectively. BMSCs treated with daidzein analog 2c, 2g, and 2l demonstrated a
1.6-, 1.6-, and 1.9-fold increase in calcium deposition relative to
vehicle-treated BMSCs, respectively, while ASCs treated with daidzein analog 2c, 
2g, or 2l demonstrated a 1.7-, 2.0-, and 2.2-fold increase in calcium deposition 
relative to vehicle-treated ASCs, respectively. Additional analysis with BMSCs
and ASCs was conducted in the more efficient compounds: 2g and 2l. ALP activity
and phosphate mineralization was increased in 2g- and 2l-treated cells. The
analysis of lineage specific gene expression demonstrated increased expression of
key osteogenic genes (RUNX2, c-FOS, SPARC, DLX5, SPP1, COL1A1, IGF1, SOST, and
DMP1) and earlier induction of these lineage specific genes, following treatment 
with 2g or 2l, relative to vehicle-treated cells. Estrogen receptor (ER)
inhibitor studies demonstrated that ER antagonist fulvestrant inhibited the
osteogenic differentiation of 2g in BMSCs and ASCs, while fulvestrant only
attenuated the effects of 2l, suggesting that 2l acts by both ER dependent and
independent pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies provide support for exploring the therapeutic efficacy
of daidzein derivatives for the treatment of osteoporosis. Furthermore, the
patterns of gene induction differed following treatment with each daidzein
analog, suggesting that these daidzein analogs activate distinct ER and non-ER
pathways to induce differentiation in BMSCs and ASCs.

PMCID: PMC4355363
PMID: 25168698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. BMC Dev Biol. 2014 Aug 28;14:36. doi: 10.1186/s12861-014-0036-7.

Vascularization of primary and secondary ossification centres in the human growth
plate.

Walzer SM, Cetin E, Grübl-Barabas R, Sulzbacher I, Rueger B, Girsch W, Toegel S, 
Windhager R, Fischer MB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Blood Group Serology and Transfusion Medicine, Waeringer Guertel
18-20, Vienna, 1090, Austria. michael.b.fischer@meduniwien.ac.at.

BACKGROUND: The switch from cartilage template to bone during endochondral
ossification of the growth plate requires a dynamic and close interaction between
cartilage and the developing vasculature. Vascular invasion of the primarily
avascular hypertrophic chondrocyte zone brings chondroclasts, osteoblast- and
endothelial precursor cells into future centres of ossification.Vascularization
of human growth plates of polydactylic digits was studied by
immunohistochemistry, confocal-laser-scanning-microscopy and RT-qPCR using
markers specific for endothelial cells CD34 and CD31, smooth muscle cells a-SMA, 
endothelial progenitor cells CD133, CXCR4, VEGFR-2 and mesenchymal progenitor
cells CD90 and CD105. In addition, morphometric analysis was performed to
quantify RUNX2+ and DLX5+ hypertrophic chondrocytes, RANK+ chondro- and
osteoclasts, and CD133+ progenitors in different zones of the growth plate.
RESULTS: New vessels in ossification centres were formed by sprouting of CD34+
endothelial cells that did not co-express the mature endothelial cell marker
CD31. These immature vessels in the growth plate showed no abluminal coverage
with a-SMA+ smooth muscle cells, but in their close proximity single CD133+
precursor cells were found that did not express VEGFR-2, a marker for endothelial
lineage commitment. In periosteum and in the perichondrial groove of Ranvier that
harboured CD90+/CD105+ chondro-progenitors, in contrast, mature vessels were
found stabilized by a-SMA+ smooth muscle cells.
CONCLUSION: Vascularization of ossification centres of the growth plate was
mediated by sprouting of capillaries coming from the bone collar or by
intussusception rather than by de-novo vessel formation involving endothelial
progenitor cells. Vascular invasion of the joint anlage was temporally delayed
compared to the surrounding joint tissue.

PMCID: PMC4236517
PMID: 25164565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Connect Tissue Res. 2014 Aug;55 Suppl 1:53-6. doi: 10.3109/03008207.2014.923867.

Biphasic effects of FGF2 on odontoblast differentiation involve changes in the
BMP and Wnt signaling pathways.

Sagomonyants K(1), Mina M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Sciences, School of Dental Medicine, University of 
Connecticut Health Center , Farmington, CT , USA.

Odontoblast differentiation during physiological and reparative dentinogenesis is
dependent upon multiple signaling molecules, including fibroblast growth factors 
(FGFs), bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and Wingless/Integrated (Wnt) ligands.
Recent studies in our laboratory showed that continuous exposure of primary
dental pulp cultures to FGF2 exerted biphasic effects on the expression of
markers of dentinogenesis. In the present study, we examined the possible
involvement of the BMP and Wnt signaling pathways in mediating the effects of
FGF2 on dental pulp cells. Our results showed that stimulatory effects of FGF2 on
dentinogenesis during the proliferation phase of growth were associated with
increased expression of the components of the BMP (Bmp2, Dlx5, Msx2, Osx) and Wnt
(Wnt10a, Wisp2) pathways, and decreased expression of an inhibitor of the Wnt
signaling, Nkd2. Further addition of FGF2 during the
differentiation/mineralization phase of growth resulted in decreased expression
of components of the BMP signaling (Bmp2, Runx2, Osx) and increased expression of
inhibitors of the Wnt signaling (Nkd2, Dkk3). This suggests that both BMP and Wnt
pathways may be involved in mediating the effects of FGF2 on dental pulp cells.

PMCID: PMC4404504
PMID: 25158181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Jan 15;24(2):214-27. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0060.

Osteogenic gene transcription is regulated via gap junction-mediated cell-cell
communication.

Mikami Y(1), Yamamoto K, Akiyama Y, Kobayashi M, Watanabe E, Watanabe N, Asano M,
Shimizu N, Komiyama K.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pathology, Nihon University School of Dentistry , Tokyo, Japan
.

An analytical study of cell-cell communications between murine osteoblast-like
MLO-A5 cells and bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell (BMSC)-like C3H10T1/2 cells
was performed. C3H10T1/2 cells expressing green fluorescent protein (10T-GFP
cells) were generated to enable the isolation of the BMSC-like cells from
co-cultures with MLO-A5 cells. The mRNA expression levels of several osteogenic
transcription factors (Runx2, Osterix, Dlx5, and Msx2) did not differ between the
co-cultured and mono-cultured 10T-GFP cells, but those of alkaline phosphatase
(ALP) and bone sialoprotein (BSP) were 300- to 400-fold higher in the co-cultured
cells. Patch clamp and biocytin transfer assays revealed gap junction-mediated
communication between co-cultured 10T-GFP and MLO-A5 cells. The addition of a gap
junction inhibitor suppressed the increases in the expression levels of the ALP
and BSP mRNAs in co-cultured 10T-GFP cells. Furthermore, the histone acetylation 
levels were higher in co-cultured 10T-GFP cells than in mono-cultured 10T-GFP
cells. These results suggest that osteoblasts and BMSCs associate via gap
junctions, and that gap junction-mediated signaling induces histone acetylation
that leads to elevated transcription of the genes encoding ALP and BSP in BMSCs.

PMCID: PMC4291207
PMID: 25137151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol. 2014 Sep-Oct;3(5):349-63. doi: 10.1002/wdev.142. 
Epub 2014 Jul 2.

Early embryonic specification of vertebrate cranial placodes.

Schlosser G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, School of Natural Sciences & Regenerative Medicine
Institute (REMEDI), National University of Ireland, Galway, Galway, Ireland.

Cranial placodes contribute to many sensory organs and ganglia of the vertebrate 
head. The olfactory, otic, and lateral line placodes form the sensory receptor
cells and neurons of the nose, ear, and lateral line system; the lens placode
develops into the lens of the eye; epibranchial, profundal, and trigeminal
placodes contribute sensory neurons to cranial nerve ganglia; and the
adenohypophyseal placode gives rise to the anterior pituitary, a major endocrine 
control organ. Despite these differences in fate, all placodes are now known to
originate from a common precursor, the preplacodal ectoderm (PPE). The latter is 
a horseshoe-shaped domain of ectoderm surrounding the anterior neural plate and
neural crest and is defined by expression of transcription factor Six1, its
cofactor Eya1, and other members of the Six and Eya families. Studies in
zebrafish, Xenopus, and chick reveal that the PPE is specified together with
other ectodermal territories (epidermis, neural crest, and neural plate) during
early embryogenesis. During gastrulation, domains of ventrally (e.g., Dlx3/Dlx5, 
GATA2/GATA3, AP2, Msx1, FoxI1, and Vent1/Vent2) and dorsally (e.g., Zic1, Sox3,
and Geminin) restricted transcription factors are established in response to a
gradient of BMP and help to define non-neural and neural competence territories, 
respectively. At neural plate stages, the PPE is then induced in the non-neural
competence territory by signals from the adjacent neural plate and mesoderm
including FGF, BMP inhibitors, and Wnt inhibitors. Subsequently, signals from
more localized signaling centers induce restricted expression domains of various 
transcription factors within the PPE, which specify multiplacodal areas and
ultimately individual placodes. For further resources related to this article,
please visit the WIREs website.CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The author has declared no
conflicts of interest for this article.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25124756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Br J Haematol. 2014 Oct;167(2):194-206. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13020. Epub 2014 Jul 31.

The bone marrow stromal compartment in multiple myeloma patients retains
capability for osteogenic differentiation in vitro: defining the stromal defect
in myeloma.

Kassen D(1), Moore S, Percy L, Herledan G, Bounds D, Rodriguez-Justo M, Croucher 
P, Yong K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University College London, London, UK.

Defects in bone repair contribute to multiple myeloma (MM) bone disease. It is
unknown whether this reflects failure of osteogenic differentiation from
mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC), inherent stromal defects or mature cell
dysfunction. We quantified the number of fibroblast colony-forming units (CFU-f) 
and osteoblast colony-forming units (CFU-ob) in freshly isolated bone marrow (BM)
from healthy individuals (N = 10) and MM patients (N = 54). CFU-f and CFU-ob were
present in MM BM, at comparable frequency to normal subjects, irrespective of
disease stage, and the presence of bone disease. Adherent cultures from MM BM are
able to differentiate into osteoblasts, as indicated by the early upregulation of
RUNX2, SP7, AXIN2 and DLX5, and the production of alkaline phosphatase and
calcium. Coculture with MM cells failed to prevent osteogenic differentiation of 
adult human MSC. On the other hand, MM cells induced cell cycle progression in
resting MSC in a cell contact dependent manner. This effect was confirmed using
both primary CD138+ cells and MM cell lines, and was not seen with B or T cell
lines. Our data confirm the presence of osteoblast progenitors and the
preservation of osteogenic function in MM, however dysregulation of cell cycle
control may contribute to the loss of normal bone homeostasis that ultimately
results in osteolytic bone loss.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25079197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Stem Cells. 2013 Jun;31(6):1193-201. doi: 10.1002/stem.1363.

A subpopulation of individual neural progenitors in the mammalian dorsal pallium 
generates both projection neurons and interneurons in vitro.

Cai Y(1), Zhang Y, Shen Q, Rubenstein JL, Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Brain Science and State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

There are two major classes of neurons in nervous systems: projection neurons and
interneurons. During Drosophila nervous system development, a subpopulation of
individual stem/progenitor cells gives rise to both motor neurons and
interneurons. However, it remains unknown whether individual stem/progenitor
cells in the mammalian brain also have the potential to give rise to both
projection neurons and interneurons. Here we present evidence that single mouse
neocortical progenitors generated both projection neurons and GABAergic
interneurons based on studies using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (to
obtain individual progenitors) and in vitro clonal analysis using time-lapse
video microscopy and immunostaining. We determined that a subpopulation of
individual dorsal pallial progenitors from E11.5 Dlx5/6-cre-IRES-EGFP and
GAD67-GFP mice can generate both GFP-negative/Tbr1-positive (GFP(-) /Tbr1+)/Tuj1+
cells and GFP+/Sp8+/calretinin+/Tuj1+ cells. The GFP(-) /Tbr1+/Tuj1+ cells had
morphological features of cultured projection neurons. Quantitative analysis of
the reconstructed lineage trees derived from single progenitors showed that the
projection neuron lineage appeared earlier than the interneuron lineage; however,
more interneuron-like cells were produced than projection neuron-like cells.
Thus, our results provide direct in vitro evidence that individual progenitors of
the mammalian dorsal pallium can generate both projection neurons and
interneurons.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23417928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Dev Biol. 2013 Apr 15;376(2):224-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.01.035. Epub 2013 
Feb 8.

Making sense of Dlx1 antisense RNA.

Kraus P(1), Sivakamasundari V, Lim SL, Xing X, Lipovich L, Lufkin T.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore 
138672, Singapore.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been recently recognized as a major class of 
regulators in mammalian systems. LncRNAs function by diverse and heterogeneous
mechanisms in gene regulation, and are key contributors to development,
neurological disorders, and cancer. This emerging importance of lncRNAs, along
with recent reports of a functional lncRNA encoded by the mouse Dlx5-Dlx6 locus, 
led us to interrogate the biological significance of another distal-less
antisense lncRNA, the previously uncharacterized Dlx1 antisense (Dlx1as)
transcript. We have functionally ablated this antisense RNA via a highly
customized gene targeting approach in vivo. Mice devoid of Dlx1as RNA are viable 
and fertile, and display a mild skeletal and neurological phenotype reminiscent
of a Dlx1 gain-of function phenotype, suggesting a role for this non-coding
antisense RNA in modulating Dlx1 transcript levels and stability. The reciprocal 
relationship between Dlx1as and Dlx1 places this sense-antisense pair into a
growing class of mammalian lncRNA-mRNA pairs characterized by inverse regulation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23415800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2013 Feb 15;4(1):17. doi: 10.1186/scrt165.

Effects of different serum conditions on osteogenic differentiation of human
adipose stem cells in vitro.

Kyllönen L, Haimi S, Mannerström B, Huhtala H, Rajala KM, Skottman H, Sándor GK, 
Miettinen S.

INTRODUCTION: Currently, human adipose stem cells (hASCs) are differentiated
towards osteogenic lineages using culture medium supplemented with L-ascorbic
acid 2-phosphate (AsA2-P), dexamethasone (Dex) and beta-glycerophosphate (ß-GP). 
Because this osteogenic medium (OM1) was initially generated for the
differentiation of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells, the component
concentrations may not be optimal for the differentiation of hASCs. After
preliminary screening, two efficient osteogenic media (OM2 and OM3) were chosen
to be compared with the commonly used osteogenic medium (OM1). To further develop
the culture conditions towards clinical usage, the osteo-inductive efficiencies
of OM1, OM2 and OM3 were compared using human serum (HS)-based medium and a
defined, xeno-free medium (RegES), with fetal bovine serum (FBS)-based medium
serving as a control.
METHODS: To compare the osteo-inductive efficiency of OM1, OM2 and OM3 in FBS-,
HS- and RegES-based medium, the osteogenic differentiation was assessed by
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, mineralization, and expression of osteogenic
marker genes (runx2A, DLX5, collagen type I, osteocalcin, and ALP).
RESULTS: In HS-based medium, the ALP activity increased significantly by OM3, and
mineralization was enhanced by both OM2 and OM3, which have high AsA2-P and low
Dex concentrations. ALP activity and mineralization of hASCs was the weakest in
FBS-based medium, with no significant differences between the OM compositions due
to donor variation. However, the qRT-PCR data demonstrated significant
upregulation of runx2A mRNA under osteogenic differentiation in FBS- and HS-based
medium, particularly by OM3 under FBS conditions. Further, the expression of DLX5
was greatly stimulated by OM1 to 3 on day 7 when compared to control. The
regulation of collagen type I, ALP, and osteocalcin mRNA was modest under
induction by OM1 to 3. The RegES medium was found to support the proliferation
and osteogenic differentiation of hASCs, but the composition of the RegES medium 
hindered the comparison of OM1, OM2 and OM3.
CONCLUSIONS: Serum conditions affect hASC proliferation and differentiation
significantly. The ALP activity and mineralization was the weakest in FBS-based
medium, although osteogenic markers were upregulated on mRNA level. When
comparing the OM composition, the commonly used OM1 was least effective.
Accordingly, higher concentration of AsA2-P and lower concentration of Dex, as in
OM2 and OM3, should be used for the osteogenic differentiation of hASCs in vitro.

PMCID: PMC3706769
PMID: 23415114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e51700. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051700. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

BMP-mediated functional cooperation between Dlx5;Dlx6 and Msx1;Msx2 during
mammalian limb development.

Vieux-Rochas M(1), Bouhali K, Mantero S, Garaffo G, Provero P, Astigiano S,
Barbieri O, Caratozzolo MF, Tullo A, Guerrini L, Lallemand Y, Robert B, Levi G,
Merlo GR.

Author information: 
(1)Evolution des Régulations Endocriniennes, Centre national de la recherche
scientifique, UMR-7221, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.

The Dlx and Msx homeodomain transcription factors play important roles in the
control of limb development. The combined disruption of Msx1 and Msx2, as well as
that of Dlx5 and Dlx6, lead to limb patterning defects with anomalies in digit
number and shape. Msx1;Msx2 double mutants are characterized by the loss of
derivatives of the anterior limb mesoderm which is not observed in either of the 
simple mutants. Dlx5;Dlx6 double mutants exhibit hindlimb ectrodactyly. While the
morphogenetic action of Msx genes seems to involve the BMP molecules, the mode of
action of Dlx genes still remains elusive. Here, examining the limb phenotypes of
combined Dlx and Msx mutants we reveal a new Dlx-Msx regulatory loop directly
involving BMPs. In Msx1;Dlx5;Dlx6 triple mutant mice (TKO), beside the expected
ectrodactyly, we also observe the hallmark morphological anomalies of Msx1;Msx2
double mutants suggesting an epistatic role of Dlx5 and Dlx6 over Msx2. In
Msx2;Dlx5;Dlx6 TKO mice we only observe an aggravation of the ectrodactyly defect
without changes in the number of the individual components of the limb. Using a
combination of qPCR, ChIP and bioinformatic analyses, we identify two Dlx/Msx
regulatory pathways: 1) in the anterior limb mesoderm a non-cell autonomous
Msx-Dlx regulatory loop involves BMP molecules through the AER and 2) in AER
cells and, at later stages, in the limb mesoderm the regulation of Msx2 by Dlx5
and Dlx6 occurs also cell autonomously. These data bring new elements to decipher
the complex AER-mesoderm dialogue that takes place during limb development and
provide clues to understanding the etiology of congenital limb malformations.

PMCID: PMC3558506
PMID: 23382810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Jun 15;22(12):1763-78. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0711. Epub 2013
Mar 15.

Epigenetic marks define the lineage and differentiation potential of two distinct
neural crest-derived intermediate odontogenic progenitor populations.

Gopinathan G(1), Kolokythas A, Luan X, Diekwisch TG.

Author information: 
(1)UIC Brodie Laboratory for Craniofacial Genetics, UIC College of Dentistry,
Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Epigenetic mechanisms, such as histone modifications, play an active role in the 
differentiation and lineage commitment of mesenchymal stem cells. In the present 
study, epigenetic states and differentiation profiles of two odontogenic neural
crest-derived intermediate progenitor populations were compared: dental pulp (DP)
and dental follicle (DF). ChIP on chip assays revealed substantial
H3K27me3-mediated repression of odontoblast lineage genes DSPP and dentin matrix 
protein 1 (DMP1) in DF cells, but not in DP cells. Mineralization inductive
conditions caused steep increases of mineralization and patterning gene
expression levels in DP cells when compared to DF cells. In contrast,
mineralization induction resulted in a highly dynamic histone modification
response in DF cells, while there was only a subdued effect in DP cells. Both DF 
and DP progenitors featured H3K4me3-active marks on the promoters of early
mineralization genes RUNX2, MSX2, and DLX5, while OSX, IBSP, and BGLAP promoters 
were enriched for H3K9me3 or H3K27me3. Compared to DF cells, DP cells expressed
higher levels of three pluripotency-associated genes, OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2.
Finally, gene ontology comparison of bivalent marks unique for DP and DF cells
highlighted cell-cell attachment genes in DP cells and neurogenesis genes in DF
cells. In conclusion, the present study indicates that the DF intermediate
odontogenic neural crest lineage is distinguished from its DP counterpart by
epigenetic repression of DSPP and DMP1 genes and through dynamic histone
enrichment responses to mineralization induction. Findings presented here
highlight the crucial role of epigenetic regulatory mechanisms in the terminal
differentiation of odontogenic neural crest lineages.

PMCID: PMC3668503
PMID: 23379639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Mar 1;432(1):152-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.01.068. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

Risedronate increases osteoblastic differentiation and function through
connexin43.

Jeong HM(1), Jin YH, Choi YH, Chung JO, Cho DH, Chung MY, Civitelli R, Chung DJ, 
Lee KY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug Development, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

Bisphosphonates are potent antiresorptive drugs which have antifracture efficacy 
by reducing bone turnover rate and increasing bone mineral density. In addition
to inhibiting osteoclast function, bisphosphonates have been reported to also
promote survival of osteocyte and osteoblast via an anti-apoptotic effect,
mediated by opening of hemi-gap junction channels formed by connexin43 (Cx43). In
this study, we investigated the effect of risedronate, one amino-bisphosphonate, 
on osteoblast differentiation and Cx43 expression using the mesenchymal cell line
C2C12. Risedronate dose-dependently increased the activity of osterix
(OSE)-luciferase containing Runx2 response element with highest activity at 50µM.
The activity of osteocalcin (OC)- and bone sialoprotein (BSP)-luciferase
reporters, markers of osteoblast differentiation, were also increased by
risedronate. When risedronate and BMP2 were used in combination, alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) activity increased to a larger extent than when BMP2 was used
alone. Risedronate as well as the pro-osteogenic transcription factors, Runx2,
Osterix or Dlx5, increased transcriptional activity of the Cx43 promoter in a
dose-dependent manner. In the presence of Runx2 or Dlx5, risedronate had an
additive effect on Cx43 promoter activity. Accordingly, risedronate increased
protein expression of Cx43, Runx2, Osterix, and Dlx5. These results suggest that 
risedronate promotes osteoblastic differentiation and positively regulates Cx43
gene transcription.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23376077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Epigenetics. 2013 Mar;8(3):246-51. doi: 10.4161/epi.23752. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

Novel alterations in the epigenetic signature of MeCP2-targeted promoters in
lymphocytes of Rett syndrome patients.

Lilja T(1), Wallenborg K, Björkman K, Albåge M, Eriksson M, Lagercrantz H, Rohdin
M, Hermanson O.

Author information: 
(1)Linnaeus Center in Developmental Biology for Regenerative Medicine (DBRM),
Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
tobias.lilja@ki.se

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with neurological symptoms, 
such as motor disorders and mental retardation. In most cases, RTT is caused by
mutations in the DNA binding protein MeCP2. In mice, MeCP2 gene deletion has been
reported to result in genome-wide increased histone acetylation. Transcriptional 
regulation of neurotrophic factor BDNF and transcription factor DLX5, essential
for proper neurogenesis, is further altered in MeCP2-deleted animals. We
therefore investigated the chromatin environment of MeCP2 target genes BDNF and
DLX5 in lymphocytes from RTT patients and human controls, and analyzed the
density of histones H3, H2B and H1, as well as the levels of methylation and
acetylation on selected lysines of histone H3. Notably, we found a general
increase in the density of histone H3 in RTT patients' lymphocytes compared with 
controls, and decreased levels of trimethylation of lysine 4 on histone H3
(H3K4me3), a modification associated with transcriptional activation. The levels 
of acetylation of lysine 9 (H3K9ac) and 27 (H3K27ac) did not show any
statistically significant changes when normalized to the decreased histone H3
levels; nevertheless, an average decrease in acetylation was noted. Our results
reveal an unexpected alteration of the chromatin state of established MeCP2
target genes in lymphocytes of human subjects with RTT.

PMCID: PMC3669117
PMID: 23348913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Arch Oral Biol. 2013 Jun;58(6):690-8. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2012.10.018.
Epub 2013 Jan 12.

Bone morphogenetic protein 6 stimulates mineralization in human dental follicle
cells without dexamethasone.

Takahashi K(1), Ogura N, Aonuma H, Ito K, Ishigami D, Kamino Y, Kondoh T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, Nihon University School of Dentistry at
Matsudo, Matsudo City, Matsudo Prefecture, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to investigate the osteogenic differentiation
human dental follicle cells (hDFCs) cultured with in osteogenic induction medium 
(OIM) without dexamethasone (DEX), and to analyze the gene expression profile
during osteogenic differentiation.
METHODS: hDFCs, which isolated from dental follicle tissue from impacted third
molar teeth, were cultured with OIM with or without DEX. Osteogenic
differentiation of hDFCs was examined using Alkaline phosphatase activity and
Arizarin red staining. Gene expression analysis was performed by Microarray and
real time-PCR.
RESULTS: We showed that hDFCs have the capacity to differentiate into osteogenic 
lineages in osteogenic induction medium lacking DEX. We also analyzed gene
expression profiling of hDFCs during osteogenic differentiation. BMP6 is
up-regulated in both the presence and absence of DEX. In addition, BMP6 enhances 
gene expression levels of DLX-5, Runx2, and Osterix, which are transcription
factors associated with osteogenic differentiation. BMP6 also stimulates
phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8 which are transcription factors associated with BMP 
signalling at protein levels. Additionally BMP6 stimulates mineralization of
hDFCs monolayers examined by Arizarin red S staining.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that hDFCs can differentiate to osteogenic
lineage cells osteogenic induction medium without DEX, and BMP6 is a key gene in 
the osteogenic differentiation of hDFCs, and has therapeutic utility for bone
regeneration and bone research.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23317773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Behav Brain Res. 2013 Apr 1;242:54-61. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2012.12.024. Epub 2012 
Dec 28.

Deletion of striatal adenosine A(2A) receptor spares latent inhibition and
prepulse inhibition but impairs active avoidance learning.

Singer P(1), Wei CJ, Chen JF, Boison D, Yee BK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Behavioral Neurobiology, ETH Zurich, Schorenstrasse 16, 8603
Schwerzenbach, Switzerland. psinger@downeurobiology.org

Following early clinical leads, the adenosine A(2A)R receptor (A(2A)R) has
continued to attract attention as a potential novel target for treating
schizophrenia, especially against the negative and cognitive symptoms of the
disease because of A(2A)R's unique modulatory action over glutamatergic in
addition to dopaminergic signaling. Through (i) the antagonistic interaction with
the dopamine D(2) receptor, and (ii) the regulation of glutamate release and
N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor function, striatal A(2A)R is ideally positioned to 
fine-tune the dopamine-glutamate balance, the disturbance of which is implicated 
in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. However, the precise function of
striatal A(2A)Rs in the regulation of schizophrenia-relevant behavior is poorly
understood. Here, we tested the impact of conditional striatum-specific A(2A)R
knockout (st-A(2A)R-KO) on latent inhibition (LI) and prepulse inhibition (PPI) -
behavior that is tightly regulated by striatal dopamine and glutamate. These are 
two common cross-species translational tests for the assessment of selective
attention and sensorimotor gating deficits reported in schizophrenia patients;
and enhanced performance in these tests is associated with antipsychotic drug
action. We found that neither LI nor PPI was significantly affected in
st-A(2A)R-KO mice, although a deficit in active avoidance learning was identified
in these animals. The latter phenotype, however, was not replicated in another
form of aversive conditioning - namely, conditioned taste aversion. Hence, the
present study shows that neither learned inattention (as measured by LI) nor
sensory gating (as indexed by PPI) requires the integrity of striatal A(2A)Rs - a
finding that may undermine the hypothesized importance of A(2A)R in the genesis
and/or treatment of schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3566338
PMID: 23276608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Version 3. F1000Res. 2013 Nov 28 [revised 2014 Sep 16];2:261. doi:
10.12688/f1000research.2-261.v3. eCollection 2013.

Transitory expression of Dlx5 and Dlx6 in maxillary arch epithelial precursors is
essential for upper jaw morphogenesis.

Gitton Y(1), Narboux-Nême N(1), Levi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Evolution des Régulations Endocriniennes, CNRS, UMR7221, Muséum National
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.

Asymmetric, articulated jaws are characteristic of most vertebrate species; they 
derive from the first pharyngeal arch (PA1) which generates both maxillary and
mandibular components. PA1 is colonized by cranial neural crest cells (CNCCs)
which give rise to most bones and tendons of the jaws. The elements formed by
different CNCCs contingents are specified by the combinatorial expression of Dlx 
genes. Dlx5 and Dlx6 are predominantly expressed by mandibular CNCCs. Analysis of
the phenotype of Dlx5 and Dlx6 double mutant mice has suggested that they are
necessary and sufficient to specify mandibular identity. Here, using 3D
reconstruction, we show that inactivation of Dlx5 and Dlx6 does not only affect
the mandibular arch, but results in the simultaneous transformation of mandibular
and maxillary skeletal elements which assume a similar morphology with gain of
symmetry. As Dlx5- and Dlx6-expressing cells are not found in the maxillary bud, 
we have examined the lineage of Dlx5-expressing progenitors using an in vivo
genetic approach. We find that a contingent of cells deriving from epithelial
precursors transiently expressing Dlx5 participate in the formation of the
maxillary arch. These cells are mostly located in the distal part of the
maxillary arch and might derive from its lambdoidal junction with the olfactory
pit. Our observations provide the first genetic demonstration of the 'Hinge and
Caps' model[1]. We support the notion that 'cap' signals could originate from
epithelial derivatives of Dlx5-expressing progenitors which migrate and colonize 
the maxillary arch epithelium. Our results imply that Dlx5 and Dlx6 control upper
and lower jaw morphogenesis through different coordinated mechanisms to generate 
functional, articulated jaws.

PMID: 25339984  [PubMed]


131. Gene. 2013 Mar 10;516(2):228-37. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.12.056. Epub 2012 Dec
21.

Protamine stimulates bone sialoprotein gene expression.

Zhou L(1), Matsumura H, Mezawa M, Takai H, Nakayama Y, Mitarai M, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba, 271-8587, Japan.

Protamine is a small, arginine-rich, nuclear protein that replaces histone late
in the haploid phase of spermatogenesis and is believed to be essential for sperm
head condensation and DNA stabilization. Protamine has many biological activities
and has roles in hematopoiesis, immune responses, the nervous system and bone
metabolism. Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is a mineralized connective tissue-specific
protein expressed in differentiated osteoblasts that appears to function in the
initial mineralization of bone. Protamine (71.35 ng/ml) increased BSP mRNA levels
by 6h in osteoblast-like ROS 17/2.8 cells. In a transient transfection assay,
protamine (71.35 ng/ml) increased luciferase activity of the construct (-116 to
+60) in ROS 17/2.8 cells and rat bone marrow stromal cells. Luciferase activities
induced by protamine were blocked by protein kinase A, tyrosine kinase and ERK1/2
inhibitors. Introduction of 2 bp mutations to the luciferase constructs showed
that the effects of protamine were mediated by a cAMP response element (CRE), a
fibroblast growth factor 2 response element (FRE) and a homeodomain
protein-binding site (HOX). Gel shift analyses showed that protamine (71.35
ng/ml) increased the nuclear protein binding to CRE, FRE and HOX. CREB,
phospho-CREB, c-Fos, c-Jun, JunD and Fra2 antibodies disrupted the formation of
CRE-protein complexes. Dlx5, Msx2, Runx2 and Smad1 antibodies disrupted FRE- and 
HOX-protein complex formations. These studies demonstrate that protamine induces 
BSP transcription by targeting CRE, FRE and HOX sites in the proximal promoter of
the rat BSP gene. Moreover, phospho-CREB, c-Fos, c-Jun, JunD, Fra2, Dlx5, Msx2,
Runx2 and Smadl transcription factors appear to be key regulators of protamine
effects on BSP transcription.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23266625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Anticancer Drugs. 2013 Mar;24(3):278-90. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0b013e32835cbde7.

Preventing MEK1 activation influences the responses of human osteosarcoma cells
to bone morphogenetic proteins 2 and 9.

Park H(1), Drevelle O, Daviau A, Senta H, Bergeron E, Faucheux N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnological Engineering,
Laboratory of Cell-Biomaterial Biohybrid Systems, University of Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Québec, J1K 2R1, Canada.

It was recently suggested that bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-2 may be useful
for treating osteosarcoma cells. BMP-9, which has been patented to treat breast
and prostate cancers, has a higher osteoinductive potential than BMP-2. Peptides 
derived from the knuckle epitope of BMPs (pBMPs) also induced osteogenic
differentiation. However, the effect of BMP-9 and pBMPs on osteosarcoma cells is 
unclear. We analyzed the effects of BMP-2, BMP-9, pBMP-2, and pBMP-9 on the
behavior of human MG-63 and SaOS-2 osteosarcoma cells. An inhibitor of MEK1
activation (PD98059) that prevents downstream extracellular signal-regulated
kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) phosphorylation and a specific inhibitor of p38 were also
used as mitogen activated protein kinase-targeting therapy is being investigated 
as a treatment modality for osteosarcoma. BMP-2 and BMP-9 (1.92 nmol/l) induced
the phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8 in both osteosarcoma cells within 1 h but had
different effects on mitogen activated protein kinase pathways. Whereas BMP-2
mainly activated ERK1/2, BMP-9 phosphorylated p38 within 1 h. pBMP-2 did not
activate either the Smad or ERK/p38, whereas pBMP-9, like BMP-9, induced both
Smad1/5/8 and p38 phosphorylation. p38 activation by BMP-9 or pBMP-9 was also
enhanced by PD98059. However, BMP-2 or BMP-9 increased the amounts of distal-less
homeobox 5 and Osterix mRNAs in SaOS-2 cells within 6 h, whereas pBMP-9 had no
effect. PD98059 promoted the highest level of Osterix mRNA in SaOS-2 cells
incubated with BMP-2 or BMP-9, whereas p38 inhibitor had no effect. Furthermore, 
PD98059 induced the lowest proliferation of MG-63 cells incubated with BMP-2,
whereas p38 inhibitor did not affect the proliferation of either osteosarcoma
cell line. Therefore a combination of BMP-2 or BMP-9 and an inhibitor of MEK1 may
be a promising tool for regulating osteosarcoma cell behavior.

PMID: 23262982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Control Release. 2013 Feb 10;165(3):173-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.11.013.
Epub 2012 Nov 29.

High levels of ephrinB2 over-expression increases the osteogenic differentiation 
of human mesenchymal stem cells and promotes enhanced cell mediated
mineralisation in a polyethyleneimine-ephrinB2 gene-activated matrix.

Tierney EG(1), McSorley K, Hastings CL, Cryan SA, O'Brien T, Murphy MJ, Barry FP,
O'Brien FJ, Duffy GP.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Engineering Research Group, Department of Anatomy, Royal College of
Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.

Gene therapy can be combined with tissue engineering constructs to produce
gene-activated matrices (GAMs) with enhanced capacity for repair.
Polyethyleneimine (PEI), a non-viral vector, has previously been optimised for
high efficiency gene transfer in rat mesenchymal stem cells (rMSCs). The use of
PEI to transfect human MSCs (hMSCs) with ephrinB2 is assessed here. Recently a
role for the ephrinB2 ligand and EphB4 receptor duo has been proposed in bone
remodelling. Herein, over-expression of the ephrinB2 ligand resulted in increased
osteogenic differentiation in hMSCs. As ephrinB2 is a cell surface anchored
ligand which only interacts with cells expressing the cognate EphB4 receptor
through direct contact, we have shown that direct cell-cell contact between two
neighbouring cells is responsible for enhanced osteogenesis. In an effort to
begin to elucidate the molecular mechanisms at play downstream of ephrinB2
over-expression, RT-PCR was performed on the GAMs which revealed no significant
changes in runx2 or BMP2 expression but an upregulation of osterix (Osx) and Dlx5
expression prompting the belief that the mode of osteogenesis is independent of
the BMP2 pathway. This select interaction, coupled with the transient gene
expression profile of PEI, makes the PEI-ephrinB2 GAM an ideal candidate matrix
for a bone targeted GAM.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23201622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Epilepsy Res. 2013 Mar;104(1-2):11-6. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2012.10.005. Epub
2012 Nov 26.

Two lines of transgenic mice expressing cre-recombinase exhibit increased seizure
susceptibility.

Kim TH(1), Richards K, Heng J, Petrou S, Reid CA.

Author information: 
(1)Florey Neuroscience Institutes, The University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia.

Conditional mouse models based on the Cre-recombinase (Cre)-loxP method are a
powerful tool for determining the spatial and temporal function of genes in
neuroscience research. The Emx1-Cre conditional model is designed to drive Cre
expression in a predominantly excitatory neuron specific manner and the
Dlx5/6-Cre mouse expresses Cre predominantly in cortical inhibitory neurons. The 
mouse models expressing the Cre transgene are healthy, active and have no overt
behavioural or brain histological phenotypes. Subcutaneous pentylenetetrazol
(scPTZ) is a proconvulsant frequently used to probe neuronal network
excitability. In both the Emx1-Cre and Dlx5/6-Cre conditional mouse models the
latency to scPTZ-induced seizures was significantly shorter than for their
wild-type littermates. This shows that mouse models carrying the Cre transgene
alone can have significant behavioural phenotypes. This may act as a confound to 
the interpretation of data obtained from crosses with loxP-flanked targets
especially in the context of epilepsy phenotypes. These data highlight that
appropriate control experiments that compare wild-type mice to those that carry
the cre-transgene but not the loxP-flanked target are essential when using this
method.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23196213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2013 Mar;54(2):141-6. doi: 10.1002/em.21752. Epub 2012 Nov
28.

Methylation alterations at imprinted genes detected among long-term shiftworkers.

Jacobs DI(1), Hansen J, Fu A, Stevens RG, Tjonneland A, Vogel UB, Zheng T, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Yale School of Public Health, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Exposure to light at night through shiftwork has been linked to alterations in
DNA methylation and increased risk of cancer development. Using an Illumina
Infinium Methylation Assay, we analyzed methylation levels of 397 CpG sites in
the promoter regions of 56 normally imprinted genes to investigate whether
shiftwork is associated with alteration of methylation patterns. Methylation was 
significantly higher at 20 CpG sites and significantly lower at 30 CpG sites (P <
0.05) in 10 female long-term shiftworkers as compared to 10 female age- and
folate intake-matched day workers. The strongest evidence for altered methylation
patterns in shiftworkers was observed for DLX5, IGF2AS, and TP73 based on the
magnitude of methylation change and consistency in the direction of change across
multiple CpG sites, and consistent results were observed using quantitative DNA
methylation analysis. We conclude that long-term shiftwork may alter methylation 
patterns at imprinted genes, which may be an important mechanism by which
shiftwork has carcinogenic potential and warrants further investigation.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23193016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Dec;158A(12):3201-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35644. Epub 2012 
Nov 20.

A 0.7<U+2009>Mb de novo duplication at 7q21.3 including the genes DLX5 and DLX6 in a
patient with split-hand/split-foot malformation.

Velinov M(1), Ahmad A, Brown-Kipphut B, Shafiq M, Blau J, Cooma R, Roth P, Iqbal 
MA.

Author information: 
(1)New York State Institute for Basic Research in Developmental Disabilities,
Staten Island, New York, USA.

Split-hand/split-foot malformation (SHFM1) has been reported to be caused by
deletions, duplications or rearrangements involving the 7q21.3 region harboring
DSS1, DLX5, and DLX6. We report on a female patient with unilateral syndactyly of
the third and fourth fingers of the right hand and overgrowth and lateral
deviation of the right great toe. There was a split foot malformation on the
right, with absent fifth toe. The left hand was apparently normal and left foot
was intact. The patient has no hearing loss. We performed conventional G-banding 
karyotype analysis, array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). G-banding karyotype result was normal 
46,XX. However, a duplication of 719<U+2009>kb (96,303,736-97,022,335; NCBI
build36/hg18, March 2006) was identified at the 7q21.3 region by aCGH. The array 
result was also confirmed by FISH analysis. The duplicated region harbors only
DLX5 and DLX6, which are known for their role in SHFM1. Additionally, FISH
analysis of parental samples showed de novo origin of this abnormality in the
patient. This is the first report that highlights the duplication of 719<U+2009>kb at
7q21.3, harboring only DLX5 and DLX6 associated with the SHFM1 phenotype.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23169702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Biomaterials. 2013 Jan;34(4):1051-62. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.10.066.
Epub 2012 Nov 17.

Effect of BMP-2 and/or BMP-9 on preosteoblasts attached to polycaprolactone
functionalized by adhesive peptides derived from bone sialoprotein.

Drevelle O(1), Daviau A, Lauzon MA, Faucheux N.

Author information: 
(1)Cell-Biomaterial Biohybrid Systems, Department of Chemical Engineering and
Biotechnological Engineering, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, 2500 boul. de
l'Université, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada J1K 2R1.

Biomaterials functionalized by adhesive peptides improve the cell-substratum
interaction. However, their influence on the response of cells to growth factors 
is still poorly understood. We have shown that bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) 2
activates the Smad pathway only in murine MC3T3-E1 preosteoblasts attached to
polycaprolactone (PCL) film functionalized by RGD peptides derived from bone
sialoprotein (pRGD). We have now analysed the way recombinant human BMP-2 and/or 
BMP-9 (0.38 nM) influence the signal transduction and differentiation of MC3T3-E1
preosteoblasts attached to PCL-pRGD. While kinetics of MAPK activation were
similar in cells treated by BMP-2 and BMP-9, different kinetics of Smad
activation and ß-catenin stabilization were observed. BMP-2 induced Smad1/5/8
phosphorylation within 0.5 and BMP-9 within 4 h, while the ß-catenin was lower at
2 h only in cells treated with BMP-9. However, both BMPs induced the
translocation of phosphorylated Smad1/5/8 to the nucleus at 4 h and increased
Dlx5, osterix and osteocalcin transcripts as well as alkaline phosphatase
activity at 72 h. A BMP-2/BMP-9 combination that maintained the ß-catenin amount 
constant but reduced that of phosphorylated Smad within 4 h had quite similar
effect than BMP-2 alone. It is therefore important to determine how biomimetic
materials influence the response of cells to BMPs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23164422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48262. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048262. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Integrative analysis reveals relationships of genetic and epigenetic alterations 
in osteosarcoma.

Kresse SH(1), Rydbeck H, Skårn M, Namløs HM, Barragan-Polania AH, Cleton-Jansen
AM, Serra M, Liestøl K, Hogendoorn PC, Hovig E, Myklebost O, Meza-Zepeda LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumour Biology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Osteosarcomas are the most common non-haematological primary
malignant tumours of bone, and all conventional osteosarcomas are high-grade
tumours showing complex genomic aberrations. We have integrated genome-wide
genetic and epigenetic profiles from the EuroBoNeT panel of 19 human osteosarcoma
cell lines based on microarray technologies.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The cell lines showed complex patterns of DNA copy number
changes, where genomic copy number gains were significantly associated with
gene-rich regions and losses with gene-poor regions. By integrating the datasets,
350 genes were identified as having two types of aberrations
(gain/over-expression, hypo-methylation/over-expression, loss/under-expression or
hyper-methylation/under-expression) using a recurrence threshold of 6/19 (>30%)
cell lines. The genes showed in general alterations in either DNA copy number or 
DNA methylation, both within individual samples and across the sample panel.
These 350 genes are involved in embryonic skeletal system development and
morphogenesis, as well as remodelling of extracellular matrix. The aberrations of
three selected genes, CXCL5, DLX5 and RUNX2, were validated in five cell lines
and five tumour samples using PCR techniques. Several genes were hyper-methylated
and under-expressed compared to normal osteoblasts, and expression could be
reactivated by demethylation using 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment for four
genes tested; AKAP12, CXCL5, EFEMP1 and IL11RA. Globally, there was as expected a
significant positive association between gain and over-expression, loss and
under-expression as well as hyper-methylation and under-expression, but gain was 
also associated with hyper-methylation and under-expression, suggesting that
hyper-methylation may oppose the effects of increased copy number for detrimental
genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Integrative analysis of genome-wide genetic and epigenetic
alterations identified dependencies and relationships between DNA copy number,
DNA methylation and mRNA expression in osteosarcomas, contributing to better
understanding of osteosarcoma biology.

PMCID: PMC3492335
PMID: 23144859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants. 2012 Sep-Oct;27(5):1096-105.

The effect of globin scaffold on osteoblast adhesion and phenotype expression in 
vitro.

Hamdan AA(1), Loty S, Isaac J, Tayot JL, Bouchard P, Khraisat A, Bedral A,
Sautier JM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, Laboartoire de Physiopathologie Orale Moléculaire, Centre de Recherche
des Cordeliers, Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, Université Paris
Descartes, Paris, France. ahmad.hamdan@ju.edu.jo

PURPOSE: Different synthetic and natural biomaterials have been used in bone
tissue regeneration. However, several limitations are associated with the use of 
synthetic as well as allogenous or xenogenous natural materials. This study
evaluated, in an in vitro model, the behavior of rat osteoblastic cells cultured 
on a human globin scaffold.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Rat osteoblastic cells were isolated from the calvaria of 
21-day-old fetal Sprague-Dawley rats. They were then grown in the presence of
globin. Real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed to study the
expression of cyclin D1, integrin <U+0392>1, Msx2, Dlx5, Runx2, and osteocalcin on days 
1, 5, and 9. Moreover, alkaline phosphatase activity was measured on days 1, 3,
5, and 7. Alizarin red staining was performed on day 9 to observe calcium
deposition.
RESULTS: Cells were able to adhere, proliferate, and differentiate on globin
scaffolds. Moreover, RT-PCR showed that globin may stimulate some key genes of
osteoblastic differentiation (Runx2, osteocalcin, Dlx5). Globin had an inhibitory
effect on alkaline phosphatase activity. Calcium deposits were seen after 9 days 
of culture.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that purified human globin might be a
suitable scaffold for bone tissue regeneration.

PMID: 23057022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Integr Biol (Camb). 2012 Dec;4(12):1470-7. doi: 10.1039/c2ib20164j.

Early gene regulation of osteogenesis in embryonic stem cells.

Kirkham GR(1), Lovrics A, Byrne HM, Jensen OE, King JR, Shakesheff KM, Buttery
LD.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University Park, Nottingham, UK.
glen.kirkham@nottingham.ac.uk

The early gene regulatory networks (GRNs) that mediate stem cell differentiation 
are complex, and the underlying regulatory associations can be difficult to map
accurately. In this study, the expression profiles of the genes Dlx5, Msx2 and
Runx2 in mouse embryonic stem cells were monitored over a 48 hour period after
exposure to the growth factors BMP2 and TGFß1. Candidate GRNs of early
osteogenesis were constructed based on published experimental findings and
simulation results of Boolean and ordinary differential equation models were
compared with our experimental data in order to test the validity of these
models. Three gene regulatory networks were found to be consistent with the data,
one of these networks exhibited sustained oscillation, a behaviour which is
consistent with the general view of embryonic stem cell plasticity. The work
cycle presented in this paper illustrates how mathematical modelling can be used 
to elucidate from gene expression profiles GRNs that are consistent with
experimental data.

PMID: 23042286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Growth Factors. 2012 Oct;30(5):333-43.

Osteogenic response of human adipose-derived stem cells to BMP-6, VEGF, and
combined VEGF plus BMP-6 in vitro.

Zhang Y(1), Madhu V, Dighe AS, Irvine JN Jr, Cui Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA
22908, USA.

Exogenous addition of three factors-mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs)-has
proven to be more beneficial than delivery of any single factor for fracture
repair in animal models. We studied the osteogenic differentiation of human
adipose-derived stem cells (hADSCs) in the presence of VEGF, BMP-6, or VEGF plus 
BMP-6 to better understand their enhancement of osteoblastic differentiation of
MSCs. The VEGF plus BMP-6 group demonstrated an additive effect on the
enhancement of mineralization and expression of ALP and Msx2 genes. Unlike VEGF
or BMP-6 alone, the combination of VEGF and BMP-6 significantly enhanced the
expression of COL1A1, osterix, and Dlx5 genes. The data indicate that a
cross-talk between VEGF and BMP-6 signaling pathways enhances osteogenic
differentiation of hADSCs.

PMID: 23017019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Dent Res. 2012 Dec;91(12):1124-9. doi: 10.1177/0022034512461916. Epub 2012 Sep 
24.

SHP is involved in BMP2-induced odontoblast differentiation.

Oh SH(1), Hwang YC, Yang H, Kang JH, Hur SW, Jung NR, Jang WG, Lee KN, Oh WM,
Park JC, Kim SH, Koh JT.

Author information: 
(1)Dental Science Research Institute and the BK21 Project, School of Dentistry,
Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, South Korea.

Small Heterodimer Partner (SHP) interacts with diverse transcription factors such
as Runx2 and regulates many cellular events including differentiation,
proliferation, and energy metabolism. SHP is reported to be a positive regulator 
of BMP2-induced bone formation. This study aimed to clarify the role of SHP in
odontoblast differentiation and matrix mineralization. Rat tooth germs were
isolated, and gene expression was determined by RT-PCR and real-time PCR.
Localization of SHP protein expression was identified by immunofluorescent
analysis. Primary human dental pulp cells (HDPCs) were cultured with BMP2 and/or 
Ad-siSHP. Matrix mineralization was evaluated by Alizarin red staining. Transient
transfection experiment was performed with the SHP or Dlx5 expressional plasmids 
and the DSPP gene. In tooth germs from post-natal days 3 to 9, BMP-2 and SHP
expression increased with DSPP and DMP1 mRNA expression. In an immunostaining
study, SHP was expressed in odontoblasts and surrounding osteoblasts. When HDPCs 
were cultured with BMP2 in mineralization-inducing medium, SHP expression also
increased with an increase in DSPP expression. Down-regulation of SHP by Ad-siSHP
inhibited matrix mineralization. In transient transfection experiments,
overexpression of SHP was shown to enhance DSPP promoter activity through
interactions between SHP and Dlx5. These results suggest that SHP may mediate
BMP2 signaling to promote mineralization of the dentin matrix.

PMID: 23010719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Dev Biol. 2012 Dec 15;372(2):166-77. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.09.006. Epub 2012 
Sep 19.

FGF signaling transforms non-neural ectoderm into neural crest.

Yardley N(1), García-Castro MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, KBT 1100, Yale
University, P.O. Box 208103, New Haven, CT 06520-8103, USA.

The neural crest arises at the border between the neural plate and the adjacent
non-neural ectoderm. It has been suggested that both neural and non-neural
ectoderm can contribute to the neural crest. Several studies have examined the
molecular mechanisms that regulate neural crest induction in neuralized tissues
or the neural plate border. Here, using the chick as a model system, we address
the molecular mechanisms by which non-neural ectoderm generates neural crest. We 
report that in response to FGF the non-neural ectoderm can ectopically express
several early neural crest markers (Pax7, Msx1, Dlx5, Sox9, FoxD3, Snail2, and
Sox10). Importantly this response to FGF signaling can occur without inducing
ectopic mesodermal tissues. Furthermore, the non-neural ectoderm responds to FGF 
by expressing the prospective neural marker Sox3, but it does not express
definitive markers of neural or anterior neural (Sox2 and Otx2) tissues. These
results suggest that the non-neural ectoderm can launch the neural crest program 
in the absence of mesoderm, without acquiring definitive neural character.
Finally, we report that prior to the upregulation of these neural crest markers, 
the non-neural ectoderm upregulates both BMP and Wnt molecules in response to
FGF. Our results provide the first effort to understand the molecular events
leading to neural crest development via the non-neural ectoderm in amniotes and
present a distinct response to FGF signaling.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3541687
PMID: 23000357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43800. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043800. Epub 2012 Aug 24.

Involvement of microRNAs in regulation of osteoblastic differentiation in mouse
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Okamoto H(1), Matsumi Y, Hoshikawa Y, Takubo K, Ryoke K, Shiota G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Department of Genetic Medicine and
Regenerative Therapeutics, Graduate School of Medicine, Tottori University,
Yonago, Tottori, Japan.

BACKGOROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs), which regulate biological processes by annealing
to the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of mRNAs to reduce protein synthesis, have
been the subject of recent attention as a key regulatory factor in cell
differentiation. The effects of some miRNAs during osteoblastic differentiation
have been investigated in mesenchymal stem cells, however they still remains to
be determined in pluripotent stem cells.METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Bone
morphogenic proteins (BMPs) are potent activators of osteoblastic
differentiation. In the present study, we profiled miRNAs during osteoblastic
differentiation of mouse induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells by BMP-4, in which 
expression of important osteoblastic markers such as Rux2, osterix, osteopontin, 
osteocalcin, PTHR1 and RANKL were significantly increased. A miRNA array analysis
revealed that six miRNAs including miR-10a, miR-10b, miR-19b, miR-9-3p, miR-124a 
and miR-181a were significantly downregulated. Interestingly, miR-124a and
miR-181a directly target the transcription factors Dlx5 and Msx2, both of which
were increased by about 80-and 30-fold, respectively. In addition, transfection
of miR-124a and miR-181a into mouse osteo-progenitor MC3T3-E1 cells significantly
reduced expression of Dlx5, Runx2, osteocalcin and ALP, and Msx2 and osteocalcin,
respectively. Finally, transfection of the anti-miRNAs of these six miRNAs, which
are predicted to target Dlx5 and Msx2, into mouse iPS cells resulted in a
significant increase in several osteoblastic differentiation markers such as
Rux2, Msx2 and osteopontin.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In the present study, we demonstrate that six miRNAs
including miR-10a, miR-10b, miR-19b, miR-9-3p, miR-124a and miR-181a miRNAs,
especially miR-124a and miR-181a, are important regulatory factors in
osteoblastic differentiation of mouse iPS cells.

PMCID: PMC3427148
PMID: 22937097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Hum Gene Ther Methods. 2012 Aug;23(4):242-54. doi: 10.1089/hgtb.2012.073. Epub
2012 Aug 30.

Restricted transgene expression in the brain with cell-type specific neuronal
promoters.

Delzor A(1), Dufour N, Petit F, Guillermier M, Houitte D, Auregan G, Brouillet E,
Hantraye P, Déglon N.

Author information: 
(1)Atomic Energy Commission (CEA), Institute of Biomedical Imaging (I2BM) and
Molecular Imaging Research Center (MIRCen), 92265 Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.

Tissue-targeted expression is of major interest for studying the contribution of 
cellular subpopulations to neurodegenerative diseases. However, in vivo methods
to investigate this issue are limited. Here, we report an analysis of the cell
specificity of expression of fluorescent reporter genes driven by six neuronal
promoters, with the ubiquitous phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK) promoter used as a
reference. Quantitative analysis of AcGFPnuc expression in the striatum and
hippocampus of rodents showed that all lentiviral vectors (LV) exhibited a
neuronal tropism; however, there was substantial diversity of transcriptional
activity and cell-type specificity of expression. The promoters with the highest 
activity were those of the 67 kDa glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD67), homeobox
Dlx5/6, glutamate receptor 1 (GluR1), and preprotachykinin 1 (Tac1) genes.
Neuron-specific enolase (NSE) and dopaminergic receptor 1 (Drd1a) promoters
showed weak activity, but the integration of an amplification system into the LV 
overcame this limitation. In the striatum, the expression profiles of Tac1 and
Drd1a were not limited to the striatonigral pathway, whereas in the hippocampus, 
Drd1a and Dlx5/6 showed the expected restricted pattern of expression. Regulation
of the Dlx5/6 promoter was observed in a disease condition, whereas Tac1 activity
was unaffected. These vectors provide safe tools that are more selective than
others available, for the administration of therapeutic molecules in the central 
nervous system (CNS). Nevertheless, additional characterization of regulatory
elements in neuronal promoters is still required.

PMCID: PMC4015079
PMID: 22934828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Nov 15;21(22):4930-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds336. Epub 2012 Aug 
21.

Functional characterization of tissue-specific enhancers in the DLX5/6 locus.

Birnbaum RY(1), Everman DB, Murphy KK, Gurrieri F, Schwartz CE, Ahituv N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences and 2Institute for Human
Genetics, University of California-San Francisco, CA, USA.

Disruption of distaless homeobox 5 and 6 (Dlx5/6) in mice results in brain,
craniofacial, genital, ear and limb defects. In humans, chromosomal aberrations
in the DLX5/6 region, some of which do not encompass DLX5/6, are associated with 
split hand/foot malformation 1 (SHFM1) as well as intellectual disability,
craniofacial anomalies and hearing loss, suggesting that the disruption of DLX5/6
regulatory elements could lead to these abnormalities. Here, we characterized
enhancers in the DLX5/6 locus whose tissue-specific expression and genomic
location along with previously characterized enhancers correlate with phenotypes 
observed in individuals with chromosomal abnormalities. By analyzing chromosomal 
aberrations at 7q21, we refined the minimal SHFM1 critical region and used
comparative genomics to select 26 evolutionary conserved non-coding sequences in 
this critical region for zebrafish enhancer assays. Eight of these sequences were
shown to function as brain, olfactory bulb, branchial arch, otic vesicle and fin 
enhancers, recapitulating dlx5a/6a expression. Using a mouse enhancer assay,
several of these zebrafish enhancers showed comparable expression patterns in the
branchial arch, otic vesicle, forebrain and/or limb at embryonic day 11.5.
Examination of the coordinates of various chromosomal rearrangements in
conjunction with the genomic location of these tissue-specific enhancers showed a
correlation with the observed clinical abnormalities. Our findings suggest that
chromosomal abnormalities that disrupt the function of these tissue-specific
enhancers could be the cause of SHFM1 and its associated phenotypes. In addition,
they highlight specific enhancers in which mutations could lead to non-syndromic 
hearing loss, craniofacial defects or limb malformations.

PMCID: PMC3529576
PMID: 22914741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Endod. 2012 Sep;38(9):1220-6. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2012.04.018. Epub 2012 Jul
24.

Biodentine induces immortalized murine pulp cell differentiation into
odontoblast-like cells and stimulates biomineralization.

Zanini M(1), Sautier JM, Berdal A, Simon S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, INSERM UMRS872, Paris, France.

INTRODUCTION: Biodentine (Septodont, Saint Maur des Faussés, France), a new
tricalcium silicate-based cement, has recently been commercialized and advertised
as a bioactive material. Its clinical application and physical properties have
been widely described, but, so far, its bioactivity and biological effect on pulp
cells have not been clearly shown. Thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate
the biological effect of Biodentine on immortalized murine pulp cells (OD-21).
METHODS: OD-21 cells were cultured with or without Biodentine. Cell proliferation
was determined by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetr
azolium (MTS) colorimetric assay after 2, 3, and 5 days of stimulation. The
expression of several biomolecular markers was analyzed to screen differentiation
pathways, both on a gene level with Real-time reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction and on a protein level by measuring alkaline phosphatase activity.
Alizarin red staining was used to assess and quantify biomineralization.
RESULTS: The expression patterns of several genes confirmed the differentiation
of OD-21 cells into odontoblasts during the period of cell culture. Our results
suggest that Biodentine is bioactive because it increased OD-21 cell
proliferation and biomineralization in comparison with controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Because of its bioactivity, Biodentine can be considered as a
suitable material for clinical indications of dentin-pulp complex regeneration,
such as direct pulp capping.

Copyright © 2012 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22892739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Pathol. 2012 Nov;228(3):366-77. doi: 10.1002/path.4075. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

Iron overload signature in chrysotile-induced malignant mesothelioma.

Jiang L(1), Akatsuka S, Nagai H, Chew SH, Ohara H, Okazaki Y, Yamashita Y,
Yoshikawa Y, Yasui H, Ikuta K, Sasaki K, Kohgo Y, Hirano S, Shinohara Y, Kohyama 
N, Takahashi T, Toyokuni S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Biological Responses, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.

Exposure to asbestos is a risk for malignant mesothelioma (MM) in humans. Among
the commercially used types of asbestos (chrysotile, crocidolite, and amosite),
the carcinogenicity of chrysotile is not fully appreciated. Here, we show that
all three asbestos types similarly induced MM in the rat peritoneal cavity and
that chrysotile caused the earliest mesothelioma development with a high fraction
of sarcomatoid histology. The pathogenesis of chrysotile-induced mesothelial
carcinogenesis was closely associated with iron overload: repeated administration
of an iron chelator, nitrilotriacetic acid, which promotes the Fenton reaction,
significantly reduced the period required for carcinogenesis; massive iron
deposition was found in the peritoneal organs with high serum ferritin; and
homozygous deletion of the CDKN2A/2B/ARF tumour suppressor genes, the most
frequent genomic alteration in human MM and in iron-induced rodent
carcinogenesis, was observed in 92.6% of the cases studied with array-based
comparative genomic hybridization. The induced rat MM cells revealed high
expression of mesoderm-specific transcription factors, Dlx5 and Hand1, and showed
an iron regulatory profile of active iron uptake and utilization. These data
indicate that chrysotile is a strong carcinogen when exposed to mesothelia,
acting through the induction of local iron overload. Therefore, an intervention
to remove local excess iron might be a strategy to prevent MM after asbestos
exposure.

Copyright © 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22864872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Periodontal Implant Sci. 2012 Jun;42(3):73-80. doi: 10.5051/jpis.2012.42.3.73. 
Epub 2012 Jun 30.

Effects of immunosuppressants, FK506 and cyclosporin A, on the osteogenic
differentiation of rat mesenchymal stem cells.

Byun YK(1), Kim KH, Kim SH, Kim YS, Koo KT, Kim TI, Seol YJ, Ku Y, Rhyu IC, Lee
YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Dental Research Institute, Seoul National
University School of Dentistry, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of the
immunosuppressants FK506 and cyclosporin A (CsA) on the osteogenic
differentiation of rat mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs).
METHODS: The effect of FK506 and CsA on rat MSCs was assessed in vitro. The MTT
assay was used to determine the deleterious effect of immunosuppressants on stem 
cell proliferation at 1, 3, and 7 days. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was
analyzed on days 3, 7, and 14. Alizarin red S staining was done on day 21 to
check mineralization nodule formation. Real-time polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was also performed to detect the expressions of bone tissue-specific
genes on days 1 and 7.
RESULTS: Cell proliferation was promoted more in the FK506 groups than the
control or CsA groups on days 3 and 7. The FK506 groups showed increased ALP
activity compared to the other groups during the experimental period. The ALP
activity of the CsA groups did not differ from the control group in any of the
assessments. Mineralization nodule formation was most prominent in the FK506
groups at 21 days. RT-PCR results of the FK506 groups showed that several
bone-related genes-osteopontin, osteonectin, and type I collagen (Col-I)-were
expressed more than the control in the beginning, but the intensity of expression
decreased over time. Runx2 and Dlx5 gene expression were up-regulated on day 7.
The effects of 50 nM CsA on osteonectin and Col-I were similar to those of the
FK506 groups, but in the 500 nM CsA group, most of the genes were less expressed 
compared to the control.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that FK506 enhances the osteoblastic
differentiation of rat MSCs. Therefore, FK506 might have a beneficial effect on
bone regeneration when immunosuppressants are needed in xenogenic or allogenic
stem cell transplantation to treat bone defects.

PMCID: PMC3394998
PMID: 22803008  [PubMed]


150. J Tissue Eng Regen Med. 2014 Jan;8(1):15-28. doi: 10.1002/term.1487. Epub 2012
Jul 5.

Effect of grafting BMP2-derived peptide to nanoparticles on osteogenic and
vasculogenic expression of stromal cells.

Mercado AE(1), Yang X, He X, Jabbari E.

Author information: 
(1)Biomimetic Materials and Tissue Engineering Laboratory, Department of Chemical
Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, 29208, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP2) plays a major role in initiating the cascade 
of osteogenesis. However, high doses of exogenous BMP2 coupled with diffusion
away from the intended site cause adverse side-effects. An alternative is to use 
biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles (NPs) grafted with peptides of the active
domains of BMP2. NPs present a multivalent form of the peptide for stronger
interaction with cell surface receptors, leading to a stronger activation of
osteogenic signalling pathways. The objective of this work was to compare
osteogenic activity of the BMP2 peptide (BMP2Pe), corresponding to residues 73-92
of BMP2 protein (BMP2Pr), grafted to biodegradable NPs with that of BMP2 protein 
(BMP2Pr). BMP2Pe was functionalized with a cysteine residue and grafted to
poly(lactide fumarate) and poly(lactide-co-ethylene oxide fumarate) (PLAF/PLEOF) 
NPs via a thioether link. The calcium content of bone marrow stromal (BMS) cells 
cultured in osteogenic medium supplemented with BMP2 peptide/protein-grafted NPs 
(BMP2Pe-gNP and BMP2Pr-gNP) was slightly higher than other BMP2-treated groups,
but all osteogenic groups showed similar levels of mineralization after 21 days. 
The expression pattern of master transcription factors Dlx5 and Runx2 indicated
that BMP2 protein induced faster osteogenic signalling than the BMP peptide. The 
expression level of Osteopontin (OP), Osteocalcin (OC) and PECAM-1 in the
NP-grafted BMP2 groups was significantly higher than those of ungrafted BMP2Pr
and BMP2Pe groups, which may be due to a more effective presentation of the
peptide/protein to cell surface receptors, thus leading to a stronger interaction
of the peptide/protein with clustered cell surface receptors.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4076642
PMID: 22764116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Nov 1;21(16):2958-68. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0349. Epub 2012 
Jul 18.

Characterization of different subpopulations from bone marrow-derived mesenchymal
stromal cells by alkaline phosphatase expression.

Kim YH(1), Yoon DS, Kim HO, Lee JW.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science, Departments of Orthopaedic
Surgery, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Multiple surface markers have been utilized for the enrichment of bone marrow
mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) and to define primitive stem cells. We
classified human bone marrow-derived MSC populations according to tissue
nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) activity. TNAP expression varied among
unexpanded primary MSCs, and its level was not related to colony-forming activity
or putative surface markers, such as CD105 and CD29, donor age, or gender. TNAP
levels were increased in larger cells, and a colony-forming unit-fibroblast assay
revealed that the colony size was decreased during in vitro expansion.
TNAP-positive (TNAP+) MSCs showed limited multipotential capacity, whereas
TNAP-negative (TNAP-) MSCs retained the differentiation potential into 3 lineages
(osteogenic-, adipogenic-, and chondrogenic differentiation). High degree of
calcium mineralization and high level of osteogenic-related gene expression
(osteopontin, dlx5, and cbfa1) were found in TNAP+<U+2009>cells. In contrast, during
chondrogenic differentiation, type II collagen was successfully induced in TNAP- 
cells, but not in TNAP+<U+2009>cells. TNAP+<U+2009>cells showed high levels of the hypertrophic
markers, type X collagen and cbfa1. Mesenchymal stem cell antigen-1 (MSCA-1) is
identical to TNAP. Therefore, TNAP+<U+2009>cells were sorted by using antibody targeting
MSCA-1. MSCA-1-positive cells sorted for TNAP+<U+2009>cells exhibited low proliferation 
rates. Expression of cell cycle-related genes (cyclin A2, CDK2, and CDK4) and
pluripotency marker genes (rex1 and nanog) were higher in TNAP- MSC than in TNAP+
MSC. Therefore, TNAP- cells can be described as more primitive bone
marrow-derived cells and TNAP levels in MSCs can be used to predict chondrocyte
hypertrophy or osteogenic capacity.

PMCID: PMC3475148
PMID: 22702738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Acta Naturae. 2011 Jul;3(3):47-51.

Transcription Factor DLX5 As a New Target for Promising Antitumor Agents.

Timakhov RA(1), Fedichev PO, Vinnik AA, Testa JR, Favorova OO.

Author information: 
(1)Quantum Pharmaceuticals, Russia.

The crystal structure of the human transcription factor DLX5 has been used for
the screening of a library consisting of 10(6 )compounds by the molecular docking
technique.In vitro testsof the 14 top-rated ligands showed that compound Q12
displays the best ability to inhibit the proliferation ofDlx5 positive mouse
lymphoma cells, which correlates with the down-regulation ofc-mycexpression.
Compound Q12 has low toxicity on normal human ovarian epithelial cells and mouse 
lymphoma cells with absent expression ofDlx5, and can be used for further
chemical optimization and for the development of novel, highly efficient cancer
treatments.

PMCID: PMC3347611
PMID: 22649693  [PubMed]


153. Biomacromolecules. 2012 Jul 9;13(7):2073-86. doi: 10.1021/bm300453k. Epub 2012
Jun 11.

Gelation characteristics and osteogenic differentiation of stromal cells in inert
hydrolytically degradable micellar polyethylene glycol hydrogels.

Moeinzadeh S(1), Barati D, He X, Jabbari E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia,
South Carolina 29208, United States.

The use of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) hydrogels in tissue engineering is limited
by their persistence in the site of regeneration. In an attempt to produce inert 
hydrolytically degradable PEG-based hydrogels, star (SPELA) poly(ethylene
glycol-co-lactide) acrylate macromonomers with short lactide segments (<15
lactides per macromonomer) were synthesized. The SPELA hydrogel was characterized
with respect to gelation time, modulus, water content, sol fraction, degradation,
and osteogenic differentiation of encapsulated marrow stromal cells (MSCs). The
properties of SPELA hydrogel were compared with those of the linear poly(ethylene
glycol-co-lactide) acrylate (LPELA). The SPELA hydrogel had higher modulus, lower
water content, and lower sol fraction than the LPELA. The shear modulus of SPELA 
hydrogel was 2.2 times higher than LPELA, whereas the sol fraction of SPELA
hydrogel was 5 times lower than LPELA. The degradation of SPELA hydrogel depended
strongly on the number of lactide monomers per macromonomer (nL) and showed a
biphasic behavior. For example, as nL increased from 0 to 3.4, 6.4, 11.6, and
14.8, mass loss increased from 7 to 37, 80, 100% and then deceased to 87%,
respectively, after 6 weeks of incubation. The addition of 3.4 lactides per
macromonomer (<10 wt % dry macromonomer or <2 wt % swollen hydrogel) increased
mass loss to 50% after 6 weeks. Molecular dynamic simulations demonstrated that
the biphasic degradation behavior was related to aggregation and micelle
formation of lactide monomers in the macromonomer in aqueous solution. MSCs
encapsulated in SPELA hydrogel expressed osteogenic markers Dlx5, Runx2,
osteopontin, and osteocalcin and formed a mineralized matrix. The expression of
osteogenic markers and extent of mineralization was significantly higher when
MSCs were encapsulated in SPELA hydrogel with the addition of bone morphogenetic 
protein-2 (BMP2). Results demonstrate that hydrolytically degradable PEG-based
hydrogels are potentially useful as a delivery matrix for stem cells in
regenerative medicine.

PMID: 22642902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 May 4;90(5):907-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.04.002.

A human homeotic transformation resulting from mutations in PLCB4 and GNAI3
causes auriculocondylar syndrome.

Rieder MJ(1), Green GE, Park SS, Stamper BD, Gordon CT, Johnson JM, Cunniff CM,
Smith JD, Emery SB, Lyonnet S, Amiel J, Holder M, Heggie AA, Bamshad MJ,
Nickerson DA, Cox TC, Hing AV, Horst JA, Cunningham ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195,
USA.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Jun 8;90(6):1116.
    Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Aug 10;91(2):397.

Auriculocondylar syndrome (ACS) is a rare, autosomal-dominant craniofacial
malformation syndrome characterized by variable micrognathia, temporomandibular
joint ankylosis, cleft palate, and a characteristic "question-mark" ear
malformation. Careful phenotypic characterization of severely affected probands
in our cohort suggested the presence of a mandibular patterning defect resulting 
in a maxillary phenotype (i.e., homeotic transformation). We used exome
sequencing of five probands and identified two novel (exclusive to the patient
and/or family studied) missense mutations in PLCB4 and a shared mutation in GNAI3
in two unrelated probands. In confirmatory studies, three additional novel PLCB4 
mutations were found in multigenerational ACS pedigrees. All mutations were
confirmed by Sanger sequencing, were not present in more than 10,000 control
chromosomes, and resulted in amino-acid substitutions located in highly conserved
protein domains. Additionally, protein-structure modeling demonstrated that all
ACS substitutions disrupt the catalytic sites of PLCB4 and GNAI3. We suggest that
PLCB4 and GNAI3 are core signaling molecules of the endothelin-1-distal-less
homeobox 5 and 6 (EDN1-DLX5/DLX6) pathway. Functional studies demonstrated a
significant reduction in downstream DLX5 and DLX6 expression in ACS cases in
assays using cultured osteoblasts from probands and controls. These results
support the role of the previously implicated EDN1-DLX5/6 pathway in regulating
mandibular specification in other species, which, when disrupted, results in a
maxillary phenotype. This work defines the molecular basis of ACS as a homeotic
transformation (mandible to maxilla) in humans.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3376493
PMID: 22560091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Jan;228(1):87-98. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24106.

Distal-less homeobox 5 inhibits adipogenic differentiation through the
down-regulation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> expression.

Lee HL(1), Woo KM, Ryoo HM, Baek JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, School of Dentistry and Dental Research
Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-749, Korea.

Distal-less homeobox 5 (Dlx5) is a positive regulator of osteoblast
differentiation that contains a homeobox domain. Because there are possible
reciprocal relationships between osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation of
bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), we examined the regulatory role of
Dlx5 in adipogenic differentiation in this study. Adipogenic stimuli suppressed
the expression levels of Dlx5 mRNA in mouse bone marrow stromal cells.
Over-expression of Dlx5 inhibited adipogenic differentiation in human bone marrow
MSCs and 3T3-L1 preadipocytic cells whereas knockdown of Dlx5 enhanced adipogenic
differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells. Over-expression of Dlx5 suppressed the
expression of adipogenic marker genes, including CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a
(C/EBPa) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>). Dlx5-mediated 
suppression of adipogenic differentiation was overcome by over-expression of
PPAR<U+03B3> but not by that of cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) or C/EBPa. 
Dlx5 decreased the transcriptional activity of CREB and C/EBPa in a
dose-dependent manner. Dlx5 directly bound to CREB and C/EBPa and prevented them 
from binding to and subsequently transactivating the PPAR<U+03B3> promoter. These
results suggest that Dlx5 plays an important regulatory role in fate
determination of bone marrow MSCs toward the osteoblast lineage through the
inhibition of adipocyte differentiation as well as the direct stimulation of
osteoblast differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22553076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 15;287(25):21429-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.362145. Epub
2012 Apr 30.

Prevention of premature fusion of calvarial suture in GLI-Kruppel family member 3
(Gli3)-deficient mice by removing one allele of Runt-related transcription factor
2 (Runx2).

Tanimoto Y(1), Veistinen L, Alakurtti K, Takatalo M, Rice DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Institute of Dentistry, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki 00014, Finland.

Mutations in the gene encoding the zinc finger transcription factor GLI3
(GLI-Kruppel family member 3) have been identified in patients with Grieg
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome in which premature fusion of calvarial suture
(craniosynostosis) is an infrequent but important feature. Here, we show that
Gli3 acts as a repressor in the developing murine calvaria and that Dlx5, Runx2
type II isoform (Runx2-II), and Bmp2 are expressed ectopically in the calvarial
mesenchyme, which results in aberrant osteoblastic differentiation in
Gli3-deficient mouse (Gli3(Xt-J/Xt-J)) and resulted in craniosynostosis. At the
same time, enhanced activation of phospho-Smad1/5/8 (pSmad1/5/8), which is a
downstream mediator of canonical Bmp signaling, was observed in Gli3(Xt-J/Xt-J)
embryonic calvaria. Therefore, we generated Gli3;Runx2 compound mutant mice to
study the effects of decreasing Runx2 dosage in a Gli3(Xt-J/Xt-J) background.
Gli3(Xt-J/Xt-J) Runx2(+/-) mice have neither craniosynostosis nor additional
ossification centers in interfrontal suture and displayed a normalization of
Dlx5, Runx2-II, and pSmad1/5/8 expression as well as sutural mesenchymal cell
proliferation. These findings suggest a novel role for Gli3 in regulating
calvarial suture development by controlling canonical Bmp-Smad signaling, which
integrates a Dlx5/Runx2-II cascade. We propose that targeting Runx2 might provide
an attractive way of preventing craniosynostosis in patients.

PMCID: PMC3375564
PMID: 22547067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Epigenetics. 2012 Jun 1;7(6):635-51. doi: 10.4161/epi.20163. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

DMSO is a strong inducer of DNA hydroxymethylation in pre-osteoblastic MC3T3-E1
cells.

Thaler R(1), Spitzer S, Karlic H, Klaushofer K, Varga F.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology at the Hanusch Hospital of WGKK and
AUVA Trauma Center Meidling; First Medical Department, Hanusch Hospital, Vienna, 
Austria.

Artificial induction of active DNA demethylation appears to be a possible and
useful strategy in molecular biology research and therapy development. Dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO) was shown to cause phenotypic changes in embryonic stem cells
altering the genome-wide DNA methylation profiles. Here we report that DMSO
increases global and gene-specific DNA hydroxymethylation levels in
pre-osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells. After 1 day, DMSO increased the expression of
genes involved in DNA hydroxymethylation (TET) and nucleotide excision repair
(GADD45) and decreased the expression of genes related to DNA methylation (Dnmt1,
Dnmt3b, Hells). Already 12 hours after seeding, before first replication, DMSO
increased the expression of the pro-apoptotic gene Fas and of the early
osteoblastic factor Dlx5, which proved to be Tet1 dependent. At this time an
increase of 5-methyl-cytosine hydroxylation (5-hmC) with a concomitant loss of
methyl-cytosines on Fas and Dlx5 promoters as well as an increase in global 5-hmC
and loss in global DNA methylation was observed. Time course-staining of nuclei
suggested euchromatic localization of DMSO induced 5-hmC. As consequence of
induced Fas expression, caspase 3/7 and 8 activities were increased indicating
apoptosis. After 5 days, the effect of DMSO on promoter- and global methylation
as well as on gene expression of Fas and Dlx5 and on caspases activities was
reduced or reversed indicating down-regulation of apoptosis. At this time, up
regulation of genes important for matrix synthesis suggests that DMSO via
hydroxymethylation of the Fas promoter initially stimulates apoptosis in a
subpopulation of the heterogeneous MC3T3-E1 cell line, leaving a cell population 
of extra-cellular matrix producing osteoblasts. 

PMCID: PMC3398991
PMID: 22507896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Sep;113(9):2822-34. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24157.

Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans lipopolysaccharide regulates bone
sialoprotein gene transcription.

Li X(1), Zhou L, Takai H, Sasaki Y, Mezawa M, Li Z, Wang Z, Yang L, Wang S,
Matsumura H, Kaneko T, Yoshimura A, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba 271-8587, Japan.

Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans (A. actinomycetemcomitans) is believed to
be associated with aggressive periodontitis characterized by a rapid bone loss.
A. actinomycetemcomitans lipopolysaccharide (LPS) has a similar structure to
Escherichia coli LPS, and they are Toll-like receptor 4 agonists. Bone
sialoprotein (BSP) is an early marker of osteoblast differentiation. To
investigate the effects of A. actinomycetemcomitans LPS on bone formation, we
targeted BSP as a marker for osteogenic differentiation and bone formation. BSP
mRNA levels were decreased by 0.1 µg/ml and increased by 0.01 µg/ml A.
actinomycetemcomitans LPS at 6 h in osteoblast-like ROS17/2.8 cells. In transient
transfection analyses, 0.1 µg/ml decreased and 0.01 µg/ml A.
actinomycetemcomitans LPS increased luciferase activities of the construct (-116 
to +60). Introduction of 2 bp mutations to the constructs showed that the effects
of A. actinomycetemcomitans LPS were mediated by a cAMP response element (CRE), a
FGF2 response element (FRE), and a homeodomain protein-binding site (HOX).
Tyrosine kinase, ERK1/2, and PI3-kinase/Akt participated in the effects of both
0.1 and 0.01 µg/ml A. actinomycetemcomitans LPS. The results of gel shift showed 
that 0.1 µg/ml decreased while 0.01 µg/ml A. actinomycetemcomitans LPS increased 
CRE-, FRE-, and HOX-binding protein complexes formation at 6 h, and revealed that
0.01 µg/ml A. actinomycetemcomitans LPS induced BSP transcription through CREB1, 
JunD, Fra2, c-Fos, Runx2, Dlx5, and Smad1 targeting those response elements.
These studies therefore indicated that 0.1 µg/ml suppressed and 0.01 µg/ml A.
actinomycetemcomitans LPS increased BSP gene transcription mediated through CRE, 
FRE, and HOX elements in the rat BSP gene promoter.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22492284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Bone. 2012 Jun;50(6):1240-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2012.03.021. Epub 2012 Mar 29.

Expression of osteoblastic and osteoclastic genes during spontaneous regeneration
and autotransplantation of goldfish scale: a new tool to study intramembranous
bone regeneration.

Thamamongood TA(1), Furuya R, Fukuba S, Nakamura M, Suzuki N, Hattori A.

Author information: 
(1)Undergraduate School of Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan.

Complementary DNA of osteoblast-specific genes (dlx5, runx2a, runx2b, osterix,
RANKL, type I collagen, ALP, and osteocalcin) was cloned from goldfish (Carassius
auratus) scale. Messenger RNA expressions were analyzed during spontaneous scale 
regeneration. Dlx5 had an early peak of expression on day 7, whereas osterix was 
constantly expressed during days 7-21. Runx2, a major osteoblastic transcription 
factor in mammalian bone, did not show any significant expression. The
expressions of two functional genes, type I collagen and ALP, continually
increased after day 7, while that of osteocalcin increased on day 14. As for
osteoclastic markers, in addition to the cloning of two functional genes, TRAP
and cathepsin K, in our previous study, we here cloned the transcription factor
NFATc1 to use as an early osteoclastic marker. Using these bone markers, we
investigate the signal key that controls the onset of scale resorption and
regeneration by performing intra-scale-pocket autotransplantation of five groups 
of modified scales, namely, 1) methanol-fixed scale, 2) proteinase K-treated
cell-free scale, 3) polarity reversal (upside-down) scale, 4) U-shape trimmed
scale, and 5) circular-hole perforated scale. In this autotransplantation, each
ontogenic scale was pulled out, modified, and then re-inserted into the same
scale pocket. At post-transplant, inside the pockets of all modified transplant
groups, new regenerating scales formed, attaching to the ongoing resorbed
transplants. Autotransplantation of methanol-fixed scale, proteinase K-treated
cell-free scale, and polarity reversal (upside-down) scale triggered scale
resorption and scale regeneration. These two processes of scale resorption and
regeneration occurred in accordance with osteoclastic and osteoblastic marker
gene expressions. These results were microscopically confirmed using TRAP and ALP
staining. Regarding the autotransplantation of U-shape trimmed and circular-hole 
perforated scales, new scales regenerated and grew at the trimmed/perforated part
of each transplant, while scale resorption occurred apparently only around the
trimmed/perforated area. In contrast, no scale resorption or regeneration was
detected in sham transplantations. Our finding suggests that loss of correct
cell-to-cell contact between the scale-pocket lining cells and the scale cortex
cells is the key to switch on the onset of scale resorption and regeneration.
Overall, the present study shows that goldfish scale regeneration shares
similarities in gene expression with intramembranous bone regeneration. Improved 
understanding of goldfish scale regeneration will help elucidate the process of
intramembranous bone regeneration and make goldfish scale a possible new tool to 
study bone regeneration.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22484181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Neurosci. 2012 Mar 21;32(12):4065-79. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6314-11.2012.

TrkA gene ablation in basal forebrain results in dysfunction of the cholinergic
circuitry.

Sanchez-Ortiz E(1), Yui D, Song D, Li Y, Rubenstein JL, Reichardt LF, Parada LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
School, Dallas, TX 75390-9133, USA.

Dysfunction of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons (BFCNs) is an early
pathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Numerous studies have
indicated that nerve growth factor (NGF) supports survival and phenotypic
differentiation of BFCNs. Consistent with a potential link to AD pathogenesis,
TrkA, a NGF receptor, is expressed in cholinergic forebrain neuronal populations 
including those in BF and striatum, and is markedly reduced in individuals with
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) without dementia and early-stage AD. To
investigate the role of TrkA in the development, connectivity, and function of
the BF cholinergic system and its contribution to AD pathology, we have generated
a forebrain-specific conditional TrkA knock-out mouse line. Our findings show a
key role for TrkA signaling in establishing the BF cholinergic circuitry through 
the ERK pathway, and demonstrate that the normal developmental increase of
choline acetyltransferase expression becomes critically dependent on TrkA
signaling before neuronal connections are established. Moreover, the anatomical
and physiological deficits caused by lack of TrkA signaling in BFCNs have
selective impact on cognitive activity. These data demonstrate that TrkA loss
results in cholinergic BF dysfunction and cognitive decline that is reminiscent
of MCI and early AD.

PMCID: PMC3403817
PMID: 22442072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Genome Res. 2012 Jun;22(6):1059-68. doi: 10.1101/gr.133546.111. Epub 2012 Mar 22.

Coding exons function as tissue-specific enhancers of nearby genes.

Birnbaum RY(1), Clowney EJ, Agamy O, Kim MJ, Zhao J, Yamanaka T, Pappalardo Z,
Clarke SL, Wenger AM, Nguyen L, Gurrieri F, Everman DB, Schwartz CE, Birk OS,
Bejerano G, Lomvardas S, Ahituv N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of
California-San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Enhancers are essential gene regulatory elements whose alteration can lead to
morphological differences between species, developmental abnormalities, and human
disease. Current strategies to identify enhancers focus primarily on noncoding
sequences and tend to exclude protein coding sequences. Here, we analyzed 25
available ChIP-seq data sets that identify enhancers in an unbiased manner
(H3K4me1, H3K27ac, and EP300) for peaks that overlap exons. We find that, on
average, 7% of all ChIP-seq peaks overlap coding exons (after excluding for peaks
that overlap with first exons). By using mouse and zebrafish enhancer assays, we 
demonstrate that several of these exonic enhancer (eExons) candidates can
function as enhancers of their neighboring genes and that the exonic sequence is 
necessary for enhancer activity. Using ChIP, 3C, and DNA FISH, we further show
that one of these exonic limb enhancers, Dync1i1 exon 15, has active enhancer
marks and physically interacts with Dlx5/6 promoter regions 900 kb away. In
addition, its removal by chromosomal abnormalities in humans could cause split
hand and foot malformation 1 (SHFM1), a disorder associated with DLX5/6. These
results demonstrate that DNA sequences can have a dual function, operating as
coding exons in one tissue and enhancers of nearby gene(s) in another tissue,
suggesting that phenotypes resulting from coding mutations could be caused not
only by protein alteration but also by disrupting the regulation of another gene.

PMCID: PMC3371700
PMID: 22442009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33412. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033412. Epub 2012 Mar 13.

Genome-wide linkage in a highly consanguineous pedigree reveals two novel loci on
chromosome 7 for non-syndromic familial Premature Ovarian Failure.

Caburet S(1), Zavadakova P, Ben-Neriah Z, Bouhali K, Dipietromaria A, Charon C,
Besse C, Laissue P, Chalifa-Caspi V, Christin-Maitre S, Vaiman D, Levi G, Veitia 
RA, Fellous M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, Université Denis Diderot, CNRS UMR7592, Paris, France.
caburet.sandrine@ijm.univ-paris-diderot.fr

BACKGROUND: The human condition known as Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is
characterized by loss of ovarian function before the age of 40. A majority of POF
cases are sporadic, but 10-15% are familial, suggesting a genetic origin of the
disease. Although several causal mutations have been identified, the etiology of 
POF is still unknown for about 90% of the patients.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We report a genome-wide linkage and homozygosity 
analysis in one large consanguineous Middle-Eastern POF-affected family
presenting an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. We identified two
regions with a LOD(max) of 3.26 on chromosome 7p21.1-15.3 and 7q21.3-22.2, which 
are supported as candidate regions by homozygosity mapping. Sequencing of the
coding exons and known regulatory sequences of three candidate genes (DLX5, DLX6 
and DSS1) included within the largest region did not reveal any causal mutations.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We detect two novel POF-associated loci on human
chromosome 7, opening the way to the identification of new genes involved in the 
control of ovarian development and function.

PMCID: PMC3302824
PMID: 22428046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent. 2012 Jun;32(3):285-93.

GDF-5 and BMP-2 regulate bone cell differentiation by gene expression of MSX1,
MSX2, Dlx5, and Runx2 and influence OCN gene expression in vitro.

Koch FP(1), Weinbach C, Hustert E, Al-Nawas B, Wagner W.

Author information: 
(1)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Medical Centre of the Johannes
Gutenberg University, Augustusplatz 2. Mainz, Germany. koch@facialplastics.de

Recombinant human growth/differentiation factor 5 (rhGDF-5) and recombinant human
bone morphogenetic protein 2 (rhBMP-2), as members of the transforming growth
factor <U+0392> family, influence bone formation and differentiation. This in vitro
osteoblast cell culture study investigated the molecular biologic effect of these
growth factors on regulator gene expression of the homebox proteins MSX1 and MSX2
as well as distal-less homebox 5 (Dlx5) and runt-related transcription factor 2
(Runx2/Cbfa1). Concerning effector genes, the messenger ribonucleic acids of
osteocalcin (OCN) were quantified using a reverse transcriptase real-time
polymerase chain reaction. Over a period of 15 days, osteoblasts were stimulated 
and analyzed at days 1, 2, 5, 10, and 15. rhGDF-5 and rhBMP-2 were applied in
concentrations of 100, 500, and 1,000 ng/mL. The results showed enhanced gene
expression of MSX1 and MSX2 by the lower rhGDF-5 concentration (100 ng/mL) during
the first 48 hours and a marginally enhanced gene expression of Runx2 and OCN in 
a dose-dependent manner. The rhBMP-2 stimulation showed enhanced MSX1 and MSX2
gene expression with peaks at 24 and 240 hours; Runx2 and OCN were more highly
expressed than the unstimulated control with the 100-ng/mL concentration. rhGDF-5
seems to stimulate early osteoblast differentiation and extracellular matrix
production, while rhBMP-2 seems to boost early and late osteoblast
differentiation. Low growth factor concentrations appeared to be more effective
in terms of gene expression.

PMID: 22408773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Dev Biol. 2012 May 1;365(1):196-207. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.02.029. Epub 2012 
Feb 25.

Early neural crest induction requires an initial inhibition of Wnt signals.

Steventon B(1), Mayor R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, Gower
Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

Neural crest (NC) induction is a long process that continues through gastrula and
neurula stages. In order to reveal additional stages of NC induction we performed
a series of explants where different known inducing tissues were taken along with
the prospective NC. Interestingly the dorso-lateral marginal zone (DLMZ) is only 
able to promote the expression of a subset of neural plate border (NPB) makers
without the presence of specific NC markers. We then analysed the temporal
requirement for BMP and Wnt signals for the NPB genes Hairy2a and Dlx5, compared 
to the expression of neural plate (NP) and NC genes. Although the NP is sensitive
to BMP levels at early gastrula stages, Hairy2a/Dlx5 expression is unaffected.
Later, the NP becomes insensitive to BMP levels at late gastrulation when NC
markers require an inhibition. The NP requires an inhibition of Wnt signals prior
to gastrulation, but becomes insensitive during early gastrula stages when
Hairy2a/Dlx5 requires an inhibition of Wnt signalling. An increase in Wnt
signalling is then important for the switch from NPB to NC at late gastrula
stages. In addition to revealing an additional distinct signalling event in NC
induction, this work emphasizes the importance of integrating both timing and
levels of signalling activity during the patterning of complex tissues such as
the vertebrate ectoderm.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3657187
PMID: 22394485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Gene. 2012 Apr 15;497(2):292-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.01.088. Epub 2012 Feb 9.

Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome and SHFM1 patients: delineating the p63-Dlx5/Dlx6 pathway.

Vera-Carbonell A(1), Moya-Quiles MR, Ballesta-Martínez M, López-González V,
Bafallíu JA, Guillén-Navarro E, López-Expósito I.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Bioquímica y Genética Clínica, Hospital U. Virgen de la Arrixaca,
Murcia, Spain.

Rapp-Hodgkin Syndrome (RHS) is a genetic disorder resulting from mutations in the
TP63 gene encoding p63 transcription factor. p63 is directly associated with a
cis-regulatory element on chromosome 7q21 that controls the expression of DLX5
and DLX6 genes which are involved in craniofacial abnormalities and ectrodactyly 
or split hand/foot malformation (SHFM). Chromosomal deletions on 7q21 locus can
result in loss of DXL5/DLX6 and/or in loss/disruption of cis-regulatory elements,
at which p63 binds. We report two patients that have in common a p63-Dlx5/Dlx6
pathway dysregulation. One showed growth retardation, craniofacial dysmorphism,
syndactyly, developmental delay and a de novo deletion (~8.5Mb) on chromosome
7q21.13-q21.3, including DLX5 and DLX6. The second patient with a clinical
diagnosis of RHS showed a de novo heterozygous missense mutation, c. 401G>A
(p.G134D), in TP63 (exon 4). Our findings may contribute to a greater
understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms underlying disorders caused by TP63
mutations.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22342398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2011 Nov;42(6):823-6.

[Changes in the expression of Dlx5, Msx2, and Dlx5/Msx2 in hPDLSCs loaded with
cyclic tensile stress].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun CX(1), Zhang LK, Feng XX, Zhao ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, West China Stomatological Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the changes in the expression of Dlx5 and Msx2 in human
periodontal ligament stem cells (hPDLSCs) loaded with cyclic tensile stress.
METHODS: hPDLSCs were subjected to cyclic tensile stress (0.5 Hz, 3000 microm
strain) for 3, 6, 12, 24 h through a four-point bending strain system. The
expressions of Dlx5 and Msx2 mRNA were determined by real time PCR.
RESULTS: Strong expressions of Dlx5 and Msx2 were found in the periodontal
fibroblasts of the tension side 20 minutes after mechanical loading. The
expression of Dlx5 mRNA decreased over time with the stress. The expression of
Msx2 mRNA increased over time with the stress.
CONCLUSION: Both Dlx5 and Msx2 are sensitive to mechanical stress. Cyclic tensile
stress may induce differentiating of hPDLSCs towards mineralized tissue cells by 
promoting Dlx5 mRNA expression and decreasing Msx2 expression.

PMID: 22332551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Biochem. 2012 Mar;151(3):247-54. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvs004. Epub 2012 Jan 16.

Regulation of bone and cartilage development by network between BMP signalling
and transcription factors.

Nishimura R(1), Hata K, Matsubara T, Wakabayashi M, Yoneda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University Graduate
School of Dentistry. rikonisi@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp

Bone morphogenetic protein(s) (BMP) are very powerful cytokines that induce bone 
and cartilage formation. BMP also stimulate osteoblast and chondrocyte
differentiation. During bone and cartilage development, BMP regulates the
expression and/or the function of several transcription factors through
activation of Smad signalling. Genetic studies revealed that Runx2, Osterix and
Sox9, all of which function downstream of BMP, play essential roles in bone
and/or cartilage development. In addition, two other transcription factors, Msx2 
and Dlx5, which interact with BMP signalling, are involved in bone and cartilage 
development. The importance of these transcription factors in bone and cartilage 
development has been supported by biochemical and cell biological studies.
Interestingly, BMP is regulated by several negative feedback systems that appear 
necessary for fine-tuning of bone and cartilage development induced by BMP. Thus,
BMP harmoniously regulates bone and cartilage development by forming network with
several transcription factors.

PMID: 22253449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Jun;227(6):2287-96. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24038.

Wnt3a stimulates Mepe, matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein, expression
directly by the activation of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway and indirectly 
through the stimulation of autocrine Bmp-2 expression.

Cho YD(1), Kim WJ, Yoon WJ, Woo KM, Baek JH, Lee G, Kim GS, Ryoo HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, School of Dentistry, Dental Research
Institute, BK21 Program, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein (MEPE) is a specific marker of
mineralizing osteoblasts and osteocytes. Canonical BMP and Wnt signaling pathways
are two of the strongest paracrine signals stimulating osteogenesis. Our previous
results indicated that Mepe expression is stimulated by the BMP-2-signaling
pathway. The specific aim of this study addressed whether Mepe expression is also
controlled by Wnt signaling, and whether there is a cross-regulation between two 
major osteogenic signaling pathways. Treatment with Wnt3a, a canonical Wnt
signaling stimulator, strongly enhanced Mepe mRNA expression. Knock-down of
ß-catenin with siRNA completely reversed Wnt3a-stimulated Mepe expression. The
Mepe mRNA expression level was increased by overexpression of ß-catenin and
Lef-1, even in the absence of Wnt3a. Highly conserved Lef-1 response elements
were identified in the mouse Mepe promoter. The direct binding of Lef-1 to these 
elements is critical for Mepe expression, indicating that Mepe is a direct target
of canonical Wnt signaling. Meanwhile, we also found that Wnt3a treatment
strongly stimulated Bmp-2 expression, and that the subsequent increase in Bmp-2
protein was determined in Wnt3a-treated conditioned medium (CM). Treatment of
MC3T3-E1 cells with CM stimulated phosphorylation of the Smad1/5 proteins and
their downstream Dlx5 mRNA expression. The CM-mediated increases of phospho-Smad 
and Dlx5 expression were not blocked completely by a Wnt3a antagonist, Dkk-1, but
were almost completely suppressed by the addition of a Bmp-2 antagonist, Noggin. 
Collectively, Wnt3a stimulates Mepe transcription directly by a canonical Wnt
signaling pathway through ß-catenin and Lef-1 and indirectly through the
activation of a Bmp-2 autocrine loop.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22213482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Oral Sci. 2011 Dec;53(4):509-16.

High concentration of sodium butyrate suppresses osteoblastic differentiation and
mineralized nodule formation in ROS17/2.8 cells.

Morozumi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Health Sciences, Nihon University School of Dentistry,
Tokyo, Japan. morotan@rio.odn.ne.jp

Periodontitis is a destructive disease that is likely the result of the
activities of different microbial complexes, including anaerobic Gram-negative
periodontopathic bacteria. Butyric acid (sodium butyrate; BA) is a major
metabolic by-product of anaerobic Gram-negative periodontopathic bacteria present
in subgingival plaque. This study was undertaken to examine the effect of BA on
the expression of osteogenesis-related transcription factors and mineralized
nodule formation in osteoblastic ROS17/2.8 cells. The cells were cultured with 0 
(control), 10(-5), 10(-4), or 10(-3) M BA for up to 7 days. The gene and protein 
expression levels of transcription factors such as Runx2, Osterix, Dlx5, Msx2,
and AJ18, as well as extracellular matrix proteins such as bone sialoprotein
(BSP) and osteocalcin, were examined using real-time PCR and Western blotting,
respectively. Mineralized nodule formation was detected by alizarin red staining.
The expression of Runx2, Osterix, Dlx5, and Msx2 decreased significantly in the
presence of 10(-3 )M BA compared to the control, whereas AJ18 expression
increased significantly. Mineralized nodule formation decreased markedly in the
presence of 10(-3) M BA. Alkaline phosphatase activity and the expression of bone
sialoprotein and osteocalcin decreased significantly in the presence of 10(-3) M 
BA compared to the control. These results suggest that 10(-3) M BA suppresses
osteoblastic differentiation and mineralized nodule formation in ROS17/2.8 cells.

PMID: 22167038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Mol Biol. 2012 Feb 3;415(5):793-806. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.11.041. Epub 2011 
Dec 2.

CECR2 is involved in spermatogenesis and forms a complex with SNF2H in the
testis.

Thompson PJ(1), Norton KA, Niri FH, Dawe CE, McDermid HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada T6G 2E9.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2012 Sep;188(3):1043-4.

The regulation of nucleosome positioning and composition by ATP-dependent
chromatin remodeling enzymes and their associated binding partners plays
important biological roles in mammals. CECR2 is a binding partner to the ISWI
(imitation switch) ATPase SNF2L/SMARCA1 and is involved in neural tube closure
and inner ear development; however, its functions in adult tissues have not been 
examined. Here, we report that CECR2 contributes to spermatogenesis and forms a
complex that includes the other ISWI ATPase SNF2H/SMARCA5 in the testis. Cecr2
mutant males non-penetrant for neural tube defects sired smaller litters than
wild-type males. Strikingly, while we found that Cecr2 mutants have normal
seminiferous epithelium morphology, sperm count, motility, and morphology, the
mutant spermatozoa were compromised in their ability to fertilize oocytes.
Investigation of CECR2/ISWI complexes in the testis showed that SNF2H interacted 
with CECR2, and this interaction was also observed in embryonic stem cells,
suggesting that CECR2 may interact with SNF2H or SNF2L depending on the cell
type. Finally, we found that Cecr2 mutants exhibit misregulation of the homeobox 
transcription factor Dlx5 in the testis, suggesting that CECR2 complexes may
regulate gene expression during spermatogenesis. Taken together, our results
demonstrate a novel role of CECR2-containing complexes in spermatogenesis and
show that CECR2 interacts predominantly with SNF2H instead of SNF2L in the
testis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22154806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Clin Calcium. 2011 Dec;21(12):61-6. doi: CliCa111218111816.

[Bone and calcium update; diagnosis and therapy of bone metabolism disease
update. Molecular mechanism in cardiac valve calcification].

[Article in Japanese]

Furukawa K(1), Motomura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine,
Japan.

When cardiac valve stenosis is accompanied by calcification, symptoms and
prognosis become much worse and may cause sudden cardiac death. The prevalence of
this disease has increased with the rapidly aging in Japanese society. It has
recently been revealed that several genes which relate to physiological
ossification and calcification play important roles in this process. To find a
suitable target for medical treatment, the molecular mechanism for calcification 
of cardiac valves should be elucidated in detail. In this review, we summarize
the current knowledge on the pathology and molecular mechanism for ectopic
calcification of the cardiac valve.

PMID: 22133825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Med Genet. 2012 Jan;49(1):16-20. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2011-100556. Epub 2011 
Nov 25.

Identification of a novel DLX5 mutation in a family with autosomal recessive
split hand and foot malformation.

Shamseldin HE(1), Faden MA, Alashram W, Alkuraya FS.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Unit, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Center, Riyad 11211, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Split hand and foot malformation (SHFM) refers to a genetically
heterogeneous developmental disorder of the hands and feet that presents as
median ray deficiency of varying severity. 7q21.3 (SHFM1) is one of six loci
described to date, and although DLX5 and DLX6 are compelling candidates in that
locus, no intragenic mutations have been described in either of these genes.
METHODS: The authors combined autozygome analysis and exome sequencing to study a
consanguineous family with a highly unusual SHFM phenotype, where there is
associated dorsalisation of the hands.
RESULTS: A novel missense mutation in a highly conserved residue of the homeobox 
domain of DLX5 was identified. Unlike previously reported position effect
mutations in SHFM1, this first documented intragenic DLX5 mutation is also
accompanied by abnormal dorsal-ventral patterning.
CONCLUSION: This study identified the first intragenic DLX5 mutation in SHFM and 
raises interesting possibilities about a dual role for DLX5 in limb development.

PMID: 22121204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Jul 20;21(11):1936-47. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0422. Epub 2012
Feb 7.

The transcription factor DLX3 regulates the osteogenic differentiation of human
dental follicle precursor cells.

Viale-Bouroncle S(1), Felthaus O, Schmalz G, Brockhoff G, Reichert TE, Morsczeck 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany.

The transcription factor DLX3 plays a decisive role in bone development of
vertebrates. In neural-crest derived stem cells from the dental follicle (DFCs), 
DLX3 is differentially expressed during osteogenic differentiation, while other
osteogenic transcription factors such as DLX5 or RUNX2 are not highly induced.
DLX3 has therefore a decisive role in the differentiation of DFCs, but its actual
biological effects and regulation are unknown. This study investigated the
DLX3-regulated processes in DFCs. After DLX3 overexpression, DFCs acquired a
spindle-like cell shape with reorganized actin filaments. Here, marker genes for 
cell morphology, proliferation, apoptosis, and osteogenic differentiation were
significantly regulated as shown in a microarray analysis. Further experiments
showed that DFCs viability is directly influenced by the expression of DLX3, for 
example, the amount of apoptotic cells was increased after DLX3 silencing. This
transcription factor stimulates the osteogenic differentiation of DFCs and
regulates the BMP/SMAD1-pathway. Interestingly, BMP2 did highly induce DLX3 and
reverse the inhibitory effect of DLX3 silencing in osteogenic differentiation.
However, after DLX3 overexpression in DFCs, a BMP2 supplementation did not
improve the expression of DLX3 and the osteogenic differentiation. In conclusion,
DLX3 influences cell viability and regulates osteogenic differentiation of DFCs
via a BMP2-dependent pathway and a feedback control.

PMCID: PMC3396153
PMID: 22107079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 Oct 18;11:307. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-307.

The homology of odontodes in gnathostomes: insights from Dlx gene expression in
the dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula.

Debiais-Thibaud M(1), Oulion S, Bourrat F, Laurenti P, Casane D, Borday-Birraux
V.

Author information: 
(1)Evolution des familles multigéniques, Laboratoire Evolution Génome et
Spéciation, UPR CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

BACKGROUND: Teeth and tooth-like structures, together named odontodes, are
repeated organs thought to share a common evolutionary origin. These structures
can be found in gnathostomes at different locations along the body: oral teeth in
the jaws, teeth and denticles in the oral-pharyngeal cavity, and dermal denticles
on elasmobranch skin. We, and other colleagues, had previously shown that teeth
in any location were serially homologous because: i) pharyngeal and oral teeth
develop through a common developmental module; and ii) the expression patterns of
the Dlx genes during odontogenesis were highly divergent between species but
almost identical between oral and pharyngeal dentitions within the same species. 
Here we examine Dlx gene expression in oral teeth and dermal denticles in order
to test the hypothesis of serial homology between these odontodes.
RESULTS: We present a detailed comparison of the first developing teeth and
dermal denticles (caudal primary scales) of the dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula)
and show that both odontodes develop through identical stages that correspond to 
the common stages of oral and pharyngeal odontogenesis. We identified six Dlx
paralogs in the dogfish and found that three showed strong transcription in teeth
and dermal denticles (Dlx3, Dlx4 and Dlx5) whereas a weak expression was detected
for Dlx1 in dermal denticles and teeth, and for Dlx2 in dermal denticles. Very
few differences in Dlx expression patterns could be detected between tooth and
dermal denticle development, except for the absence of Dlx2 expression in teeth.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our histological and expression data strongly
suggest that teeth and dermal denticles develop from the same developmental
module and under the control of the same set of Dlx genes. Teeth and dermal
denticles should therefore be considered as serial homologs developing through
the initiation of a common gene regulatory network (GRN) at several body
locations. This mechanism of heterotopy supports the 'inside and out' model that 
has been recently proposed for odontode evolution.

PMCID: PMC3217942
PMID: 22008058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Cell Prolif. 2011 Oct;44(5):428-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2011.00770.x.

Importance of Sox2 in maintenance of cell proliferation and multipotency of
mesenchymal stem cells in low-density culture.

Yoon DS(1), Kim YH, Jung HS, Paik S, Lee JW.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, South
Korea.

OBJECTIVES: This study has aimed to repopulate 'primitive' cells from
late-passage mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) of poor multipotentiality and low cell
proliferation rate, by simply altering plating density.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Effects of low density culture compared t high density
culture on late-passage bone marrow (BM)-derived MSCs and pluripotency markers of
multipotentiality were investigated. Cell proliferation, gene expression, RNA
interference and differentiation potential were assayed.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: We repopulated 'primitive' cells by replating
late-passage MSCs at low density (17 cells/cm(2) ) regardless of donor age.
Repopulated MSCs from low-density culture were smaller cells with spindle shaped 
morphology compared to MSCs from high-density culture. The latter had enhanced
colony-forming ability, proliferation rate, and adipogenic and chondrogenic
potential. Strong expression of osteogenic-related genes (Cbfa1, Dlx5, alkaline
phosphatase and type <U+0399> collagen) in late-passage MSCs was reduced by replating at
low density, whereas expression of three pluripotency markers (Sox2, Nanog and
Oct-4), Osterix and Msx2 reverted to levels of early-passage MSCs. Knockdown of
Sox2 and Msx2 but not Nanog, using RNA interference, showed significant decrease 
in colony-forming ability. Specifically, knockdown of Sox2 significantly
inhibited multipotentiality and cell proliferation. Our data suggest that plating
density should be considered to be a critical factor for enrichment of
'primitive' cells from heterogeneous BM and that replicative senescence and
multipotentiality of MSCs during in vitro expansion may be predominantly
regulated through Sox2.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21951286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. BMC Res Notes. 2011 Sep 26;4:370. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-4-370.

Unveiling novel genes upregulated by both rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 during early
osteoblastic transdifferentiation of C2C12 cells.

Bustos-Valenzuela JC(1), Fujita A, Halcsik E, Granjeiro JM, Sogayar MC.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Institute, Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Therapy
Centre (NUCEL), University of São Paulo, Avenida Prof, Lineu Prestes, 748 Bloco
9S, São Paulo, SP 05508-000, Brazil. mcsoga@iq.usp.br.

FINDINGS: We set out to analyse the gene expression profile of pre-osteoblastic
C2C12 cells during osteodifferentiation induced by both rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 using
DNA microarrays. Induced and repressed genes were intercepted, resulting in 1,318
induced genes and 704 repressed genes by both rhBMP2 and rhBMP7. We selected and 
validated, by RT-qPCR, 24 genes which were upregulated by rhBMP2 and rhBMP7; of
these, 13 are related to transcription (Runx2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, Id1, Id2, Id3,
Fkhr1, Osx, Hoxc8, Glis1, Glis3 and Cfdp1), four are associated with cell
signalling pathways (Lrp6, Dvl1, Ecsit and PKCd) and seven are associated with
the extracellular matrix (Ltbp2, Grn, Postn, Plod1, BMP1, Htra1 and IGFBP-rP10). 
The novel identified genes include: Hoxc8, Glis1, Glis3, Ecsit, PKCd, LrP6, Dvl1,
Grn, BMP1, Ltbp2, Plod1, Htra1 and IGFBP-rP10.
BACKGROUND: BMPs (bone morphogenetic proteins) are members of the TGFß
(transforming growth factor-ß) super-family of proteins, which regulate growth
and differentiation of different cell types in various tissues, and play a
critical role in the differentiation of mesenchymal cells into osteoblasts. In
particular, rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 promote osteoinduction in vitro and in vivo, and
both proteins are therapeutically applied in orthopaedics and dentistry.
CONCLUSION: Using DNA microarrays and RT-qPCR, we identified both previously
known and novel genes which are upregulated by rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 during the onset
of osteoblastic transdifferentiation of pre-myoblastic C2C12 cells. Subsequent
studies of these genes in C2C12 and mesenchymal or pre-osteoblastic cells should 
reveal more details about their role during this type of cellular differentiation
induced by BMP2 or BMP7. These studies are relevant to better understanding the
molecular mechanisms underlying osteoblastic differentiation and bone repair.

PMCID: PMC3196718
PMID: 21943021  [PubMed]


177. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 25;286(47):41083-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.258715. Epub
2011 Sep 14.

GADD45A protein plays an essential role in active DNA demethylation during
terminal osteogenic differentiation of adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Zhang RP(1), Shao JZ, Xiang LX.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.

Methylation and demethylation of DNA are the complementary processes of
epigenetic regulation. These two types of regulation influence a diverse array of
cellular activities, including the maintenance of pluripotency and self-renewal
in embryonic stem cells. It was generally believed that DNA demethylation occurs 
passively over several cycles of DNA replication and that active DNA
demethylation is rare. Recently, evidence for active DNA demethylation has been
obtained in several cancer, neuronal, and embryonic stem cell lines. Studies in
embryonic stem cell models, however, suggested that active DNA demethylation
might be restricted to the early development of progenitor cells. Whether active 
demethylation is involved in terminal differentiation of adult stem cells is
poorly understood. We provide evidence that active DNA demethylation does occur
during terminal specification of stem cells in an adipose-derived mesenchymal
stem cell-derived osteogenic differentiation model. The medium CpG regions in
promoters of the Dlx5, Runx2, Bglap, and Osterix osteogenic lineage-specific
genes were demethylated during the increase in gene expression associated with
osteogenic differentiation. The growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible protein
GADD45A was up-regulated in these processes. Knockdown of GADD45A led to
hypermethylation of Dlx5, Runx2, Bglap, and Osterix promoters, followed by
suppression of the expression of these genes and interruption of osteogenic
differentiation. These results reveal that GADD45A plays an essential role in
gene-specific active DNA demethylation during adult stem cell differentiation.
They enhance the current knowledge of osteogenic specification and may also lead 
to a better understanding of the common mechanisms underlying epigenetic
regulation in adult stem cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3220515
PMID: 21917922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Arthritis Res Ther. 2011;13(5):R144. doi: 10.1186/ar3458. Epub 2011 Sep 13.

Ossification process involving the human thoracic ligamentum flavum: role of
transcription factors.

Uchida K(1), Yayama T, Cai HX, Nakajima H, Sugita D, Guerrero AR, Kobayashi S,
Yoshida A, Chen KB, Baba H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation Medicine, Faculty of Medical
Sciences, Fukui University, Eiheiji, Fukui 910-1193, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Ossification of the ligamentum flavum (OLF) of the spine is
associated with serious neurologic compromise, but the pathomechanism of this
process remains unclear. The objective of this study was to investigate the
pathomechanism of the ossification process, including the roles of various
transcriptional factors in the ossification of human thoracic ligamentum flavum.
METHODS: Sections of the thoracic ligamentum flavum were obtained from 31
patients with OLF who underwent posterior thoracic decompression, and from six
control patients free of OLF. Cultured ligamentum flavum cells (n = 6, each) were
examined with real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
analysis for Sry-type high-mobility group box 9 (Sox9), runt-related
transcription factor 2 (Runx2), muscle segment homeobox 2 (Msx2), Osterix,
distal-less homeobox 5 (Dlx5), and AP-1. The harvested sections were examined
with hematoxylin-eosin, the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated
dUTP-biotin nick end-labeling (TUNEL) method, and immunohistochemistry for the
transcriptional factors.
RESULTS: Compared with the control, the OLF showed disorganization of the elastic
fiber bundles and abundant hypertrophic chondrocytes in the ossification front.
TUNEL-positive chondrocytes were found near the ossified plaques. The mRNA
expression levels of Sox9, Runx2, Msx2, and AP-1 in cultured cells from the
ligamentum flavum of OLF patients were significantly different from those of the 
control. OLF samples were strongly immunoreactive to Sox9, Runx2, and Msx2 at
proliferating chondrocytes in the fibrocartilage area. Hypertrophic chondrocytes 
were positive for Runx2, Osterix, Dlx5, and AP-1.
CONCLUSIONS: The ossification process in OLF seems to involve chondrocyte
differentiation under the unique expression of transcriptional factors.
Accumulation of hypertrophic chondrocytes was evident around the calcified area
at the ossification front, and we suggest that the differentiation of these cells
seems to be concerned with the ossification process.

PMCID: PMC3308072
PMID: 21914169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Clin Orthop Surg. 2011 Sep;3(3):230-7. doi: 10.4055/cios.2011.3.3.230. Epub 2011 
Aug 19.

Disturbed osteoblastic differentiation of fibrous hamartoma cell from congenital 
pseudarthrosis of the tibia associated with neurofibromatosis type I.

Lee DY(1), Cho TJ, Lee HR, Lee K, Moon HJ, Park MS, Yoo WJ, Chung CY, Choi IH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Fibrous hamartoma is the key pathology of congenital pseudarthrosis
of the tibia (CPT), which was shown to have low osteogenicity and high
osteoclastogenicity. This study further investigated the mechanism of impaired
osteoblastic differentiation of fibrous hamartoma cells.
METHODS: Fibroblast-like cells were obtained from enzymatically dissociated
fibrous hamartomas of 11 patients with CPT associated with neurofibromatosis type
I (NF1). Periosteal cells were also obtained from the distal tibial periosteum of
3 patients without CPT or NF1 as control. The mRNA levels of Wnt ligands and
their canonical receptors, such as Lrp5 and ß-catenin, were assayed using reverse
transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR). Changes in mRNA expression of osteoblast marker genes
by rhBMP2 treatment were assayed using quantitative real time RT-PCR. Changes in 
mRNA expression of transcription factors specifically involved in osteoblastic
differentiation by rhBMP2 treatment was also assayed using quantitative real-time
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Wnt1 and Wnt3a mRNA expression was lower in fibrous hamartoma than in
tibial periosteal cells, but their canonical receptors did not show significant
difference. Response of osteoblastic marker gene expression to rhBMP2 treatment
showed patient-to-patient variability. Col1a1 mRNA expression was up-regulated in
most fibrous hamartoma tissues, osteocalcin was up-regulated in a small number of
patients, and ALP expression was down-regulated in most fibrous hamartoma
tissues. Changes in mRNA expression of the transcription factors in response to
rhBMP2 also showed factor-to-factor and patient-to-patient variability. Dlx5 was 
consistently up-regulated by rhBMP2 treatment in all fibrous hamartoma tissues
tested. Msx2 expression was down-regulated by rhBMP2 in most cases but by lesser 
extent than control tissue. Runx2 expression was up-regulated in 8 out of 18
fibrous hamartoma tissues tested. Osterix expression was up-regulated in 2 and
down-regulated in 3 fibrous hamartoma tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Congenital pseudarthrosis of the tibia appears to be caused by
fibrous hamartoma originating from aberrant growth of Nf1 haploinsufficient
periosteal cells, which failed in terminal osteoblastic differentiation and
arrested at a certain stage of this process. This pathomechanism of CPT should be
targeted in the development of novel therapeutic biologic intervention.

PMCID: PMC3162204
PMID: 21909471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011 Oct 1;668(1-2):140-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2011.07.003.
Epub 2011 Jul 26.

Administration of zinc inhibits osteoclastogenesis through the suppression of
RANK expression in bone.

Hie M(1), Tsukamoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Nutrition, Nara Women's University, Nara
630-8506, Japan.

Zinc (Zn) has been known to inhibit osteoclastic bone resorption and stimulate
osteoblastic bone formation. However, the mechanisms responsible for these
effects have not been well characterized in vivo. Here, the effects of a dietary 
administration of Zn on osteoclastogenesis and osteoblastogenesis were
investigated in Zn-adequate rats. The administration of Zn decreased the
activities of bone tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) and cathepsin K,
without affecting the serum osteocalcin level. Histological analysis showed a
decrease in the number of osteoclasts with a normal number of osteoblasts in the 
metaphysis of the proximal tibia. The mRNA levels of receptor for activation of
NF-<U+03BA>B (RANK), c-fos, c-jun, TRAP and cathepsin K were significantly decreased,
although those of RANK ligand, macrophage colony-stimulating factor and c-fms
were unaltered. The gene expression of bone morphogenic protein-2, Runx2, Dlx5,
osterix, alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin and collagen was not affected. The
level of the RANK protein decreased, while the levels of the Runx2 and ß-catenin 
proteins were unchanged. Further, the osteoclastic differentiation of precursor
cells in vitro was suppressed. The suppressed osteoclastogenesis was associated
with decreased levels of reactive oxygen species, extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase (ERK) activation and RANK expression. A lower lipid peroxide level and a
higher glutathione level were also observed. These results suggested that
Zn-administration did not affect osteoblastogenesis but decreased
osteoclastogenesis by inhibiting RANK expression through suppression of the
production of reactive oxygen species and ERK activation in Zn-adequate rats.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21806983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Clin Oral Implants Res. 2010 Nov;21(11):1278-87. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0501.2010.01944.x. Epub 2010 Aug 19.

Osteoblast response to magnesium ion-incorporated nanoporous titanium oxide
surfaces.

Park JW(1), Kim YJ, Jang JH, Song H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, Korea. jinwoo@knu.ac.kr

OBJECTIVE: This study investigated the surface characteristics and in vitro
osteoconductivity of a titanium (Ti) surface incorporated with the magnesium ions
(Mg) produced by hydrothermal treatment for future application as an endosseous
implant surface.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Mg-incorporated Ti oxide surfaces were produced by
hydrothermal treatment using Mg-containing solution on two different
microstructured surfaces--abraded minimally rough (Ma) or grit-blasted moderately
rough (RBM) samples. The surface characteristics were evaluated using scanning
electron microscopy, thin-film X-ray diffractometry, X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy, optical profilometry, and inductively coupled plasma atomic
emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). MC3T3-E1 pre-osteoblast cell attachment,
proliferation, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, and quantitative analysis of 
osteoblastic gene expression on Ma, RBM, Mg-incorporated Ma (Mg), and
Mg-incorporated grit-blasted (RBM/Mg) Ti surfaces were evaluated.
RESULTS: Hydrothermal treatment produced an Mg-incorporated Ti oxide layer with
nanoporous surface structures. Mg-incorporated surfaces showed surface
morphologies and surface roughness values almost identical to those of untreated 
smooth or micro-rough surfaces at the micron scale. ICP-AES analysis showed Mg
ions released from treated surfaces into the solution. Mg incorporation
significantly increased cellular attachment (P=0 at 0.5 h, P=0.01 at 1 h) on
smooth surfaces, but no differences were found on micro-rough surfaces. Mg
incorporation further increased ALP activity in cells grown on both smooth and
micro-rough surfaces at 7 and 14 days of culture (P=0). Real-time polymerase
chain reaction analysis showed higher mRNA expressions of the osteoblast
transcription factor gene (Dlx5), various integrins, and the osteoblast phenotype
genes (ALP, bone sialoprotein and osteocalcin) in cells grown on micro-rough
(RBM) and Mg-incorporated (Mg and RBM/Mg) surfaces than those on Ma surfaces. Mg 
incorporation further increased the mRNA expressions of key osteoblast genes and 
integrins (a1, a2, a5, and ß1) in cells grown on both the smooth and the
micro-rough surfaces.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that an Mg-incorporated nanoporous Ti oxide
surface produced by hydrothermal treatment may improve implant bone healing by
enhancing the attachment and differentiation of osteoblastic cells.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 20497442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Neurosci. 2010 May 19;30(20):6944-53. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5772-09.2010.

Developmental origin of the neuronal subtypes that comprise the amygdalar fear
circuit in the mouse.

Waclaw RR(1), Ehrman LA, Pierani A, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229,
USA.

We have taken a genetic-based fate-mapping approach to determine the specific
contributions of telencephalic progenitors to the structures that comprise the
amygdalar fear circuit including the central (CA), lateral (LA), and basolateral 
(BLA) amygdala. Our data indicate that progenitors in the ventral pallium (VP)
contribute projection neurons to the LA and BLA but not the CA. Rather, the CA
appears to derive, at least in part, from progenitors located in the ventral
lateral ganglionic eminence (vLGE). Diverse groups of interneurons populate these
amygdalar nuclei, and as predicted our data support the notion that they
originate from subpallial progenitors. A rather specific population of amygdalar 
interneurons, the intercalated cells (ITCs), is known to play a fundamental role 
in fear-related behaviors. However, no information on their specific origin has, 
as yet, been provided. Our findings suggest that the ITCs arise from the dorsal
lateral ganglionic eminence (dLGE) and migrate in the lateral migratory stream to
populate the paracapsular regions as well as the main intercalated mass of the
amygdala (IA). Germ-line Gsx2 mutants are known to exhibit an expansion of the VP
into the LGE and a concomitant reduction in the dLGE and vLGE. Accordingly, Gsx2 
conditional mutants display a significantly enlarged LA and a significant
reduction in ITCs both within the paracapsular regions and the IA. Additional
support for a dLGE origin of the ITCs was obtained in conditional mutants of the 
dLGE gene Sp8. Thus, our findings indicate diverse origins for the neuronal
components that comprise the amygdalar fear circuit.

PMCID: PMC2882074
PMID: 20484636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Dev Biol. 2010 Aug 1;344(1):158-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.04.029. Epub 2010
May 21.

Conserved expression of mouse Six1 in the pre-placodal region (PPR) and
identification of an enhancer for the rostral PPR.

Sato S(1), Ikeda K, Shioi G, Ochi H, Ogino H, Yajima H, Kawakami K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical University, 
3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan. ssato@jichi.ac.jp

All cranial sensory organs and sensory neurons of vertebrates develop from
cranial placodes. In chick, amphibians and zebrafish, all placodes originate from
a common precursor domain, the pre-placodal region (PPR), marked by the
expression of Six1/4 and Eya1/2. However, the PPR has never been described in
mammals and the mechanism involved in the formation of PPR is poorly defined.
Here, we report the expression of Six1 in the horseshoe-shaped mouse ectoderm
surrounding the anterior neural plate in a pattern broadly similar to that of
non-mammalian vertebrates. To elucidate the identity of Six1-positive mouse
ectoderm, we searched for enhancers responsible for Six1 expression by in vivo
enhancer assays. One conserved non-coding sequence, Six1-14, showed specific
enhancer activity in the rostral PPR of chick and Xenopus and in the mouse
ectoderm. These results strongly suggest the presence of PPR in mouse and that it
is conserved in vertebrates. Moreover, we show the importance of the homeodomain 
protein-binding sites of Six1-14, the Six1 rostral PPR enhancer, for enhancer
activity, and that Dlx5, Msx1 and Pax7 are candidate binding factors that
regulate the level and area of Six1 expression, and thereby the location of the
PPR. Our findings provide critical information and tools to elucidate the
molecular mechanism of early sensory development and have implications for the
development of sensory precursor/stem cells.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20471971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. BMC Dev Biol. 2010 May 11;10:48. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-48.

Conditional expression of Spry1 in neural crest causes craniofacial and cardiac
defects.

Yang X(1), Kilgallen S, Andreeva V, Spicer DB, Pinz I, Friesel R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center Research Institute,
Scarborough, ME 04074, USA.

BACKGROUND: Growth factors and their receptors are mediators of organogenesis and
must be tightly regulated in a temporal and spatial manner for proper tissue
morphogenesis. Intracellular regulators of growth factor signaling pathways
provide an additional level of control. Members of the Sprouty family negatively 
regulate receptor tyrosine kinase pathways in several developmental contexts. To 
gain insight into the role of Spry1 in neural crest development, we analyzed the 
developmental effects of conditional expression of Spry1 in neural crest-derived 
tissues.
RESULTS: Here we report that conditional expression of Spry1 in neural crest
cells causes defects in craniofacial and cardiac development in mice.
Spry1;Wnt1-Cre embryos die perinatally and exhibit facial clefting, cleft palate,
cardiac and cranial nerve defects. These defects appear to be the result of
decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis of neural crest and neural
crest-derived cell populations. In addition, the domains of expression of several
key transcription factors important to normal craniofacial and cardiac
development including AP2, Msx2, Dlx5, and Dlx6 were reduced in Spry1;Wnt1-Cre
transgenic embryos.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, these data suggest that Spry1 is an important regulator
of craniofacial and cardiac morphogenesis and perturbations in Spry1 levels may
contribute to congenital disorders involving tissues of neural crest origin.

PMCID: PMC2874773
PMID: 20459789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Int J Stem Cells. 2010 May;3(2):74-9.

Application of ultrasound stimulation in bone tissue engineering.

Yang MH(1), Lim KT(1), Choung PH(2), Cho CS(3), Chung JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosystems & Biomaterials Science and Engineering, School of
Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgery and Dental Research Institute, School of Dentistry, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Korea ; Tooth Bioengineering National Research
Laboratory of Post BK21, School of Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Korea. (3)Research Institute for Agriculture and Life Sciences, School of
Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Many studies have been investigated on the effects of the low-intensity pulsed
ultrasound (LIPUS) on bone healing, acceleration of bone mineralization and
regeneration. Many researchers have focused on a more comprehensive understanding
of the biological mechanism of the osteoblast by LIPUS because the osteoblast is 
an important cell in bone formation. The effects of LIPUS on the proliferation,
gene expression of Runx2, Msx2, Dlx5, and AJ18, and the second messenger
signaling of osteoblast were reported. Various parameters of LIPUS, such as
intensity, frequency, duration and topology, were investigated to find
appropriate conditions in osteoblast. Less than 120 mW/cm(2) of intensity and 1-3
MHz of frequency were considered good condition for regeneration of bone tissue. 
Increased osteoblast cells and higher mineralized nodule formation explain the
enhancement of proliferation by LIPUS. In addition, LIPUS affects on
differentiation of osteoblast cells, which is shown by increased ALPase, and
transcriptional factors, Runx2. Ultrasound stimulates PEG2 and COX-2 in
osteoblast, and the signals accelerates the bone regeneration in tissue
engineering.

PMCID: PMC4021800
PMID: 24855544  [PubMed]


246. Biomaterials. 2010 Jul;31(21):5652-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.03.019.
Epub 2010 Apr 21.

Enhancement of bone regeneration by gene delivery of BMP2/Runx2 bicistronic
vector into adipose-derived stromal cells.

Lee SJ(1), Kang SW, Do HJ, Han I, Shin DA, Kim JH, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Bioscience, CHA University, 606-16 Yeoksam 1-dong,
Gangnam-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Adipose tissue contains multipotent mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) that are able
to differentiate into various tissues. Bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) is
known as one of the key osteogenesis induction factors in MSCs. Recently, several
new transcription factors that contribute to osteogenic differentiation have been
reported, among them Runx2, Osterix, and Dlx5. We hypothesized that
adipose-derived stromal cells (ASCs) could be induced to efficiently
differentiate into osteocytes by the co-expression of the BMP2 and Runx2 genes.
To prove this hypothesis, we constructed a bicistronic vector encoding the BMP2
and Runx2 genes linked to the 'self-cleaving' 2A peptide sequence.
BMP2/Runx2-ASCs showed a gradual increase in alkaline phosphatase activity for
two weeks. RT-PCR analysis and alizarin red staining revealed a high expression
of osteogenesis-related markers (osteopontin, osteocalcin and collagen type I)
and increased mineralization in BMP2/Runx2-ASCs compared to BMP2-ASCs. Six weeks 
after in vivo transplantation, BMP2/Runx2-ASCs also showed a significant increase
in bone formation compared to ASCs and BMP2-ASCs. These findings demonstrate that
the co-transfection of two osteogenic lineage-determining genes can enhance
osteogenic differentiation of ASCs.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20413153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Neurosci. 2010 Apr 14;30(15):5334-45. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5963-09.2010.

Dlx5 and Dlx6 regulate the development of parvalbumin-expressing cortical
interneurons.

Wang Y(1), Dye CA, Sohal V, Long JE, Estrada RC, Roztocil T, Lufkin T, Deisseroth
K, Baraban SC, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California 
94158, USA. Yanling.wang@ucsf.edu

Dlx5 and Dlx6 homeobox genes are expressed in developing and mature cortical
interneurons. Simultaneous deletion of Dlx5 and 6 results in exencephaly of the
anterior brain; despite this defect, prenatal basal ganglia differentiation
appeared largely intact, while tangential migration of Lhx6(+) and Mafb(+)
interneurons to the cortex was reduced and disordered. The migration deficits
were associated with reduced CXCR4 expression. Transplantation of mutant immature
interneurons into a wild-type brain demonstrated that loss of either Dlx5 or
Dlx5&6 preferentially reduced the number of mature parvalbumin(+) interneurons;
those parvalbumin(+) interneurons that were present had increased dendritic
branching. Dlx5/6(+/-) mice, which appear normal histologically, show spontaneous
electrographic seizures and reduced power of gamma oscillations. Thus, Dlx5&6
appeared to be required for development and function of somal innervating
(parvalbumin(+)) neocortical interneurons. This contrasts with Dlx1, whose
function is required for dendrite innervating (calretinin(+), somatostatin(+),
and neuropeptide Y(+)) interneurons (Cobos et al., 2005).

PMCID: PMC2919857
PMID: 20392955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Stem Cells Dev. 2010 Dec;19(12):1895-910. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0485. Epub 2010
Oct 12.

Functional module analysis reveals differential osteogenic and stemness
potentials in human mesenchymal stem cells from bone marrow and Wharton's jelly
of umbilical cord.

Hsieh JY(1), Fu YS, Chang SJ, Tsuang YH, Wang HW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) found in bone marrow (BM)-MSCs are an attractive
source for the regeneration of damaged tissues. Alternative postnatal, perinatal,
and fetal sources of MSCs are also under intensive investigation. MSCs from the
Wharton's jelly matrix of umbilical cord (WJ)-MSCs have higher pancreatic and
endothelial differentiation potentials than BM-MSCs, but the underlying
mechanisms are poorly understood. We compared the gene expression profiles,
enriched canonical pathways, and genetic networks of BM-MSCs and WJ-MSCs. WJ-MSCs
express more angiogenesis- and growth-related genes including epidermal growth
factor and FLT1, whereas BM-MSCs express more osteogenic genes such as RUNX2,
DLX5, and NPR3. The gene expression pattern of BM-MSCs is more similar to
osteoblasts than WJ-MSCs, suggesting a better osteogenic potential. In contrast, 
WJ-MSCs are more primitive because they share more common genes with embryonic
stem cells. BM-MSCs are more sensitive to environmental stimulations because
their molecular signatures altered more significantly in different culture
conditions. WJ-MSCs express genes enriched in vascular endothelial growth factor 
and PI3K-NF<U+03BA>B canonical pathways, whereas BM-MSCs express genes involved in
antigen presentation and chemokine/cytokine pathways. Drylab results could be
verified by wetlab experiments, in which BM-MSCs were more efficient in
osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation, whereas WJ-MSCs proliferated better.
WJ-MSCs thus constitute a promising option for angiogenesis, whereas BM-MSCs in
bone remodeling. Our results reveal systematically the underlying genes and
regulatory networks of 2 MSCs from unique ontological and anatomical origins, as 
well as the resulted phenotypes, thereby providing a better basis for cell-based 
therapy and the following mechanistic studies on MSC biology.

PMID: 20367285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Genesis. 2010 Jun;48(6):262-373. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20625.

Spatio-temporal dynamics of gene expression of the Edn1-Dlx5/6 pathway during
development of the lower jaw.

Vieux-Rochas M(1), Mantero S, Heude E, Barbieri O, Astigiano S, Couly G, Kurihara
H, Levi G, Merlo GR.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.

The morphogenesis of the vertebrate skull results from highly dynamic integrated 
processes involving the exchange of signals between the ectoderm, the endoderm,
and cephalic neural crest cells (CNCCs). Before migration CNCCs are not committed
to form any specific skull element, molecular signals exchanged in restricted
regions of tissue interaction are crucial in providing positional identity to the
CNCCs mesenchyme and activate the specific morphogenetic process of different
skeletal components of the head. In particular, the endothelin-1 (Edn1)-dependent
activation of Dlx5 and Dlx6 in CNCCs that colonize the first pharyngeal arch
(PA1) is necessary and sufficient to specify maxillo-mandibular identity. Here,
to better analyze the spatio-temporal dynamics of this process, we associate
quantitative gene expression analysis with detailed examination of skeletal
phenotypes resulting from combined allelic reduction of Edn1, Dlx5, and Dlx6. We 
show that Edn1-dependent and -independent regulatory pathways act at different
developmental times in distinct regions of PA1. The Edn1-->Dlx5/6-->Hand2 pathway
is already active at E9.5 during early stages of CNCCs colonization. At later
stages (E10.5) the scenario is more complex: we propose a model in which PA1 is
subdivided into four adjacent territories in which distinct regulations are
taking place. This new developmental model may provide a conceptual framework to 
interpret the craniofacial malformations present in several mouse mutants and in 
human first arch syndromes. More in general, our findings emphasize the
importance of quantitative gene expression in the fine control of morphogenetic
events.

2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20333701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Bone. 2010 Jun;46(6):1533-45. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2010.02.024. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

New roles and mechanism of action of BMP4 in postnatal tooth cytodifferentiation.

Gluhak-Heinrich J(1), Guo D, Yang W, Harris MA, Lichtler A, Kream B, Zhang J,
Feng JQ, Smith LC, Dechow P, Harris SE.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 
78229-3900, USA. gluhak@uthscsa.edu

During the phase of overt tooth cytodifferentiation that occurs after birth in
the mouse and using the 3.6Collagen1a-Cre and the BMP4 floxed and BMP4 knockout
mice, the BMP4 gene was deleted in early collagen producing odontoblasts around
postnatal day 1. BMP4 expression was reduced over 90% in alveolar osteoblasts and
odontoblasts. There was decreased rate of predentin to dentin formation and
decreased mature odontoblast differentiation reflected in reduced DMP1 expression
and proper dentinal tubule formation, as well as reduced Collagen type I and
Osteocalcin expression. We observed mutant dysmorphogenic odontoblasts that
failed to properly elongate and differentiate. The consequence of this failed
differentiation process leads to permanent loss of dentin thickness, apparent
enlarged pulp chambers in the molars and reduced bone supporting the tooth
structures in mice as old as 10-12 months. Deletion of the BMP4 gene in
odontoblasts also indirectly disrupted the process of enamel formation that
persisted throughout life. The mechanism for this altered differentiation program
in the absence of the BMP4 gene in odontoblasts is from decreased BMP signaling, 
and decreased expression of three key transcription factors, Dlx3, Dlx5, and
Osterix. BMP signaling, as well as Dlx3 and Amelogenin expression, is also
indirectly reduced in the ameloblasts of the odontoblast BMP4 cKO mice. This
supports a key paracrine or endocrine postnatal role of odontoblast derived BMP4 
on the proper amelogenesis and formation of the enamel.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2875306
PMID: 20206312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Jun;223(3):779-87. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22095.

Dlx homeobox gene family expression in osteoclasts.

Lézot F(1), Thomas BL, Blin-Wakkach C, Castaneda B, Bolanos A, Hotton D, Sharpe
PT, Heymann D, Carles GF, Grigoriadis AE, Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR 872, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France.
frederic.lezot@crc.jussieu.fr

Skeletal growth and homeostasis require the finely orchestrated secretion of
mineralized tissue matrices by highly specialized cells, balanced with their
degradation by osteoclasts. Time- and site-specific expression of Dlx and Msx
homeobox genes in the cells secreting these matrices have been identified as
important elements in the regulation of skeletal morphology. Such specific
expression patterns have also been reported in osteoclasts for Msx genes. The aim
of the present study was to establish the expression patterns of Dlx genes in
osteoclasts and identify their function in regulating skeletal morphology. The
expression patterns of all Dlx genes were examined during the whole
osteoclastogenesis using different in vitro models. The results revealed that
Dlx1 and Dlx2 are the only Dlx family members with a possible function in
osteoclastogenesis as well as in mature osteoclasts. Dlx5 and Dlx6 were detected 
in the cultures but appear to be markers of monocytes and their derivatives. In
vivo, Dlx2 expression in osteoclasts was examined using a Dlx2/LacZ transgenic
mouse. Dlx2 is expressed in a subpopulation of osteoclasts in association with
tooth, brain, nerve, and bone marrow volumetric growths. Altogether the present
data suggest a role for Dlx2 in regulation of skeletal morphogenesis via
functions within osteoclasts.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20205208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Mar 16;107(11):5124-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0911929107. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

Activin A promotes multiple myeloma-induced osteolysis and is a promising target 
for myeloma bone disease.

Vallet S(1), Mukherjee S, Vaghela N, Hideshima T, Fulciniti M, Pozzi S, Santo L, 
Cirstea D, Patel K, Sohani AR, Guimaraes A, Xie W, Chauhan D, Schoonmaker JA,
Attar E, Churchill M, Weller E, Munshi N, Seehra JS, Weissleder R, Anderson KC,
Scadden DT, Raje N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Understanding the pathogenesis of cancer-related bone disease is crucial to the
discovery of new therapies. Here we identify activin A, a TGF-beta family member,
as a therapeutically amenable target exploited by multiple myeloma (MM) to alter 
its microenvironmental niche favoring osteolysis. Increased bone marrow plasma
activin A levels were found in MM patients with osteolytic disease. MM cell
engagement of marrow stromal cells enhanced activin A secretion via
adhesion-mediated JNK activation. Activin A, in turn, inhibited osteoblast
differentiation via SMAD2-dependent distal-less homeobox-5 down-regulation.
Targeting activin A by a soluble decoy receptor reversed osteoblast inhibition,
ameliorated MM bone disease, and inhibited tumor growth in an in vivo humanized
MM model, setting the stage for testing in human clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC2841922
PMID: 20194748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Stem Cells Dev. 2010 Oct;19(10):1523-33. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0393.

The effects of COX-2 inhibitor during osteogenic differentiation of bone
marrow-derived human mesenchymal stem cells.

Yoon DS(1), Yoo JH, Kim YH, Paik S, Han CD, Lee JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea.

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors suppress bone repair and bone formation by
suppressing angiogenesis as well as potentially interfering with osteoblast and
osteoclast functions. In spite of these reports, there is a controversy over the 
exact effects of COX-2 inhibitors on bone formation processes itself. This work
was designed to investigate the effect of COX-2 inhibitor on osteogenesis of
human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). MSCs in osteogenesis were
treated with COX-2 inhibitor (celecoxib and naproxen) in the absence or presence 
of interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß), which was used to induce inflammation. Following
differentiation, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and calcium contents of IL-1ß-treated
MSC were significantly reduced by high doses of COX-2 inhibitors compared with
the low-dose group. However, in non-inflammatory-conditioned MSCs, ALP and
calcium contents were not reduced by COX-2 inhibitors. The mRNA expression of
Runx2/Cbf alpha 1, Dlx5, and osteocalcin was also decreased by COX-2 inhibitors
in inflammatory-conditioned MSCs and showed a significant decrease for the high
dose while they remained constant in the non-inflammatory-conditioned MSCs. These
data indicate that the osteogenic potential of MSC is inhibited/delayed by the
treatment of high-dose NSAIDs under inflammatory conditions.

PMID: 20095820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Bioelectromagnetics. 2010 May;31(4):277-85. doi: 10.1002/bem.20560.

EMF acts on rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells to promote differentiation to 
osteoblasts and to inhibit differentiation to adipocytes.

Yang Y(1), Tao C, Zhao D, Li F, Zhao W, Wu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Tongji Hospital, Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

The use of electromagnetic fields (EMFs) to treat nonunion fractures developed
from observations in the mid-1900s. Whether EMF directly regulates the bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), differentiating into osteoblasts or
adipocytes, remains unknown. In the present study, we investigated the roles of
sinusoidal EMF of 15 Hz, 1 mT in differentiation along these separate lineages
using rat bone marrow MSCs. Our results showed that EMF promoted osteogenic
differentiation of the stem cells and concurrently inhibited adipocyte formation.
EMF increased alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and mineralized nodule
formation, and stimulated osteoblast-specific mRNA expression of RUNX2, ALP,
BMP2, DLX5, and BSP. In contrast, EMF decreased adipogenesis and inhibited
adipocyte-specific mRNA expression of adipsin, AP-2, and PPARgamma2, and also
inhibited protein expression of PPARgamma2. These observations suggest that
commitment of MSCs into osteogenic or adipogenic lineages is influenced by EMF.

PMID: 20041434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2010 Jan 1;2:133-42.

Ochratoxin A induces craniofacial malformation in mice acting on Dlx5 gene
expression.

Napoletano M(1), Pennino D, Izzo G, de Maria S, Ottaviano R, Ricciardi M, Mancini
R, Schiattarella A, Farina E, Metafora S, Cartenì M, Ritieni A, Minucci S,
Morelli F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A Buzzati Traverso CNR, Naples, Italy.

Ochratoxin A (OTA) is a mycotoxin produced by fungal of Aspergillus species
absorbed in human through contaminate food in gastrointestinal tract. OTA has
been demonstrated to be teratogenic in a number of species including mice and
potentially human. Mice exposed in uterus to OTA develop craniofacial
abnormalities such as exencephaly, microencephaly, microphthalmia and facial
clefts. An important role in differentiation of maxillofacial are exerted by the 
Hox related genes Dlx and Msx. In the present investigation we have confirmed
that 2.75 mg/kg body weight OTA, given at gestational day 7.5, induces
significant developmental craniofacial anomalies in mice and we have demonstrated
the down expression of Dlx5, a member of Dlx gene family, that seems to be
responsible of the observed deformities. These results support the hypothesis
that Dlx5 is a target for ochratoxin and the inhibition of its function, directly
or indirectly, could be at origin of the observed differentiation defects.

PMID: 20036863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Dev Dyn. 2010 Feb;239(2):458-73. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22182.

The function and regulation of TBX22 in avian frontonasal morphogenesis.

Higashihori N(1), Buchtová M, Richman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Health Sciences, Life Sciences Institute, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

The frontonasal mass gives rise to the facial midline and fuses with the
maxillary prominence to form the upper lip. Here we focus on the regulation and
function of TBX22, a repressor dynamically expressed in the frontonasal mass.
Both FGF and Noggin (a BMP antagonist) strongly induce gTBX22, however, each has 
opposite effects on morphogenesis - Noggin inhibits whereas FGF stimulates
growth. To determine whether TBX22 mediates these effects, we used retroviruses
to locally increase expression levels. RCAS::hTBX22 decreased proliferation,
reduced expression of MSX2 and DLX5 and caused cleft lip. Decreased levels of
endogenous gTBX22 were also observed but were not the primary cause of the
phenotype as determined in rescue experiments. Our data suggest that genetic or
environmental insults such as those affecting the BMP pathway could lead to a
gain-of-function of TBX22 and predispose an individual to cleft lip.

PMID: 20033915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2010 Feb;43(2):176-85. Epub 2009 Dec 18.

Rat Dlx5 is expressed in the subventricular zone and promotes neuronal
differentiation.

Shu HF(1), Gao FY, Zhang CQ, Liu SY, Zhang ZY, Song YC, Qiu KJ, Yang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

The molecular mechanisms and potential clinical applications of neural precursor 
cells have recently been the subject of intensive study. Dlx5, a homeobox
transcription factor related to the distal-less gene in Drosophila, was shown to 
play an important role during forebrain development. The subventricular zone
(SVZ) in the adult brain harbors the largest abundance of neural precursors. The 
anterior SVZ (SVZa) contains the most representative neural precursors in the
SVZ. Further research is necessary to elucidate how Dlx5-related genes regulate
the differentiation of SVZa neural precursors. Here, we employed
immunohistochemistry and molecular biology techniques to study the expression of 
Dlx5 and related homeobox genes Er81 and Islet1 in neonatal rat brain and in in
vitro cultured SVZa neural precursors. Our results show that Dlx5 and Er81 are
also highly expressed in the SVZa, rostral migratory stream, and olfactory bulb. 
Islet1 is only expressed in the striatum. In cultured SVZa neural precursors,
Dlx5 mRNA expression gradually decreased with subsequent cell passages and was
completely lost by passage four. We also transfected a Dlx5 recombinant plasmid
and found that Dlx5 overexpression promoted neuronal differentiation of in vitro 
cultured SVZa neural precursors. Taken together, our data suggest that Dlx5 plays
an important role during neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 20027483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Orthop Res. 2010 May;28(5):571-7. doi: 10.1002/jor.21035.

Polymethylmethacrylate particles impair osteoprogenitor viability and expression 
of osteogenic transcription factors Runx2, osterix, and Dlx5.

Chiu R(1), Smith KE, Ma GK, Ma T, Smith RL, Goodman SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Stanford University Medical Center, 300
Pasteur Drive, Edwards Building, R-116, Stanford, California 94305-5341, USA.

Polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) particles have been shown to inhibit the
differentiation of osteoprogenitor cells, but the mechanism of this inhibitory
effect has not been investigated. We hypothesize that the inhibitory effects of
PMMA particles involve impairment of osteoprogenitor viability and direct
inhibition of transcription factors that regulate osteogenesis. We challenged
MC3T3-E1 osteoprogenitors with PMMA particles and examined the effects of these
materials on osteoprogenitor viability and expression of transcription factors
Runx2, osterix, Dlx5, and Msx2. MC3T3-E1 cells treated with PMMA particles over a
72-h period showed a significant reduction in cell viability and proliferation as
indicated by a dose- and time-dependent increase in supernatant levels of lactate
dehydrogenase, an intracellular enzyme released from dead cells, a dose-dependent
decrease in cell number and BrdU uptake, and the presence of large numbers of
positively labeled Annexin V-stained cells. The absence of apoptotic cells on
TUNEL assay indicated that cell death occurred by necrosis, not apoptosis.
MC3T3-E1 cells challenged with PMMA particles during the first 6 days of
differentiation in osteogenic medium showed a significant dose-dependent decrease
in the RNA expression of Runx2, osterix, and Dlx5 on all days of measurement,
while the RNA expression of Msx2, an antagonist of Dlx5-induced osteogenesis,
remained relatively unaffected. These results indicate that PMMA particles impair
osteoprogenitor viability and inhibit the expression of transcription factors
that promote osteoprogenitor differentiation.

Copyright (c) 2009 Orthopaedic Research Society.

PMID: 20014320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Neuroscience. 2010 Mar 10;166(1):220-30. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.12.004.
Epub 2009 Dec 14.

Molecular characterization of the intercalated cell masses of the amygdala:
implications for the relationship with the striatum.

Kaoru T(1), Liu FC, Ishida M, Oishi T, Hayashi M, Kitagawa M, Shimoda K,
Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Group, Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life
Sciences, Machida-shi, Tokyo 194-8511, Japan.

The intercalated cell masses of the amygdala consist of cell clusters located
between the basolateral complex of the amygdala and its surrounding structures
including the central nucleus of the amygdala and the external capsule. Although 
recent studies have revealed that the intercalated cell masses may play an
important role in emotional learning and memory, there are only a few reports on 
its molecular characterization. We examined the expression patterns of
transcription factors in the intercalated cell masses in late embryonic stage and
postnatal rats, and non-human primates. Dlx5, Foxp2, Pbx3 and Meis2 were
expressed in all subdivisions of the intercalated cell masses, while Ebf1, Nkx2.1
and Foxp1 were not. In contrast, Pax6 was only expressed in a small population of
the main intercalated islands, but not in the medial or lateral cell clusters. In
addition, few Pax6-positive neurons co-expressed Foxp2. Thus the intercalated
cell masses do not contain a homogeneous population of neurons, in terms of their
molecular constituents. Given that Foxp2, Pbx3 and Meis2 are preferentially
expressed in distinct cell populations in the developing striatum, and that the
intercalated cell masses of the amygdala appear to be a ventrocaudal expansion of
the striatum, the intercalated neurons may share a common origin with some types 
of neurons located in the dorsal striatum.

Copyright 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20004711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Feb;30(4):1018-27. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01401-09. Epub 2009 Dec
7.

Selective signaling by Akt2 promotes bone morphogenetic protein 2-mediated
osteoblast differentiation.

Mukherjee A(1), Wilson EM, Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Mail Code L224, 3181 S.W. Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR
97239-3098, USA.

Mesenchymal stem cells are essential for repair of bone and other supporting
tissues. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) promote commitment of these
progenitors toward an osteoblast fate via functional interactions with osteogenic
transcription factors, including Dlx3, Dlx5, and Runx2, and also can direct their
differentiation into bone-forming cells. BMP-2-stimulated osteoblast
differentiation additionally requires continual signaling from insulin-like
growth factor (IGF)-activated pathways. Here we identify Akt2 as a critical
mediator of IGF-regulated osteogenesis. Targeted knockdown of Akt2 in mouse
primary bone marrow stromal cells or in a mesenchymal stem cell line, or genetic 
knockout of Akt2, did not interfere with BMP-2-mediated signaling but resulted in
inhibition of osteoblast differentiation at an early step that preceded
production of Runx2. In contrast, Akt1-deficient cells differentiated normally.
Complete biochemical and morphological osteoblast differentiation was restored in
cells lacking Akt2 by adenoviral delivery of Runx2 or by a recombinant lentivirus
encoding wild-type Akt2. In contrast, lentiviral Akt1 was ineffective. Taken
together, these observations define a specific role for Akt2 as a gatekeeper of
osteogenic differentiation through regulation of Runx2 gene expression and
indicate that the closely related Akt1 and Akt2 exert distinct effects on the
differentiation of mesenchymal precursors.

PMCID: PMC2815574
PMID: 19995912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 30;4(11):e8097. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008097.

Dlx5 Is a cell autonomous regulator of chondrocyte hypertrophy in mice and
functionally substitutes for Dlx6 during endochondral ossification.

Zhu H(1), Bendall AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario, Canada.

The axial and appendicular skeleton of vertebrates develops by endochondral
ossification, in which skeletogenic tissue is initially cartilaginous and the
differentiation of chondrocytes via the hypertrophic pathway precedes the
differentiation of osteoblasts and the deposition of a definitive bone matrix.
Results from both loss-of-function and misexpression studies have implicated the 
related homeobox genes Dlx5 and Dlx6 as partially redundant positive regulators
of chondrocyte hypertrophy. However, experimental perturbations of Dlx expression
have either not been cell type specific or have been done in the context of
endogenous Dlx5 expression. Thus, it has not been possible to conclude whether
the effects on chondrocyte differentiation are cell autonomous or whether they
are mediated by Dlx expression in adjacent tissues, notably the perichondrium. To
address this question we first engineered transgenic mice in which Dlx5
expression was specifically restricted to immature and differentiating
chondrocytes and not the perichondrium. Col2a1-Dlx5 transgenic embryos and
neonates displayed accelerated chondrocyte hypertrophy and mineralization
throughout the endochondral skeleton. Furthermore, this transgene specifically
rescued defects of chondrocyte differentiation characteristic of the Dlx5/6 null 
phenotype. Based on these results, we conclude that the role of Dlx5 in the
hypertrophic pathway is cell autonomous. We further conclude that Dlx5 and Dlx6
are functionally equivalent in the endochondral skeleton, in that the requirement
for Dlx5 and Dlx6 function during chondrocyte hypertrophy can be satisfied with
Dlx5 alone.

PMCID: PMC2779492
PMID: 19956613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Neurosci. 2009 Dec 2;29(48):15100-3. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4215-09.2009.

Genetic deletion of A2A adenosine receptors in the striatum selectively impairs
habit formation.

Yu C(1), Gupta J, Chen JF, Yin HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, 
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708, USA.

A(2A) receptors are a major class of G-protein-coupled receptors for adenosine.
Highly expressed in the striatum, on the projection neurons giving rise to the
striatopallidal or "indirect" pathway, they have been implicated in sleep,
addiction, and other processes, yet their role in the control of striatal
circuits and behavior remains unclear. Using established assays from the
instrumental learning paradigm, we showed that mice with striatum-specific
deletion of A(2A) receptors were selectively impaired in habit formation. After
training that generated habitual lever pressing in wild-type controls, the
performance of striatum-specific A(2A) knock-out mice remained goal directed,
being highly sensitive to outcome devaluation and reversal of the action-outcome 
contingency. These data demonstrate a critical role for A(2A) receptors on
striatopallidal medium spiny projection neurons in shaping behavior and decision 
making, providing the first instance of a selective alteration in instrumental
learning after striatum-specific genetic manipulations.

PMCID: PMC2862754
PMID: 19955361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Development. 2009 Dec;136(24):4225-33. doi: 10.1242/dev.036723.

Indirect modulation of Shh signaling by Dlx5 affects the oral-nasal patterning of
palate and rescues cleft palate in Msx1-null mice.

Han J(1), Mayo J, Xu X, Li J, Bringas P Jr, Maas RL, Rubenstein JL, Chai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology School of Dentistry University of
Southern California, CSA 103, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Cleft palate represents one of the most common congenital birth defects in human.
During embryonic development, palatal shelves display oronasal (O-N) and
anteroposterior polarity before the onset of fusion, but how the O-N pattern is
established and how it relates to the expansion and fusion of the palatal shelves
are unknown. Here we address these questions and show that O-N patterning is
associated with the expansion and fusion of the palatal shelves and that Dlx5 is 
required for the O-N patterning of palatal mesenchyme. Loss of Dlx5 results in
downregulation of Fgf7 and expanded Shh expression from the oral to the nasal
side of the palatal shelf. This expanded Shh signaling is sufficient to restore
palatal expansion and fusion in mice with compromised palatal mesenchymal cell
proliferation, such as Msx1-null mutants. Exogenous Fgf7 inhibits Shh signaling
and reverses the cranial neural crest (CNC) cell proliferation rescue in the
Msx1/Dlx5 double knockout palatal mesenchyme. Thus, Dlx5-regulated Fgf7 signaling
inhibits the expression of Shh, which in turn controls the fate of CNC cells
through tissue-tissue interaction and plays a crucial role during palatogenesis. 
Our study shows that modulation of Shh signaling may be useful as a potential
therapeutic approach for rescuing cleft palate.

PMCID: PMC2781056
PMID: 19934017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Dev Biol. 2010 Feb 1;338(1):38-49. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.11.003. Epub 2009
Nov 10.

Requirement for Lmo4 in the vestibular morphogenesis of mouse inner ear.

Deng M(1), Pan L, Xie X, Gan L.

Author information: 
(1)University of Rochester Flaum Eye Institute, University of Rochester,
Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

During development, compartmentalization of an early embryonic structure produces
blocks of cells with distinct properties and developmental potentials. The
auditory and vestibular components of vertebrate inner ears are derived from
defined compartments within the otocyst during embryogenesis. The vestibular
apparatus, including three semicircular canals, saccule, utricle, and their
associated sensory organs, detects angular and linear acceleration of the head
and relays the information through vestibular neurons to vestibular nuclei in the
brainstem. How the early developmental events manifest vestibular structures at
the molecular level is largely unknown. Here, we show that LMO4, a
LIM-domain-only transcriptional regulator, is required for the formation of
semicircular canals and their associated sensory cristae. Targeted disruption of 
Lmo4 resulted in the dysmorphogenesis of the vestibule and in the absence of
three semicircular canals, anterior and posterior cristae. In Lmo4-null otocysts,
canal outpouches failed to form and cell proliferation was reduced in the
dorsolateral region. Expression analysis of the known otic markers showed that
Lmo4 is essential for the normal expression of Bmp4, Fgf10, Msx1, Isl1, Gata3,
and Dlx5 in the dorsolateral domain of the otocyst, whereas the initial
compartmentalization of the otocyst remains unaffected. Our results demonstrate
that Lmo4 controls the development of the dorsolateral otocyst into semicircular 
canals and cristae through two distinct mechanisms: regulating the expression of 
otic specific genes and stimulating the proliferation of the dorsolateral part of
the otocyst.

PMCID: PMC2812651
PMID: 19913004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Bone. 2010 Mar;46(3):628-42. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2009.10.021. Epub 2009 Oct 24.

Loading-related regulation of gene expression in bone in the contexts of estrogen
deficiency, lack of estrogen receptor alpha and disuse.

Zaman G(1), Saxon LK, Sunters A, Hilton H, Underhill P, Williams D, Price JS,
Lanyon LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Basic Sciences, The Royal Veterinary College,
University of London, Royal College Street, London NW1 0TU, UK. gzaman@rvc.ac.uk

Loading-related changes in gene expression in resident cells in the tibia of
female mice in the contexts of normality (WT), estrogen deficiency (WT-OVX),
absence of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha(-/-)) and disuse due to sciatic
neurectomy (WT-SN) were established by microarray. Total RNA was extracted from
loaded and contra-lateral non-loaded tibiae at selected time points after a
single, short period of dynamic loading sufficient to engender an osteogenic
response. There were marked changes in the expression of many genes according to 
context as well as in response to loading within those contexts. In WT mice at 3,
8, 12 and 24 h after loading the expression of 642, 341, 171 and 24 genes,
respectively, were differentially regulated compared with contra-lateral bones
which were not loaded. Only a few of the genes differentially regulated by
loading in the tibiae of WT mice have recognized roles in bone metabolism or have
been linked previously to osteogenesis (Opn, Sost, Esr1, Tgfb1, Lrp1, Ostn, Timp,
Mmp, Ctgf, Postn and Irs1, BMP and DLX5). The canonical pathways showing the
greatest loading-related regulation were those involving pyruvate metabolism,
mitochondrial dysfunction, calcium-induced apoptosis, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis,
aryl hydrocarbon receptor and oxidative phosphorylation. In the tibiae from
WT-OVX, ERalpha(-/-) and WT-SN mice, 440, 439 and 987 genes respectively were
differentially regulated by context alone compared to WT. The early response to
loading in tibiae of WT-OVX mice involved differential regulation compared to
their contra-lateral non-loaded pair of fewer genes than in WT, more
down-regulation than up-regulation and a later response. This was shared by
WT-SN. In tibiae of ERalpha(-/-) mice, the number of genes differentially
regulated by loading was markedly reduced at all time points. These data indicate
that in resident bone cells, both basal and loading-related gene expression is
substantially modified by context. Many of the genes differentially regulated by 
the earliest loading-related response were primarily involved in energy
metabolism and were not specific to bone.

PMCID: PMC2887492
PMID: 19857613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Dev Biol. 2010 Jan 1;337(1):63-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.003. Epub 2009
Oct 20.

Gata4 directs development of cardiac-inducing endoderm from ES cells.

Holtzinger A(1), Rosenfeld GE, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical School, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The transcription factor Gata4 is essential for normal heart morphogenesis and
regulates the survival, growth, and proliferation of cardiomyocytes. We tested if
Gata4 can specify cardiomyocyte fate from an uncommitted stem or progenitor cell 
population, by developing a system for conditional expression of Gata4 in
embryonic stem cells. We find that in embryoid body cultures containing even a
low ratio of these cells, expression of Gata4 is sufficient to enhance
significantly the generation of cardiomyocytes, via a non-cell-autonomous
mechanism. The Gata4-expressing cells do not generate cardiac or other mesoderm
derivatives. Rather, Gata4 expression directs the development of two types of
Sox17+ endoderm. This includes an epCam+Dpp4+ subtype of visceral endoderm. In
addition, Gata4 generates similar amounts of epCam+Dpp4- definitive endoderm
enriched for Cxcr4, FoxA2, FoxA3, Dlx5 and other characteristic transcripts. Both
types of endoderm express cardiac-inducing factors, including WNT antagonists
Dkk1 and Sfrp5, although the visceral endoderm subtype has much higher
cardiac-inducing activity correlating with relatively enhanced levels of
transcripts encoding BMPs. The Gata4-expressing cells eventually express
differentiation markers showing commitment to liver development, even under
conditions that normally support mesoderm development. The results suggest that
Gata4 is capable of specifying endoderm fates that facilitate, with temporal and 
spatial specificity, the generation of cardiomyocyte progenitors from associated 
mesoderm.

PMCID: PMC2799892
PMID: 19850025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Dev Dyn. 2009 Nov;238(11):2725-34. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22111.

Foxg1 is required for proper separation and formation of sensory cristae during
inner ear development.

Hwang CH(1), Simeone A, Lai E, Wu DK.

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Molecular Biology, National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, Rockville, Maryland 20850, USA.

The vestibular portion of the inner ear, the three semicircular canals and their 
sensory cristae, is responsible for detecting angular head movements. It was
proposed that sensory cristae induce formation of their non-sensory components,
the semicircular canals. Here, we analyzed the inner ears of Foxg1(-/-) mouse
mutants, which display vestibular defects that are in conflict with the above
model. In Foxg1(-/-) ears, the lateral canal is present without the lateral
ampulla, which houses the lateral crista. Our gene expression analyses indicate
that at the time when canal specification is thought to occur, the prospective
lateral crista is present, which could have induced lateral canal formation prior
to its demise. Our genetic fate-mapping analyses indicate an improper separation 
between anterior and lateral cristae in Foxg1(-/-) mutants. Our data further
suggest that a function of Foxg1 in the inner ear is to restrict sensory fate.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19842177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 18;390(3):775-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.10.048. Epub 2009 Oct 17.

Traf2 interacts with Smad4 and regulates BMP signaling pathway in MC3T3-E1
osteoblasts.

Shimada K(1), Ikeda K, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry, Tokyo,
Japan. shimada-ki@dent.nihon-u.ac.jp

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) play important roles in osteoblast
differentiation and maturation. In mammals, the BMP-induced receptor-regulated
Smads form complexes with Smad4. These complexes translocate and accumulate in
the nucleus, where they regulate the transcription of various target genes.
However, the function of Smad4 remains unclear. We performed a yeast two-hybrid
screen using Smad4 as bait and a cDNA library derived from bone marrow, to
indentify the proteins interacting with Smad4. cDNA clones for Tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) receptor-associated factor 2 (Traf2) were identified, and the
interaction between the endogenous proteins was confirmed in the mouse osteoblast
cell line MC3T3-E1. To investigate the function of Traf2, we silenced it with
siRNA. The level of BMP-2 protein in the medium, the expression levels of the
Bmp2 gene and BMP-induced transcription factor genes, including Runx2, Dlx5,
Msx2, and Sp7, and the phosphorylated-Smad1 protein level were increased in cells
transfected with Traf2 siRNA. The nuclear accumulation of Smad1 increased with
TNF-alpha stimulation for 30 min at Traf2 silencing. These results suggest that
the TNF-alpha-stimulated nuclear accumulation of Smad1 may be dependent on Traf2.
Thus, the interaction between Traf2 and Smad4 may play a role in the cross-talk
between TNF-alpha and BMP signaling pathways.

PMID: 19836350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Cell Biochem Funct. 2010 Jan;28(1):45-51. doi: 10.1002/cbf.1617.

Changes in the mRNA expression of osteoblast-related genes in response to
beta(3)-adrenergic agonist in UMR106 cells.

Nuntapornsak A(1), Wongdee K, Thongbunchoo J, Krishnamra N, Charoenphandhu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Activation of adrenergic receptors (AR) was demonstrated to result in either bone
gain or bone loss depending on the activated AR subtypes and concentrations of
agonists used. While beta(2)-AR agonist was extensively investigated as an
osteopenic agent, effects of beta(3)-AR activation on osteoblasts were still
elusive. Rat osteoblast-like UMR106 cells were herein found to express several AR
subtypes, including beta(3)-AR. After exposure to a low-dose beta(3)-AR agonist
BRL37344 (10 nmol L(-1)), UMR106 cells downregulated the mRNA expression of
transcription factors Runx2 and Dlx5, which are important for initiation of
osteoblast differentiation. Low-dose BRL37344 also decreased the expression ratio
of receptor activator of nuclear factor kappaB ligand (RANKL) over
osteoprotegerin (OPG), suggesting the protective effect of beta(3)-AR agonist
against bone resorption. Alkaline phosphatase expression was markedly decreased, 
whereas expressions of osteocalcin and osteopontin were increased by 100 nmol
L(-1) BRL37344, indicating that beta(3)-AR activation could accelerate the
transition of matrix maturation stage to mineralization stage. In conclusion,
beta(3)-AR activation in rat osteoblasts induced alteration in the expression of 
osteoblast-related transcription factor genes as well as genes required for bone 
formation and resorption. The present results also suggest that, besides
beta(2)-AR, beta(3)-AR is another AR subtype responsible for the sympathetic
nervous system-induced bone remodeling.

2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 19827007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Bone. 2010 Feb;46(2):514-23. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2009.09.033. Epub 2009 Oct 6.

Inhibition of methylation decreases osteoblast differentiation via a
non-DNA-dependent methylation mechanism.

Vaes BL(1), Lute C, van der Woning SP, Piek E, Vermeer J, Blom HJ, Mathers JC,
Müller M, de Groot LC, Steegenga WT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Nutrition, Wageningen University and Research Centre,
Wageningen, The Netherlands.

S-adenosylmethionine (SAM)-dependent methylation of biological molecules
including DNA and proteins is rapidly being uncovered as a critical mechanism for
regulation of cellular processes. We investigated the effects of reduced
SAM-dependent methylation on osteoblast differentiation by using periodate
oxidized adenosine (ADOX), an inhibitor of SAM-dependent methyltransferases. The 
capacity of this agent to modulate osteoblast differentiation was analyzed under 
non-osteogenic control conditions and during growth factor-induced
differentiation and compared with the effect of inhibition of DNA methylation by 
5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-CdR). Without applying specific osteogenic
triggers, both ADOX and 5-Aza-CdR induced mRNA expression of the osteoblast
markers Alp, Osx, and Ocn in murine C2C12 cells. Under osteogenic conditions,
ADOX inhibited differentiation of both human mesenchymal stem cells and C2C12
cells. Gene expression analysis of early (Msx2, Dlx5, Runx2) and late (Alp, Osx, 
Ocn) osteoblast markers during bone morphogenetic protein 2-induced C2C12
osteoblast differentiation revealed that ADOX only reduced expression of the late
phase Runx2 target genes. By using a Runx2-responsive luciferase reporter
(6xOSE), we showed that ADOX reduced the activity of Runx2, while 5-Aza-CdR had
no effect. Taken together, our data suggest that decreased SAM-dependent
methyltransferase activity leads to impaired osteoblast differentiation via
non-DNA-dependent methylation mechanisms and that methylation is a regulator of
Runx2-controlled gene expression.

(c) 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19815105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Biomech. 2009 Dec 11;42(16):2721-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2009.08.006. Epub
2009 Sep 18.

Synergistic action of static stretching and BMP-2 stimulation in the osteoblast
differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts.

Kim IS(1), Song YM, Cho TH, Kim JY, Weber FE, Hwang SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-768, Republic 
of Korea.

Static stretching is a major type of mechanical stimuli utilized during
distraction osteogenesis (DO), a general surgical method for the lengthening of
bone. The molecular signals that drive the regenerative process in DO include a
variety of cytokines. Among these, bone morphogenic protein (BMP, -2 and -4) has 
been reported to exhibit strongly enhanced expression following the application
of mechanical strain during the distraction phase. We hypothesize that mechanical
stretching enhances osteoblast differentiation in DO by means of interaction with
BMP-2 induced cytokine stimulation. C2C12 pluripotential myoblasts were exposed
to stretching load and the resulting cell proliferation and osteoblast
differentiation were then examined. The application of static stretching force
resulted in significant cell proliferation at day 3, although with variable
intensity according to the magnitude of stretching. A combined treatment of
stretching load with BMP-2 stimulation significantly increased alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) activity and up-regulated the gene expression of osteogenic
markers (ALP, type I collagen, osteopontin, osteocalcin, cbfa1, osterix and
dlx5). Results obtained with the combined treatment yielded more activity than
just the BMP-2 treatment or stretching alone. These results reveal that specific 
levels of static stretching force increase cell proliferation and effectively
stimulate the osteoblast differentiation of C2C12 cells in conjunction with BMP-2
stimulation, thus indicating a synergistic interaction between mechanical strain 
and cytokine signaling.

PMID: 19766220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Nov 1;517(1):37-50. doi: 10.1002/cne.22132.

Arcuate nucleus expression of NKX2.1 and DLX and lineages expressing these
transcription factors in neuropeptide Y(+), proopiomelanocortin(+), and tyrosine 
hydroxylase(+) neurons in neonatal and adult mice.

Yee CL(1), Wang Y, Anderson S, Ekker M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, University of
California San Francisco, Genetics and Development, San Francisco, California
94158-2611, USA.

Despite its small size, the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus has a critical
role in regulating energy homeostasis. We have begun to define genetic approaches
to express genes in specific cell types within the developing arcuate nucleus, to
allow precise molecular perturbations of these cells. Furthermore, our analysis
aims to contribute to defining the transcriptional networks that regulate the
development of function of the arcuate neurons. Here, we define the neuronal
cells types within the arcuate that express Nkx2.1 and Dlx homeobox genes. In
addition, we used mice expressing Cre recombinase from the Dlx5/6 intergenic
enhancer (Dlx5/6i) and from the Nkx2.1 locus to follow the fate of embryonic
cells expressing these genes within the arcuate nucleus. We demonstrate that
NKX2.1(+) cells and their lineages are broadly expressed in arcuate neurons
[gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)(+), neuropeptide Y (NPY)(+), proopiomelanocortin 
(POMC)(+), tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)(+)] and glia (tanycytes). On the other hand,
DLX(+) cells and their lineages mark only GABA(+) and TH(+) (dopaminergic)
neurons, and Dlx1(-/-) mutants have fewer TH(+) neurons. These results have
implications for the genetic control of arcuate development and function and for 
the utility of the Nkx2.1-Cre and Dlx5/6i-Cre mouse lines to alter gene
expression in the developing arcuate.

PMCID: PMC3021751
PMID: 19711380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Hum Genet. 2010 Jan;127(1):19-31. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0736-4.

Deletion of an enhancer near DLX5 and DLX6 in a family with hearing loss,
craniofacial defects, and an inv(7)(q21.3q35).

Brown KK(1), Reiss JA, Crow K, Ferguson HL, Kelly C, Fritzsch B, Morton CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
kerry_kocher@student.hms.harvard.edu

Precisely regulated temporal and spatial patterns of gene expression are
essential for proper human development. Cis-acting regulatory elements, some
located at large distances from their corresponding genes, play a critical role
in transcriptional control of key developmental genes and disruption of these
regulatory elements can lead to disease. We report a three generation family with
five affected members, all of whom have hearing loss, craniofacial defects, and a
paracentric inversion of the long arm of chromosome 7, inv(7)(q21.3q35). High
resolution mapping of the inversion showed that the 7q21.3 breakpoint is located 
65 and 80 kb centromeric of DLX6 and DLX5, respectively. Further analysis
revealed a 5,115 bp deletion at the 7q21.3 breakpoint. While the breakpoint does 
not disrupt either DLX5 or DLX6, the syndrome present in the family is similar to
that observed in Dlx5 knockout mice and includes a subset of the features
observed in individuals with DLX5 and DLX6 deletions, implicating dysregulation
of DLX5 and DLX6 in the family's phenotype. Bioinformatic analysis indicates that
the 5,115 bp deletion at the 7q21.3 breakpoint could contain regulatory elements 
necessary for DLX5 and DLX6 expression. Using a transgenic mouse reporter assay, 
we show that the deleted sequence can drive expression in the inner ear and
developing bones of E12.5 embryos. Consequently, the observed familial syndrome
is likely caused by dysregulation of DLX5 and/or DLX6 in specific tissues due to 
deletion of an enhancer and possibly separation from other regulatory elements by
the chromosomal inversion.

PMCID: PMC2847447
PMID: 19707792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Dev Biol. 2009 Oct 15;334(2):481-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.08.015. Epub 2009 
Aug 21.

Tgfbr2 is required for development of the skull vault.

Seo HS(1), Serra R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294-0005, USA.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) is known to play important roles in
multiple developmental processes. One of the main functions is in skeletal
development. Our previous studies demonstrated that loss of Tgfbr2 in
Prx1Cre-expressing limb mesenchyme results in defects in the long bones and
joints of mice. Here we show that loss of Tgfbr2 also results in defects in the
development of the skull vault indicating Tgfbr2 has a critical role in
intramembranous bone formation as well as endochondral bone formation. Mutant
mice did not survive after birth and demonstrated an open skull. The first signs 
of skull defects were observed at E14.5 day. Prx1Cre(+)/Tgfbr2(f/f) embryos
showed significantly reduced cell proliferation in the developing mesenchyme of
the skull by E14.5 day without any detectable alteration in apoptosis suggesting 
that reduced cell proliferation in Prx1Cre(+)/Tgfbr2(f/f) embryos was at least
partially responsible for the defects observed. Immunofluorescent staining showed
a significant reduction in the expression of Runx2/Cbfa1 and Osterix/Sp7 in
Prx1Cre(+)/Tgfbr2(f/f) embryos suggesting that osteoblast differentiation was
also altered in Prx1Cre(+)/Tgfbr2(f/f) embryos. To distinguish between the
effects of losing Tgfbr2 on mesenchymal proliferation versus osteoblast
differentiation, osteoprogenitor cells from the skulls of Tgfbr2(f/f) embryos
were cultured under conditions of high cell density and Tgfbr2 was deleted from
the cells using Adeno-Cre virus. RT-PCR analysis showed that the mRNA level of
Runx2 and Osterix as well as Dlx5 and Msx2 were down-regulated in Tgfbr2-deleted 
cultures compared to control cultures indicating that Tgfbr2 regulates osteoblast
differentiation independent of regulating proliferation. Together, these results 
suggest that Tgfbr2 is required for normal development of the skull.

PMCID: PMC2753698
PMID: 19699732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2009 Aug 1;34(17):1834-8. doi:
10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181ae18ba.

Zonal responsiveness of the human intervertebral disc to bone morphogenetic
protein-2.

Kim H(1), Lee JU, Moon SH, Kim HC, Kwon UH, Seol NH, Kim HJ, Park JO, Chun HJ,
Kwon IK, Lee HM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Science Graduated School, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

STUDY DESIGN: In vitro experiment using bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) and 
cells from the nucleus pulposus (NP), transitional zone (TZ), and anulus fibrosus
(AF) of the human intervertebral disc (IVD).
OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate the differential effect of BMP-2 on DNA synthesis,
proteoglycan synthesis, and osteocalcin mRNA expression in human IVD cells from
the NP, TZ, and AF, respectively.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: BMP-2 has been proven to be effective in stimulating 
proteoglycan synthesis in articular chondrocytes and IVD cells from the NP.
Nevertheless, the effect of BMP-2 on cells from different regions of the IVD has 
not yet been thoroughly elucidated.
METHODS: Human IVDs were harvested from surgical disc procedures and tissue from 
the NP, TZ, and AF was obtained. Disc tissue was enzymatically digested, and IVD 
cells were cultured three-dimensionally in alginate beads. Then IVD cell cultures
from the NP, TZ, and AF were exposed to BMP-2. DNA synthesis and newly
synthesized proteoglycan were measured. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction for mRNA expression of bone sialoprotein, DLX5, osteocalcin, and
collagen type I, was performed.
RESULTS: Cells from the AF responded to BMP-2 with mitogenesis. There was no
significant increase in DNA synthesis in cultures from the NP and TZ treated with
BMP-2. Only cells from the NP showed a significant increase in newly synthesized 
proteoglycan in response to BMP-2. IVD cells from all zones demonstrated no
significant expression of bone sialoprotein, DLX5, osteocalcin mRNA after
treatment with BMP-2.
CONCLUSION: BMP-2 clearly exerted a mitogenic effect on AF cells, and stimulated 
proteoglycan synthesis in NP cells. However, BMP-2 did not have an osteogenic
effect in any IVD region. Taken together, these results confirm that BMP-2 can be
used as an anabolic agent for mitogenesis in AF cells and NP cell matrix
regeneration without the possibility of osteogenesis.

PMID: 19644335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Aug;12(8):1020-7. doi: 10.1038/nn.2371. Epub 2009 Jul 20.

Balanced gene regulation by an embryonic brain ncRNA is critical for adult
hippocampal GABA circuitry.

Bond AM(1), Vangompel MJ, Sametsky EA, Clark MF, Savage JC, Disterhoft JF, Kohtz 
JD.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology and Department of Pediatrics, Children's Memorial
Hospital and Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.

Genomic studies demonstrate that, although the majority of the mammalian genome
is transcribed, only about 2% of these transcripts are code for proteins. We
investigated how the long, polyadenylated Evf2 noncoding RNA regulates
transcription of the homeodomain transcription factors DLX5 and DLX6 in the
developing mouse forebrain. We found that, in developing ventral forebrain, Evf2 
recruited DLX and MECP2 transcription factors to important DNA regulatory
elements in the Dlx5/6 intergenic region and controlled Dlx5, Dlx6 and Gad1
expression through trans and cis-acting mechanisms. Evf2 mouse mutants had
reduced numbers of GABAergic interneurons in early postnatal hippocampus and
dentate gyrus. Although the numbers of GABAergic interneurons and Gad1 RNA levels
returned to normal in Evf2 mutant adult hippocampus, reduced synaptic inhibition 
occurred. These results suggest that noncoding RNA-dependent balanced gene
regulation in embryonic brain is critical for proper formation of GABA-dependent 
neuronal circuitry in adult brain.

PMCID: PMC3203213
PMID: 19620975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 11;284(37):25230-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.008391. Epub
2009 Jul 18.

Molecular regulation of matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein expression by
bone morphogenetic protein-2.

Cho YD(1), Yoon WJ, Woo KM, Baek JH, Lee G, Cho JY, Ryoo HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Dentistry and Dental
Research Institute, BK21 Program, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-749,
Korea.

Matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein (MEPE) is mainly expressed in
mineralizing tissues, and its C-terminal proteolytic cleavage product is an
acidic-serine-asparate-rich-MEPE-associated motif (ASARM) that is a strong
regulator of body phosphate metabolism and mineralization. There is sufficient
data supporting a role for MEPE protein function in mineralization, however,
little is known about the regulation of MEPE gene expression. As bone
morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) is one of the most important signals for
calvarial mineralization and MEPE expression is higher in mineralized tissues, we
attempted to uncover a regulatory circuit between BMP-2 and MEPE expression. Mepe
expression is very low in proliferating MC3T3-E1 cells, but is dramatically
increased in the mineralization stage and is strongly stimulated by treatment
with BMP-2, even in proliferating cells. Overexpression and knock-down
experiments of Smads, Dlx5, and Runx2 indicated that they are indispensable
mediators of BMP-2-induced Mepe expression. In contrast, Msx2 showed strong
inhibition of Mepe transcription. PHEX is an enzyme that prevents the release of 
the ASARM motif, a mineralization inhibitor, from the MEPE molecule. Thus, the
MEPE/PHEX ratio may be a good indicator of mineralization progression because we 
found that the mRNA ratio and protein levels were low when osteoblasts were
actively differentiating to the mineralization stage and the ratio was high when 
the cells reached the mineralization stage when it is assumed that osteocytes may
protect themselves and make a space to survive from the mineralized matrix by
releasing the ASARM motif. Collectively, MEPE expression is bone cell-specific
and induced by the BMP-2 signaling pathway. In addition, the MEPE/PHEX ratio of
the cell could be a very important barometer indicating the progression of tissue
mineralization.

PMCID: PMC2757226
PMID: 19617624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Biol Reprod. 2009 Nov;81(5):906-20. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.078139. Epub 2009
Jul 1.

Characterization of conserved and nonconserved imprinted genes in swine.

Bischoff SR(1), Tsai S, Hardison N, Motsinger-Reif AA, Freking BA, Nonneman D,
Rohrer G, Piedrahita JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Center for Comparative Medicine and Translational Research, North Carolina State 
University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27606, USA.

To increase our understanding of imprinted genes in swine, we carried out a
comprehensive analysis of this gene family using two complementary approaches:
expression and phenotypic profiling of parthenogenetic fetuses, and analysis of
imprinting by pyrosequencing. The parthenote placenta and fetus were smaller than
those of controls but had no obvious morphological differences at Day 28 of
gestation. By Day 30, however, the parthenote placentas had decreased
chorioallantoic folding, decreased chorionic ruggae, and reduction of
fetal-maternal interface surface in comparison with stage-matched control
fetuses. Using Affymetrix Porcine GeneChip microarrays and/or semiquantitative
PCR, brain, fibroblast, liver, and placenta of Day 30 fetuses were profiled, and 
25 imprinted genes were identified as differentially expressed in at least one of
the four tissue types: AMPD3, CDKN1C, COPG2, DHCR7, DIRAS3, IGF2 (isoform
specific), IGF2AS, IGF2R, MEG3, MEST, NAP1L5, NDN, NNAT, OSBPL1A, PEG3, APEG3,
PEG10, PLAGL1, PON2, PPP1R9A, SGCE, SLC38A4, SNORD107, SNRPN, and TFPI2. For
DIRAS3, PLAGL1, SGCE, and SLC38A4, tissue-specific differences were detected. In 
addition, we examined the imprinting status of candidate genes by quantitative
allelic pyrosequencing. Samples were collected from Day 30 pregnancies generated 
from reciprocal crosses of Meishan and White Composite breeds, and
single-nucleotide polymorphisms were identified in candidate genes. Imprinting
was confirmed for DIRAS3, DLK1, H19, IGF2AS, NNAT, MEST, PEG10, PHLDA2, PLAGL1,
SGCE, and SNORD107. We also found no evidence of imprinting in ASB4, ASCL2, CD81,
COMMD1, DCN, DLX5, and H13. Combined, these results represent the most
comprehensive survey of imprinted genes in swine to date.

PMCID: PMC2770020
PMID: 19571260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Cytotechnology. 2009 Jul;60(1-3):11. doi: 10.1007/s10616-009-9203-2. Epub 2009
Jun 26.

5-Azacytidine facilitates osteogenic gene expression and differentiation of
mesenchymal stem cells by alteration in DNA methylation.

Zhou GS(1), Zhang XL(2,)(3), Wu JP(2,)(3), Zhang RP(2,)(3), Xiang LX(2,)(3), Dai 
LC(4), Shao JZ(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Huzhou Central Hospital, 313100, Huzhou,
Zhejiang, People's Republic of China. gfz@mail.huptt.zj.cn. (2)College of Life
Sciences, Zhejiang University, 310058, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(3)Key Lab for Cell and Gene Engineering of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, People's
Republic of China. (4)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Huzhou Central
Hospital, 313100, Huzhou, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China. (5)College of
Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, 310058, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.
shaojz@zju.edu.cn. (6)Key Lab for Cell and Gene Engineering of Zhejiang Province,
Hangzhou, People's Republic of China. shaojz@zju.edu.cn.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are considered to be one of the most promising
therapeutic cell sources as they encompass a plasticity of multiple cell
lineages. The challenge in using these cells lies in developing well-defined
protocols for directing cellular differentiation to generate a desired lineage.
In this study, we investigated the effect of 5-azacytidine, a DNA demethylating
agent, on osteogenic differentiation of MSCs. The cells were exposed to
5-azacytidine in culture medium for 24 h prior to osteogenic induction.
Osteogenic differentiation was determined by several the appearance of a number
of osteogenesis characteristics, including gene expression, ALP activity, and
calcium mineralization. Pretreatment of MSCs with 5-azacytidine significantly
facilitated osteogenic differentiation and was accompanied by hypomethylation of 
genomic DNA and increased osteogenic gene expression. Taking dlx5 as a
representative, methylation alterations of the "CpG island shore" in the promoter
caused by 5-azacytidine appeared to contribute to osteogenic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2780539
PMID: 19557538  [PubMed]


280. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2009 Sep;48(9):786-94. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20683.

Recurrent chromosomal rearrangements implicate oncogenes contributing to T-cell
lymphomagenesis in Lck-MyrAkt2 transgenic mice.

Timakhov RA(1), Tan Y, Rao M, Liu Z, Altomare DA, Pei J, Wiest DL, Favorova OO,
Knepper JE, Testa JR.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

The oncogene v-akt was isolated from a retrovirus that induced naturally
occurring thymic lymphomas in AKR mice. We hypothesized that constitutive
activation of Akt2 could serve as a first hit for the clonal expansion of
malignant T-cells by promoting cell survival and genomic instability, leading to 
chromosome alterations. Furthermore, genes that cooperate with Akt2 to promote
malignant transformation may reside at translocation/inversion junctions found in
spontaneous thymic lymphomas from transgenic mice expressing constitutively
active Akt2 specifically in T cells. Cytogenetic analysis revealed that thymic
tumors from multiple founder lines exhibited either of two recurrent chromosomal 
rearrangements, inv(6)(A2B1) or t(14;15)(C2;D1). Fluorescence in situ
hybridization, array CGH, and PCR analysis were used to delineate the inv(6) and 
t(14;15) breakpoints. Both rearrangements involved T-cell receptor loci. The
inv(6) results in robust upregulation of the homeobox/transcription factor gene
Dlx5 because of its relocation near the Tcrb enhancer. The t(14;15) places the
Tcra enhancer in the vicinity of the Myc proto-oncogene, resulting in upregulated
Myc expression. These findings suggest that activation of the Akt pathway can act
as the initial hit to promote cell survival and genomic instability, whereas the 
acquisition of T-cell-specific overexpression of Dlx5 or Myc leads to
lymphomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC2739734
PMID: 19530243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Clin Oral Implants Res. 2009 Jun;20(6):616-23. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0501.2008.01687.x.

Platelet-poor plasma stimulates the proliferation but inhibits the
differentiation of rat osteoblastic cells in vitro.

Hamdan AA(1), Loty S, Isaac J, Bouchard P, Berdal A, Sautier JM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U872, Eq. 5, Laboratoire de Physiopathologie Orale Moléculaire, Paris,
France. ahmoodi@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Recent studies have shown that the use of platelet preparations in 
bone and implant surgery might stimulate bone formation. However, the biological 
mechanisms are not well understood. Moreover, few studies have attempted to
evaluate the effect of platelet-poor plasma (PPP), which is a product of the
platelet-rich plasma preparation process.
OBJECTIVE: Thus, this study investigated the behavior of osteoblasts isolated
from fetal rat calvaria cultivated in the presence of homologous PPP.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: PPP was obtained by centrifugation of the rat mother's
blood and used in replacement of fetal calf serum, which is classically used in
primary culture procedures. Proliferation was measured by an MTT assay at 24, 48,
and 72 h. Real-time PCR was performed to study the expression of Runx2, Dlx5, and
osteocalcin (OC) on days 0 (4 h), 1, 3, 7, and 12.
RESULTS: Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) biochemical activity was evaluated on days 0 
(4 h), 1, 3, 7, and 12. Observations by phase-contrast microscopy showed that
osteoblasts were able to differentiate until the mineralization of the matrix in 
the presence of PPP. PPP enhanced the proliferation significantly compared with
the control group (P< or =0.001). PCR results showed that Runx2, Dlx5, and OC
were expressed by cells in the experimental group at lower levels compared with
the control group. Biochemical assay of ALP showed a lower activity in the
experimental group compared with the control group (P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that, in the presence of homologous PPP, rat
osteoblastic cells are able to maintain their phenotype, with a higher rate of
proliferation. However, PPP seems to inhibit osteoblastic differentiation.

PMID: 19515037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 31;284(31):20593-601. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.021477. Epub
2009 Jun 4.

DLX5 (distal-less homeobox 5) promotes tumor cell proliferation by
transcriptionally regulating MYC.

Xu J(1), Testa JR.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Signaling and Genetics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

The human DLX homeobox genes, which are related to Dll (Drosophila distal-less
gene), encode transcription factors that are expressed primarily in embryonic
development. Recently, DLX5 was reported to act as an oncogene in lymphomas and
lung cancers, although the mechanism is not known. The identification of target
genes of DLX5 can facilitate our understanding of oncogenic mechanisms driven by 
overexpression of DLX5. The MYC oncogene is aberrantly expressed in many human
cancers and regulates transcription of numerous target genes involved in
tumorigenesis. Here we demonstrate by luciferase assay that the MYC promoter is
specifically activated by overexpression of DLX5 and that two DLX5 binding sites 
in the MYC promoter are important for transcriptional activation of MYC. We also 
show that DLX5 binds to the MYC promoter both in vitro and in vivo and that
transfection of a DLX5 expression plasmid promotes the expression of MYC in a
dose-dependent manner in mammalian cells. Furthermore, overexpression of DLX5
results in increased cell proliferation by up-regulating MYC. Knockdown of DLX5
in lung cancer cells overexpressing DLX5 resulted in decreased expression of MYC 
and reduced cell proliferation, which was rescued by overexpression of MYC.
Because DLX5 has a restricted pattern of expression in adult tissues, it may
serve as a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of cancers that
overexpress DLX5.

PMCID: PMC2742824
PMID: 19497851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 17;284(29):19272-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.014001. Epub 2009
May 19.

MicroRNA-141 and -200a are involved in bone morphogenetic protein-2-induced mouse
pre-osteoblast differentiation by targeting distal-less homeobox 5.

Itoh T(1), Nozawa Y, Akao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Gifu International Institute of Biotechnology, 1-1 Naka-Fudogaoka,
Kakamigahara, Gifu 504-0838, Japan. titoh@giib.or.jp

MicroRNAs (miRs) are endogenously expressed 18-25-nucleotide RNAs that regulate
gene expression through translational repression by binding to a target mRNA.
Recently, it was indicated that miRs act as key regulators in cell
differentiation, cell growth, and cell death. In osteogenesis, several miRs (for 
example miR-26a, -125b, -133, and -135) regulate osteoblast cell growth or
differentiation in human adipose tissue-derived stem cells, mouse mesenchymal ST2
stem cells, and mouse premyogenic C2C12 cells. Additionally, Smad proteins
control Drosha-mediated miR maturation. Therefore, miRs are closely related to
osteogenesis. Here we investigated miR expression profile by an miR array and
identified the candidate miRs, miR-141 and -200a, as pre-osteoblast
differentiation-related miRs. The effects of miR-141 and -200a on pre-osteoblast 
differentiation were examined by using transfection of murine pre-osteoblastic
MC3T3-E1 cells with mature miR-141 or -200a and antisense inhibitor for miR-141
or -200a. It was shown that miR-141 and -200a remarkably modulated the
BMP-2-induced pre-osteoblast differentiation through the translational repression
of Dlx5, which is a bone-generating transcription factor expressed in
pre-osteoblast differentiation. Furthermore, it was indicated that Dlx5 is a
common target of miR-141 and -200a by using a luciferase reporter assay. Thus, we
have observed for the first time that miR-141 and -200a are involved in
pre-osteoblast differentiation in part by regulating the expression of Dlx5.

PMCID: PMC2740552
PMID: 19454767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Jun;149A(6):1224-30. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32877.

Characterization of the complex 7q21.3 rearrangement in a patient with bilateral 
split-foot malformation and hearing loss.

Saitsu H(1), Kurosawa K, Kawara H, Eguchi M, Mizuguchi T, Harada N, Kaname T,
Kano H, Miyake N, Toda T, Matsumoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Japan. hsaitsu@yokohama-cu.ac.jp

We report on complex rearrangements of the 7q21.3 region in a female patient with
bilateral split-foot malformation and hearing loss. G-banding karyotype was
46,XX,t(7;15)(q21;q15),t(9;14)(q21;q11.2)dn. By fluorescence, in situ
hybridization (FISH), Southern hybridization, and inverse PCR, the 7q21.3
translocation breakpoint was determined at the nucleotide level. The breakpoint
did not disrupt any genes, but was mapped to 38-kb telomeric to the DSS1 gene,
and 258- and 272-kb centromeric to the DLX6 and DLX5 genes, respectively. It
remains possible that the translocation would disrupt the interaction between
these genes and their regulatory elements. Interestingly, microarray analysis
also revealed an interstitial deletion close to (but not continuous to) the
7q21.3 breakpoint, indicating complex rearrangements within the split-hand/foot
malformation 1 (SHFM1) locus in this patient. Furthermore, a 4.6-Mb deletion at
15q21.1-q21.2 adjacent to the 15q15 breakpoint was also identified. Cloning of
the deletion junction at 7q21.3 revealed that the 0.8-Mb deletion was located
750-kb telomeric to the translocation breakpoint, encompassing TAC1, ASNS, OCM,
and a part of LMTK2. Because TAC1, ASNS, and OCM genes were located on the
reported copy number variation regions, it was less likely that the three genes
were related to the split-foot malformation. LMTK2 appeared to be a potential
candidate gene for SHFM1, but no LMTK2 mutations were found in 29 individuals
with SHFM. Further LMTK2 analysis of SHFM patients together with hearing loss is 
warranted.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19449426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Brain. 2009 Jun;132(Pt 6):1563-76. doi: 10.1093/brain/awp107. Epub 2009 May 12.

Targeted loss of Arx results in a developmental epilepsy mouse model and
recapitulates the human phenotype in heterozygous females.

Marsh E(1), Fulp C, Gomez E, Nasrallah I, Minarcik J, Sudi J, Christian SL,
Mancini G, Labosky P, Dobyns W, Brooks-Kayal A, Golden JA.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Research Center, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 3615 Civic
Center Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. marshe@email.chop.edu

Comment in
    Epilepsy Curr. 2010 Jan;10(1):24-7.

Mutations in the X-linked aristaless-related homeobox gene (ARX) have been linked
to structural brain anomalies as well as multiple neurocognitive deficits. The
generation of Arx-deficient mice revealed several morphological anomalies,
resembling those observed in patients and an interneuron migration defect but
perinatal lethality precluded analyses of later phenotypes. Interestingly, many
of the neurological phenotypes observed in patients with various ARX mutations
can be attributed, in part, to interneuron dysfunction. To directly test this
possibility, mice carrying a floxed Arx allele were generated and crossed to
Dlx5/6(CRE-IRES-GFP)(Dlx5/6(CIG)) mice, conditionally deleting Arx from
ganglionic eminence derived neurons including cortical interneurons. We now
report that Arx(-/y);Dlx5/6(CIG) (male) mice exhibit a variety of seizure types
beginning in early-life, including seizures that behaviourally and
electroencephalographically resembles infantile spasms, and show evolution
through development. Thus, this represents a new genetic model of a malignant
form of paediatric epilepsy, with some characteristics resembling infantile
spasms, caused by mutations in a known infantile spasms gene. Unexpectedly,
approximately half of the female mice carrying a single mutant Arx allele
(Arx(-/+);Dlx5/6(CIG)) also developed seizures. We also found that a subset of
human female carriers have seizures and neurocognitive deficits. In summary, we
have identified a previously unrecognized patient population with neurological
deficits attributed to ARX mutations that are recapitulated in our mouse model.
Furthermore, we show that perturbation of interneuron subpopulations is an
important mechanism underling the pathogenesis of developmental epilepsy in both 
hemizygous males and carrier females. Given the frequency of ARX mutations in
patients with infantile spasms and related disorders, our data unveil a new model
for further understanding the pathogenesis of these disorders.

PMCID: PMC2685924
PMID: 19439424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Aug 1;107(5):865-72. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22188.

Increased bone resorption and osteopenia in Dlx5 heterozygous mice.

Samee N(1), Geoffroy V, Marty C, Schiltz C, Vieux-Rochas M, Clément-Lacroix P,
Belleville C, Levi G, de Vernejoul MC.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U606, Hôpital Lariboisière, 2, rue Ambroise-Paré, 75475 Paris Cedex 10,
France.

Distal-less (Dlx) homeobox transcription factors play a central role in the
control of osteogenesis. In particular, Dlx5 regulates osteoblasts/osteoclasts
coupling during perinatal bone formation. We analyze here the effect of Dlx5
allelic reduction in the control of bone remodeling. We first show that Dlx5
expression persists during postnatal bone development. We then compare the
skeletal phenotype of 10- and 20-week-old Dlx5(+/-) mice to that of wild-type
(WT) littermates. Dlx5(+/-) male mice exhibit lower bone mineral density (BMD) at
both ages while only 20-week-old females are affected. microCT analyses reveal a 
reduction in cortical thickness of femoral midshafts in Dlx5(+/-) mice.
Histomorphometry on distal femora shows no changes in trabecular structure and
confirms a reduction in Dlx5(+/-) cortical thickness. The cortical decrease of
10-week-old mice does not derive from a reduction in periosteal bone apposition, 
but results from increased bone resorption with a significantly higher number of 
endosteal osteoclasts per bone surface and a larger marrow diameter. Urinary
level of deoxypyridinoline is also higher in heterozygous mice confirming an
increase in bone resorption activity. Our findings might be relevant for
understanding complex, multifactorial diseases such as osteoporosis in which
quantitative deregulation of gene expression leads to disruption of bone
homeostasis.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19415689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Nov;17(11):1432-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.72. Epub 2009 Apr
29.

Split hand/foot malformation due to chromosome 7q aberrations(SHFM1): additional 
support for functional haploinsufficiency as the causative mechanism.

van Silfhout AT(1), van den Akker PC, Dijkhuizen T, Verheij JB, Olderode-Berends 
MJ, Kok K, Sikkema-Raddatz B, van Ravenswaaij-Arts CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of
Groningen, The Netherlands.

We report on three patients with split hand/foot malformation type 1 (SHFM1). We 
detected a deletion in two patients and an inversion in the third, all involving 
chromosome 7q21q22. We performed conventional chromosomal analysis, array
comparative genomic hybridization and fluorescence in situ hybridization. Both
deletions included the known genes associated with SHFM1 (DLX5, DLX6 and DSS1),
whereas in the third patient one of the inversion break points was located just
centromeric to these genes. These observations confirm that haploinsufficiency
due to either a simultaneous deletion of these genes or combined downregulation
of gene expression due to a disruption in the region between these genes and a
control element could be the cause of the syndrome. We review previously reported
studies that support this hypothetical mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2986677
PMID: 19401716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jun 19;384(1):100-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.04.082. Epub 2009 Apr 23.

Calmodulin-dependent kinase II regulates Dlx5 during osteoblast differentiation.

Seo JH(1), Jin YH, Jeong HM, Kim YJ, Jeong HG, Yeo CY, Lee KY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug Development, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

Calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII) acts as a key regulator of osteoblast
differentiation. CaMKII is a Ca(2+)-activated serine/threonine kinase and it
regulates the activity of target proteins by phosphorylation. Dlx5 transcription 
factor plays crucial roles in osteoblast differentiation. The expression of Dlx5 
is regulated by several osteogenic signaling pathways from early stages of
osteoblastogenesis. In addition, Dlx5 can be phosphorylated and activated by p38,
suggesting that the function of Dlx5 can be also modulated by post-translational 
modification. Although CaMKII and Dlx5 both play crucial roles during osteoblast 
differentiation, the interaction between CaMKII and Dlx5 has not been
investigated. In the current study, we examined the effects CamKII on the
function of Dlx5. We found that CaMKII phosphorylates Dlx5, and that CaMKII
increases the protein stability and the osteoblastogenic transactivation activity
of Dlx5. Conversely, a CaMKII inhibitor KN-93 decreased the osteogenic and
transactivation activities of Dlx5. These results indicate that CaMKII regulates 
osteoblast differentiation, at least in part, by increasing the protein stability
and the transcriptional activity of Dlx5.

PMID: 19393622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Neurosci Res. 2009 Sep;87(12):2615-23. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22094.

ABCB1 is predominantly expressed in human fetal neural stem/progenitor cells at
an early development stage.

Yamamoto A(1), Shofuda T, Islam MO, Nakamura Y, Yamasaki M, Okano H, Kanemura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Clinical Research, Osaka
National Hospital, National Hospital Organization, Osaka, Japan.

ABCB1 is a human ABC transporter originally characterized by its ability to cause
resistance to chemotherapy drugs in cancer cells, and later found to be
functionally expressed in human neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) in vitro.
Here, we performed a detailed examination of ABCB1's expression on human NSPCs in
vitro and in human fetal brain tissues, and analyzed the cellular properties of
the human NSPCs expressing ABCB1. We confirmed that ABCB1 was expressed on the
surface of human NSPCs, and its level correlated well with those of Nestin and
CD133. The population of fluorescence-activated cell sorter-sorted human NSPCs
expressing high levels of ABCB1 showed enrichment of proliferating cells, higher 
expression of 246 genes (e.g., RGS6, IGFBP7, GFAP, TNC, Hes1), and lower
expression of 71 genes (e.g., STMN2, DLX5, BASP1, DCX, CD24) compared with human 
NSPCs expressing low or no ABCB1. In situ, ABCB1 was selectively expressed in
cells in the ventricular or subventricular regions of lateral ventricles that
expressed Nestin in human development. These findings suggest that ABCB1 is
predominantly expressed in immature human fetal NSPCs in vitro and at early
developmental stages in vivo, and that it may be a useful marker for human NSPCs.

PMID: 19384922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 May 5;106(18):7595-600. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0811343106. Epub 2009 Apr 21.

Netrin-1-alpha3beta1 integrin interactions regulate the migration of interneurons
through the cortical marginal zone.

Stanco A(1), Szekeres C, Patel N, Rao S, Campbell K, Kreidberg JA, Polleux F,
Anton ES.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina Neuroscience Center and Department of Cell and
Molecular Physiology, The University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Cortical GABAergic interneurons, most of which originate in the ganglionic
eminences, take distinct tangential migratory trajectories into the developing
cerebral cortex. However, the ligand-receptor systems that modulate the
tangential migration of distinct groups of interneurons into the emerging
cerebral wall remain unclear. Here, we show that netrin-1, a diffusible guidance 
cue expressed along the migratory routes traversed by GABAergic interneurons,
interacts with alpha3beta1 integrin to promote interneuronal migration. In vivo
analysis of interneuron-specific alpha3beta1 integrin, netrin-1-deficient mice
(alpha3(lox/-)Dlx5/6-CIE, netrin-1(-/-)) reveals specific deficits in the
patterns of interneuronal migration along the top of the developing cortical
plate, resulting in aberrant interneuronal positioning throughout the cerebral
cortex and hippocampus of conditional alpha3(lox/-)Dlx5/6-CIE, netrin-1(-/-)
mice. These results indicate that specific guidance mechanisms, such as
netrin-1-alpha3beta1 integrin interactions, modulate distinct routes of
interneuronal migration and the consequent positioning of groups of cortical
interneurons in the developing cerebral cortex.

PMCID: PMC2678634
PMID: 19383784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Cell Biochem. 2009 May 15;107(2):224-32. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22118.

Hydrostatic pressures promote initial osteodifferentiation with ERK1/2 not p38
MAPK signaling involved.

Liu J(1), Zhao Z, Li J, Zou L, Shuler C, Zou Y, Huang X, Li M, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)West China College of Stomatology, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China.

Mechanical stress has been considered to be an important factor in bone
remodeling and recent publications have shown that mechanical stress can regulate
the direction of stem cell differentiation. The exact mechanobiological effects
of pressure on initial osteodifferentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have
not been determined. These mechanobiological mechanisms may be important both in 
biological responses during orthodontic tooth movement and in the development of 
new mechanobiological strategies for bone tissue engineering. We investigated the
effects of static (23 kPa) or dynamic (10-36 kPa and at 0.25 Hz frequency)
pressure on MSCs during the initial process of osteoblastic differentiation
following treatment with dexamethasone, beta-glycerophosphate and ascorbic acid
(for 0, 3, and 7 days, respectively). The following parameters were analyzed in
the ALPase activity, mRNA level of osteogenesis-related transcription factors
(Runx2, Osterix, Msx2, and Dlx5), and phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK. The
results showed that exposure to either dynamic or static pressure induced initial
osteodifferentiation of MSCs. Particularly both types of pressure strongly
stimulated the expression of osteogenesis-related factors of totally
undifferentiated MSCs. ERK signaling participated in early osteodifferentiation
and played a positive but non-critical role in mechanotransduction, whereas p38
MAPK was not involved in this process. Furthermore, the undifferentiated MSCs
were highly sensitive to pressure exposure; whereas after osteoinduction MSCs
reacted to pressure in a lower response state. The findings should lead to
further studies to unveil the complex initial biological mechanisms of bone
remodeling and regeneration upon mechanical stimuli.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19259952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2009 Feb;41(2):108-15.

Daily low-intensity pulsed ultrasound-mediated osteogenic differentiation in rat 
osteoblasts.

Suzuki A(1), Takayama T, Suzuki N, Sato M, Fukuda T, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry, Tokyo,
Japan. takayama@dent.nihon-u.ac.jp

There were few studies investigating the effects of the mechanical stimulation
provided by daily low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS) treatment. LIPUS is
known to accelerate bone mineralization and regeneration; however, the precise
cellular mechanism is unclear.Our purpose was to determine how daily LIPUS
treatment affected cell viability, alkaline phosphatase activity,
osteogenesis-related gene expression, and mineralized nodule formation in
osteoblasts. The typical osteoblastic cell line ROS 17/2.8 cells were cultured in
the absence or presence of LIPUS stimulation. Daily LIPUS treatments (1.5 MHz; 20
min) were administered at an intensity of 30 mW/cm(2) for 14 days. Expression of 
osteogenesis-related genes was examined at mRNA levels using real-time polymerase
chain reaction and at protein levels using western blotting analysis. LIPUS
stimulation did not affect the rate of cell viability. Alkaline phosphatase
activity was increased after 10 days of culture with daily LIPUS stimulation.
LIPUS significantly increased the expression of mRNAs encoding Runx2, Msx2, Dlx5,
osterix, bone sialoprotein, and bone morphogenetic protein-2, whereas it
significantly reduced the expression of mRNA encoding the transcription factor
AJ18. Mineralized nodule formation was markedly increased on Day 14 of LIPUS
stimulation. LIPUS stimulation directly affected osteogenic cells, leading to
mineralized nodule formation. LIPUS is likely to have a fundamental influence on 
key functional activities of osteoblasts in alveolar bone.

PMID: 19204827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Brain Dev. 2010 Feb;32(2):98-104. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2008.12.021. Epub 2009 
Feb 4.

Expression analysis and mutation detection of DLX5 and DLX6 in autism.

Nakashima N(1), Yamagata T, Mori M, Kuwajima M, Suwa K, Momoi MY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Jichi Medical University, Tochigi, Japan.

Linkage analysis has reported the chromosomal region 7q21 to be related with
autism. This region contains an imprinting region with MECP2-binding sites, and
DLX5 is reported to be modulated by MECP2. DLX5 and adjacent DLX6 are homeobox
genes working in neurogenesis. From these points, DLX5 and DLX6 are candidate
genes for autism. Therefore, we analyzed the expression of DLX5 and DLX6, and
also PEG10 as a control in the lymphoblasts of autistic spectrum disorder (ASD)
patients by real-time PCR to identify potential abnormality of expression. And we
also analyzed DLX5 and DLX6 on ASD patients for mutation by direct sequence. The 
expression level of DLX5 was not different between ASD and controls but was
higher in four ASD patients compared to controls. Clinical features of these four
patients were variable. DLX5 expression was biallelic in two ASD patients and two
controls, indicating that DLX5 was not imprinted. There was no mutation in DLX5
in ASD. Although DLX5 was not likely to play major role in ASD, genes relating to
DLX5 expression and downstream of DLX5 are considered to be candidate genes for
some of the ASD patients. In DLX6, we detected a G656A base change (R219H) in two
ASD patients who were male siblings. DLX6 may contribute to the pathogenesis of
ASD.

2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19195802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Life Sci. 2009 Feb 27;84(9-10):302-10. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2008.12.011. Epub 2008 
Dec 24.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 induces the differentiation of a mesenchymal
progenitor cell line, ROB-C26, into mature osteoblasts and adipocytes.

Kato S(1), Kawabata N, Suzuki N, Ohmura M, Takagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Nihon University School of Dentistry, Tokyo 101-8310,
Japan.

AIMS: Osteoblasts and adipocytes originate from common precursor cells. We
examined the effects of bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) on the molecular
mechanisms governing the diametric actions of BMP-2 on simultaneous mature
osteoblast and adipocyte differentiation in a clonal mesenchymal progenitor cell 
line, ROB-C26 (C26).
MAIN METHODS: The present study using RT-PCR, Western blotting and ELISA
investigated the effects of BMP-2 on transcription factors for osteoblasts
(Runx2, Dlx5, Osterix, Msx2 and AJ18) and adipocytes (PPARgamma2), osteoblastic
markers, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bone sialoprotein (BSP) and osteocalcin
(OC), and adipocyte differentiation-dependent protein, aP2 in C26 cells.
KEY FINDINGS: BMP-2 increased not only mRNA and protein expressions of Dlx5
followed by inducing Osterix and BSP levels in a dose- and time-dependent manner 
with an increase in Runx2, Msx2, AJ18, ALP and OC levels, but also induced
PPARgamma2 and aP2 levels. At the light microscopic level, BMP-2 induced mature
osteoblastic and adipogenic differentiation in the C26 cultures not only by an
increase in the number of ALP-positive osteoblasts, in their staining intensity
and in the number of mature adipocytes with Oil Red O-positive lipid droplets,
but also mineralized matrix formation of the cultures assessed by detecting an
increase in calcium concentration and the formation of Alizarin Red S-positive
mineralization nodules.
SIGNIFICANCE: These results indicate that BMP-2 induces the differentiation of
C26 mesenchymal progenitors into mature osteoblasts and adipocytes and the
usefulness of this cell line for studying the regulatory mechanism of osteoblast 
and adipocyte differentiation from common mesenchymal progenitors.

PMID: 19146860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Med Sci (Paris). 2008 Dec;24(12):1025-7. doi: 10.1051/medsci/200824121025.

[Role of the cadherin Celsr3 in the connectivity of the cerebral cortex].

[Article in French]

Zhou L, Goffinet AM, Tissir F.

PMID: 19116108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Dev Growth Differ. 2008 Dec;50(9):717-29. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2008.01069.x.

Retinoic acid affects craniofacial patterning by changing Fgf8 expression in the 
pharyngeal ectoderm.

Abe M(1), Maeda T, Wakisaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Osaka University
Graduate School of Dentistry, Suita, Osaka, Japan. m-abe@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp

Retinoic acid signaling plays important roles in establishing normal patterning
and cellular differentiation during embryonic development. In this study, we show
that single administration of retinoic acid at embryonic day 8.5 causes homeotic 
transformation of the lower jaw into upper jaw-like structures. This homeosis was
preceded by downregulation of Fgf8 and Sprouty expression in the proximal domain 
of the first pharyngeal arch. Downregulation of mesenchymal genes such as Dlx5,
Hand2, Tbx1 and Pitx2 was also observed. The oropharynx in retinoic acid-treated 
embryos was severely constricted. Consistent with this observation, Patched
expression in the arch endoderm and mesenchyme was downregulated. Thus, retinoic 
acid affects the expression of subsets of epithelial and mesenchymal genes,
possibly disrupting the regional identity of the pharyngeal arch.

PMID: 19046160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Development. 2008 Dec;135(24):4165-77. doi: 10.1242/dev.026633.

Competence, specification and commitment to an olfactory placode fate.

Bhattacharyya S(1), Bronner-Fraser M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, 139-74, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 
91125, USA.

The nasal placode shares a common origin with other sensory placodes within a
pre-placodal domain at the cranial neural plate border. However, little is known 
about early events in nasal placode development as it segregates from prospective
lens, neural tube and epidermis. Here, Dlx3, Dlx5, Pax6 and the pan-neuronal
marker Hu serve as molecular labels to follow the maturation of olfactory
precursors over time. When competence to form olfactory placode was tested by
grafting ectoderm from different axial levels to the anterior neural fold, we
found that competence is initially broad for head, but not trunk, ectoderm and
declines rapidly with time. Isolated olfactory precursors are specified by HH10, 
concomitant with their complete segregation from other placodal, epidermal and
neural progenitors. Heterotopic transplantation of olfactory progenitors reveals 
they are capable of autonomous differentiation only 12 hours later, shortly
before overt placode invagination at HH14. Taken together, these results show
that olfactory placode development is a step-wise process whereby signals from
adjacent tissues specify competent ectoderm at or before HH10, followed by
gradual commitment just prior to morphological differentiation.

PMID: 19029046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 2;105(48):18806-11. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0807345105. Epub 2008 Nov 18.

An endothelin-1 switch specifies maxillomandibular identity.

Sato T(1), Kurihara Y, Asai R, Kawamura Y, Tonami K, Uchijima Y, Heude E, Ekker
M, Levi G, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Articulated jaws are highly conserved structures characteristic of gnathostome
evolution. Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions within the first pharyngeal arch
(PA1) instruct cephalic neural crest cells (CNCCs) to form the different skeletal
elements of the jaws. The endothelin-1 (Edn1)/endothelin receptor type-A
(Ednra)-->Dlx5/6-->Hand2 signaling pathway is necessary for lower jaw formation. 
Here, we show that the Edn1 signaling is sufficient for the conversion of the
maxillary arch to mandibular identity. Constitutive activation of Ednra induced
the transformation of upper jaw, maxillary, structures into lower jaw,
mandibular, structures with duplicated Meckel's cartilage and dermatocranial jaws
constituted by 4 dentary bones. Misexpression of Hand2 in the Ednra domain caused
a similar transformation. Skeletal transformations are accompanied by
neuromuscular remodeling. Ednra is expressed by most CNCCs, but its constitutive 
activation affects predominantly PA1. We conclude that after migration CNCCs are 
not all equivalent, suggesting that their specification occurs in sequential
steps. Also, we show that, within PA1, CNCCs are competent to form both
mandibular and maxillary structures and that an Edn1 switch is responsible for
the choice of either morphogenetic program.

PMCID: PMC2596216
PMID: 19017795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Feb;42(2):119-29. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0095. Epub 2008 Nov 
5.

The nuclear receptors NUR77 and SF1 play additive roles with c-JUN through
distinct elements on the mouse Star promoter.

Martin LJ(1), Tremblay JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction, Perinatal and Child Health, CHUQ Research Centre, CHUL Room
T1-49, 2705 Laurier Boulevard, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada G1V 4G2.

The steroidogenic acute regulatory protein plays an essential role in steroid
biosynthesis in steroidogenic cells. It is involved in the transport of
cholesterol through the mitochondrial membrane where the first step of
steroidogenesis occurs. Star gene expression in testicular Leydig cells is
regulated by the pituitary LH through the cAMP signaling pathway. So far, several
transcription factors have been implicated in the regulation of Star promoter
activity in these cells. These include the nuclear receptors NUR77 and SF1, AP-1 
family members (particularly c-JUN), GATA4, C/EBPbeta, DLX5/6, and CREB. Some of 
these factors were also shown to act in a cooperative manner to further enhance
Star promoter activity. Here, we report that NUR77 and c-JUN have additive
effects on the Star promoter. These effects were abolished only when both
elements, NUR77 at -95 bp and AP-1 at -78 bp, were mutated. Consistent with this,
in vitro co-immunoprecipitation revealed that NUR77 and c-JUN interact and that
this interaction is mediated through part of the ligand binding domain of NUR77. 
Furthermore, we found that SF1 could cooperate with c-JUN on the mouse Star
promoter but this cooperation involved different regulatory elements.
Collectively, our data not only provide new insights into the molecular
mechanisms that control mouse Star transcription in Leydig cells but also reveal 
a novel mechanism for the regulation of NR4A1-dependent genes in tissues where
NUR77 and c-JUN factors are co-expressed.

PMID: 18987158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Protein Expr Purif. 2009 Feb;63(2):89-94. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2008.09.014. Epub
2008 Oct 4.

Expression, purification and osteogenic bioactivity of recombinant human BMP-4,
-9, -10, -11 and -14.

Bessa PC(1), Cerqueira MT, Rada T, Gomes ME, Neves NM, Nobre A, Reis RL, Casal M.

Author information: 
(1)3B's Research Group - Biomaterials, Biodegradables and Biomimetics, University
of Minho, Headquarters of the European Institute of Excellence on Tissue
Engineering and Regenerative Medicine, Guimarães, Portugal.
paulo.bessa@dep.uminho.pt

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are cytokines from the TGF-beta superfamily,
with important roles during embryonic development and in the induction of bone
and cartilage tissue differentiation in the adult body. In this contribution, we 
report the expression of recombinant human BMP-4, BMP-9, BMP-10, BMP-11 (or
growth differentiation factor-11, GDF-11) and BMP-14 (GDF-5), using Escherichia
coli pET-25b vector. BMPs were overexpressed, purified by affinity his-tag
chromatography and shown to induce the expression of early markers of bone
differentiation (e.g. smad-1, smad-5, runx2/cbfa1, dlx5, osterix, osteopontin,
bone sialoprotein and alkaline phosphatase) in C2C12 cells and in human adipose
stem cells. The described approach is a promising method for producing large
amounts of different recombinant BMPs that show potential for novel biomedical
applications.

PMID: 18950713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008 Dec;28(12):2266-74. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.176958. Epub 2008 Oct 23.

High-density lipoproteins affect endothelial BMP-signaling by modulating
expression of the activin-like kinase receptor 1 and 2.

Yao Y(1), Shao ES, Jumabay M, Shahbazian A, Ji S, Boström KI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA 90095-1679, USA.

OBJECTIVE: High-density lipoproteins (HDL) have antiinflammatory effects on the
vascular endothelium. Because bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are known to be 
inflammatory mediators, we examined the effect of HDL on BMP signaling.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Increasing concentrations of HDL progressively enhanced
expression of the activin-like kinase receptor (ALK)1 and ALK2 in human aortic
endothelial cells as determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction and
immunoblotting. Induction of ALK1 was a result of enhanced ALK2 expression as
determined by siRNA interference, and was associated with increased levels of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and matrix Gla protein (MGP). The
HDL-induction of ALK2 was dependent on BMP-signaling, and affected coregulation
of the ALK2 gene by the homeodomain proteins MSX2, DLX3, and DLX5, as determined 
by reporter gene assays, siRNA interference, and chromatin immunoprecipitation.
Apolipoprotein A-I transgenic mice, known to have high HDL and inhibition of
atherogenesis, exhibited similar changes in aortic gene expression as seen in
endothelial cells treated with HDL in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that HDL benefits the arterial wall by allowing for
enhanced ALK1 and ALK2 signaling, resulting in an increase of VEGF and MGP,
essential for endothelial cell survival and prevention of vascular calcification,
respectively.

PMCID: PMC2709402
PMID: 18948634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Cell Biol Int. 2008 Nov;32(11):1362-70. doi: 10.1016/j.cellbi.2008.08.005. Epub
2008 Aug 16.

RNA interference of the BMPR-IB gene blocks BMP-2-induced osteogenic gene
expression in human bone cells.

Singhatanadgit W(1), Salih V, Olsen I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomaterials and Tissue Engineering, Eastman Dental Institute,
University College London, London, UK.

We have previously shown that human bone cells express bone morphogenetic protein
receptor-IB (BMPR-IB). However, little is known about the precise role of this
receptor in the response of osteoblastic genes to the BMP in these cells. To
determine BMPR-IB-dependent osteoblastic gene expression, the present study
examined the effects of BMPR-IB knockdown on BMP-induced osteoblast-associated
genes. BMPR-IB mRNA and protein were markedly suppressed by transfection of cells
with BMPR-IB siRNA. Using three different bone cell samples, BMP-2 stimulation of
alkaline phosphatase (ALP), osteocalcin (OC), distal-less homeobox-5 (Dlx5) and
core binding factor alpha-1 (Cbfa1) was found to be specifically and
significantly reduced in the BMPR-IB siRNA-transfected cultures compared with
that of control cultures. Our study has provided evidence that BMPR-IB-dependent 
signaling plays a crucial role in BMP-2 up-regulation of the ALP, OC, Dlx5 and
Cbfa1 genes in bone cells, suggesting a pivotal role of this receptor in
BMP-2-induced osteoblast differentiation in vitro. These findings thus suggest
the possibility that BMPR-IB could be a therapeutic target for enhancing bone
regeneration in vivo.

PMID: 18773965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Cells Tissues Organs. 2009;189(1-4):115-21. doi: 10.1159/000151748. Epub 2008 Aug
27.

Msx1 expression regulation by its own antisense RNA: consequence on tooth
development and bone regeneration.

Babajko S(1), Petit S, Fernandes I, Méary F, LeBihan J, Pibouin L, Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, INSERM UMRS872 Equipe 5, Biologie
Oro-Faciale et Pathologie, Université Denis Diderot, Paris 7, France.
Sylvie.Babajko@crc.jussieu.fr

Msx homeogenes play an important role in epithelial-mesenchymal interactions
leading development. Msx1 is relevant for dental and craniofacial morphogenesis, 
as suggested by phenotypes of Msx1 mutations in human and Msx1 KO mice. During
adulthood, Msx1 is still expressed in the skeleton where its role is largely
unknown. Our group showed that the Msx1 gene is submitted to bidirectional
transcription generating a long noncoding antisense (AS) RNA. During tooth
development, Msx1 sense (S) and AS RNAs showed specific patterns of expression.
Thus, the aim of the present study was to analyze the relation between Msx1 S and
AS RNAs. In vivo mapping in adult mice showed that both Msx1 RNAs were detected
in tested tissues such as bone. In vitro, Msx1 AS RNA decreased endogenous Msx1 S
expression and modified Msx1 protein cell distribution. Regulations of Dlx5 and
Bmp4 expression involving Msx1 S and AS RNAs showed that Msx1 AS RNA could
modulate Msx1 function. The study of Msx1 S and AS RNA status is interesting in
the case of tooth agenesis and bone loss to see if a disturbance of this balance 
could be associated with a disturbance of bone homeostasis. In that sense, our
current results suggest a clear involvement of Msx1 in alveolar bone.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18728357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Cells Tissues Organs. 2009;189(1-4):144-52. doi: 10.1159/000151747. Epub 2008 Aug
27.

Transcriptional regulation of osteoblasts.

Franceschi RT(1), Ge C, Xiao G, Roca H, Jiang D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich. 48109-1078, USA.
rennyf@umich.edu

The differentiation of osteoblasts from mesenchymal precursors requires a series 
of cell fate decisions controlled by a hierarchy of transcription factors. These 
include RUNX2, Osterix (OSX), ATF4 and a large number of nuclear coregulators.
During bone development, initial RUNX2 expression coincides with the formation of
mesenchymal condensations and precedes the branching of chondrogenic and
osteogenic lineages. Given its central role in bone development, it is not
surprising that RUNX2 is subject to a variety of controls. These include
posttranslational modification, especially phosphorylation, and interactions with
accessory nuclear factors. Specific examples of RUNX2 regulation to be reviewed
include phosphorylation by the ERK/MAP kinase pathway and interactions with DLX5.
RUNX2 is regulated via phosphorylation of critical serine residues in the
proline/serine/threonine domain. In vivo, the transgenic expression of
constitutively active MAP kinase in osteoblasts accelerated skeletal development,
while a dominant-negative MAPK retarded development in a RUNX2-dependent manner. 
DLX5-RUNX2 complexes can be detected in osteoblasts and this interaction plays a 
critical role in maintaining osteoblast-specific expression of the bone
sialoprotein gene. These studies allow us to begin understanding the complex
mechanisms necessary to fine-tune bone formation as mesenchymal progenitors
progress down the osteoblast lineage.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3512205
PMID: 18728356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Dev Biol. 2008 Oct 15;322(2):415-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.07.029. Epub 2008 
Jul 31.

Characterization of a distinct subpopulation of striatal projection neurons
expressing the Dlx genes in the basal ganglia through the activity of the I56ii
enhancer.

Ghanem N(1), Yu M, Poitras L, Rubenstein JL, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics (CAREG), Department of 
Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Regulation of region-specific neuronal differentiation and migration in the
embryonic forebrain is a complex mechanism that involves a variety of
transcription factors such as the Dlx genes. At least four cis-acting regulatory 
elements (CREs) are responsible for the Dlx transcriptional regulation in the
subcortical telencephalon and the rostral diencephalon. These include I12b and
URE2 in the Dlx1/2 bigene cluster, and, I56i and I56ii in the Dlx5/6 cluster. We 
previously reported that URE2, I12b, and I56i, mark different progenitor cell
populations in the ganglionic eminences as well as different subtypes of adult
cortical interneurons. Here, we carried out a detailed spatial and temporal
analysis of the I56ii CRE activity in the developing telencephalon between E10.5 
and E15.5, and compared its activity with the other three Dlx CREs using lacZ
reporter genes in transgenic mice. We show that I56ii marks distinct group(s) of 
neurons located in the superficial mantle of the LGE and MGE between E11.5 and
E13.5. The I56ii-positive cells are Dlx- and GABA-immunoreactive. However, unlike
the other CREs, I56ii does not label interneuron progenitors in the basal
ganglia, nor tangentially migrating cells to the cortex at E13.5. Instead,
I56ii-positive cells mark a subpopulation(s) of post-mitotic projection neurons
that tangentially migrate from the LGE to the deep mantle of the MGE and reside
between the subventricular zone and the globus pallidus during midgestation. The 
majority of these neurons express the striatal markers Meis2 and Islet1.
Moreover, both Meis2 and Islet1 activate transcription of a reporter gene
containing the I56ii sequence in co-transfection assays, indicating that these
transcriptional factors may be potential upstream modulators of the Dlx genes in 
vivo.

PMID: 18706405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Cells Tissues Organs. 2009;189(1-4):122-5. doi: 10.1159/000151453. Epub 2008 Aug 
14.

Molecular switches involving homeodomain proteins, HOXA10 and RUNX2 regulate
osteoblastogenesis.

Hassan MQ(1), Saini S, Gordon JA, van Wijnen AJ, Montecino M, Stein JL, Stein GS,
Lian JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Mass. 01655, USA.

The osteoinductive BMP2 signal facilitates commitment to the osteoblast phenotype
by inducing several classes of early response genes. Among these are bone-related
HOX factors, homeodomain, RUNX and OSTERIX proteins. Here we demonstrate
molecular events among BMP2-induced transcription factors that constitute a
network of molecular switches on promoters of bone-related genes to coordinate
their temporal expression during cellular differentiation. Our studies provide
evidence for (1) selective association of HOXA10, MSX2, DLX3 and DLX5 homeodomain
transcription factors on Runx2 and OC genes at stages of osteoblast maturation as
well as (2) participation of these factors with RUNX2 in chromatin remodeling of 
bone-specific genes for repression, activation and attenuation of transcription. 
These findings reveal the requirement for multiple levels of control for the
appropriate timing of osteoblast-related gene expression.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2665705
PMID: 18701816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Development. 2008 Sep;135(17):2905-16. doi: 10.1242/dev.019778.

Dlx genes pattern mammalian jaw primordium by regulating both lower jaw-specific 
and upper jaw-specific genetic programs.

Jeong J(1), Li X, McEvilly RJ, Rosenfeld MG, Lufkin T, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California San Francisco, 1550 4th street, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA. juhee.jeong@ucsf.edu

Dlx transcription factors are implicated in patterning the mammalian jaw, based
on their nested expression patterns in the first branchial arch (primordium for
jaw) and mutant phenotypes; inactivation of Dlx1 and Dlx2 (Dlx1/2-/-) causes
defects in the upper jaw, whereas Dlx5/6(-/-) results in homeotic transformation 
of the lower jaw into upper jaw. Therefore, the 'Dlx codes' appear to regionalize
the jaw primordium such that Dlx1/2 regulate upper jaw development, while Dlx5/6 
confer the lower jaw fate. Towards identifying the genetic pathways downstream of
Dlx5/6, we compared the gene expression profiles of the wild-type and Dlx5/6(-/-)
mouse mandibular arch (prospective lower jaw). We identified 20 previously
unrecognized Dlx5/6-downstream genes, of which 12 were downregulated and 8
upregulated in the mutant. We found a Dlx-regulated transcriptional enhancer in
close proximity to Gbx2, one of the Dlx5/6-downstream genes, strongly suggesting 
that Gbx2 is a direct target of Dlx5/6. We also showed that Pou3f3 is normally
expressed in the maxillary (prospective upper jaw) but not mandibular arch, is
upregulated in the mandibular arch of Dlx5/6(-/-), and is essential for formation
of some of the maxillary arch-derived skeleton. A comparative analysis of the
morphological and molecular phenotypes of various Dlx single and double mutants
revealed that Dlx1, 2, 5 and 6 act both partially redundantly and
antagonistically to direct differential expression of downstream genes in each
domain of the first branchial arch. We propose a new model for Dlx-mediated
mammalian jaw patterning.

PMID: 18697905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Dev Biol. 2008 Sep 15;321(2):303-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.046. Epub 2008
Apr 15.

TGF-beta mediated Dlx5 signaling plays a crucial role in osteo-chondroprogenitor 
cell lineage determination during mandible development.

Oka K(1), Oka S, Hosokawa R, Bringas P Jr, Brockhoff HC 2nd, Nonaka K, Chai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, School of Dentistry, University of 
Southern California, 2250 Alcazar Street, CSA 103, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling is crucial for mandible
development. During its development, the majority of the mandible is formed
through intramembranous ossification whereas the proximal region of the mandible 
undergoes endochondral ossification. Our previous work has shown that TGF-beta
signaling is required for the proliferation of cranial neural crest (CNC)-derived
ectomesenchyme in the mandibular primordium where intramembranous ossification
takes place. Here we show that conditional inactivation of Tgfbr2 in CNC cells
results in accelerated osteoprogenitor differentiation and perturbed
chondrogenesis in the proximal region of the mandible. Specifically, the
appearance of chondrocytes in Tgfbr2(fl/fl);Wnt1-Cre mice is delayed and they are
smaller in size in the condylar process and completely missing in the angular
process. TGF-beta signaling controls Sox9 expression in the proximal region,
because Sox9 expression is delayed in condylar processes and missing in angular
process in Tgfbr2(fl/fl);Wnt1-Cre mice. Moreover, exogenous TGF-beta can induce
Sox9 expression in the mandibular arch. In the angular processes of
Tgfbr2(fl/fl);Wnt1-Cre mice, osteoblast differentiation is accelerated and Dlx5
expression is elevated. Significantly, deletion of Dlx5 in Tgfbr2(fl/fl);Wnt1-Cre
mice results in the rescue of cartilage formation in the angular processes.
Finally, TGF-beta signaling-mediated Scleraxis expression is required for
tendonogenesis in the developing skeletal muscle. Thus, CNC-derived cells in the 
proximal region of mandible have a cell intrinsic requirement for TGF-beta
signaling.

PMCID: PMC3378386
PMID: 18684439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Am J Pathol. 2008 Sep;173(3):773-80. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.080243. Epub 2008
Jul 31.

Dlx5, a positive regulator of osteoblastogenesis, is essential for
osteoblast-osteoclast coupling.

Samee N(1), Geoffroy V, Marty C, Schiltz C, Vieux-Rochas M, Levi G, de Vernejoul 
MC.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U606, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France.

The homeodomain protein Dlx5 is an activator of Runx2 (a key regulator of
osteogenesis) and is thought to be an important regulator of bone formation. At
present, however, the perinatal lethality of Dlx5-null mice has hampered the
elucidation of its function in osteogenesis. Here we provide the first analysis
of the effects of Dlx5 inactivation on bone development. Femurs of Dlx5-null
mouse embryos at the end of gestation exhibit a reduction in both total and
trabecular bone volume associated with increased trabecular separation and
reduced trabecular number. These parameters are often associated with
pathological conditions characterized by reduced osteoblast activity and
increased bone resorption. Dlx5(-/-) osteoblasts in culture display reduced
proliferation and differentiation rate and reduction of Runx2, Osx, Osteocalcin
and Bone Sialoprotein expression. In addition to impaired osteoblast function,
Dlx5(-/-) femurs exhibit significant increases in osteoclast number. As Dlx5 is
not expressed by osteoclasts, we suggest that its osteoblastic expression might
control osteoblast/osteoclast coupling. Cultured Dlx5(-/-) osteoblasts displayed 
a higher RANKL/OPG ratio. Furthermore, Dlx5(-/-) osteoblasts induced a higher
number of TRAP-positive multinucleated cells in normal spleen cultures with a
globally increased resorption activity. These findings suggest that Dlx5 is a
central regulator of bone turnover as it activates bone formation directly and
bone resorption indirectly.

PMCID: PMC2527089
PMID: 18669617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Eur J Cell Biol. 2008 Oct;87(10):751-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2008.04.004. Epub
2008 Jul 11.

DLX5 overexpression impairs osteogenic differentiation of human bone marrow
stromal cells.

Muraglia A(1), Perera M, Verardo S, Liu Y, Cancedda R, Quarto R, Corte G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genova, Italy.

The transcription factor DLX5 belongs to a family of homeoproteins required for
craniofacial morphogenesis and forebrain development. DLX5 is expressed during
formation of several skeletal elements such as cartilage, teeth and bone, and its
knockout causes severe craniofacial malformations with a delay in the
ossification process. Bone marrow contains mesenchymal progenitor cells which may
differentiate along multiple pathways, therefore representing an interesting in
vitro and in vivo model to study the mesodermal lineage differentiation. Here we 
report the effect of DLX5 overexpression in ex vivo expanded human bone marrow
stromal cells by retroviral infection on the osteogenic lineage differentiation. 
A reduced mineral deposition was observed in DLX5-transduced cells upon
osteogenic induction in culture. When DLX5-transduced cells were implanted in
immunodeficient mice, a 60% reduction in bone matrix deposition was observed,
whereas the in vitro chondrogenic potential was unaffected. A quantitative gene
expression study indicated that DLX5 overexpression does not affect the early
osteogenic commitment of bone marrow stromal cells but prevents their terminal
differentiation. This block may be mediated by the observed persistent expression
of SOX2, a transcription factor known to inhibit osteogenic differentiation.

PMID: 18620781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2008 Jun;84(2):123-30. doi: 10.1002/bdrc.20124.

Transcriptional regulators of chondrocyte hypertrophy.

Solomon LA(1), Bérubé NG, Beier F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.

Coordinated transition from proliferation to terminal differentiation and
hypertrophy of growth plate chondrocytes is required for normal growth of
endochondral bones and thus determines final height in humans. Over the last
decades, transcription factors of the Sox and Runx families have been shown to be
the central regulators of this process. More recently, numerous additional
transcription factors have been identified as positive or negative regulators of 
chondrocyte hypertrophy, such as Shox/Shox2, Dlx5, and MEF2C. These factors do
not only control skeletal development and growth, but might also participate in
ectopic chondrocyte hypertrophy during the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. This
review focuses on recent advances in our understanding of the transcriptional
regulation of chondrocyte hypertrophy, with particular attention to genes that
have only recently been implicated in cartilage development or received little
attention so far.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18546336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Cell Mol Med. 2008 Aug;12(4):1188-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2008.00377.x.
Epub 2008 Jun 5.

DLX5 expression is monoallelic and Dlx5 is up-regulated in the Mecp2-null frontal
cortex.

Miyano M(1), Horike S, Cai S, Oshimura M, Kohwi-Shigematsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of
California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

PMCID: PMC3597349
PMID: 18537997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Anim Genet. 2008 Aug;39(4):395-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2008.01740.x. Epub
2008 May 21.

Isolation and imprinting analysis of the porcine DLX5 gene and its association
with carcass traits.

Cheng HC(1), Zhang FW, Jiang CD, Li FE, Xiong YZ, Deng CY.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Swine Genetics and Breeding of Ministry of Agriculture,
Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.

Imprinted genes play important roles in mammalian growth and development.
However, reports on imprinted genes are limited in livestock. In this study, the 
complete ORF containing 289 amino acids of the porcine DLX5 gene was obtained. A 
C-to-T SNP mutation in exon 1 of the DLX5 gene was used to detect imprinting
status with an RT-PCR/RFLP test (using HhaI) in eight heterozygous pigs from a
population of Large White x Meishan F(1) hybrids. Imprinting analysis showed that
the porcine DLX5 gene was maternally expressed in skeletal muscle, fat, lung,
spleen, stomach and small intestine, but not imprinted in heart, liver, kidney,
uterus, ovary, testicle or pituitary. A PCR-RFLP test was also used to detect the
polymorphism in 310 pigs of a Large White x Meishan F(2) resource population. The
statistical results showed significant association (P < 0.01) of the genotypes
and fat meat percentage, carcass length, bone percentage, 6-7 rib fat thickness, 
average backfat thickness, thorax-waist fat thickness and buttock fat thickness.

PMID: 18498429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 15;14(8):2363-70. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-1523.

Activation of placenta-specific transcription factor distal-less homeobox 5
predicts clinical outcome in primary lung cancer patients.

Kato T(1), Sato N, Takano A, Miyamoto M, Nishimura H, Tsuchiya E, Kondo S,
Nakamura Y, Daigo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

PURPOSE AND EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To identify novel biomarkers and therapeutic
targets for lung cancers, we screened for genes that were highly transactivated
in lung cancers using a cDNA microarray representing 27,648 genes. DLX5 gene, a
member of the human distal-less homeobox transcriptional factor family that is
expressed during early embryonic development, was found to be overexpressed in
the great majority of lung cancers. Tissue microarray consisting of archival
non-small cell lung cancer samples from 369 patients was applied to examine the
clinicopathologic significance of DLX5 protein. A role of DLX5 in cancer cell
growth and/or survival was investigated through small interfering RNA
experiments.
RESULTS: Northern blot and immunohistochemical analyses detected expression of
DLX5 only in placenta among 23 normal tissues examined. Immunohistochemical
analysis showed that positive immunostaining of DLX5 was correlated with tumor
size (pT classification; P = 0.0053) and poorer prognosis of non-small cell lung 
cancer patients (P = 0.0045). It was also shown to be an independent prognostic
factor (P = 0.0415). Treatment of lung cancer cells with small interfering RNAs
for DLX5 effectively knocked down its expression and suppressed cell growth.
CONCLUSIONS: These data implied that DLX5 is useful as a target for the
development of anticancer drugs and cancer vaccines as well as for a prognostic
biomarker in clinic.

PMID: 18413826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2008 Apr;83(2):134-44. doi:
10.1002/bdrb.20154.

Retinoic acid-induced inner ear teratogenesis caused by defective
Fgf3/Fgf10-dependent Dlx5 signaling.

Liu W(1), Levi G, Shanske A, Frenz DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

BACKGROUND: Retinoic acid (RA) is essential for inner ear development. However,
exposure to excess RA at a critical period leads to inner ear defects. These
defects are associated with disruption in epithelial-mesenchymal interactions.
METHODS: This study investigates the role of Dlx5 in the epithelial-mesenchymal
interactions that guide otic capsule chondrogenesis, as well as the effect of
excess in utero RA exposure on Dlx5 expression in the developing mouse inner ear.
Control of Dlx5 by Fgf3 and Fgf10 under excess RA conditions is investigated by
examining the developmental window during which Fgf3 and Fgf10 are altered by in 
utero RA exposure and by testing the ability of Fgf3 and Fgf10 to mitigate the
reduction in chondrogenesis and Dlx5 expression mediated by RA in high-density
cultures of periotic mesenchyme containing otic epithelium, a model of
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions in which chondrogenic differentiation of
periotic mesenchyme ensues in response to induction by otic epithelium.
RESULTS: Dlx5 deletion alters expression of TGFbeta(1), important for otic
capsule chondrogenesis, in the developing inner ear and compromises the ability
of cultured periotic mesenchyme containing otic epithelium, harvested from Dlx5
null embryos, to differentiate into cartilage when compared with control
cultures. Downregulation in Dlx5 ensues as a consequence of in utero RA exposure 
in association with inner ear dysmorphogenesis. This change in Dlx5 is noted at
embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5), but not at E9.5, suggesting that Dlx5 is not a direct
RA target. Before Dlx5 downregulation, Fgf3 and Fgf10 expression is modified in
the inner ear by excess RA, with the ability of exogenous Fgf3 and Fgf10 to
rescue chondrogenesis and Dlx5 expression in RA-treated cultures of periotic
mesenchyme containing otic epithelium supporting these fibroblast growth factors 
(FGFs) as intermediary genes by which RA mediates its effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Disruption in an Fgf3, -10/Dlx5 signaling cascade is operant in
molecular mechanisms of inner ear teratogenesis by excess RA.

(c)2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18412219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. PLoS Genet. 2008 Apr 11;4(4):e1000050. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000050.

Bmp4 is essential for the formation of the vestibular apparatus that detects
angular head movements.

Chang W(1), Lin Z, Kulessa H, Hebert J, Hogan BL, Wu DK.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, NIH,
Rockville, Maryland, United States of America.

Angular head movements in vertebrates are detected by the three semicircular
canals of the inner ear and their associated sensory tissues, the cristae. Bone
morphogenetic protein 4 (Bmp4), a member of the Transforming growth factor family
(TGF-beta), is conservatively expressed in the developing cristae in several
species, including zebrafish, frog, chicken, and mouse. Using mouse models in
which Bmp4 is conditionally deleted within the inner ear, as well as chicken
models in which Bmp signaling is knocked down specifically in the cristae, we
show that Bmp4 is essential for the formation of all three cristae and their
associated canals. Our results indicate that Bmp4 does not mediate the formation 
of sensory hair and supporting cells within the cristae by directly regulating
genes required for prosensory development in the inner ear such as Serrate1
(Jagged1 in mouse), Fgf10, and Sox2. Instead, Bmp4 most likely mediates crista
formation by regulating Lmo4 and Msx1 in the sensory region and Gata3, p75Ngfr,
and Lmo4 in the non-sensory region of the crista, the septum cruciatum. In the
canals, Bmp2 and Dlx5 are regulated by Bmp4, either directly or indirectly.
Mechanisms involved in the formation of sensory organs of the vertebrate inner
ear are thought to be analogous to those regulating sensory bristle formation in 
Drosophila. Our results suggest that, in comparison to sensory bristles, crista
formation within the inner ear requires an additional step of sensory and
non-sensory fate specification.

PMCID: PMC2274953
PMID: 18404215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Neurosci. 2008 Mar 19;28(12):2970-5. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5255-07.2008.

A critical role of the adenosine A2A receptor in extrastriatal neurons in
modulating psychomotor activity as revealed by opposite phenotypes of striatum
and forebrain A2A receptor knock-outs.

Shen HY(1), Coelho JE, Ohtsuka N, Canas PM, Day YJ, Huang QY, Rebola N, Yu L,
Boison D, Cunha RA, Linden J, Tsien JZ, Chen JF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropharmacology Laboratory, Department of Neurology, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

The function of striatal adenosine A(2A) receptors (A(2A)Rs) is well recognized
because of their high expression levels and the documented antagonistic
interaction between A(2A)Rs and dopamine D(2) receptors in the striatum. However,
the role of extrastriatal A(2A)Rs in modulating psychomotor activity is largely
unexplored because of the low level of expression and lack of tools to
distinguish A(2A)Rs in intrinsic striatal versus nonstriatal neurons. Here, we
provided direct evidence for the critical role of A(2A)Rs in extrastriatal
neurons in modulating psychomotor behavior using newly developed
striatum-specific A(2A)R knock-out (st-A(2A)R KO) mice in comparison with
forebrain-specific A(2A)R KO (fb-A(2A)R KO) mice. In contrast to fb-A(2A)R KO
(deleting A(2A)Rs in the neurons of striatum as well as cerebral cortex and
hippocampus), st-A(2A)R KO mice exhibited Cre-mediated selective deletion of the 
A(2A)R gene, mRNA, and proteins in the neurons (but not astrocytes and microglial
cells) of the striatum only. Strikingly, cocaine- and phencyclidine-induced
psychomotor activities were enhanced in st-A(2A)R KO but attenuated in fb-A(2A)R 
KO mice. Furthermore, selective inactivation of the A(2A)Rs in extrastriatal
cells by administering the A(2A)R antagonist KW6002 into st-A(2A)R KO mice
attenuated cocaine effects, whereas KW6002 administration into wild-type mice
enhanced cocaine effects. These results identify a critical role of A(2A)Rs in
extrastriatal neurons in providing a prominent excitatory effect on psychomotor
activity. These results indicate that A(2A)Rs in striatal and extrastriatal
neurons exert an opposing modulation of psychostimulant effects and provide the
first direct demonstration of a predominant facilitatory role of extrastriatal
A(2A)Rs.

PMID: 18354001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Rev Neurol. 2008;46 Suppl 1:S71-7.

[Autism, epilepsy and genetics].

[Article in Spanish]

Muñoz-Yunta JA(1), Palau-Baduell M, Salvadó-Salvadó B, Valls-Santasusana A,
Rosendo-Moreno N, Clofent-Torrentó M, Manchado F.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Neuropediatría, Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona. 
10030amy@telefonica.net

INTRODUCTION: The rate of epilepsy in autism is higher than in other
developmental disorders and estimates point to a frequency range of between 7%
and 42%. Between 40% and 47% of autistic children suffer from clinical epilepsy. 
Onset of epilepsy may occur at any age.
DEVELOPMENT: During the ontogenesis of the nervous system, if the maturing
process is upset by some epileptogenic phenomenon, the consequences on the
consolidation of the emerging cognitive functions can be severe. Epileptiform
discharges can occur although clinical seizures are absent, but nevertheless they
still have an effect on the maturing process. Between 10% and 50% of autistic
children undergo a regression of acquired behaviour following a period of normal 
development. The absence of clinical seizures during regression does not rule out
the epileptogenic origin of the regressive process.
CONCLUSIONS: The relation between pervasive developmental disorders and epilepsy,
epileptiform activity and subclinical seizures can be explained from a
neurobiological point of view, on the one hand, by an imbalance between the
excitatory system -glutamate- and the inhibitory system -gamma-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA)- in key points in the cerebral cortex and, on the other, by means of
molecular genetic studies and studies of candidate genes (FOXP2, WNT2, subunits
of GABA receptors, neuroligins, ARX, SCN1A, SCN2A, MECP2, CDKL5 and DLX5).

PMID: 18302128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Brain Res Bull. 2008 Mar 18;75(2-4):231-5. doi:
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2007.10.037. Epub 2007 Nov 20.

Conserved pattern of OTP-positive cells in the paraventricular nucleus and other 
hypothalamic sites of tetrapods.

Bardet SM(1), Martinez-de-la-Torre M, Northcutt RG, Rubenstein JL, Puelles L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy & Psychobiology, and CIBERER Research Group 736;
Medical School, University of Murcia, Murcia E30071, Spain. sbardet@um.es

The paraventricular nucleus complex (Pa) is a component of central neural
circuitry that regulates several homeostatic variables. The paraventricular
nucleus is composed of magnocellular neurons that project to the posterior
pituitary and parvicellular neurons that project to numerous sites in the central
nervous system. According to the revised prosomeric model, the paraventricular
nucleus is located caudal to the eye stalk along the rostrocaudal dimension of
the dorsal hypothalamic alar plate. Caudally, the paraventricular nucleus abuts
the prethalamus (prosomere 3), and the entire complex is flanked ventrally and
dorsally by Dlx5-expressing domains of the alar plate. The homeodomain
transcription factor Orthopedia (Otp) is expressed in several separate
hypothalamic sites: the paraventricular nucleus, perimammillary region and
arcuate nucleus. In this study, we compared Otp expression in the hypothalamus of
mouse (Mus musculus), chick (Gallus gallus), frog (Rana perezi) and axolotol
(Ambystoma mexicanum), using immunohistochemical and in situ hybridization
techniques. In all cases, Otp-positive cells in the paraventricular nucleus were 
excluded from Dlx5-expressing adjacent domains. Other positive neuronal
populations were observed in the arcuate nucleus and oblique perimammillary band.
Expression in the medial amygdala appears to be continuous with the
Otp-expressing paraventricular nucleus complex. This area is relatively
unevaginated in the amphibian brains, barely evaginated in the chick, and fully
evaginated in the mouse. These data led us to conclude that the expression
pattern of Otp is topologically highly conserved in tetrapods and is
plesiomorphic among chordates.

PMID: 18331876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Development. 2008 Apr;135(7):1377-88. doi: 10.1242/dev.011759.

Regulation of Dlx5 and Dlx6 gene expression by p63 is involved in EEC and SHFM
congenital limb defects.

Lo Iacono N(1), Mantero S, Chiarelli A, Garcia E, Mills AA, Morasso MI, Costanzo 
A, Levi G, Guerrini L, Merlo GR.

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute, Molecular Biotechnology Center, University of
Torino, Via Nizza 52, Torino, 10126, Italy.

The congenital malformation Split Hand-Foot Malformation (SHFM, or ectrodactyly) 
is characterized by a medial cleft of hands and feet, and missing central
fingers. Five genetically distinct forms are known in humans; the most common
(type-I) is linked to deletions of DSS1 and the distalless-related homeogenes
DLX5 and DLX6. As Dlx5;Dlx6 double-knockout mice show a SHFM-like phenotype, the 
human orthologs are believed to be the disease genes. SHFM-IV and
Ectrodactyly-Ectodermal dysplasia-Cleft lip (EEC) are caused by mutations in p63,
an ectoderm-specific p53-related transcription factor. The similarity in the limb
phenotype of different forms of SHFM may underlie the existence of a regulatory
cascade involving the disease genes. Here, we show that p63 and Dlx proteins
colocalize in the nuclei of the apical ectodermal ridge (AER). In homozygous p63-
(null) and p63EEC (R279H) mutant limbs, the AER fails to stratify and the
expression of four Dlx genes is strongly reduced; interestingly, the p63+/EEC and
p63+/- hindlimbs, which develop normally and have a normally stratified AER, show
reduced Dlx gene expression. The p63+/EEC mutation combined with an incomplete
loss of Dlx5 and Dlx6 alleles leads to severe limb phenotypes, which are not
observed in mice with either mutation alone. In vitro, DeltaNp63alpha induces
transcription from the Dlx5 and Dlx6 promoters, an activity abolished by EEC and 
SHFM-IV mutations, but not by Ankyloblepharon-Ectodermal defects-Cleft lip/palate
(AEC) mutations. ChIP analysis shows that p63 is directly associated with the
Dlx5 and Dlx6 promoters. Thus, our data strongly implicate p63 and the Dlx5-Dlx6 
locus in a pathway relevant in the aetio-pathogenesis of SHFM.

PMID: 18326838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Bone. 2008 May;42(5):886-93. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2008.01.009. Epub 2008 Feb 7.

Ubc9 promotes the stability of Smad4 and the nuclear accumulation of Smad1 in
osteoblast-like Saos-2 cells.

Shimada K(1), Suzuki N, Ono Y, Tanaka K, Maeno M, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13
Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8310, Japan. shimada-ki@dent.nihon-u.ac.jp

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) play important roles in osteoblast
differentiation and maturation. In mammals, the BMP-induced receptor-regulated
Smads form complexes with Smad4. These complexes translocate and accumulate
within the nucleus, where they regulate the transcription of various target
genes. However, the function of Smad4 remains unclear. We performed a yeast
two-hybrid screen using Smad4 as bait and a cDNA library derived from human bone 
marrow to identify the proteins interacting with Smad4. Two full-length cDNA
clones for Ubc9 were identified, and the potential functions of Ubc9 were
investigated. To determine the role of Ubc9 in the BMP signaling pathway, the
endogenous transcription of Ubc9 in the human osteoblast cell line Saos-2 was
silenced using siRNA. The expression of BMP-induced transcription factors,
including Runx2, Dlx5, Msx2, and Osterix, was examined using real-time reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), and the protein expression of 
Smad4, Smad1, phosphorylated Smad1, and BMP type I receptors was determined by
Western blotting. The subcellular localization of Smad1 and Smad4 was observed
using immunofluorescence staining after Ubc9 silencing. To determine whether
Smad4 is sumoylated in vitro, recombinant Smad4 was purified and sumoylated Smad4
was visualized using Western blotting. The mRNA expression of various
transcription factors was markedly inhibited after Ubc9 silencing. The protein
levels of Smad4 and phosphorylated Smad1 decreased in a dose-dependent manner
according to the amount of siRNA applied. Gene silencing also decreased the
nuclear accumulation of Smad1 and Smad4. The sumoylation assay showed that
sumoylated Smad4 is present and dependent on Ubc9 in vitro, which was confirmed
by pretreatment with Senp2, a SUMO-protease. These results suggest that Ubc9
promotes the stability of sumoylated Smad4. Furthermore, the expression of key
transcription factors, phosphorylated Smad1 protein, and the nuclear accumulation
of Smad1 and Smad4 are inhibited by Ubc9 silencing. Thus, Ubc9 plays an important
role in the up-regulation of the BMP signaling pathway.

PMID: 18321803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Cancer Res. 2008 Mar 1;68(5):1296-302. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-3218.

A novel recurrent chromosomal inversion implicates the homeobox gene Dlx5 in
T-cell lymphomas from Lck-Akt2 transgenic mice.

Tan Y(1), Timakhov RA, Rao M, Altomare DA, Xu J, Liu Z, Gao Q, Jhanwar SC, Di
Cristofano A, Wiest DL, Knepper JE, Testa JR.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

The oncogene v-akt was isolated from a retrovirus that induced murine thymic
lymphomas. Transgenic mice expressing a constitutively activated form of the
cellular homologue Akt2 specifically in immature T cells develop spontaneous
thymic lymphomas. We hypothesized that tumors from these mice might exhibit
oncogenic chromosomal rearrangements that cooperate with activated Akt2 in
lymphomagenesis. Cytogenetic analysis revealed a recurrent clonal inversion of
chromosome 6, inv(6), in thymic lymphomas from multiple transgenic founder lines,
including one line in which 15 of 15 primary tumors exhibited this same
rearrangement. Combined fluorescence in situ hybridization, PCR, and DNA sequence
analyses showed that the distal inv(6) breakpoint resides at the T-cell receptor 
beta chain locus, Tcrb. The proximal breakpoint maps to a region near a locus
comprising the linked homeobox/transcription factor genes Dlx5 and Dlx6.
Expression analysis of genes translocated to the vicinity of the Tcrb enhancer
revealed that Dlx5 and Dlx6 are overexpressed in tumors exhibiting the inv(6).
Experimental overexpression of Dlx5 in mammalian cells resulted in enhanced cell 
proliferation and increased colony formation, and clonogenic assays revealed
cooperativity when both Dlx5 and activated Akt2 were coexpressed. In addition,
DLX5, but not DLX6, was found to be abundantly expressed in three of seven human 
T-cell lymphomas tested. These findings suggest that the Dlx5 can act as an
oncogene by cooperating with Akt2 to promote lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 18316591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Apr 15;314(7):1495-506. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.12.023. Epub
2008 Jan 12.

Transient down-regulation of cbfa1/Runx2 by RNA interference in murine C3H10T1/2 
mesenchymal stromal cells delays in vitro and in vivo osteogenesis, but does not 
overtly affect chondrogenesis.

Gordeladze JO(1), Noël D, Bony C, Apparailly F, Louis-Plence P, Jorgensen C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basal Medical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Oslo, Norway. j.o.gordeladze@medisin.uio.no

In order to ensure that MSCs designed for in vivo cartilage repair do not
untowardly differentiate into osteoblasts and mineralize in situ, we tested
whether siRNA-induced suppression of cbfa1/Runx2 affected the osteogenic and
chondrogenic differentiation potential of the murine cell line C3H10T1/2.
Anti-cbfa1/Runx2 siRNA decreased the levels of cbfa1/Runx2 mRNA and protein by
65-80%, and also markedly reduced the expression of osteoblast-related genes such
as Dlx5, osterix, collagen type I, alkaline phosphatase (AP), osteocalcin,
SPARC/osteonectin and osteopontin, leading to a temporal expression of AP enzyme 
activity and mineralization potential delayed by at least some 7-9 days.
Furthermore, siRNA-transfected cells, grown under chondrogenic conditions did not
display biologically significant changes in the expression of aggrecan, collagen 
type II or type X, or histology when grown in micropellets or monolayer cultures.
Finally, when cells were propagated in osteogenic medium and injected into the
tibial muscles of SCID mice, no overtly mineralized bone tissue emerged. These
experiments indicate that a major transient reduction of cbfa1/Runx2 expression
in MSCs is sufficient to delay osteoblastic differentiation, both in vitro and in
vivo, while chondrogenesis seemed to be sustained.

PMID: 18313048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Dev Biol. 2008 Apr 15;316(2):458-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.01.001. Epub 2008 
Jan 16.

Expression and function of Dlx genes in the osteoblast lineage.

Li H(1), Marijanovic I, Kronenberg MS, Erceg I, Stover ML, Velonis D, Mina M,
Heinrich JG, Harris SE, Upholt WB, Kalajzic I, Lichtler AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, 263 Farmington Avenue, CT 06030, USA.

Our laboratory and others have shown that overexpression of Dlx5 stimulates
osteoblast differentiation. Dlx5(-/-)/Dlx6(-/-) mice have more severe
craniofacial and limb defects than Dlx5(-/-), some of which are potentially due
to defects in osteoblast maturation. We wished to investigate the degree to which
other Dlx genes compensate for the lack of Dlx5, thus allowing normal development
of the majority of skeletal elements in Dlx5(-/-) mice. Dlx gene expression in
cells from different stages of the osteoblast lineage isolated by FACS sorting
showed that Dlx2, Dlx5 and Dlx6 are expressed most strongly in less mature
osteoblasts, whereas Dlx3 is very highly expressed in differentiated osteoblasts 
and osteocytes. In situ hybridization and Northern blot analysis demonstrated the
presence of endogenous Dlx3 mRNA within osteoblasts and osteocytes. Dlx3 strongly
upregulates osteoblastic markers with a potency comparable to Dlx5. Cloned chick 
or mouse Dlx6 showed stimulatory effects on osteoblast differentiation. Our
results suggest that Dlx2 and Dlx6 have the potential to stimulate osteoblastic
differentiation and may compensate for the absence of Dlx5 to produce relatively 
normal osteoblastic differentiation in Dlx5 knockout mice, while Dlx3 may play a 
distinct role in late stage osteoblast differentiation and osteocyte function.

PMCID: PMC2679944
PMID: 18280462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Endocrinology. 2008 May;149(5):2090-7. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-1265. Epub 2008 Feb
14.

Positive regulation of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene expression
through the interaction between Dlx and GATA-4 for testicular steroidogenesis.

Nishida H(1), Miyagawa S, Vieux-Rochas M, Morini M, Ogino Y, Suzuki K, Nakagata
N, Choi HS, Levi G, Yamada G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Resources and Development, Graduate School of Medical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences and the Global COE Research Program, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

Split hand/foot malformation (SHFM) is syndromic ectrodactyly often associated
with mental retardation and/or craniofacial defects. Several clinical reports
previously described urogenital dysplasia such as micropenis, hypospadias, and
small testis in SHFM patients. Genetic lesions in the Dlx5 and Dlx6 (Dlx5/6)
locus are associated with the human genetic disorder SHFM type 1. Although Dlx5/6
are expressed in the testis, their possible function of Dlx5/6 during testis
differentiation has not been described. In this study, we show that Dlx5/6 are
expressed in the fetal Leydig cells during testis development. We examined the
effect of Dlx5 expression on the promoter activation of the steroidogenic acute
regulatory protein (StAR) gene, which is essential for gonadal and adrenal
steroidogenesis, in a Leydig cell line. Dlx5 efficiently activates the StAR
promoter when GATA-4, another transcription factor essential for testicular
steroidogenesis, was coexpressed. The transcriptional activation required the
GATA-4-recognition element in the StAR promoter region and Dlx5 can physically
interact with GATA-4. Furthermore, we herein show that the double inactivation of
Dlx5 and Dlx6 in the mouse leads to decreased testosterone level and abnormal
masculinization phenotype. These results suggest that Dlx5 and Dlx6 participate
in the control of steroidogenesis during testis development. The findings of this
study may open the way to analyze human congenital birth defects.

PMID: 18276760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Cereb Cortex. 2008 Oct;18(10):2306-17. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhm258. Epub 2008 Feb 
3.

Gene expression in cortical interneuron precursors is prescient of their mature
function.

Batista-Brito R(1), Machold R, Klein C, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Smilow Neuroscience Program and the Department of Cell Biology, Smilow
Research Building, New York University Medical Center, 522 First Avenue, New
York, NY 10016, USA.

At present little is known about the developmental mechanisms that give rise to
inhibitory gamma-aminobutyric acidergic interneurons of the neocortex or the
timing of their subtype specification. As such, we performed a gene expression
microarray analysis on cortical interneuron precursors isolated through their
expression of a Dlx5/6(Cre-IRES-EGFP) transgene. We purified these precursors
from the embryonic mouse neocortex at E13.5 and E15.5 by sorting of enhanced
green fluorescent protein-expressing cells. We identified novel transcription
factors, neuropeptides, and cell surface genes whose expression is highly
enriched in embryonic cortical interneuron precursors. Our identification of many
of the genes known to be selectively enriched within cortical interneurons
validated the efficacy of our approach. Surprisingly, we find that subpopulations
of migrating cortical interneurons express genes encoding for proteins
characteristic of mature interneuron subtypes as early as E13.5. These results
provide support for the idea that many of the genes characteristic of specific
cortical interneuron subtypes are evident prior to their functional integration
into cortical microcircuitry. They suggest interneurons are already relegated to 
specific genetic subtypes shortly after they become postmitotic. Moreover, our
work has revealed that many of the genes expressed in cortical interneuron
precursors have been independently linked to neurological disorders in both mice 
and humans.

PMCID: PMC2536702
PMID: 18250082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Gene. 2008 Feb 29;410(1):97-104. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2007.11.017. Epub 2007 Dec
7.

AP1 binding site is another target of FGF2 regulation of bone sialoprotein gene
transcription.

Takai H(1), Araki S, Mezawa M, Kim DS, Li X, Yang L, Li Z, Wang Z, Nakayama Y,
Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba, Japan.

Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is an early marker of osteoblast differentiation. We
previously reported that fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) regulates BSP gene
transcription via FGF2 response element (FRE) in the proximal promoter of rat BSP
gene. We here report that activator protein 1 (AP1) binding site overlapping with
glucocorticoid response element (GRE) AP1/GRE in the rat BSP gene promoter is
another target of FGF2. Using the osteoblastic cell line ROS17/2.8, we determined
that BSP mRNA levels increased by 10 ng/ml FGF2 at 6 and 12 h. Runx2 protein
levels increased by FGF2 (10 ng/ml) at 3 h. Treatment of ROS17/2.8 cells with
FGF2 (10 ng/ml, 12 h) increased luciferase activities of constructs including
-116 to +60 and -938 to +60 of the rat BSP gene promoter. Effects of FGF2
abrogated in constructs included 2 bp mutations in the FRE and AP1/GRE elements. 
Luciferase activities induced by FGF2 were blocked by tyrosine kinase inhibitor
herbimycin A, src-tyrosine kinase inhibitor PP1 and MAP kinase kinase inhibitor
U0126. Gel shift analyses showed that FGF2 increased binding of FRE and AP1/GRE
elements. Notably, the AP1/GRE-protein complexes were supershifted by Smad1 and
c-Fos antibodies, c-Jun and Dlx5 antibodies disrupted the complexes formation, on
the other hand AP1/GRE-protein complexes did not change by Runx2 antibody. These 
studies demonstrate that FGF2 stimulates BSP gene transcription by targeting the 
FRE and AP1/GRE elements in the rat BSP gene promoter.

PMID: 18226471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Development. 2008 Feb;135(4):755-65. doi: 10.1242/dev.012708. Epub 2008 Jan 16.

Recombinase-mediated cassette exchange reveals the selective use of
Gq/G11-dependent and -independent endothelin 1/endothelin type A receptor
signaling in pharyngeal arch development.

Sato T(1), Kawamura Y, Asai R, Amano T, Uchijima Y, Dettlaff-Swiercz DA,
Offermanns S, Kurihara Y, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The endothelin (Edn) system comprises three ligands (Edn1, Edn2 and Edn3) and
their G-protein-coupled type A (Ednra) and type B (Ednrb) receptors. During
embryogenesis, the Edn1/Ednra signaling is thought to regulate the dorsoventral
axis patterning of pharyngeal arches via Dlx5/Dlx6 upregulation. To further
clarify the underlying mechanism, we have established mice in which gene
cassettes can be efficiently knocked-in into the Ednra locus using
recombinase-mediated cassette exchange (RMCE) based on the Cre-lox system. The
first homologous recombination introducing mutant lox-flanked Neo resulted in
homeotic transformation of the lower jaw to an upper jaw, as expected. Subsequent
RMCE-mediated knock-in of lacZ targeted its expression to the cranial/cardiac
neural crest derivatives as well as in mesoderm-derived head mesenchyme. Knock-in
of Ednra cDNA resulted in a complete rescue of craniofacial defects of Ednra-null
mutants. By contrast, Ednrb cDNA could not rescue them except for the most distal
pharyngeal structures. At early stages, the expression of Dlx5, Dlx6 and their
downstream genes was downregulated and apoptotic cells distributed distally in
the mandible of Ednrb-knock-in embryos. These results, together with similarity
in craniofacial defects between Ednrb-knock-in mice and neural-crest-specific
Galpha(q)/Galpha(11)-deficient mice, indicate that the dorsoventral axis
patterning of pharyngeal arches is regulated by the Ednra-selective,
G(q)/G(11)-dependent signaling, while the formation of the distal pharyngeal
region is under the control of a G(q)/G(11)-independent signaling, which can be
substituted by Ednrb. This RMCE-mediated knock-in system can serve as a useful
tool for studies on gene functions in craniofacial development.

PMID: 18199583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Dent Res. 2008 Jan;87(1):45-50.

Phenotypic analysis of Dlx5 overexpression in post-natal bone.

Zhang J(1), Zhu J, Valverde P, Li L, Pageau S, Tu Q, Nishimura R, Yoneda T, Yang 
P, Zheng W, Ma W, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Biology, Department of General Dentistry, Tufts University
School of Dental Medicine, One Kneeland Street, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Dlx5 plays an important role in the embryonic development of mineralized tissues.
We hypothesized that Dlx5 also functions in regulating post-natal bone formation 
in mice. To prove this hypothesis, we infected 5-day-old bone sialoprotein
(BSP)/avian retroviral receptor gene (TVA) transgenic mice with
replication-competent retroviral vectors expressing wild-type Dlx5 (RCAS-Dlx5WT) 
and mutated Dlx5 at arginine (R) 31 of its homeodomain (RCAS-Dlx5RH).
Immunohistochemistry indicated that RCAS-Dlx5WT increased BSP and osteopontin
(OPN) expression, whereas it decreased that of osteocalcin (OC). RCAS-Dlx5RH
mediated opposite effects. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR confirmed these results. Ex
vivo overexpression of RCAS-Dlx5WT in BSP/TVA calvarial cells promoted, whereas
that of RCAS-Dlx5RH inhibited, mineralized nodule formation as compared with that
in control cells. Our results suggest that Dlx5 promotes expression of early
markers of osteogenic differentiation and increases mineralization post-natally.

PMCID: PMC2833013
PMID: 18096892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 15;283(7):3816-26. Epub 2007 Dec 3.

BMP-2 induces Osterix expression through up-regulation of Dlx5 and its
phosphorylation by p38.

Ulsamer A(1), Ortuño MJ, Ruiz S, Susperregui AR, Osses N, Rosa JL, Ventura F.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques II, Universitat de Barcelona, IDIBELL,
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, E-08907, Spain.

Osterix, a zinc-finger transcription factor, is specifically expressed in
osteoblasts and osteocytes of all developing bones. Because no bone formation
occurs in Osterix null mice, Osterix is thought to be an essential regulator of
osteoblast differentiation. We report that bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2)
induces an increase in Osterix expression, which is mediated through a
homeodomain sequence located in the proximal region of the Osterix promoter. Our 
results demonstrate that induction of Dlx5 by BMP-2 mediates Osterix
transcriptional activation. First, BMP-2 induction of Dlx5 precedes the induction
of Osterix. Second, Dlx5 binds to the BMP-responsive homeodomain sequences both
in vitro and in vivo. Third, Dlx5 overexpression and knock-down assays
demonstrate its role in activating Osterix expression in response to BMP-2.
Furthermore, we show that Dlx5 is a novel substrate for p38 MAPK in vitro and in 
vivo and that Ser-34 and Ser-217 are the sites phosphorylated by p38.
Phosphorylation at Ser-34/217 increases the transactivation potential of Dlx5.
Thus, we propose that BMP activates expression of Osterix through the induction
of Dlx5 and its further transcriptional activation by p38-mediated
phosphorylation.

PMID: 18056716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Arch Oral Biol. 2008 Mar;53(3):214-9. Epub 2007 Dec 4.

Compressive force stimulates the expression of osteogenesis-related transcription
factors in ROS 17/2.8 cells.

Yanagisawa M(1), Suzuki N, Mitsui N, Koyama Y, Otsuka K, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Nihon University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13
Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To determine how compressive force affects the expression of
osteogenesis-related transcription factors in osteoblasts.
DESIGN: Cells of ROS 17/2.8, a typical osteoblastic cell line, were cultured with
or without continuous compressive force (0.5-2.0 g/cm(2)). Expression of mRNA
encoding the osteogenesis-related transcription factors Runx2, Osterix, Msx2,
Dlx5 and AJ18 was measured using real-time polymerase chain reaction. Protein
expression of these transcription factors was determined by Western blotting.
RESULTS: A compressive force of 1.0 g/cm(2) significantly increased mRNA and
protein expression of Runx2, Osterix, Msx2 and Dlx5, which are critical for
osteoblast differentiation. In contrast, mRNA and protein expression of AJ18,
which downregulates osteoblast differentiation, were decreased with 1.0 g/cm(2)
of compressive force.
CONCLUSIONS: A compressive force of 1.0 g/cm(2), which was considered optimal for
bone formation under the present experimental conditions, stimulates osteoblastic
differentiation via the modulation of osteogenesis-related transcription factors.

PMID: 18054892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Comp Neurol. 2008 Jan 1;506(1):46-74.

Histogenetic compartments of the mouse centromedial and extended amygdala based
on gene expression patterns during development.

García-López M(1), Abellán A, Legaz I, Rubenstein JL, Puelles L, Medina L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Murcia, 30100 
Murcia, Spain.

The amygdala controls emotional and social behavior and regulates instinctive
reflexes such as defense and reproduction by way of descending projections to the
hypothalamus and brainstem. The descending amygdalar projections are suggested to
show a cortico-striato-pallidal organization similar to that of the basal ganglia
(Swanson [2000] Brain Res 886:113-164). To test this model we investigated the
embryological origin and molecular properties of the mouse centromedial and
extended amygdalar subdivisions, which constitute major sources of descending
projections. We analyzed the distribution of key regulatory genes that show
restricted expression patterns within the subpallium (Dlx5, Nkx2.1, Lhx6, Lhx7/8,
Lhx9, Shh, and Gbx1), as well as genes considered markers for specific subpallial
neuronal subpopulations. Our results indicate that most of the centromedial and
extended amygdala is formed by cells derived from multiple subpallial
subdivisions. Contrary to a previous suggestion, only the central--but not the
medial--amygdala derives from the lateral ganglionic eminence and has
striatal-like features. The medial amygdala and a large part of the extended
amygdala (including the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis) consist of
subdivisions or cell groups that derive from subpallial, pallial (ventral
pallium), or extratelencephalic progenitor domains. The subpallial part includes 
derivatives from the medial ganglionic eminence, the anterior peduncular area,
and possibly a novel subdivision, called here commissural preoptic area, located 
at the base of the septum and related to the anterior commissure. Our study
provides a molecular and morphological foundation for understanding the complex
embryonic origins and adult organization of the centromedial and extended
amygdala.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17990271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Dev Dyn. 2007 Dec;236(12):3532-44.

GAD isoforms exhibit distinct spatiotemporal expression patterns in the
developing mouse lens: correlation with Dlx2 and Dlx5.

Kwakowsky A(1), Schwirtlich M, Zhang Q, Eisenstat DD, Erdélyi F, Baranyi M,
Katarova ZD, Szabó G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Technology and Developmental Neurobiology, Institute of
Experimental Medicine, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the major inhibitory neurotransmitter of the
adult nervous system and its biosynthetic enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase
(GAD) are abundantly expressed in the embryonic nervous system and are involved
in the modulation of cell proliferation, migration, and differentiation. Here we 
describe for the first time the expression of GABA and embryonic and adult GAD
isoforms in the developing mouse lens. We show that the GAD isoforms are
sequentially induced with specific spatiotemporal profiles: GAD65 and embryonic
GAD isoforms prevail in primary fibers, while GAD67 is the predominant GAD
expressed in the postnatal secondary fibers. This pattern correlates well with
the expression of Dlx2 and Dlx5, known as upstream regulators of GAD. GABA and
GAD are most abundant at the tips of elongating fibers and are absent from
organelle-free cells, suggesting their involvement is primarily in shaping of the
cytoskeleton during fiber elongation stages.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 17969168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Epigenetics. 2007 Jan-Mar;2(1):5-10. Epub 2006 Dec 12.

The Odyssey of MeCP2 and parental imprinting.

LaSalle JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology and Immunology, One Shields Avenue, Davis, California
95616, USA. jmlasalle@ucdavis.edu

DNA methylation in mammals has long been implicated in the epigenetic mechanism
of parental imprinting, in which selective expression of one allele of specific
genes is based on parental origin. Methyl CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2)
selectively binds to methylated DNA and mutations in the MECP2 cause the
autism-spectrum neurodevelopmental disorder Rett syndrome. This review outlines
the emerging story of how MeCP2 has been implicated in the regulation of specific
imprinted genes and loci, including UBE3A and DLX5. The story of MeCP2 and
parental imprinting has unfolded with some interesting but unexpected twists,
revealing new insights on the function of MeCP2 in the process.

PMID: 17965611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Brain. 2007 Oct;130(Pt 10):2736-45.

Genomic deletion size at the epsilon-sarcoglycan locus determines the clinical
phenotype.

Asmus F(1), Hjermind LE, Dupont E, Wagenstaller J, Haberlandt E, Munz M, Strom
TM, Gasser T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurodegeneration, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research,
Center of Neurology, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
friedrich.asmus@uni-tuebingen.de

Myoclonus-dystonia (M-D, DYT11) is a dystonia plus syndrome characterized by
brief myoclonic jerks predominantly of neck and upper limbs in combination with
focal or segmental dystonia. It is caused by heterozygous mutations of the
epsilon-sarcoglycan (SGCE) gene on chromosome 7q21.3. We present three patients
with heterozygous large deletions in the 7q21.13-21.3 region. By quantitative
analysis of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) oligonucleotide arrays, the
deletion size was determined to range from 1.63 to 8.78 Mb. All deletions
contained the maternally imprinted SGCE gene and up to 43 additional neighbouring
genes. Two of the patients presented with typical M-D, whereas one paediatric
patient with split-hand/split-foot malformation and sensorineural hearing loss
(SHFM1D, OMIM 220600) had not developed M-D at the age of 9 years. This patient
had the largest deletion of 8.78 Mb (7q21.13-21.3) containing also SHFM1, DLX6
and DLX5, which had been previously shown to be deleted in SHFM1D. In two
patients, the deletions removed the paternal allele of the KRIT1 gene, which is a
major cause of cavernous cerebral malformations type 1 (CCM1). Only the adult
patient showed asymptomatic cavernous cerebral malformations on cranial MRI,
underlining age-dependent penetrance and haploinsufficiency as pivotal features
of patients with KRIT1 mutations. All three deletions contained the COL1A2 gene. 
In contrast to dominant negative point mutations, which cause osteogenesis
imperfecta with bone fractures, haploinsufficiency of COL1A2 resulted only in
subtle symptoms like recurrent joint subluxation or hypodontia. Assessing copy
number variations by SNP arrays is an easy and reliable technique to delineate
the size of human interstitial deletions. It will therefore become a standard
technique to study patients, in whom heterozygous whole gene deletions are
detected and information on neighbouring deleted genes is required for
comprehensive genetic counselling and clinical management.

PMID: 17898012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Eur J Hum Genet. 2008 Jan;16(1):36-44. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Abnormal urethra formation in mouse models of split-hand/split-foot malformation 
type 1 and type 4.

Suzuki K(1), Haraguchi R, Ogata T, Barbieri O, Alegria O, Vieux-Rochas M,
Nakagata N, Ito M, Mills AA, Kurita T, Levi G, Yamada G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Resources and Development, Graduate School of Medical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

Urogenital birth defects are one of the common phenotypes observed in hereditary 
human disorders. In particular, limb malformations are often associated with
urogenital developmental abnormalities, as the case for Hand-foot-genital
syndrome displaying similar hypoplasia/agenesis of limbs and external genitalia. 
Split-hand/split-foot malformation (SHFM) is a syndromic limb disorder affecting 
the central rays of the autopod with median clefts of the hands and feet, missing
central fingers and often fusion of the remaining ones. SHFM type 1 (SHFM1) is
linked to genomic deletions or rearrangements, which includes the
distal-less-related homeogenes DLX5 and DLX6 as well as DSS1. SHFM type 4 (SHFM4)
is associated with mutations in p63, which encodes a p53-related transcription
factor. To understand that SHFM is associated with urogenital birth defects, we
performed gene expression analysis and gene knockout mouse model analyses. We
show here that Dlx5, Dlx6, p63 and Bmp7, one of the p63 downstream candidate
genes, are all expressed in the developing urethral plate (UP) and that targeted 
inactivation of these genes in the mouse results in UP defects leading to
abnormal urethra formation. These results suggested that different set of
transcription factors and growth factor genes play similar developmental
functions during embryonic urethra formation. Human SHFM syndromes display
multiple phenotypes with variations in addition to split hand foot limb
phenotype. These results suggest that different genes associated with human SHFM 
could also be involved in the aetiogenesis of hypospadias pointing toward a
common molecular origin of these congenital malformations.

PMID: 17878916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Neurosci. 2007 Sep 5;27(36):9757-68.

Activation of the Wnt-beta catenin pathway in a cell population on the surface of
the forebrain is essential for the establishment of olfactory axon connections.

Zaghetto AA(1), Paina S, Mantero S, Platonova N, Peretto P, Bovetti S, Puche A,
Piccolo S, Merlo GR.

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute-Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Institute for
Biomedical Technologies Milano, 20090 Segrate, Italy.

A variety of signals governing early extension, guidance, and connectivity of
olfactory receptor neuron (ORN) axons has been identified; however, little is
known about axon-mesoderm and forebrain (FB)-mesoderm signals. Using Wnt-beta
catenin reporter mice, we identify a novel Wnt-responsive resident cell
population, located in a Frizzled7 expression domain at the surface of the
embryonic FB, along the trajectory of incoming ORN axons. Organotypic slice
cultures that recapitulate olfactory-associated Wnt-beta catenin activation show 
that the beta catenin response depends on a placode-derived signal(s). Likewise, 
in Dlx5-/- embryos, in which the primary connections fail to form, Wnt-beta
catenin response on the surface of the FB is strongly reduced. The olfactory
placode expresses a number of beta catenin-activating Wnt genes, and the
Frizzled7 receptor transduces the "canonical" Wnt signal; using Wnt expression
plasmids we show that Wnt5a and Wnt7b are sufficient to rescue beta catenin
activation in the absence of incoming axons. Finally, blocking the canonical Wnt 
pathway with the exogenous application of the antagonists Dikkopf-1 or
secreted-Frizzled-receptor protein-2 prevents ORN axon contact to the FB. These
data reveal a novel function for Wnt signaling in the establishment of
periphery-CNS olfactory connections and highlight a complex interplay between
cells of different embryonic origin for ORN axon connectivity.

PMCID: PMC1986640
PMID: 17804636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Sep;81(3):492-506. Epub 2007 Aug 2.

DLX5 and DLX6 expression is biallelic and not modulated by MeCP2 deficiency.

Schüle B(1), Li HH, Fisch-Kohl C, Purmann C, Francke U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA.

Mutations in MECP2 and Mecp2 (encoding methyl-CpG binding protein 2 [MeCP2])
cause distinct neurological phenotypes in humans and mice, respectively, but the 
molecular pathology is unclear. Recent literature claimed that the developmental 
homeobox gene DLX5 is imprinted and that its imprinting status is modulated by
MeCP2, leading to biallelic expression in Rett syndrome and twofold
overexpression of Dlx5 and Dlx6 in Mecp2-null mice. The conclusion that DLX5 is a
direct target of MeCP2 has implications for research on the molecular bases of
Rett syndrome, autism, and genomic imprinting. Attempting to replicate the
reported data, we evaluated allele-specific expression of DLX5 and DLX6 in mouse 
x human somatic cell hybrids, lymphoblastoid cell lines, and frontal cortex from 
controls and individuals with MECP2 mutations. We identified novel
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in DLX5 and DLX6, enabling the first imprinting
studies of DLX6. We found that DLX5 and DLX6 are biallelically expressed in
somatic cell hybrids and in human cell lines and brain, with no differences
between affected and control samples. We also determined expression levels of
Dlx5 and Dlx6 in forebrain from seven male Mecp2-mutant mice and eight wild-type 
littermates by real-time quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction assays. Expression of Dlx5 and Dlx6, as well as of the imprinted gene
Peg3, in mouse forebrain was highly variable, with no consistent differences
between Mecp2-null mutants and controls. We conclude that DLX5 and DLX6 are not
imprinted in humans and are not likely to be direct targets of MeCP2 modulation. 
In contrast, the imprinting status of PEG3 and PEG10 is maintained in
MeCP2-deficient tissues. Our results confirm that MeCP2 plays no role in the
maintenance of genomic imprinting and add PEG3 and PEG10 to the list of studied
imprinted genes.

PMCID: PMC1950824
PMID: 17701895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Life Sci. 2007 Jul 12;81(5):405-12. Epub 2007 Jun 19.

Effects of compressive force on the differentiation of pluripotent mesenchymal
cells.

Yanagisawa M(1), Suzuki N, Mitsui N, Koyama Y, Otsuka K, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Nihon University School of Dentistry, Tokyo,
Japan.

The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of mechanical stress on the
differentiation of the pluripotent mesenchymal cell line C2C12. C2C12 cells were 
cultured continuously under compressive force (0.25-2.0 g/cm(2)). After
mechanical stress loading, the levels of expression of mRNAs and proteins for
phenotype-specific markers of osteoblasts (Runx2, Msx2, Dlx5, Osterix, AJ18),
chondroblasts (Sox5, Sox9), myoblasts (MyoD), and adipocytes (PPAR gamma) were
measured by real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis and Western blot
analysis, respectively. The expression of activated p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase (p38 MAPK) was measured by Western blotting and/or ELISA. Loading 0.5
g/cm(2) of compressive force significantly increased the expression levels of
Runx2, Msx2, Dlx5, Osterix, Sox5, and Sox9. In contrast, the expression levels of
AJ18, MyoD, and PPAR gamma were decreased by exposure to 0.5 g/cm(2) of
compressive force. Loading 0.5 g/cm(2) of compressive force also induced the
phosphorylation of p38 MAPK. SB203580, which is a specific inhibitor of p38 MAPK,
inhibited the compressive force-induced phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and partially
blocked compressive force-induced Runx2 mRNA expression. These results
demonstrate that compressive force stimulation directs the differentiation
pathway of C2C12 cells into the osteoblast and chondroblast lineage via activated
phosphorylation of p38 MAPK.

PMID: 17644142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Mol Histol. 2007 Dec;38(6):517-25. Epub 2007 Jul 12.

Molecular identity of olfactory bulb interneurons: transcriptional codes of
periglomerular neuron subtypes.

Allen ZJ 2nd(1), Waclaw RR, Colbert MC, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, OH 45229, USA.

Interneurons in the glomerular layer (GL) of the olfactory bulb represent a
diverse set of cells, which can be identified by distinct expression of different
neurotransmitters as well as calcium binding proteins. Using genetic based fate
mapping, we show here that at least three of these different interneurons
subtypes (i.e. dopaminergic, calbindin- and calretinin-expressing) derive from
cells that express the homeobox genes Dlx5/6. The transcription factors ER81,
Meis2, Pax6 and Sp8 have all been implicated in olfactory bulb interneuron
development and each of these can be observed in Dlx5/6-derived periglomerular
cells. Conversely, the T-box factors Tbr1 and Tbx21, which mark olfactory bulb
projection neurons, are not expressed in the Dlx5/6-derived periglomerular cells.
While the interneuron subtypes that are marked by Pax6 and Sp8 have been
described, little information exists as to the specific subtypes that express
ER81 or Meis2. We show here that ER81 is expressed in dopaminergic cells and in a
subset of calretinin-expressing cells in the GL. Meis2 is found in dopaminergic
and calbindin-expressing cells as well as in a subpopulation of the
calretinin-expressing interneurons of the glomerular layer. These findings
suggest that distinct transcriptional codes may underlie the differentiation of
specific olfactory bulb interneuron subtypes.

PMID: 17624499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Neurosci. 2007 Jun 27;27(26):6878-91.

A subpopulation of olfactory bulb GABAergic interneurons is derived from Emx1-
and Dlx5/6-expressing progenitors.

Kohwi M(1), Petryniak MA, Long JE, Ekker M, Obata K, Yanagawa Y, Rubenstein JL,
Alvarez-Buylla A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA.

The subventricular zone (SVZ) of the postnatal brain continuously generates
olfactory bulb (OB) interneurons. We show that calretinin+, calbindin+, and
dopaminergic (TH+) periglomerular OB interneurons correspond to distinct subtypes
of GABAergic cells; all were produced in the postnatal mouse brain, but they
matured and were eliminated at different rates. The embryonic lateral ganglionic 
eminence (LGE) is thought to be the site of origin of postnatal SVZ neural
progenitors. Consistently, grafts of the embryonic LGE into the adult brain SVZ
generated many OB interneurons, including TH+ and calbindin+ periglomerular
interneurons. However, calretinin+ cells were not produced from these LGE grafts.
Surprisingly, pallial and septal embryonic progenitors transplanted into the
adult brain SVZ also resulted in the generation of OB interneurons, including
calretinin+ cells. A subset of Dlx2+ OB interneurons was derived from cells
expressing Emx1, a transcription factor largely restricted to the pallium during 
development. Emx1 lineage-derived cells contributed a substantial portion of
GABAergic cells in the OB, including calretinin+ interneurons. This is in
contrast to cortex, in which Emx1 lineage-derived cells do not differentiate into
GABAergic neurons. Our results suggest that some OB interneurons are derived from
progenitors outside the LGE and that precursors expressing what has classically
been considered a pallial transcription factor generate GABAergic interneurons.

PMID: 17596436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Mol Histol. 2007 Aug;38(4):347-58. Epub 2007 Jun 23.

The role of Dlx homeogenes in early development of the olfactory pathway.

Merlo GR(1), Mantero S, Zaghetto AA, Peretto P, Paina S, Gozzo M.

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute, CNR-ITB Milano, Via F.lli Cervi 93, 20090
Segrate, Milano, Italy. gmerlo@dti.telethon.it

Erratum in
    J Mol Histol. 2007 Dec;38(6):611.

Corrected and republished in
    J Mol Histol. 2007 Dec;38(6):612-23.

Republished in
    J Mol Histol. 2007 Dec;38(6):612-23.

Development of the olfactory pathway requires interaction between cells and
signals of different origin. Olfactory receptor neurons (ORN) in the olfactory
placodes (OP) extend axons towards the forebrain (FB); with innervation taking
place at a later time following degradation of the basement membrane. Cells from 
the OP migrate along ORN axons and differentiate into various elements, including
ensheathing and Gonadotropin Releasing Hormone (GnRH)+ cells. The importance of
the olfactory connection and migration is highlighted by the severe endocrine
phenotype in Kallmann's patients who lack this migratory pathway. Little is known
about the genetic control of intrinsic ORN properties. Inactivation of the
distalless-related Dlx5 prevents connections between ORNs and FB. Using a
grafting approach we show that misguidance and lack of connectivity is due to
intrinsic defects in ORN neurites and migratory cells (MgC), and not to
environmental factors. These data point to a cell-autonomous function of Dlx5 in 
providing ORN axons with their connectivity properties. Dlx5 also marks a
population of early MgC that partly overlaps with the GnRH+ population. In the
absence of Dlx5 MgCs of the Dlx5+ lineage migrate, associated with PSA-NCAM+
axons, but fail to reach the FB as a consequence of the lack of axonal connection
and not an inability to migrate. These data suggests that Dlx5 is not required to
initiate migration and differentiation of MgCs.

PMID: 17588208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2007 Jul;16(3):723-43.

Rett syndrome.

Ben Zeev Ghidoni B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Safra Pediatric Hospital, Sheba Medical Center,
Ramat-Gan, Israel. benzeev4@netvision.net.il

Rett syndrome (RS) is an X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder and the second most
common cause of genetic mental retardation in females. Different mutations in
MECP2 are found in up to 95% of typical cases of RS. This mainly neuronal
expressed gene functions as a major transcription repressor. Extensive studies on
girls who have RS and mouse models are aimed at finding main gene targets for
MeCP2 protein and defining neuropathologic changes caused by its defects. Studies
comparing autistic features in RS with idiopathic autism and mentally retarded
patients are presented. Decreased dendritic arborization is common to RS and
autism, leading to further research on similarities in pathogenesis, including
MeCP2 protein levels in autistic brains and MeCP2 effects on genes connected to
autism, like DLX5 and genes on 15q11-13 region. This area also is involved in
Angelman syndrome, which has many similarities to RS. Despite these connections, 
MECP2 mutations in nonspecific autistic and mentally retarded populations are
rare.

PMID: 17562589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Dev Growth Differ. 2007 Aug;49(6):515-21. Epub 2007 Jun 7.

Studies on the role of Dlx5 in regulation of chondrocyte differentiation during
endochondral ossification in the developing mouse limb.

Chin HJ(1), Fisher MC, Li Y, Ferrari D, Wang CK, Lichtler AC, Dealy CN, Kosher
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, School of Medicine, Farmington, Connecticut 06030, USA.

The homeodomain transcription factor Dlx5 has been implicated in the regulation
of chondrocyte and osteoblast differentiation during endochondral ossification in
the developing limb. In a gain-of-function approach to directly investigate the
role of Dlx5 in chondrocyte maturation, we have used cartilage-specific
Col2a1-Dlx5 promoter/enhancer constructs to target overexpression of Dlx5 to the 
differentiating cartilage models of the limbs of transgenic mice. Targeted
overexpression of Dlx5 in cartilage rudiments results in the formation of
shortened skeletal elements containing excessive numbers of hypertrophic
chondrocytes and expanded domains of expression of Ihh and type X collagen,
molecular markers of hypertrophic maturation. This suggests that hypertrophic
differentiation is enhanced in response to Dlx5 misexpression. Skeletal elements 
overexpressing Dlx5 also exhibit a marked reduction in the zone of proliferation,
indicating that overexpression of Dlx5 reduces chondrocyte proliferation
concomitant with promoting hypertrophic maturation. Taken together these results 
indicate that Dlx5 is a positive regulator of chondrocyte maturation during
endochondral ossification, and suggest that it regulates the process at least in 
part by promoting the conversion of immature proliferating chondrocytes into
hypertrophying chondrocytes; a critical step in the maturation process.

PMID: 17555518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. PLoS One. 2007 Jun 6;2(6):e510.

Molecular dynamics of retinoic acid-induced craniofacial malformations:
implications for the origin of gnathostome jaws.

Vieux-Rochas M(1), Coen L, Sato T, Kurihara Y, Gitton Y, Barbieri O, Le Blay K,
Merlo G, Ekker M, Kurihara H, Janvier P, Levi G.

Author information: 
(1)Evolution des Régulations Endocriniennes, CNRS, UMR5166, Muséum National
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Intake of retinoic acid (RA) or of its precursor, vitamin A, during
early pregnancy is associated with increased incidence of craniofacial lesions.
The origin of these teratogenic effects remains enigmatic as in cranial neural
crest cells (CNCCs), which largely contribute to craniofacial structures, the
RA-transduction pathway is not active. Recent results suggest that RA could act
on the endoderm of the first pharyngeal arch (1stPA), through a RARbeta-dependent
mechanism.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show that RA provokes dramatically
different craniofacial malformations when administered at slightly different
developmental times within a narrow temporal interval corresponding to the
colonization of the 1(st) PA by CNCCs. We provide evidence showing that RA acts
on the signalling epithelium of the 1(st) PA, gradually reducing the expression
of endothelin-1 and Fgf8. These two molecular signals are instrumental in
activating Dlx genes in incoming CNCCs, thereby triggering the morphogenetic
programs, which specify different jaw elements.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The anatomical series induced by RA-treatments at
different developmental times parallels, at least in some instances, the supposed
origin of modern jaws (e.g., the fate of the incus). Our results might provide a 
conceptual framework for the rise of jaw morphotypes characteristic of
gnathostomes.

PMCID: PMC1876820
PMID: 17551590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Tissue Eng. 2007 Jul;13(7):1513-23.

Osterix induces osteogenic gene expression but not differentiation in primary
human fetal mesenchymal stem cells.

Kurata H(1), Guillot PV, Chan J, Fisk NM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Fetal Medicine Group, Institute of Reproductive and Developmental
Biology, Imperial College London, UK. h.kurata@imperial.ac.uk

The transcription factor osterix (Osx) is a key regulator of osteoblast
differentiation and induces bone formation in embryonic but not adult stem cells.
We investigated the effect of up-regulating Osx on an intermediate stem cell
type, first trimester fetal mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), which are more
expandable than adult MSCs. Human fetal (hf ) MSCs were transduced with a
lentiviral vector encoding human Osx. In undifferentiating MSCs cultures, forced 
expression of Osx stimulated osteopontin and alkaline phosphatase expression.
However, Osx did not up-regulate osteocalcin, a late marker of osteoblast
differentiation or result in extracellular calcium crystals, indicating that Osx 
does not directly mediate terminal differentiation in primary hfMSCs. To
understand the downstream effects of Osx expression in primary hfMSCs, we next
investigated the regulatory relationship between Osx, and the transcription
factors Dlx5, Runx2, and Msx2. Osx induced Dlx5 but did not affect Runx2 and
Msx2, whereas stealth ribonucleic acid interference of Osx inhibited Dlx5 without
affecting expression of Runx2 and Msx2. In conclusion, Osx regulates osteogenic
gene expression in hfMSCs but is insufficient to induce terminal osteogenic
differentiation.

PMID: 17518720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Epigenetics. 2007 Jan-Mar;2(1):5-10.

The odyssey of MeCP2 and parental imprinting.

LaSalle JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Rowe Program in Human Genetics, School of
Medicine, One Shields Ave, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
jmlasalle@ucdavis.edu

DNA methylation in mammals has long been implicated in the epigenetic mechanism
of parental imprinting, in which selective expression of one allele of specific
genes is based on parental origin. Methyl CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2)
selectively binds to methylated DNA and mutations in the MECP2 cause the
autism-spectrum neurodevelopmental disorder Rett syndrome. This review outlines
the emerging story of how MeCP2 has been implicated in the regulation of specific
imprinted genes and loci, including UBE3A and DLX5. The story of MeCP2 and
parental imprinting has unfolded with some interesting but unexpected twists,
revealing new insights on the function of MeCP2 in the process.

PMCID: PMC1866173
PMID: 17486180  [PubMed]


348. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 29;282(26):18676-85. Epub 2007 Apr 17.

A novel regulatory role for stromal-derived factor-1 signaling in bone
morphogenic protein-2 osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal C2C12 cells.

Zhu W(1), Boachie-Adjei O, Rawlins BA, Frenkel B, Boskey AL, Ivashkiv LB, Blobel 
CP.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Tissue Degeneration Program, Hospital for Special Surgery, New
York, New York 10021, USA. ZhuW@HSS.EDU

Stromal-derived factor 1 (SDF-1) is a chemokine with important functions in
development and postnatal tissue homeostasis. SDF-1 signaling via the
G-protein-coupled receptor CXCR4 regulates the recruitment of stem and precursor 
cells to support tissue-specific repair or regeneration. In this study we
examined the contribution of SDF-1 signaling to osteogenic differentiation of
mesenchymal C2C12 cells induced by bone morphogenic protein 2 (BMP2). Blocking
SDF-1 signaling before BMP2 stimulation by treatment with siRNA, antibodies
against SDF-1 or CXCR4, or the G-protein-coupled receptor inhibitor pertussis
toxin strongly suppressed BMP2 induction of osteogenic differentiation in C2C12
cells, as evidenced by an early decrease in the expression of the myogenesis
inhibitor Id1, the osteogenic master regulators Runx2 and Osx, the
osteoblast-associated transcription factors JunB, Plzf, Msx2, and Dlx5, and later
of the bone marker proteins osteocalcin and alkaline phosphatase. Similarly,
blocking SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling strongly inhibited BMP2-induced osteogenic
differentiation of ST2 bone marrow stromal cells. Moreover, we found that the
interaction between SDF-1 and BMP2 signaling was mediated via intracellular Smads
and MAPK activation. Our data provide the first evidence for a co-requirement of 
the SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling axis in BMP2-induced osteogenic differentiation of
C2C12 and ST2 cells and, thus, uncover a new potential target for modulation of
osteogenesis.

PMID: 17439946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Dev Cell. 2007 Apr;12(4):645-52.

The transcription factor MEF2C is required for craniofacial development.

Verzi MP(1), Agarwal P, Brown C, McCulley DJ, Schwarz JJ, Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Mail Code 2240, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

MEF2 transcription factors are well-established regulators of muscle development.
We have discovered an unanticipated role for MEF2C in the neural crest, where
tissue-specific inactivation results in neonatal lethality due to severe
craniofacial defects. We show that MEF2C is required for expression of the Dlx5, 
Dlx6, and Hand2 transcription factor genes in the branchial arches, and we
identify a branchial arch-specific enhancer in the Dlx5/6 locus, which is
activated synergistically by MEF2C and Dlx5, demonstrating that these factors
interact to induce transcription. Mef2c and Dlx5/6 also interact genetically.
Mice heterozygous for either Dlx5/6 or Mef2c are normal at birth and survive to
weaning. By contrast, heterozygosity for both Mef2c and Dlx5/6 results in
defective palate development and neonatal lethality. Taken together, the studies 
presented here define a feed-forward transcriptional circuit between the MADS-box
transcription factor MEF2C and the homeodomain transcription factors Dlx5 and
Dlx6 in craniofacial development.

PMCID: PMC1920108
PMID: 17420000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Neurosci. 2007 Apr 4;27(14):3884-93.

Rac1 controls the formation of midline commissures and the competency of
tangential migration in ventral telencephalic neurons.

Chen L(1), Liao G, Waclaw RR, Burns KA, Linquist D, Campbell K, Zheng Y, Kuan CY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Previous studies using dominant-mutant constructs have implicated Rac1 GTPase in 
neuritogenesis and neuronal migration. However, overexpression of dominant
mutants generally blocks Rho-GTPase activity; thus, it may not reveal the
specific or physiological functions of Rac1. To address this issue, we have
applied a conditional gene-targeting strategy, using Foxg1-Cre mice to delete
Rac1 in the ventricular zone (VZ) of telencephalon and Dlx5/6-Cre-IRES (internal 
ribosomal entry site)-EGFP (enhanced green fluorescent protein) (Dlx5/6-CIE) in
the subventricular zone (SVZ) of ventral telencephalon, respectively.
Surprisingly, the deletion of Rac1 in VZ progenitors did not prevent axonal
outgrowth of telencephalic neurons. However, the anterior commissure was absent, 
and the corpus callosal as well as hippocampal commissural axons failed to cross 
the midline in Rac1/Foxg1-Cre knock-out embryos. The thalamocortical and
corticothalamic axons also showed defasciculation or projection defects. These
results suggest that Rac1 controls axon guidance rather than neuritogenesis. In
addition, although Rac1/Foxg1-Cre knock-out embryos showed delayed radial
migration of cortical projection neurons and severe impairment of tangential
migration by the ventral telencephalon-derived interneurons, deletion of Rac1 in 
the SVZ by Dlx5/6-CIE mice produced no discernible defects in tangential
migration. These contrasting effects of Rac1 deletion on tangential migration
suggest that Rac1 is dispensable for cellular motility per se during neuronal
migration. Together, these results underscore the challenge of deciphering the
biological functions of Rac1, and Rho-GTPases in general, during mammalian brain 
development. Moreover, they indicate that Rac1 has a critical role in axon
guidance and in acquisition of migratory competency during differentiation of the
progenitors for the ventral telencephalon-derived interneurons.

PMID: 17409253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Development. 2007 May;134(9):1755-65. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

The proneural determinant MASH1 regulates forebrain Dlx1/2 expression through the
I12b intergenic enhancer.

Poitras L(1), Ghanem N, Hatch G, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics (CAREG Department of
Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Establishment of neuronal networks is an extremely complex process involving the 
interaction of a diversity of neuronal cells. During mammalian development, these
highly organized networks are formed through the differentiation of multipotent
neuronal progenitors into multiple neuronal cell lineages. In the developing
forebrain of mammals, the combined function of the Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5 and Dlx6
homeobox genes is necessary for the differentiation of the GABAergic interneurons
born in the ventricular and subventricular zones of the ventral telencephalon, as
well as for the migration of these neurons to the hippocampus, cerebral cortex
and olfactory bulbs. The 437 bp I12b enhancer sequence in the intergenic region
of the Dlx1/2 bigene cluster is involved in the forebrain regulation of Dlx1/2.
Using DNase I footprinting, we identified six regions of I12b potentially bound
by transcription factors. Mutagenesis of each binding site affected the
expression of reporter constructs in transgenic mice. However, the effects of
impairing protein-DNA interactions were not uniform across the forebrain Dlx1/2
expression domains, suggesting that distinct regulatory interactions are taking
place in the different populations of neuronal precursors. Analyses of
protein-DNA interactions provide evidence of a direct role for MASH1 in Dlx1/2
regulation in the forebrain. DLX proteins play a crucial role in the maintenance 
of their own expression, as shown by transgenic and co-transfection experiments. 
These studies suggest that the seemingly continuous domains of Dlx gene
expression in the telencephalon and diencephalon are in fact the combination of
distinct cell populations within which different genetic regulatory interactions 
take place.

PMID: 17409112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Brain Dev. 2007 Sep;29(8):491-5. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

Imprinting status of paternally imprinted DLX5 gene in Japanese patients with
Rett syndrome.

Itaba-Matsumoto N(1), Maegawa S, Yamagata H, Kondo I, Oshimura M, Nanba E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Functional Genomics, Research Center for Bioscience and
Technology, Tottori University, 86 Nishicho, Yonago, Tottori 683-8503, Japan.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked severe neurodevelopmental disorder mostly
affecting female and is mainly caused by mutations of methyl-CpG-binding protein 
2 gene (MECP2). MECP2, which has a crucial role for transcriptional repression
and chromatin remodeling, consists of methyl-CpG binding domain (MBD) and
transcriptional repression domain (TRD). Paternally imprinted distal-less
homeobox gene 5 (DLX5), that has an important role for the development of
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic neurons, was identified as a target of MECP2
recently. We selected the 12 samples from the 40 RTT lymphoblast cell lines by a 
mononucleotide repeat polymorphism within the 3'UTR of DLX5. In 12 samples, 5 and
6 samples have the mutations located in MBD and TRD, respectively. No expression 
and 25-75% expression of the mutated MECP2 allele were detected in 4 samples with
MBD mutation and 4 samples with TRD mutation. In this study, the expression of
mutated MECP2 alleles was low especially in the samples with the MBD mutation
suggesting the biased frequency of the cells during the culture. However, a
sample with high expression of mutated MECP2 in TRD mutation showed bialleic
expression of DLX5 suggesting loss of imprinting.

PMID: 17363207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 11;282(19):14515-24. Epub 2007 Mar 10.

Wnt signaling stimulates osteoblastogenesis of mesenchymal precursors by
suppressing CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma.

Kang S(1), Bennett CN, Gerin I, Rapp LA, Hankenson KD, Macdougald OA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan
Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0622, USA.

Mesenchymal precursor cells have the potential to differentiate into several cell
types, including adipocytes and osteoblasts. Activation of Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling shifts mesenchymal cell fate toward osteoblastogenesis at the expense
of adipogenesis; however, molecular mechanisms by which Wnt signaling alters
mesenchymal cell fate have not been fully investigated. Our prior work indicates 
that multipotent precursors express adipogenic and osteoblastogenic transcription
factors at physiological levels and that ectopic expression of Wnt10b in
bipotential ST2 cells suppresses expression of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
alpha (C/EBPalpha) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPARgamma) and increases expression of Runx2, Dlx5, and osterix. Here, we
demonstrate that transient activation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling rapidly
suppresses C/EBPalpha and PPARgamma, followed by activation of osteoblastogenic
transcription factors. Enforced expression of C/EBPalpha or PPARgamma partially
rescues lipid accumulation and decreases mineralization in ST2 cells expressing
Wnt10b, suggesting that suppression of C/EBPalpha and PPARgamma is required for
Wnt/beta-catenin to alter cell fate. Furthermore, knocking down expression of
C/EBPalpha, PPARgamma, or both greatly reduces adipogenic potential and causes
spontaneous osteoblastogenesis in ST2 cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts,
suggesting that Wnt signaling alters the fate of mesenchymal precursor cells
primarily by suppressing C/EBPalpha and PPARgamma.

PMID: 17351296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 15;304(2):860-74. Epub 2007 Jan 9.

Dlx5 drives Runx2 expression and osteogenic differentiation in developing cranial
suture mesenchyme.

Holleville N(1), Matéos S, Bontoux M, Bollerot K, Monsoro-Burq AH.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 7128, Institut d'Embryologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, 94736
Nogent-sur-Marne, France.

Craniofacial bones derive from cephalic neural crest, by endochondral or
intramembranous ossification. Here, we address the role of the homeobox
transcription factor Dlx5 during the initial steps of calvaria membranous
differentiation and we show that Dlx5 elicits Runx2 induction and full osteoblast
differentiation in embryonic suture mesenchyme grown "in vitro". First, we
compare Dlx5 expression to bone-related gene expression in the developing skull
and mandibular bones. We classify genes into three groups related to consecutive 
steps of ossification. Secondly, we study Dlx5 activity in osteoblast precursors,
by transfecting Dlx5 into skull mesenchyme dissected prior to the onset of either
Dlx5 and Runx2 expression or osteogenesis. We find that Dlx5 does not modify the 
proliferation rate or the expression of suture markers in the immature calvaria
cells. Rather, Dlx5 initiates a complete osteogenic differentiation in these
early primary cells, by triggering Runx2, osteopontin, alkaline phosphatase, and 
other gene expression according to the sequential temporal sequence observed
during skull osteogenesis "in vivo". Thirdly, we show that BMP signaling
activates Dlx5, Runx2, and alkaline phosphatase in those primary cultures and
that a dominant-negative Dlx factor interferes with the ability of the BMP
pathway to activate Runx2 expression. Together, these data suggest a pivotal role
of Dlx5 and related Dlx factors in the onset of differentiation of chick calvaria
osteoblasts.

PMID: 17335796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2007 Apr;17(2):121-5. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

MeCP2 in Rett syndrome: transcriptional repressor or chromatin architectural
protein?

Chadwick LH(1), Wade PA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

Rett syndrome is a progressive neurological disorder caused by mutations in the
methyl-DNA binding protein MeCP2. The longstanding model depicting MeCP2 as a
transcriptional repressor predicts that the Rett syndrome phenotype probably
results from misregulation of MeCP2 target genes. Somewhat unexpectedly, the
identification of such targets has proven challenging. The recent identification 
of two MeCP2 targets, BDNF and DLX5, are suggestive of two very different roles
for this protein--one as a classical repressor protein, and the other as a
mediator of a complex, specialized chromatin structure.

PMID: 17317146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Jun;211(3):577-84.

Osterix is a key target for mechanical signals in human thoracic ligament flavum 
cells.

Fan D(1), Chen Z, Wang D, Guo Z, Qiang Q, Shang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China.

Mechanical stress is considered to be an important factor in the progression of
thoracic ossification of the ligament flavum (TOLF). To elucidate the mechanism
underlying mechanical stress-induced TOLF, we investigated the effect of
stretching on cultured flavum ligament cells derived from TOLF and non-TOLF
patients. We found that the mRNA expression of alkaline phosphatase (ALP),
osteocalcin, Runx2, and osterix, but not that of Dlx5 and Msx2, was significantly
increased by stretching in TOLF cells. In addition, the effect seems to be finely
tuned by stretching-triggered activation of distinct mitogen-activated protein
kinase cascades. Specifically, a p38 specific inhibitor, SB203580, significantly 
inhibited stretching-induced osterix expression as well as ALP activity, whereas 
a specific inhibitor of ERK1/2, U0126, prevented stretching-induced Runx2
expression. We showed that overexpression of osterix resulted in a significant
increase of ALP activity in TOLF cells, and osterix-specific RNAi completely
abrogated the stretching-induced ALP activity, indicating that osterix plays a
key role in stretching-stimulated osteogenic effect in TOLF cells. These results 
suggest that mechanical stress plays important roles in the progression of TOLF
through induction of osteogenic differentiation of TOLF cells, and our findings
support that osterix functions as a molecular link between mechanostressing and
osteogenic differentiation.

PMID: 17311298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2007 Feb;66(2):117-23.

Methyl CpG-binding protein 2 (a mutation of which causes Rett syndrome) directly 
regulates insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 in mouse and human brains.

Itoh M(1), Ide S, Takashima S, Kudo S, Nomura Y, Segawa M, Kubota T, Mori H,
Tanaka S, Horie H, Tanabe Y, Goto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Retardation and Birth Defect Research, National Institute
of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.
itoh@ncnp.go.jp

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a major neurodevelopmental disorder, characterized by
mental retardation and autistic behavior. Mutation of the MeCP2 gene, encoding
methyl CpG-binding protein 2, causes the disease. The pathomechanism by which
MeCP2 dysfunction leads to the RTT phenotype has not been elucidated. We found
that MeCP2 directly regulates expression of insulin-like growth factor binding
protein 3 (IGFBP3) gene in human and mouse brains. A chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay showed that the IGFBP3 promoter contained an MeCP2
binding site. IGFBP3 overexpression was observed in the brains of mecp2-null mice
and human RTT patients using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction and
Western blot analyses. Moreover, mecp2-null mice showed a widely distributed and 
increased number of IGFBP3-positive cells in the cerebral cortex, whereas
wild-type mice at the same age showed fewer IGFBP3-positive cells. These results 
suggest that IGFBP3 is a downstream gene regulated by MeCP2 and that the
previously reported BDNF and DLX5 genes and MeCP2 may contribute directly to the 
transcriptional expression of IGFBP3 in the brain. Interestingly, the pathologic 
features of mecp2-null mice have some similarities to those of IGFBP3-transgenic 
mice, which show a reduction of early postnatal growth. IGFBP3 overexpression due
to lack of MeCP2 may lead to delayed brain maturation.

PMID: 17278996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Feb 15;143(4):333-7.

Characterization of a 16 Mb interstitial chromosome 7q21 deletion by tiling path 
array CGH.

Tzschach A(1), Menzel C, Erdogan F, Schubert M, Hoeltzenbein M, Barbi G,
Petzenhauser C, Ropers HH, Ullmann R, Kalscheuer V.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
tzschach@molgen.mpg.de

We report on a 42-year-old female patient with an interstitial 16 Mb deletion in 
7q21.1-21.3 and a balanced reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 6 and 7
[karyotype 46,XX,t(6;7)(q23.3;q32.3)del(7)(q21.1q21.3)de novo]. We characterized 
the size and position of the deletion by tiling path array comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH), and we mapped the translocation breakpoints on chromosomes 6
and 7 by FISH. The clinical features of this patient-severe mental retardation,
short stature, microcephaly and deafness-are in accordance with previously
reported patients with 7q21 deletions. Chromosome band 7q21.3 harbors a locus for
split hand/split foot malformation (SHFM1), and part of this locus, including the
SHFM1 candidate genes SHFM1, DLX5, and DLX6, is deleted. The absence of limb
abnormalities in this patient suggests either a location of the SHFM1 causing
factor distal to this deletion, or reduced penetrance of haploinsufficiency of a 
SHFM1 factor within the deleted interval.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17230488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Jun;211(3):728-35.

BMP-2 promotes differentiation of osteoblasts and chondroblasts in
Runx2-deficient cell lines.

Liu T(1), Gao Y, Sakamoto K, Minamizato T, Furukawa K, Tsukazaki T, Shibata Y,
Bessho K, Komori T, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oral Pathology, Department of Oral Restitution, Graduate School of 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

To investigate the molecular mechanism underlying the differentiation of
osteoblasts and chondroblasts, we established a clonal cell lines, RD-C6, from
Runx2-deficient mouse embryos. RD-C6 cells expressed almost undetectable levels
of phenotypes related to osteoblast and chondroblast differentiation at basal
culture condition, whereas treatment with recombinant human bone morphogenetic
protein-2 (rhBMP-2) or transduction of BMP-2 by adenovirus effectively induced
this cell line to express mRNA related to the differentiation of osteoblasts and 
chondroblasts including alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin, and osterix.
Transduction of Runx2 also induced the expression of these mRNA in RD-C6 cells.
BMP-2 transduction increased expression levels of mRNA for Msx2 and Dlx5, but
Runx2 transduction induced no significant increases in expression levels of these
mRNA. Microarray analysis using RD-C6 cells with or without rhBMP-2 treatment
demonstrated that BMP-2 upregulated 66 genes including 13 transcription-related
molecules such as Id1, Id2, Id4, Hey1, Smad6, Smad7, and Msx2. To confirm bone
and cartilage formation ability of RD-C6 cells, we transplanted RD-C6 cells into 
the peritoneal cavity of athymic mice using diffusion chambers with rhBMP-2.
RD-C6 cells generated unmineralized cartilage but not bone. These results
indicate that BMP-2 induces Runx2-deficient cells to express markers related to
osteoblast and chondroblast differentiation using a Runx2-independent pathway,
but it failed to induce these cells to differentiate into bone-forming
osteoblasts and mature chondrocytes.

PMID: 17226753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2007 Jan;39(1):1-7.

Enamel matrix derivative stimulates osteogenesis- and chondrogenesis-related
transcription factors in C3H10T1/2 cells.

Narukawa M(1), Suzuki N, Takayama T, Yamashita Y, Otsuka K, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry,
Tokyo101-8310, Japan.

Our purpose was to determine how enamel matrix derivative (EMD) affects the
expression of osteogenesis- and chondrogenesis-related transcription factors in
undifferentiated mesenchymal cells. C3H10T1/2 cell line, a typical pluripotential
mesenchymal cell line, was cultured with or without EMD for up to 7 d. Expression
of mRNAs encoding osteogenesis- and chondrogenesis-related transcription factors 
(Runx2, Osterix, AJ18, Dlx5, Msx2, Sox5, Sox9 and Zfp60) was measured using
real-time polymerase chain reaction. Runx2 and Sox9 protein expression and the
presence of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-6-like molecules in EMD were
determined by Western blotting. EMD substantially increased mRNA levels of
osteogenesis- and chondrogenesis-related transcription factors. EMD also induced 
Runx2 and Sox9 protein expression. Western blotting analysis of EMD using
anti-BMP-6 antibody revealed immunoreactive bands corresponding to about 14 kDa
and 60 kDa. These results suggest that EMD stimulates osteogenesis- and
chondrogenesis-related transcription factors, and these activities may be
mediated, at least in part, by BMP-6 in EMD.

PMID: 17213952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Life Sci. 2007 Feb 13;80(10):965-71. Epub 2006 Nov 29.

Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound stimulates osteogenic differentiation in ROS
17/2.8 cells.

Takayama T(1), Suzuki N, Ikeda K, Shimada T, Suzuki A, Maeno M, Otsuka K, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13,
Kanda-Surugadai, Tokyo, Japan. takayama@dent.nihon-u.ac.jp

There have been no studies investigating the effects of the mechanical
stimulation provided by Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS) treatment on
periodontal disease accompanying bone loss. LIPUS is known to accelerate
mineralization and bone regeneration, but the precise cellular mechanism is
unclear. Here, we investigated the effect of LIPUS on osteogenesis by examining
the effect of LIPUS stimulation on cell proliferation, alkaline phosphatase
(ALPase) activity, osteogenesis-related gene expression, and mineralized nodule
formation in a rat osteosarcoma cell line. The cells were cultured in medium with
or without the addition of LIPUS stimulation. The ultrasound signal consisted of 
1.5 MHz at an intensity of 30 mW/cm(2) for 20 min for all cultures. LIPUS
stimulation did not affect the rate of cell proliferation. ALPase activity was
increased at day 7 of culture after LIPUS stimulation. Real-time PCR analysis
indicated that LIPUS significantly increased the expression of mRNA for the
transcription factors Runx2, Msx2, Dlx5, and Osterix and for bone sialoprotein,
whereas the mRNA expression of AJ18 was significantly reduced. The mineralized
nodule formation and the calcium content in mineralized nodules were markedly
increased on day 14 of culture after LIPUS stimulation. Our study demonstrates
that LIPUS stimulation directly affects osteogenic cells, leading to mineralized 
nodule formation. In view of the widespread use of LIPUS for the clinical therapy
of periodontal disease, it is likely that LIPUS has an important influence on key
functional activities of osteoblasts in alveolar bone.

PMID: 17174343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Apr;211(1):253-60.

The suppressive effect of myeloid Elf-1-like factor (MEF) in osteogenic
differentiation.

Kim YJ(1), Kim BG, Lee SJ, Lee HK, Lee SH, Ryoo HM, Cho JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and BK 21 Program, Kyungpook National University,
Daegu, Korea.

Myeloid Elf-1 like factor (MEF) is a member of the Ets transcription factor
family. Ets family proteins control the expression of genes that are critical for
biological processes such as proliferation, differentiation, and cell death. Some
of Ets factors are also known to regulate bone development. In this study, we
investigated the role of MEF in osteoblast differentiation. MEF expression was
highest early in the differentiation of MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts and was reduced by
treatment with BMP-2. The expression of MEF suppressed the alkaline phosphatase
activity and expression induced by BMP-2 stimulation and mediated by Runx2. The
expression of MEF also reduces osteocalcin mRNA levels, and mineralization in
MC3T3-E1 cells. We found that the MEF-mediated suppression of osteogenic
differentiation was critically related to Runx2 regulation. The MEF and Runx2
proteins physically interact to form a complex, and this interaction interferes
with Runx2 binding to the cis-acting element OSE2 derived from the osteocalcin
promoter. Co-transfection of MEF inhibited the 6xOSE2-luciferase reporter
activity induced by Runx2. In addition, MEF stimulated the transcription of a
negative mediator Msx2, and a transcriptional repressor, Mab21L1, and suppressed 
the transcription of a positive mediator, Dlx5 in osteoblast differentiation. MEF
overexpression stimulated C2C12 cell proliferation. Together, our findings
suggest that MEF promotes cell proliferation and functions as a negative
regulator of osteogenic differentiation by directly interacting with Runx2 and
suppressing its transcriptional activity.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17167770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Mol Cells. 2006 Oct 31;22(2):182-8.

Methylation of the mouse DIx5 and Osx gene promoters regulates cell type-specific
gene expression.

Lee JY(1), Lee YM, Kim MJ, Choi JY, Park EK, Kim SY, Lee SP, Yang JS, Kim DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University,
Skeletal Diseases Genome Research Center, Kyungpook National University Hospital,
Daegu 700-422, Korea.

Dlx5 and Osx are master regulatory proteins essential for initiating the cascade 
leading to osteoblast differentiation in mammals, but the mechanism of
osteoblast-specific expression is not fully understood. DNA methylation at CpG
sequences is involved in tissue and cell type-specific gene expression. We
investigated the methylation status of Dlx5 and Osx in osteogenic and
nonosteogenic cell lines by methylation-specific PCR (MSP). The CpG dinucleotides
of the Dlx5 and Osx promoter regions were unmethylated in osteogenic cell lines
transcribing these genes but methylated in nonosteogenic cell lines. Treatment of
C2C12 cells with 5-AzadC induced dose- and time-dependent expression of Dlx5 and 
Osx mRNA by demethylating the corresponding promoters. Furthermore the mRNAs for 
the osteoblast markers ALP and OC, which were undetectable in untreated cells,
gradually increased after 5-AzadC treatment. In addition, BMP-2 stimulation
induced Dlx5 expression by hypomethylating its promoter. These findings suggest
that DNA methylation plays an important role in cell type-specific expression of 
Dlx5 and Osx.

PMID: 17085970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Stem Cells. 2007 Feb;25(2):500-10. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

Analysis of Oct4-dependent transcriptional networks regulating self-renewal and
pluripotency in human embryonic stem cells.

Babaie Y(1), Herwig R, Greber B, Brink TC, Wruck W, Groth D, Lehrach H, Burdon T,
Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Roslin Institute, Department of Gene Function and Development, Roslin,
Midlothian, United Kingdom.

The POU domain transcription factor OCT4 is a key regulator of pluripotency in
the early mammalian embryo and is highly expressed in the inner cell mass of the 
blastocyst. Consistent with its essential role in maintaining pluripotency, Oct4 
expression is rapidly downregulated during formation of the trophoblast lineage. 
To enhance our understanding of the molecular basis of this differentiation event
in humans, we used a functional genomics approach involving RNA
interference-mediated suppression of OCT4 function in a human ESC line and
analysis of the resulting transcriptional profiles to identify OCT4-dependent
genes in human cells. We detected altered expression of >1,000 genes, including
targets regulated directly by OCT4 either positively (NANOG, SOX2, REX1, LEFTB,
LEFTA/EBAF DPPA4, THY1, and TDGF1) or negatively (CDX2, EOMES, BMP4, TBX18,
Brachyury [T], DKK1, HLX1, GATA6, ID2, and DLX5), as well as targets for the
OCT4-associated stem cell regulators SOX2 and NANOG. Our data set includes
regulators of ACTIVIN, BMP, fibroblast growth factor, and WNT signaling. These
pathways are implicated in regulating human ESC differentiation and therefore
further validate the results of our analysis. In addition, we identified a number
of differentially expressed genes that are involved in epigenetics, chromatin
remodeling, apoptosis, and metabolism that may point to underlying molecular
mechanisms that regulate pluripotency and trophoblast differentiation in humans. 
Significant concordance between this data set and previous comparisons between
inner cell mass and trophectoderm in human embryos indicates that the study of
human ESC differentiation in vitro represents a useful model of early embryonic
differentiation in humans.

PMID: 17068183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 29;281(52):40515-26. Epub 2006 Oct 23.

BMP2 commitment to the osteogenic lineage involves activation of Runx2 by DLX3
and a homeodomain transcriptional network.

Hassan MQ(1), Tare RS, Lee SH, Mandeville M, Morasso MI, Javed A, van Wijnen AJ, 
Stein JL, Stein GS, Lian JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Several homeodomain (HD) proteins are critical for skeletal patterning and
respond directly to BMP2 as an early step in bone formation. RUNX2, the earliest 
transcription factor proven essential for commitment to osteoblastogenesis, is
also expressed in response to BMP2. However, there is a gap in our knowledge of
the regulatory cascade from BMP2 signaling to the onset of osteogenesis. Here we 
show that BMP2 induces DLX3, a homeodomain protein that activates Runx2 gene
transcription. Small interfering RNA knockdown studies in osteoblasts validate
that DLX3 is a potent regulator of Runx2. Furthermore in Runx2 null cells, DLX3
forced expression suffices to induce transcription of Runx2, osteocalcin, and
alkaline phosphatase genes, thus defining DLX3 as an osteogenic regulator
independent of RUNX2. Our studies further show regulation of the Runx2 gene by
several homeodomain proteins: MSX2 and CDP/cut repress whereas DLX3 and DLX5
activate endogenous Runx2 expression and promoter activity in non-osseous cells
and osteoblasts. These HD proteins exhibit distinct temporal expression profiles 
during osteoblast differentiation as well as selective association with Runx2
chromatin that is related to Runx2 transcriptional activity and recruitment of
RNA polymerase II. Runx2 promoter mutagenesis shows that multiple HD elements
control expression of Runx2 in relation to the stages of osteoblast maturation.
Our studies establish mechanisms for commitment to the osteogenic lineage
directly through BMP2 induction of HD proteins DLX3 and DLX5 that activate Runx2,
thus delineating a transcriptional regulatory pathway mediating osteoblast
differentiation. We propose that the three homeodomain proteins MSX2, DLX3, and
DLX5 provide a key series of molecular switches that regulate expression of Runx2
throughout bone formation.

PMID: 17060321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Int J Dev Biol. 2006;50(8):709-13.

Expression of Dlx5 and Dlx6 during specification of the elbow joint.

Ferrari D(1), Kosher RA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine and Skeletal Development, Department of Oral 
Rehabilitation, Biomaterials and Skeletal Development, University of Connecticut 
Health Center, School of Dental Medicine, Farmington, Connecticut 06030, USA.

The onset of elbow joint formation in the developing limb is characterized
morphologically by the conversion of differentiated chondrocytes at the site of
incipient joint formation into the densely packed flattened cells of the joint
interzone. However, experimental studies have indicated that the elbow joint is
specified well before joint interzone formation by a distinctive population of
precursor cells located at the site in the developing limb bud at which the elbow
joint will subsequently form. Here we show that during specification of the elbow
joint in the chick limb bud, the homeodomain transcription factors Dlx5 and Dlx6 
are highly expressed by a discrete group of cells that encompass the prospective 
elbow joint. The Dlx5- and Dlx6-expressing cells at the prospective elbow joint
are located where the differentiating humerus branches into the radius and ulna. 
Thus, Dlx5 and Dlx6 are the earliest molecular markers of the presumptive elbow
joint yet described. The onset of Dlx5 expression in the region of the
presumptive elbow joint is shortly followed by the initiation of expression
amongst the Dlx5-expressing cells of Gdf5, which encodes a secreted signaling
molecule that is involved in regulating the onset of joint formation. These
results suggest that Dlx genes may be involved in specification of the elbow
joint and/or in providing positional information that specifies the site at which
the elbow joint will form.

PMID: 17051482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Comp Neurol. 2006 Dec 10;499(5):745-67.

Chicken lateral septal organ and other circumventricular organs form in a
striatal subdomain abutting the molecular striatopallidal border.

Bardet SM(1), Cobos I, Puelles E, Martínez-De-La-Torre M, Puelles L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology, Medical School, University of
Murcia, Murcia E30071, Spain.

The avian lateral septal organ (LSO) is a telencephalic circumventricular
specialization with liquor-contacting neurons (Kuenzel and van Tienhoven [1982]
J. Comp. Neurol. 206:293-313). We studied the topological position of the chicken
LSO relative to molecular borders defined previously within the telencephalic
subpallium (Puelles et al. [2000] J. Comp. Neurol. 424:409-438). Differential
expression of Dlx5 and Nkx2.1 homeobox genes, or the Shh gene encoding a secreted
morphogen, allows distinction of striatal, pallidal, and preoptic subpallial
sectors. The chicken LSO complex was characterized chemoarchitectonically from
embryonic to posthatching stages, by using immunohistochemistry for calbindin,
tyrosine hydroxylase, NKX2.1, and BEN proteins and in situ hybridization for
Nkx2.1, Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, Shh, and Dlx5 mRNA. Medial and lateral parts of LSO
appear, respectively, at the striatal part of the septum and adjacent bottom of
the lateral ventricle (accumbens), in lateral continuity with another
circumventricular organ that forms along a thin subregion of the entire striatum,
abutting the molecular striatopallidal boundary; we called this the
"striatopallidal organ" (SPO). The SPO displays associated distal periventricular
cells, which are lacking in the LSO. Moreover, the SPO is continuous
caudomedially with a thin, linear ependymal specialization found around the
extended amygdala and preoptic areas. This differs from SPO and LSO in some
molecular aspects. We tentatively identified this structure as being composed of 
an "extended amygdala organ" (EAO) and a "preoptohypothalamic organ" (PHO). The
position of LSO, SPO, EAO, and PHO within a linear Dlx5-expressing ventricular
domain that surrounds the Nkx2.1-expressing pallidopreoptic domain provides an
unexpected insight into possible common and differential causal mechanisms
underlying their formation.

PMID: 17048229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Mech Dev. 2006 Nov;123(11):819-30. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

Dlx5- and Dlx6-mediated chondrogenesis: Differential domain requirements for a
conserved function.

Hsu SH(1), Noamani B, Abernethy DE, Zhu H, Levi G, Bendall AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ont., Canada N1G 2W1.

During endochondral ossification in the vertebrate limb, multipotent mesenchymal 
cells first differentiate into chondroblasts (chondrogenesis) that further
differentiate (via chondrocyte hypertrophy) to a terminal cellular phenotype.
Dlx5 and Dlx6 are functionally redundant regulators of chondrocyte hypertrophy.
We now show that Dlx5 and Dlx6 also regulate the earlier step of chondrogenesis
in the limb. Limb bud mesenchymal cells from Dlx5/6(-/-) embryos show reduced
chondrogenesis compared to wild-type littermates, and expression of either Dlx5
or Dlx6 stimulated differentiation of limb bud mesenchymal cells to
chondroblasts. The functional overlap between Dlx5 and Dlx6 occurs despite the
fact that the amino- and carboxyl-terminal domains of the encoded proteins are
dissimilar. In order to reconcile the disparity between the divergent structures 
of Dlx5 and Dlx6 with their overlapping biological functions, we investigated the
domain requirements and transcriptional activities associated with Dlx5- and
Dlx6-mediated chondrogenesis. We find distinct domain requirements for the
chondrogenic function of these related homeoproteins, indicating divergent
molecular mechanisms of action.

PMID: 17027239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Dec;209(3):912-22.

Up-regulation of bone morphogenetic protein receptor IB by growth factors
enhances BMP-2-induced human bone cell functions.

Singhatanadgit W(1), Salih V, Olsen I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomaterials and Tissue Engineering, Eastman Dental Institute,
University College London, 256 Gray's Inn Road, London, United Kingdom.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) stimulate osteoblast differentiation by signal 
transduction via three BMP receptors (BMPR-IA, -IB, and -II). Several growth
factors, including transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1), fibroblast
growth factor-2 (FGF-2) and platelet-derived growth factor-AB (PDGF-AB), have
also been shown to play an important part in osteogenesis. The mechanism
underlying these activities is unclear, but these growth factors could modulate
the BMP/BMPR pathway by up-regulating BMPR expression, thereby enhancing the
osteogenic responses of bone cells to the BMP. In this study we have therefore
examined the effects of TGF-beta1, FGF-2, and PDGF-AB on BMPR expression and
BMP-2-mediated osteoblast functions in primary human bone cells. The results
showed that although the ligand BMP-2 and growth factors had little effect on
BMPR-IA and -II transcript expression, they significantly up-regulated BMPR-IB
mRNA specifically. However, only the growth factors, but not the ligand BMP-2,
increased the surface expression of the BMPR-IB antigen, which was found to be
due to a differential effect of BMP-2 and the growth factors on the
Smurf1/Smad6-induced breakdown process. Pre-incubation of the cells with the
growth factors significantly augmented BMP-2-induced Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation,
and Dlx5 expression ALP activity, compared with that of cells treated with BMP-2 
alone. When cells were transfected with siRNA targeting BMPR-IB, the growth
factors neither up-regulated BMPR-IB transcript expression nor enhanced
BMP-2-induced Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation, Dlx5 expression and ALP activity. The
results indicate that increased BMPR-IB by TGF-beta1, FGF-2, and PDGF-AB
significantly enhances BMP-2-induced osteogenic functions in vitro, suggesting
that they might positively modulate bone formation by up-regulating BMPR-IB in
vivo.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17001689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Bone. 2007 Jan;40(1):84-92. Epub 2006 Sep 1.

Glucocorticoids induce the differentiation of a mesenchymal progenitor cell line,
ROB-C26 into adipocytes and osteoblasts, but fail to induce terminal osteoblast
differentiation.

Ito S(1), Suzuki N, Kato S, Takahashi T, Takagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Division of Functional Morphology, Dental Research
Center, Nihon University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13, Kanda-Surugadai, Tokyo
101-8310, Japan.

To clarify the effects of glucocorticoids (GCs) on osteoblast and adipocyte
differentiation, we investigated the effects of dexamethasone (Dex), a GC
analogue on transcription factors for osteoblasts (Runx2, Dlx5 and Osterix) and
adipocytes (C/EBPs such as C/EBPalpha, C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta, and PPARgamma2),
late osteoblastic markers, bone sialoprotein (BSP) and osteocalcin (OC), and
adipocyte differentiation-dependent protein, aP2 in a clonal mesenchymal
progenitor cell line, ROB-C26 (C26). C26 cells were dose- and time-dependently
responsive to Dex in terms of an increase in not only mRNA and protein
expressions of the C/EBPs, PPARgamma2 and aP2, but also Runx2, Dlx5, BSP and OC
with no induction of Osterix, which is considered to act mainly on terminal
osteoblast differentiation. Cycloheximide pretreatment indicated that Dex
signaling immediately increases expressions of the C/EBPs and Dlx5, while
expressions of the rest of the genes require de novo protein synthesis.
Continuous Dex treatment stimulated adipocyte formation, but failed to induce
Osterix expression and mineralized matrix formation. However, BMP-2 treatment of 
Dex-treated cells induced Osterix expression and subsequent mineralized matrix
formation. These results indicate that Dex up-regulates the C/EBPs followed by
increasing PPARgamma2 and aP2 expressions in C26 cells to induce adipocyte
differentiation, while Dex enhances Dlx5 followed by increasing Runx2, BSP and OC
expressions at gene and protein levels, but cannot induce Osterix expression,
suggesting that Dex does not promote their terminal osteoblast differentiation.

PMID: 16949358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Med Hypotheses. 2007;68(1):169-75. Epub 2006 Aug 9.

Advances in Runx2 regulation and its isoforms.

Li YL(1), Xiao ZS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Kansas Med Center, The Kidney Institute/6108 WHE, 3901 Rainbow
Blvd, Kansas City, KS 66160, United states.

During the last 10 years, we have witnessed major progress in skeleton biology.
Runx2 is an accepted transcription factor essential for osteoblast development
from mesenchymal stem cells and maturation into osteocytes and organize crucial
events during bone formation. Alternations in Runx2 expression levels are
associated with skeletal diseases. In vitro and in vivo studies have reported
that multiple integrated complex path ways (such as Wnt/LRP5/beta-catenin,
BMP/Smads, 1, 25-(OH)2-vitaminD3/VDR/VDRE pathway, etc.) and several regulatory
proteins (such as Msx2, Dlx5, Twists, etc.) play critical roles in modulating
Runx2 gene expression, activity, and the subsequent bone formation. These
findings provide novel insights through controlling osteoblast differentiation to
treat osteoporosis or other bone diseases with altered bone mass by stimulating
Runx2 expression. Further studies have shown that expression of RUNX2 is
initiated from two promoters, the distal P1 promoter and the proximal P2
promoter. The alternative use of promoters gives rise to the genesis of two major
protein isoforms with distinct amino termini, named as Runx2-TypeI and
Runx2-TypeII. Here, we also review a complex spatio-temporal pattern of two major
isoforms expressions and their possible function differences in skeleton
development.

PMID: 16901655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Genesis. 2006 Sep;44(9):425-37.

Dlx5 and Dlx6 homeobox genes are required for specification of the mammalian
vestibular apparatus.

Robledo RF(1), Lufkin T.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine.

The mammalian inner ear is a complex organ that develops from a surface ectoderm 
into distinct auditory and vestibular components. Congenital malformation of
these two components resulting from single or multiple gene defects is a common
clinical occurrence and is observed in patients with split hand/split foot
malformation, a malformation which is phenocopied by Dlx5/6 null mice. Analysis
of mice lacking Dlx5 and Dlx6 homeobox genes identified their restricted and
combined expression in the otic epithelium as a crucial regulator of vestibular
cell fates. Otic induction initiates without incident in Dlx5/6(-/-) embryos, but
dorsal otic derivatives including the semicircular ducts, utricle, saccule, and
endolymphatic duct fail to form. Dlx5 and Dlx6 seem to influence vestibular cell 
fates by restricting Pax2 and activating Gbx2 and Bmp4 expression domains. Given 
their proximity to the disease locus and the observed phenotype in Dlx5/6 null
mice, Dlx5/6 are likely candidates to mediate the inner ear defects observed in
patients with split hand/split foot malformation.

PMID: 16900517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Life Sci. 2006 Oct 12;79(20):1936-43. Epub 2006 Jun 23.

Effects of low-intensity pulsed ultrasound on the differentiation of C2C12 cells.

Ikeda K(1), Takayama T, Suzuki N, Shimada K, Otsuka K, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry, Tokyo,
Japan.

Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS) is known to accelerate bone regeneration,
but the precise cellular mechanism is still unclear. The purpose of this study
was to determine the effect of LIPUS on the differentiation of pluripotent
mesenchymal cell line C2C12. The cells were cultured in differentiation medium
with or without the addition of LIPUS stimulation. The ultrasound signal
consisted of 1.5 MHz at an intensity of 70 mW/cm2 for 20 min for all cultures. To
verify the cell lineage after LIPUS stimulation, mRNA expression of cellular
phenotype-specific markers characterizing osteoblasts (Runx2, Msx2, Dlx5, AJ18), 
chondroblasts (Sox9), myoblasts (MyoD), and adipocytes (C/EBP, PPARgamma) was
studied using real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis. The protein
expression of Runx2 and activated phosphorylation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(p38 MAPK) were performed using Western blotting. The mRNA expression of Runx2,
Msx2, Dlx5, AJ18, and Sox9 was increased markedly by the LIPUS stimulation,
whereas the expression of MyoD, C/EBP, and PPARgamma was drastically decreased.
In the Western blot analysis, LIPUS stimulation increased Runx2 protein
expression and phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK. Our study demonstrated
that LIPUS stimulation converts the differentiation pathway of C2C12 cells into
the osteoblast and/or chondroblast lineage via activated phosphorylation of
ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK.

PMID: 16846618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Dec 1;99(5):1233-9.

Regulation of osteoblast differentiation by transcription factors.

Komori T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Reconstructive Medicine, Division of Cell
Biology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-7-1
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8588, Japan. komorit@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Runx2, osterix, and beta-catenin are essential for osteoblast differentiation.
Runx2 directs multipotent mesenchymal cells to an osteoblastic lineage, and
inhibits them from differentiating into the adipocytic and chondrocytic lineages.
After differentiating to preosteoblasts, beta-catenin, osterix, and Runx2 direct 
them to immature osteoblasts, which produce bone matrix proteins, blocking their 
potential to differentiate into the chondrocytic lineage. Runx2 inhibits
osteoblast maturation and the transition into osteocytes, keeping osteoblasts in 
an immature stage. Other transcription factors including Msx1, Msx2, Dlx5, Dlx6, 
Twist, AP1(Fos/Jun), Knox-20, Sp3, and ATF4 are also involved in osteoblast
differentiation. To gain an understanding of bone development, it is important to
position these transcription factors to the right places in the processes of
osteoblast differentiation.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16795049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Cereb Cortex. 2006 Jul;16 Suppl 1:i82-8.

Cellular patterns of transcription factor expression in developing cortical
interneurons.

Cobos I(1), Long JE, Thwin MT, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94158-2611, USA.

Most gamma-aminobutyric acidergic interneurons in the neocortex and hippocampus
are derived from subpallial progenitors in the medial ganglionic eminence and
migrate tangentially to the pallium, where they differentiate into a diverse set 
of neuronal subtypes. Toward elucidating the mechanisms underlying the generation
of interneuron diversity, we have studied in mice the expression patterns in
differentiating and mature neocortical interneurons of 8 transcription factors,
including 6 homeobox (Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, Arx, Lhx6, Cux2), 1 basic
helix-loop-helix, (NPAS1), and 1 bZIP (MafB). Their patterns of expression change
during interneuron differentiation and show distinct distributions within
interneuron subpopulations in adult neocortex. This study is a first step to
define the combinatorial codes of transcription factors that participate in
regulating the specification and function of cortical interneuron subtypes.

PMID: 16766712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Neurosci. 2006 May 24;26(21):5794-9.

Cannabinoid receptor type 1 located on presynaptic terminals of principal neurons
in the forebrain controls glutamatergic synaptic transmission.

Domenici MR(1), Azad SC, Marsicano G, Schierloh A, Wotjak CT, Dodt HU,
Zieglgänsberger W, Lutz B, Rammes G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neuropharmacology, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, 
80804 Munich, Germany.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2006 Jun 14;26(24):table of contents.

It is widely accepted that cannabinoids regulate GABA release by activation of
cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1). Results obtained from a variety of brain
regions consistently indicate that cannabinoid agonists can also reduce
glutamatergic synaptic transmission. However, there are still conflicting data
concerning the role of CB1 in cannabinoid-induced inhibition of glutamatergic
transmission in cortical areas. Here, we provide direct evidence that activation 
of CB1 on terminals of principal neurons controls excitatory synaptic responses
in the forebrain. In slices of the basolateral amygdala, the CA1 region of the
hippocampus, and the primary somatosensory cortex of wild-type mice, application 
of the CB1 agonist
(R)-(+)-[2,3-dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl)pyrrolo[1,2,3-de]-1,4-benzox
azin-6-yl]-1-naphthalenylmethanone (WIN55,212-2; WIN) (5 mum) reduced evoked
excitatory postsynaptic responses. In contrast, in slices obtained from
conditional mouse mutants lacking CB1 in all principal forebrain neurons but not 
in GABAergic interneurons (CB1(f/f;CaMKIIalphaCre)), WIN no longer affected
glutamatergic synaptic transmission in any of the brain regions tested.
Compatible with a presynaptic mechanism, WIN did not change the sensitivity to
focally uncaged l-glutamate. WIN reduced glutamatergic responses in slices
obtained from mice lacking CB1 exclusively in GABAergic neurons
(CB1(f/f;Dlx5/6-Cre)), thus excluding the involvement of CB1 expressed on
GABAergic neurons in this effect of the drug. The present data strongly indicate 
that excitatory synaptic transmission in forebrain areas is directly modulated by
CB1 expressed on presynaptic axon terminals originating from glutamatergic
neurons.

PMID: 16723537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Neurosci. 2006 May 17;26(20):5383-92.

Necdin promotes GABAergic neuron differentiation in cooperation with Dlx
homeodomain proteins.

Kuwajima T(1), Nishimura I, Yoshikawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Regulation of Neuronal Development, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Necdin, a member of the MAGE (melanoma antigen) protein family, is expressed
predominantly in terminally differentiated neurons. The necdin gene NDN is
maternally imprinted and expressed only from the paternal allele, the deficiency 
of which is implicated in the pathogenesis of the neurodevelopmental disorder
Prader-Willi syndrome. Necdin binds to its homologous MAGE protein MAGE-D1 (also 
known as NRAGE or Dlxin-1), which interacts with Msx (msh homeobox) and Dlx
(distal-less homeobox) family homeodomain transcription factors. Members of the
Dlx homeobox gene family are involved in the differentiation and specification of
forebrain GABAergic neurons. Here we demonstrate that necdin associates with Dlx 
homeodomain proteins via MAGE-D1 to promote the differentiation of GABAergic
neurons in mouse embryonic forebrain. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that 
necdin was coexpressed with Dlx2, Dlx5, or MAGE-D1 in a subpopulation of
embryonic forebrain cells. Necdin bound to Dlx2 and Dlx5 via MAGE-D1 and enhanced
Dlx2-dependent activation of the Wnt1 (wingless-type MMTV integration site
family) promoter. Necdin significantly increased the populations of cells
expressing the GABAergic neuron markers calbindin D-28k and glutamic acid
decarboxylase when overexpressed by electroporation in cultured forebrain slices.
In this assay, Dlx5N, a truncated Dlx5 mutant that competes with Dlx2 to bind
MAGE-D1, diminished the effect of necdin on GABAergic neuron differentiation.
Furthermore, mutant mice lacking the paternal necdin allele showed a significant 
reduction in the differentiation of forebrain GABAergic neurons in vivo and in
vitro. These results suggest that paternally expressed necdin facilitates the
differentiation and specification of GABAergic neurons in cooperation with Dlx
homeodomain proteins.

PMID: 16707790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Aug;208(2):326-35.

Insulin-like growth factor-I increases bone sialoprotein (BSP) expression through
fibroblast growth factor-2 response element and homeodomain protein-binding site 
in the proximal promoter of the BSP gene.

Nakayama Y(1), Nakajima Y, Kato N, Takai H, Kim DS, Arai M, Mezawa M, Araki S,
Sodek J, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Matsudo, Chiba, Japan.

Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) promotes bone formation by stimulating
proliferation and differentiation of osteoblasts. Bone sialoprotein (BSP), is
thought to function in the initial mineralization of bone, is selectively
expressed by differentiated osteoblast. To determine the molecular mechanism of
IGF-I regulation of osteogenesis, we analyzed the effects of IGF-I on the
expression of BSP in osteoblast-like Saos2 and in rat stromal bone marrow
(RBMC-D8) cells. IGF-I (50 ng/ml) increased BSP mRNA levels at 12 h in Saos2
cells. In RBMC-D8 cells, IGF-I increased BSP mRNA levels at 3 h. From transient
transfection assays, a twofold increase in transcription by IGF-I was observed at
12 h in pLUC3 construct that included the promoter sequence from -116 to +60.
Effect of IGF-I was abrogated by 2-bp mutations in either the FGF2 response
element (FRE) or homeodomain protein-binding site (HOX). Gel shift analyses
showed that IGF-I increased binding of nuclear proteins to the FRE and HOX
elements. Notably, the HOX-protein complex was supershifted by Smad1 antibody,
while the FRE-protein complex was shifted by Smad1 and Cbfa1 antibodies. Dlx2 and
Dlx5 antibodies disrupted the formation of the FRE- and HOX-protein complexes.
The IGF-I effects on the formation of FRE-protein complexes were abolished by
tyrosine kinase inhibitor herbimycin A (HA), PI3-kinase/Akt inhibitor LY249002,
and MAP kinase kinase inhibitor U0126, while IGF-I effects on HOX-protein
complexes were abolished by HA and LY249002. These studies demonstrate that IGF-I
stimulates BSP transcription by targeting the FRE and HOX elements in the
proximal promoter of BSP gene.

PMID: 16642470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Genesis. 2006 Mar;44(3):105-14.

Cell dissociation experiments reveal that positional information operates in the 
chicken frontonasal mass.

Kawakami M(1), Inoue M, Richman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nara Medical University, Japan. 
mkawaka@naramed-u.ac.jp

In this study we examined the role of cell-cell affinity in patterning the avian 
frontonasal mass-the facial prominence that forms the prenasal cartilage and
premaxillary bone. Reconstituted cell pellets derived from undifferentiated,
frontonasal mass mesenchyme were recombined with facial epithelium and grafted to
host embryos to continue development. We determined that the cells reestablished 
a recognizable frontonasal mass pattern and were able to induce egg teeth in
overlying ectoderm. Further analysis revealed there were region-specific
differences in the cartilage patterns such that central recombinations were more 
likely to form a straight cartilage rod, whereas lateral mesenchyme pellets were 
more likely to form complex, branched cartilage patterns. The basis for the
pattern differences was that central mesenchyme cells showed preferential
clustering in the cartilage condensations in the center of the graft, whereas
lateral cells were spread throughout as determined by dye labeling and quail
chicken chimeras. The disruption of cell contacts temporarily delayed onset of
gene expression but by 48 h both Msx2 and Dlx5 were expressed. Msx2, in
particular, had very clear edges to the expression domains and often the pattern 
of expression correlated with type of cartilage morphology. Together, these data 
suggest that an important patterning mechanism in the face is the ability of
mesenchymal cells to sort out according to position and that Msx2 may help
repress chondrogenic potential in the lateral frontonasal mass.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16496300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Calcif Tissue Int. 2006 Feb;78(2):98-102. Epub 2006 Feb 6.

Gene expression of runx2, Osterix, c-fos, DLX-3, DLX-5, and MSX-2 in dental
follicle cells during osteogenic differentiation in vitro.

Morsczeck C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stiftung Caesar, Center of Advanced European Studies and Research, Ludwig
Erhard Allee 2, Bonn 53175, Germany. Morsczeck@gmx.de

Recently, osteogenic precursor cells were isolated from human dental follicles,
which differentiate into cementoblast- or osteoblast- like cells under in vitro
conditions. However, mechanisms for osteogenic differentiation are not known in
detail. Dental follicle cell long-term cultures supplemented with dexamethasone
or with insulin resulted in mineralized nodules, whereas no mineralization or
alkaline phosphatase activity was detected in the control culture without an
osteogenic stimulus. A real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) analysis was developed to investigate gene expression during osteogenic
differentiation in vitro. Expression of the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) gene was
detected during differentiation in the control culture and was similar to that in
cultures with dexamethasone and insulin. DLX-3, DLX-5, runx2, and MSX-2 are
differentially expressed during osteogenic differentiation in bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells. In dental follicle cells, gene expression of runx2,
DLX-5, and MSX-2 was unaffected during osteogenic differentiation in vitro.
Osteogenic differentiation appeared to be independent of MSX-2 expression; the
same was true of runx2 and DLX-5, which were protagonists of osteogenic
differentiation and osteocalcin promoter activity in bone marrow mesenchymal stem
cells. Like in bone marrow-derived stem cells, DLX-3 gene expression was
increased in dental follicle cells during osteogenic differentiation but similar 
to control cultures. However, gene expression of osterix was not detected in
dental follicle cells during osteogenic differentiation; this gene is expressed
during osteogenic differentiation in bone marrow stem cells. These real-time PCR 
results display molecular mechanisms in dental follicle precursor cells during
osteogenic differentiation that are different from those in bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells.

PMID: 16467978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Oral Sci. 2005 Dec;47(4):199-207.

Autoregulatory mechanism of Runx2 through the expression of transcription factors
and bone matrix proteins in multipotential mesenchymal cell line, ROB-C26.

Takahashi T(1), Kato S, Suzuki N, Kawabata N, Takagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Nihon University School of Dentistry, Tokyo, Japan.
takahashi-tm@dent.nihon-u.ac.jp

Runx2 is essential for osteoblast differentiation and gene expression of bone
matrix proteins, however, little is known about the mechanism regulating its
activity. In this study, the role of Runx2 on gene expression of transcription
factors, AJ18, Msx2, and Dlx5, was examined in vitro. It is known that AJ18 and
Msx2 act as repressors to inhibit activity of Runx2, whereas Dlx5 promotes its
activity. An expression vector inserted Runx2 cDNA was transiently overexpressed 
in a rat multipotential mesenchymal cell line, ROB-C26 (C26). Real time reverse
transcription-PCR analysis showed that, in exogenous Runx2-overexpressing C26
cells (C26-Rx), AJ18 expression increased 1.8-fold, Msx2 expression increased
3.0-fold, and Dlx5 expression increased 2.7-fold compared to the cells
transfected with vector alone (C26-Co). Luciferase assay also showed that, in
C26-Rx, AJ18 promoter activity increased 2.1-fold compared to C26-Co.
Furthermore, gene expression of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and bone matrix
proteins including type I collagen (Col1), osteocalcin (OC), osteopontin (OPN),
and matrix Gla protein (MGP) was examined. In C26-Rx, MGP expression increased
1.8-fold, and OPN expression increased 1.4-fold compared to C26-Co. However, no
significant difference in Col1, ALP, and OC expressions was detected between
C26-Rx and C26-Co. These results suggest that the existence of autoregulatory
feed back loops, which inhibit Runx2 activity through the interaction of AJ18,
Dlx5, and Msx2 cooperating with that of MGP and OPN, interferes with the
differentiation of C26 cells toward mature osteoblasts.

PMID: 16415564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Psychiatr Genet. 2006 Feb;16(1):19-23.

Autism and ultraconserved non-coding sequence on chromosome 7q.

Richler E(1), Reichert JG, Buxbaum JD, McInnes LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Autism has been linked to a broad region on chromosome 7q that
contains a large number of genes involved in transcription and development. This 
region is also enriched for ultraconserved non-coding elements, defined as
human-rodent sequences that are 100% aligned over > or =200 base pairs, which
have a high likelihood of being functional. Therefore, as only a few rare coding 
variants have been detected in the autism candidate genes on 7q examined to date,
we decided to screen these ultraconserved elements for possible autism
susceptibility alleles.
METHODS: We used denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography, and DNA
sequencing, to perform variant detection in a total of 146 cases with autism, 96 
from the Autism Genetic Resource Exchange and 50 from the Central Valley of Costa
Rica, as well as 124 controls from the Polymorphism Discovery Resource Panel. We 
screened 10 consecutive ultraconserved elements in, or flanking, the genes
DLX5/6, AUTS2 and FOXP2 on chromosome 7q.
RESULTS: Although we did find several rare variants in autism cases that were not
present in controls, we also observed rare variants present in controls and not
cases. The most common variant occurred in controls at a frequency of 3.3%.
Interestingly, two ultraconserved elements each harbored three independent
variants and one ultraconserved element harbored two independent variants,
suggesting that ultraconservation is maintained chiefly by a decreased tendency
toward fixation, rather than a significantly lower mutation rate.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that these sequences are unlikely to harbor major
autism susceptibility alleles.

PMID: 16395125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Development. 2006 Jan;133(2):371-81.

TGFbeta-mediated FGF signaling is crucial for regulating cranial neural crest
cell proliferation during frontal bone development.

Sasaki T(1), Ito Y, Bringas P Jr, Chou S, Urata MM, Slavkin H, Chai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology School of Dentistry University of
Southern California, 2250 Alcazar Street, CSA 103, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

The murine frontal bone derives entirely from the cranial neural crest (CNC) and 
consists of the calvarial (lateral) aspect that covers the frontal lobe of brain 
and the orbital aspect that forms the roof of bony orbit. TGFbeta and FGF
signaling have important regulatory roles in postnatal calvarial development. Our
previous study has demonstrated that conditional inactivation of Tgfbr2 in the
neural crest results in severe defects in calvarial development, although the
cellular and molecular mechanisms by which TGFbeta signaling regulates the fate
of CNC cells during frontal bone development remain unknown. Here, we show that
TGFbeta IIR is required for proliferation of osteoprogenitor cells in the
CNC-derived frontal bone anlagen. FGF acts downstream of TGFbeta signaling in
regulating CNC cell proliferation, and exogenous FGF2 rescues the cell
proliferation defect in the frontal primordium of Tgfbr2 mutant. Furthermore, the
CNC-derived frontal primordium requires TGFbeta IIR to undergo terminal
differentiation. However, this requirement is restricted to the developing
calvarial aspect of the frontal bone, whereas the orbital aspect forms despite
the ablation of Tgfbr2 gene, implying a differential requirement for TGFbeta
signaling during the development of various regions of the frontal bone. This
study demonstrates the biological significance of TGFbeta-mediated FGF signaling 
cascade in regulating frontal bone development, suggests that TGFbeta functions
as a morphogen in regulating the fate of the CNC-derived osteoblast and provides 
a model for investigating abnormal craniofacial development.

PMID: 16368934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Mech Dev. 2006 Jan;123(1):3-16. Epub 2005 Dec 5.

Msx1 and Dlx5 act independently in development of craniofacial skeleton, but
converge on the regulation of Bmp signaling in palate formation.

Levi G(1), Mantero S, Barbieri O, Cantatore D, Paleari L, Beverdam A, Genova F,
Robert B, Merlo GR.

Author information: 
(1)Evolution des Régulations Endocriniennes, CNRS UMR5166, Museum National
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.

Msx and Dlx homeoproteins control the morphogenesis and organization of
craniofacial skeletal structures, specifically those derived from the pharyngeal 
arches. In vitro Msx and Dlx proteins have opposing transcriptional properties
and form heterodimeric complexes via their homeodomain with reciprocal functional
repression. In this report we examine the skeletal phenotype of Msx1; Dlx5 double
knock-out (DKO) mice in relationship with their expression territories during
craniofacial development. Co-expression of Dlx5 and Msx1 is only observed in
embryonic tissues in which these genes have independent functions, and thus
direct protein interactions are unlikely to control morphogenesis of the cranium.
The DKO craniofacial phenotypes indicate a complex interplay between these genes,
acting independently (mandible and middle ear), synergistically (deposition of
bone tissue) or converging on the same morphogenetic process (palate growth and
closure). In the latter case, the absence of Dlx5 rescues in part the
Msx1-dependent defects in palate growth and elevation. At the basis of this
effect, our data implicate the Bmp (Bmp7, Bmp4)/Bmp antagonist (Follistatin)
signal: in the Dlx5(-/-) palate changes in the expression level of Bmp7 and
Follistatin counteract the reduced Bmp4 expression. These results highlight the
importance of precise spatial and temporal regulation of the Bmp/Bmp antagonist
system during palate closure.

PMID: 16330189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 3;281(9):5341-7. Epub 2005 Dec 2.

Extracellular matrix-mediated signaling by dentin phosphophoryn involves
activation of the Smad pathway independent of bone morphogenetic protein.

Jadlowiec JA(1), Zhang X, Li J, Campbell PG, Sfeir C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Pathology, School of Dental Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, 3501 Terrace Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

Cells have ingenious mechanisms for interpreting complex signals from their
external microenvironment. Previously, we have shown that phosphophoryn (PP)
regulates the expression of bone/dentin marker genes via the integrin/MAPK
signaling pathway (Jadlowiec, J., Koch, H., Zhang, X., Campbell, P. G., Seyedain,
M., and Sfeir, C. (2004) J. Biol. Chem. 279, 53323-53330). We hypothesize that
other signaling pathways important for mineralized tissue morphogenesis such as
the Smad pathway could be involved in PP signaling. We determined activation of
the Smad pathway in human adult mesenchymal stem cells following treatment with
recombinant PP (rPP). We observed that PP enhanced phosphorylation of Smad1
within 30 min and Smad1 translocation to the nucleus within 1 h. PP up-regulated 
the expression of Smad1 target genes, Smad6, Dlx5, and Runx2. The timing of PP
activation of Smad1 implies this is a direct effect; however, we also
investigated the possible involvement of bone morphogenetic proteins in PP
stimulation of the Smad pathway. PP was shown to up-regulate Bmp-2 gene
expression 12 h post-treatment with PP, which is much later than initial
detection of Smad1 phosphorylation at 30 min. Furthermore, addition of Noggin did
not block Smad1 phosphorylation by PP. We propose that PP could signal via the
Smad pathway by either directly stimulating the phosphorylation of Smad1 via
integrins or other mechanisms. These might include integrin/bone morphogenetic
protein receptor interactions or involvement of PP with other growth factors
leading to the modulation of intracellular signaling. It is noteworthy that a
non-transforming growth factor-beta family member activates the Smad pathway. The
role of PP in regulating the Smad pathway raises very interesting questions
regarding the role of PP during bone and tooth development.

PMID: 16326713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Dev Biol. 2006 Jan 15;289(2):308-17. Epub 2005 Dec 1.

Molecular mechanisms underlying inner ear patterning defects in kreisler mutants.

Choo D(1), Ward J, Reece A, Dou H, Lin Z, Greinwald J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Center for Hearing and
Deafness Research, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, OH 45229-3039, USA.
daniel.choo@cchmc.org

Prior studies have shown that kreisler mutants display early inner ear defects
that are related to abnormal hindbrain development and signaling. These defects
in kreisler mice have been linked to mutation of the kr/mafB gene. To investigate
potential relevance of kr/mafB and abnormal hindbrain development in inner ear
patterning, we analyzed the ear morphogenesis in kreisler mice using a paint-fill
technique. We also examined the expression patterns of a battery of genes
important for normal inner ear patterning and development. Our results indicate
that the loss of dorsal otic structures such as the endolymphatic duct and sac is
attributable to the downregulation of Gbx2, Dlx5 and Wnt2b in the dorsal region
of the otocyst. In contrast, the expanded expression domain of Otx2 in the
ventral otic region likely contributes to the cochlear phenotype seen in kreisler
mutants. Sensory organ development is also markedly disrupted in kreisler
mutants. This pattern of defects and gene expression changes is remarkably
similar to that observed in Gbx2 mutants. Taken together, the data show an
important role for hindbrain cues, and indirectly, kr/mafB, in guiding inner ear 
morphogenesis. The data also identify Gbx2, Dlx5, Wnt2b and Otx2 as key otic
genes ultimately affected by perturbation of the kr/mafB-hindbrain pathway.

PMID: 16325169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Int J Dev Biol. 2006;50(1):71-5.

Dlx3 is expressed in the ventral forebrain of chicken embryos: implications for
the evolution of the Dlx gene family.

Zhu H(1), Bendall AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.

The archetypal genomic arrangement of vertebrate Dlx genes is as three bigene
clusters (Dlx1/2, Dlx3/4, Dlx5/6). Phylogenetic sequence analysis of mouse and
zebrafish Dlx clusters supports the notion that the Dlx3/4 cluster is more
derived and the absence of expression of either Dlx3 or Dlx4 in the central
nervous system, as reported to date, is consistent with this. Together, these
observations have prompted a model in which cis-regulatory elements, responsible 
for directing Dlx gene transcription in the forebrain, were lost from the Dlx3/4 
bigene cluster prior to the divergence of tetrapods from fish. Here, we describe 
Dlx3 expression in the forebrain of chicken embryos; this constitutes the first
documented evidence of expression of either Dlx3 or Dlx4 in the central nervous
system of a vertebrate. Our observations have implications for models of the
evolutionary history of the Dlx gene family, for the genomic organization of Dlx 
genes in birds and for functional redundancy of Dlx gene function during avian
forebrain development.

PMID: 16323080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Gene. 2006 Jan 17;366(1):51-7. Epub 2005 Nov 28.

Critical molecular switches involved in BMP-2-induced osteogenic differentiation 
of mesenchymal cells.

Ryoo HM(1), Lee MH, Kim YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry and Skeletal Diseases Genome
Research Center, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 700-422, South Korea.
hmryoo@snu.ac.kr

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-2 strongly induces bone formation. Introduction 
of the protein in muscle tissue results in ectopic bone formation. Similarly,
BMP-2 treatment also stimulates the in vitro transdifferentiation of myogenic
cells to osteogenic cells. The establishment of an in vitro model system has
enabled the investigation of intracellular events including BMP receptor
activation, BMP-2-induced R-Smad activation, and kinase activation, and the role 
of osteogenic transcription factors, such as Runx2, Osx, Dlx5, and Msx2. Many
reviews have addressed events downstream of BMP-receptor binding but few deal
with molecular cascades involved in BMP-2-induced osteogenesis. We focus on
critical molecular switches, especially transcription factors, and several kinase
pathways involved in osteogenic differentiation.

PMID: 16314053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Anat. 2005 Nov;207(5):501-61.

Reassessing the Dlx code: the genetic regulation of branchial arch skeletal
pattern and development.

Depew MJ(1), Simpson CA, Morasso M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, Guy's Hospital,
London, UK. michael.depew@kcl.ac.uk

The branchial arches are meristic vertebrate structures, being metameric both
between each other within the rostrocaudal series along the ventrocephalic
surface of the embryonic head and within each individual arch: thus, just as each
branchial arch must acquire a unique identity along the rostrocaudal axis, each
structure within the proximodistal axis of an arch must also acquire a unique
identity. It is believed that regional specification of metameric structures is
controlled by the nested expression of related genes resulting in a regional
code, a principal that is though to be demonstrated by the regulation of
rostrocaudal axis development in animals exerted by the nested HOM-C/Hox homeobox
genes. The nested expression pattern of the Dlx genes within the murine branchial
arch ectomesenchyme has more recently led to the proposal of a Dlx code for the
regional specification along the proximodistal axis of the branchial arches (i.e.
it establishes intra-arch identity). This review re-examines this hypothesis, and
presents new work on an allelic series of Dlx loss-of-function mouse mutants that
includes various combinations of Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx3, Dlx5 and Dlx6. Although we
confirm fundamental aspects of the hypothesis, we further report a number of
novel findings. First, contrary to initial reports, Dlx1, Dlx2 and Dlx1/2
heterozygotes exhibit alterations of branchial arch structures and Dlx2-/- and
Dlx1/2-/- mutants have slight alterations of structures derived from the distal
portions of their branchial arches. Second, we present evidence for a role for
murine Dlx3 in the development of the branchial arches. Third, analysis of
compound Dlx mutants reveals four grades of mandibular arch transformations and
that the genetic interactions of cis first-order (e.g. Dlx5 and Dlx6), trans
second-order (e.g. Dlx5 and Dlx2) and trans third-order paralogues (e.g. Dlx5 and
Dlx1) result in significant and distinct morphological differences in mandibular 
arch development. We conclude by integrating functions of the Dlx genes within
the context of a hypothesized general mechanism for the establishment of pattern 
and polarity in the first branchial arch of gnathostomes that includes regionally
secreted growth factors such as Fgf8 and Bmp and other transcription factors such
as Msx1, and is consistent both with the structure of the conserved gnathostome
jaw bauplan and the elaboration of this bauplan to meet organismal end-point
designs.

PMCID: PMC1571560
PMID: 16313391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Histochem Cell Biol. 2006 May;125(5):593-602. Epub 2005 Nov 8.

Expression profile of genes related to osteoclastogenesis in mouse growth plate
and articular cartilage.

Kishimoto K(1), Kitazawa R, Kurosaka M, Maeda S, Kitazawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 
7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho, 650-0017, Kobe, Chuo-ku, Japan.

Based on developmental fate and function, cartilage tissue is broadly classified 
into transient cartilage (e.g. growth plate, GP) and permanent cartilage (e.g.
articular cartilage, AC). The former eventually disappears and is replaced by
bone during the endochondral ossification process, whereas the latter retains its
permanency. Osteo(chondro)clasts, multinucleated giant cells of the
monocyte/macrophage lineage, are selectively induced in the GP during
endochondral ossification and play central roles in the resorption of
cartilagenous matrices. The aim of this study was to investigate the factors
determining the GP-specific recruitment of osteo(chondro)clasts. We especially
focused on the expression pattern of the receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand
(RANKL), an essential factor for osteo(chondro)clast differentiation, and on that
of epigenetic and transcriptional factors affecting RANKL gene expression. Knee
joints of male BALB/c mice aged 8 weeks were dissected and subjected to
immunohistochemical analysis using anti-RANKL, Runx2, Dlx5 and Msx2 antibodies.
The methylation status of the mouse RANKL gene promoter in both the GP and the AC
was analyzed by sodium bisulfite mapping using microdissected mouse tissue. The
expression of BMP-2, -3, -4, -6 and type X collagen mRNA was examined by in situ 
hybridization (ISH). At the boundary between the calcifying cartilage and the
hypertrophic chondrocytes of the GP, RANKL-expressing chondrocytes overlapped
those expressing Runx2, Dlx5 and Msx2, near numerous osteo(chondro)clasts.
Although similar BMP-2 and -4 expression was observed in chondrocytes in both the
GP and the AC as well as in maturing osteoblasts, a rather restricted BMP-6
expression pattern was observed in resting and proliferating chondrocytes in the 
GP. On the other hand, sodium bisulfite mapping showed that mostly non-CpG
methylation was similarly scattered in a non-specific manner in chondrocytes in
the GP and the AC. Taken together with the fact that putative Runx2 binding
elements are located in the RANKL promoter, our data suggest that Runx2, an
essential transcription factor for skeletal development, is also a key regulator 
of RANKL expression in chondrocytes in the GP. Furthermore, a selective and
sequential expression of a subset of BMP and of transcription factors may define 
the expression pattern of RANKL through Runx2.

PMID: 16283360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. BMC Genet. 2005 Nov 2;6:52.

Analysis of four DLX homeobox genes in autistic probands.

Hamilton SP(1), Woo JM, Carlson EJ, Ghanem N, Ekker M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
steveh@lppi.ucsf.edu

BACKGROUND: Linkage studies in autism have identified susceptibility loci on
chromosomes 2q and 7q, regions containing the DLX1/2 and DLX5/6 bigene clusters. 
The DLX genes encode homeodomain transcription factors that control craniofacial 
patterning and differentiation and survival of forebrain inhibitory neurons. We
investigated the role that sequence variants in DLX genes play in autism by
in-depth resequencing of these genes in 161 autism probands from the AGRE
collection.
RESULTS: Sequencing of exons, exon/intron boundaries and known enhancers of DLX1,
2, 5 and 6 identified several nonsynonymous variants in DLX2 and DLX5 and a
variant in a DLX5/6 intragenic enhancer. The nonsynonymous variants were detected
in 4 of 95 families from which samples were sequenced. Two of these four SNPs
were not observed in 378 undiagnosed samples from North American populations,
while the remaining 2 were seen in one sample each.
CONCLUSION: Segregation of these variants in pedigrees did not generally support 
a contribution to autism susceptibility by these genes, although functional
analyses may provide insight into the biological understanding of these important
proteins.

PMCID: PMC1310613
PMID: 16266434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Jan;91(1):228-38. Epub 2005 Oct 25.

Endometriosis-specific genes identified by real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction expression profiling of endometriosis
versus autologous uterine endometrium.

Hu WP(1), Tay SK, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Singapore General Hospital, Outram
Road, Singapore 169608.

CONTEXT: The etiology and molecular pathogenesis of endometriosis, a prevalent
estrogen-dependent gynecologic disease, are poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to identify the differentially
expressed genes between autologous ectopic and eutopic endometrium.
DESIGN: Subtractive hybridization was used for a genome-wide search for
differentially expressed genes between autologous ectopic and eutopic
endometrium. Real-time RT-PCR was used for gene expression profiling in the
paired tissue samples taken from multiple subjects.
PATIENTS: The paired pelvic endometriosis and uterine endometrium tissue biopsies
were procured from 15 patients undergoing laparoscopy or hysterectomy for
endometriosis.
RESULTS: Seventy-eight candidate genes were identified from the subtractive cDNA 
libraries. Seventy-six of these genes were investigated in approximately 8000
real-time PCR for their differential expression in 30 paired tissue biopsies from
15 patients affected by endometriosis. Cluster analysis on gene expression
revealed highly consistent profiles in two groups of genes, despite the clinical 
heterogeneity of the 15 cases. Thirty-four genes specific to early disease point 
to their potential roles in establishment and evolution of endometriosis. Most
interestingly, 14 genes were consistently dysregulated in the paired samples from
the majority of the patients. Of these, there were two uncharacterized
transcripts and two novel genes, and 10 were matched to known genes: IGFBP5,
PIM2, RPL41, PSAP, FBLN1, SIPL, DLX5, HSD11B2, SET, and RHOE.
CONCLUSIONS: Dysregulation of 14 genes was found to be overtly associated with
endometriosis. Some of these genes, known to participate in estrogen activities
and antiapoptosis, may play a role in the pathogenesis of endometriosis and may
represent potential diagnostic markers or therapeutic targets for endometriosis.

PMID: 16249290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Child Neurol. 2005 Sep;20(9):759-63.

Rett syndrome and neuronal development.

Johnston MV(1), Blue ME, Naidu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. 
johnston@kennedykrieger.org

The clinical signs of Rett syndrome, as well as neuropathology and brain imaging,
suggest that the disorder disrupts neuronal circuits. Studies using receptor
autoradiography demonstrate abnormalities in the density of excitatory glutamate 
and inhibitory gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) synaptic receptors in postmortem
brain from young female subjects with Rett syndrome. MeCP2, the protein that is
abnormal in most female individuals with Rett syndrome, is expressed
predominantly in neurons and appears during development at the time of synapse
formation. Studies of nasal epithelium from patients with Rett syndrome show that
the maturation of olfactory receptor neurons is impeded prior to the time of
synapse formation. Recent reports indicate that MeCP2 controls the expression of 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor and the DNA-binding homeobox protein Dlx5.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor enhances glutamate neurotransmission at
excitatory synapses, whereas Dlx5 is expressed in most GABAergic neurons and
stimulates the synthesis of GABA. Taken together, this information supports the
hypothesis that Rett syndrome is a genetic disorder of synapse development,
especially synapses that use glutamate and GABA as neurotransmitters.

PMID: 16225832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Development. 2005 Nov;132(22):4987-98. Epub 2005 Oct 12.

Sonic hedgehog maintains the identity of cortical interneuron progenitors in the 
ventral telencephalon.

Xu Q(1), Wonders CP, Anderson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New
York, NY 10021, USA.

Fate determination in the mammalian forebrain, where mature phenotypes are often 
not achieved until postnatal stages of development, has been an elusive topic of 
study despite its relevance to neuropsychiatric disease. In the ventral
telencephalon, major subgroups of cerebral cortical interneurons originate in the
medial ganglionic eminence (MGE), where the signaling molecule sonic hedgehog
(Shh) continues to be expressed during the period of neuronogenesis. To examine
whether Shh regulates cortical interneuron specification, we studied mice
harboring conditional mutations in Shh within the neural tube. At embryonic day
12.5, NestinCre:Shh(Fl/Fl) mutants have a relatively normal index of S-phase
cells in the MGE, but many of these cells do not co-express the interneuron
fate-determining gene Nkx2.1. This effect is reproduced by inhibiting Shh
signaling in slice cultures, and the effect can be rescued in
NestinCre:Shh(Fl/Fl) slices by the addition of exogenous Shh. By culturing MGE
progenitors on a cortical feeder layer, cell fate analyses suggest that Shh
signaling maintains Nkx2.1 expression and cortical interneuron fate determination
by MGE progenitors. These results are corroborated by the examination of
NestinCre:Shh(Fl/Fl) cortex at postnatal day 12, in which there is a dramatic
reduction in cell profiles that express somatostatin or parvalbumin. By contrast,
analyses of Dlx5/6Cre:Smoothened(Fl/Fl) mutant mice suggest that cell-autonomous 
hedgehog signaling is not crucial to the migration or differentiation of most
cortical interneurons. These results combine in vitro and ex vivo analyses to
link embryonic abnormalities in Shh signaling to postnatal alterations in
cortical interneuron composition.

PMID: 16221724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Bone. 2006 Jan;38(1):74-84. Epub 2005 Aug 30.

Netoglitazone is a PPAR-gamma ligand with selective effects on bone and fat.

Lazarenko OP(1), Rzonca SO, Suva LJ, Lecka-Czernik B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 629
Jack Stephens Dr., Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.

Thiazolidinediones are effective anti-diabetic drugs that improve insulin
sensitivity through the activation of the nuclear receptor and adipocyte-specific
transcription factor, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPAR-gamma). Recent evidence suggests that PPAR-gamma also controls bone cell
development and bone homeostasis. In mice, PPAR-gamma insufficiency results in
increased bone mass, whereas administration of the specific PPAR-gamma agonist
rosiglitazone leads to bone loss and increased bone marrow adiposity. Although
the pro-adipocytic and anti-osteoblastic activities of PPAR-gamma can be
separated in vitro using ligands with distinct chemical structures, little
evidence exists supporting this functional separation in vivo. Netoglitazone
(MCC-555, RWJ-241947) is a thiazolidinedione, which acts as either a full or
partial PPAR-gamma agonist, or antagonist, in a cell type specific manner. In
this study, the pro-adipocytic and anti-osteoblastic activities of netoglitazone 
were evaluated in vitro, using both U-33/gamma2 cells as a model of marrow
mesenchymal cell differentiation under the control of PPAR-gamma2 and primary
bone marrow cultures, and in vivo in C57BL/6 mice. In vitro, netoglitazone
induced adipocyte and inhibited osteoblast formation in a PPAR-gamma2-dependent
manner; however, it was 100-fold less effective than rosiglitazone. In vivo, the 
administration of netoglitazone at an effective hyperglycemic dose (10 microg/g
body weight/day) did not result in trabecular bone loss. Bone quality parameters 
such as bone mineral density and bone microarchitecture were not affected in
netoglitazone-treated animals. The observed lack of an in vivo effect of
netoglitazone on bone was entirely consistent with its low anti-osteoblastic
activity in vitro. In contrast to the observed in vitro effects, netoglitazone in
vivo effectively induced marrow adipocyte formation and induced changes in the
weights of extramedullary fat depots. Consistent with these cell type-specific
effects, expression of the adipocyte-specific gene marker FABP4/aP2 was
increased, whereas the expression of osteoblast-specific gene markers, Runx2,
Dlx5, osteocalcin, and collagen were not affected by netoglitazone. In
conclusion, netoglitazone is a member of a new class of PPAR-gamma ligands with
distinct anti-diabetic, anti-osteoblastic, and pro-adipocytic activities in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1850100
PMID: 16137931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 21;280(42):35579-87. Epub 2005 Aug 22.

Dlx5 specifically regulates Runx2 type II expression by binding to
homeodomain-response elements in the Runx2 distal promoter.

Lee MH(1), Kim YJ, Yoon WJ, Kim JI, Kim BG, Hwang YS, Wozney JM, Chi XZ, Bae SC, 
Choi KY, Cho JY, Choi JY, Ryoo HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry and Skeletal Diseases Genome
Research Center, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea.

Two major isoforms of the Runx2 gene are expressed by alternative promoter usage:
Runx2 type I (Runx2-I) is derived from the proximal promoter (P2), and Runx2 type
II (Runx2-II) is produced by the distal promoter (P1). Our previous results
indicate that Dlx5 mediates BMP-2-induced Runx2 expression and osteoblast
differentiation (Lee, M.-H., Kim, Y-J., Kim, H-J., Park, H-D., Kang, A-R., Kyung,
H.-M., Sung, J-H., Wozney, J. M., Kim, H-J., and Ryoo, H-M. (2003) J. Biol. Chem.
278, 34387-34394). However, little is known of the molecular mechanisms by which 
Dlx5 up-regulates Runx2 expression in BMP-2 signaling. Here, Runx2-II expression 
was found to be specifically stimulated by BMP-2 treatment or by Dlx5
overexpression. In addition, BMP-2, Dlx5, and Runx2-II were found to be expressed
in osteogenic fronts and parietal bones of the developing cranial vault and
Runx2-I and Msx2 in the sutural mesenchyme. Furthermore, Runx2 P1 promoter
activity was strongly stimulated by Dlx5 overexpression, whereas Runx2 P2
promoter activity was not. Runx2 P1 promoter deletion analysis indicated that the
Dlx5-specific response is due to sequences between -756 and -342 bp of the P1
promoter, where three Dlx5-response elements are located. Dlx5 responsiveness to 
these elements was confirmed by gel mobility shift assay and site-directed
mutagenesis. Moreover, Msx2 specifically suppressed the Runx2 P1 promoter, and
the responsible region overlaps with that recognized by Dlx5. In summary, Dlx5
specifically transactivates the Runx2 P1 promoter, and its action on the P1
promoter is antagonized by Msx2.

PMID: 16115867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2005 Jul;50(8):978-84.

[How the methyl-CpG binding protein-related epigenetic disease turns on the genes
that produce its symptoms].

[Article in Japanese]

Horike S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics & Genomic Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children,
Canada. shinichi@genet.sickkids.on.ca

PMID: 16001803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 2;280(35):30845-55. Epub 2005 Jul 5.

Cooperative interactions between RUNX2 and homeodomain protein-binding sites are 
critical for the osteoblast-specific expression of the bone sialoprotein gene.

Roca H(1), Phimphilai M, Gopalakrishnan R, Xiao G, Franceschi RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, Prevention, and Geriatrics and Center for
Craniofacial Regeneration, School of Dentistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
48109-1078, USA.

The bone sialoprotein (Bsp) gene provides an excellent model for studying
mechanisms controlling osteoblast-specific gene expression. Although the RUNX2
transcription factor directly regulates many osteoblast-related genes, its
function in Bsp expression remains uncertain. By using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis in MC3T3-E1 (clone MC-4) preosteoblast cells,
RUNX2 was shown to bind a chromatin fragment containing the proximal Bsp
promoter. Two putative RUNX2-binding sites (R1 and R2) were identified within
this region of the mouse, rat, and human genes and were shown to bind RUNX2 in
vitro and in vivo (by ChIP assay). Site-specific mutagenesis established that
both sites act as osteoblast-specific transcriptional enhancers and together
account for nearly two-thirds of the total promoter activity. In addition,
functional cooperativity was observed between the R2 site and an adjacent
homeodomain protein-binding site previously characterized by this laboratory (the
C site). All three sites (R1, R2, and C) are necessary for maximal promoter
activity in osteoblasts. DLX5 in MC-4 cell nuclear extracts binds to the C site
in vitro. Furthermore, ChIP assays revealed that DLX5 is selectively associated
with chromatin in the vicinity of the C site only when Bsp is transcriptionally
active. Finally, co-immunoprecipitation assays detected a physical complex
containing DLX5 and RUNX2. Taken together, our data show that RUNX2 is a direct
regulator of Bsp in osteoblasts and that it functions in cooperation with DLX5 or
a related factor to activate osteoblast-specific gene expression.

PMID: 16000302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Genes Dev. 2005 Jul 1;19(13):1612-23. Epub 2005 Jun 16.

Wnt-dependent regulation of inner ear morphogenesis is balanced by the opposing
and supporting roles of Shh.

Riccomagno MM(1), Takada S, Epstein DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The inner ear is partitioned along its dorsal/ventral axis into vestibular and
auditory organs, respectively. Gene expression studies suggest that this
subdivision occurs within the otic vesicle, the tissue from which all inner ear
structures are derived. While the specification of ventral otic fates is
dependent on Shh secreted from the notochord, the nature of the signal
responsible for dorsal otic development has not been described. In this study, we
demonstrate that Wnt signaling is active in dorsal regions of the otic vesicle,
where it functions to regulate the expression of genes (Dlx5/6 and Gbx2)
necessary for vestibular morphogenesis. We further show that the source of Wnt
impacting on dorsal otic development emanates from the dorsal hindbrain, and
identify Wnt1 and Wnt3a as the specific ligands required for this function. The
restriction of Wnt target genes to the dorsal otocyst is also influenced by Shh. 
Thus, a balance between Wnt and Shh signaling activities is key in distinguishing
between vestibular and auditory cell types.

PMCID: PMC1172066
PMID: 15961523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Bioessays. 2005 Jul;27(7):676-80.

Association by guilt: identification of DLX5 as a target for MeCP2 provides a
molecular link between genomic imprinting and Rett syndrome.

Bapat S(1), Galande S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune, India.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental disorder affecting
almost exclusively girls. Although mutations in methyl-CpG-binding protein
(MeCP2) are known to be associated with RTT, gene expression patterns are not
significantly altered in MeCP2-deficient cells. A recent study1 identified
MeCP2-mediated histone modification and formation of a higher-order chromatin
loop structure specifically associated with silent chromatin at the Dlx5-Dlx6
locus in normal cells, and its absence thereof in RTT patients. This altered
expression of Dlx5 through loss of silent chromatin loop formation provides a
molecular mechanism underlying RTT and proposes a novel role for MeCP2 in
chromatin organization and imprinting.

Copyright (c) 2005 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 15954098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 8;280(27):25331-8. Epub 2005 Apr 22.

SP3/SP1 transcription activity regulates specific expression of collagen type X
in hypertrophic chondrocytes.

Magee C(1), Nurminskaya M, Faverman L, Galera P, Linsenmayer TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Tufts University, Boston,
Massachusetts 02111, USA.

Previously, we have shown that two non-canonical specificity protein (SP)-binding
sites within the proximal promoter (nucleotide (nt) -139 to +5) of the chicken
Col10a1 gene are involved in conferring tissue-specific expression of type X
collagen to hypertrophic chondrocytes. In the present study, we examined the role
of SP3/SP1 transcription factors in the regulation of the Col10a1 promoter. The
SP3/SP1 ratio is higher in hypertrophic versus non-hypertrophic chondrocytes, due
to the significant decrease in SP1 in hypertrophic cells detected by real-time
PCR and Western blot analyses. Functional analyses by transfection-mediated
overexpression of SP1 and SP3 suggest that SP1 inhibits the Col10a1 promoter.
This effect is negated by an interaction with SP3 in hypertrophic chondrocytes.
Additionally, mutation analysis showed that the 40-bp intervening sequence (nt
-115 to -75) is required for expression of the Col10a1 gene. In this sequence, a 
binding site for Dlx5/6 transcription factors (nt -99 to -87) retards a protein
specific for hypertrophic chondrocytes in electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
Endogenous levels of Dlx5 are 3-fold higher in hypertrophic versus
non-hypertrophic cells by real-time PCR analysis, and overexpression of Dlx5 in
non-hypertrophic chondrocytes activates the proximal Col10a1 promoter 3-fold.
These results indicate that the SP3/SP1 ratio and Dlx5 are important regulators
of the proximal Col10a1 promoter in hypertrophic cartilage and suggest that
interactions between SP3 and SP1 regulate expression of different types of
collagen during chondrocyte differentiation.

PMID: 15849196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Dev Biol. 2005 May 1;281(1):22-37.

Dlx2 over-expression regulates cell adhesion and mesenchymal condensation in
ectomesenchyme.

McKeown SJ(1), Newgreen DF, Farlie PG.

Author information: 
(1)Craniofacial Sciences Consortium, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal 
Children's Hospital and University of Melbourne, Parkville 3052, Victoria,
Australia.

The Dlx family of homeodomain transcription factors have diverse roles in
development including craniofacial morphogenesis and consists of 6 members with
overlapping expression patterns. Dlx2 is expressed within the developing
branchial arches in both the epithelium and mesenchyme and targeted deletion in
mice has revealed roles in patterning and development of the craniofacial
skeleton. Defects in Dlx2 null mice include skeletal anomalies of proximal
branchial arch 1 derivatives while distal elements are largely spared indicating 
redundancy within the Dlx family. We have investigated the function of Dlx2 using
in ovo electroporation and cell culture. Ectopic expression of Dlx2 within the
neural tube beginning prior to emigration of neural crest cells at E1.25
drastically inhibits the migration of transfected cells and induces aggregation
of transfected neuroepithelial cells within the neural tube at 24 h
post-electroporation. By 48 h post-electroporation, the majority of transfected
cells formed multicellular aggregates that were found adjacent to the basal side 
of the neural tube and very few Dlx2 expressing cells migrated to the level of
the branchial arches. Similar results were obtained for Dlx5, suggesting these
effects may be common to Dlx genes. Electroporation of the Dlx2 expression
construct into branchial arch mesenchyme induced N-cadherin and NCAM, a dramatic 
increase in cell-cell adhesion relative to controls, and resulted in an increase 
in mesenchymal condensation. These results suggest a role for Dlx genes in
regulating ectomesenchymal cell adhesion and supports the possibility that the
skeletal dysmorphology seen in Dlx null mice may derive from abnormalities at the
condensation stage.

PMID: 15848386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Development. 2005 May;132(10):2309-18. Epub 2005 Apr 13.

Gbx2 is required for the morphogenesis of the mouse inner ear: a downstream
candidate of hindbrain signaling.

Lin Z(1), Cantos R, Patente M, Wu DK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institutes on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20850, USA.

Gbx2 is a homeobox-containing transcription factor that is related to unplugged
in Drosophila. In mice, Gbx2 and Otx2 negatively regulate each other to establish
the mid-hindbrain boundary in the neural tube. Here, we show that Gbx2 is
required for the development of the mouse inner ear. Absence of the endolymphatic
duct and swelling of the membranous labyrinth are common features in Gbx2-/-
inner ears. More severe mutant phenotypes include absence of the anterior and
posterior semicircular canals, and a malformed saccule and cochlear duct.
However, formation of the lateral semicircular canal and its ampulla is usually
unaffected. These inner ear phenotypes are remarkably similar to those reported
in kreisler mice, which have inner ear defects attributed to defects in the
hindbrain. Based on gene expression analyses, we propose that activation of Gbx2 
expression within the inner ear is an important pathway whereby signals from the 
hindbrain regulate inner ear development. In addition, our results suggest that
Gbx2 normally promotes dorsal fates such as the endolymphatic duct and
semicircular canals by positively regulating genes such as Wnt2b and Dlx5.
However, Gbx2 promotes ventral fates such as the saccule and cochlear duct,
possibly by restricting Otx2 expression.

PMID: 15829521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Dev Dyn. 2005 May;233(1):115-21.

Runx2 regulates FGF2-induced Bmp2 expression during cranial bone development.

Choi KY(1), Kim HJ, Lee MH, Kwon TG, Nah HD, Furuichi T, Komori T, Nam SH, Kim
YJ, Kim HJ, Ryoo HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry and Skeletal Diseases Genome
Research Center, Kyungpook National University, 101 Dong In-dong, Jung-gu, Daegu,
700-422, Korea.

Calvarial bone is formed by the intramembranous bone-forming process, which
involves many signaling molecules. The constitutive activation of the fibroblast 
growth factor (FGF) signaling pathway accelerates osteoblast differentiation and 
results in premature cranial suture closure. Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
signaling pathways, which involve the downstream transcription factors Dlx5 and
Msx2, are also involved in the bone-forming processes. However, the relationships
between these two main signaling cascades are still unclear. We found that FGF2
treatment of developing bone fronts stimulated Bmp2 gene expression but that BMP2
treatment could not induce Fgf2 expression. Moreover, the disruption of the Runx2
gene completely eliminated the expression of Bmp2 and its downstream genes Dlx5
and Msx2 in the developing primordium of bone, while the expression of Fgf2 was
maintained. In addition, cultured Runx2-/- cells expressed very low baseline
levels of Bmp2 that were up-regulated by transfection with a Runx2-expressing
plasmid. These levels in turn were markedly elevated by FGF2 treatment. FGF2
treatment also strongly enhanced the Bmp2 expression in MC3T3-E1 cells, whose
endogenous Runx2 gene is intact and which express Bmp2 at low baseline levels as 
well. These results indicate that Runx2 is an important mediator of the
expression of Bmp2 in response to FGF stimulation in cranial bone development.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15765505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Mar 1;102(9):3324-9. Epub 2005 Feb 22.

Regulation of osteoblastogenesis and bone mass by Wnt10b.

Bennett CN(1), Longo KA, Wright WS, Suva LJ, Lane TF, Hankenson KD, MacDougald
OA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0622, USA.

Wnts comprise a family of secreted signaling proteins that regulate diverse
developmental processes. Activation of Wnt signaling by Wnt10b inhibits
differentiation of preadipocytes and blocks adipose tissue development; however, 
the effect of Wnt10b on other mesenchymal lineages has not been defined. To
explore the physiological role of Wnt signaling in bone development, we analyzed 
FABP4-Wnt10b mice, which express the Wnt10b transgene in marrow. Femurs from
FABP4-Wnt10b mice have almost four times as much bone in the distal metaphyses
and are mechanically stronger. These mice maintain elevated bone mass at least
through 23 months of age. In addition, FABP4-Wnt10b mice are protected from the
bone loss characteristic of estrogen deficiency. We used pharmacological and
genetic approaches to demonstrate that canonical Wnt signaling stimulates
osteoblastogenesis and inhibits adipogenesis of bipotential mesenchymal
precursors. Wnt10b shifts cell fate toward the osteoblast lineage by induction of
the osteoblastogenic transcription factors Runx2, Dlx5, and osterix and
suppression of the adipogenic transcription factors C/EBPalpha and PPARgamma. One
mechanism whereby Wnt10b promotes osteoblastogenesis is suppression of PPARgamma 
expression. Finally, Wnt10b-/- mice have decreased trabecular bone and serum
osteocalcin, confirming that Wnt10b is an endogenous regulator of bone formation.

PMCID: PMC552924
PMID: 15728361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Lancet Neurol. 2005 Feb;4(2):83.

Advance made in understanding Rett's syndrome.

Bradbury J.

PMID: 15709225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Comp Neurol. 2005 Mar 14;483(3):292-303.

The vertebrate ortholog of Aristaless is regulated by Dlx genes in the developing
forebrain.

Cobos I(1), Broccoli V, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94158-2611, USA.

The Dlx transcription factors have a central role in controlling the development 
of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic neurons in the forebrain. However, little
is known about how they control the properties of GABAergic neurons. One
candidate is the Aristaless (Arx) homeobox gene, which lies genetically
downstream of the fly Dlx gene (Distal-less, Dll). The expression of Arx in the
mouse forebrain includes Dlx-expressing territories, such us the ventral
thalamus, parts of the hypothalamus, and the ganglionic eminences and their
derivatives in the subpallial telencephalon, and is expressed, as with the Dlx
genes, in cortical GABAergic neurons. By using gain-of-function and
loss-of-function assays in mouse and chicken embryos, we show that the Dlx genes 
have a conserved role in regulating the expression of Arx in the forebrain of
vertebrates. Ectopic expression of Dlx genes with electroporation in brain slices
from mouse embryos and in the neural tube of chick embryos shows that Dlx genes
are sufficient to induce Arx ectopically. Moreover, we provide evidence that the 
Dlx genes exert a functionally relevant role in regulating Arx in vivo, as shown 
by the severe reduction in the expression of Arx in Dlx1/2 double-knockout mice. 
Therefore, our results suggest evolutionarily conserved functions of Dlx genes in
regulating Arx expression between Drosophila and vertebrates.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15682394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Comp Neurol. 2005 Feb 28;483(1):48-65.

Dlx gene expression during chick inner ear development.

Brown ST(1), Wang J, Groves AK.

Author information: 
(1)Gonda Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, House Ear Institute, Los
Angeles, California 90057-1922, USA.

Members of the Dlx gene family play essential roles in the development of the
zebrafish and mouse inner ear, but little is known regarding Dlx genes and avian 
inner ear development. We have examined the inner ear expression patterns of
Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx3, Dlx5, and Dlx6 during the first 7 days of chicken embryonic
development. Dlx1 and Dlx2 expression was seen only in nonneuronal cells of the
cochleovestibular ganglion and nerves from stage 21 to stage 32. Dlx3 marks the
otic placode beginning at stage 9 and becomes limited to epithelium adjacent to
the hindbrain as invagination of the placode begins. Dlx3 expression then
resolves to the dorsal otocyst and gradually becomes limited to the endolymphatic
sac by stage 30. Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression in the developing inner ear is first
seen at stages 12 and 13, respectively, in the rim of the otic pit, before
spreading throughout the dorsal otocyst. As morphogenesis proceeds, Dlx5 and Dlx6
expression is seen throughout the forming semicircular canals and endolymphatic
structures. During later stages, both genes are seen to mark the distal surface
of the forming canals and display expression complementary to that of BMP4 in the
vestibular sensory regions. Dlx5 expression is also seen in the lagena macula and
the cochlear and vestibular nerves by stage 30. These findings suggest important 
roles for Dlx genes in the vestibular and neural development of the avian inner
ear.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15672396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Cell Tissue Res. 2005 Mar;319(3):447-53. Epub 2005 Jan 13.

Deletion of the endothelin-A receptor gene within the developing mandible.

Ruest LB(1), Kedzierski R, Yanagisawa M, Clouthier DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Craniofacial Biology and the Birth
Defects Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, 40292, USA.

Signaling from the endothelin-A (Ednra) receptor is responsible for initiating
multiple signaling pathways within neural crest cells (NCCs). Loss of this
initiation is presumably the basis for the craniofacial defects observed in
Ednra-/- embryos. However, it is not known whether continued Ednra signaling in
NCC derivatives is required for subsequent development of the lower jaw. To
address this question, mice containing loxP recombination sequences flanking a
portion of the Ednra gene were bred with transgenic mice that express Cre
recombinase under control of a Dlx5/6 enhancer element. We find that while Ednra 
gene inactivation within the mandibular arch of these Ednra conditional knockout 
embryos is detectable by embryonic day (E) 10.5, mandibular arch-specific gene
expression is normal, as is overall mandible development. These results suggest
that while Ednra receptor signaling is crucial for early NCC patterning,
subsequent Ednra signaling is not essential for mandible bone development.

PMCID: PMC2806232
PMID: 15647918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Nat Genet. 2005 Jan;37(1):10-1.

Is Rett syndrome a loss-of-imprinting disorder?

Pescucci C, Meloni I, Renieri A.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2005 Jan;37(1):31-40.

PMID: 15624014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Dev Dyn. 2005 Feb;232(2):313-24.

Xenopus aristaless-related homeobox (xARX) gene product functions as both a
transcriptional activator and repressor in forebrain development.

Seufert DW(1), Prescott NL, El-Hodiri HM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Human Genetics, Columbus Children's Research
Institute, 700 Children's Drive, Columbus, OH 43205, USA.

Mutations in the aristaless-related homeobox (ARX) gene have been found in
patients with a variety of X-linked mental retardation syndromes with forebrain
abnormalities, including lissencephaly. Arx is expressed in the developing mouse,
Xenopus, and zebrafish forebrain. We have used whole-mount in situ hybridization,
overexpression, and loss-of-function studies to investigate the involvement of
xArx in Xenopus brain development. We verified that xArx is expressed in the
prospective diencephalon, as the forebrain is patterned and specified during
neural plate stages. Expression spreads into the ventral and medial telencephalon
as development proceeds through neural tube and tadpole stages. Overexpression of
xArx resulted in morphological abnormalities in forebrain development, including 
loss of rostral midline structures, syn- or anophthalmia, dorsal displacement of 
the nasal organ, and ventral neural tube hyperplasia. Additionally, there is a
delay in expression of many molecular markers of brain and retinal development.
However, expression of some markers, dlx5 and wnt8b, was enhanced in
xArx-injected embryos. Loss-of-function experiments indicated that xArx was
necessary for normal forebrain development. Expansion of wnt8b expression
depended on xArx function as a transcriptional repressor, whereas ectopic
expression of dlx5, accompanied by development of ectopic otic structures,
depended on function of Arx as a transcriptional activator. These results suggest
that Arx acts as a bifunctional transcriptional regulator in brain development.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15614781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Nat Genet. 2005 Jan;37(1):31-40. Epub 2004 Dec 19.

Loss of silent-chromatin looping and impaired imprinting of DLX5 in Rett
syndrome.

Horike S(1), Cai S, Miyano M, Cheng JF, Kohwi-Shigematsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron
Road, Mail Stop 84-171, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720,
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2005 Jan;37(1):10-1.

Mutations in MECP2 are associated with Rett syndrome, an X-linked
neurodevelopmental disorder. To identify genes targeted by Mecp2, we sequenced
100 in vivo Mecp2-binding sites in mouse brain. Several sequences mapped to an
imprinted gene cluster on chromosome 6, including Dlx5 and Dlx6, whose
transcription was roughly two times greater in brains of Mecp2-null mice compared
with those of wild-type mice. The maternally expressed gene DLX5 showed a loss of
imprinting in lymphoblastoid cells from individuals with Rett syndrome. Because
Dlx5 regulates production of enzymes that synthesize gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA), loss of imprinting of Dlx5 may alter GABAergic neuron activity in
individuals with Rett syndrome. In mouse brain, Dlx5 imprinting was relaxed, yet 
Mecp2-mediated silent-chromatin structure existed at the Dlx5-Dlx6 locus in
brains of wild-type, but not Mecp2-null, mice. Mecp2 targeted histone deacetylase
1 to a sharply defined, approximately 1-kb region at the Dlx5-Dlx6 locus and
promoted repressive histone methylation at Lys9 at this site. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation-combined loop assays showed that Mecp2 mediated the silent
chromatin-derived 11-kb chromatin loop at the Dlx5-Dlx6 locus. This loop was
absent in chromatin of brains of Mecp2-null mice, and Dlx5-Dlx6 interacted with
far distant sequences, forming distinct active chromatin-associated loops. These 
results show that formation of a silent-chromatin loop is a new mechanism
underlying gene regulation by Mecp2.

PMID: 15608638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Dev Biol. 2004 Dec 15;276(2):523-40.

dlx3b and dlx4b function in the development of Rohon-Beard sensory neurons and
trigeminal placode in the zebrafish neurula.

Kaji T(1), Artinger KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology, University of Colorado Health Sciences
Center, 4200 East Ninth Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

Rohon-Beard sensory neurons, neural crest cells, and sensory placodes can be
distinguished at the boundary of the embryonic epidermis (skin) and the neural
plate. The inductive signals at the neural plate border region are likely to
involve a gradient of bone morphogenic protein (BMP) in conjunction with FGF and 
Wnts and other signals. However, how these signals are transduced to produce the 
final cell fate remains to be determined. Recent evidence from Xenopus and chick 
suggest that Dlx genes are required for the generation of cell fates at the
neural plate border (McLarren, K.W., Litsiou, A., Streit, A., 2003. DLX5
positions the neural crest and preplacode region at the border of the neural
plate. Dev. Biol. 259, 34-47; Woda, J.M., Pastagia, J., Mercola, M., Artinger,
K.B., 2003. Dlx proteins position the neural plate border and determine adjacent 
cell fates. Development 130, 331-342). In the present study, we extend these
findings to zebrafish, where we unequivocally demonstrate that dlx3b and dlx4b
function in a dose-dependent manner to specify cell fates such as Rohon-Beard
sensory neurons and trigeminal sensory placodes. dlx function was examined by
inhibiting: (1) protein levels with antisense morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs), 
and (2) activity by repressing the ability of dlx-homeodomain to bind to
downstream targets (EnR-dlx3bhd mRNA; dlx3b homeodomain fused to Engrailed
transcriptional repressor domain). Inhibition of dlx3b and dlx4b protein and
activity resulted in the reduction or complete loss of Rohon-Beard (RB) sensory
neurons and trigeminal (TG) sensory placodes. These data suggest that dlx3b and
dlx4b function in the specification of RB neurons and trigeminal sensory placodes
in zebrafish. Further, we have shown that dlx3b and dlx4b function in a
non-cell-autonomous manner for RB neuron development; dlx3b and dlx4b act to
regulate bmp2b expression at the non-neural ectodermal border. These data suggest
that the contribution of dlx3b and dlx4b to neural plate border formation is
partially non-cell-autonomous acting via BMP activity.

PMCID: PMC4027963
PMID: 15581883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Aging Cell. 2004 Dec;3(6):379-89.

Aging activates adipogenic and suppresses osteogenic programs in mesenchymal
marrow stroma/stem cells: the role of PPAR-gamma2 transcription factor and
TGF-beta/BMP signaling pathways.

Moerman EJ(1), Teng K, Lipschitz DA, Lecka-Czernik B.

Author information: 
(1)Reynolds Department of Geriatrics, Center on Aging, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.

Osteoblasts and adipocytes originate from a common progenitor, which arises from 
bone marrow mesenchymal stroma/stem cells (mMSC). Aging causes a decrease in the 
number of bone-forming osteoblasts and an increase in the number of marrow
adipocytes. Here, we demonstrate that, during aging, the status of mMSC changes
with respect to both their intrinsic differentiation potential and production of 
signaling molecules, which contributes to the formation of a specific marrow
microenvironment necessary for maintenance of bone homeostasis. Aging causes a
decrease in the commitment of mMSC to the osteoblast lineage and an increase in
the commitment to the adipocyte lineage. This is reflected by changes in the
expression of phenotype-specific gene markers. The expression of
osteoblast-specific transcription factors, Runx2 and Dlx5, and osteoblast
markers, collagen and osteocalcin, is decreased in aged mMSC. Conversely, the
expression of adipocyte-specific transcription factor PPAR-gamma2, shown
previously to regulate osteoblast development and bone formation negatively and
to regulate marrow adipocyte differentiation positively, is increased, as is a
gene marker of adipocyte phenotype, fatty acid binding protein aP2. Furthermore, 
production of an endogenous PPAR-gamma activator(s) that stimulates adipocyte
differentiation and production of autocrine/paracrine factor(s) that suppresses
the osteoblastic phenotype are also increased. In addition, expression of
different components of TGF-beta and BMP2/4 signaling pathways is altered,
suggesting that activities of these two cytokines essential for bone homeostasis 
change with aging.

PMCID: PMC1850101
PMID: 15569355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Development. 2004 Dec;131(23):5871-81. Epub 2004 Nov 3.

Six1 promotes a placodal fate within the lateral neurogenic ectoderm by
functioning as both a transcriptional activator and repressor.

Brugmann SA(1), Pandur PD, Kenyon KL, Pignoni F, Moody SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Institute for Biomedical Sciences, The
George Washington University, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Cranial placodes, which give rise to sensory organs in the vertebrate head, are
important embryonic structures whose development has not been well studied
because of their transient nature and paucity of molecular markers. We have used 
markers of pre-placodal ectoderm (PPE) (six1, eya1) to determine that gradients
of both neural inducers and anteroposterior signals are necessary to induce and
appropriately position the PPE. Overexpression of six1 expands the PPE at the
expense of neural crest and epidermis, whereas knock-down of Six1 results in
reduction of the PPE domain and expansion of the neural plate, neural crest and
epidermis. Using expression of activator and repressor constructs of six1 or
co-expression of wild-type six1 with activating or repressing co-factors (eya1
and groucho, respectively), we demonstrate that Six1 inhibits neural crest and
epidermal genes via transcriptional repression and enhances PPE genes via
transcriptional activation. Ectopic expression of neural plate, neural crest and 
epidermal genes in the PPE demonstrates that these factors mutually influence
each other to establish the appropriate boundaries between these ectodermal
domains.

PMID: 15525662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Oct;24(20):9248-61.

Dlx3 transcriptional regulation of osteoblast differentiation: temporal
recruitment of Msx2, Dlx3, and Dlx5 homeodomain proteins to chromatin of the
osteocalcin gene.

Hassan MQ(1), Javed A, Morasso MI, Karlin J, Montecino M, van Wijnen AJ, Stein
GS, Stein JL, Lian JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 55
Lake Ave., North, Worcester, MA 01655-0106, USA.

Genetic studies show that Msx2 and Dlx5 homeodomain (HD) proteins support
skeletal development, but null mutation of the closely related Dlx3 gene results 
in early embryonic lethality. Here we find that expression of Dlx3 in the mouse
embryo is associated with new bone formation and regulation of osteoblast
differentiation. Dlx3 is expressed in osteoblasts, and overexpression of Dlx3 in 
osteoprogenitor cells promotes, while specific knock-down of Dlx3 by RNA
interference inhibits, induction of osteogenic markers. We characterized gene
regulation by Dlx3 in relation to that of Msx2 and Dlx5 during osteoblast
differentiation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed a molecular switch
in HD protein association with the bone-specific osteocalcin (OC) gene. The
transcriptionally repressed OC gene was occupied by Msx2 in proliferating
osteoblasts, while Dlx3, Dlx5, and Runx2 were recruited postproliferatively to
initiate transcription. Dlx5 occupancy increased over Dlx3 in mature osteoblasts 
at the mineralization stage of differentiation, coincident with increased RNA
polymerase II occupancy. Dlx3 protein-DNA interactions stimulated OC promoter
activity, while Dlx3-Runx2 protein-protein interaction reduced Runx2-mediated
transcription. Deletion analysis showed that the Dlx3 interacting domain of Runx2
is from amino acids 376 to 432, which also include the transcriptionally active
subnuclear targeting sequence (376 to 432). Thus, we provide cellular and
molecular evidence for Dlx3 in regulating osteoprogenitor cell differentiation
and for both positive and negative regulation of gene transcription. We propose
that multiple HD proteins in osteoblasts constitute a regulatory network that
mediates development of the bone phenotype through the sequential association of 
distinct HD proteins with promoter regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC517873
PMID: 15456894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 3;279(49):50773-80. Epub 2004 Sep 21.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2-induced alkaline phosphatase expression is
stimulated by Dlx5 and repressed by Msx2.

Kim YJ(1), Lee MH, Wozney JM, Cho JY, Ryoo HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry and Skeletal Diseases Genome
Research Center, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 700-422, Korea.

Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is a widely accepted bone marker. Its expression is
stimulated by bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-2 treatment, the activation of BMP
receptors and R-Smads, and the expression of Dlx5 and Runx2. However, how BMP-2
induces ALP expression is not clearly understood. We dissected the murine ALP
promoter and found within it a Dlx5-binding cis-acting element by electrophoretic
mobility shift assays and site-directed mutagenesis of the element. Dlx5 and the 
product of its target gene, Runx2, stimulated ALP promoter activity in an
additive manner. However, because Dlx5 continued to stimulate ALP expression in
Runx2(-/-) cells, the ALP stimulatory activity of Dlx5 is independent of Runx2.
We also found that overexpression of Msx2 suppressed the mRNA level and enzyme
activity of ALP that were induced by BMP-2 stimulation, and suppressed the
Dlx5-stimulated ALP promoter activity by competing with Dlx5 for the cis-acting
element in the ALP promoter. Moreover, Msx2 levels are constitutively high in
C2C12 myogenic cells but decrease over time after BMP-2 treatment. This may
explain why BMP-2 treatment of these cells results in immediate Dlx5 expression
yet ALP expression commences only 1-2 days later. In other words, Msx2 in high
levels counteracts initially the transcriptional activity of Dlx5 in low levels
until a threshold Dlx5:Msx2 ratio is reached to the levels that allow the ALP
stimulatory activity of Dlx5 to prevail. Thus, Dlx5 transactivates ALP
expression, directly by binding to its cognate response element and/or indirectly
by stimulating Runx2 expression, and Msx2 counteracts the direct transactivation 
of Dlx5.

PMID: 15383550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Dev Dyn. 2004 Nov;231(3):631-9.

Mouse orthologue of ARX, a gene mutated in several X-linked forms of mental
retardation and epilepsy, is a marker of adult neural stem cells and forebrain
GABAergic neurons.

Colombo E(1), Galli R, Cossu G, Gécz J, Broccoli V.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Institute, DIBIT, San Raffaele Science Park, Via Olgettina 
58, 20132 Milan, Italy.

Mutations in the human ARX gene show unusually heterogeneous clinical
presentations, including syndromic and nonsyndromic mental retardation, myoclonic
epilepsy with spasticity, and lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia, that are
believed to arise from an impairment of the embryonic mechanisms building the
anterior central nervous system structures. Here, we show that the murine
ortholog Arx has a highly dynamic expression pattern during both early shaping of
the forebrain vesicle and later major events of neural migrations and cell-type
specification. Early on, the Arx gene is specifically activated in anterior
forebrain anlage. Afterward, Arx expression is confined to the telencephalic
vesicles and is enhanced during differentiation of the subpallial structures of
the ganglionic eminences, overlapping with Dlx2, Dlx5, and Gad1 transcriptional
domains. Tangentially migrating neurons reaching the cortical plate are also
Arx-positive at all embryonic stages analyzed. RNA-protein colabeling staining
shows that Arx expression is maintained in the mature cortical interneurons,
suggesting its involvement in the different functions of the gamma-aminobutyric
acid (GABA)ergic neurons settled into the adult cerebral cortex. Finally, Arx
expression is detected in the anterior subventricular layer of the adult brain,
where neural stem cells have been shown to be located. Of interest, Arx
expression is highly up-regulated during in vitro differentiation of pure neural 
stem cell cultures retrieved from adult brain. All together, these findings
suggest Arx as a gene involved in the commitment of proliferating neuroblasts
into a GABAergic neuronal fate. In conclusion, our mouse Arx expression data
provide important further insights into the puzzling complexity of the human ARX 
mutation pleiotropy.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15376319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Hum Genet. 2004;49(5):273-7.

Dlx5, the mouse homologue of the human-imprinted DLX5 gene, is biallelically
expressed in the mouse brain.

Kimura MI(1), Kazuki Y, Kashiwagi A, Kai Y, Abe S, Barbieri O, Levi G, Oshimura
M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Regenerative Medicine and Biofunction, Graduate School of Medical
Science, Tottori University, 86 Nishimachi, Yonago 683-8503, Japan.

The mouse Dlx5 gene encodes a distal-less-related DNA-binding homeobox protein
first expressed during early embryonic development in anterior regions of mouse
embryo and is located on chromosome 6, which is the syntenic region to the human 
chromosome 7q21-q31 imprinting cluster. Recently, its human homologue, DLX5, was 
identified to be imprinted and maternally expressed, at least in normal human
lymphoblasts and in brain tissues. In our study, we analyzed the imprinting
status of mouse Dlx5 by RT-PCR, first in the F1 of a reciprocal cross between two
different mouse strains, and second in heterozygous Dlx5 mutant mice. Both
approaches revealed that mouse Dlx5 followed a biallelic pattern of expression in
brain tissue and in testis. Our findings suggest that the Dlx5 gene escapes
genomic imprinting, at least in mice of certain genetic backgrounds.

PMID: 15362572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Mol Histol. 2004 Jan;35(1):81-90.

Effects of bone morphogenetic protein-2 and transforming growth factor beta1 on
gene expression of transcription factors, AJ18 and Runx2 in cultured osteoblastic
cells.

Takagi M(1), Kamiya N, Takahashi T, Ito S, Hasegawa M, Suzuki N, Nakanishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Nihon University School of Dentistry, Tokyo 101-8310,
Japan.

Osteoblast differentiation is controlled by multiple transcription factors,
Runx2, AJ18, Osterix, Dlx5 and Msx2. The mechanisms of regulation of AJ18 mRNA
expression by the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) superfamily remain
poorly understood. However, it is known that BMP-2 induces differentiation of C26
cells into more mature osteoblastic cells. The present study, using Northern blot
and real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction analyses,
investigated the effects of bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) and TGF-beta1 on
mRNA expression of AJ18 and Runx2 in a clonal osteoblast precursor cell line
ROB-C26 (C26) cultured for 3, 6 or 9 days in the presence or absence of BMP-2.
Although mRNA expression of Osterix and bone sialoprotein (BSP) was undetectable 
in the C26 culture, BMP-2 induced Osterix expression on days 3-9, but not BSP
expression. BMP-2 also stimulated significantly Dlx5 expression on days 3-9, Msx2
and matrix Gla protein expressions on days 3 and 6, Runx2, alkaline phosphatase
and osteocalcin expressions on days 6 and 9 in the culture. Furthermore, BMP-2
increased significantly Smad5 mRNA in the culture on day 3, indicating BMP-2
involvement in the regulation of Smad5 mRNA expression. In contrast, the
inhibitory effects of BMP-2 on AJ18 mRNA expression were significant on days 3-9,
indicating that a decrease in AJ18 mRNA expression is essential for the increased
osteoblastic differentiation. Furthermore, TGF-beta1 (0, 0.1, 1.0 and 5.0 ng/ml) 
treatment of C26 cells cultured for 6 days in the presence or absence of BMP-2
for 24h stimulated mRNA levels of AJ18 and Runx2, maximal stimulation occurring
principally at 1.0 ng/ml. These observations indicate that the expression of AJ18
and Runx2 mRNAs in C26 cells is under the control of BMP-2 and TGF-beta1, which
exert different effects on AJ18 mRNA expression, but are potent stimulators of
Runx2 mRNA expression during osteoblast differentiation.

PMID: 15323353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Development. 2004 Sep;131(18):4413-23. Epub 2004 Aug 11.

Endothelin-A receptor-dependent and -independent signaling pathways in
establishing mandibular identity.

Ruest LB(1), Xiang X, Lim KC, Levi G, Clouthier DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Craniofacial Biology and the Birth
Defects Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

The lower jaw skeleton is derived from cephalic neural crest (CNC) cells that
reside in the mandibular region of the first pharyngeal arch. Endothelin-A
receptor (Ednra) signaling in crest cells is crucial for their development, as
Ednra(-/-) mice are born with severe craniofacial defects resulting in neonatal
lethality. In this study, we undertook a more detailed analysis of mandibular
arch development in Ednra(-/-) embryos to better understand the cellular and
molecular basis for these defects. We show that most lower jaw structures in
Ednra(-/-) embryos undergo a homeotic transformation into maxillary-like
structures similar to those observed in Dlx5/Dlx6(-/-) embryos, though lower
incisors are still present in both mutant embryos. These structural changes are
preceded by aberrant expansion of proximal first arch gene expression into the
distal arch, in addition to the previously described loss of a Dlx6/Hand2
expression network. However, a small distal Hand2 expression domain remains.
Although this distal expression is not dependent on either Ednra or Dlx5/Dlx6
function, it may require one or more GATA factors. Using fate analysis, we show
that these distal Hand2-positive cells probably contribute to lower incisor
formation. Together, our results suggest that the establishment of a 'mandibular 
identity' during lower jaw development requires both Ednra-dependent and
-independent signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC2818681
PMID: 15306564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Comp Neurol. 2004 Sep 6;477(1):55-80.

Expression of regulatory genes during differentiation of thalamic nuclei in mouse
and monkey.

Jones EG(1), Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience, University of California, Davis, Davis, California
95616, USA. ejones@ucdavis.edu

Expression patterns of genes implicated in development of the thalamus were
examined in mice and monkeys, using in situ hybridization with RNA probes
complementary to Cad6, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, Gbx2, Id2, and Lef1 cDNAs. Expression
patterns were related to the evolving cytoarchitecture in mice at birth (P0) and 
in adulthood, and in fetal monkeys early and late in the period of gestation when
thalamic nuclei are becoming histologically differentiated out of a series of
pronuclear masses. At the earlier developmental stage, each gene was expressed in
a pattern that appeared to be pronucleus-specific and maintained a
nucleus-specific pattern into adulthood, with the possible exception of Gbx2.
Each gene displayed a unique expression pattern in the dorsal thalamus, ventral
thalamus, and epithalamus, and no gene was expressed throughout all three
divisions or in every nucleus of a division. With the exception of Dlx2, whose
expression disappeared at the later time point, all continued to be expressed
into adulthood at higher levels and with identical patterns. Despite late
appearance of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic cells in the dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus of mice, no Dlx genes, which promote formation of a GABAergic 
phenotype elsewhere, were detected in dorsal thalamus. Each thalamic nucleus was 
distinguished by expression of a combination of genes, and homologous nuclei in
mouse and monkey exhibited the same combination. The presence of a centre médian 
nucleus and four pulvinar nuclei in monkeys was marked by patterns of expression 
not found in mice. The centre médian nucleus was marked by high expression of
Id2, which was expressed only weakly in very few nuclei of mice.

PMID: 15281080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Dev Biol. 2004 Jul 15;271(2):403-14.

Segregation of lens and olfactory precursors from a common territory: cell
sorting and reciprocity of Dlx5 and Pax6 expression.

Bhattacharyya S(1), Bailey AP, Bronner-Fraser M, Streit A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA.

Cranial placodes are focal regions of columnar epithelium next to the neural tube
that contribute to sensory ganglia and organs in the vertebrate head, including
the olfactory epithelium and the crystalline lens of the eye. Using focal dye
labelling within the presumptive placode domain, we show that lens and nasal
precursors arise from a common territory surrounding the anterior neural plate.
They then segregate over time and converge to their final positions in discrete
placodes by apparently directed movements. Since these events closely parallel
the separation of eye and antennal primordia (containing olfactory sensory cells)
from a common imaginal disc in Drosophila, we investigated whether the vertebrate
homologues of Distalless (Dll) and Eyeless (Ey), which determine antennal and eye
identity in the fly, play a role in segregation of lens and nasal precursors in
the chick. Dlx5 and Pax6 are initially co-expressed by future lens and olfactory 
cells. As soon as presumptive lens cells acquire columnar morphology all Dlx
family members are down-regulated in the placode, while Pax6 is lost in the
olfactory region. Lens precursor cells that express ectopic Dlx5 never acquire
lens-specific gene expression and are excluded from the lens placode to cluster
in the head ectoderm. These results suggest that the loss of Dlx5 is required for
cells to adopt a lens fate and that the balance of Pax6 and Dlx expression
regulates cell sorting into appropriate placodal domains.

PMID: 15223343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Dev Biol. 2004 Jun 15;270(2):513-24.

Transcriptional regulation of Msx2 in the AERs of developing limbs is dependent
on multiple closely spaced regulatory elements.

Cheng HC(1), Wang CK, Upholt WB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of BioStructure and Function, School of Dental Medicine, University
of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030-3705, USA.

In developing limb buds, Msx2 transcripts are expressed in the apical ectodermal 
ridge (AER) and in various regions of the limb mesenchyme. To identify DNA
sequences responsible for Msx2 expression in the AER, we characterized the
expression of LacZ reporter constructs driven by chicken Msx2 regulatory
sequences in transgenic mice. We have identified a 55-bp enhancer that can direct
AER-specific reporter gene expression. This 55-bp enhancer contains three
elements that are evolutionary conserved among five vertebrate Msx2 genomic
sequences. AER expression of reporter constructs in transgenic mice is lost or
reduced when mutations are introduced into each of these three regions. Moreover,
changing the relative orientation by reverse complementing one of the three
elements also results in loss of expression, suggesting that the relative
orientations of transcription factor binding is important. To identify the
transcription factor(s) binding to these elements, we conducted one-hybrid
screening and identified Dlx5 and Sox11. Both Dlx5 and Sox11 are expressed in the
AER, and the proteins encoded by these genes bind to separate conserved elements,
supporting their possible roles in regulating Msx2 expression.

PMID: 15183730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Mech Dev. 2004 Apr;121(4):387-95.

Endothelin-1 regulates the dorsoventral branchial arch patterning in mice.

Ozeki H(1), Kurihara Y, Tonami K, Watatani S, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Endothelin-1 (ET-1), a 21-amino acid peptide secreted by the epithelium and core 
mesenchyme in the branchial arches as well as vascular endothelium, is involved
in craniofacial and cardiovascular development through endothelin receptor type-A
(EdnrA) expressed in the neural crest-derived ectomesenchyme. Here we show that
ET-1(-/-) mutant mice exhibit a homeotic-like transformation of the lower jaw to 
an upper jaw. Most of the maxillary arch-derived components are duplicated and
replaced mandibular arch-derived structures, resulting in a mirror image of the
upper and lower jaws in the ET-1(-/-) mutant. As for hyoid arch-derivatives, the 
ventral structures are severely affected in comparison to the dorsal ones in the 
ET-1(-/-) mutant. Correspondingly, the expression of Dlx5 and Dlx6,
Distalless-related homeobox genes determining the ventral identity of the
anterior branchial arches, and of the mandibular marker gene Pitx1 is
significantly downregulated in the ET-1(-/-) mutant, whereas the expression of
Dlx2 and the maxillary marker gene Prx2 is unaffected or rather upregulated.
These findings indicate that the ET-1/EdnrA signaling may contribute to the
dorsoventral axis patterning of the branchial arch system as a mediator of the
regional intercellular interactions.

PMID: 15110048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Dev Biol. 2004 Apr 15;268(2):532-45.

Intergenic enhancers with distinct activities regulate Dlx gene expression in the
mesenchyme of the branchial arches.

Park BK(1), Sperber SM, Choudhury A, Ghanem N, Hatch GT, Sharpe PT, Thomas BL,
Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute at the Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, ON, Canada
K1Y 4E9.

The vertebrate Dlx genes, generally organized as tail-to-tail bigene clusters,
are expressed in the branchial arch epithelium and mesenchyme with nested
proximodistal expression implicating a code that underlies the fates of jaws.
Little is known of the regulatory architecture that is responsible for Dlx gene
expression in developing arches. We have identified two distinct cis-acting
regulatory sequences, I12a and I56i, in the intergenic regions of the Dlx1/2 and 
Dlx5/6 clusters that act as enhancers in the arch mesenchyme. LacZ transgene
expression containing I12a is restricted to a subset of Dlx-expressing
ectomesenchyme in the first arch. The I56i enhancer is active in a broader domain
in the first arch mesenchyme. Expression of transgenes containing either the I12a
or the I56i enhancers is dependent on the presence of epithelium between the
onset of their expression at E9-10 until independence at E11. Both enhancers
positively respond to FGF8 and FGF9; however, the responses of the reporter
transgenes were limited to their normal domain of expression. BMP4 had a negative
effect on expression of both transgenes and counteracted the effects of FGF8.
Furthermore, bosentan, a pharmacological inhibitor of Endothelin-1 signaling
caused a loss of I56i-lacZ expression in the most distal aspects of the
expression domain, corresponding to the area of Dlx-6 expression previously shown
to be under the control of Endothelin-1. Thus, the combinatorial branchial arch
expression of Dlx genes is achieved through interactions between signaling
pathways and intrinsic cellular factors. I56i drives the entire expression of
Dlx5/6 in the first arch and contains necessary sequences for regulation by at
least three separate pathways, whereas I12a only replicates a small domain of
endogenous expression, regulated in part by BMP-4 and FGF-8.

PMID: 15063187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2004 Jan;25(1):153-61.

Defective neuronogenesis in the absence of Dlx5.

Perera M(1), Merlo GR, Verardo S, Paleari L, Corte G, Levi G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Biologia dello Sviluppo, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul 
Cancro-IST, 16132 Genova, Italy.

Dlx genes play an important role in the control of the development of the central
nervous system (CNS). Single or compound inactivation of Dlx1, Dlx2, or Dlx5 in
the mouse causes defects of neuronal migration and differentiation. Dlx5, in
particular, is essential for the correct development of the olfactory system.
Targeted inactivation of Dlx1 and Dlx2 in the mouse results in abnormal neuronal 
differentiation in the embryonic subcortical forebrain and is associated to the
loss of Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression. So far, however, it has been impossible to
investigate the role of Dlx genes on late neurogenesis, as their inactivation
leads to perinatal death. We have now generated cultures of neural stem cells
(NSCs) derived from embryonic and newborn Dlx5-null mice, and we have compared
their capacity to differentiate in vitro to that of equivalent cells derived from
normal littermates. We show here that in the absence of Dlx5, NSCs derived from
newborn animals have a severely reduced capacity to generate neurons. This is not
the case for cells derived from E12.5 embryos. Forced expression of Dlx5 in
cultures of newborn mutant NSCs fully restores their neuronogenic potential. Our 
data suggest that Dlx5 is essential for secondary (postnatal) neuronogenesis.

PMID: 14962748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Feb 9;32(3):884-92. Print 2004.

Identification of a direct Dlx homeodomain target in the developing mouse
forebrain and retina by optimization of chromatin immunoprecipitation.

Zhou QP(1), Le TN, Qiu X, Spencer V, de Melo J, Du G, Plews M, Fonseca M, Sun JM,
Davie JR, Eisenstat DD.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, 675 McDermot Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.

Understanding homeobox gene specificity and function has been hampered by the
lack of proven direct transcriptional targets during development. Dlx genes are
expressed in the developing forebrain, retina, craniofacial structures and limbs.
Dlx1/Dlx2 double knockout mice die at birth with multiple defects including
abnormal forebrain development and decreased Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression. We have
successfully applied chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) to identify a direct
transcriptional target of DLX homeoproteins from embryonic tissues in vivo. We
optimized cross-linking conditions to enrich for protein-DNA complexes, then
using specific high affinity DLX antibodies captured immunoenriched DLX genomic
DNA transcriptional targets. DLX homeobox proteins bind differentially to the
Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic enhancer in newborn retina (DLX2) and embryonic striatum
(DLX1, DLX2) in situ. Reporter gene assays demonstrated the functional
significance of the binding of DLX proteins to this regulatory element, confirmed
in vitro by electrophoretic mobility shift assays, using tissue extracts or
recombinant DLX proteins. ChIP provides the best approach to identify direct Dlx 
homeoprotein targets from developing tissues in situ. The use of this technology 
will advance our understanding of Dlx gene function in the vertebrate in vivo and
can be applied to examine targets of other homeobox genes and other classes of
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC373381
PMID: 14769946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Development. 2004 Feb;131(3):551-62. Epub 2003 Dec 24.

Six1 controls patterning of the mouse otic vesicle.

Ozaki H(1), Nakamura K, Funahashi J, Ikeda K, Yamada G, Tokano H, Okamura HO,
Kitamura K, Muto S, Kotaki H, Sudo K, Horai R, Iwakura Y, Kawakami K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical School,
Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

Six1 is a member of the Six family homeobox genes, which function as components
of the Pax-Six-Eya-Dach gene network to control organ development. Six1 is
expressed in otic vesicles, nasal epithelia, branchial arches/pouches,
nephrogenic cords, somites and a limited set of ganglia. In this study, we
established Six1-deficient mice and found that development of the inner ear,
nose, thymus, kidney and skeletal muscle was severely affected. Six1-deficient
embryos were devoid of inner ear structures, including cochlea and vestibule,
while their endolymphatic sac was enlarged. The inner ear anomaly began at around
E10.5 and Six1 was expressed in the ventral region of the otic vesicle in the
wild-type embryos at this stage. In the otic vesicle of Six1-deficient embryos,
expressions of Otx1, Otx2, Lfng and Fgf3, which were expressed ventrally in the
wild-type otic vesicles, were abolished, while the expression domains of Dlx5,
Hmx3, Dach1 and Dach2, which were expressed dorsally in the wild-type otic
vesicles, expanded ventrally. Our results indicate that Six1 functions as a key
regulator of otic vesicle patterning at early embryogenesis and controls the
expression domains of downstream otic genes responsible for respective inner ear 
structures. In addition, cell proliferation was reduced and apoptotic cell death 
was enhanced in the ventral region of the otic vesicle, suggesting the
involvement of Six1 in cell proliferation and survival. In spite of the
similarity of otic phenotypes of Six1- and Shh-deficient mice, expressions of
Six1 and Shh were mutually independent.

PMID: 14695375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Genesis. 2003 Dec;37(4):188-94.

Dlx5/6-enhancer directed expression of Cre recombinase in the pharyngeal arches
and brain.

Ruest LB(1), Hammer RE, Yanagisawa M, Clouthier DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Craniofacial Biology and the Birth
Defects Center, University of Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA.

Dlx5 and Dlx6, two members of the Distalless gene family, are required for
development of numerous tissues during embryogenesis, including facial and limb
development. This gene pair is expressed in tandem, transcribed toward each other
and separated by a short intergenic region containing multiple putative
enhancers. Targeted inactivation of Dlx5 and Dlx6 in mice results in multiple
developmental defects in craniofacial and limb structures, suggesting that these 
genes are crucial for aspects of both neural crest and nonneural crest
development. To further investigate potential developmental roles of Dlx5 and
Dlx6, we used one of the Dlx5/6 intergenic enhancers to drive Cre recombinase
expression in transgenic mice. Crossing Dlx5/6-Cre transgenic mice with mice from
the R26R strain results in beta-galactosidase staining in the apical ectodermal
ridge, brain, and neural crest-derived mesenchyme of the pharyngeal arches, with 
staining in term embryos observed in the facial skeleton and specific brain
structures. However, in contrast to endogenous expression patterns of Dlx5 and
Dlx6, Cre expression within the pharyngeal arches occurs during a very narrow
window in early development. Our studies suggest that Dlx5/6-Cre mice may prove
useful both in further understanding the function and regulation of Distalless
genes during development and in studies of gene function in conditional knockout 
mice.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2830754
PMID: 14666512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Mech Dev. 2003 Dec;120(12):1469-79.

Msx1/Bmp4 genetic pathway regulates mammalian alveolar bone formation via
induction of Dlx5 and Cbfa1.

Zhang Z(1), Song Y, Zhang X, Tang J, Chen J, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, 2000 Stern Hall, 
6400 Freret St, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA. zzhang 1@tulane.edu

In the developing mammalian tooth, the cranial neural crest derived dental
mesenchyme consists of the dental papilla and dental follicle. The dental papilla
gives rise to odontoblasts and dental pulp and the dental follicle gives rise to 
the periodontium, including the osteoblasts that contribute to the alveolar
process. The alveolar process is a specialized intramembranous bone that forms
the primary support structure for the dentition. The Msx1 gene controls many
aspects of craniofacial development, as evidenced by craniofacial abnormalities
seen in Msx1(-/-) mice, including the arrest of tooth development and the absence
of the alveolar bone. Previous studies demonstrated that ectopic expression of
Bmp4, a downstream target of Msx1, in the Msx1(-/-) dental mesenchyme rescued
alveolar bone formation. Here we confirm an early requirement of BMP activity for
alveolar bone formation. We show that the expression of Cbfa1 and Dlx5, two genes
encode transcription factors that are critical for bone differentiation, overlaps
with that of Msx1 and Bmp4 in the developing tooth and alveolar process. We have 
demonstrated that Dlx5 and Cbfa1 expression is down-regulated in Msx1(-/-) dental
mesenchyme and that Msx1 and Bmp4 expression are unaltered in Cbfa1(-/-) mice.
These data place Dlx5 and Cbfa1 downstream from the Msx1/Bmp4 in the genetic
pathway that regulates tooth development. Ectopic expression of Bmp4 in Msx1
mutants restores the expression of Dlx5, but not Cbfa1, in the dental mesenchyme,
and rescues the expression of both Dlx5 and Cbfa1 in the developing alveolar
bone. Therefore, the early expression of Cfba1 in the dental mesenchyme appears
dispensable for the development of the alveolar bone. Taken together with in
vitro gene induction studies, our results demonstrate that BMP4 controls Dlx5
expression in dental mesenchyme, and functions upstream to both Dlx5 and Cbfa1 to
regulate alveolar bone formation during tooth development.

PMID: 14654219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Endocrinology. 2004 Jan;145(1):401-6. Epub 2003 Sep 18.

Bone is a target for the antidiabetic compound rosiglitazone.

Rzonca SO(1), Suva LJ, Gaddy D, Montague DC, Lecka-Czernik B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Reynolds Center on Aging, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas 72205, USA.

Rosiglitazone is an FDA-approved oral antidiabetic agent for the treatment of
type 2 diabetes. This compound improves insulin sensitivity through the
activation of the nuclear receptor, peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma). In addition to sensitizing cells to insulin, the
PPAR-gamma2 isoform appears to be critical for the regulation of osteoblast and
adipocyte differentiation from common mesenchymal bone marrow progenitors. We
have demonstrated previously that PPAR-gamma2 activated with rosiglitazone acts
as a dominant inhibitor of osteoblastogenesis in murine bone marrow in vitro.
Here, we show that in vivo, rosiglitazone administration results in significant
bone loss. When rosiglitazone (20 microg/g body weight/d) was given to
6-month-old, nondiabetic C57BL/6 mice for 7 wk, a significant decrease in total
body bone mineral density was observed. Analysis of bone microarchitecture, using
micro-computed tomography, demonstrated a decrease in bone volume, trabecular
width, and trabecular number and an increase in trabecular spacing.
Histomorphometric analysis showed a decrease in bone formation rate, with a
simultaneous increase in fat content in the bone marrow. Changes in bone
morphology and structure were accompanied by changes in the expression of
osteoblast- and adipocyte-specific marker genes; the expression of the
osteoblast-specific genes Runx2/Cbfa1, Dlx5, and alpha1(I)collagen were
decreased, whereas the expression of the adipocyte-specific fatty acid binding
protein aP2, was increased. These in vivo data suggest that rosiglitazone therapy
may pose a significant risk of adverse skeletal effects in humans.

PMCID: PMC1855213
PMID: 14500573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Sep 26;309(3):689-94.

BMP-2-induced Osterix expression is mediated by Dlx5 but is independent of Runx2.

Lee MH(1), Kwon TG, Park HS, Wozney JM, Ryoo HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu 700-422, Republic of Korea.

BMP-2 stimulates the expression of three osteogenic master transcription factors:
Runx2, Dlx5, and Osterix (Osx). However, the hierarchical regulatory
relationships among them are not yet clearly understood. Osx was commonly
stimulated in osteogenic and non-osteogenic cells in response to BMP-signaling,
as Dlx5 was in our previous report. A cycloheximide experiment indicated that Osx
expression by BMP-2 requires new protein synthesis. Even if Osx has been
suggested as a downstream target of Runx2, the results of this study indicated
that Osx expression was still induced by BMP-2 treatment in Runx2 null cells, but
not induced by Runx2 overexpression in myogenic C2C12 cells. Instead, Osx
expression by BMP-2 was completely abrogated by the antisense blocking of Dlx5.
Depending upon the coincident expression pattern of Osx and Dlx5, and the
blocking of Osx expression by the antisense Dlx5, BMP-2-induced Osx expression is
mainly mediated not by Runx2, but by Dlx5.

PMID: 12963046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Front Biosci. 2003 Sep 1;8:s1249-65.

Transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 activated genes in osteoblasts using gene
expression microarray analysis: role of Dlx2 and Dlx5 transcription factors.

Harris SE(1), Guo D, Harris MA, Krishnaswamy A, Lichtler A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, University of Missouri at Kansas City, School of
Dentistry, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA. harrisse@umkc.edu

This presentation will focus on using microarray data on a clonal osteoblast cell
model to analyze the early BMP-2 responsive genes, as well as some of the later
genes regulated by BMP2 during different phases of mineralization. We will focus 
on the early phases of gene expression that occur after BMP2 signaling from 30
min up to 1 day. The hypothesis is that understanding how these early genes are
regulated during the initial multilayering and growth phase of osteoblasts will
lead to models of how BMP activity stimulates cell growth, cell migration,
multilayering, matrix deposition and remodeling phase that allows subsequent
mineralization. The Dlx2 and Dlx5 homeobox genes have been shown to be critical
for bone formation both in vitro and in vivo. Both Dlx 2 and Dlx5 are activated
within 15-30 minutes after BMP2 addition to the mouse 2T3 osteoblast model and
primary fetal rat calvarial osteoblasts. The Dlx2 and Dlx5 genes stay elevated in
the presence of BMP2 for up to 5 days, a time when overt mineralization is just
beginning. To understand the genomic network that Dlx5 and Dlx2 regulate at the
transcription level, we have taken an approach where we use a specific
transcription repressor protein, Engrailed, ligated to the Dlx5 homeodomain. The 
idea is that this Eng-Dlx5 protein will interact with Dlx5 and possibly Dlx2 and 
related Dlx- regulated genes in vivo and down-regulate their transcriptional
initiation. Using a microarray approach with over 5,000 known genes we can
identify the genes that are directly and indirectly regulated by Dlx5 and Dlx2.
This will allow us to build an initial genomic network of Dlx- regulated genes at
the transcriptional level. We will present our model and preliminary efforts at
understanding the genomic network regulated by this important BMP2-regulated
transcription factor class in osteoblast biology.

PMID: 12957859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Croat Med J. 2003 Aug;44(4):407-11.

Dlx5 regulation of mouse osteoblast differentiation mediated by avian retrovirus 
vector.

Erceg I(1), Tadic T, Kronenberg MS, Marijanovic I, Lichtler AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, Farmington, USA. ivana.erceg@st.hinet.hr

AIM: To study the effect of Dlx5 introduced by replication-competent avian
splice-acceptor (RCAS) in mouse calvarial and bone marrow stromal cells, and to
demonstrate that RCAS vector can be a useful system for studying gene expression 
in mammalian cells derived from Beta-AKE mouse.
METHOD: Beta-AKE mouse used in experiments is a transgenic mouse line expressing 
the receptor for the Bryant polymerase subgroup A of RCAS vector (RCAS-BP(A)
vector). Primary calvarial osteoblast cultures were obtained from 7-day-old
Beta-AKE mice. Bone marrow stromal cells were derived from the long bones of
8-week-old Beta-AKE mice. Expression of genes cloned into RCAS vector in mouse
cells was first established by detecting green fluorescent protein (GFP) in cells
infected with RCAS-BP(A)-GFP sapphire by using fluorescence microscopy. Cells
were then infected with RCAS-BP(A)-Dlx5 or RCAS-BP(A) alone as a control, for
three days. After differentiation, cells were harvested for mRNA analysis at
different time points (day 6 or 7, 11 or 12, 14 or 18, and 21 or 25). The cells
were cultured in the presence of ascorbic acid and Beta-glycerophosphate, which
promotes osteoblastic differentiation.
RESULTS: Mouse calvarial and bone marrow stromal cells infected with
RCAS-BP(A)-GFP sapphire were fluorescent compared with the controls. Both types
of cells infected with RCAS-BP(A)Dlx5 consistently expressed increased levels of 
bone differentiation markers - type 1 collagen (Col1a1), osteocalcin, and bone
sialoprotein mRNA.
CONCLUSION: RCAS-BP(A) vector transduction of cells from Beta-AKE mice is a
useful system for studying the role of gene expression in mouse osteoblastic
cells. Dlx5 overexpression mediated by an RCAS-BP(A) vector stimulates mouse
osteoblastic differentiation in Beta-AKE transgenic mice. Dlx5 induces osteoblast
differentiation from bones formed either by endochondral or by membranous
ossification.

PMID: 12950142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Int J Dev Biol. 2003 Jun;47(5):335-44.

Dlx5 regulates chondrocyte differentiation at multiple stages.

Bendall AJ(1), Hu G, Levi G, Abate-Shen C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson
Medical School, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA. abendall@uoguelph.ca

Endochondral ossification, in which cartilaginous templates are progressively
replaced by marrow and bone, represents the dominant mode of development of the
axial and appendicular skeleton of vertebrates. Chondrocyte differentiation
within the cartilaginous core of these skeletal elements is tightly regulated,
both spatially and temporally. Here, we describe the expression of Dlx5 in the
cartilaginous core of limb skeletal elements in chicken and mouse embryos. We
find that Dlx5 is one of the earliest genes expressed in condensing limb
mesenchyme that will give rise to the limb skeleton. Later, when proliferating
and differentiating chondrocytes are found in spatially distinct regions of the
cartilaginous model, Dlx5 is expressed in the zone of hypertrophy and in
proliferating chondrocytes that are poised to differentiate. Consistent with this
pattern of expression, we show that forced expression of Dlx5 potentiates early
and late chondrocyte differentiation and inhibits proliferation in cultured
cells. Examination of the limbs of mutant Dlx5 mouse embryos revealed that they
displayed a delay in chondrocyte maturation compared with wild type littermates. 
Taken together, our data reveal a positive role for Dlx5 during multiple stages
of chondrocyte differentiation and, along with previous studies of Dlx5 and
osteogenesis, identify Dlx5 as a general regulator of differentiation in the
mouse skeleton.

PMID: 12895028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Neuroscience. 2003;120(2):379-85.

The differentiation potential of precursor cells from the mouse lateral
ganglionic eminence is restricted by in vitro expansion.

Skogh C(1), Parmar M, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Division of Neurobiology, Lund University,
Solvegatan 17, BMC A11, S-221 84 Lund, Sweden.

We have investigated whether the differentiation potential of attached cultures
derived from the mouse lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) is influenced by in
vitro expansion. Primary neuronal cultures derived from the LGE give rise to
neurons expressing the striatal projection neuron markers Islet1 (ISL1) and
dopamine and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein of 32 kilodaltons (DARPP-32) as well
as the olfactory bulb interneuron marker Er81. Our previous results showed that
after expansion in vitro, LGE precursor cells can be induced to differentiate
into neurons which exhibit molecular characteristics of the LGE, such as the
homeobox transcription factors DLX and MEIS2. We show here that while attached
LGE cultures maintain Er81 expression through five passages, they lose the
ability to generate ISL1- or dopamine and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein of 32
kilodaltons-expressing neurons already after the first passage. This indicates
that the expansion of LGE precursor cells restricts their differentiation
potential in vitro. Interestingly, the undifferentiated LGE cultures retain the
expression of both the Isl1 and Er81 genes, suggesting that precursor cells for
both striatal projection neurons and olfactory bulb interneurons are present in
these cultures. Thus the restriction in differentiation potential of the expanded
LGE cultures likely reflects deficiencies in the differentiation conditions used.

PMID: 12890509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Leukoc Biol. 2003 Aug;74(2):302-5.

DLX genes as targets of ALL-1: DLX 2,3,4 down-regulation in t(4;11) acute
lymphoblastic leukemias.

Ferrari N(1), Palmisano GL, Paleari L, Basso G, Mangioni M, Fidanza V, Albini A, 
Croce CM, Levi G, Brigati C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro
IST, Genova, Italy.

Dlx genes constitute a gene family thought to be essential in morphogenesis and
development. We show here that in vertebrate cells, Dlx genes appear to be part
of a regulatory cascade initiated by acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)-1, a
master regulator gene whose disruption is implicated in several human acute
leukemias. The expression of Dlx2, Dlx3, Dlx5, Dlx6, and Dlx7 was absent in All-1
-/- mouse embryonic stem cells and reduced in All-1 +/- cells. In leukemic
patients affected by the t(4;11)(q21;q23) chromosomal abnormality, the expression
of DLX2, DLX3, and DLX4 was virtually abrogated. Our data indicate that Dlx genes
are downstream targets of ALL-1 and could be considered as important tools for
the study of the early leukemic cell phenotype.

PMID: 12885948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Struct Funct Genomics. 2003;3(1-4):151-9.

The role of gene duplication in the evolution and function of the vertebrate
Dlx/distal-less bigene clusters.

Sumiyama K(1), Irvine SQ, Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
PO Box 208103, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The Dlx gene family controls developmental patterning principally in the
pharyngeal and cranial regions. We review the structure and function of these
genes in the vertebrates and relate these properties to their evolution. We
particularly focus on the Dlx3-7 bigene cluster which we postulate to be more
derived phylogenetically and functionally than the other two bigene clusters,
Dlx1-2 and Dlx5-6. We stress the transcriptional control of the Dlx3-7 bigene
cluster, and postulate its control by Dlx1-2.

PMID: 12836694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 5;278(36):34387-94. Epub 2003 Jun 18.

BMP-2-induced Runx2 expression is mediated by Dlx5, and TGF-beta 1 opposes the
BMP-2-induced osteoblast differentiation by suppression of Dlx5 expression.

Lee MH(1), Kim YJ, Kim HJ, Park HD, Kang AR, Kyung HM, Sung JH, Wozney JM, Kim
HJ, Ryoo HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, 700-422 Korea.

Intramuscular injection of BMP-2 induces ectopic bone formation in vivo.
Similarly, BMP-2 treatment blocks myogenic differentiation and induces
osteoblastic transdifferentiation of premyoblastic C2C12 cells. Previous reports 
suggested that BMP-2-stimulated Runx2 expression could play a pivotal role in
transdifferentiation. However, increased Runx2 expression by TGF-beta 1 did not
support osteoblast differentiation in vitro. These results indicate that the
induction of Runx2 is not sufficient to explain the BMP-induced
transdifferentiation. We found that Dlx5 is specifically expressed in osteogenic 
cells, and is specifically induced by BMP-2 or -4 signaling but not by other
osteotrophic signals or other TGF-beta superfamily members. Cycloheximide
treatment indicated that Dlx5 was immediately induced by BMP signaling, while
Runx2 required de novo protein synthesis. In addition, blocking or overexpressing
each transcription factor indicated that Dlx5 is an indispensable mediator of
BMP-2-induced Runx2 expression but is not involved in TGF-beta 1-induced Runx2
expression. Moreover, TGF-beta 1 opposed BMP-2-induced osteogenic
transdifferentiation through Dlx5 suppression by de novo induction of AP-1. Taken
together, these results indicate that Dlx5 is an indispensable regulator of
BMP-2-induced osteoblast differentiation as well as the counteraction point of
the opposing TGF-beta 1 action.

PMID: 12815054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Dev Biol. 2003 Jul 1;259(1):34-47.

DLX5 positions the neural crest and preplacode region at the border of the neural
plate.

McLarren KW(1), Litsiou A, Streit A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, Guy's Campus,
St. Thomas Street, London SE1 9RT, UK.

The neural crest and sensory placodes arise from a region of the embryonic
ectoderm that lies between the neural plate and future epidermis. While some of
the signalling pathways that are involved in cell fate determination at the
border of the neural plate have been characterised, it is still unclear how
different signals are integrated. Transcription factors of the DLX gene family
that may mediate such cell fate decisions are expressed at the border of the
neural plate. Here, we demonstrate that DLX5 is involved in positioning this
border by repressing neural properties and simultaneously by promoting the
formation of border-like cells that express the neural fold markers MSX1 and BMP4
and the preplacodal region marker SIX4. However, DLX5 is not sufficient to impart
epidermal character or to specify cell fates that arise at the border of the
neural plate, like neural crest or fully formed sensory placodes, in a
cell-autonomous manner. Additional signals are generated when mature neural plate
and epidermis interact and these are required for neural crest formation. We
propose that patterning of the embryonic ectoderm is a multistep process that
sequentially subdivides the ectoderm into regions with defined cell fates.

PMID: 12812786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Genomics. 2003 Jun;81(6):556-9.

A new imprinted cluster on the human chromosome 7q21-q31, identified by
human-mouse monochromosomal hybrids.

Okita C(1), Meguro M, Hoshiya H, Haruta M, Sakamoto YK, Oshimura M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cell Genetics, Department of Molecular and Cellular 
Biology, School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University,
Tottori 683-8503, Japan.

We have previously established a series of human monochromosomal hybrids
containing a single human chromosome of defined parental origin as an in vitro
resource for the investigation of human imprinted loci. Using the hybrids with a 
paternal or maternal human chromosome 7, we determined the allelic expression
profiles of 76 ESTs mapped to the human chromosome 7q21-q31. Seven
genes/transcripts, including PEG10 which has previously been reported to be
imprinted, showed parent-of-origin-specific expression in monochromosomal
hybrids. One of the 6 candidate genes/transcripts, i.e., DLX5 was confirmed to be
imprinted in normal human lymphoblasts and brain tissues by a polymorphic
analysis. Thus, an imprinted domain has been newly defined in the region of human
chromosome 7q21-q31 using human-mouse monochromosomal hybrids.

PMID: 12782124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 1;278(31):29057-64. Epub 2003 May 16.

The receptor tyrosine kinase Ror2 associates with the melanoma-associated antigen
(MAGE) family protein Dlxin-1 and regulates its intracellular distribution.

Matsuda T(1), Suzuki H, Oishi I, Kani S, Kuroda Y, Komori T, Sasaki A, Watanabe
K, Minami Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Graduate School of
Medicine, Kobe University, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

The mammalian Ror family receptor tyrosine kinases, Ror1 and Ror2, play crucial
roles in developmental morphogenesis. Although the functions of Ror1 and Ror2 are
redundant, Ror2 exhibits more specific functions during development. We show that
when expressed in mammalian cells, Ror2, but not Ror1, associates with the
melanoma-associated antigen (MAGE) family protein, Dlxin-1, which is known to
bind to the homeodomain proteins Msx2 and Dlx5 and regulate their transcriptional
functions. This association requires the cytoplasmic C-terminal region of Ror2,
containing proline-rich and serine/threonine-rich domains, and the C-terminal
necdin homology domain of Dlxin-1. Interestingly, the cytoplasmic C-terminal
region of Ror2 is missing in patients with brachydactyly type B. Interestingly,
transient expression and immunohistochemical analyses reveal that both Dlxin-1
and Msx2 are co-localized in the nuclei in the absence of Ror2. In the presence
of Ror2, Dlxin-1 is co-localized with Ror2 at the membranous compartments and
Msx2 is retained in the nuclei. It was also found that the majority of cellular
Dlxin-1 is retained in the membrane fractions of wild-type but not Ror2-/- mouse 
embryonic fibroblasts. Furthermore, we show that transcriptional activity of
Msx2, irrespective of Ror2 kinase activity, is regulated by ectopic expression of
Ror2 using a reporter plasmid containing the WIP element. Thus, Ror2 sequesters
Dlxin-1 in membranous compartments, thereby affecting the transcriptional
function of Msx2.

PMID: 12754255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Cancer Res. 2003 May 15;63(10):2631-7.

Osteoblast-related transcription factors Runx2 (Cbfa1/AML3) and MSX2 mediate the 
expression of bone sialoprotein in human metastatic breast cancer cells.

Barnes GL(1), Javed A, Waller SM, Kamal MH, Hebert KE, Hassan MQ, Bellahcene A,
Van Wijnen AJ, Young MF, Lian JB, Stein GS, Gerstenfeld LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Boston University Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA. gbarnes@bu.edu

Human breast cancers are known to preferentially metastasize to skeletal sites,
however, the mechanisms that mediate the skeletal preference (orthotropism) of
specific types of cancers remains poorly understood. There is a significant
clinical correlation between the expression of bone sialoprotein (BSP) and
skeletal metastasis of breast cancers. Our laboratory, as well as others, have
proposed the concept that skeletal selective metastasis and associated disease
may be attributable to a mimicry of skeletal cellular phenotypes by metastasizing
cancer cells. We hypothesize that breast cancer cell expression of phenotypic
properties of skeletal cell types, including BSP as one component of that
phenotype, is the result of ectopic expression or activity of one or more central
transcriptional regulators of bone cell gene expression. To test this hypothesis,
we examined the molecular mechanisms that regulate bsp expression in human breast
cancer cell lines with previously characterized metastatic potentials. Our
results demonstrate that the majority of the distal bsp promoter sequences act to
repress BSP expression in cancer cells and that most of the promoter activity
resides in the proximal -110 bp of the bsp promoter. In this region, we
identified a putative Runx binding element providing a basis for a mechanism for 
skeletal gene activation. Our results demonstrate that Runx2 is ectopically
expressed in breast cancer cells and that one isoform of Runx2 can activate bsp
expression in these cells. In addition, we observe that bsp expression is
additionally regulated by the homeodomain factor Msx2, another regulator of
osteoblast-associated genes. Thus, this is the first report of osteoblast-related
transcription factors being expressed in human breast cancer cells and provides a
component of a mechanism that may explain the osteoblastic phenotype of human
breast cancer cells that preferentially metastasize to bone.

PMID: 12750290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2003 Apr;22(4):530-43.

The Dlx5 homeodomain gene is essential for olfactory development and connectivity
in the mouse.

Levi G(1), Puche AC, Mantero S, Barbieri O, Trombino S, Paleari L, Egeo A, Merlo 
GR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie Général et Comparée, CNRS, UMR 8572, Museum
National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.

The distalless-related homeogene Dlx5 is expressed in the olfactory placodes and 
derived tissues and in the anterior-basal forebrain. We investigated the role of 
Dlx5 in olfactory development. In Dlx5(-/-) mice, the olfactory bulbs (OBs) lack 
glomeruli, exhibit disorganized cellular layers, and show reduced numbers of TH- 
and GAD67-positive neurons. The olfactory epithelium in Dlx5(-/-) mice is
composed of olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs) that appear identical to wild-type 
ORNs, but their axons fail to contact the OBs. We transplanted Dlx5(-/-) OBs into
a wild-type newborn mouse; wild-type ORN axons enter the mutant OB and form
glomeruli, but cannot rescue the lamination defect or the expression of TH and
GAD67. Thus, the absence of Dlx5 in the OB does not per se prevent ORN axon
ingrowth. In conclusion, Dlx5 plays major roles in the connectivity of ORN axons 
and in the differentiation of OB interneurons.

PMID: 12727448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Dev Biol. 2003 May 1;257(1):177-89.

BMP signals regulate Dlx5 during early avian skull development.

Holleville N(1), Quilhac A, Bontoux M, Monsoro-Burq AH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Embryologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, CNRS, UMR 7128, 49 bis,
avenue de La Belle Gabrielle, 94736, Nogent-sur-Marne, France.

The vertebrate skull vault forms almost entirely by the direct mineralisation of 
mesenchyme, without the formation of a cartilaginous template, a mechanism called
membranous ossification. Dlx5 gene mutation leads to cranial dismorphogenesis
which differs from the previously studied craniosynostosis syndromes [Development
126 (1999), 3795; Development 126 (1999), 3831]. In avians, little is known about
the genetic regulation of cranial vault development. In this study, we analyze
Dlx5 expression and regulation during skull formation in the chick embryo. We
compare Dlx5 expression pattern with that of several genes involved in mouse
cranial suture regulation. This provides an initial description of the expression
in the developing skull of the genes encoding the secreted molecules BMP 2, BMP
4, BMP 7, the transmembrane FGF receptors FGFR 1, FGFR 2, FGFR 4, the
transcription factors Msx1, Msx2, and Twist, as well as Goosecoid and the early
membranous bone differentiation marker osteopontin. We show that Dlx5 is
activated in proliferating osteoblast precursors, before osteoblast
differentiation. High levels of Dlx5 transcripts are observed at the osteogenic
fronts (OFs) and at the edges of the suture mesenchyme, but not in the suture
itself. Dlx5 expression is initiated in areas where Bmp4 and Bmp7 genes become
coexpressed. In a calvarial explant culture system, Dlx5 transcription is
upregulated by BMPs and inhibited by the BMP-antagonist Noggin. In addition, FGF4
activates Bmp4 but not Bmp7 gene transcription and is not sufficient to induce
ectopic Dlx5 expression in the immature calvarial mesenchyme. From these data, we
propose a model for the regulatory network implicated in early steps of chick
calvarial development.

PMID: 12710966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Genome Res. 2003 Apr;13(4):533-43.

Regulatory roles of conserved intergenic domains in vertebrate Dlx bigene
clusters.

Ghanem N(1), Jarinova O, Amores A, Long Q, Hatch G, Park BK, Rubenstein JL, Ekker
M.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute and Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1Y 4E9.

Dlx homeobox genes of vertebrates are generally arranged as three bigene clusters
on distinct chromosomes. The Dlx1/Dlx2, Dlx5/Dlx6, and Dlx3/Dlx7 clusters likely 
originate from duplications of an ancestral Dlx gene pair. Overlaps in expression
are often observed between genes from the different clusters. To determine if the
overlaps are a result of the conservation of enhancer sequences between
paralogous clusters, we compared the Dlx1/2 and the Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic regions 
from human, mouse, zebrafish, and from two pufferfish, Spheroides nephelus and
Takifugu rubripes. Conservation between all five vertebrates is limited to four
sequences, two in Dlx1/Dlx2 and two in Dlx5/Dlx6. These noncoding sequences are
>75% identical over a few hundred base pairs, even in distant vertebrates.
However, when compared to each other, the four intergenic sequences show a much
more limited similarity. Each intergenic sequence acts as an enhancer when tested
in transgenic animals. Three of them are active in the forebrain with overlapping
patterns despite their limited sequence similarity. The lack of sequence
similarity between paralogous intergenic regions and the high degree of sequence 
conservation of orthologous enhancers suggest a rapid divergence of Dlx
intergenic regions early in chordate/vertebrate evolution followed by fixation of
cis-acting regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC430168
PMID: 12670995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Apr 1;100(7):4030-4. Epub 2003 Mar 17.

Regulation of Dlx3 gene expression in visceral arches by evolutionarily conserved
enhancer elements.

Sumiyama K(1), Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06511, USA.

The mammalian Distal-less (Dlx) clusters (Dlx1-2, Dlx5-6, and Dlx3-7) have a
nested expression pattern in developing visceral (branchial) arches. Genetic
regulatory mechanisms controlling Dlx spatial expression within the visceral
arches have not yet been defined. Here we show that an enhancer in the Dlx3-7
cluster can regulate the visceral arch specific expression pattern of the Dlx3
gene. We have used a 79-kb transgene construct containing the entire Dlx3-7
bigene cluster with a LacZ reporter inserted in frame in the first exon of the
Dlx3 gene. Visceral arch expression is absent when a 4-kb element located within 
the Dlx3-7 intergenic region is deleted. A 245-bp element (I37-2) whose DNA
sequence is highly conserved between human and mouse located within the
4kb-deleted region can drive visceral arch expression when fused to a hsp68-lacZ 
reporter transgene construct. Reporter expression is detected in 9.5 and 10.5
days postcoitum transgenic embryos in a manner consistent with the endogenous
Dlx3 expression pattern in the mesenchyme of the first and second visceral
arches. Thus the I37-2 element is both necessary and sufficient for Dlx3
expression. The I37-2 element contains several putative binding sites for several
transcription factors including Dlx and other homeodomain proteins within the
evolutionarily conserved region. Significantly, the I37-2 element shows a
sequence-match including a Dlx binding site to a cis-element in the Dlx5-6
intermediate region designated mI56i [Zerucha, T., Stuhmer, T., Hatch, G., Park, 
B. K., Long, Q., Yu, G., Gambarotta, A., Schultz, J. R., Rubenstein, J. L. &
Ekker, M. (2000) J. Neurosci. 20, 709-721], despite distant phylogenetic
relationship between these clusters. Our results provide evidence for a concerted
role for DLX auto- and cross-regulation in the establishment of a nested
expression pattern for Dlx3-7 and Dlx5-6 clusters within the visceral arches.

PMCID: PMC153042
PMID: 12642674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Neurosci. 2003 Jan 15;23(2):568-78.

DLX5 regulates development of peripheral and central components of the olfactory 
system.

Long JE(1), Garel S, Depew MJ, Tobet S, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, Langley Porter Psychiatric Institute, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0984, USA.

Induction, neurogenesis, and synaptogenesis of the olfactory bulb are thought to 
require interactions with the olfactory epithelium. The Dlx family of homeobox
genes is expressed in both the olfactory bulb and olfactory epithelium. In
particular, Dlx5 is expressed in the olfactory placode, olfactory epithelium, and
local circuit neurons of the olfactory bulb. Here we analyzed mice lacking DLX5
function. The Dlx5-/- mutation reduces the size of the olfactory epithelium.
Although some olfactory neurons are formed, they fail to generate olfactory axons
that innervate the olfactory bulb. Despite the lack of innervation, the olfactory
bulb forms, and neurogenesis of projection and local circuit neurons proceeds.
However, the mutation has a cell-autonomous effect on the ability of neural
progenitors to produce olfactory bulb local circuit neurons, with granule cells
more severely affected than periglomerular cells. In addition, the mutation has a
noncell-autonomous effect on the morphogenesis of mitral cells.

PMID: 12533617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Heredity (Edinb). 2003 Jan;90(1):3-5.

Evolution and development. Making jaws.

Schilling T.

PMID: 12522416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Neurosci. 2003 Jan 1;23(1):167-74.

Identification of two distinct progenitor populations in the lateral ganglionic
eminence: implications for striatal and olfactory bulb neurogenesis.

Stenman J(1), Toresson H, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Research Foundation,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

The lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) is known to give rise to striatal
projection neurons as well as interneurons, which migrate in the rostral
migratory stream (RMS) to populate the granule cell and glomerular layers of the 
olfactory bulb. Because all of these neuronal subtypes express Distalless-related
(DLX) homeobox proteins during their differentiation, we set out to further
characterize progenitors in the Dlx-positive domain of the LGE. Previous studies 
have shown that the LIM homeobox protein Islet1 (ISL1) marks the LGE
subventricular zone (SVZ) and differentiating striatal projection neurons.
However, ISL1 is not expressed in neurons of the developing olfactory bulb or the
RMS. We show here that the dorsal-most portion of the Dlx-expressing region of
the LGE SVZ lacks ISL1 cells. This dorsal domain, however, contains cells that
express the ETS transcription factor Er81, which is also expressed in granule and
periglomerular cells of the developing and adult olfactory bulb. Moreover, the
adult SVZ and RMS contain numerous Er81-positive cells. Fate-mapping studies
using Dlx5/6-cre transgenic mice demonstrate that Er81-positive cells in the
granule cell and glomerular layers of the olfactory bulb derive from the
Dlx-expressing SVZ region. These findings suggest that the LGE SVZ contains two
distinct progenitor populations: a DLX(+);ISL1(+) population representing
striatal progenitors and a DLX(+);Er81(+) population comprising olfactory bulb
interneuron progenitors. In support of this, mice mutant for the homeobox genes
Gsh2 and Gsh1/2, which show olfactory bulb defects, exhibit dramatically reduced 
numbers of Er81-positive cells in the LGE SVZ as well as in the olfactory bulb
mantle.

PMID: 12514213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Endocrinology. 2003 Jan;144(1):346-52.

Diabetes interferes with the bone formation by affecting the expression of
transcription factors that regulate osteoblast differentiation.

Lu H(1), Kraut D, Gerstenfeld LC, Graves DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology and Oral Biology, Boston University School of
Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Type 1 diabetes in humans has as one of its complications inadequate bone
formation, resulting in osteopenia and delayed fracture healing. To investigate
the mechanisms by which diabetes affects bone formation, experiments were
performed in a marrow ablation model. Mice were made diabetic by multiple
low-dose streptozotocin treatment, and controls were treated with vehicle alone. 
Killing occurred 0, 2, 4, 6, 10, and 16 d following marrow ablation. Histologic
analysis demonstrated that the amount of immature mesenchymal tissue was
equivalent in both the experimental and control groups on d 4. On d 6 a burst of 
bone formation occurred in the control group that was significantly reduced in
the diabetic group. This deficit was evident at the molecular level as shown by
diminished expression of osteocalcin, collagen types I. When transcription
factors were examined, core-binding factor alpha1 (Cbfa1)/runt domain factor-2
(Runx-2) and human homolog of the drosophila distal-less gene (Dlx5) expression
were substantially reduced in the diabetic, compared with control, groups on d 4 
and 6. C-fos but not c-jun expression was also suppressed in the diabetic group
but not closely linked to bone formation. Insulin treatment substantially
reversed the effect of diabetes on the expression of bone matrix osteocalcin and 
collagen type I and transcription factors Cbfa1/Runx2 and Dlx5. These results
indicate that diabetic animals produce sufficient amounts of immature mesenchymal
tissue but fail to adequately express genes that regulate osteoblast
differentiation, Cbfa1/Runx-2 and Dlx5, which in turn, leads to decreased bone
formation.

PMID: 12488363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Dev Biol. 2002 Dec 15;252(2):257-70.

Dlx5 is a positive regulator of chondrocyte differentiation during endochondral
ossification.

Ferrari D(1), Kosher RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of BioStructure and Function, University of Connecticut Health
Center, Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

The process of endochondral ossification in which the bones of the limb are
formed after generation of cartilage models is dependent on a precisely regulated
program of chondrocyte maturation. Here, we show that the homeobox-containing
gene Dlx5 is expressed at the onset of chondrocyte maturation during the
conversion of immature proliferating chondrocytes into postmitotic hypertrophying
chondrocytes, a critical step in the maturation process. Moreover, retroviral
misexpression of Dlx5 during differentiation of the skeletal elements of the
chick limb in vivo results in the formation of severely shortened skeletal
elements that contain excessive numbers of hypertrophying chondrocytes which
extend into ectopic regions, including sites normally occupied by immature
chondrocytes. The expansion in the extent of hypertrophic maturation detectable
histologically is accompanied by expanded and upregulated domains of expression
of molecular markers of chondrocyte maturation, particularly type X collagen and 
osteopontin, and by expansion of mineralized cartilage matrix, which is
characteristic of terminal hypertrophic differentiation. Furthermore, Dlx5
misexpression markedly reduces chondrocyte proliferation concomitant with
promoting hypertrophic maturation. Taken together, these results indicate that
Dlx5 is a positive regulator of chondrocyte maturation and suggest that it
regulates the process at least in part by promoting conversion of immature
proliferating chondrocytes into hypertrophying chondrocytes. Retroviral
misexpression of Dlx5 also enhances formation of periosteal bone, which is
derived from the Dlx5-expressing perichondrium that surrounds the diaphyses of
the cartilage models. This suggests that Dlx5 may be involved in regulating
osteoblast differentiation, as well as chondrocyte maturation, during
endochondral ossification.

PMID: 12482714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Gene. 2002 Oct 16;299(1-2):205-17.

An L1 element disrupts human bone sialoprotein promoter: lack of tissue-specific 
regulation by distalless5 (Dlx5) and runt homeodomain protein2 (Runx2)/core
binding factor a1 (Cbfa1) elements.

Kiyoshima T(1), Yamauchi M, Wong C, Jheon A, Ganss B, Sodek J.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Group in Periodontal Physiology, Faculty of Dentistry, University of
Toronto, Room 239 FitzGerald Building, 150 College Street, Toronto, Ontario M5S
3E2, Canada.

Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is a phosphorylated and sulphated glycoprotein with
hydroxyapatite nucleating properties that is specifically expressed in
association with physiological and pathological mineralization. Although previous
studies have indicated that tissue-specific expression of murine BSP is regulated
through a proximal homeodomain element that binds distalless5 (Dlx5)
transcription analysis of the homologous human promoter revealed modest
enhancement in osteogenic cells. Moreover, whereas forced expression of an
antisense Dlx5 vector increased transcription, Dlx5 expression did not alter
transcription significantly. Since extended promoter sequences are required to
confer absolute tissue-specific expression of BSP in vivo, we characterized the
upstream region of the human BSP gene. In contrast to the rat and mouse
promoters, which show conserved sequences extending several kbs upstream,
analysis of approximately 3 kb of the human promoter showed no sequence
conservation beyond -0.99 kb. Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA from four
different BAC clones showed that this sequence was not an aberration in the human
genomic library used to isolate the BSP gene. Using clone BAC H-NH0811I08, the
human BSP promoter sequence was extended approximately 8 kb upstream from which
the non-homologous region was characterized as a 3.48 kb insert coding for an L1 
retrotransposon element. Transcriptional analyses of chimeric promoter constructs
revealed that the retrotransposon element suppresses transcription <80%. Upstream
of the inserted DNA several regions, varying in length from 26 to 161 bps, were
conserved within the mouse and human promoters. One of these conserved regions
included a runt homeodomain protein2 (Runx2)/core binding factor a1 (Cbfa1)
elements consensus element in reverse orientation. Whereas a multimeric form of
the element was transcriptionally active in response to Runx2/Cbfa1 when ligated 
to the BSP basal promoter, the single element in the context of the extended
promoter was unresponsive. These studies have characterized the upstream promoter
of the human BSP gene, which is interrupted by a unique high-frequency DNA insert
that suppresses BSP gene transcription.

PMID: 12459268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Genesis. 2002 Dec;34(4):221-7.

Jaw transformation with gain of symmetry after Dlx5/Dlx6 inactivation: mirror of 
the past?

Beverdam A(1), Merlo GR, Paleari L, Mantero S, Genova F, Barbieri O, Janvier P,
Levi G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Morphogenesis, National Institute for Cancer Research,
Genova, Italy.

In modern vertebrates upper and lower jaws are morphologically different. Both
develop from the mandibular arch, which is colonized mostly by Hox-free neural
crest cells. Here we show that simultaneous inactivation of the murine homeobox
genes Dlx5 and Dlx6 results in the transformation of the lower jaw into an upper 
jaw and in symmetry of the snout. This is the first homeotic-like transformation 
found in this Hox-free region after gene inactivation. A suggestive parallel
comes from the paleontological record, which shows that in primitive vertebrates 
both jaws are essentially mirror images of each other. Our finding supports the
notion that Dlx genes are homeotic genes associated with morphological novelty in
the vertebrate lineage.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12434331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Cell Biochem. 2002;87(4):458-69.

Transcriptional regulation restricting bone sialoprotein gene expression to both 
hypertrophic chondrocytes and osteoblasts.

Barnes GL(1), Della Torre T, Sommer B, Young MF, Gerstenfeld LC.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Research Laboratory of the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Boston University Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.
gbarnes@bu.edu

This study identifies a cis-acting element that confers tissue-restricted
expression to the bone sialoprotein (BSP) gene. Using both gain of function and
loss-of function studies, we demonstrate that this element acts as a tissue
specific enhancer of BSP expression in osteoblasts and hypertrophic chondrocytes 
but does not function in non-hypertrophic chondrocytes or fibroblasts.
Furthermore, our data demonstrate that binding of this element occurs in
correlation with active BSP expression. While Dlx5 has been implicated as the
tissue-specific regulator of BSP expression through direct DNA binding at an
element with homology to the one under study here, our results demonstrate that
Dlx5 does not act as a positive regulator of BSP expression. Finally, mutational 
analyses of this element demonstrate that while there is homology to putative
homeodomain binding elements, this site is unlikely to bind homeodomain factors
including Dlx5. Thus, these studies identify an important cis-acting element in
the BSP promoter that acts as a tissue-specific enhancer of BSP expression in
both osteoblasts and hypertrophic chondrocytes. As such this is the first
demonstration of a common regulatory mechanism utilized by both chondrocytes and 
osteoblasts for the tissue-restricted expression of the BSP gene.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12397605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Science. 2002 Oct 11;298(5592):371-3.

Evolution. Jaws of the fates.

Koentges G(1), Matsuoka T.

Author information: 
(1)Wolfson Institute of Biomedical Research, University College, London WC1E 6AU,
UK. g.koentges@ucl.ac.uk

Comment on
    Science. 2002 Oct 11;298(5592):381-5.

PMID: 12376690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Eur J Pharmacol. 2002 Sep 6;451(1):19-25.

Enhancement of osteogenesis in vitro by a novel osteoblast
differentiation-promoting compound, TAK-778, partly through the expression of
Msx2.

Gotoh M(1), Notoya K, Ienaga Y, Kawase M, Makino H.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Research Laboratories I, Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda
Chemical Industries, Ltd, 17-85, Jusohonmachi 2-chome, Yodogawa, Osaka 532-8686, 
Japan. Goto_Masayuki@takeda.co.jp

TAK-778
[(2R,4S)-(-)-N-(4-Diethoxyphosphorylmethylphenyl)-1,2,4,5-tetrahydro-4-methyl-7,8
-methylenedioxy-5-oxo-3-benzothiepin-2-carboxamide: mw 505.52], a novel compound 
promoting osteoblast differentiation, promotes osteogenesis in vitro and enhances
bone formation during skeletal repair in vivo. In this study, we further
evaluated the effects of TAK-778 on the differentiation of cultured bone marrow
stromal cells into osteoblasts in the presence of dexamethasone, paying
particular attention to the expression of transcription factors involved in
regulating osteoblast differentiation. Treatment of TAK-778 (10(-7)-10(-5) M) for
4 h resulted in an increase in the mRNA expression of Msx2, but not Cbfa1 or
Dlx5. This transcriptional alteration preceded the changes in other markers
related to the osteoblast phenotype, such as alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin
mRNA. The transfection of Msx2-antisense in the cells caused a significant
reduction in the levels of alkaline phosphatase mRNA expression induced by
TAK-778. These results suggest that TAK-778 promotes osteoblast differentiation
partly through the expression of Msx2, a homeobox-related gene.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 12223224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Dev Biol. 2002 Sep 15;249(2):237-54.

Extensive cell movements accompany formation of the otic placode.

Streit A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College, Guy's Hospital, London
SE1 9RT, United Kingdom. andrea.streit@kcl.ac.uk

During development, the vertebrate inner ear arises from the otic placode, a
thickened portion of the ectoderm next to the hindbrain. Here, the first detailed
fate maps of this region in the chick embryo are presented. At head process
stages, placode precursors are scattered throughout a large region of the
embryonic ectoderm, where they intermingle with future neural, neural crest,
epidermal, and other placode cells. Within the next few hours, dramatic cell
movements shift the future otic placode cells toward the midline and ultimately
result in convergence to their final position next to rhombomeres 5-6. Individual
cells and small cell groups undergo constant cell rearrangements and appear to
sort out from nonotic cells. While the major portion of the otic placode is
derived from the nonneural ectoderm, the neural folds also contribute cells to
the placode at least until the four-somite stage. Comparison of these fate maps
with gene expression patterns at equivalent stages reveals molecular
heterogeneity of otic precursor cells in terms of their expression of dlx5, msx1,
Six4, and ERNI. Although Pax2 expression coincides with the region where otic
precursors are found from stage 8, not all Pax2-positive cells will ultimately
contribute to the otic placode.

PMID: 12221004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Science. 2002 Oct 11;298(5592):381-5. Epub 2002 Aug 22.

Specification of jaw subdivisions by Dlx genes.

Depew MJ(1), Lufkin T, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, 401 Parnassus Avenue,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0984, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2002 Oct 11;298(5592):371-3.

The success of vertebrates was due in part to the acquisition and modification of
jaws. Jaws are principally derived from the branchial arches, embryonic
structures that exhibit proximodistal polarity. To investigate the mechanisms
that specify the identity of skeletal elements within the arches, we examined
mice lacking expression of Dlx5 and Dlx6, linked homeobox genes expressed
distally but not proximally within the arches. Dlx5/6-/- mutants exhibit a
homeotic transformation of lower jaws to upper jaws. We suggest that nested Dlx
expression in the arches patterns their proximodistal axes. Evolutionary
acquisition and subsequent refinement of jaws may have been dependent on
modification of Dlx expression.

PMID: 12193642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Dev Biol. 2002 Aug 1;248(1):157-69.

The Dlx5 homeobox gene is essential for vestibular morphogenesis in the mouse
embryo through a BMP4-mediated pathway.

Merlo GR(1), Paleari L, Mantero S, Zerega B, Adamska M, Rinkwitz S, Bober E, Levi
G.

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute (DTI), Advanced Biotechnology Center, Largo R.
Benzi 10, 16132 Genoa, Italy. giorgio_merlo@hotmail.com

In the mouse embryo, Dlx5 is expressed in the otic placode and vesicle, and later
in the semicircular canals of the inner ear. In mice homozygous for a null
Dlx5/LacZ allele, a severe dysmorphogenesis of the vestibular region is observed,
characterized by the absence of semicircular canals and the shortening of the
endolymphatic duct. Minor defects are observed in the cochlea, although Dlx5 is
not expressed in this region. Cristae formation is severely impaired; however,
sensory epithelial cells, recognized by calretinin immunostaining, are present in
the vestibular epithelium of Dlx5(-/-) mice. The maculae of utricle and saccule
are present but cells appear sparse and misplaced. The abnormal morphogenesis of 
the semicircular canals is accompanied by an altered distribution of
proliferating and apoptotic cells. In the Dlx5(-/-) embryos, no changes in
expression of Nkx5.1(Hmx3), Pax2, and Lfng have been seen, while expression of
bone morphogenetic protein-4 (Bmp4) was drastically reduced. Notably, BMP4 has
been shown to play a fundamental role in vestibular morphogenesis of the chick
embryo. We propose that development of the semicircular canals and the vestibular
inner ear requires the independent control of several homeobox genes, which
appear to exert their function via tight regulation of BPM4 expression and the
regional organization of cell differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis.

PMID: 12142028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Genesis. 2002 Jun;33(2):97-101.

Mouse model of split hand/foot malformation type I.

Merlo GR(1), Paleari L, Mantero S, Genova F, Beverdam A, Palmisano GL, Barbieri
O, Levi G.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Laboratory-CBA, Dulbecco Telethon Medical Institute DTMI, Genova,
Italy.

Split hand/foot malformation type I (SHFM1) disease locus maps to chromosome
7q21.3-q22, a region that includes the distal-less-related (dll) genes DLX5 and
DLX6. However, incomplete penetrance, variable expressivity, segregation
distortion, and syndromic association with other anomalies have so far prevented 
the identification of the SHFM1 gene(s) in man. Here we show that the targeted
double inactivation of Dlx5 and Dlx6 in the mouse causes in homozygous mutant
animals bilateral ectrodactyly with a severe defect of the central ray of the
hindlimbs, a malformation typical of SHFM1. This is the first evidence that the
role of dll/Dlx genes in appendage development is conserved from insects to
mammals and proves their involvement in SHFM1.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12112878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Bone Miner Res. 2002 Jun;17(6):1008-14.

Overexpression of Dlx5 in chicken calvarial cells accelerates osteoblastic
differentiation.

Tadic T(1), Dodig M, Erceg I, Marijanovic I, Mina M, Kalajzic Z, Velonis D,
Kronenberg MS, Kosher RA, Ferrari D, Lichtler AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, Farmington 06030, USA.

Our laboratory and others have shown that a homeodomain protein binding site
plays an important role in transcription of the Collal gene in osteoblasts. This 
suggests that homeodomain proteins have an important role in osteoblast
differentiation. We have investigated the role of Dlx5 in osteoblastic
differentiation. In situ hybridization studies indicated that Dlx5 is expressed
in chick calvarial osteoblasts (cCOB) in vivo. Northern blot analysis indicated
that Dlx5 expression in cultured cCOBs is induced concurrently with osteoblastic 
markers. To study the effect of overexpression of Dlx5 on osteoblast
differentiation, we infected primary osteoblast cultures from 15-day-old
embryonal chicken calvaria with replication competent retroviral vectors
[RCASBP(A)] expressing Dlx5 or control replication competent avian splice
acceptor brianhightiter polymerase subtype A [RCASBP(A)]. Expression of Collal,
osteopontin, alkaline phosphatase, and osteocalcin messenger RNA (mRNA) occurred 
sooner and at higher levels in cultures infected with RCASBP(A)DLX5 than in
RCASBP(A)-infected cultures. Mineralization of Dlx5-expressing cultures was
evident by days 12-14, and RCAS-infected control osteoblasts did not begin to
mineralize until day 17. Dlx5 also stimulated osteoblastic differentiation of
calvarial cells that do not normally undergo osteoblastic differentiation in
vitro. Our results suggest that Dlx5 plays an important role in inducing
calvarial osteoblast differentiation.

PMID: 12054155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Development. 2002 Jun;129(12):2807-22.

Fate map of the chicken neural plate at stage 4.

Fernández-Garre P(1), Rodríguez-Gallardo L, Gallego-Díaz V, Alvarez IS, Puelles
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Murcia, 30100, Murcia, Spain.

A detailed fate map was obtained for the early chick neural plate (stages 3d/4). 
Numerous overlapping plug grafts were performed upon New-cultured chick embryos, 
using fixable carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester to label donor
chick tissue. The specimens were harvested 24 hours after grafting and reached in
most cases stages 9-11 (early neural tube). The label was detected
immunocytochemically in wholemounts, and cross-sections were later obtained. The 
positions of the graft-derived cells were classified first into sets of purely
neural, purely non-neural and mixed grafts. Comparisons between these sets
established the neural plate boundary at stages 3d/4. Further analysis
categorized graft contributions to anteroposterior and dorsoventral subdivisions 
of the early neural tube, including data on the floor plate and the eye field.
The rostral boundary of the neural plate was contained within the earliest
expression domain of the Ganf gene, and the overall shape of the neural plate was
contrasted and discussed with regard to the expression patterns of the genes
Plato, Sox2, Otx2 and Dlx5 (and others reported in the literature) at stages
3d/4.

PMID: 12050131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Genes Dev. 2002 May 1;16(9):1089-101.

The Dlx5 and Dlx6 homeobox genes are essential for craniofacial, axial, and
appendicular skeletal development.

Robledo RF(1), Rajan L, Li X, Lufkin T.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center for Developmental and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, New York, NY 10029-6574, USA.

Dlx homeobox genes are mammalian homologs of the Drosophila Distal-less (Dll)
gene. The Dlx/Dll gene family is of ancient origin and appears to play a role in 
appendage development in essentially all species in which it has been identified.
In Drosophila, Dll is expressed in the distal portion of the developing
appendages and is critical for the development of distal structures. In addition,
human Dlx5 and Dlx6 homeobox genes have been identified as possible candidate
genes for the autosomal dominant form of the split-hand/split-foot malformation
(SHFM), a heterogeneous limb disorder characterized by missing central digits and
claw-like distal extremities. Targeted inactivation of Dlx5 and Dlx6 genes in
mice results in severe craniofacial, axial, and appendicular skeletal
abnormalities, leading to perinatal lethality. For the first time, Dlx/Dll gene
products are shown to be critical regulators of mammalian limb development, as
combined loss-of-function mutations phenocopy SHFM. Furthermore,
spatiotemporal-specific transgenic overexpression of Dlx5, in the apical
ectodermal ridge of Dlx5/6 null mice can fully rescue Dlx/Dll function in limb
outgrowth.

PMCID: PMC186247
PMID: 12000792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 21;277(25):22541-6. Epub 2002 Apr 16.

A RING finger protein Praja1 regulates Dlx5-dependent transcription through its
ubiquitin ligase activity for the Dlx/Msx-interacting MAGE/Necdin family protein,
Dlxin-1.

Sasaki A(1), Masuda Y, Iwai K, Ikeda K, Watanabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Research, National Institute for Longevity Sciences,
Obu, Aichi 474-8522, Japan.

Msx2 and Dlx5 are homeodomain proteins that play an important role in osteoblast 
differentiation and whose expression is induced by bone morphogenetic proteins.
Recently we have identified a novel protein, Dlxin-1, that associates with these 
homeodomain proteins and regulates Dlx5-dependent transcriptional function
(Masuda, Y., Sasaki, A., Shibuya, H., Ueno, N., Ikeda, K., and Watanabe, K.
(2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 5331-5338). In an attempt to elucidate the molecular
function of Dlxin-1, two closely related RING finger proteins, Praja1 and
Neurodap-1, were isolated by yeast two-hybrid screening using the C-terminal
necdin homology domain of Dlxin-1 as bait. Glutathione S-transferase pull-down
and immunoprecipitation/Western blotting assays following co-transfection of
Dlxin-1 and Praja1 revealed that Praja1 binds to the C-terminal necdin homology
domain of Dlxin-1 in vitro and in vivo, respectively. Overexpression of Praja1
caused a decrease in Dlxin-1 protein level, which was reversed when a proteasome 
inhibitor was added. Overexpression of Praja1 with a mutation in the RING finger 
inhibited the decrease in Dlxin-1 protein, pointing to the importance of
ubiquitin-protein isopeptide ligase (E3) activity associated with RING finger.
Wild-type Praja1, but not its RING finger mutant, promoted ubiquitination of
Dlxin-1 in vivo. Finally, expression of Praja1 down-regulated Dlx5-dependent
transcriptional activity in a GAL4-dependent assay. These results suggest that
Praja1 regulates the transcription function of the homeodomain protein Dlx5 by
controlling the stability of Dlxin-1 via an ubiquitin-dependent degradation
pathway.

PMID: 11959851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Brain Res Bull. 2002 Feb-Mar 1;57(3-4):289-91.

The effects of BMPs on early chick embryos suggest a conserved signaling
mechanism for epithelial and neural induction among vertebrates.

Gallego-Díaz V(1), Schoenwolf GC, Alvarez IS.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Biologia Celular. Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de
Extremadura, Badajoz, Spain.

In Xenopus embryos neural specification takes place by inhibition of epithelial
specification, allowing blastoderm cells to continue their previously established
neural determination process. This mechanism has been termed neural induction as 
a "default state". The understanding of this model has been completed with the
identification of molecules that can block the epithelial inducers. The
antagonist mechanism between epithelial signals (bone morphogenetic proteins
[BMPs]) and their blocking agents (BMP antagonists) can explain the formation of 
the prospective neural territory and why these BMP antagonists function as neural
inducers when over-expressed in Xenopus. Despite this well understood mechanism
in amphibians, little information is available for other species. The formation
of the neural plate by means of a "default state" mechanism in other vertebrates 
still lacks experimental confirmation. We present evidence that the growth
factors of the BMP family are also epithelial inducers in bird embryos, and that 
when over-expressed they can partially block neural induction.

PMID: 11922974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Craniofac Surg. 2002 Jan;13(1):129-87; discussion 188-90.

Development of the facial midline.

Carstens MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Loma Linda University, Children's Hospital, Oakland, CA.
michael@michaelcarstensmd.com

"Intellectual excellence lies in having faith in the observation of apparently
nontranscendental and unimportant facts. To observe an anatomic element calmly,
with an open, analytical spirit, and with spiritual freedom, can lead to an
explosive vortex of new knowledge."-Miguel Orticochea, M.D.(1) Traditional
descriptive embryology based upon the interaction of frontonasal, lateral nasal, 
and medial nasal prominences is incapable of explaining the three-dimensional
development of the facial midline. The internal structure of the nose and that of
the oronasal midline can best be explained by the presence of paired A fields
originating from the prechordal mesendoderm, associated with the nasal and optic 
placodes, supplied by the internal carotid artery, and sharing a common genetic
coding with the prosomeres of the forebrain. Mesial drift of these fields leads
to fusion of their medial walls; this in turn provides bilateral functional
matrics within which form the orbits ethmoids, lacrimals, turbinates,
premaxillae, vomerine bones, and the cartilages of the nose. This two-part paper 
reports six lines of evidence supporting the field theory model of facial
development: (1) An apparent watershed exists in the midline of the base between 
the territories of the internal and external carotid systems. Isolation of the
ICA in injected fetal specimens confirmed that the demarcation was distinct and
restricted to the embryonic nasal capsule. (2) Field theory explains the
developmental anatomy of the contents of the nasal capsule. (3) The neuromeric
model of CNS development provides a genetic basis for the anatomy and behavior of
fields. (4) Mutants for the Dlx5 gene demonstrate A field deletion patterns.
These experiments relate the nasal placode to the structures of the A fields. (5)
Separate regions of the original nasal placodes give rise to neurons, which are
dedicated to separate sensory and endocrine systems. The A fields constitute the 
pathways by which these neurons reach the brain. (6) Non-cleft lip-related cleft 
palate, holoprosencephaly, and the Kallmann syndrome are clinical models that
demonstrate the effects of anatomic disturbances within the A fields.

PMID: 11887012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jan 25;290(3):955-61.

MSX2 expression in the apical ectoderm ridge is regulated by an MSX2 and Dlx5
binding site.

Pan ZZ(1), Kronenberg MS, Huang DY, Sumoy L, Rogina B, Lichtler AC, Upholt WB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of BioStructure and Function, School of Medicine, University of
Connecticut Health Center, 263 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, Connecticut 06030, 
USA.

The apical ectodermal ridge (AER) is a specialized ectodermal region essential
for limb outgrowth. Msx2 expression patterns in limb development strongly suggest
an important role for Msx2 in the AER. Our previous studies identified a 348-bp
fragment of the chicken Msx2 gene with AER enhancer activity. In this study, the 
functions of four potential homeodomain binding TAAT sites in this enhancer were 
studied using transgenic mice and in vitro protein-DNA interactions. Transgenic
studies indicate that the four TAAT sites are not redundant and that only the
B-TAAT site is critical for AER enhancer activity. The expression patterns of
Msx2 and Dlx5 genes in the AER suggest that they might be involved in the
regulation of Msx2. In support of this hypothesis, we found that Msx2 and Dlx5
can bind to the B-TAAT site as well as to a fragment containing the D- and E-TAAT
sites in the Msx2 AER enhancer sequences. (c)2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11798166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Development. 2002 Jan;129(1):245-52.

Ectopic expression of the Dlx genes induces glutamic acid decarboxylase and Dlx
expression.

Stühmer T(1), Anderson SA, Ekker M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, LPPI, University of California at San Francisco, 401 Parnassus
Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143-0984, USA.

The expression of the Dlx homeobox genes is closely associated with neurons that 
express gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the embryonic rostral forebrain. To
test whether the Dlx genes are sufficient to induce some aspects of the phenotype
of GABAergic neurons, we adapted the electroporation method to ectopically
express DLX proteins in slice cultures of the mouse embryonic cerebral cortex.
This approach showed that ectopic expression of Dlx2 and Dlx5 induced the
expression of glutamic acid decarboxylases (GADs), the enzymes that synthesize
GABA. We also used this method to show cross-regulation between different Dlx
family members. We find that Dlx2 can induce Dlx5 expression, and that Dlx1, Dlx2
and Dlx5 can induce expression from a Dlx5/6-lacZ enhancer/"reporter construct.

PMID: 11782417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Development. 2001 Dec;128(24):5017-29.

Hmx2 homeobox gene control of murine vestibular morphogenesis.

Wang W(1), Chan EK, Baron S, Van de Water T, Lufkin T.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center for Developmental and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029-6574, USA.

Development of the vertebrate inner ear is characterized by a series of
genetically programmed events involving induction of surface ectoderm,
preliminary morphogenesis, specification and commitment of sensory, nonsensory
and neuronal cells, as well as outgrowth and restructuring of the otocyst to form
a complex labyrinth. Hmx2, a member of the Hmx homeobox gene family, is
coexpressed with Hmx3 in the dorsolateral otic epithelium. Targeted disruption of
Hmx2 in mice demonstrates the temporal and spatial involvement of Hmx2 in the
embryonic transition of the dorsal portion (pars superior) of the otocyst to a
fully developed vestibular system. In Hmx2 null embryos, a perturbation in cell
fate determination in the lateral aspect of the otic epithelium results in
reduced cell proliferation in epithelial cells, which includes the vestibular
sensory patches and semicircular duct fusion plates, as well as in the adjacent
mesenchyme. Consequently, enlargement and morphogenesis of the pars superior of
the otocyst to form a complex labyrinth of cavities and ducts is blocked, as
indicated by the lack of any distinguishable semicircular ducts, persistence of
the primordial vestibular diverticula, significant loss in the three cristae and 
the macula utriculus, and a fused utriculosaccular chamber. The developmental
regulators Bmp4, Dlx5 and Pax2 all play a critical role in inner ear ontogeny,
and the expression of each of these genes is affected in the Hmx2 null otocyst
suggesting a complex regulatory role for Hmx2 in this genetic cascade. Both Hmx2 
and Hmx3 transcripts are coexpressed in the developing central nervous system
including the neural tube and hypothalamus. A lack of defects in the CNS, coupled
with the fact that not all of the Hmx2-positive regions in developing inner ear
are impaired in the Hmx2 null mice, suggest that Hmx2 and Hmx3 have both unique
and overlapping functions during embryogenesis.

PMID: 11748138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Mech Dev. 2001 Dec;109(2):303-13.

FGFs control the patterning of the inner ear but are not able to induce the full 
ear program.

Adamska M(1), Herbrand H, Adamski M, Krüger M, Braun T, Bober E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, Martin-Luther University
Halle-Wittenberg, Hollystrasse 1, 06097, Halle, Germany.

FGF2 or FGF8 applied ectopically, close to the developing otic placode enhances
transcription of a subset of ear marker genes such as Nkx5-1, SOHo1 and Pax2.
Other ear expressed genes (Dlx5 and BMP4) are not up-regulated by FGFs. Ectopic
FGFs lead to an increase in size of the vestibulo-cochlear ganglion. This
phenotypic change is due to an increased recruitment of epithelial cells to the
neuronal fate rather than to an enhanced proliferation. We also observed an
induction of additional, vesicle-like structures upon ectopic FGF treatment, but 
this induction never led to enrolment of a full ear program. We further
demonstrate that FGF8 is expressed in two separate, short waves, first at the
otic placode stage and later at the vesicle stage. Both activities correspond to 
critical morphogenetic events in ear development. We propose that FGF8 is an
important regulator of otocyst patterning.

PMID: 11731242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Genes Cells. 2001 Oct;6(10):851-6.

Regulation of the activity of the transcription factor Runx2 by two homeobox
proteins, Msx2 and Dlx5.

Shirakabe K(1), Terasawa K, Miyama K, Shibuya H, Nishida E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Biostudies,
Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Runx2, formerly called PEBP2alphaA or Cbfa1, is a transcription
factor whose deletion causes a complete lack of ossification. It directly
regulates the expression of osteoblast-specific genes through the
osteoblast-specific cis-acting element found in the promoter region of these
genes.
RESULTS: In this study, we have found conditions in which induction of the
expression of Runx2 is not accompanied by expression of an osteoblast-specific
gene, osteocalcin in C2C12 cells. This finding suggests the existence of a
repressor of the activity of Runx2. We have then found that the homeobox protein 
Msx2 is able to repress the transcription activity of Runx2 by interacting with
it. Furthermore, our results have shown that the other homeobox protein Dlx5 has 
an activity which interferes with both abilities of Msx2 to interact with Runx2
and repress its transcription activity. It has previously been shown that a
missense mutation of Msx2 (P148H) causes Boston-type craniosynostosis in humans. 
Interestingly, while this mutant form of Msx2 was able to bind to Runx2 and
repress its activity, these abilities of Msx2 (P148H) were not subject to
regulation by Dlx5.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that regulation of the activity of Runx2 by
Msx2 and Dlx5 plays an important role in the mammalian skull development.

PMID: 11683913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2001 Oct 24;130(2):217-30.

Evidence that GRIP, a PDZ-domain protein which is expressed in the embryonic
forebrain, co-activates transcription with DLX homeodomain proteins.

Yu G(1), Zerucha T, Ekker M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Center for Neurobiology
and Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, 401 Parnassus Avenue, University of
California at San Francisco, CA 94143-0984, USA.

The DLX homeodomain proteins control development of the basal ganglia and
branchial arches. To identify co-factors that regulate DLX function we utilized
the yeast two-hybrid assay, and found a DLX interacting protein (DIP2) which
binds to the N-terminal region of DLX2 via a PDZ domain. DIP2 appears to be an
alternatively spliced form of GRIP1, a protein known to bind AMPA glutamate
receptors via PDZ domains. Thus, we named it GRIP1b. We provide evidence that
GRIP1b can function as a transcriptional co-activator of DLX2 and DLX5. Glutamate
receptors inhibit this co-activation. These results suggest that some PDZ
proteins may regulate transcription via their interactions with homeodomain
proteins. Furthermore, these results suggest a link between glutamate receptors, 
PDZ proteins and the DLX transcription factors, all of which are co-expressed in 
the developing basal ganglia.

PMID: 11675124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Mol Reprod Dev. 2001 Nov;60(3):331-7.

Distinct roles for Distal-less genes Dlx3 and Dlx5 in regulating ectodermal
development in Xenopus.

Luo T(1), Matsuo-Takasaki M, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, 6 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD
20892-2790, USA.

In vertebrates, there are six or more copies of genes related to the Drosophila
pattern formation homeodomain gene Distal-less. Among this family, Dlx3 and Dlx5 
share extensive sequence homology and have similar, but distinctive, expression
patterns, suggesting that these two factors may have substantially redundant
developmental functions. Here we show that at the earliest phases of
embryogenesis in Xenopus, there are significant differences between Dlx3 and Dlx5
expression and that this correlates with different functions in the restriction
of neural crest and neural plate boundaries, respectively.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11599044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Croat Med J. 2001 Aug;42(4):436-9.

Dlx5 induces expression of COL1A1 promoter contained in a retrovirus vector.

Tadic T(1), Erceg I, Stover ML, Rowe DW, Lichtler AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, Farmington CT 06030, USA.

AIM: To determine whether retrovirally expressed Dlx5, a homeobox-containing
transcription factor, can induce a 2.3 kb rat COL1A1 promoter-reporter construct,
which is transduced into osteoblastic cells by the use of a retrovirus vector.
METHODS: A self-inactivating retrovirus vector containing the rat COL1A1 driving 
green fluorescent protein (GFP) was transduced into chick calvarial periosteal
cells. These cells were then infected with a replication-competent retroviral
vector expressing Dlx5, or a control vector. The cells were cultured in the
presence of ascorbic acid and beta-glycerol-phosphate, which promotes
osteoblastic differentiation. Expression of the COL1A1 promoter was assessed by
detecting GFP with fluorescence microscopy.
RESULTS: GFP was detected only in cells infected with the Dlx5 expressing
retrovirus. The GFP positive cells were observed in regions of the culture that
had undergone osteoblastic differentiation, as detected by cell morphology and
the presence of a mineralized matrix.
CONCLUSION: The 2.3 kb rat COL1A1 promoter fragment contains elements responsive 
to Dlx5, and the self-inactivating retroviral vector allows these elements to be 
used appropriately.

PMID: 11471195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Int J Dev Biol. 2001 Jun;45(4):681-4.

Differential regulation of Dlx gene expression by a BMP morphogenetic gradient.

Luo T(1), Matsuo-Takasaki M, Lim JH, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-2790, USA.

Three members of the vertebrate Distal-less gene family, Dlx3, 5 and 6, are
transcribed in early gastrula embryos of Xenopus laevis. This expression is
confined to ectoderm and is excluded from the presumptive neural plate region.
Expression of all three genes is dependent upon BMP signaling, with significant
differences in how the three genes respond to the BMP antagonist chordin. This
correlates with the different expression domain boundaries in vivo for Dlx3
compared to Dlx5 and 6, suggesting that BMP signal attenuation could be the
primary factor in determining these different patterns in the gastrula ectoderm.

PMID: 11461005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. DNA Cell Biol. 2001 Jun;20(6):359-65.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) signaling to the Col2alpha1 gene in
chondroblasts requires the homeobox gene Dlx-2.

Xu SC(1), Harris MA, Rubenstein JL, Mundy GR, Harris SE.

Author information: 
(1)Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals, Mason, Ohio 45040, USA. xu.sc@pg.com

To understand the role of Dlx genes in the process of chondrogenesis, we studied 
the expression of Dlx-2 and Dlx-5 mRNAs in a mouse clonal chondroblast cell line,
TMC23. We also examined the involvement of Dlx2 in the bone morphogenetic
protein-2 (BMP-2) signaling to the type II collagen gene, Col2alpha1, in this
cell line. In this report, we show that the TMC23 cells express Dlx-2 and Dlx-5
mRNAs, and the levels can be upregulated by recombinant BMP-2 at an early stage
of chondroblast differentiation. Addition of rBMP-2 dramatically increased type
II collagen expression at both the mRNA and the protein level. Also, rBMP-2
increased transcription of Col2alpha1, as shown by stimulation of a
chondrocyte-specific Col2alpha1 enhancer. The mechanism involves Dlx-2, as the
stimulatory effect of rBMP-2 on the Col2alpha enhancer was blocked by an
antisense oligonucleotide against Dlx-2 mRNA. The rBMP-2 signaling to the
Col2alpha1 enhancer was also blocked by a dominant-negative Smad1 expression
vector. These data demonstrate that Dlx-2 is a downstream target of the BMP-2
signaling pathway in chondroblasts. Therefore, we propose a model in which rBMP-2
stimulates Dlx-2 expression, which then serves as a necessary transcription
factor for Col2alpha1 gene expression through a chondrocyte-specific enhancer
fragment.

PMID: 11445007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Dev Biol. 2001 Apr 15;232(2):458-70.

Three-dimensional digital mouse atlas using high-resolution MRI.

Dhenain M(1), Ruffins SW, Jacobs RE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Institute, Pasadena, California 91125, USA.

We present an archetypal digital atlas of the mouse embryo based on microscopic
magnetic resonance imaging. The atlas is composed of three modules: (1) images of
fixed embryos 6 to 15.5 days postconception (dpc) [Theiler Stages (TS) 8 to 24]; 
(2) an annotated atlas of the anterior portion of a 13.5 dpc (TS 22) mouse with
anatomical structures delineated and linked to explanatory files; and (3)
three-dimensional renderings of the entire 13.5 dpc embryo and specific organ
systems. The explanatory files include brief descriptions of the structure at
each volume element in the image and links to 3D reconstructions, allowing
visualization of the shape of the isolated structures. These files can also
contain or be linked to other types of information and data including detailed
anatomical and physiological information about structures with pointers to online
references, relationships between structures, temporal characteristics (cell
lineage patterns, size, and shape changes), and gene expression patterns (both
spatial and temporal). As an example, we have "painted" in the expression pattern
of Dlx5/Dlx6 genes. This digital atlas provides a means to put specific data
within the context of normal specimen anatomy, to analyze the information in 3D, 
and to examine relationships between different types of information.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11401405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jun 19;98(13):7336-41. Epub 2001 Jun 5.

Endogenous Msx1 antisense transcript: in vivo and in vitro evidences, structure, 
and potential involvement in skeleton development in mammals.

Blin-Wakkach C(1), Lezot F, Ghoul-Mazgar S, Hotton D, Monteiro S, Teillaud C,
Pibouin L, Orestes-Cardoso S, Papagerakis P, Macdougall M, Robert B, Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biology-Odontology, Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale, E 0110, Institut des Cordeliers, IFR 58, 75006 Paris, France.
biol_odonto_fr@yahoo.com

Msx1 is a key factor for the development of tooth and craniofacial skeleton and
has been proposed to play a pivotal role in terminal cell differentiation. In
this paper, we demonstrated the presence of an endogenous Msx1 antisense RNA
(Msx1-AS RNA) in mice, rats, and humans. In situ analysis revealed that this RNA 
is expressed only in differentiated dental and bone cells with an inverse
correlation with Msx1 protein. These in vivo data and overexpression of Msx1
sense and AS RNA in an odontoblastic cell line (MO6-G3) showed that the balance
between the levels of the two Msx1 RNAs is related to the expression of Msx1
protein. To analyze the impact of this balance in the Msx-Dlx homeoprotein
pathway, we analyzed the effect of Msx1, Msx2, and Dlx5 overexpression on
proteins involved in skeletal differentiation. We showed that the Msx1-AS RNA is 
involved in crosstalk between the Msx-Dlx pathways because its expression was
abolished by Dlx5. Msx1 was shown to down-regulate a master gene of skeletal
cells differentiation, Cbfa1. All these data strongly suggest that the ratio
between Msx1 sense and antisense RNAs is a very important factor in the control
of skeletal terminal differentiation. Finally, the initiation site for Msx1-AS
RNA transcription was located by primer extension in both mouse and human in an
identical region, including a consensus TATA box, suggesting an evolutionary
conservation of the AS RNA-mediated regulation of Msx1 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC34669
PMID: 11390985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Dev Biol. 2001 Mar 15;231(2):410-9.

Formation of the middle ear: recent progress on the developmental and molecular
mechanisms.

Mallo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stübeweg 51, Freiburg, D-79108, Germany. mallo@immunobio.mpg.de

The middle ear allows animals to hear while moving in an aerial medium. It is
composed of a cavity harbouring a chain of three ossicles that transmit
vibrations produced by airborne sound in the tympanic membrane into the inner
ear, where they are converted into neural impulses. The middle ear develops in
the branchial arches, and this requires sequential interactions between the
epithelia and the underlying mesenchyme. Gene-inactivation experiments have
identified genes required for the formation of different middle ear components.
Some encode for signalling molecules, including Endothelin1 and Fgf8, probable
mediators of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. Other genes, including Eya1,
Prx1, Hoxa1, Hoxa2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, and Gsc, are most likely involved in
patterning and morphogenetic processes in the neural crest-derived mesenchyme.
Mechanisms controlling formation of a functional tympanic membrane are also
discussed. Basically, the tympanic ring, which serves as support for the tympanic
membrane, directs invagination of the first pharyngeal cleft ectoderm to form the
external acoustic meatus (EAM), which provides the outer layer of the membrane.
Gsc and Prx1 are essential for tympanic ring development. While invaginating, the
EAM controls skeletogenesis in the underlying mesenchyme to form the manubrium of
the malleus, the link between the membrane and the middle ear ossicles.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11237469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 16;276(7):5331-8. Epub 2000 Nov 17.

Dlxin-1, a novel protein that binds Dlx5 and regulates its transcriptional
function.

Masuda Y(1), Sasaki A, Shibuya H, Ueno N, Ikeda K, Watanabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Research, National Institute for Longevity Sciences,
36-3 Gengo, Morioka-cho, Obu, Aichi 474-8522, Japan.

Dlx5, a member of the Dlx family of homeodomain proteins, plays a critical role
in bone development and fracture healing. To understand the molecular mechanism
underlying the transcriptional regulation by Dlx5, we performed yeast two-hybrid 
screening and isolated a novel protein, Dlxin-1, that binds Dlx5 and regulates
its transcriptional function. Dlxin-1 cDNA encodes a 775-amino acid protein that 
has a partial homology with necdin at the C terminus and 25 repeats of
hexapeptides (WQXPXX) in the middle region. Dlxin-1 mRNA is expressed in various 
adult tissues, but not the spleen, and also in osteoblastic and chondrogenic cell
lines. During embryogenesis, a strong signal for Dlxin-1 mRNA was found in cell
layers surrounding cartilaginous elements in bone rudiment during digit
formation. Dlxin-1 binds not only Dlx5 but also Dlx7 and Msx2 and forms
homomultimers in vivo. Transfection and reporter gene assays indicate that
Dlxin-1 activates the transcriptional function of Dlx5. Therefore, Dlxin-1 may
act as a regulator of the function of Dlx family members in bone formation.

PMID: 11084035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Exp Zool. 2000 Oct 15;288(3):235-41.

Differential expression of orthologous Dlx genes in zebrafish and mice:
implications for the evolution of the Dlx homeobox gene family.

Quint E(1), Zerucha T, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Loeb Health Research Institute at the Ottawa Hospital, Ontario, Canada.

Dlx homeobox genes of vertebrates are often organised as physically linked pairs 
in which the two genes are transcribed convergently (tail-to-tail arrangement).
Three such Dlx pairs have been found in mouse, human, and zebrafish and are
thought to have originated from the duplication of an ancestral gene pair. These 
pairs include Dlx1/Dlx2, Dlx7/Dlx3, and Dlx6/Dlx5 (the zebrafish orthologue of
Dlx5 is named dlx4). Expression patterns of physically linked Dlx genes overlap
extensively. Furthermore, orthologous Dlx genes often show highly similar
expression patterns. We analysed Dlx expression during the gastrula and early
somitogenesis of the mouse and zebrafish. It was found that expression of the
mouse Dlx6 gene takes place in the rostral ectoderm and presumptive olfactory and
otic placodes with patterns similar to the previously reported expression of the 
physically linked Dlx5 gene. However, we observed only very weak expression of
the mouse Dlx3 gene at the same stage. This contrasts with the expression of dlx 
genes in zebrafish where dlx3 and dlx7, but not dlx4 and dlx6 are expressed
during gastrulation in the rostral ectoderm and presumptive placodes. Thus, Dlx
expression patterns at early stages are better conserved between paralogous pairs
of physically linked genes than between orthologous pairs. This suggests that
early expression of Dlx genes existed prior to the duplications that led to the
multiple pairs of physically linked genes but was differentially conserved in
different paralogs in zebrafish and mice.

PMID: 11069141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Int J Dev Biol. 2000;44(6):619-26.

Multiple functions of Dlx genes.

Merlo GR(1), Zerega B, Paleari L, Trombino S, Mantero S, Levi G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Morphogenesis, National Cancer Institute-IST, Genova, 
Italy.

Dlx genes comprise a highly conserved family of homeobox genes homologous to the 
distal-less (Dll) gene of Drosophila. They are thought to act as transcription
factors. All Dlx genes are expressed in spatially and temporally restricted
patterns in craniofacial primordia, basal telencephalon and diencephalon, and in 
distal regions of extending appendages, including the limb and the genital bud.
Most of them are expressed during morphogenesis of sensory organs and during
migration of neural crest cells and interneurons. In addition, Dlx5 and Dlx6 are 
expressed in differentiating osteoblasts. Gene targeting of Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx3 and 
Dlx5 in the mouse germ-line has revealed functions in craniofacial patterning,
sensory organ morphogenesis, osteogenesis and placental formation. However, no
effect on limb development has yet been revealed from gene inactivation studies. 
A role for these genes in limb development is however suggested by the linkage of
the Split Foot/Hand Malformation human syndrome to a region containing DLX5 and
DLX6. As for most transcription factors, these genes seem to have multiple
functions at different stages of development or in different tissues and cell
types.

PMID: 11061425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Hum Mutat. 2000 Nov;16(5):448.

Two 3' polymorphisms in DLX5: g126427delTATC and g126249T-->C.

Hart PS(1), Michalec MD, Wright JT, Hart TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.
harts@msx.dept-med.pitt.edu

PMID: 11058915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 5;275(18):13907-17.

Identification of a homeodomain binding element in the bone sialoprotein gene
promoter that is required for its osteoblast-selective expression.

Benson MD(1), Bargeon JL, Xiao G, Thomas PE, Kim A, Cui Y, Franceschi RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1078, USA.

Bone sialoprotein is a 70-kDa extracellular matrix component that is intimately
associated with biomineralization, yet the cis-acting elements of the Bsp gene
that restrict its expression to mineralizing cells remain uncharacterized. To
identify such elements, we analyzed a 2472-base pair fragment of the murine
promoter that directs osteoblast-selective expression of a luciferase reporter
gene and found that the region between -338 and -178 relative to the
transcriptional start is crucial for its osteoblast-selective activity. We
identified an element within this region that binds a protein complex in the
nuclear extracts of osteoblastic cells and is required for its transcriptional
activity. Introduction of a mutation that disrupts a homeodomain binding site
within this sequence eliminates both its in vitro binding and nearly all of the
osteoblastic-selective activity of the 2472-base pair promoter. We further found 
that the Dlx5 homeoprotein, which is able to regulate the osteoblast-specific
osteocalcin promoter, can bind this element and stimulate its enhancer activity
when overexpressed in COS7 cells. These data represent the first description of
an osteoblast-specific element within the bone sialoprotein promoter and
demonstrate its regulation by a member of a family of factors known to be
involved in skeletogenesis.

PMID: 10788516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Neurosci. 2000 Jan 15;20(2):709-21.

A highly conserved enhancer in the Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic region is the site of
cross-regulatory interactions between Dlx genes in the embryonic forebrain.

Zerucha T(1), Stühmer T, Hatch G, Park BK, Long Q, Yu G, Gambarotta A, Schultz
JR, Rubenstein JL, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Loeb Health Research Institute at the Ottawa Hospital and Department of
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1Y 4E9, Canada.

Four Dlx homeobox genes, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, and Dlx6 are expressed in the same
primordia of the mouse forebrain with temporally overlapping patterns. The four
genes are organized as two tail-to-tail pairs, Dlx1/Dlx2 and Dlx5/Dlx6, a genomic
arrangement conserved in distantly related vertebrates like zebrafish. The
Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic region contains two sequences of a few hundred base pairs,
remarkably well conserved between mouse and zebrafish. Reporter transgenes
containing these two sequences are expressed in the forebrain of transgenic mice 
and zebrafish with patterns highly similar to endogenous Dlx5 and Dlx6
expression. The activity of the transgene is drastically reduced in mouse mutants
lacking both Dlx1 and Dlx2, consistent with the decrease in endogenous Dlx5 and
Dlx6 expression. These results suggest that cross-regulation by Dlx proteins,
mediated by the intergenic sequences, is essential for Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression
in the forebrain. This hypothesis is supported by cotransfection and DNA-protein 
binding experiments. We propose that the Dlx genes are part of a highly conserved
developmental pathway that regulates forebrain development.

PMID: 10632600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Development. 2000 Jan;127(2):403-12.

Temporospatial cell interactions regulating mandibular and maxillary arch
patterning.

Ferguson CA(1), Tucker AS, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, GKT Dental Institute, Kings College,
Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.

The cellular origin of the instructive information for hard tissue patterning of 
the jaws has been the subject of a long-standing controversy. Are the cranial
neural crest cells prepatterned or does the epithelium pattern a developmentally 
uncommitted population of ectomesenchymal cells? In order to understand more
about how orofacial patterning is controlled we have investigated the temporal
signalling interactions and responses between epithelium and mesenchymal cells in
the mandibular and maxillary primordia. We show that within the mandibular arch, 
homeobox genes that are expressed in different proximodistal spatial domains
corresponding to presumptive molar and incisor ectomesenchymal cells are induced 
by signals from the oral epithelium. In mouse, prior to E10, all ectomesenchyme
cells in the mandibular arch are equally responsive to epithelial signals such as
Fgf8, indicating that there is no pre-specification of these cells into different
populations and suggesting that patterning of the hard tissues of the mandible is
instructed by the epithelium. By E10.5, ectomesenchymal cell gene expression
domains are still dependent on epithelial signals but have become fixed and
ectopic expression cannot be induced. At E11 expression becomes independent of
epithelial signals such that removal of the epithelium does not affect spatial
ectomesenchymal expression. Significantly, however, the response of
ectomesenchyme cells to epithelial regulatory signals was found to be different
in the mandibular and maxillary primordium. Thus, whereas both mandibular and
maxillary arch epithelia could induce Dlx2 and Dlx5 expression in the mandible
and Dlx2 expression in the maxilla, neither could induce Dlx5 expression in the
maxilla. Reciprocal cell transplantations between mandibular and maxillary arch
ectomesenchymal cells revealed intrinsic differences between these populations of
cranial neural crest-derived cells. Research in odontogenesis has shown that the 
oral epithelium of the mandibular and maxillary primordia has unique instructive 
signaling properties required to direct odontogenesis, which are not found in
other branchial arch epithelia. As a consequence, development of jaw-specific
skeletal structures may require some prespecification of maxillary ectomesenchyme
to restrict the instructive influence of the epithelial signals and allow
development of maxillary structures distinct from mandibular structures.

PMID: 10603356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Pediatr Res. 1999 Dec;46(6):650-6.

Comparative study of MSX-2, DLX-5, and DLX-7 gene expression during early human
tooth development.

Davideau JL(1), Demri P, Hotton D, Gu TT, MacDougall M, Sharpe P, Forest N,
Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie-Odontologie, Université Paris VII, France.

Msx and Dlx family transcription factors are key elements of craniofacial
development and act in specific combinations with growth factors to control the
position and shape of various skeletal structures in mice. In humans, the
mutations of MSX and DLX genes are associated with specific syndromes, such as
tooth agenesis, craniosynostosis, and tricho-dento-osseous syndrome. To establish
some relationships between those reported human syndromes, previous experimental 
data in mice, and the expression patterns of MSX and DLX homeogenes in the human 
dentition, we investigated MSX-2, DLX-5, and DLX-7 expression patterns and
compared them in orofacial tissues of 7.5- to 9-wk-old human embryos by using in 
situ hybridization. Our data showed that MSX-2 was strongly expressed in the
progenitor cells of human orofacial skeletal structures, including mandible and
maxilla bones, Meckel's cartilage, and tooth germs, as shown for DLX-5. DLX-7
expression was restricted to the vestibular lamina and, later on, to the
vestibular part of dental epithelium. The comparison of MSX-2, DLX-5, and DLX-7
expression patterns during the early stages of development of different human
tooth types showed the existence of spatially ordered sequences of homeogene
expression along the vestibular/lingual axis of dental epithelium. The expression
of MSX-2 in enamel knot, as well as the coincident expression of MSX-2, DLX-5,
and DLX-7 in a restricted vestibular area of dental epithelium, suggests the
existence of various organizing centers involved in the control of human tooth
morphogenesis.

PMID: 10590019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Mech Dev. 1999 Dec;89(1-2):189-93.

Expression of DLX3 in chick embryos.

Pera E(1), Kessel M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für biophysikalische Chemie, Abteilung Molekulare
Zellbiologie, Am Fassberg, D-37077, Göttingen, Germany.

Higher vertebrates appear to possess six genes encoding a homeodomain of the
distal-less type. We report the cloning and expression pattern of the chicken
DLX3 gene, a homeobox gene highly related to the DLX5 gene with regard to both
the encoded protein structure and the expression pattern. DLX3 RNA was observed
during the development of the olfactory and otic placodes, in the distal portion 
of the first and second visceral arch mesenchyme, in the growing limb buds, and
in the tail tip. No expression occurs in the central nervous system.

PMID: 10559497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Development. 1999 Dec;126(23):5285-94.

Ebf1 controls early cell differentiation in the embryonic striatum.

Garel S(1), Marín F, Grosschedl R, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Ebf1/Olf-1 belongs to a small multigene family encoding closely related
helix-loop-helix transcription factors, which have been proposed to play a role
in neuronal differentiation. Here we show that Ebf1 controls cell differentiation
in the murine embryonic striatum, where it is the only gene of the family to be
expressed. Ebf1 targeted disruption affects postmitotic cells that leave the
subventricular zone (SVZ) en route to the mantle: they appear to be unable to
downregulate genes normally restricted to the SVZ or to activate some
mantle-specific genes. These downstream genes encode a variety of regulatory
proteins including transcription factors and proteins involved in retinoid
signalling as well as adhesion/guidance molecules. These early defects in the
SVZ/mantle transition are followed by an increase in cell death, a dramatic
reduction in size of the postnatal striatum and defects in navigation and
fasciculation of thalamocortical fibres travelling through the striatum. Our data
therefore show that Ebf1 plays an essential role in the acquisition of mantle
cell molecular identity in the developing striatum and provide information on the
genetic hierarchies that govern neuronal differentiation in the ventral
telencephalon.

PMID: 10556054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Comp Neurol. 1999 Nov 15;414(2):217-37.

DLX-1, DLX-2, and DLX-5 expression define distinct stages of basal forebrain
differentiation.

Eisenstat DD(1), Liu JK, Mione M, Zhong W, Yu G, Anderson SA, Ghattas I, Puelles 
L, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Center for Neurobiology
and Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry and Programs in Neuroscience and
Developmental Biology, University of California at San Francisco, California
94143-0984, USA.

The homeobox genes in the Dlx family are required for differentiation of basal
forebrain neurons and craniofacial morphogenesis. Herein, we studied the
expression of Dlx-1, Dlx-2, and Dlx-5 RNA and protein in the mouse forebrain from
embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5) to E12.5. We provide evidence that Dlx-2 is expressed 
before Dlx-1, which is expressed before Dlx-5. We also demonstrate that these
genes are expressed in the same cells, which may explain why single mutants of
the Dlx genes have mild phenotypes. The DLX proteins are localized primarily to
the nucleus, although DLX-5 also can be found in the cytoplasm. During
development, the fraction of Dlx-positive cells increases in the ventricular
zone. Analysis of the distribution of DLX-1 and DLX-2 in M-phase cells suggests
that these proteins are distributed symmetrically to daughter cells during
mitosis. We propose that DLX-negative cells in the ventricular zone are specified
progressively to become DLX-2-expressing cells during neurogenesis; as these
cells differentiate, they go on to express DLX-1, DLX-5, and DLX-6. This process 
appears to be largely the same in all regions of the forebrain that express the
Dlx genes. In the basal telencephalon, these DLX-positive cells differentiate
into projection neurons of the striatum and pallidum as well as interneurons,
some of which migrate to the cerebral cortex and the olfactory bulb.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10516593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Development. 1999 Sep;126(17):3831-46.

Dlx5 regulates regional development of the branchial arches and sensory capsules.

Depew MJ(1), Liu JK, Long JE, Presley R, Meneses JJ, Pedersen RA, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Center for Neurobiology
and Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry and Programs in Neuroscience,
Developmental Biology, Oral Biology and Biomedical Sciences, University of
California at San Fran.

We report the generation and analysis of mice homozygous for a targeted deletion 
of the Dlx5 homeobox gene. Dlx5 mutant mice have multiple defects in craniofacial
structures, including their ears, noses, mandibles and calvaria, and die shortly 
after birth. A subset (28%) exhibit exencephaly. Ectodermal expression of Dlx5 is
required for the development of olfactory and otic placode-derived epithelia and 
surrounding capsules. The nasal capsules are hypoplastic (e.g. lacking
turbinates) and, in most cases, the right side is more severely affected than the
left. Dorsal otic vesicle derivatives (e. g. semicircular canals and
endolymphatic duct) and the surrounding capsule, are more severely affected than 
ventral (cochlear) structures. Dlx5 is also required in mandibular arch
ectomesenchyme, as the proximal mandibular arch skeleton is dysmorphic. Dlx5 may 
control craniofacial development in part through the regulation of the goosecoid 
homeobox gene. goosecoid expression is greatly reduced in Dlx5 mutants, and both 
goosecoid and Dlx5 mutants share a number of similar craniofacial malformations. 
Dlx5 may perform a general role in skeletal differentiation, as exemplified by
hypomineralization within the calvaria. The distinct focal defects within the
branchial arches of the Dlx1, Dlx2 and Dlx5 mutants, along with the nested
expression of their RNAs, support a model in which these genes have both
redundant and unique functions in the regulation of regional patterning of the
craniofacial ectomesenchyme.

PMID: 10433912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Development. 1999 Sep;126(17):3795-809.

Craniofacial, vestibular and bone defects in mice lacking the Distal-less-related
gene Dlx5.

Acampora D(1), Merlo GR, Paleari L, Zerega B, Postiglione MP, Mantero S, Bober E,
Barbieri O, Simeone A, Levi G.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetic and Biophysics, CNR, via Marconi 10, Italy.

The Dlx5 gene encodes a Distal-less-related DNA-binding homeobox protein first
expressed during early embryonic development in anterior regions of the mouse
embryo. In later developmental stages, it appears in the branchial arches, the
otic and olfactory placodes and their derivatives, in restricted brain regions,
in all extending appendages and in all developing bones. We have created a null
allele of the mouse Dlx5 gene by replacing exons I and II with the E. coli lacZ
gene. Heterozygous mice appear normal. Beta-galactosidase activity in Dlx5+/-
embryos and newborn animals reproduces the known pattern of expression of the
gene. Homozygous mutants die shortly after birth with a swollen abdomen. They
present a complex phenotype characterised by craniofacial abnormalities affecting
derivatives of the first four branchial arches, severe malformations of the
vestibular organ, a delayed ossification of the roof of the skull and abnormal
osteogenesis. No obvious defect was observed in the patterning of limbs and other
appendages. The defects observed in Dlx5-/- mutant animals suggest multiple and
independent roles of this gene in the patterning of the branchial arches, in the 
morphogenesis of the vestibular organ and in osteoblast differentiation.

PMID: 10433909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Mech Dev. 1999 Mar;81(1-2):183-6.

Expression of DLX5 during human embryonic craniofacial development.

Davideau JL(1), Demri P, Gu TT, Simmons D, Nessman C, Forest N, MacDougall M,
Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie-Odontologie, Université Paris VII, Paris, France.
biol_odonto_fr@yahoo.com

Dlx (distal-less gene) homeogenes encode transcription factors that are involved 
in the patterning of orofacial skeleton derived from cephalic neural crest cells.
In order to study the role of DLX genes during embryonic development in human,
DLX5 expression pattern was investigated in 6- to 11-week-old human embryos. A
DLX5 PCR fragment was amplified from a human dental cDNA library subcloned and
used for in situ hybridization investigations. DLX5 gene expression was primarily
detected in the mandible at 6 weeks and then, after in the maxilla. DLX5 gene
expression became restricted to progenitor cells of developing tooth germs, bones
and cartilages of mandible and maxilla. During odontogenesis from bud to late cap
stages, DLX5 transcripts were present in both dental epithelium and mesenchyme
tissues. DLX5 expression was restricted to few cells in the vestibular aspect of 
the dental epithelium, while DLX5 mRNA signal was more widely distributed in
dental mesenchyme. The observed expression pattern of DLX5 homeogene extends the 
proposed site-specific combination of homeogene expression in neural crest
derived cells to human specific dentition. Furthermore, during the bud and cap
stages of tooth morphogenesis, the asymmetric expression of DLX5 in the dental
epithelium and dental mesenchyme may contribute to the complex patterning of
human tooth shape.

PMID: 10330497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Dev Biol. 1999 Apr 1;208(1):123-33.

A BMP-inducible gene, dlx5, regulates osteoblast differentiation and mesoderm
induction.

Miyama K(1), Yamada G, Yamamoto TS, Takagi C, Miyado K, Sakai M, Ueno N, Shibuya 
H.

Author information: 
(1)New Product Research Laboratories III, Daiichi Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo
R&D Center, Kita-Kasai, Edogawa-ku, Tokyo, 134, Japan.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), members of the transforming growth factor
beta superfamily, have been identified by their ability to induce cartilage and
bone from nonskeletal cells and have been shown to act as a ventral morphogen in 
Xenopus mesoderm. We isolated a murine homeobox-containing gene, distal-less 5
(mDlx5), as a BMP-inducible gene in osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells. Stable
transfectants of MC3T3-E1 that overexpress mDlx5 mRNA showed increase in various 
osteogenic markers, a fourfold increase in alkaline phosphatase activity, a
sixfold increase in osteocalcin production, and appearance in mineralization of
extracellular matrix. Furthermore, mDlx5 was induced orthotopically in mouse
embryos treated with BMP-4 and in fractured bone of adult mice. Consistent with
these observations, we also found that injection of mDlx5 mRNA into dorsal
blastomeres enhanced the ventralization of Xenopus embryos. These findings
suggest that mDlx5 is a target gene of the BMP signaling pathway and acts as an
important regulator of both osteogenesis and dorsoventral patterning of embryonic
axis.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10075846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Development. 1999 Jan;126(1):63-73.

Ectodermal patterning in the avian embryo: epidermis versus neural plate.

Pera E(1), Stein S, Kessel M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für biophysikalische Chemie, Abteilung Molekulare
Zellbiologie, D-37077 Göttingen, Germany.

Ectodermal patterning of the chick embryo begins in the uterus and continues
during gastrulation, when cells with a neural fate become restricted to the
neural plate around the primitive streak, and cells fated to become the epidermis
to the periphery. The prospective epidermis at early stages is characterized by
the expression of the homeobox gene DLX5, which remains an epidermal marker
during gastrulation and neurulation. Later, some DLX5-expressing cells become
internalized into the ventral forebrain and the neural crest at the hindbrain
level. We studied the mechanism of ectodermal patterning by transplantation of
Hensen's nodes and prechordal plates. The DLX5 marker indicates that not only a
neural plate, but also a surrounding epidermis is induced in such operations.
Similar effects can be obtained with neural plate grafts. These experiments
demonstrate that the induction of a DLX5-positive epidermis is triggered by the
midline, and the effect is transferred via the neural plate to the periphery. By 
repeated extirpations of the endoderm we suppressed the formation of an
endoderm/mesoderm layer under the epiblast. This led to the generation of
epidermis, and to the inhibition of neuroepithelium in the naked ectoderm. This
suggests a signal necessary for neural, but inhibitory for epidermal development,
normally coming from the lower layers. Finally, we demonstrate that BMP4, as well
as BMP2, is capable of inducing epidermal fate by distorting the epidermis-neural
plate boundary. This, however, does not happen independently within the neural
plate or outside the normal DLX5 domain. In the area opaca, the
co-transplantation of a BMP4 bead with a node graft leads to the induction of
DLX5, thus indicating the cooperation of two factors. We conclude that ectodermal
patterning is achieved by signalling both from the midline and from the
periphery, within the upper but also from the lower layers.

PMID: 9834186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Biochemistry. 1998 Nov 17;37(46):16360-8.

Reciprocal regulation of osteocalcin transcription by the homeodomain proteins
Msx2 and Dlx5.

Newberry EP(1), Latifi T, Towler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Center for Cardiovascular Research, Division of
Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Osteocalcin (OC) is a small calcium binding protein expressed in bones and teeth 
undergoing mineralization. OC expression in calvarial osteoblasts and
odontoblasts is regulated in part via protein-protein interactions between the
homeodomain repressor, Msx2, and components of the cell type-specific basal OC
promoter. Recent work suggests that homeodomain proteins form heterodimers that
confer transcriptional regulation. Since the homeodomain proteins Dlx5 and Msx2
are both expressed by primary rat calvarial osteoblasts, we examined whether Msx2
and Dlx5 functionally interact to regulate the OC promoter. In both primary rat
calvarial and MC3T3E1 mouse calvarial osteoblasts, transient expression of Dlx5
only mildly augments basal OC promoter (luciferase reporter) activity, while Msx2
suppresses transcriptional activity by ca. 80%. However, Dlx5 completely reverses
Msx2 repression of the OC promoter. Structure-function analyses using far-Western
blot and transient cotransfection assays reveal that (i) Msx2 and Dlx5 can form
dimers, (ii) Dlx5 residues 127-143 are necessary for dimerization and to reverse 
Msx2-dependent OC repression, and (iii) intrinsic DNA binding activity of Dlx5 is
not required for OC regulation. Msx2 inhibits the DNA binding activity of a third
complex, the OC fibroblast growth factor response element binding protein
(OCFREB), that supports activity of the basal OC promoter. Dlx5 completely
abrogates Msx2 suppression of OCFREB DNA binding activity, and residues required 
for Dlx5 transcriptional de-repression in vivo are also required for reversing
inhibition of OCFREB binding in vitro. Finally, Dlx5 reverses Msx2 inhibition of 
OC promoter activation by FGF2/forskolin. Thus, Dlx5 regulates the expression of 
the OC promoter in calvarial osteoblasts in part by de-repression, antagonizing
Msx2 repression of transcription factors that support basal OC promoter activity.

PMID: 9819228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Neurosci. 1998 Oct 15;18(20):8322-30.

An early phase of embryonic Dlx5 expression defines the rostral boundary of the
neural plate.

Yang L(1), Zhang H, Hu G, Wang H, Abate-Shen C, Shen MM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, New
Jersey 08854, USA.

Relatively little is known about the molecular events that specify the
rostrocaudal axis of the neural plate. Here we show that a member of the
Distal-less (Dlx) homeobox gene family, Dlx5, is one of the earliest known
markers for the most rostral ectoderm, before the formation of an overt neural
plate. During late gastrulation Dlx5 expression becomes localized to the anterior
neural ridge, which defines the rostral boundary of the neural plate, and also
extends caudolaterally, marking the region of the presumptive neural crest.
Subsequently, Dlx5 is expressed in tissues (olfactory epithelium, ventral
cephalic epithelium) that are believed to derive from the anterior neural ridge, 
based on the avian fate map. The early phase of Dlx5 expression in the anterior
neural ridge and its derivatives is distinct from a later phase of expression in 
the ventral telencephalon and diencephalon and also appears to be unique for Dlx5
among members of the Dlx family. Another distinctive feature of Dlx5 expression
is the occurrence of an alternative transcript (deltaDlx5), which encodes a
truncated protein lacking the homeodomain, and represents a significant fraction 
of total Dlx5 transcripts at all embryonic stages that were examined. In contrast
with full-length DLX5, the deltaDLX5 truncated protein is deficient in
DNA-binding activity and does not interact with the homeoprotein partner MSX1.
Taken together, our findings suggest that Dlx5 activity may be regulated via the 
expression of an alternative transcript and demonstrate that Dlx5 marks the
anterior boundary of the neural plate.

PMID: 9763476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Dev Dyn. 1997 Dec;210(4):498-512.

Dlx genes encode DNA-binding proteins that are expressed in an overlapping and
sequential pattern during basal ganglia differentiation.

Liu JK(1), Ghattas I, Liu S, Chen S, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, University
of California at San Francisco, 94143-0984, USA.

The Dlx gene family encodes homeodomain proteins that are required for forebrain 
and craniofacial development. Towards elucidating the roles for each of these
genes, we have isolated cDNA clones encoding the full-coding sequence for murine 
Dlx-5 and partial coding sequence for murine Dlx-6. Three different classes of
sense Dlx-5 cDNA clones were characterized, two of which lack the homeobox. We
also identified an antisense Dlx-6 transcript. Genomic analysis shows that the
Dlx-5 and -6 genes are linked. Biochemical analysis using gel shift assays
demonstrate that DLX-1, -2 and -5 have very similar DNA-binding properties. The
expression of Dlx-1, -2, -5, -6 and antisense Dlx-1 and -6 was studied in the
midgestation mouse brain. We found that the Dlx genes are expressed in
overlapping patterns at different stages of differentiation within the primordia 
of the basal ganglia. Dlx-1 and -2 are expressed in the least mature cells (in
the ventricular and subventricular zones). Dlx-5 appears to be co-expressed with 
Dlx-1 and -2 in the SVZ, but is also expressed in the postmitotic cells of the
mantle. Dlx-6 expression is strongest in the mantle. Antisense Dlx-1 and -6 have 
their highest expression in the SVZ. These results suggest that each of these Dlx
genes may have a distinct role in different steps of differentiation in the basal
ganglia.

PMID: 9415433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Genomics. 1997 Nov 1;45(3):580-90.

Relationship between the genomic organization and the overlapping embryonic
expression patterns of the zebrafish dlx genes.

Ellies DL(1), Stock DW, Hatch G, Giroux G, Weiss KM, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Civic Hospital, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, K1Y 4E9, Canada.

To understand the relationship between the expression and the genomic
organization of the zebrafish dlx genes, we have determined the genomic structure
of the dlx2 and dlx4 loci. This led to the identification of the zebrafish dlx1
and dlx6 genes, which are closely linked to dlx2 and dlx4, respectively.
Therefore, the inverted convergent configuration of Dlx genes is conserved among 
vertebrates. Analysis of the expression patterns of dlx1 and dlx6 showed striking
similarities to those of dlx2 and dlx4, respectively, the genes to which they are
linked. Furthermore, the expression patterns of dlx3 and dlx7, which likely
constitute a third pair of convergently transcribed genes, are indistinguishable.
Thus, the overlapping expression patterns of linked Dlx genes during embryonic
development suggest that they share cis-acting sequences that control their
spatiotemporal expression. The evolutionary conservation of the genomic
organization and combinatorial expression of Dlx genes in distantly related
vertebrates suggest tight control mechanisms that are essential for their
function during development.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9367683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Oct;11(11):1681-94.

Stage-specific expression of Dlx-5 during osteoblast differentiation: involvement
in regulation of osteocalcin gene expression.

Ryoo HM(1), Hoffmann HM, Beumer T, Frenkel B, Towler DA, Stein GS, Stein JL, van 
Wijnen AJ, Lian JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655, USA.

Two homeotic genes, Dlx and Msx, appear to regulate development of mineralized
tissues, including bone, cartilage, and tooth. Expression of Msx-1 and Msx-2 has 
been studied during development of the osteoblast phenotype, but the role of Dlx 
in this context and in the regulation of bone-expressed genes is unknown. We used
targeted differential display to isolate homeotic genes of the Dlx family that
are expressed at defined stages of osteoblast differentiation. These studies were
carried out with fetal rat calvarial cells that produce bone-like tissue in
vitro. We observed a mineralization stage-specific mRNA and cloned the
corresponding cDNA, which represents the rat homolog of Dlx-5. Northern blot
analysis and competitive RT-PCR demonstrated that Dlx-5 and the bone-specific
osteocalcin genes exhibit similar up-regulated expression during the
mineralization period of osteoblast differentiation. This expression pattern
differs from that of Msx-2, which is found predominantly in proliferating
osteoblasts. Several approaches were pursued to determine functional consequences
of Dlx-5 expression on osteocalcin transcription. Constitutive expression of
Dlx-5 in ROS 17/2.8 cells decreased osteocalcin promoter activity in transient
assays, and conditional expression of Dlx-5 in stable cell lines reduced
endogenous mRNA levels. Consistent with this finding, antisense inhibition of
Dlx-5 increased osteocalcin gene transcription. Osteocalcin promoter deletion
analysis and binding of the in vitro translation product of Dlx-5 demonstrated
that repressor activity was targeted to a single homeodomain-binding site,
located in OC-Box I (-99 to -76). These findings demonstrate that Dlx-5 represses
osteocalcin gene transcription. However, the coupling of increased Dlx-5
expression with progression of osteoblast differentiation suggests an important
role in promoting expression of the mature bone cell phenotype.

PMID: 9328350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 May;17(5):2920-32.

Heterodimerization of Msx and Dlx homeoproteins results in functional antagonism.

Zhang H(1), Hu G, Wang H, Sciavolino P, Iler N, Shen MM, Abate-Shen C.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, UMDNJ-Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Protein-protein interactions are known to be essential for specifying the
transcriptional activities of homeoproteins. Here we show that representative
members of the Msx and Dlx homeoprotein families form homo- and heterodimeric
complexes. We demonstrate that dimerization by Msx and Dlx proteins is mediated
through their homeodomains and that the residues required for this interaction
correspond to those necessary for DNA binding. Unlike most other known examples
of homeoprotein interactions, association of Msx and Dlx proteins does not
promote cooperative DNA binding; instead, dimerization and DNA binding are
mutually exclusive activities. In particular, we show that Msx and Dlx proteins
interact independently and noncooperatively with homeodomain DNA binding sites
and that dimerization is specifically blocked by the presence of such DNA sites. 
We further demonstrate that the transcriptional properties of Msx and Dlx
proteins display reciprocal inhibition. Specifically, Msx proteins act as
transcriptional repressors and Dlx proteins act as activators, while in
combination, Msx and Dlx proteins counteract each other's transcriptional
activities. Finally, we show that the expression patterns of representative Msx
and Dlx genes (Msx1, Msx2, Dlx2, and Dlx5) overlap in mouse embryogenesis during 
limb bud and craniofacial development, consistent with the potential for their
protein products to interact in vivo. Based on these observations, we propose
that functional antagonism through heterodimer formation provides a mechanism for
regulating the transcriptional actions of Msx and Dlx homeoproteins in vivo.

PMCID: PMC232144
PMID: 9111364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Gene. 1997 Mar 10;187(1):55-61.

Isolation and identification of homeobox genes from the human placenta including 
a novel member of the Distal-less family, DLX4.

Quinn LM(1), Johnson BV, Nicholl J, Sutherland GR, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Flinders University of South
Australia, Adelaide.

We have carried out a DNA binding site screen of a 32-week human placental cDNA
library using a consensus homeodomain binding site as a probe. This study
represents the first library screen carried out to isolate homeobox genes from
the human placenta. We have shown that three homeobox genes known to be expressed
in the embryo, HB24, GAX and MSX2 are also expressed in the placenta. We have
also identified a novel homeobox gene, DLX4, that shows 85% sequence identity
with the homeodomain encoded by the Drosophila Distal-less (Dll) gene. DLX4
therefore represents a new member of the Distal-less family of homeobox genes.
This is the first evidence that members of the Distal-less family of homeobox
genes are expressed in the placenta. Using fluorescence in situ hybridisation
(FISH), DLX4 has been assigned to human chromosome 17q21-q22. This places DLX4 in
the same region of chromosome 17 as another member of the Distal-less family,
DLX3 (Scherer et al., 1995), and the HOX-B homeobox gene cluster (Acampora et
al., 1989: Boncinelli et al., 1991). Members of the Distal-less family (DLX1 and 
DLX2; DLX5 and DLX6) are found as closely linked pairs on human chromosomes
(Simeone et al., 1994). We predict that DLX3 and DLX4 are closely linked and have
arisen through gene duplication and divergence from a common ancestral precursor.

PMID: 9073066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Dev Dyn. 1997 Feb;208(2):266-77.

Expression of murine Lhx5 suggests a role in specifying the forebrain.

Sheng HZ(1), Bertuzzi S, Chiang C, Shawlot W, Taira M, Dawid I, Westphal H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA.

A LIM homeobox gene, Lim5, is known to be expressed in the forebrain of Xenopus
and zebrafish (Toyama et al. [1995] Dev. Biol. 170:583-593). Results from
developmental and comparative studies of its mouse ortholog, Lhx5, indicate that 
this gene may play important roles in forebrain development. Lhx5 expression is
detected in the most anterior portion of the neural tube at the headfold stage,
overlapping partially with Otx2 expression domain. After neural tube closure,
Lhx5 is expressed as a transverse stripe, covering most of the diencephalic
primordium. This expression recedes to restricted areas as Dlx gene expression
occurs. By midgestation, both genes, Lhx5 and Dlx5, are expressed in the
diencephalon and ventral telencephalon in an alternating complementary pattern.
It may be that Dlx inhibits Lhx5, and this may represent a step of early
regionalization of the forebrain. Lhx5 is also expressed in midbrain, hindbrain, 
and spinal cord, overlapping extensively with Lhx1 starting from day E10.5 of
gestation. The early, persistent, and dynamic expression of Lhx5 suggests a
regulatory function in forebrain formation.

PMID: 9022063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 1;93(20):10858-63.

The evolution of the vertebrate Dlx gene family.

Stock DW(1), Ellies DL, Zhao Z, Ekker M, Ruddle FH, Weiss KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park
16802, USA.

The vertebrate Dlx gene family consists of homeobox-containing transcription
factors distributed in pairs on the same chromosomes as the Hox genes. To
investigate the evolutionary history of Dlx genes, we have cloned five new
zebrafish family members and have provided additional sequence information for
two mouse genes. Phylogenetic analyses of Dlx gene sequences considered in the
context of their chromosomal arrangements suggest that an initial tandem
duplication produced a linked pair of Dlx genes after the divergence of chordates
and arthropods but prior to the divergence of tunicates and vertebrates. This
pair of Dlx genes was then duplicated in the chromosomal events that led to the
four clusters of Hox genes characteristic of bony fish and tetrapods. It is
possible that a pair of Dlx genes linked to the Hoxc cluster has been lost from
mammals. We were unable to distinguish between independent duplication and
retention of the ancestral state of bony vertebrates to explain the presence of a
greater number of Dlx genes in zebrafish than mammals. Determination of the
linkage relationship of these additional zebrafish Dlx genes to Hox clusters
should help resolve this issue.

PMCID: PMC38247
PMID: 8855272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1996 Jun 8;785:38-47.

Dlx5 and Dlx6: an evolutionary conserved pair of murine homeobox genes expressed 
in the embryonic skeleton.

Chen X(1), Li X, Wang W, Lufkin T.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center for Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, New York 10029-6574, USA.

PMID: 8702182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Hum Mol Genet. 1996 May;5(5):571-9.

Characterization of the split hand/split foot malformation locus SHFM1 at
7q21.3-q22.1 and analysis of a candidate gene for its expression during limb
development.

Crackower MA(1), Scherer SW, Rommens JM, Hui CC, Poorkaj P, Soder S, Cobben JM,
Hudgins L, Evans JP, Tsui LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Canada.

Split hand/split foot malformation (SHFM) is a heterogeneous limb developmental
disorder, characterized by missing digits and fusion of remaining digits. An
autosomal dominant form of this disorder (SHFM1) has been mapped to 7q21.3-q22.1 
on the basis of SHFM-associated chromosomal rearrangements. Utilizing a YAC
contig across this region, we have defined a critical interval of 1.5 Mb by the
analysis of six interstitial deletion patients and mapped the translocation
breakpoints of seven ectrodactyly patients within the interval. To delineate the 
basic molecular defect underlying SHFM, we have searched for candidate genes in a
500 kb region containing five of the translocation breakpoints. Three genes were 
identified, two genes of the Distal-less (dii) homeobox gene family, DLX5 and
DLX6 and a novel gene, which we named DSS1. DSS1 is predicted to encode a highly 
acidic polypeptide with no significant similarity to any known proteins but 100% 
amino acid sequence identify with its murine homolog (Dss1). Using RNA in situ
hybridization analysis, we detected a tissue-specific expression profile for Dss1
in limb bud, craniofacial primordia and skin. A deficiency in expression of Dss1,
DLX5 and/or DLX6 during development may explain the SHFM phenotypes.

PMID: 8733122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Neurosci. 1995 Dec;15(12):7879-91.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 increases Otx2 expression in precursor cells from
mammalian telencephalon.

Robel L(1), Ding M, James AJ, Lin X, Simeone A, Leckman JF, Vaccarino FM.

Author information: 
(1)Child Study Center, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Dissociated primary cultures from rat telencephalon at different developmental
stages were used to study the effect of basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF2) on 
Otx2, Dlx1, and Emx1, three homeobox genes expressed in different regions of the 
developing mammalian forebrain. At embryonic day (E)13.5. the regional pattern of
expression of Otx1, Otx2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, and Emx1 is maintained in primary
culture, suggesting that cells are already committed to a regional identity at
this stage. In these cultures, Otx2 is expressed by precursor cells, whereas Dlx1
and Emx1 are predominantly expressed by postmitotic cells. We found that FGF2
increased Otx2 expression within precursor cells and the total number of
Otx2-expressing cells. This effect was gene-specific, dose-dependent, and
temporally regulated, with larger effects at earlier stages of development
(E11.5). At E13.5, the effect of FGF2 on Otx2 expression was restricted to the
basal telencephalon. Our results suggest that a restricted population of
neuroblasts respond to FGF2 in a temporally regulated fashion by proliferating
and increasing Otx2 expression. This interaction between FGF2 and Otx2 may be
important for the regulation of neurogenesis in the forebrain.

PMID: 8613727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Hum Mol Genet. 1994 Aug;3(8):1345-54.

Physical mapping of the split hand/split foot locus on chromosome 7 and
implication in syndromic ectrodactyly.

Scherer SW(1), Poorkaj P, Massa H, Soder S, Allen T, Nunes M, Geshuri D, Wong E, 
Belloni E, Little S, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

Split hand/split foot (ectrodactyly; SHSF) is a human developmental malformation 
characterized by missing digits and claw-like extremities. An autosomal dominant 
form of this disorder has been mapped to 7q21.3-q22.1; the locus has been
designated SHFD1. We have constructed a physical map consisting of overlapping
yeast artificial chromosome clones for the entire region. Somatic cell hybrid and
fluorescent in situ hybridization analyses were used to define SHSF-associated
chromosomal rearrangements in twelve patients. An SHFD1 critical interval of 1.5 
Mb was established by analysis of five patients with deletions. Translocation or 
inversion breakpoints found in six patients were mapped within 700 kb of each
other in the critical region. Of note is that eight of the patients analyzed
(67%) are in fact classified as having syndromic ectrodactyly. Thus, these
mapping data establish a relationship between simple split hand/split foot and
this more complex group of human birth defects. Finally, we have mapped DLX5, a
member of the Distal-less homeobox gene family, to the SHFD1 critical interval.

PMID: 7987313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Mar 15;91(6):2250-4.

Cloning and characterization of two members of the vertebrate Dlx gene family.

Simeone A(1), Acampora D, Pannese M, D'Esposito M, Stornaiuolo A, Gulisano M,
Mallamaci A, Kastury K, Druck T, Huebner K, et al.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, Consiglio Nazionale delle 
Ricerche, Naples, Italy.

A number of vertebrate genes of the Dlx gene family have been cloned in mouse,
frog, and zebrafish. These genes contain a homeobox related to that of
Distalless, a gene expressed in the developing head and limbs of Drosophila
embryos. We cloned and studied the expression of two members of this family,
which we named Dlx5 and Dlx6, in human and mouse. The two human genes, DLX5 and
DLX6, are closely linked in an inverted convergent configuration in a region of
chromosome 7, at 7q22. Similarly, the two human genes DLX1 and DLX2 are closely
linked in a convergent configuration at 2q32, near the HOXD (previously HOX4)
locus. In situ hybridization experiments in mouse embryos revealed expression of 
Dlx5 and Dlx6 mRNA in restricted regions of ventral diencephalon and basal
telencephalon, with a distribution very similar to that reported for Dlx1 and
Dlx2 mRNA. A surprising feature of Dlx5 and Dlx6 is that they are also expressed 
in all skeletal structures of midgestation embryos after the first cartilage
formation. The expression pattern of these genes, together with their chromosome 
localization, may provide useful cues for the study of congenital disorders in
which there is a combination of craniofacial and limb defects.

PMCID: PMC43348
PMID: 7907794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


