
1. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2016 Jan 5;371(1685):20150040. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2015.0040.

Loss of neurogenesis in Hydra leads to compensatory regulation of neurogenic and 
neurotransmission genes in epithelial cells.

Wenger Y(1), Buzgariu W(1), Galliot B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Evolution, Institute of Genetics and Genomics in
Geneva (IGe3), Faculty of Sciences, University of Geneva, 30 quai Ernest
Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. (2)Department of Genetics and Evolution,
Institute of Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (IGe3), Faculty of Sciences,
University of Geneva, 30 quai Ernest Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
brigitte.galliot@unige.ch.

Hydra continuously differentiates a sophisticated nervous system made of
mechanosensory cells (nematocytes) and sensory-motor and ganglionic neurons from 
interstitial stem cells. However, this dynamic adult neurogenesis is dispensable 
for morphogenesis. Indeed animals depleted of their interstitial stem cells and
interstitial progenitors lose their active behaviours but maintain their
developmental fitness, and regenerate and bud when force-fed. To characterize the
impact of the loss of neurogenesis in Hydra, we first performed transcriptomic
profiling at five positions along the body axis. We found neurogenic genes
predominantly expressed along the central body column, which contains stem cells 
and progenitors, and neurotransmission genes predominantly expressed at the
extremities, where the nervous system is dense. Next, we performed
transcriptomics on animals depleted of their interstitial cells by hydroxyurea,
colchicine or heat-shock treatment. By crossing these results with
cell-type-specific transcriptomics, we identified epithelial genes up-regulated
upon loss of neurogenesis: transcription factors (Dlx, Dlx1, DMBX1/Manacle, Ets1,
Gli3, KLF11, LMX1A, ZNF436, Shox1), epitheliopeptides (Arminins, PW peptide),
neurosignalling components (CAMK1D, DDCl2, Inx1), ligand-ion channel receptors
(CHRNA1, NaC7), G-Protein Coupled Receptors and FMRFRL. Hence epitheliomuscular
cells seemingly enhance their sensing ability when neurogenesis is compromised.
This unsuspected plasticity might reflect the extended multifunctionality of
epithelial-like cells in early eumetazoan evolution.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4685579
PMID: 26598723  [PubMed - in process]


2. Endocrinology. 2016 Jan;157(1):245-57. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1560. Epub 2015 Oct
27.

Importance of Adult Dmbx1 in Long-Lasting Orexigenic Effect of Agouti-Related
Peptide.

Hirono S(1), Lee EY(1), Kuribayashi S(1), Fukuda T(1), Saeki N(1), Minokoshi
Y(1), Iwanaga T(1), Miki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical Physiology (S.H., E.Y.L., S.K., T.M.) and Neurological 
Surgery (S.H., N.S.), Chiba University Graduate School of Medicine, Chuo-ku,
Chiba, 260-0856, Japan; Division of Neuropathology (T.F.), Department of
Pathology, The Jikei University School of Medicine, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-0003,
Japan; Department of Developmental Physiology (Y.M.), National Institute for
Physiological Sciences, Myoudaijicho, Okazaki-City, 444-8585, Japan; and
Laboratory of Histology and Cytology (T.I.), Hokkaido University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

Dmbx1 is a brain-specific homeodomain transcription factor expressed primarily
during embryogenesis, and its systemic disruption (Dmbx1(-/-)) in the ICR mouse
strain resulted in leanness associated with impaired long-lasting orexigenic
effect of agouti-related peptide (AgRP). Because spatial and temporal expression 
patterns of Dmbx1 change dramatically during embryogenesis, it remains unknown
when and where Dmbx1 plays a critical role in energy homeostasis. In the present 
study, the physiological roles of Dmbx1 were examined by its conditional
disruption (Dmbx1(loxP/loxP)) in the C57BL/6 mouse strain. Although Dmbx1
disruption in fetal brain resulted in neonatal lethality, its disruption by
synapsin promoter-driven Cre recombinase, which eliminated Dmbx1 expression
postnatally, exempted the mice (Syn-Cre;Dmbx1(loxP/loxP) mice) from lethality.
Syn-Cre;Dmbx1(loxP/loxP) mice show mild leanness and impaired long-lasting
orexigenic action of AgRP, demonstrating the physiological relevance of Dmbx1 in 
the adult. Visualization of Dmbx1-expressing neurons in adult brain using the
mice harboring tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase in the Dmbx1 locus
(Dmbx1(CreERT2/+) mice) revealed Dmbx1 expression in small numbers of neurons in 
restricted regions, including the lateral parabrachial nucleus (LPB). Notably,
c-Fos expression in LPB was increased at 48 hours after AgRP administration in
Dmbx1(loxP/loxP) mice but not in Syn-Cre;Dmbx1(loxP/loxP) mice. These
c-Fos-positive neurons in LPB did not coincide with neurons expressing Dmbx1 or
melanocortin 4 receptor but did coincide with those expressing calcitonin
gene-related peptide. Accordingly, Dmbx1 in the adult LPB is required for the
long-lasting orexigenic effect of AgRP via the neural circuitry involving
calcitonin gene-related peptide neurons.

PMID: 26505115  [PubMed - in process]


3. Dev Biol. 2015 Jun 15;402(2):216-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.03.020. Epub 2015 
Apr 11.

Mutual antagonism of the paired-type homeobox genes, vsx2 and dmbx1, regulates
retinal progenitor cell cycle exit upstream of ccnd1 expression.

Wong L(1), Power N(1), Miles A(1), Tropepe V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5S 3G5. (2)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3G5; Department of Ophthalmology and Vision
Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5T 3A9; Centre for the
Analysis of Genome Evolution and Function, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5S 3B2. Electronic address: v.tropepe@utoronto.ca.

Understanding the mechanisms that regulate the transition between the
proliferative and a post-mitotic state of retinal progenitor cells (RPCs) is key 
to advancing our knowledge of retinal growth and maturation. In the present study
we determined that during zebrafish embryonic retinal neurogenesis, two
paired-type homeobox genes - vsx2 and dmbx1 - function in a mutually antagonistic
manner. We demonstrate that vsx2 gene expression requires active Fgf signaling
and that this in turn suppresses dmbx1 expression and maintains cells in an
undifferentiated, proliferative RPC state. This vsx2-dependent RPC state can be
prolonged cell-autonomously by knockdown of dmbx1, or it can be suppressed
prematurely by the over-expression of dmbx1, which we show can inhibit vsx2
expression and lead to precocious neuronal differentiation. dmbx1 loss of
function also results in altered expression of canonical cell cycle genes, and in
particular up-regulation of ccnd1, which correlates with our previous finding of 
a prolonged RPC cell cycle. By knocking down ccnd1 and dmbx1 simultaneously, we
show that RPCs can overcome this phenotype to exit the cell cycle on time and
differentiate normally into retinal neurons. Collectively, our data provide novel
insight into the mechanism that enables RPCs to exit the cell cycle through a
previously unrecognized antagonistic interaction of two paired-type homeobox
genes that are central regulators of an Fgf-vsx2-dmbx1-ccnd1 signaling axis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25872183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cell Rep. 2015 Jan 13;10(2):148-61. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.12.015. Epub 2014 
Dec 31.

Accelerating novel candidate gene discovery in neurogenetic disorders via
whole-exome sequencing of prescreened multiplex consanguineous families.

Alazami AM(1), Patel N(1), Shamseldin HE(1), Anazi S(1), Al-Dosari MS(2),
Alzahrani F(1), Hijazi H(1), Alshammari M(3), Aldahmesh MA(1), Salih MA(3),
Faqeih E(4), Alhashem A(5), Bashiri FA(3), Al-Owain M(6), Kentab AY(3), Sogaty
S(7), Al Tala S(8), Temsah MH(3), Tulbah M(9), Aljelaify RF(10), Alshahwan
SA(11), Seidahmed MZ(12), Alhadid AA(3), Aldhalaan H(13), AlQallaf F(13), Kurdi
W(9), Alfadhel M(14), Babay Z(15), Alsogheer M(16), Kaya N(1), Al-Hassnan ZN(6), 
Abdel-Salam GM(17), Al-Sannaa N(18), Al Mutairi F(14), El Khashab HY(19), Bohlega
S(13), Jia X(20), Nguyen HC(20), Hammami R(1), Adly N(1), Mohamed JY(1),
Abdulwahab F(1), Ibrahim N(1), Naim EA(21), Al-Younes B(21), Meyer BF(21), Hashem
M(1), Shaheen R(1), Xiong Y(20), Abouelhoda M(21), Aldeeri AA(22), Monies DM(21),
Alkuraya FS(23).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center,
Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia. (2)Department of Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy, 
King Saud University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia. (3)Department of Pediatrics,
King Khalid University Hospital and College of Medicine, King Saud University,
Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia. (4)Department of Pediatrics, King Fahad Medical City,
Riyadh 11525, Saudi Arabia. (5)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of
Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh 11533, Saudi Arabia; Department of
Pediatrics, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh 11159, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal
University, Riyadh 11533, Saudi Arabia; Department of Medical Genetics, King
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, King Fahad General Hospital, Jeddah 23325, Saudi
Arabia. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Armed Forces Hospital, Khamis Mushayt 62413,
Saudi Arabia. (9)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, King Faisal Specialist
Hospital, Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia. (10)Center of Excellence for Genomics, King
Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Riyadh 11442, Saudi Arabia.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh 11159, 
Saudi Arabia. (12)Department of Pediatrics, Security Forces Hospital, Riyadh
12625, Saudi Arabia. (13)Department of Neurosciences, King Faisal Specialist
Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia. (14)Division of
Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health
Sciences, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh 14611, Saudi Arabia. (15)Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh
11451, Saudi Arabia. (16)Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, King Saud
University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia. (17)Department of Clinical Genetics,
Human Genetics and Genome Research Division, National Research Centre, Cairo
12345, Egypt. (18)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins Aramco Healthcare,
Dhahran 34465, Saudi Arabia. (19)Department of Pediatrics, King Khalid University
Hospital and College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi
Arabia; Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital, Ain Shams University,
Cairo 01234, Egypt. (20)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale
University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (21)Department of Genetics, King Faisal
Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia; Saudi Human 
Genome Program, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Riyadh 11442,
Saudi Arabia. (22)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and
Research Center, Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia; Department of Internal Medicine,
College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.
(23)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia; Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of
Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh 11533, Saudi Arabia; Saudi Human Genome
Program, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Riyadh 11442, Saudi
Arabia. Electronic address: falkuraya@kfshrc.edu.sa.

Our knowledge of disease genes in neurological disorders is incomplete. With the 
aim of closing this gap, we performed whole-exome sequencing on 143 multiplex
consanguineous families in whom known disease genes had been excluded by
autozygosity mapping and candidate gene analysis. This prescreening step led to
the identification of 69 recessive genes not previously associated with disease, 
of which 33 are here described (SPDL1, TUBA3E, INO80, NID1, TSEN15, DMBX1, CLHC1,
C12orf4, WDR93, ST7, MATN4, SEC24D, PCDHB4, PTPN23, TAF6, TBCK, FAM177A1,
KIAA1109, MTSS1L, XIRP1, KCTD3, CHAF1B, ARV1, ISCA2, PTRH2, GEMIN4, MYOCD, PDPR, 
DPH1, NUP107, TMEM92, EPB41L4A, and FAM120AOS). We also encountered instances in 
which the phenotype departed significantly from the established clinical
presentation of a known disease gene. Overall, a likely causal mutation was
identified in >73% of our cases. This study contributes to the global effort
toward a full compendium of disease genes affecting brain function.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25558065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cell Rep. 2014 Jul 24;8(2):327-37. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.07.002. Epub 2014
Jul 17.

Genome-wide functional analysis reveals factors needed at the transition steps of
induced reprogramming.

Yang CS(1), Chang KY(2), Rana TM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program for RNA Biology, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 10901
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA
01605, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego School
of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, Mail Code 0762, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(2)Program for RNA Biology, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 10901
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Department of Pediatrics,
University of California San Diego School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, Mail
Code 0762, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (3)Program for RNA Biology, Sanford-Burnham
Medical Research Institute, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA; Department of Pediatrics,
University of California San Diego School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, Mail
Code 0762, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic address: trana@ucsd.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Aug 7;15(2):116-8.

Although transcriptome analysis can uncover the molecular changes that occur
during induced reprogramming, the functional requirements for a given factor
during stepwise cell-fate transitions are left unclear. Here, we used a
genome-wide RNAi screen and performed integrated transcriptome analysis to
identify key genes and cellular events required at the transition steps in
reprogramming. Genes associated with cell signaling pathways (e.g., Itpr1, Itpr2,
and Pdia3) constitute the major regulatory networks before cells acquire
pluripotency. Activation of a specific gene set (e.g., Utf1 or Tdgf1) is
important for mature induced pluripotent stem cell formation. Strikingly, a major
proportion of RNAi targets (~ 53% to 70%) includes genes whose expression levels 
are unchanged during reprogramming. Among these non-differentially expressed
genes, Dmbx1, Hnf4g, Nobox, and Asb4 are important, whereas Nfe2, Cdkn2aip, Msx3,
Dbx1, Lzts1, Gtf2i, and Ankrd22 are roadblocks to reprogramming. Together, our
results provide a wealth of information about gene functions required at
transition steps during reprogramming.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4152236
PMID: 25043178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. BMC Dev Biol. 2010 Sep 22;10:100. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-100.

Duplicate dmbx1 genes regulate progenitor cell cycle and differentiation during
zebrafish midbrain and retinal development.

Wong L(1), Weadick CJ, Kuo C, Chang BS, Tropepe V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell & Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: The Dmbx1 gene is important for the development of the midbrain and
hindbrain, and mouse gene targeting experiments reveal that this gene is required
for mediating postnatal and adult feeding behaviours. A single Dmbx1 gene exists 
in terrestrial vertebrate genomes, while teleost genomes have at least two
paralogs. We compared the loss of function of the zebrafish dmbx1a and dmbx1b
genes in order to gain insight into the molecular mechanism by which dmbx1
regulates neurogenesis, and to begin to understand why these duplicate genes have
been retained in the zebrafish genome.
RESULTS: Using gene knockdown experiments we examined the function of the dmbx1
gene paralogs in zebrafish, dmbx1a and dmbx1b in regulating neurogenesis in the
developing retina and midbrain. Dose-dependent loss of dmbx1a and dmbx1b function
causes a significant reduction in growth of the midbrain and retina that is
evident between 48-72 hpf. We show that this phenotype is not due to patterning
defects or persistent cell death, but rather a deficit in progenitor cell cycle
exit and differentiation. Analyses of the morphant retina or anterior hindbrain
indicate that paralogous function is partially diverged since loss of dmbx1a is
more severe than loss of dmbx1b. Molecular evolutionary analyses of the Dmbx1
genes suggest that while this gene family is conservative in its evolution, there
was a dramatic change in selective constraint after the duplication event that
gave rise to the dmbx1a and dmbx1b gene families in teleost fish, suggestive of
positive selection. Interestingly, in contrast to zebrafish dmbx1a, over
expression of the mouse Dmbx1 gene does not functionally compensate for the
zebrafish dmbx1a knockdown phenotype, while over expression of the dmbx1b gene
only partially compensates for the dmbx1a knockdown phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that both zebrafish dmbx1a and dmbx1b genes are
retained in the fish genome due to their requirement during midbrain and retinal 
neurogenesis, although their function is partially diverged. At the cellular
level, Dmbx1 regulates cell cycle exit and differentiation of progenitor cells.
The unexpected observation of putative post-duplication positive selection of
teleost Dmbx1 genes, especially dmbx1a, and the differences in functionality
between the mouse and zebrafish genes suggests that the teleost Dmbx1 genes may
have evolved a diverged function in the regulation of neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2954992
PMID: 20860823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cerebrospinal Fluid Res. 2008 Oct 18;5:16. doi: 10.1186/1743-8454-5-16.

Hydrocephalus caused by conditional ablation of the Pten or beta-catenin gene.

Ohtoshi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Neurobiology, The Ohio State University, 1060 Carmack
Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. otoshi.3@osu.edu.

To investigate the roles of Pten and beta-Catenin in the midbrain, either the
Pten gene or the beta-catenin gene was conditionally ablated, using Dmbx1
(diencephalon/mesencephalon-expressed brain homeobox gene 1)-Cre mice. Homozygous
disruption of the Pten or beta-catenin gene in Dmbx1-expressing cells caused
severe hydrocephalus and mortality during the postnatal period. Conditional
deletion of Pten resulted in enlargement of midbrain structures. beta-catenin
conditional mutant mice showed malformation of the superior and inferior
colliculi and stenosis of the midbrain aqueduct. These results demonstrate that
both Pten and beta-Catenin are essential for proper midbrain development, and
provide the direct evidence that mutations of both Pten and beta-catenin lead to 
hydrocephalus.

PMCID: PMC2580761
PMID: 18928559  [PubMed]


8. Turk J Pediatr. 2007 Jul-Sep;49(3):334-6.

Mutational analysis of the human MBX gene in four Korean families demonstrating
microphthalmia with congenital cataract.

Miyamoto T(1), Yu YS, Sato H, Hayashi H, Sakugawa N, Ishikawa M, Sengoku K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Asahikawa Medical College, Asahikawa,
Japan.

The MBX gene is a novel paired-type homeobox gene. It plays a number of critical 
roles in the development of the eyes in the zebrafish. The knockdown of the mbx
expression by morpholino antisense oligonucleotides leads to a reduction in the
size of eyes and tectum in the zebrafish. We investigated whether the human MBX
gene was associated with susceptibility to microphthalmia by analyzing four
Korean families demonstrating microphthalmia with congenital cataract. Mutational
analysis was performed on the human MBX gene using these families. However, no
mutations could be detected. Therefore, no indications were found for an
association between the MBX gene and microphthalmia with congenital cataract in
humans.

PMID: 17990594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Comp Neurol. 2007 Dec 1;505(4):379-403.

A model of early molecular regionalization in the chicken embryonic pretectum.

Ferran JL(1), Sánchez-Arrones L, Sandoval JE, Puelles L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology, University of Murcia, Murcia,
Spain.

The pretectal region of the brain is visualized as a dorsal region of prosomere 1
in the caudal diencephalon, including derivatives from both the roof and alar
plates. Its neuronal derivatives in the adult brain are known as pretectal
nuclei. The literature is inconsistent about the precise anteroposterior
delimitation of this region and on the number of specific histogenetic domains
and subdomains that it contains. We performed a cross-correlated gene-expression 
map of this brain area in chicken embryos, with the aim of identifying
differently fated pretectal domains on the basis of combinatorial gene expression
patterns. We examined in detail Pax3, Pax6, Pax7, Tcf4, Meis1, Meis2, Nkx2.2,
Lim1, Dmbx1, Dbx1, Six3, FoxP2, Zic1, Ebf1, and Shh mRNA expression, as well as
PAX3 and PAX7 immunoreaction, between stages HH11 and HH28. The patterns analyzed
serve to fix the cephalic and caudal boundaries of the pretectum and to define
three molecularly distinct anteroposterior pretectal domains (precommissural,
juxtacommissural, and commissural) and several dorsoventral subdomains. These
molecular specification patterns are established step by step between stages HH10
and HH18, largely before neurogenesis begins. This set of gene-architectonic data
constitutes a useful scaffold for correlations with fate maps and other
experimental embryologic results and may serve as well for inquiries on
homologies in this part of the brain.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17912743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Sep 25;104(39):15514-9. Epub 2007 Sep 14.

Dmbx1 is essential in agouti-related protein action.

Fujimoto W(1), Shiuchi T, Miki T, Minokoshi Y, Takahashi Y, Takeuchi A, Kimura K,
Saito M, Iwanaga T, Seino S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School
of Medicine, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Dmbx1 is a paired-class homeodomain transcription factor. We show here that mice 
deficient in Dmbx1 exhibit severe leanness associated with hypophagia and
hyperactivity and that isolation of a Dmbx1(-/-) mouse from its cohabitants
induces self-starvation, sometimes leading to death, features similar to those of
anorexia nervosa in humans. Interestingly, overexpression of agouti in Dmbx1(-/-)
mice failed to induce aspects of the A(y)/a phenotype, including hyperphagia,
obesity, and diabetes mellitus. In Dmbx1(-/-) mice, administration of
agouti-related protein increased cumulative food intake for the initial 6 h but
significantly decreased it over 24- and 48-h periods. In addition, Dmbx1 was
shown to be expressed at embryonic day 15.5 in the lateral parabrachial nucleus, 
the rostral nucleus of the tractus solitarius, the dorsal motor nucleus of the
vagus, and the reticular nucleus in the brainstem, all of which receive
melanocortin signaling, indicating involvement of Dmbx1 in the development of the
neural network for the signaling. Thus, Dmbx1 is essential for various actions of
agouti-related protein and plays a role in normal regulation of energy
homeostasis and behavior.

PMCID: PMC1976593
PMID: 17873059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mamm Genome. 2006 Jul;17(7):744-50. Epub 2006 Jul 14.

Generation and maintenance of Dmbx1 gene-targeted mutant alleles.

Ohtoshi A(1), Bradley A, Behringer RR, Nishijima I.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Molecular and Human Genetics, Children's Research Institute, 700
Children's Drive, Columbus, Ohio 43205, USA. otoshia@pediatrics.ohio-state.edu

Dmbx1 encodes a paired-like homeodomain protein that is expressed in neural
tissues at mouse embryonic and postnatal stages. We previously generated two
Dmbx1 mutant alleles, Dmbx1 (-) and Dmbx1 ( z ), by homologous recombination in
mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. In this article we report the generation of
three novel Dmbx1 mutant alleles, Dmbx1 (tauZ ), Dmbx1 (tauG ), and Dmbx1 ( Cre
), that carry the intronic insertion of tau (tau)-lacZ, tau-eGFP, and Cre
reporter genes, respectively. Dmbx1 (tauZ ) and Dmbx1 (tauG ) recapitulated the
Dmbx1 expression, and the reporter gene expression was detected in the
diencephalon and mesencephalon during embryogenesis. The crossing of Dmbx1 ( Cre 
) mice with Rosa26 reporter mice identified the Cre-mediated DNA excision in the 
postnatal midbrain, cerebellum, medulla oblongata, and spinal cord. To maintain
the Dmbx1 mutant alleles without genotyping, we crossed Dmbx1 mutant mice with
Inv4(1) ( Brd ) mice that possess the inversion between D4Mit117 and D4Mit281 on 
Chromosome 4, where Dmbx1 is located. The intercrossing of the non-agouti (a/a)
albino (Tyr ( c-Brd )/Tyr ( c-Brd )) Dmbx1 mutant mice carrying Inv4(1) ( Brd )
tagged with K14-Agouti and Tyrosinase coat-color markers resulted in the
generation of dark brown Dmbx1 wild-type [Inv4(1) ( Brd )/Inv4(1) ( Brd )], light
brown Dmbx1 heterozygous [Dmbx1 ( tm )/Inv4(1) ( Brd )], and albino Dmbx1
homozygous (Dmbx1 ( tm )/Dmbx1 ( tm )) mutant mice. To our knowledge, this is the
first demonstration of the proof-of-principle of the maintenance of viable
gene-targeted alleles using coat-color-tagged nonlethal balancer chromosomes.

PMID: 16845469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Cell Sci. 2005 Sep 15;118(Pt 18):4295-310.

Paxillin is required for cell-substrate adhesion, cell sorting and slug migration
during Dictyostelium development.

Bukharova T(1), Weijer G, Bosgraaf L, Dormann D, van Haastert PJ, Weijer CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Biocentre, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee,
Dundee DD1 5EH, UK.

Erratum in
    J Cell Sci. 2005 Oct 15;118(Pt 20):4913. Bukahrova, Tanya [corrected to
Bukhavora, Tanya].

Paxillin is a key regulatory component of focal adhesion sites, implicated in
controlling cell-substrate interactions and cell movement. We analyse the
function of a Dictyostelium discoideum paxillin homologue, PaxB, which contains
four highly conserved LD and four LIM domains, but lacks two characteristic
tyrosine residues, that form the core of vertebrate SH2-binding domains. PaxB is 
expressed during growth and all stages of development, but expression peaks
during slug formation. Using a paxB-gfp knockin strain we show the existence of
focal adhesions and characterise their dynamics. During multicellular development
PaxB is not only found in focal adhesions at the cell-substrate interface, but
also in the tips of filopodial structures predominantly located at the trailing
ends of cells. paxB- strains are less adhesive to the substrate, they can
aggregate but multicellular development from the mound stage onwards is severely 
impeded. paxB- strains are defective in proper cell type proportioning, cell
sorting, slug migration and form-defective fruiting bodies. Mutation of a
conserved JNK phosphorylation site, implicated in the control of cell migration, 
does not have any major effects on cell sorting, slug migration or morphogenesis 
in Dictyostelium. PaxB does not appear to function redundantly with its closest
relative Lim2 (paxA), which when deleted also results in a mound arrest
phenotype. However, analysis of paxA- and paxB- single and double null mutants
suggest that PaxB may act upstream of Lim2.

PMID: 16155255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Brain Res Bull. 2005 Sep 15;66(4-6):510-7. Epub 2005 Apr 26.

The evolutionary origins of vertebrate midbrain and MHB: insights from mouse,
amphioxus and ascidian Dmbx homeobox genes.

Takahashi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, , UK.
toki.takahashi@zoology.oxford.ac.uk

Comparative studies on developmental gene expression suggest that the ancestral
chordate central nervous system comprised anterior, midbrain-hindbrain boundary
(MHB) and posterior regions. The most anterior region consists of both forebrain 
and midbrain in vertebrates. It remains, however, unresolved when or how the
vertebrate midbrain was established from this anterior zone. I previously
reported a mouse PRD-class homeobox gene, Dmbx1, expressed in the presumptive
midbrain at early developmental stages, and in the hindbrain at later stages,
with exclusion from the MHB. To investigate the evolution of midbrain
development, I have cloned Dmbx genes from amphioxus and from Ciona, representing
the two most closely related lineages to the vertebrates, and examined embryonic 
Dmbx expression in these species. In amphioxus, no Dmbx expression is observed in
the neural tube, supporting previous arguments that the MHB equivalent region has
been secondarily lost in evolution. In Ciona, the CiDmbx gene is detected in
neural cells posterior to Pax-2/5/8-positive cells (MHB homologue), but not in
any cells anterior to them. These results support the lack of a midbrain
homologue in Ciona, and suggest that midbrain development is a vertebrate
innovation. Here, I report the full sequences of these genes and discuss the
evolution of midbrain development in relation to the tripartite neural ground
plan and the origin of the MHB organizer.

PMID: 16144640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. FEBS Lett. 2005 May 23;579(13):2926-32.

Functional analysis of transcriptional repressor Otx3/Dmbx1.

Kimura K(1), Miki T, Shibasaki T, Zhang Y, Ogawa M, Saisho H, Okuno M, Iwanaga T,
Seino S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Kobe University, Graduate School 
of Medicine, Japan.

Otx3/Dmbx1 is a member of paired class homeodomain transcription factors. In this
study, we found that Otx3/Dmbx1 represses the Otx2-mediated transactivation by
forming heterodimer with Otx2 on the P3C (TAATCCGATTA) sequence in vitro. The 156
amino acid region (residues 1-156) of Otx3/Dmbx1 is required for its repressor
activity, and interacts directly with Otx2. Co-localization of Otx3/Dmbx1 and
Otx2 in brain sections was confirmed by in situ hybridization. These data suggest
that Otx3/Dmbx1 represses Otx2-mediated transcription in the developing brain. We
also identified the consensus binding sequence [TAATCCGATTA and
TAATCC(N2-4)TAATCC] of Otx3/Dmbx1.

PMID: 15890343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Sep;24(17):7548-58.

Neonatal lethality, dwarfism, and abnormal brain development in Dmbx1 mutant
mice.

Ohtoshi A(1), Behringer RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas, M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Dmbx1 encodes a paired-like homeodomain protein that is expressed in developing
neural tissues during mouse embryogenesis. To elucidate the in vivo role of
Dmbx1, we generated two Dmbx1 mutant alleles. Dmbx1- lacks the homeobox and
Dmbx1z is an insertion of a lacZ reporter gene. Dmbx1z appears to be a faithful
reporter of Dmbx1 expression during embryogenesis and after birth. Dmbx1-lacZ
expression was detected in the superior colliculus, cerebellar nuclei, and
subpopulations of the medulla oblongata and spinal cord. Some Dmbx1 homozygous
mutant mice died during the neonatal period, while others survived to adulthood; 
however, their growth was impaired. Both heterozygous and homozygous mutant
offspring from Dmbx1 homozygous mutant females exhibited a low survival rate and 
poor growth. However, even wild-type pups fostered onto Dmbx1 homozygous mutant
females grew poorly, suggesting a Dmbx1-dependent nursing defect. Dmbx1 mutant
mice had an aberrant Dmbx1-lacZ expression pattern in the nervous system,
indicating that they had abnormal brain development. These results demonstrate
that Dmbx1 is required for postnatal survival, growth, and brain development.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Microbiology

PMCID: PMC507007
PMID: 15314164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Development. 2004 Jul;131(14):3285-94. Epub 2004 Jun 16.

Amphioxus and ascidian Dmbx homeobox genes give clues to the vertebrate origins
of midbrain development.

Takahashi T(1), Holland PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PS,
UK.

The ancestral chordate neural tube had a tripartite structure, comprising
anterior, midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB) and posterior regions. The most
anterior region encompasses both forebrain and midbrain in vertebrates. It is not
clear when or how the distinction between these two functionally and
developmentally distinct regions arose in evolution. Recently, we reported a
mouse PRD-class homeobox gene, Dmbx1, expressed in the presumptive midbrain at
early developmental stages, and the hindbrain at later stages, with exclusion
from the MHB. This gene provides a route to investigate the evolution of midbrain
development. We report the cloning, genomic structure, phylogeny and embryonic
expression of Dmbx genes from amphioxus and from Ciona, representing the two most
closely related lineages to the vertebrates. Our analyses show that Dmbx genes
form a distinct, ancient, homeobox gene family, with highly conserved sequence
and genomic organisation, albeit more divergent in Ciona. In amphioxus, no Dmbx
expression is observed in the neural tube, supporting previous arguments that the
MHB equivalent region has been secondarily modified in evolution. In Ciona, the
CiDmbx gene is detected in neural cells caudal to Pax2/5/8-positive cells (MHB
homologue), in the Hox-positive region, but, interestingly, not in any cells
rostral to them. These results suggest that a midbrain homologue is missing in
Ciona, and argue that midbrain development is a novelty that evolved specifically
on the vertebrate lineage. We discuss the evolution of midbrain development in
relation to the ancestry of the tripartite neural ground plan and the origin of
the MHB organiser.

PMID: 15201221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Development. 2003 Dec;130(26):6611-23.

Isthmus-to-midbrain transformation in the absence of midbrain-hindbrain organizer
activity.

Jászai J(1), Reifers F, Picker A, Langenberg T, Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics,
Pfotenhauerstrasse 108, 01307 Dresden, Germany.

In zebrafish acerebellar (ace) embryos, because of a point mutation in fgf8, the 
isthmic constriction containing the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB) organizer
fails to form. The mutants lack cerebellar development by morphological criteria,
and they appear to have an enlarged tectum, showing no obvious reduction in the
tissue mass at the dorsal mesencephalic/metencephalic alar plate. To reveal the
molecular identity of the tissues located at equivalent rostrocaudal positions
along the neuraxis as the isthmic and cerebellar primordia in wild-types, we
undertook a detailed analysis of ace embryos. In ace mutants, the appearance of
forebrain and midbrain specific marker genes (otx2, dmbx1, wnt4) in the caudal
tectal enlargement reveals a marked rostralized gene expression profile during
early somitogenesis, followed by the lack of early and late cerebellar-specific
gene expression (zath1/atoh1, gap43, tag1/cntn2, neurod, zebrin II). The Locus
coeruleus (LC) derived from rostral rhombomere 1 is also absent in the mutants. A
new interface between otx2 and epha4a suggests that the rostralization stops at
the caudal part of rhombomere 1. The mesencephalic basal plate is also affected
in the mutant embryos, as indicated by the caudal expansion of the diencephalic
expression domains of epha4a, zash1b/ashb, gap43 and tag1/cntn2, and by the
dramatic reduction of twhh expression. No marked differences are seen in cell
proliferation and apoptotic patterns around the time the rostralization of gene
expression becomes evident in the mutants. Therefore, locally distinct cell
proliferation and cell death is unlikely to be the cause of the fate alteration
of the isthmic and cerebellar primordia in the mutants. Dil cell-lineage labeling
of isthmic primordial cells reveals that cells, at the location equivalent of the
wild-type MHB, give rise to caudal tectum in ace embryos. This suggests that a
caudalto-rostral transformation leads to the tectal expansion in the mutants.
Fgf8-coated beads are able to rescue morphological MHB formation, and elicit the 
normal molecular identity of the isthmic and cerebellar primordium in ace
embryos. Taken together, our analysis reveals that cells of the isthmic and
cerebellar primordia acquire a more rostral, tectal identity in the absence of
the functional MHB organizer signal Fgf8.

PMID: 14660549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mech Dev. 2002 Jun;114(1-2):219-23.

Dmbx1 is a paired-box containing gene specifically expressed in the caudal most
brain structures.

Broccoli V(1), Colombo E, Cossu G.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Institute, H.S. Raffaela Scientific Park, Via Olgettina 58,
I-20132, Milan, Italy. broccoli.vania@hsr.it

Homeobox genes encode a particular class of transcription factors that are
involved in several different developmental processes such as specification of
regional identity, cell determination and proliferation. In particular, during
early brain morphogenesis, they provide a genetic code, which generates single
rhombomere identity in the hindbrain (Science 284 (1999) 2168) and interneurons
specification in the ventral neural tube (Nat. Rev. Genet. 1 (2000) 20). We have 
isolated a paired homeobox containing gene, which has been recently named Dmbx1
(Mech. Dev. 110 (2002) 241). Dmbx1 protein can be listed into the paired-like
class, due to the highest homology in its homeodomain, with several other members
of this family. With the exception of olfactory neurons, Dmbx1 is expressed only 
in the developing central nervous system and in particular during early
determination and successive differentiation of the midbrain and caudal
diencephalon. Interestingly, Dmbx1 expression labels cerebellar granule
progenitors at the onset of differentiation and spinal cord V0 interneurons.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12175515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mech Dev. 2002 Jun;114(1-2):213-7.

The paired-type homeobox gene Dmbx1 marks the midbrain and pretectum.

Gogoi RN(1), Schubert FR, Martinez-Barbera JP, Acampora D, Simeone A, Lumsden A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, 4th Floor, New Hunt's House, Guy's 
Campus, King's College London, London SE1 1UL, UK.

We have isolated a paired-type homeobox gene Dmbx1, previously known as Atx
(Development 128 (2001) 4789), from chick and mouse. Sequence similarity reveals 
that this gene is highly related to the Otx genes. Expression of Dmbx1 commences 
during gastrulation, when transcripts are detected in a crescent around the
anterior neural plate. As development progresses, Dmbx1 marks the prospective
midbrain and pretectum. Dmbx1 shares its caudal border of expression with Otx2,
while expression is sharply delimited rostrally by the
synencephalic-parencephalic boundary, later becoming restricted to the posterior 
synencephalon. At later stages, Dmbx1 is expressed in dynamic domains of the
hindbrain and spinal cord. Additional sites of expression comprise stomodeal
ectoderm and foregut endoderm, presomitic mesoderm, and the nasal pit.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12175514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Dev Genes Evol. 2002 Jul;212(6):293-7. Epub 2002 May 24.

An orphan PRD class homeobox gene expressed in mouse brain and limb development.

Takahashi T(1), Holland PW, Cohn MJ, Shimizu K, Kurokawa M, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Animal and Microbial Science, The University of Reading,
Whiteknights, Reading, RG6 6AJ, UK.

We report the cDNA sequence and expression of a mouse homeobox gene, Dmbx1, from 
the PRD class and comparison to its human orthologue. The gene defines a new
homeobox gene family, Dmbx, phylogenetically distinct from the Ptx, Alx, Prx Otx,
Gsc, Otp and Pax gene families. The Dmbx1 gene is expressed in the developing
mouse diencephalon, midbrain and hindbrain, and has dynamic expression during
forelimb and hindlimb development. Unusually for homeobox genes, there is no
orthologue in the Drosophila or Caenorhabditis genomes; we argue this reflects
secondary loss.

PMID: 12111214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 2;277(31):28065-9. Epub 2002 Jun 7.

Identification, tissue expression, and functional characterization of Otx3, a
novel member of the Otx family.

Zhang Y(1), Miki T, Iwanaga T, Koseki Y, Okuno M, Sunaga Y, Ozaki N, Yano H,
Koseki H, Seino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Transcription factors containing a homeodomain play an important role in the
organogenesis of vertebrates. We have isolated a novel homeodomain transcription 
factor, Otx3, which is structurally and functionally related to Otx1 and Otx2,
transcription factors that are critical in brain morphogenesis. Mouse Otx3 is a
protein composed of 376 amino acids. Otx3 mRNA was expressed in mouse embryos
from 10.5 to 13.5 days postcoitum (dpc) and in adult cerebellum as assessed by
Northern blotting. Whole-mount in situ hybridization of mouse embryos from 9.5 to
11.5 dpc revealed strong expression of Otx3 mRNA in the diencephalon,
mesencephalon, metencephalon, myelencephalon, and developing eye, indicating an
expression pattern largely overlapping but distinct from those of Otx1 and Otx2. 
In addition, Otx3 was shown by electrophoretic mobility shift assay to bind to
the TAATCC motif, the consensus binding sequence for Otx1, Otx2, and Crx. Results
of a transcription reporter assay suggest that Otx3 functions as a transcription 
repressor by binding to this motif. These results suggest that Otx3 is a novel
member of the Otx family and may be involved in the development of the central
nervous system.

PMID: 12055180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mech Dev. 2002 Jan;110(1-2):241-4.

Dmbx1, a novel evolutionarily conserved paired-like homeobox gene expressed in
the brain of mouse embryos.

Ohtoshi A(1), Nishijima I, Justice MJ, Behringer RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

To identify novel homeobox genes expressed during mouse embryogenesis, we
searched the databases and found a novel mouse paired-like homeobox gene,
Dmbx1(diencephalon/mesencephalon-expressed brain homeobox gene 1), that is also
conserved in zebrafish and human. Linkage analysis mapped mouse Dmbx1 to the
mid-portion of chromosome 4 that is the homologous gene cluster region of human
chromosome 1, where human DMBX1 is located. Both mouse and human Dmbx1/DMBX1 have
four coding exons and their gene structures are conserved. Whole-mount in situ
hybridization revealed that Dmbx1 expression is detected in 7.5-9.5 dpc mouse
embryos. At 7.5 and 8.5 dpc, Dmbx1 is expressed in a sub-region of the anterior
head folds. At 9.5 dpc, expression is observed in the caudal diencephalon as well
as in the mesencephalon and is restricted to the neuroepithelium. Expression in
adult tissues was detected in brain, stomach, and testis. Dmbx1 provides a unique
marker of the developing anterior nervous system and should provide a useful
molecular resource to elucidate the mechanisms that pattern the vertebrate brain.

PMID: 11744391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


