
1. BMC Genomics. 2015 Nov 18;16:973. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2142-8.

Gene expression analysis at the onset of sex differentiation in turbot
(Scophthalmus maximus).

Robledo D(1), Ribas L(2), Cal R(3), Sánchez L(4), Piferrer F(5), Martínez P(6),
Viñas A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Biología, Universidade de Santiago de
Compostela, 15782, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. diego.robledo@usc.es.
(2)Institut de Ciències del Mar, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas 
(CSIC), 08003, Barcelona, Spain. lribas@icm.csic.es. (3)Instituto Español de
Oceanografía, Centro Oceanográfico de Vigo, 36390, Vigo, Spain.
rosa.cal@vi.ieo.es. (4)Departamento de Genética. Facultad de Veterinaria,
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Campus de Lugo, 27002, Lugo, Spain.
lauraelena.sanchez@usc.es. (5)Institut de Ciències del Mar, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), 08003, Barcelona, Spain.
piferrer@icm.csic.es. (6)Departamento de Genética. Facultad de Veterinaria,
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Campus de Lugo, 27002, Lugo, Spain.
paulino.martinez@usc.es. (7)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Biología,
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, 15782, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
anamaria.vinas@usc.es.

BACKGROUND: Controlling sex ratios is essential for the aquaculture industry,
especially in those species with sex dimorphism for relevant productive traits,
hence the importance of knowing how the sexual phenotype is established in fish. 
Turbot, a very important fish for the aquaculture industry in Europe, shows one
of the largest sexual growth dimorphisms amongst marine cultured species, being
all-female stocks a desirable goal for the industry. Although important knowledge
has been achieved on the genetic basis of sex determination (SD) in this species,
the master SD gene remains unknown and precise information on gene expression at 
the critical stage of sex differentiation is lacking. In the present work, we
examined the expression profiles of 29 relevant genes related to sex
differentiation, from 60 up to 135 days post fertilization (dpf), when gonads are
differentiating. We also considered the influence of three temperature regimes on
sex differentiation.
RESULTS: The first sex-related differences in molecular markers could be observed
at 90 days post fertilization (dpf) and so we have called that time the onset of 
sex differentiation. Three genes were the first to show differential expression
between males and females and also allowed us to sex turbot accurately at the
onset of sex differentiation (90 dpf): cyp19a1a, amh and vasa. The expression of 
genes related to primordial germ cells (vasa, gsdf, tdrd1) started to increase
between 75-90 dpf and vasa and tdrd1 later presented higher expression in females
(90-105 dpf). Two genes placed on the SD region of turbot (sox2, fxr1) did not
show any expression pattern suggestive of a sex determining function. We also
detected changes in the expression levels of several genes (ctnnb1, cyp11a, dmrt2
or sox6) depending on culture temperature.
CONCLUSION: Our results enabled us to identify the first sex-associated genetic
cues (cyp19a1a, vasa and amh) at the initial stages of gonad development in
turbot (90 dpf) and to accurately sex turbot at this age, establishing the
correspondence between gene expression profiles and histological sex.
Furthermore, we profiled several genes involved in sex differentiation and found 
specific temperature effects on their expression.

PMCID: PMC4652359
PMID: 26581195  [PubMed - in process]


2. Life Sci. 2015 Dec 15;143:168-73. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2015.10.036. Epub 2015 Nov
5.

New transcription factors involved with postnatal ventral prostate gland
development in male Wistar rats during the first week.

Nishan U(1), Damas-Souza DM(2), Barbosa GO(2), Muhammad N(3), Rahim A(3),
Carvalho HF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Functional Biology, State University of Campinas,
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil; Interdisciplinary Research Centre in Biomedical
Materials (IRCBM), COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Lahore, Pakistan.
Electronic address: umarnishan@ciitlahore.edu.pk. (2)Department of Structural and
Functional Biology, State University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Interdisciplinary Research Centre in Biomedical Materials (IRCBM), COMSATS
Institute of Information Technology, Lahore, Pakistan.

AIMS: The high incidence in men of prostatic diseases, including benign and
malignant tumors, makes the understanding of prostate development and biology
very important. Understanding the organogenesis of the prostate gland has been a 
substantial challenge as "prostatic code" is not well defined at the present
time. The novelty of this work lies in unveiling new transcription factors (TFs) 
during neonatal ventral prostate (VP) gland development in male Wistar rats.
MAIN METHODS: The techniques of qRT-PCR and immunohistochemistry have been
employed to perform this work while the VP gland was obtained from neonatal rats 
at day zero (the day of birth) day 3 and 6.
KEY FINDINGS: 16 TFs were studied and we found an increased expression of Eya2,
Lhrh and Znf142, invariable levels of Znf703 and Dbp, and decreased expression of
11 others at postnatal development day 3 and 6 as compared to day zero. ZNF703
was found by immunohistochemistry in epithelial cells at days 0, 3 and 6. qRT-PCR
for Eya2 and Dmrt2 showed the highest and lowest fold change for them
respectively, and immunohistochemistry showed that the former is being expressed 
at the three selected time points while the latter appears to be diminishing with
very few cells expressing it until day 6.
SIGNIFICANCE: Results from this work is reporting the role of these TFs for the
first time and will significantly contribute to the current understanding of the 
development and branching morphogenesis of the neonatal VP gland during the first
week of postnatal development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26549646  [PubMed - in process]


3. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Jul 31. [Epub ahead of print]

A Pooling Genome-Wide Association Study Combining a Pathway Analysis for Typical 
Sporadic Parkinson's Disease in the Han Population of Chinese Mainland.

Hu Y(1), Deng L, Zhang J, Fang X, Mei P, Cao X, Lin J, Wei Y, Zhang X, Xu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University,
Nanchang, 330006, Jiangxi, China, zenzixiao_ren@126.com.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) on sporadic Parkinson's disease (sPD) are 
mainly conducted in European and American populations at present, and the Han
populations of Chinese mainland (HPCM) almost have not been studied yet. Here, we
conducted a pooling GWAS combining a pathway analysis with 862,198 autosomal
single nucleotide polymorphisms of IlluminaHumanOmniZhongHua-8 in 250 sPD and 250
controls from HPCM precluded toxicant exposure, age, and heavy coffee drinking
habit interference. We revealed that among the 22 potential loci implicated,
PRDM2/KIAA1026 (kgp8090149), TSG1/MANEA (kgp154172), PDE10A (kgp8130520), MDGA2
(rs9323124), ATPBD4/LOC100288892 (kgp11333367), ZFP64/TSHZ2 (kgp4156164),
PAQR3/ARD1B (kgp9482779), FLJ23172/FNDC3B (kgp760898), C18orf1 (kgp348599),
FLJ43860/NCRNA00051 (kgp4105983), CYP1B1/C2orf58 (kgp11353523), WNT9A/LOC728728
(rs849898), ANXA1/LOC100130911 (rs10746953), FLJ35379/LOC100132423 (kgp9550589), 
PLEKHN1 (kgp7172368), DMRT2/SMARCA2 (kgp10769919), ZNF396/INO80C (rs1362858),
C3orf67/LOC339902 (rs6783485), LOC285194/IGSF11 (rs1879553), FGF10/MRPS30
(rs13153459), BARX1/PTPDC1 (kgp6542803), and COL5 A2 (rs11186), the peak
significance was at the kgp4105983 of FLJ43860 gene in chromosome 8, the first
top strongest associated locus with sPD was PRDM2 (kgp8090149) in chromosome 1,
and the 24 pathways including 100 significantly associated genes were strongly
associated with sPD from HPCM. The 40 genes were shared by at least two pathways.
The most possible associated pathways with sPD were axon guidance, ECM-receptor
interaction, neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, tight junction, focal
adhesion, gap junction, long-term depression, drug metabolism-cytochrome P450,
adherens junction, endocytosis, and protein digestion and absorption. Our results
indicated that these loci, pathways, and their related genes might be involved in
the pathogenesis of sPD from HPCM and provided some novel evidences for further
searching the genetic pathogenesis of sPD.

PMID: 26227905  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Genet Mol Res. 2015 May 18;14(2):5229-33. doi: 10.4238/2015.May.18.14.

Genome-wide association with residual body weight gain in Bos indicus cattle.

Santana MH(1), Gomes RC(2), Utsunomiya YT(3), Neves HH(3), Novais FJ(4), Bonin
MN(2), Fukumasu H(4), Garcia JF(3), Alexandre PA(4), Oliveira Junior GA(4),
Coutinho LL(5), Ferraz JB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Zootecnia e Engenharia de Alimentos, Pirassununga, SP, Brasil
miguel-has@hotmail.com. (2)Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuária, Campo
Grande, MS, Brasil. (3)Faculdade de Ciências Agrárias e Veterinárias,
Universidade Estadual Paulista, Jaboticabal, SP, Brasil. (4)Faculdade de
Zootecnia e Engenharia de Alimentos, Pirassununga, SP, Brasil. (5)Escola Superior
de Agricultura Luiz de Queiroz, Universidade de São Paulo, Piracicaba, SP,
Brasil.

Weight gain is a key performance trait for beef cat-tle; however, attention
should be given to the production costs for better profitability. Therefore, a
feed efficiency trait based on per-formance can be an interesting approach to
improve performance without increasing food costs. To identify candidate genes
and ge-nomic regions associated with residual body weight gain (RWG), we
conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) with 720 Nellore cattle using
the GRAMMAR-Gamma association test. We identified 30 significant single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), especially on chromosomes 2, 8, 12, and 17.
Several genes and quantitative train loci (QTLs) present in the regions
identified were appointed; we highlight DMRT2 (doublesex and mab-3 related
tran-scription factor 2), IFFO2 (intermediate filament family orphan 2), LNX2
(ligand of numb-protein X 2), MTIF3 (mitochondrial transla-tional initiation
factor 3), and TRNAG-CCC (transfer RNA glycine anticodon CCC). The metabolic
pathways that can explain part of the phenotypic variation in RWG are related to 
oxidative stress and muscle control.

PMID: 26125717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2015;79(8):1257-65. doi:
10.1080/09168451.2015.1025690. Epub 2015 Apr 7.

De novo transcriptome sequencing to identify the sex-determination genes in
Hyriopsis schlegelii.

Shi J(1), Hong Y, Sheng J, Peng K, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)a School of Life Sciences , Nanchang University , Nanchang , China.

This study presents the first analysis of expressed transcripts in the spermary
and ovary of Hyriopsis schlegelii (H. schlegelii). A total of 132,055 unigenes
were obtained and 31,781 of these genes were annotated. In addition, 19,511
upregulated and 25,911 downregulated unigenes were identified in the spermary.
Ten sex-determination genes were selected and further analyzed by real-time PCR. 
In addition, mammalian genes reported to govern sex-determination pathways,
including Sry, Dmrt1, Dmrt2, Sox9, GATA4, and WT1 in males and Wnt4, Rspo1,
Foxl2, and ß-catenin in females, were also identified in H. schlegelii. These
results suggest that H. schlegelii and mammals use similar gene regulatory
mechanisms to control sex determination. Moreover, genes associated with dosage
compensation mechanisms, such as Msl1, Msl2, and Msl3, and hermaphrodite
phenotypes, such as Tra-1, Tra-2a, Tra-2ß, Fem1A, Fem1B, and Fem1C, were also
identified in H. schlegelii. The identification of these genes indicates that
diverse regulatory mechanisms regulate sexual polymorphism in H. schlegelii.

PMID: 25848829  [PubMed - in process]


6. Fertil Steril. 2014 Sep;102(3):728-738.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2014.06.005.
Epub 2014 Jul 1.

Telomere homeostasis is compromised in spermatocytes from patients with
idiopathic infertility.

Reig-Viader R(1), Capilla L(2), Vila-Cejudo M(3), Garcia F(4), Anguita B(4),
Garcia-Caldés M(1), Ruiz-Herrera A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Biologia Cel.lular, Fisiologia i Immunologia, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Campus UAB, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain; Institut de
Biotecnologia i Biomedicina (IBB), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Campus UAB,
Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain. (2)Institut de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina (IBB),
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Campus UAB, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain.
(3)Departament de Biologia Cel.lular, Fisiologia i Immunologia, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Campus UAB, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain. (4)Fecunmed,
Casals s/n, Granollers, Spain. (5)Departament de Biologia Cel.lular, Fisiologia i
Immunologia, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Campus UAB, Cerdanyola del
Vallès, Spain; Institut de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina (IBB), Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Campus UAB, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain. Electronic
address: aurora.ruizherrera@uab.cat.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2015 Jul;194(1):171.
    Fertil Steril. 2014 Sep;102(3):690-1.

OBJECTIVE: To study whether the telomere structure of germ cells from idiopathic 
infertile men is altered and if this impairment is influenced by meiotic
recombination and telomere length.
DESIGN: We performed a detailed analysis of both telomeric repeat-containing RNA 
(TERRA) and telomerase distribution in testis cell spreads by combining
immunofluorescence and RNA fluorescent in situ hybridization. In addition we
analyzed meiotic recombination between homologous chromosomes by
immunofluorescence and telomere length by quantitative fluorescent in situ
hybridization.
SETTING: University.
PATIENT(S): Men consulting for fertility problems.
INTERVENTION(S): Unilateral testicular biopsies.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): We observed that TERRA levels and its nuclear
distribution were compromised in infertile patients. In addition, the presence of
the protein component of telomerase at telomeres decreased in the affected
patients. However, neither telomerase-TERRA association nor telomere length was
altered in spermatocytes I of infertile samples compared with control
individuals. In addition, we observed that meiotic recombination was reduced in
infertile individuals.
RESULT(S): Telomere homeostasis is impaired in infertile patients, and this was
translated into a decrease in TERRA levels together with an alteration of the
TERRA-protein component of telomerase telomeric association in primary
spermatocytes.
CONCLUSION(S): This study demonstrates for the first time that telomere structure
and homeostasis in germ cells is compromised in infertile individuals. In the
light of our results we propose that the analysis of telomeric structure (i.e.,
TERRA levels and telomere association with TERRA and telomerase) would provide
new tools for our understanding of the origin of human infertility.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24996497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 14;9(2):e88918. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088918. eCollection
2014.

Genome-wide gene expression profile analyses identify CTTN as a potential
prognostic marker in esophageal cancer.

Lu P(1), Qiao J(1), He W(1), Wang J(1), Jia Y(1), Sun Y(1), Tang S(2), Fu L(2),
Qin Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, China. (2)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, the
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

AIM: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is one of the most common fatal
malignances of the digestive tract. Its prognosis is poor mainly due to the lack 
of reliable markers for early detection and prognostic prediction. Here we aim to
identify the molecules involved in ESCC carcinogenesis and those as potential
markers for prognosis and as new molecular therapeutic targets.
METHODS: We performed genome-wide gene expression profile analyses of 10 primary 
ESCCs and their adjacent normal tissues by cDNA microarrays representing 47,000
transcripts and variants. Candidate genes were then validated by semi
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR), tissue microarrays (TMAs) and
immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining.
RESULTS: Using an arbitrary cutoff line of signal log ratio of =1.5 or =-1.5, we 
observed 549 up-regulated genes and 766 down-regulated genes in ESCCs compared
with normal esophageal tissues. The functions of 302 differentially expressed
genes were associated with cell metabolism, cell adhesion and immune response.
Several candidate deregulated genes including four overexpressed (CTTN, DMRT2,
MCM10 and SCYA26) and two underexpressed (HMGCS2 and SORBS2) were subsequently
verified, which can be served as biomarkers for ESCC. Moreover, overexpression of
cortactin (CTTN) was observed in 126/198 (63.6%) of ESCC cases and was
significantly associated with lymph node metastasis (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.000), pathologic stage
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.000) and poor survival (P<0.001) of ESCC patients. Furthermore, a
significant correlation between CTTN overexpression and shorter disease-specific 
survival rate was found in different subgroups of ESCC patient stratified by the 
pathologic stage (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Our data provide valuable information for establishing molecules as
candidates for prognostic and/or as therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC3925182
PMID: 24551190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Apr;34(4):902-12. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.303123. Epub 2014 Feb 6.

Tissue-specific RNA-Seq in human evoked inflammation identifies blood and adipose
LincRNA signatures of cardiometabolic diseases.

Liu Y(1), Ferguson JF, Xue C, Ballantyne RL, Silverman IM, Gosai SJ, Serfecz J,
Morley MP, Gregory BD, Li M, Reilly MP.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Biostatistics and Epidemiology and Biology,
Cardiovascular Institute, Perelman School of Medicine and School of Arts and
Science at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

OBJECTIVE: Inappropriate transcriptional activation of innate immunity is a
pathological feature of several cardiometabolic disorders, but little is known
about inflammatory modulation of long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) in
disease-relevant human tissues.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: We applied deep RNA sequencing (>500 million filtered reads
per sample) to blood and adipose during low-dose experimental endotoxemia
(lipopolysaccharide) in a healthy human, with targeted replication in separate
individuals undergoing endotoxemia (n=6), to identify inflammatory lincRNAs. A
subset of these lincRNAs was examined for expression in adipocytes and monocytes,
modulation in adipose of obese humans, and overlap with genome-wide association
study signals for inflammatory and cardiometabolic traits. Of a stringent set of 
4284 lincRNAs, 11% to 22% were expressed with 201 and 56 lincRNAs modulated by
lipopolysaccharide in blood or adipose, respectively. Tissue-specific expression 
of a subset of 6 lipopolysaccharide-lincRNAs was replicated with
lipopolysaccharide modulation confirmed for all 3 expressed in blood and 2 of 4
expressed in adipose. The broader generalizability of findings in blood of
subject A was confirmed by RNA sequencing in 7 additional subjects. We confirmed 
adipocytes and monocytes as potential cell-sources of selective
lipopolysaccharide-regulated lincRNAs, and 2 of these, linc-DMRT2 (P=0.002) and
linc-TP53I13 (P=0.01), were suppressed in adipose of obese humans. Finally, we
provide examples of lipopolysaccharide-modulated lincRNAs that overlap single
nucleotide polymorphisms that are associated with cardiometabolic traits.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide novel insights into tissue-level, inflammatory 
transcriptome regulation in cardiometabolic diseases. These are complementary to 
more usual approaches limited to interrogation of DNA variations.

PMCID: PMC3966947
PMID: 24504737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Mar;41(3):1237-45. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2968-6. Epub 2014
Jan 5.

Identification of Dmrt genes and their up-regulation during gonad transformation 
in the swamp eel (Monopterus albus).

Sheng Y(1), Chen B, Zhang L, Luo M, Cheng H, Zhou R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Center for Developmental Biology, College of Life
Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, People's Republic of China.

The swamp eel is a teleost fish with a characteristic of natural sex reversal and
an ideal model for vertebrate sexual development. However, underlying molecular
mechanisms are poorly understood. We report the identification of five DM
(doublesex and mab-3) domain genes in the swamp eel that include Dmrt2, Dmrt2b,
Dmrt3, Dmrt4 and Dmrt5, which encode putative proteins of 527, 373, 471, 420 and 
448 amino acids, respectively. Phylogenetic tree showed that these genes are
clustered into corresponding branches of the DM genes in vertebrates. Southern
blot analysis indicated that the Dmrt1-Dmrt3-Dmrt2 genes are tightly linked in a 
conserved gene cluster. Notably, these Dmrt genes are up-regulated during gonad
transformation. Furthermore, mRNA in situ hybridisation showed that Dmrt2, Dmrt3,
Dmrt4 and Dmrt5 are expressed in developing germ cells. These results are
evidence that the DM genes are involved in sexual differentiation in the swamp
eel.

PMID: 24390316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Genome Biol. 2013 Dec 17;14(12):r137. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-12-r137.

Integrative DNA methylation and gene expression analysis in high-grade soft
tissue sarcomas.

Renner M, Wolf T, Meyer H, Hartmann W, Penzel R, Ulrich A, Lehner B, Hovestadt V,
Czwan E, Egerer G, Schmitt T, Alldinger I, Renker EK, Ehemann V, Eils R,
Wardelmann E, Büttner R, Lichter P, Brors B, Schirmacher P, Mechtersheimer G.

BACKGROUND: High-grade soft tissue sarcomas are a heterogeneous, complex group of
aggressive malignant tumors showing mesenchymal differentiation. Recently, soft
tissue sarcomas have increasingly been classified on the basis of underlying
genetic alterations; however, the role of aberrant DNA methylation in these
tumors is not well understood and, consequently, the usefulness of
methylation-based classification is unclear.
RESULTS: We used the Infinium HumanMethylation27 platform to profile DNA
methylation in 80 primary, untreated high-grade soft tissue sarcomas,
representing eight relevant subtypes, two non-neoplastic fat samples and 14
representative sarcoma cell lines. The primary samples were partitioned into
seven stable clusters. A classification algorithm identified 216 CpG sites,
mapping to 246 genes, showing different degrees of DNA methylation between these 
seven groups. The differences between the clusters were best represented by a set
of eight CpG sites located in the genes SPEG, NNAT, FBLN2, PYROXD2, ZNF217,
COL14A1, DMRT2 and CDKN2A. By integrating DNA methylation and mRNA expression
data, we identified 27 genes showing negative and three genes showing positive
correlation. Compared with non-neoplastic fat, NNAT showed DNA hypomethylation
and inverse gene expression in myxoid liposarcomas, and DNA hypermethylation and 
inverse gene expression in dedifferentiated and pleomorphic liposarcomas.
Recovery of NNAT in a hypermethylated myxoid liposarcoma cell line decreased cell
migration and viability.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis represents the first comprehensive integration of DNA
methylation and transcriptional data in primary high-grade soft tissue sarcomas. 
We propose novel biomarkers and genes relevant for pathogenesis, including NNAT
as a potential tumor suppressor in myxoid liposarcomas.

PMCID: PMC4054884
PMID: 24345474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Dev Dyn. 2013 Nov;242(11):1332-44. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24033. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Regulation of mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition by PARAXIS during
somitogenesis.

Rowton M(1), Ramos P, Anderson DM, Rhee JM, Cunliffe HE, Rawls A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona.

BACKGROUND: Dynamic alterations in cell shape, migration, and adhesion play a
central role in tissue morphogenesis during embryonic development and congenital 
disease. The mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition that occurs during vertebrate
somitogenesis is required for proper patterning of the axial musculoskeletal
system. Somitic MET is initiated in the presomitic mesoderm by PARAXIS-dependent 
changes in cell adhesion, cell polarity, and the composition of the extracellular
matrix. However, the target genes downstream of the transcription factor PARAXIS 
remain poorly described.
RESULTS: A genome-wide comparison of gene expression in the anterior presomitic
mesoderm and newly formed somites of Paraxis(-/-) embryos resulted in a set of
deregulated genes enriched for factors associated with extracellular matrix and
cytoskeletal organization and cell-cell and cell-ECM adhesion. The greatest
change in expression was seen in fibroblast activation protein alpha (Fap),
encoding a dipeptidyl peptidase capable of increasing fibronectin and collagen
fiber organization in extracellular matrix. Further, downstream genes in the Wnt 
and Notch signaling pathways were downregulated, predicting that PARAXIS
participates in positive feedback loops in both pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that PARAXIS initiates and stabilizes somite 
epithelialization by integrating signals from multiple pathways to control the
reorganization of the ECM, cytoskeleton, and adhesion junctions during MET.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24038871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(1):e1003211. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003211. Epub 2013 Jan 
17.

Genome-wide analysis reveals selection for important traits in domestic horse
breeds.

Petersen JL(1), Mickelson JR, Rendahl AK, Valberg SJ, Andersson LS, Axelsson J,
Bailey E, Bannasch D, Binns MM, Borges AS, Brama P, da Câmara Machado A,
Capomaccio S, Cappelli K, Cothran EG, Distl O, Fox-Clipsham L, Graves KT, Guérin 
G, Haase B, Hasegawa T, Hemmann K, Hill EW, Leeb T, Lindgren G, Lohi H, Lopes MS,
McGivney BA, Mikko S, Orr N, Penedo MC, Piercy RJ, Raekallio M, Rieder S, Røed
KH, Swinburne J, Tozaki T, Vaudin M, Wade CM, McCue ME.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota, 
USA. jlpeters@umn.edu

Intense selective pressures applied over short evolutionary time have resulted in
homogeneity within, but substantial variation among, horse breeds. Utilizing this
population structure, 744 individuals from 33 breeds, and a 54,000 SNP genotyping
array, breed-specific targets of selection were identified using an F(ST)-based
statistic calculated in 500-kb windows across the genome. A 5.5-Mb region of
ECA18, in which the myostatin (MSTN) gene was centered, contained the highest
signature of selection in both the Paint and Quarter Horse. Gene sequencing and
histological analysis of gluteal muscle biopsies showed a promoter variant and
intronic SNP of MSTN were each significantly associated with higher Type 2B and
lower Type 1 muscle fiber proportions in the Quarter Horse, demonstrating a
functional consequence of selection at this locus. Signatures of selection on
ECA23 in all gaited breeds in the sample led to the identification of a shared,
186-kb haplotype including two doublesex related mab transcription factor genes
(DMRT2 and 3). The recent identification of a DMRT3 mutation within this
haplotype, which appears necessary for the ability to perform alternative gaits, 
provides further evidence for selection at this locus. Finally, putative loci for
the determination of size were identified in the draft breeds and the Miniature
horse on ECA11, as well as when signatures of selection surrounding candidate
genes at other loci were examined. This work provides further evidence of the
importance of MSTN in racing breeds, provides strong evidence for selection upon 
gait and size, and illustrates the potential for population-based techniques to
find genomic regions driving important phenotypes in the modern horse.

PMCID: PMC3547851
PMID: 23349635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cell Adh Migr. 2013 Jan-Feb;7(1):72-81. doi: 10.4161/cam.23411. Epub 2013 Jan 1.

The myotomal basement membrane: insight into laminin-111 function and its control
by Sonic hedgehog signaling.

Borycki AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
a.g.borycki@sheffield.ac.uk

The importance of laminin-containing basement membranes (BM) for adult muscle
function is well established, in particular due to the severe phenotype of
congenital muscular dystrophies in patients with mutations disrupting the
BM-muscle cell interaction. Developing muscles in the embryo are also dependent
on an intact BM. However, the processes controlled by BM-muscle cell interactions
in the embryo are only beginning to be elucidated. In this review, we focus on
the myotomal BM to illustrate the critical role of laminin-111 in BM assembly and
function at the surface of embryonic muscle cells. The myotomal BM provides also 
an interesting paradigm to study the complex interplay between
laminins-containing BM and growth factor-mediated signaling and activity.

PMCID: PMC3544789
PMID: 23287393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. EMBO J. 2012 Nov 5;31(21):4165-78. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.266. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

A role for CTCF and cohesin in subtelomere chromatin organization, TERRA
transcription, and telomere end protection.

Deng Z(1), Wang Z, Stong N, Plasschaert R, Moczan A, Chen HS, Hu S, Wikramasinghe
P, Davuluri RV, Bartolomei MS, Riethman H, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

The contribution of human subtelomeric DNA and chromatin organization to telomere
integrity and chromosome end protection is not yet understood in molecular
detail. Here, we show by ChIP-Seq that most human subtelomeres contain a CTCF-
and cohesin-binding site within ~1-2<U+2009>kb of the TTAGGG repeat tract and adjacent
to a CpG-islands implicated in TERRA transcription control. ChIP-Seq also
revealed that RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) was enriched at sites adjacent to the
CTCF sites and extending towards the telomere repeat tracts. Mutation of
CTCF-binding sites in plasmid-borne promoters reduced transcriptional activity in
an orientation-dependent manner. Depletion of CTCF by shRNA led to a decrease in 
TERRA transcription, and a loss of cohesin and RNAPII binding to the
subtelomeres. Depletion of either CTCF or cohesin subunit Rad21 caused
telomere-induced DNA damage foci (TIF) formation, and destabilized TRF1 and TRF2 
binding to the TTAGGG proximal subtelomere DNA. These findings indicate that CTCF
and cohesin are integral components of most human subtelomeres, and important for
the regulation of TERRA transcription and telomere end protection.

PMCID: PMC3492729
PMID: 23010778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Development. 2012 Oct;139(19):3553-60. doi: 10.1242/dev.077263. Epub 2012 Aug 16.

Celf1 regulation of dmrt2a is required for somite symmetry and left-right
patterning during zebrafish development.

Matsui T(1), Sasaki A, Akazawa N, Otani H, Bessho Y.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Research, Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara
Institute of Science and Technology, 8916-5 Takayama, Nara 630-0101, Japan.
matsui@bs.naist.jp

RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) bind to numerous and diverse mRNAs to control gene
expression post-transcriptionally, although the in vivo functions of specific
RBP-mRNA interactions remain largely unknown. Here, we show that an RBP named
Cugbp, Elav-like family member 1 (Celf1) controls expression of a gene named
doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 2a (dmrt2a), which is essential 
for somite symmetry and left-right patterning during zebrafish development. Celf1
promotes dmrt2a mRNA decay by binding to UGU repeats in the 3'UTR of dmrt2a mRNA 
such that celf1 overexpression reduces the amount of dmrt2a mRNA, leading to
asymmetric somitogenesis and laterality defects. Furthermore, blocking the
Celf1-dmrt2a mRNA interaction by a target protector morpholino alleviates
failures in somite symmetry and left-right patterning that are caused by celf1
overexpression. Our results therefore demonstrate that Celf1-dependent
fine-tuning of dmrt2a expression is essential for generating bilateral symmetry
of somites and left-right asymmetric patterning during zebrafish development.

PMID: 22899848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Gene. 2012 Sep 1;505(2):221-32. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.06.021. Epub 2012 Jun
27.

Sex dimorphic expression of five dmrt genes identified in the Atlantic cod
genome. The fish-specific dmrt2b diverged from dmrt2a before the fish
whole-genome duplication.

Johnsen H(1), Andersen Ø.

Author information: 
(1)Nofima Marin, Muninbakken 9-13, N-9291 Tromsø, Norway. hanne.johnsen@nofima.no

The Doublesex and Mab-3 related transcription factors (Dmrt) are characterised by
the zinc finger-like DM domain binding similar DNA sequences, but show different 
spatio-temporal expression patterns and functions throughout ontogenesis. Dmrt1
is the master regulator of sex determination in very distant metazoans, while
Dmrt2 and Dmrt4 are of crucial importance in vertebrate somitogenesis and
neurogenesis, respectively. To elucidate the evolutionary divergence of the fish 
dmrt genes, we examined the expression patterns and the chromosomal synteny of
the five dmrt genes identified in the Atlantic cod genome. Quantitative PCR
analyses of cod dmrt1, dmrt2a, dmrt3, dmrt4 and dmrt5 revealed distinct
expression patterns in the embryo and larvae, and indicated conserved
extragonadal functions during early development. Several dmrt genes seem to be
involved in the sexual differentiation of gonads and brain, but the sex-dimorphic
expression patterns differed substantially between teleosts, suggesting
functional switch between Dmrt members. The dmrt2a-dmrt3-dmrt1 cluster was found 
to be located in a conserved syntenic region, and the flanking genes have become 
duplicated in teleosts and are closely linked in a paralogous region lacking the 
dmrt cluster. Similarly, the region containing the fish-specific dmrt2b gene was 
found to have a paralogous region without a dmrt2b duplicate in a separate
linkage group in the teleost genomes. We propose that the teleost segments
paralogous to the dmrt2a- and dmrt2b regions, respectively, were formed through
the fish-specific whole genome duplication (3R), while dmrt2a and dmrt2b
originated from the second round (2R) of whole genome duplication of the
ancestral dmrt2. The dmrt2b paralog seems to have been lost in Atlantic cod as in
tetrapods and may be a pseudogene in pufferfish, while dmrt2a and dmrt2b have
acquired different functions in zebrafish. Contrasting with the retained
duplicates of dmrt flanking genes, the massive losses of dmrt duplicates in the
vertebrate tetraploidizations suggest that their functions are exquisitely
sensitive to gene dosage.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22749781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Genes Cells. 2011 Nov;16(11):1097-109. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2011.01555.x.

Zebrafish Dmrta2 regulates neurogenesis in the telencephalon.

Yoshizawa A(1), Nakahara Y, Izawa T, Ishitani T, Tsutsumi M, Kuroiwa A, Itoh M,
Kikuchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima
University, Kagamiyama 1-3-1, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8526 Japan.

Although recent findings showed that some Drosophila doublesex and Caenorhabditis
elegans mab-3 related genes are expressed in neural tissues during development,
their functions have not been fully elucidated. Here, we isolated a zebrafish
mutant, ha2, that shows defects in telencephalic neurogenesis and found that ha2 
encodes Doublesex and MAB-3 related transcription factor like family A2 (Dmrta2).
dmrta2 expression is restricted to the telencephalon, diencephalon and olfactory 
placode during somitogenesis. We found that the expression of the proneural gene,
neurogenin1, in the posterior and dorsal region of telencephalon
(posterior-dorsal telencephalon) is markedly reduced in this mutant at the
14-somite stage without any defects in cell proliferation or cell death. In
contrast, the telencephalic expression of her6, a Hes-related gene that is known 
to encode a negative regulator of neurogenin1, expands dramatically in the ha2
mutant. Based on over-expression experiments and epistatic analyses, we propose
that zebrafish Dmrta2 controls neurogenin1 expression by repressing her6 in the
posterior-dorsal telencephalon. Furthermore, the expression domains of the
telencephalic marker genes, foxg1 and emx3, and the neuronal differentiation
gene, neurod, are downregulated in the ha2 posterior-dorsal telencephalon during 
somitogenesis. These results suggest that Dmrta2 plays important roles in the
specification of the posterior-dorsal telencephalic cell fate during
somitogenesis.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2011 by the Molecular Biology Society
of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22023386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 28;5(12):e14438. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014438.

Left-right function of dmrt2 genes is not conserved between zebrafish and mouse.

Lourenço R(1), Lopes SS, Saúde L.

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Lisboa, Instituto de Medicina
Molecular e Instituto de Histologia e Biologia do Desenvolvimento, Lisboa,
Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Members of the Dmrt family, generally associated with sex
determination, were shown to be involved in several other functions during
embryonic development. Dmrt2 has been studied in the context of zebrafish
development where, due to a duplication event, two paralog genes dmrt2a and
dmrt2b are present. Both zebrafish dmrt2a/terra and dmrt2b are important to
regulate left-right patterning in the lateral plate mesoderm. In addition,
dmrt2a/terra is necessary for symmetric somite formation while dmrt2b regulates
somite differentiation impacting on slow muscle development. One dmrt2 gene is
also expressed in the mouse embryo, where it is necessary for somite
differentiation but with an impact on axial skeleton development. However,
nothing was known about its role during left-right patterning in the lateral
plate mesoderm or in the symmetric synchronization of somite formation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using a dmrt2 mutant mouse line, we show that
this gene is not involved in symmetric somite formation and does not regulate the
laterality pathway that controls left-right asymmetric organ positioning. We
reveal that dmrt2a/terra is present in the zebrafish laterality organ, the
Kupffer's vesicle, while its homologue is excluded from the mouse equivalent
structure, the node. On the basis of evolutionary sub-functionalization and
neo-functionalization theories we discuss this absence of functional
conservation.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results show that the role of dmrt2 gene is not
conserved during zebrafish and mouse embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC3010978
PMID: 21203428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. BMC Cell Biol. 2010 Jun 4;11:39. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-11-39.

Heme and non-heme iron transporters in non-polarized and polarized cells.

Yanatori I(1), Tabuchi M, Kawai Y, Yasui Y, Akagi R, Kishi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Kawasaki Medical School, Okayama 701-0192,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Heme and non-heme iron from diet, and recycled iron from hemoglobin
are important products of the synthesis of iron-containing molecules. In excess, 
iron is potentially toxic because it can produce reactive oxygen species through 
the Fenton reaction. Humans can absorb, transport, store, and recycle iron
without an excretory system to remove excess iron. Two candidate heme
transporters and two iron transporters have been reported thus far. Heme
incorporated into cells is degraded by heme oxygenases (HOs), and the iron
product is reutilized by the body. To specify the processes of heme uptake and
degradation, and the reutilization of iron, we determined the subcellular
localizations of these transporters and HOs.
RESULTS: In this study, we analyzed the subcellular localizations of 2 isoenzymes
of HOs, 4 isoforms of divalent metal transporter 1 (DMT1), and 2 candidate heme
transporters--heme carrier protein 1 (HCP1) and heme responsive gene-1
(HRG-1)--in non-polarized and polarized cells. In non-polarized cells, HCP1,
HRG-1, and DMT1A-I are located in the plasma membrane. In polarized cells, they
show distinct localizations: HCP1 and DMT1A-I are located in the apical membrane,
whereas HRG-1 is located in the basolateral membrane and lysosome. 16Leu at
DMT1A-I N-terminal cytosolic domain was found to be crucial for plasma membrane
localization. HOs are located in smooth endoplasmic reticulum and colocalize with
NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase.
CONCLUSIONS: HCP1 and DMT1A-I are localized to the apical membrane, and HRG-1 to 
the basolateral membrane and lysosome. These findings suggest that HCP1 and
DMT1A-I have functions in the uptake of dietary heme and non-heme iron. HRG-1 can
transport endocytosed heme from the lysosome into the cytosol. These localization
studies support a model in which cytosolic heme can be degraded by HOs, and the
resulting iron is exported into tissue fluids via the iron transporter
ferroportin 1, which is expressed in the basolateral membrane in enterocytes or
in the plasma membrane in macrophages. The liberated iron is transported by
transferrin and reutilized for hemoglobin synthesis in the erythroid system.

PMCID: PMC3224662
PMID: 20525315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. PLoS One. 2010 May 18;5(5):e10696. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010696.

Pathway signature and cellular differentiation in clear cell renal cell
carcinoma.

Tun HW(1), Marlow LA, von Roemeling CA, Cooper SJ, Kreinest P, Wu K, Luxon BA,
Sinha M, Anastasiadis PZ, Copland JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida, United 
States of America.

BACKGROUND: Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most common kidney
cancer. The purpose of this study is to define a biological pathway signature and
a cellular differentiation program in ccRCC.
METHODOLOGY: We performed gene expression profiling of early-stage ccRCC and
patient-matched normal renal tissue using Affymetrix HG-U133a and HG-U133b
GeneChips combined with a comprehensive bioinformatic analyses, including pathway
analysis. The results were validated by real time PCR and IHC on two independent 
sample sets. Cellular differentiation experiments were performed on ccRCC cell
lines and their matched normal renal epithelial cells, in differentiation media, 
to determine their mesenchymal differentiation potential.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We identified a unique pathway signature with three major
biological alterations-loss of normal renal function, down-regulated metabolism, 
and immune activation-which revealed an adipogenic gene expression signature
linked to the hallmark lipid-laden clear cell morphology of ccRCC. Culturing
normal renal and ccRCC cells in differentiation media showed that only ccRCC
cells were induced to undergo adipogenic and, surprisingly, osteogenic
differentiation. A gene expression signature consistent with epithelial
mesenchymal transition (EMT) was identified for ccRCC. We revealed significant
down-regulation of four developmental transcription factors (GATA3, TFCP2L1,
TFAP2B, DMRT2) that are important for normal renal development.
CONCLUSIONS: ccRCC is characterized by a lack of epithelial differentiation,
mesenchymal/adipogenic transdifferentiation, and pluripotent mesenchymal stem
cell-like differentiation capacity in vitro. We suggest that down-regulation of
developmental transcription factors may mediate the aberrant differentiation in
ccRCC. We propose a model in which normal renal epithelial cells undergo
dedifferentiation, EMT, and adipogenic transdifferentiation, resulting in ccRCC. 
Because ccRCC cells grown in adipogenic media regain the characteristic ccRCC
phenotype, we have identified a new in vitro ccRCC cell model more resembling
ccRCC tumor morphology.

PMCID: PMC2872663
PMID: 20502531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS Genet. 2010 Apr 1;6(4):e1000897. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000897.

A Pax3/Dmrt2/Myf5 regulatory cascade functions at the onset of myogenesis.

Sato T(1), Rocancourt D, Marques L, Thorsteinsdóttir S, Buckingham M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Unité de Recherche Associée 2578, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

All skeletal muscle progenitor cells in the body derive from the dermomyotome,
the dorsal epithelial domain of developing somites. These multipotent stem cells 
express Pax3, and this expression is maintained in the myogenic lineage where
Pax3 plays an important role. Identification of Pax3 targets is therefore
important for understanding the mechanisms that underlie the onset of myogenesis.
In a microarray screen of Pax3-GFP sorted cells, with analysis on Pax3 gain and
loss of function genetic backgrounds, we identify Dmrt2, expressed in the
dermomyotome, as a Pax3 target. In vitro gel shift analysis and chromatin
immunoprecipitation with in vivo extracts show that Pax3 binds to a conserved 286
bp sequence, situated at -18 kb from Dmrt2. This sequence directs reporter
transgene expression to the somite, and this is severely affected when the Pax3
site is mutated in the context of the locus. In Dmrt2 mutant embryos, somite
maturation is perturbed and the skeletal muscle of the myotome is abnormal. We
now report that the onset of myogenesis is also affected. This depends on
activation, in the epaxial dermomyotome, of the myogenic determination gene,
Myf5, through its early epaxial enhancer. This sequence contains sites that bind 
Dmrt2, which belongs to the DM class of DNA-binding proteins. Mutation of these
sites compromises activity of the enhancer in transgenic embryos where the
reporter transgene is under the control of the Myf5 epaxial enhancer.
Transactivation of this site by Dmrt2 is demonstrated in vitro, and conditional
overexpression of Dmrt2 in Pax3 expressing cells in the somite confirms the role 
of this factor in the activation of Myf5. These results reveal a novel genetic
network, comprising a Pax3/Dmrt2/Myf5 regulatory cascade that operates in stem
cells of the epaxial dermomyotome to initiate skeletal muscle formation.

PMCID: PMC2848553
PMID: 20368965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. An Pediatr (Barc). 2010 Mar;72(3):210-4. doi: 10.1016/j.anpedi.2009.10.018. Epub 
2010 Feb 6.

[Chromosome 9P deletion: Gonadal dysgenesis associated with mental retardation
and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum: A contiguous gene syndrome?].

[Article in Spanish]

Climent Alcalá FJ(1), Molina Rodríguez MA, González Casado I, Osona Bris L,
Salamanca Fresno L, Guerrero-Fernández J, Martínez-Frías ML, Gracia Bouthelier R.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, España. fjcliment@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Many genes are involved in testicular differentiation. The
alterations of these genes are responsible for sexual differentiation disorders
with 46 XY karyotype.
CASE: We report the case of a newborn who had an interscrotal hypospadias,
palpable gonads and hypoplastic penis. Karyotype 46 XY. Abdominal ultrasound
revealed testes and absence of Müllerian remnants. There was a good response to
the short gonadotrophin test. At one year he had signs of psychomotor retardation
and hypotonia. The magnetic resonance revealed frontal-temporal atrophy and a
decrease in the corpus callosum. Testicular biopsy was compatible with gonadal
dysgenesis. A preoperative cystography showed a vaginal remnant. Due to the
presence of a sexual differentiation disorder, psychomotor retardation and facial
dysmorphism, we requested a high-resolution karyotype: deletion 46, XY, del (9p) 
(p23-pter). Ish tel (9p-).
DISCUSSION: Many genes are involved in testicular differentiation, some of which 
also affect the development of other tissues. In the short arm of chromosome 9,
two genes, DMRT1 and DMRT2, are involved in sexual differentiation. Their
alterations have also been described as causing mental retardation. In the
evaluation of 46,XY disorders of sex differentiation, the accompanying signs are 
very important for guiding the genetic study.

2009 Asociación Española de Pediatría. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 20138017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2009;126(1-2):180-5. doi: 10.1159/000245918. Epub 2009 Dec 
9.

Comparative cytogenetic and molecular studies of DM domain genes in pig and
cattle.

Bratus A(1), Slota E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immuno- and Cytogenetics of Animals, National Research Institute
of Animal Production, Kraków, Poland. abratus @ izoo.krakow.pl

Despite great differences in the biology of sex determination, the DM domain
genes are thought to regulate sexual development in both invertebrates and
vertebrates. Although they seem to represent the first known example of the
conservation of metazoan sexual pathways, the structure-function relationships of
this gene family have not yet been clearly determined. Our previous and current
studies on the DMRT (Doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor) gene
cluster, DMRT1, DMRT2, DMRT3, in pig and cattle, have revealed conserved linkage 
to bovine (BTA8q17) and swine (SSC1q21) autosomes. However, the DMRT cluster
seems to harbour the genes in different orders in both cattle (Entrez database)
and pig (IMpRH map), compared to other vertebrates investigated so far. Moreover,
we found that expression of DMRT1 (considered as the testicular regulator so far)
is not restricted to gonads in adult animals. Beside ovary and testis, DMRT1
expression was detectable in swine kidney and bovine liver, heart, skeletal
muscle, kidney, lung, spleen and showed no differences between the sexes. Swine
and bovine DMRT3 expression was strongly restricted to the adult testis, while
DMRT2 homologues have a wider expression pattern, as occurs in other mammals. The
significance of this expression pattern of DMRT genes in adult pig and cattle
remains unclear. It might shed new light on mammalian DM domain genes evolution
and livestock intersexuality.

(c) 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20016168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 30;4(9):e7261. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007261.

Fish-specific duplicated dmrt2b contributes to a divergent function through
Hedgehog pathway and maintains left-right asymmetry establishment function.

Liu S(1), Li Z, Gui JF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Graduate School of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Wuhan, China.

Gene duplication is thought to provide raw material for functional divergence and
innovation. Fish-specific dmrt2b has been identified as a duplicated gene of the 
dmrt2a/terra in fish genomes, but its function has remained unclear. Here we
reveal that Dmrt2b knockdown zebrafish embryos display a downward tail curvature 
and have U-shaped somites. Then, we demonstrate that Dmrt2b contributes to a
divergent function in somitogenesis through Hedgehog pathway, because Dmrt2b
knockdown reduces target gene expression of Hedgehog signaling, and also impairs 
slow muscle development and neural tube patterning through Hedgehog signaling.
Moreover, the Dmrt2b morphants display defects in heart and visceral organ
asymmetry, and, some lateral-plate mesoderm (LPM) markers expressed in left side 
are randomized. Together, these data indicate that fish-specific duplicated
dmrt2b contributes to a divergent function in somitogenesis through Hedgehog
pathway and maintains the common function for left-right asymmetry establishment.

PMCID: PMC2749440
PMID: 19789708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2009;125(2):81-6. doi: 10.1159/000227830. Epub 2009 Aug 31.

The 9p24.3 breakpoint of a constitutional t(6;9)(p12;p24) in a patient with
chronic lymphocytic leukemia maps close to the putative promoter region of the
DMRT2 gene.

Rüssel J(1), Dutta U, Wand D, Schlote D, Hansmann I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik und Medizinische Biologie, Martin-Luther-Universität
Halle-Wittenberg, Halle/Saale, Germany.

B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) is a very common hematological
malignancy. Although several alterations in different loci have been identified
and established as prognostic factors the pathogenetic cascade remains obscure.
Here we give an account on a 71-year-old man with B-CLL and a translocation
t(6;9) in his diagnostic bone marrow. Subsequent chromosome analysis of his blood
lymphocytes revealed a constitutional karyotype 46,XY,t(6;9) (p12;p24) that has
not been previously reported. Seeking for gene disruption correlated with the
B-CLL we precisely mapped both breakpoints by fluorescence in situ hybridization 
(FISH) analysis with chromosome-specific bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)
clones and their long-range polymerase chain reaction (LRPCR) subfragments. An
11-kb LRPCR subfragment derived from RP11-399A15 was found to span the breakpoint
at 6p12.1. FISH analysis with a 12-kb LRPCR fragment derived from RP11-147I11
which overlaps with RP11-110M16 as well as with a cDNA for DMRT2 (doublesex and
mab-3 related transcription factor 2) maps the 9p24.3 breakpoint maximum 10 kb
upstream from DMRT2. In silico analysis of the transcripts within the vicinity of
the breakpoints revealed that the translocation does not disrupt any known genes 
but could affect the putative DMRT2 promoter. Long range effects on gene
expression cannot be excluded so far.

(c) 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19729909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Biochimie. 2008 Jun;90(6):878-87. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2008.02.021. Epub 2008
Mar 4.

Fish specific duplication of Dmrt2: characterization of zebrafish Dmrt2b.

Zhou X(1), Li Q, Lu H, Chen H, Guo Y, Cheng H, Zhou R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Center for Developmental Biology, College of Life
Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, PR China.

The protein families with a conserved zinc finger-like DNA binding DM domain are 
putative transcription factors related to the sexual regulator Dsx of Drosophila 
and Mab-3 of Caenorhabditis elegans. Although several members have been cloned,
there are still other members need to be identified, and origin and evolution of 
the gene family also remain unclear. We report here cloning, expression and
synteny analysis of a duplicated copy of zebrafish Dmrt2a gene, the Dmrt2b which 
is fish specific, whereas Dmrt2a exists in all vertebrates. During embryogenesis,
the Dmrt2b expression increased gradually from shield stage to hatching stage,
and mainly localized in branchial arches from 24 hpf to 40 hpf, indicating that
it has a potential role in the development of branchial arches. The duplicated
Dmrt2b and Dmrt2a with structural variation and expression diversification during
development revealed that a process of functional diploidization of gene function
occurred during zebrafish lineage. DNA binding experiment indicated that Dmrt2b
recognized similar DNA sequences to those of both DSX and MAB-3, indicating a
conserved regulatory function. Synteny analysis among chromosomes containing
Dmrt2a and Dmrt2b showed that zebrafish Dmrt2b and at least nine genes on
chromosome 6 have respective homologues on chromosome 5 containing Dmrt2a.
Further synteny search from genome information showed that Dmrt2b and its
neighborhood existed only in the genome of teleosts. Dmrt2a and Dmrt2b were
duplicated from the duplication event, which might be part of the third genome
duplication, occurred during the evolution of ray-finned fishes, probably before 
the emergence of osteichthyes around 350 Myr. The duplicated Dmrt2b and Dmrt2a
with structural variation and expression diversification suggested their diverse 
roles: Dmrt2b in specification of branchial arches while Dmrt2a in somitogenesis.
These analyses undoubtedly help understanding functional divergence and evolution
of the DM genes following gene duplication in fishes.

PMID: 18358846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Comp Med. 2007 Oct;57(5):460-8.

Dmrt2 and Pax3 double-knockout mice show severe defects in embryonic myogenesis.

Seo KW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA. kwangwons@yahoo.com

Myogenesis is one of the critical developmental processes in mammals. Several
transcription factors from the dermomyotome affect embryonic myogenesis. Among
these, Dmrt2 and Pax3 were tested for genetic and functional interactions during 
embryonic myogenesis by evaluating myogenin and desmin expression patterns in
Dmrt2-Pax3 mutant mouse embryos. In doubly homozygous mutant embryos, myogenin
expression was reduced, and the expression pattern was altered dramatically. In
Pax3-knockout mouse embryos, the pattern of Dmrt2 expression was altered,
suggesting that Pax3 is important in maintaining the epaxial dermomyotome. Even
though Pax3 and Dmrt2 are expressed in similar tissue- and
developmental-stage-specific manners during dermomyotomal development, they
appear to have independent roles in mammalian myogenesis. The processes
characteristic of embryonic myogenesis are similar to those occurring during
muscle regeneration in adults. Therefore, these results may provide insight into 
the pathogenesis of innate muscular dystrophy and may lead to the development of 
drugs to promote muscle repair after injury.

PMID: 17974128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Hum Reprod. 2007 Sep;13(9):685-9. Epub 2007 Jul 20.

Association of deletion 9p, 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis and autistic spectrum
disorder.

Vinci G(1), Chantot-Bastaraud S, El Houate B, Lortat-Jacob S, Brauner R,
McElreavey K.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction, Fertility and Populations, Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 
75724, Paris Cedex 15, France.

Deletions of distal chromosome 9p24 are often associated with 46,XY gonadal
dysgenesis and, depending on the extent of the deletion, the monosomy 9p
syndrome. We have previously noted that some cases of 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis
carry a 9p deletion and exhibit behavioural problems consistent with autistic
spectrum disorder. These cases had a small terminal deletion of 9p with limited
or no somatic anomalies that are characteristic of the monosomy 9p syndrome.
Here, we present a new case of 46,XY partial gonadal dysgenesis and autistic
spectrum disorder associated with a de novo deletion of 9p24 that was detected by
ultra-high resolution oligo microarray comparative genomic hybridization. The
deletion included the candidate sex-determining genes in the region DMRT1 and
DMRT3. These data suggest that a gene responsible for autistic spectrum disorder 
is located within 9p24. It remains to be determined if the gonadal dysgenesis and
autistic spectrum disorder are caused by a single gene or if they are caused by
distinct genetic entities at 9p24.

PMID: 17644778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Zoolog Sci. 2007 Jan;24(1):95-9.

Expression of DMRT genes in the gonads of Rana rugosa during sex determination.

Matsushita Y(1), Oshima Y, Nakamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Education and Integrated Arts and Sciences, 
Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan,

Sex is determined by various transcription factors. Dmrt1, a gene that contains
the DM domain (Doublesex/Mab-3 DNA-binding motif), is known to be one of the
critical factors required for testicular development in vertebrates. Recently,
other DM domain-containing genes (DMRT genes) were isolated in mice and fish. In 
mice, three of the seven known DMRT genes are expressed in the embryonic gonad.
In amphibians, however, only Dmrt1 and Dmrt4 have been cloned. To clarify the
role(s) of DMRT genes in sex determination in vertebrates, the molecular cloning 
of amphibian DMRT genes would be very helpful. In this study, we isolated Dmrt2, 
-3, and -5 from the frog Rana rugosa and analyzed by RT-PCR their expression
during sex determination. The analysis revealed that all three genes are
expressed in the developing gonad/mesonephros complex during sex determination
with no dimorphism. The results suggest that Dmrt2, -3, and -5 may be involved in
sexual development in R. rugosa and that they may function in both testicular and
ovarian differentiation.

PMID: 17409722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Hered. 2006 Nov-Dec;97(6):541-8. Epub 2006 Nov 29.

Tuatara (Sphenodon) genomics: BAC library construction, sequence survey, and
application to the DMRT gene family.

Wang Z(1), Miyake T, Edwards SV, Amemiya CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
zhenshan@u.washington.edu

The tuatara (Sphenodon punctatus) is of "extraordinary biological interest" as
the most distinctive surviving reptilian lineage (Rhyncocephalia) in the world.
To provide a genomic resource for an understanding of genome evolution in
reptiles, and as part of a larger project to produce genomic resources for
various reptiles (evogen.jgi.doe.gov/second_levels/BACs/our_libraries.html), a
large-insert bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) library from a male tuatara
was constructed. The library consists of 215 424 individual clones whose average 
insert size was empirically determined to be 145 kb, yielding a genomic coverage 
of approximately 6.3x. A BAC-end sequencing analysis of 121 420 bp of sequence
revealed a genomic GC content of 46.8%, among the highest observed thus far for
vertebrates, and identified several short interspersed repetitive elements
(mammalian interspersed repeat-type repeats) and long interspersed repetitive
elements, including chicken repeat 1 element. Finally, as a quality control
measure the arrayed library was screened with probes corresponding to 2 conserved
noncoding regions of the candidate sex-determining gene DMRT1 and the DM domain
of the related DMRT2 gene. A deep coverage contig spanning nearly 300 kb was
generated, supporting the deep coverage and utility of the library for exploring 
tuatara genomics.

PMID: 17135461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. FEBS Lett. 2006 Nov 27;580(27):6442-6. Epub 2006 Nov 7.

Mice deficient in Dmrt7 show infertility with spermatogenic arrest at pachytene
stage.

Kawamata M(1), Nishimori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Agriculture, Tohoku
University, Sendai 981-8555, Japan.

Genes including DM domain regulate sexual development in diverse metazoan phyla. 
One of these genes, Dmrt7, was expressed only in testes of adult mice. To
determine the role of Dmrt7 in mice, we generated Dmrt7-knockout mice (Dmrt7-/-).
Although the Dmrt7-/- showed normal growth, null males were infertile. No sperm
was detected in the epididymis of Dmrt7-/- adult males. Absence of spermatids in 
a histological analysis, decreased expression of Ccna1 mRNA and the accumulation 
of SCP3-positive spermatocytes showed the arrest of spermatogenesis at the
pachytene stage in the Dmrt7-knockout mice.

PMID: 17098235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Dec;26(23):8984-91. Epub 2006 Sep 18.

Mice mutant in the DM domain gene Dmrt4 are viable and fertile but have
polyovular follicles.

Balciuniene J(1), Bardwell VJ, Zarkower D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics Cell Biology and Development, 6-160 Jackson Hall, 321
Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Proteins containing the DM domain, a zinc finger-like DNA binding motif, have
been implicated in sexual differentiation in diverse metazoan organisms. Of seven
mammalian DM domain genes, only Dmrt1 and Dmrt2 have been functionally analyzed. 
Here, we report expression analysis and targeted disruption of Dmrt4 (also called
DmrtA1) in the mouse. Dmrt4 is widely expressed during embryonic and postnatal
development. However, we find that mice homozygous for a putative null mutation
in Dmrt4 develop essentially normally, undergo full sexual differentiation in
both sexes, and are fertile. We observed two potential mutant phenotypes in Dmrt4
mutant mice. First, ovaries of most mutant females have polyovular follicles,
suggesting a role in folliculogenesis. Second, 25% of mutant males consistently
exhibited copulatory behavior toward other males. We also tested potential
redundancy between Dmrt4 and two other gonadally expressed DM domain genes, Dmrt1
and Dmrt7. We observed no enhancement of gonadal phenotypes in the double
mutants, suggesting that these genes function independently in gonadal
development.

PMCID: PMC1636805
PMID: 16982677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Genomics. 2007 Jan;89(1):10-21. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

DMRT gene cluster analysis in the platypus: new insights into genomic
organization and regulatory regions.

El-Mogharbel N(1), Wakefield M, Deakin JE, Tsend-Ayush E, Grützner F, Alsop A,
Ezaz T, Marshall Graves JA.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Genomics Group, Research School of Biological Sciences, Australian
National University, P.O. Box 475, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia.
nisrine.el-mogharbel@anu.edu.au

We isolated and characterized a cluster of platypus DMRT genes and compared their
arrangement, location, and sequence across vertebrates. The DMRT gene cluster on 
human 9p24.3 harbors, in order, DMRT1, DMRT3, and DMRT2, which share a DM domain.
DMRT1 is highly conserved and involved in sexual development in vertebrates, and 
deletions in this region cause sex reversal in humans. Sequence comparisons of
DMRT genes between species have been valuable in identifying exons, control
regions, and conserved nongenic regions (CNGs). The addition of platypus
sequences is expected to be particularly valuable, since monotremes fill a gap in
the vertebrate genome coverage. We therefore isolated and fully sequenced
platypus BAC clones containing DMRT3 and DMRT2 as well as DMRT1 and then
generated multispecies alignments and ran prediction programs followed by
experimental verification to annotate this gene cluster. We found that the three 
genes have 58-66% identity to their human orthologues, lie in the same order as
in other vertebrates, and colocate on 1 of the 10 platypus sex chromosomes, X5.
We also predict that optimal annotation of the newly sequenced platypus genome
will be challenging. The analysis of platypus sequence revealed differences in
structure and sequence of the DMRT gene cluster. Multispecies comparison was
particularly effective for detecting CNGs, revealing several novel potential
regulatory regions within DMRT3 and DMRT2 as well as DMRT1. RT-PCR indicated that
platypus DMRT1 and DMRT3 are expressed specifically in the adult testis (and not 
ovary), but DMRT2 has a wider expression profile, as it does for other mammals.
The platypus DMRT1 expression pattern, and its location on an X chromosome,
suggests an involvement in monotreme sexual development.

PMID: 16962738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Genetics. 2006 Nov;174(3):1573-81. Epub 2006 Sep 1.

Amh and Dmrta2 genes map to tilapia (Oreochromis spp.) linkage group 23 within
quantitative trait locus regions for sex determination.

Shirak A(1), Seroussi E, Cnaani A, Howe AE, Domokhovsky R, Zilberman N, Kocher
TD, Hulata G, Ron M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Agricultural Research Organization, Volcani
Center, Bet Dagan, Israel.

Recent studies have revealed that the major genes of the mammalian sex
determination pathway are also involved in sex determination of fish. Several
studies have reported QTL in various species and strains of tilapia, regions
contributing to sex determination have been identified on linkage groups 1, 3,
and 23. Genes contributing to sex-specific mortality have been detected on
linkage groups 2, 6, and 23. To test whether the same genes might control sex
determination in mammals and fishes, we mapped 11 genes that are considered
putative master key regulators of sex determination: Amh, Cyp19, Dax1, Dmrt2,
Dmrta2, Fhl3l, Foxl2, Ixl, Lhx9, Sf1, and Sox8. We identified polymorphisms in
noncoding regions of these genes and genotyped these sites for 90 individuals of 
an F2 mapping family. Mapping of Dax1 joined LG16 and LG21 into a single linkage 
group. The Amh and Dmrta2 genes were mapped to two distinct regions of LG23. The 
Amh gene was mapped 5 cM from UNH879 within a QTL region for sex determination
and 2 cM from UNH216 within a QTL region for sex-specific mortality. Dmrta2 was
mapped 4 cM from UNH848 within another QTL region for sex determination. Cyp19
was mapped to LG1 far from a previously reported QTL region for sex determination
on this chromosome. Seven other candidate genes mapped to LG4, -11, -12, -14, and
-17.

PMCID: PMC1667067
PMID: 16951079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Dev Biol. 2006 Feb 1;290(1):200-10. Epub 2006 Jan 4.

Targeted disruption of the DM domain containing transcription factor Dmrt2
reveals an essential role in somite patterning.

Seo KW(1), Wang Y, Kokubo H, Kettlewell JR, Zarkower DA, Johnson RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 77030, USA.

Dmrt2 is expressed in the dermomyotome of developing vertebrate somites. To
determine the role of Dmrt2 during mouse embryonic development, we generated a
null mutation of Dmrt2 via homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells.
Dmrt2 heterozygous mice derived from these cells are phenotypically normal.
However, Dmrt2 homozygotes die soon after birth. The cause of death is likely due
to abnormal rib and sternal development, leading to an inability to breathe. Loss
of Dmrt2 leads to embryonic somite patterning defects, first evidenced at
embryonic day (E) 10.5 and more pronounced by E11.5. Notably, both the
dermomyotome and myotome fail to adopt a normal epithelial morphology in the
absence of Dmrt2. Accompanying these morphological defects are alterations in the
expression patterns of dermomyotomal and myotomal transcription factors including
Pax3, Paraxis, Myf5, myogenin, Mrf4 and MyoD. Despite these defects, embryos
harvested from E13.5 onwards exhibited relatively normal muscle pattern and mass,
suggesting that early myotomal defects are corrected by a Dmrt2-independent
mechanism. Taken together, our results define an essential function for Dmrt2 in 
somite development and provide evidence that DM domain genes have been co-opted
into other critical developmental pathways distinct from that of sex
determination or differentiation.

PMID: 16387292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Mol Reprod Dev. 2006 Mar;73(3):288-97.

Quantitative expression of candidate genes for developmental competence in bovine
two-cell embryos.

Dode MA(1), Dufort I, Massicotte L, Sirard MA.

Author information: 
(1)Embrapa Recursos Genéticos e Biotecnologia, Brasília, DF, Brazil.

Only competent oocytes are able to undergo complete maturation and normal
embryonic development. Therefore, the identification of genes that are
differentially expressed in competent oocytes would contribute to our
understanding of the factors controlling competency. It is well known that time
of cleavage after insemination in vitro is highly correlated with embryonic
developmental potential and this can be used to distinguish between oocytes of
different quality. The main objective of this study was to identify genes
associated with competency and rapid cleavage. We examined the expression of 16
candidate genes (IDH, YEAF Cathepsin B, RAD50, TCP1 NCOR1, HUEL, STK6, ZNF403,
AOP2, EEF1A1, Hsp90, Hsp40, AKR1B1, PGRMC1, and DMRT2) in early and late cleaving
embryos, by real time PCR. These transcripts were derived from previous study in 
our laboratory using cDNA coming from a suppressive subtraction hybridization
(SSH) between early cleaving versus late cleaving embryos spotted on a microarray
slide. Of the 16 genes evaluated, 3 (IDH, YEAF, and H2A) showed statistical
difference (P < 0.05) between early and late cleaving embryos. However, some
genes such as Cathepsin B (P = 0.0677), RAD50 (P = 0.0899), and TCP1 (P = 0.0824)
tended to show higher expression in the early cleaving than in the late cleaving 
embryo. In conclusion, we have identified three genes (YEAF, IDH, H2A) that were 
differentially expressed in the early cleaving embryos, and their expression can 
be associated with greater developmental competence.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16362969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Nat Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;7(9):918-20.

terra is a left-right asymmetry gene required for left-right synchronization of
the segmentation clock.

Saúde L(1), Lourenço R, Gonçalves A, Palmeirim I.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Centro de Biologia do Desenvolvimento, Rua da
Quinta Grande, 6, 2780-156 Oeiras, Portugal. mlsaude@igc.gulbenkian.pt

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2005 Nov;7(11):1147.

To establish the vertebrate body plan, it is fundamental to create left-right
asymmetry in the lateral-plate mesoderm to correctly position the organs.
However, it is also crucial to maintain symmetry between the left and the right
sides of the presomitic mesoderm, ensuring the allocation of symmetrical body
structures, such as the axial skeleton and skeletal muscles. Here, we show that
terra is an early left-sided expressed gene that links left-right patterning with
bilateral synchronization of the segmentation clock.

PMID: 16136187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Prenat Diagn. 2005 Oct;25(10):945-8.

Prenatal diagnosis of del(9)(p24): a sex reverse case.

Privitera O(1), Vessecchia G, Bernasconi B, Bettio D, Stioui S, Giordano G.

Author information: 
(1)AO Ospedale Civile di Legnano, Stabilimento di Legnano, UO Laboratorio
Analisi-Sezione di Citogenetica.

BACKGROUND: We report on a fetus with sex reversal and del(9)(p24) consequent to 
a malsegregation of a maternal balanced complex translocation involving
chromosomes 7, 9 and 11.
METHODS: Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed in order to
verify the presence of the SRY gene and the absence of DMRT1 and DMRT2 genes
located in 9p24.3 region and frequently associated with sex reversal.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The prenatal karyotype revealed an unbalanced male
fetus. The postmortem examination showed a malformed fetus with female external
genitalia. Lack of DMRT1-2 genes established by FISH.

Copyright 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 16086437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Yi Chuan Xue Bao. 2004 Oct;31(10):1103-8.

[Phylogenetic tree and synteny of DMRT genes family of vertebrates].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo YQ(1), Cheng HH, Gao S, Zhou RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Biology, College of Life Sciences, Whuhan University,
Wuhan 430072, China. guoyqmq@public.wh.hb.cn

Vertebrates contain a family of genes related to the Drosophila doublesex and C. 
elegans mab-3 genes, which encode transcription factors including a DNA-binding
motif, DM domain. Evolution and function of different DMRT genes of vertebrates
have not been understood yet,although some DM proteins are involved in sex
determination, sexual differentiation and early embryonic development among
different phyla. By genomic analysis of zebrafish and rat DMRT genes, all protein
sequences of the vertebrate DMRTs were searched from gene databases and aligned. 
Phylogenetic tree of all these DMRT genes was reconstructed and evaluated by
Bootstrap method. These DMRT genes were clustered into seven subfamilies. Results
from analysis of gene structure and cluster organization of DMRT genes showed
that synteny of DMRT genes of vertebrates were highly conserved among human,
mouse, rat, fugu, medaka and zebrafish, with two syntenic groups, DMRT 1
approximately 3 and DMRT 5 approximately 6.

PMID: 15552045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Nov 1;130A(4):415-23.

Three patients with 9p deletions including DMRT1 and DMRT2: a girl with XY
complement, bilateral ovotestes, and extreme growth retardation, and two XX
females with normal pubertal development.

Ounap K(1), Uibo O, Zordania R, Kiho L, Ilus T, Oiglane-Shlik E, Bartsch O.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Center, United Laboratories, Tartu University Clinics, 3 Oru 
Street, Tartu 51005, Estonia. katrin.ounap@kliinikum.ee

It is well documented that distal 9p monosomy can be associated with XY sex
reversal. Recently, the possibility of DMRT1 and/or DMRT2 (the genes for
doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 1 and 2) being the sex
determining genes(s) at 9p has been raised. DMRT1 and DMRT2 map near the 9p
telomere, distal of marker D9S1779. We describe here three unrelated females with
distal 9p monosomy, one with XY complement and two with XX complements. In each
individual, fluorescent in situ hybridization predicted the loss of the DMRT
genes. Patient 1, an XY individual with monosomy 9pter --> p24.1 approximately
24.2 and trisomy 7q32 --> qter had normal female external genitalia, a blind
ending vagina, no uterus, a Fallopian tube on the right, and bilateral ovotestes 
with primitive ovarian tissue. She also had extreme growth retardation. Around 80
cases of distal 9p monosomy have been reported previously, but there has been no 
report of ovotestes or gonads comprising ovarian tissue in a XY patient with 9p
deletion. Findings in Patient 1 suggest that the phenotypic spectrum of the
heterozygous DMRT deletion may include true hermaphroditism. Patients 2 and 3
were 12- and 14-year-old females with XX complements, normal external genitalia, 
and normal pubertal development. Patient 2 had pure monosomy 9pter --> p23 and
Patient 3 had monosomy 9pter --> p22.3 approximately 23 combined with trisomy
3pter --> p23 approximately 24. To date, detailed reports on the gonadal status
of XX 9p-females have been limited to prepubertal girls. Patients 2 and 3 are the
first females reported to have distal 9p monosomy and a normal puberty.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15481033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Yi Chuan Xue Bao. 2004 May;31(5):468-73.

[Cloning of four members of giant panda Dmrt genes].

[Article in Chinese]

Shui Y(1), Yu HS, Xia LX, Guo YQ, Cheng HH, Zhou RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Biology, College of Life Sciences, Whuhan University,
Wuhan 430072, China. shuiyee@hotmail.com

Sex determining genes Mab-3 of C. elegans and Doublesex of Drosophila contain a
common DNA binding motif called DM (Doublesex and Mab-3) domain, both of which
regulate similar aspects of sexual development. Human Doublesex-related gene
DMRT1 has been identified, which also contains the conserved DM-related
DNA-binding domain and plays an essential role in gonadal differentiation. We
amplified genomic DNA of the giant panda using the DM degenerate primers and
detected two bands, approximately 140 bp and 250 bp. After cloned into T-easy
vector and sequenced, four sequences showed high homology with the DM domain.
Amino acid sequence of the first clone is 100% identical with the Dmrt1 of human,
mouse and pig, hence we named it as pDmrt1. The second clone is 96% identical
with human DMRTB1, and the third one 100% with the Dmrt3 of mouse and medaka,
which were named as pDmrtb1 and pDmrt3 respectively. The last sequence contains
an intron of 116 bp within the DM domain, which encodes an amino acid sequence
100% identical with human DMRTC2, accordingly we named it as pDmrtc2. Based on
similarities of amino acid sequences of the DM domain, Dmrt protein sequences
from human, mouse and giant panda were included in a phylogenetic tree. They
revealed seven distinct subgroups: Dmrt1, Dmrt2, Dmrt3, Dmrt4 (DMRTA1), Dmrt5
(DMRTA2), Dmrt6 (DMRTB1) and Dmrt7 (DMRTC2). Our results further reveal the
unexpected complexity and the evolutionary conservation of the DM domain gene
family in both invertebrates and vertebrates.

PMID: 15478606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mech Dev. 2004 Jul;121(7-8):997-1005.

Developmentally regulated and non-sex-specific expression of autosomal dmrt genes
in embryos of the Medaka fish (Oryzias latipes).

Winkler C(1), Hornung U, Kondo M, Neuner C, Duschl J, Shima A, Schartl M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry I, Biocenter, University of Wuerzburg,
Wuerzburg, Germany. cwinkler@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de

The dmrtgene family of vertebrates comprises several transcription factors that
share a highly conserved DNA-binding domain, the DM domain. Like some of their
invertebrate counterparts, e.g. Drosophila doublesex (dsx) and the Caenorhabditis
elegans Mab3, several are implicated in sex determination and differentiation.
Thus far, dmrt genes represent the only factors involved in sexual development
that are conserved across phyla. In the teleost Medaka (Oryzias latipes), a
duplicated copy of dmrt1, designated dmrt1bY or dmy, has recently been postulated
to be the master regulator of male development in this species. Here, we have
analyzed the expression of four additional Medaka dmrt genes during embryonic and
larval development. In contrast to other vertebrates, the autosomally located
dmrt1a gene of Medaka is not expressed at detectable levels during embryogenesis.
On the other hand, dmrt2, dmrt3 and dmrt4 show highly restricted and
non-overlapping expression patterns during embryogenesis. While dmrt2 is
expressed in early somites, dmrt3 transcripts are found in dorsal interneurons
and dmrt4 is expressed in the developing olfactory system. Other than in mouse,
they do not show any sex specific expression and no transcription could be
detected in the early developing gonads. However, all four analyzed dmrt genes
share expression in the differentiating gonad of larvae and in adult testis.

PMID: 15210205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 Mar;3(1):77-82.

Sexually dimorphic expression of multiple doublesex-related genes in the
embryonic mouse gonad.

Kim S(1), Kettlewell JR, Anderson RC, Bardwell VJ, Zarkower D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

The only molecular similarity shown so far for sexual regulatory genes among
different phyla involves doublesex (dsx) of Drosophila, mab-3 and mab-23 of
Caenorhabditis elegans, and Dmrt1 of vertebrates. These genes encode DM domain
transcription factors (DM = dsx and mab-3) and are required for sexual
differentiation. In the case of dsx and mab-3, the two genes control analogous
aspects of sexual development, bind similar DNA sequences, and are capable of
functional substitution in vivo. All three phyla have multiple DM domain genes,
but it is unknown how many of these are involved in sexual development. Mammals, 
for example, have at least seven DM domain genes, but embryonic expression has
only been examined in detail for Dmrt1(dsx- and mab-3 related transcription
factor 1). We have identified additional murine DM domain genes and have examined
their expression in the mouse embryo, with emphasis on the developing gonad. At
least three murine DM domain genes in addition to Dmrt1 are expressed in the
embryonic gonad: Dmrt4 is expressed at similar levels in gonads of both sexes;
Dmrt3 is more highly expressed in males; and Dmrt7 is more highly expressed in
females. Expression of three other genes is low or absent in the embryonic gonad.
Two of these, Dmrt5 and Dmrt6, are expressed primarily in the brain, and the
third, Dmrt2, is expressed in presomitic mesoderm and developing somites. Our
data suggest that multiple DM domain genes may be involved in mammalian sexual
development, and that they may function in both testis and ovary development.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 12609607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Exp Zool. 2002 Apr 15;294(1):63-7.

A conserved family of doublesex-related genes from fishes.

Huang X(1), Cheng H, Guo Y, Liu L, Gui J, Zhou R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Center for Developmental Biology, College of Life
Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China.

The sex-determining gene Mab-3 of C. elegans and the doublesex gene of Drosophila
each contain a common DM domain and share a similar role. Human doublesex-related
gene DMRT1 also encodes a conserved DM-related DNA-binding domain. We present
here the amplification of a broad range of DM domain sequences from three fish
species using degenerate PCR. Our results reveal unexpected complexity of the DM 
domain gene family in vertebrates.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11932949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Genome Biol. 2001;2(12):RESEARCH0050. Epub 2001 Nov 14.

Computational prediction of membrane-tethered transcription factors.

Zupicich J(1), Brenner SE, Skarnes WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California at
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720-3200, USA. joelz@socrates.berkeley.edu

BACKGROUND: Sequestration of transcription factors in the membrane is emerging as
an important mechanism for the regulation of gene expression. A handful of
membrane-spanning transcription factors has been previously identified whose
access to the nucleus is regulated by proteolytic cleavage from the membrane. To 
investigate the existence of other transmembrane transcription factors, we
analyzed computationally all proteins in SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL for the combined
presence of a DNA-binding domain and a transmembrane segment.
RESULTS: Using Pfam hidden Markov models and four transmembrane-prediction
programs, we identified with high confidence 76 membrane-spanning transcription
factors in SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL. Analysis of the distribution of two proteins
predicted by our method, MTJ1 and DMRT2, confirmed their localization to
intracellular membrane compartments. Furthermore, elimination of the predicted
transmembrane segment led to nuclear localization for each of these proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis uncovered a wealth of predicted membrane-spanning
transcription factors that are structurally and taxonomically diverse, 56 of
which lack experimental annotation. Seventy-five of the proteins are modular in
structure, suggesting that a single proteolysis may be sufficient to liberate a
DNA-binding domain from the membrane. This study provides grounds for
investigations into the stimuli and mechanisms that release this intriguing class
of transcription factors from membranes.

PMCID: PMC64835
PMID: 11790253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Genomics. 2001 Sep;77(1-2):8-17.

Genomic organization and expression of the doublesex-related gene cluster in
vertebrates and detection of putative regulatory regions for DMRT1.

Brunner B(1), Hornung U, Shan Z, Nanda I, Kondo M, Zend-Ajusch E, Haaf T, Ropers 
HH, Shima A, Schmid M, Kalscheuer VM, Schartl M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

Genes related to the Drosophila melanogaster doublesex and Caenorhabditis elegans
mab-3 genes are conserved in human. They are identified by a DNA-binding homology
motif, the DM domain, and constitute a gene family (DMRTs). Unlike the
invertebrate genes, whose role in the sex-determination process is essentially
understood, the function of the different vertebrate DMRT genes is not as clear. 
Evidence has accumulated for the involvement of DMRT1 in male sex determination
and differentiation. DMRT2 (known as terra in zebrafish) seems to be a critical
factor for somitogenesis. To contribute to a better understanding of the function
of this important gene family, we have analyzed DMRT1, DMRT2, and DMRT3 from the 
genome model organism Fugu rubripes and the medakafish, a complementary model
organism for genetics and functional studies. We found conservation of synteny of
human chromosome 9 in F. rubripes and an identical gene cluster organization of
the DMRTs in both fish. Although expression analysis and gene linkage mapping in 
medaka exclude a function for any of the three genes in the primary step of male 
sex determination, comparison of F. rubripes and human sequences uncovered three 
putative regulatory regions that might have a role in more downstream events of
sex determination and human XY sex reversal.

PMID: 11543627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. FEBS Lett. 2001 Aug 10;503(1):25-9.

The nuclear localization signal of zebrafish terra is located within the DM
domain.

Zhang L(1), Hua Z, Ren J, Meng A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Developmental Biology, Department of Biological
Sciences and Biotechnology, National Laboratory of Protein Sciences of MOE,
Tsinghua University, 100084, Beijing, China.

Zebrafish Terra is a member of the DM domain-containing transcription factor
family and is involved in somitogenesis. The other known members of this family
play a role in sex differentiation across species from Caenorhabditis elegans to 
human. Using the green fluorescence protein-Terra fusion constructs, we have
identified the nuclear localization signal (NLS) of terra by transfecting human
HeLa cells. The terra NLS is located between the two intertwined zinc-binding
sites of the DNA-binding domain. However, the nuclear translocation of terra is
independent of the structure required for DNA binding. Mutational analysis
demonstrates that basic residues K77 and R78 within the DM domain are absolutely 
required for the translocation of Terra into the nuclei. Sequence comparison
discloses that the NLS of Terra is also present in the other known members of the
DM family, indicating the conservative nature of the NLS of this family during
evolution.

PMID: 11513848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Dev Biol. 2001 Jan 1;229(1):215-23.

Double-stranded RNA injection produces nonspecific defects in zebrafish.

Zhao Z(1), Cao Y, Li M, Meng A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Developmental Biology, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
100084, China.

We have investigated the ability of dsRNA to inhibit gene functions in zebrafish 
using sequences targeted to the maternal gene pouII-1, the transgene GFP, and an 
intron of the zebrafish gene terra. We found that embryos injected with all of
these dsRNAs at approximately 7.5 pg/embryo or higher had general growth arrest
during gastrulation and displayed various nonspecific defects at 24 h
postfertilization, although embryonic development was unaffected before the
midblastula stage. Reducing dsRNA concentration could alleviate the global
defects. Injection of GFP dsRNA (7.5-30 pg/embryo) did not inhibit GFP expression
in transgenic fish, although abnormal embryos were induced. Co-injection of GFP
mRNA with either GFP or non-GFP dsRNA caused reduction of GFP expression.
Whole-mount in situ hybridization clearly showed that embryos injected with dsRNA
degraded co-injected and endogenous mRNA without sequence specificity, indicating
that dsRNA has a nonspecific effect at the posttranscriptional level. It appears 
that RNAi is not a viable technique for studying gene function in zebrafish
embryos.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11133165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Sep;85(9):3094-100.

Sex-determining gene(s) on distal 9p: clinical and molecular studies in six
cases.

Muroya K(1), Okuyama T, Goishi K, Ogiso Y, Fukuda S, Kameyama J, Sato H, Suzuki
Y, Terasaki H, Gomyo H, Wakui K, Fukushima Y, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

We report on clinical and molecular findings in five karyotypic males (cases 1-5)
and one karyotypic female (case 6) with distal 9p monosomy. Cases 1-3 and 6 had
female external genitalia, case 4 showed ambiguous external genitalia, and case 5
exhibited male external genitalia with left cryptorchidism and right intrascrotal
testis. Gonadal explorations at gonadectomy in cases 3 and 4 revealed that case 3
had left streak gonad and right agonadism, and case 4 had bilateral hypoplastic
testes. Endocrine studies in cases 1-4 and 6 showed that cases 1, 3, and 6 had
definite primary hypogonadism, with basal FSH levels of 54, 39, and 41 IU/L,
respectively, whereas case 2 with severe malnutrition was unremarkable for the
baseline values, and case 4 had fairly good testicular function. Fluorescence in 
situ hybridization and microsatellite analyses demonstrated that all cases had
hemizygosity of the 9p sex-determining region distal to D9S1779, with loss of the
candidate sex-determining genes DMRT1 and DMRT2 from the abnormal chromosome 9.
Sequence analysis in cases 1-4 and 6 showed that they had normal sequences of
each exon of DMRT1 and the DM domain of DMRT2 on the normal chromosome 9, and
that cases 1-4 had normal SRY sequence. The results provide further support for
the presence of a sex-determining gene(s) on distal 9p and favor the possibility 
of DMRT1 and/or DMRT2 being the sex-determining gene(s). Furthermore, as
hemizygosity of the 9p sex-determining region was associated with a wide spectrum
of gonadogenesis from agonadism to testis formation in karyotypic males and with 
primary hypogonadism regardless of karyotypic sex, it is inferred that
haploinsufficiency of the 9p sex-determining gene(s) primarily hinders the
formation of indifferent gonad, leading to various degrees of defective testis
formation in karyotypic males and impaired ovary formation in karyotypic females.

PMID: 10999792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2000;89(3-4):252-7.

Sex-specific expression of an evolutionarily conserved male regulatory gene,
DMRT1, in birds.

Shan Z(1), Nanda I, Wang Y, Schmid M, Vortkamp A, Haaf T.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany.

Based on its Z-sex-chromosomal location and its structural homology to male
sexual regulatory factors in humans (DMRT1 and DMRT2), Drosophila (Dsx), and
Caenorhabditis elegans (Mab-3), chicken DMRT1 is an excellent candidate for a
testis-determining factor in birds. The data we present provide further strong
support for this hypothesis. By whole mount in situ hybridization chicken DMRT1
is expressed at higher levels in the male than in the female genital ridges
during early stages of embryogenesis. Its expression becomes testis-specific
after onset of sexual differentiation. Northern blot and RT PCR analysis showed
that in adult birds DMRT1 is expressed exclusively in the testis. We propose that
two gene dosages are required for testis formation in ZZ males, whereas
expression from a single Z chromosome in ZW females leads to female sexual
differentiation.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 10965136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Genomics. 2000 May 1;65(3):203-12.

A new submicroscopic deletion that refines the 9p region for sex reversal.

Calvari V(1), Bertini V, De Grandi A, Peverali G, Zuffardi O, Ferguson-Smith M,
Knudtzon J, Camerino G, Borsani G, Guioli S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento Patologia Umana ed Ereditaria, Università degli Studi di Pavia,
Italy.

Male to female sex reversal has been described in patients with deletions of
chromosome 9p, and a region critical for sex reversal has been localized to
p24.3, at the tip of the chromosome (TD9). It was proposed that the sex reversal 
may arise by haploinsufficiency for a gene localized to the minimum deletion. The
9p24.3 genes DMRT1 and DMRT2 are the favorite TD9 candidates to date, in virtue
of their sequence similarity to doublesex and mab-3, sexual regulators in
Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans, respectively. The hypothesis of sex
reversal by combined haploinsufficiency for the two genes was put forward to
explain the lack of mutations in either gene in XY sex-reversed females. Here we 
describe a XY sex-reversed patient carrying a novel 9p deletion that extends over
less than 700 kb of genomic DNA. This region defines the smallest interval for
sex reversal found to date. DMRT1 and DMRT2 map outside this region. Our data do 
not support the hypothesis of combined haploinsufficiency for DMRT1 and DMRT2.
Nevertheless, DMRT1 localizes very close to the deletion breakpoint and has a
pattern of expression compatible with a role in sex determination. It therefore
remains a candidate gene for 9p sex reversal.

PMID: 10857744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Genomics. 2000 Mar 1;64(2):179-86.

The human doublesex-related gene, DMRT2, is homologous to a gene involved in
somitogenesis and encodes a potential bicistronic transcript.

Ottolenghi C(1), Veitia R, Barbieri M, Fellous M, McElreavey K.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Immunogénétique humaine, INSERM U276, Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du
Docteur Roux, Paris, 75724, France.

Intense efforts are currently being pursued to identify autosomal genes
associated with 46,XY male-to-female sex reversal. The genes DMRT1 and 2 are
located on distal 9p, a region deleted in 46,XY sex-reversed patients. They are
considered excellent candidates because of their homology to regulators of sex
development in invertebrates. We present the genomic structure of DMRT2, showing 
that it generates several transcripts with distinct coding potential. In addition
to the previously reported 226-amino-acid protein-encoding transcript, we
describe other mRNA isoforms that are potentially bicistronic and are predicted
to encode an additional 328-amino-acid polypeptide. Finally, a stop
codon-containing exon (exon 4) can be skipped by alternative splicing and can
generate a transcript that is predicted to encode a fusion protein. The latter
shares 58% amino acid identity with a gene recently described in fish, termed
terra. Differences in expression pattern exist for DMRT2 mRNA isoforms among the 
human adult tissues tested, between adult tissues and human embryos, and between 
DMRT2 and DMRT1 during embryonic development. We failed to detect mutations by
sequencing of DMRT2 in a sample of 46,XY female patients. The interesting
structure of DMRT2 coupled to preliminary functional studies in fish showing that
terra is involved in somitogenesis suggests that validation or exclusion of this 
gene as a cause of sex reversal will require more in-depth investigations.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10729224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Genomics. 2000 Mar 1;64(2):170-8.

The region on 9p associated with 46,XY sex reversal contains several transcripts 
expressed in the urogenital system and a novel doublesex-related domain.

Ottolenghi C(1), Veitia R, Quintana-Murci L, Torchard D, Scapoli L,
Souleyreau-Therville N, Beckmann J, Fellous M, McElreavey K.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Immunogénétique humaine, INSERM U276, Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du
Docteur Roux, Paris, 75724, France.

Deletions of 9p have been associated with 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis, and the
smallest region of overlap has been mapped to the tip of chromosome 9. Two
candidate genes (DMRT1 and 2) have been found in the region. Despite intensive
mutation searches, no mutations have been detected in these genes. To gain
insights into the genomics of the region and to isolate other candidate genes for
the phenotype, we have constructed a P1 artificial chromosome (PAC)/bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) contig spanning over 500 kb and covering the
consensus critical region. We have analyzed the expression pattern of several
ESTs mapped or sublocalized within the framework of the contig. In addition, a
sample shotgun sequencing of a PAC containing the mentioned DM genes led to the
detection of novel transcripts displaying an expression pattern specific to
testis and kidney, consistent with a role in the development of the urogenital
system. One of them, expressed in adult testis and human embryos aged 4-5 weeks, 
encodes a potential polypeptide and is located immediately downstream of a
sequence capable of encoding a novel DM domain. The region was partially screened
for mutations in sex-reversed patients by Southern blot, sequencing, and FISH. No
mutations were found. Our results suggest that the critical region on 9p involved
in male-to-female sex reversal displays greater gene density and genomic
complexity than previously anticipated. Future investigations will include
functional and mutational studies of the novel transcripts mapped or sublocalized
within the critical region by this study as well as cloning efforts to isolate
additional candidate genes.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10729223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Jun;8(6):989-96.

A region of human chromosome 9p required for testis development contains two
genes related to known sexual regulators.

Raymond CS(1), Parker ED, Kettlewell JR, Brown LG, Page DC, Kusz K, Jaruzelska J,
Reinberg Y, Flejter WL, Bardwell VJ, Hirsch B, Zarkower D.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics Graduate Program, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

Deletion of the distal short arm of chromosome 9 (9p) has been reported in a
number of cases to be associated with gonadal dysgenesis and XY sex reversal,
suggesting that this region contains one or more genes required in two copies for
normal testis development. Recent studies have greatly narrowed the interval
containing this putative autosomal testis-determining gene(s) to the distal
portion of 9p24.3. We previously identified DMRT1, a human gene with sequence
similarity to genes that regulate the sexual development of nematodes and
insects. These genes contain a novel DNA-binding domain, which we named the DM
domain. DMRT1 maps to 9p24. 3 and in adults is expressed specifically in the
testis. We have investigated the possible role of DM domain genes in 9p sex
reversal. We identified a second DM domain gene, DMRT2, which also maps to
9p24.3. We found that point mutations in the coding region of DMRT1 and the DM
domain of DMRT2 are not frequent in XY females. We showed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis that both genes are deleted in the smallest reported
sex-reversing 9p deletion, suggesting that gonadal dysgenesis in 9p-deleted
individuals might be due to combined hemizygosity of DMRT1 and DMRT2.

PMID: 10332030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Development. 1999 Mar;126(6):1259-68.

A Drosophila doublesex-related gene, terra, is involved in somitogenesis in
vertebrates.

Meng A(1), Moore B, Tang H, Yuan B, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics and Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

The Drosophila doublesex (dsx) gene encodes a transcription factor that mediates 
sex determination. We describe the characterization of a novel zebrafish
zinc-finger gene, terra, which contains a DNA binding domain similar to that of
the Drosophila dsx gene. However, unlike dsx, terra is transiently expressed in
the presomitic mesoderm and newly formed somites. Expression of terra in
presomitic mesoderm is restricted to cells that lack expression of MyoD. In vivo,
terra expression is reduced by hedgehog but enhanced by BMP signals.
Overexpression of terra induces rapid apoptosis both in vitro and in vivo,
suggesting that a tight regulation of terra expression is required during
embryogenesis. Terra has both human and mouse homologs and is specifically
expressed in mouse somites. Taken together, our findings suggest that terra is a 
highly conserved protein that plays specific roles in early somitogenesis of
vertebrates.

PMID: 10021344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


