
1. Biomark Cancer. 2016 Mar 13;8:25-42. doi: 10.4137/BIC.S38394. eCollection 2016.

Novel Molecular Markers for Breast Cancer.

Inoue K(1), Fry EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Medical
Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC, USA.

The use of molecular biomarkers assures that breast cancer (BC) patients receive 
optimal treatment. Established biomarkers, such as estrogen receptor,
progesterone receptor, HER2, and Ki67, have been playing significant roles in the
subcategorization of BC to predict the prognosis and decide the specific therapy 
to each patient. Antihormonal therapy using 4-hydroxytamoxifen or aromatase
inhibitors have been employed in patients whose tumor cells express hormone
receptors, while monoclonal antibody to HER2 has been administered to
HER2-positive BCs. Although new therapeutic agents have been developed in the
past few decades, many patients still die of the disease due to relapse; thus,
novel molecular markers that predict therapeutic failure and those that can be
targets for specific therapy are expected. We have chosen four of such molecules 
by reviewing recent publications, which are cyclin E, B-Myb, Twist, and DMP1ß.
The oncogenicity of these molecules has been demonstrated in vivo and/or in vitro
through studies using transgenic mice or siRNAs, and their expressions have been 
shown to be associated with shortened overall or disease-free survival of BC
patients. The former three molecules have been shown to accelerate
epithelial-mesenchymal transition that is often associated with cancer stem
cell-ness and metastasis; all these four can be novel therapeutic targets as
well. Thus, large prospective studies employing immunohistochemistry will be
needed to establish the predictive values of these molecules in patients with BC.

PMCID: PMC4790586
PMID: 26997872  [PubMed]


2. Int J Cancer. 2016 Jan 23. doi: 10.1002/ijc.30003. [Epub ahead of print]

Aberrant splicing of the DMP1-ARF-MDM2-p53 pathway in cancer.

Inoue K(1), Fry EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pathology, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Medical
Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157, USA.

Alternative splicing of mRNA precursors is a ubiquitous mechanism for generating 
numerous transcripts with different activities from one genomic locus in
mammalian cells. The gene products from a single locus can thus have similar,
dominant-negative, or even opposing functions. Aberrant alternative splicing has 
been found in cancer to express proteins that promote cell growth, local
invasion, and metastasis. This review will focus on the aberrant splicing of
tumor suppressor/oncogenes that belong to the DMP1-ARF-MDM2-p53 pathway. Our
recent study shows that the DMP1 locus generates both tumor-suppressive DMP1a
(p53-dependent) and oncogenic DMP1ß (p53-independent) splice variants, and the
DMP1ß/a ratio increases with neoplastic transformation of breast epithelial
cells. This process is associated with high DMP1ß protein expression and shorter 
survival of breast cancer (BC) patients. Accumulating pieces of evidence show
that ARF is frequently inactivated by aberrant splicing in human cancers,
demonstrating its involvement in human malignancies. Splice variants from the
MDM2 locus promote cell growth in culture and accelerate tumorigenesis in vivo.
Human cancers expressing these splice variants are associated with advanced
stage/metastasis, and thus have negative clinical impacts. Although they lack
most of the p53-binding domain, their activities are mostly dependent on p53
since they bind to wild type MDM2. The p53 locus produces splice isoforms that
have either favorable (ß/<U+03B3> at the C-terminus) or negative impact (<U+0394>40, <U+0394>133 at
the N-terminus) on patients' survival. Since the oncogenic alternative splicing
products from these loci are expressed only in cancer cells, they may eventually 
become targets for molecular therapies. This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved.

© 2016 UICC.

PMID: 26802432  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Sep;1849(9):1198-208. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.07.009. Epub 2015 Jul 15.

Human DMTF1ß antagonizes DMTF1a regulation of the p14(ARF) tumor suppressor and
promotes cellular proliferation.

Tschan MP(1), Federzoni EA(2), Haimovici A(3), Britschgi C(2), Moser BA(4), Jin
J(3), Reddy VA(2), Sheeter DA(2), Fischer KM(2), Sun P(5), Torbett BE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA;
Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Bern,
Bern CH-3010, Switzerland. (2)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (3)Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of
Pathology, University of Bern, Bern CH-3010, Switzerland. (4)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, 
IL 60607, USA. (5)Cell and Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (6)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic address: betorbet@scripps.edu.

The human DMTF1 (DMP1) transcription factor, a DNA binding protein that interacts
with cyclin D, is a positive regulator of the p14ARF (ARF) tumor suppressor. Our 
earlier studies have shown that three differentially spliced human DMP1 mRNAs, a,
ß and <U+03B3>, arise from the human gene. We now show that DMP1a, ß and <U+03B3> isoforms
differentially regulate ARF expression and promote distinct cellular functions.
In contrast to DMP1a, DMP1ß and <U+03B3> did not activate the ARF promoter, whereas only
ß resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of DMP1a-induced transactivation of the
ARF promoter. Ectopic expression of DMP1ß reduced endogenous ARF mRNA levels in
human fibroblasts. The DMP1ß- and <U+03B3>-isoforms share domains necessary for the
inhibitory function of the ß-isoform. That DMP1ß may interact with DMP1a to
antagonize its function was shown in DNA binding assays and in cells by the close
proximity of DMP1a/ß in the nucleus. Cells stably expressing DMP1ß, as well as
shRNA targeting all DMP1 isoforms, disrupted cellular growth arrest induced by
serum deprivation or in PMA-derived macrophages in the presence or absence of
cellular p53. DMP1 mRNA levels in acute myeloid leukemia samples, as compared to 
granulocytes, were reduced. Treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia patient
samples with all-trans retinoic acid promoted differentiation to granulocytes and
restored DMP1 transcripts to normal granulocyte levels. Our findings imply that
DMP1a- and ß-ratios are tightly regulated in hematopoietic cells and DMP1ß
antagonizes DMP1a transcriptional regulation of ARF resulting in the alteration
of cellular control with a gain in proliferation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4687731 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26187004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Int J Cancer. 2016 Apr 1;138(7):1577-85. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29663. Epub 2015 Jul
14.

Transcription factors that interact with p53 and Mdm2.

Inoue K(1), Fry EA(1), Frazier DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Medical
Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157.

The tumor suppressor p53 is activated upon cellular stresses such as DNA damage, 
oncogene activation, hypoxia, which transactivates sets of genes that induce DNA 
repair, cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, or autophagy, playing crucial roles in the 
prevention of tumor formation. The central regulator of the p53 pathway is Mdm2
which inhibits transcriptional activity, nuclear localization and protein
stability. More than 30 cellular p53-binding proteins have been isolated and
characterized including Mdm2, Mdm4, p300, BRCA1/2, ATM, ABL and 53BP-1/2. Most of
them are nuclear proteins; however, not much is known about p53-binding
transcription factors. In this review, we focus on transcription factors that
directly interact with p53/Mdm2 through direct binding including Dmp1, E2F1, YB-1
and YY1. Dmp1 and YB-1 bind only to p53 while E2F1 and YY1 bind to both p53 and
Mdm2. Dmp1 has been shown to bind to p53 and block all the known functions for
Mdm2 on p53 inhibition, providing a secondary mechanism for tumor suppression in 
Arf-null cells. Although E2F1-p53 binding provides a checkpoint mechanism to
silence hyperactive E2F1, YB-1 or YY1 interaction with p53 subverts the activity 
of p53, contributing to cell cycle progression and tumorigenesis. Thus, the modes
and consequences for each protein-protein interaction vary from the viewpoint of 
tumor development and suppression.

© 2015 UICC.

PMCID: PMC4698088 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26132471  [PubMed - in process]


5. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 30;6(18):16043-58.

MicroRNA-155 promotes bladder cancer growth by repressing the tumor suppressor
DMTF1.

Peng Y(1), Dong W(1,)(2), Lin TX(1,)(2), Zhong GZ(1), Liao B(3), Wang B(1,)(2),
Gu P(1), Huang L(1), Xie Y(1), Lu FD(1), Chen X(1), Xie WB(1), He W(1), Wu SX(1),
Huang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 
Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. (2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Malignant Tumor Epigenetics and Gene Regulation, SunYat-Sen Memorial Hospital,
SunYat-Sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of
Medical Examination Center, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.

MicroRNA-155 (miR-155) is dysregulated in human cancers. In this study, we
reported that miR-155 was over-expressed in bladder cancer tissues. We found that
miR-155 promoted cell proliferation in vitro and tumorigenesis in vivo. MiR-155
directly reduced the expression of the tumor suppressor DMTF1. The expression of 
DMTF1 was decreased in bladder cancer tissues. Similar to the restoring miR-155
expression, knockdown of DMTF1 promoted cell growth and cell cycle progression,
whereas DMTF1 over-expression rescued the effect of miR-155. Moreover, we
investigated DMTF1-Arf-p53 pathway and found that DMTF1 worked in both
p53-dependent and p53-independent manners. Taken together, our findings suggested
that miR-155 functions as a tumor promoter in bladder cancer, which is partially 
through repressing DMTF1 expression. The identification of miR-155 and its novel 
target DMTF1 will be valuable in developing diagnostic markers and therapeutic
applications for bladder cancer.

PMCID: PMC4599255
PMID: 25965824  [PubMed - in process]


6. J Pathol. 2015 May;236(1):90-102. doi: 10.1002/path.4504. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

DMP1ß, a splice isoform of the tumour suppressor DMP1 locus, induces
proliferation and progression of breast cancer.

Maglic D(1), Stovall DB, Cline JM, Fry EA, Mallakin A, Taneja P, Caudell DL,
Willingham MC, Sui G, Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Medical Center
Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157, USA; Department of Pathology, Wake Forest
School of Medicine, Medical Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157, USA;
Graduate Program in Molecular Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Medical
Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157, USA.

Our recent work has indicated that the DMP1 locus on 7q21, encoding a
haplo-insufficient tumour suppressor, is hemizygously deleted at a high frequency
in breast cancer. The locus encodes DMP1a protein, an activator of the p53
pathway leading to cell cycle arrest and senescence, and two other functionally
undefined isoforms, DMP1ß and DMP1<U+03B3>. In this study, we show that the DMP1 locus
is alternatively spliced in ~30% of breast cancer cases with relatively decreased
DMP1a and increased DMP1ß expression. RNA-seq analyses of a publicly available
database showed significantly increased DMP1ß mRNA in 43-55% of human breast
cancers, dependent on histological subtypes. Similarly, DMP1ß protein was found
to be overexpressed in ~60% of tumours relative to their surrounding normal
tissue. Importantly, alteration of DMP1 splicing and DMP1ß overexpression were
associated with poor clinical outcomes of the breast cancer patients, indicating 
that DMP1ß may have a biological function. Indeed, DMP1ß increased proliferation 
of non-tumourigenic mammary epithelial cells and knockdown of endogenous DMP1
inhibited breast cancer cell growth. To determine DMP1ß's role in vivo, we
established MMTV-DMP1ß transgenic mouse lines. DMP1ß overexpression was
sufficient to induce mammary gland hyperplasia and multifocal tumour lesions in
mice at 7-18 months of age. The tumours formed were adenosquamous carcinomas with
evidence of transdifferentiation and keratinized deposits. Overall, we identify
alternative splicing as a mechanism utilized by cancer cells to modulate the DMP1
locus through diminishing DMP1a tumour suppressor expression, while
simultaneously up-regulating the tumour-promoting DMP1ß isoform.

Copyright © 2014 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4398631 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25537728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Am J Pathol. 2013 Oct;183(4):1339-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.06.027. Epub
2013 Aug 11.

Cooperation between Dmp1 loss and cyclin D1 overexpression in breast cancer.

Zhu S(1), Mott RT, Fry EA, Taneja P, Kulik G, Sui G, Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North 
Carolina; Department of Cancer Biology, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Graduate Program in Molecular Medicine, Wake
Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.

Cyclin D1 is a component of the core cell-cycle machinery and is frequently
overexpressed in breast cancer. It physically interacts with the tumor suppressor
Dmp1 that attenuates the oncogenic signals from Ras and HER2 by inducing
Arf/p53-dependent cell-cycle arrest. Currently, the biological significance of
Dmp1-cyclin D1 interplay in breast cancer has not been determined. Here, we show 
that cyclin D1 bound to Dmp1 to activate both Arf and Ink4a promoters and,
consequently, induced apoptosis or G2/M cell-cycle delay in normal cells to
protect them from neoplastic transformation. The cyclin D1-induced Ink4a/Arf gene
expression was dependent on Dmp1 because the induction was not detected in
Dmp1-deficient or DMP1-depleted cells. Arf/Ink4a expression was increased in
pre-malignant mammary glands from Dmp1(+/+);MMTV-cyclin D1 and
Dmp1(+/+);MMTV-D1T286A mice but significantly down-regulated in those from
Dmp1-deficient mice. Selective Dmp1 deletion was found in 21% of the MMTV-D1 and 
D1T286A mammary carcinomas, and the Dmp1 heterozygous status significantly
accelerated mouse mammary tumorigenesis with reduced apoptosis and increased
metastasis. Overall, our study reveals a pivotal role of combined Dmp1 loss and
cyclin D1 overexpression in breast cancer.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3791682
PMID: 23938323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Oncogene. 2013 Aug 29;32(35):4120-9. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.423. Epub 2012 Oct 8.

Prognostic value of the hDMP1-ARF-Hdm2-p53 pathway in breast cancer.

Maglic D(1), Zhu S, Fry EA, Taneja P, Kai F, Kendig RD, Sugiyama T, Miller LD,
Willingham MC, Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Medical
Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157 USA.

Our recent study showed critical roles of Dmp1 as a sensor of oncogenic Ras,
HER2/neu signaling and activation of the Arf-p53 pathway. To elucidate the role
of human DMP1 (hDMP1) in breast cancer, one hundred and ten pairs of human breast
cancer specimen were studied for the alterations of the hDMP1-ARF-Hdm2-p53
pathway with follow up of clinical outcomes. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the 
hDMP1 locus was found in 42% of human breast carcinomas, while that of INK4a/ARF 
and p53 were found in 20 and 34%, respectively. Hdm2 amplification was found in
13% of the same sample, which was found independently of LOH for hDMP1.
Conversely, LOH for hDMP1 was found in mutually exclusive fashion with that of
INK4a/ARF and p53, and was associated with low Ki67 index and diploid karyotype. 
Consistently, LOH for hDMP1 was associated with luminal A category and longer
relapse-free survival, while that of p53 was associated with non-luminal A and
shorter survival. Thus, loss of hDMP1 could define a new disease category
associated with prognosis of breast cancer patients. Human breast epithelial
cells/cancer cells with wild-type p53 were sensitive to growth inhibition by
activated Dmp1:ER while those that delete p14(ARF) or p53, and/or Hdm2
amplification showed partial or nearly complete resistance, indicating that p53
is a critical target for hDMP1 to exhibit its biological activity.

PMCID: PMC3742602
PMID: 23045280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Metallomics. 2012 Apr;4(4):342-9. doi: 10.1039/c2mt00182a. Epub 2012 Feb 28.

Is MtnE, the fifth Drosophila metallothionein, functionally distinct from the
other members of this polymorphic protein family?

Pérez-Rafael S(1), Kurz A, Guirola M, Capdevila M, Palacios O, Atrian S.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Química, Facultat de Ciències, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, 08193 Cerdanyola del Vallès, Barcelona, Spain.

Metallothioneins (MTs) are a super-family of small, Cys-rich, non-homologous
proteins that bind metal ions through the formation of metal-thiolate bonds.
Although universally ubiquitous, they exhibit distinct metal-binding preferences,
either for divalent (Zn-thioneins) or monovalent (Cu-thioneins) metal ions.
Drosophila constitutes a bizarre exception, since it is currently the only case
of metazoans synthesizing only Cu-thioneins, which are similar to the
paradigmatic yeast Cup1 protein. Until recently, the Drosophila MT system was
assumed to be composed of 4 isoforms (MtnA, MtnB, MtnC and MtnD), all of them
responsive to heavy metal load through the dMTF1 transcription factor. The
significance of this polymorphism has been analyzed in depth both at genomic and 
proteomic levels. Singularly, a fifth MT isoform was recently annotated and named
MtnE. The analysis of the MtnE expression pattern revealed some differential
traits with regard to the other MTs. We analyze here the peculiarities of the
metal binding abilities of the MtnE polypeptide and compare them with those of
the other Drosophila MTs determined through the same rationale. Characterization 
by ESI-MS spectrometry and CD and UV-visible spectrophotometry of the Zn(II)-,
Cd(II)- and Cu(I)-MtnE complexes obtained by recombinant synthesis demonstrates
that MtnE is the least metal-specific isoform of the Drosophila MTs, and
therefore it could play a role when/where a broad spectrum of metal coordination 
abilities are advantageous in terms of physiological needs.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

PMID: 22370740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cancer Res. 2012 Apr 1;72(7):1740-50. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-2410. Epub
2012 Feb 13.

Dmp1 physically interacts with p53 and positively regulates p53's stability,
nuclear localization, and function.

Frazier DP(1), Kendig RD, Kai F, Maglic D, Sugiyama T, Morgan RL, Fry EA,
Lagedrost SJ, Sui G, Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cancer Biology, and Graduate Program in Molecular 
Medicine, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Medical Center Boulevard,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, USA.

The transcription factor Dmp1 is a Ras/HER2-activated haplo-insufficient tumor
suppressor that activates the Arf/p53 pathway of cell-cycle arrest. Recent
evidence suggests that Dmp1 may activate p53 independently of Arf in certain cell
types. Here, we report findings supporting this concept with the definition of an
Arf-independent function for Dmp1 in tumor suppression. We found that Dmp1 and
p53 can interact directly in mammalian cells via the carboxyl-terminus of p53 and
the DNA-binding domain of Dmp1. Expression of Dmp1 antagonized ubiquitination of 
p53 by Mdm2 and promoted nuclear localization of p53. Dmp1-p53 binding
significantly increased the level of p53, independent of the DNA-binding activity
of Dmp1. Mechanistically, p53 target genes were activated synergistically by the 
coexpression of Dmp1 and p53 in p53(-/-);Arf(-/-) cells, and genotoxic responses 
of these genes were hampered more dramatically in Dmp1(-/-) and p53(-/-) cells
than in Arf(-/-) cells. Together, our findings identify a robust new mechanism of
p53 activation mediated by direct physical interaction between Dmp1 and p53.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3319807
PMID: 22331460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jan;32(2):348-64. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06030-11. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Hypergrowth mTORC1 signals translationally activate the ARF tumor suppressor
checkpoint.

Miceli AP(1), Saporita AJ, Weber JD.

Author information: 
(1)BRIGHT Institute, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular
Oncology, and Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Siteman Cancer Center,
Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.

The ARF tumor suppressor is a potent sensor of hyperproliferative cues emanating 
from oncogenic signaling. ARF responds to these cues by eliciting a cell cycle
arrest, effectively abating the tumorigenic potential of these stimuli. Prior
reports have demonstrated that oncogenic Ras(V12) signaling induces ARF through a
mechanism mediated by the Dmp1 transcription factor. However, we now show that
ARF protein is still induced in response to Ras(V12) in the absence of Dmp1
through the enhanced translation of existing Arf mRNAs. Here, we report that the 
progrowth Ras/tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC)/mTORC1 signaling pathway regulates
ARF protein expression and triggers ARF-mediated tumor suppression through a
novel translational mechanism. Hyperactivation of mTORC1 through Tsc1 loss
resulted in a significant increase in ARF expression, activation of the p53
pathway, and a dramatic cell cycle arrest, which were completely reversed upon
Arf deletion. ARF protein induced from Ras(V12) in the absence of Dmp1 repressed 
anchorage-independent colony formation in soft agar and tumor burden in an
allograft model. Taken together, our data demonstrate the ability of the ARF
tumor suppressor to respond to hypergrowth stimuli to prevent unwarranted tumor
formation.

PMCID: PMC3255786
PMID: 22064482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Blood. 2011 Dec 15;118(25):6562-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-349084. Epub 2011 
Oct 28.

Regulation of murine hematopoietic stem cell quiescence by Dmtf1.

Kobayashi M(1), Srour EF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, 980 West Walnut
St., Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

The cell-cycle status of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) is tightly regulated,
most likely to balance maintenance of stem-cell status through quiescence and
expansion/differentiation of the hematopoietic system. Tumor-suppressor genes
(TSGs), with their cell cycle-regulatory functions, play important roles in HSC
regulation. The cyclin-D binding myb-like transcription factor 1 (Dmtf1) was
recently recognized as a TSG involved in human cancers by repressing oncogenic
Ras/Raf signaling. However, the role of Dmtf1 in the hematopoietic system is
entirely unknown. In the present study, we demonstrate that Dmtf1 regulates HSC
function under both steady-state and stress conditions. Dmtf1(-/-) mice showed
increased blood cell counts in multiple parameters, and their progenitor cells
had increased proliferation and accelerated cell-cycle progression. In addition, 
long-term HSCs from Dmtf1(-/-) mice had a higher self-renewal capacity that was
clearly demonstrated in secondary recipients in serial transplantation studies.
Dmtf1(-/-) BM cells showed hyper proliferation after 5-fluorouracil-induced
myeloablation. Steady-state expression and Induction of CDKN1a (p21) and Arf were
impaired in HSCs from Dmtf1(-/-) mice. The function of Dmtf1 was mediated by both
Arf-dependent and Arf-independent pathways. Our results implicate Dmtf1 in the
regulation of HSC function through novel cell cycle-regulatory mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3242718
PMID: 22039255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Bone Miner Res. 2011 Nov;26(11):2634-46. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.465.

Cell line IDG-SW3 replicates osteoblast-to-late-osteocyte differentiation in
vitro and accelerates bone formation in vivo.

Woo SM(1), Rosser J, Dusevich V, Kalajzic I, Bonewald LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endodontics, University of Missouri-Kansas City School of
Dentistry, Kansas City, MO, USA.

Osteocytes are the most abundant cells in bone yet are the most challenging to
study because they are embedded in a mineralized matrix. We generated a clonal
cell line called IDG-SW3 (for Immortomouse/Dmp1-GFP-SW3) from long-bone chips
from mice carrying a Dmp1 promoter driving GFP crossed with the Immortomouse,
which expresses a thermolabile SV40 large T antigen regulated by interferon <U+03B3>
(IFN-<U+03B3>). Cells from these mice can be expanded at 33<U+2009>°C in the presence of IFN-<U+03B3> 
and then allowed to resume their original phenotype at 37<U+2009>°C in the absence of
IFN-<U+03B3>. IDG-SW3<U+2009>cells are Dmp1-GFP(-) and T antigen(+) under immortalizing
conditions but Dmp1-GFP(+) and T antigen(-) under osteogenic conditions. Like
osteoblasts, they express alkaline phosphatase and produce and mineralize a type 
1 collagen matrix containing calcospherulites. Like early osteocytes, they
express E11/gp38, Dmp1, MEPE, and Phex. Like late osteocytes, they develop a
dendritic morphology and express SOST/sclerostin and fibroblast growth factor 23 
(FGF-23), regulated by parathyroid hormone (PTH) and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3). 
When cultured on 3D matrices, they express Dmp1-GFP and sclerostin. When the 3D
cultures are implanted in calvarial defects in vivo, they accelerate bone
healing. This cell line should prove useful for studying osteoblast-to-osteocyte 
transition, mechanisms for biomineralization, osteocyte function, and regulation 
of SOST/sclerostin and FGF-23.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMCID: PMC3192242
PMID: 21735478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Int J Cancer. 2010 Mar 15;126(6):1403-16. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24938.

The Arf-inducing transcription factor Dmp1 encodes a transcriptional activator of
amphiregulin, thrombospondin-1, JunB and Egr1.

Mallakin A(1), Sugiyama T, Kai F, Taneja P, Kendig RD, Frazier DP, Maglic D,
Matise LA, Willingham MC, Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Medical
Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Dmp1 (Dmtf1) encodes a Myb-like transcription factor implicated in tumor
suppression through direct activation of the Arf-p53 pathway. The human DMP1 gene
is frequently deleted in non-small cell lung cancers, especially those that
retain wild-type INK4a/ARF and/or p53. To identify novel genes that are regulated
by Dmp1, transcriptional profiles of lung tissue from Dmp1-null and wild-type
mice were generated using the GeneChip Microarray. Comparative analysis of gene
expression changes between the two groups resulted in identification of numerous 
genes that may be regulated by Dmp1. Notably, amphiregulin (Areg),
thrombospondin-1 (Tsp-1), JunB, Egr1, adrenomedullin (Adm), Bcl-3 and methyl-CpG 
binding domain protein 1 (Mbd1) were downregulated in the lungs from Dmp1-null
mice while Gas1 and Ect2 genes were upregulated. These target genes were chosen
for further analyses since they are involved in cell proliferation,
transcription, angiogenesis/metastasis, apoptosis, or DNA methylation, and thus
could account for the tumor suppressor phenotype of Dmp1. Dmp1 directly bound to 
the genomic loci of Areg, Tsp-1, JunB and Egr1. Significant upregulation or
downregulation of the novel Dmp1 target genes was observed upon transient
expression of Dmp1 in alveolar epithelial cells, an effect which was nullified by
the inhibition of de novo mRNA synthesis. Interestingly, these genes and their
protein products were significantly downregulated or upregulated in the lungs
from Dmp1-heterozygous mice as well. Identification of novel Dmp1 target genes
not only provides insights into the effects of Dmp1 on global gene expression,
but also sheds light on the mechanism of haploid insufficiency of Dmp1 in tumor
suppression.

PMCID: PMC2836939
PMID: 19816943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2008 Jul;8(4):435-47. doi: 10.1586/14737159.8.4.435.

Role of DMP1 and its future in lung cancer diagnostics.

Sugiyama T(1), Frazier DP, Taneja P, Morgan RL, Willingham MC, Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pathology & Cancer Biology, Wake Forest University Health
Sciences, Medical Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157-0001, USA.
tsugiyam@wfubmc.edu

Erratum in
    Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2008 Sep;8(5):670.

Lung cancer is the most lethal carcinoma worldwide. Mutations of p53,
inactivation of p16(INK4a), and overexpression of cyclins E, A and B are
independently associated with poor prognoses of patients, while the prognostic
value of cyclin D1 or RB expression is inconclusive. Cyclin D binding myb-like
protein 1 (Dmp1) encodes a DNA binding protein that receives signals from
oncogenic Ras and functions as a tumor suppressor by activating the Arf-p53
[corrected] pathway. Dmp1 has been shown to be haplo-insufficient for tumor
suppression in mouse models including K-ras-mediated lung carcinogenesis. The
human DMP1 gene is located on chromosome 7q21, and our recent results revealed
that the hDMP1 gene is deleted, but not mutated or silenced, in approximately 40 
% of human non-small-cell lung carcinomas. These cases typically retained
wild-type ARF and p53 and expressed very low levels of the hDMP1 protein. Thus,
hDMP1 loss could be a novel diagnostic marker for non-small-cell lung carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC3749846
PMID: 18598225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Clin Med Oncol. 2008;2:209-19. Epub 2008 Apr 1.

Signal transduction involving the dmp1 transcription factor and its alteration in
human cancer.

Sugiyama T(1), Frazier DP, Taneja P, Kendig RD, Morgan RL, Matise LA, Lagedrost
SJ, Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pathology, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Medical
Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, N.C. 27157-0001, U.S.A.

Dmp1 (cyclin D-interacting myb-like protein 1; also called Dmtf1) is a
transcription factor that has been isolated in a yeast two-hybrid screen through 
its binding property to cyclin D2. Dmp1 directly binds to and activates the Arf
promoter and induces Arf-p53-dependent cell cycle arrest in primary cells. D-type
cyclins usually inhibit Dmp1-mediated transcription in a Cdk-independent fashion;
however, Dmp1 shows synergistic effects with D-cyclins on the Arf promoter. Ras
or Myc oncogene-induced tumor formation is accelerated in both Dmp1(+/-) and
Dmp1(-/-) mice with no significant differences between Dmp1(+/-) and Dmp1(-/-).
Thus, Dmp1 is haplo-insufficient for tumor suppression. Tumors from Dmp1(-/-) or 
Dmp1(+/-) mice often retain wild-type Arf and p53, suggesting that Dmp1 is a
physiological regulator of the Arf-p53 pathway. The Dmp1 promoter is activated by
oncogenic Ras-Raf signaling, while it is repressed by physiological mitogenic
stimuli, overexpression of E2F proteins, and genotoxic stimuli mediated by NF-<U+03BA>B.
The human DMP1 gene (hDMP1) is located on chromosome 7q21 and is hemizygously
deleted in approximately 40% of human lung cancers, especially those that retain 
normal INK4a/ARF and P53 loci. Thus, hDMP1 is clearly involved in human
carcinogenesis, and tumors with hDMP1 deletion may constitute a discrete disease 
entity.

PMCID: PMC3161675
PMID: 21892281  [PubMed]


17. Leukemia. 2008 May;22(5):1087-90. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

The hDMP1 tumor suppressor is a new WT1 target in myeloid leukemias.

Tschan MP, Gullberg U, Shan D, Torbett BE, Fey MF, Tobler A.

PMID: 17972942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Cancer Cell. 2007 Oct;12(4):381-94.

Mutually exclusive inactivation of DMP1 and ARF/p53 in lung cancer.

Mallakin A(1), Sugiyama T, Taneja P, Matise LA, Frazier DP, Choudhary M, Hawkins 
GA, D'Agostino RB Jr, Willingham MC, Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Medical
Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Dmp1 (Dmtf1) is activated by oncogenic Ras-Raf signaling and induces cell-cycle
arrest in an Arf, p53-dependent fashion. The survival of K-ras(LA) mice was
shortened by approximately 15 weeks in both Dmp1(+/-) and Dmp1(-/-) backgrounds, 
the lung tumors of which showed significantly decreased frequency of p53
mutations compared to Dmp1(+/+). Approximately 40% of K-ras(LA) lung tumors from 
Dmp1(+/+) mice lost one allele of the Dmp1 gene, suggesting the primary
involvement of Dmp1 in K-ras-induced tumorigenesis. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) 
of the hDMP1 gene was detectable in approximately 35% of human lung carcinomas,
which was found in mutually exclusive fashion with LOH of INK4a/ARF or that of
P53. Thus, DMP1 is a pivotal tumor suppressor for both human and murine lung
cancers.

PMCID: PMC2239345
PMID: 17936562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Oncogene. 2007 Jun 28;26(30):4329-35. Epub 2007 Jan 22.

Dmp1 and tumor suppression.

Inoue K(1), Mallakin A, Frazier DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Medical
Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157-0001, USA. kinoue@wfubmc.edu

Dmp1 (cyclin D binding myb-like protein 1; also called Dmtf1) is a transcription 
factor that was isolated in a yeast two-hybrid screen through its binding
property to cyclin D2. Although it was initially predicted to be involved in the 
cyclin D-Rb pathway, overexpression of Dmp1 in primary cells induces cell cycle
arrest in an Arf, p53-dependent fashion. Dmp1 is a unique Arf regulator, the
promoter of which is activated by oncogenic Ras-Raf signaling. Dmp1 expression is
repressed by physiological mitogenic stimuli as well as by overexpressed E2F
proteins; thus, it is a novel marker of cells that have exited from the cell
cycle. Spontaneous and oncogene-induced tumor formation is accelerated in both
Dmp1(+/-) and Dmp1(-/-) mice; the Dmp1(+/-) tumors often retain and express the
wild-type allele; thus, Dmp1 is haplo-insufficient for tumor suppression. Tumors 
from Dmp1(+/-) and Dmp1(-/-) mice often retain wild-type Arf and p53, suggesting 
that Dmp1 is a physiological regulator of the Arf-p53 pathway. The human DMP1
(hDMP1) gene is located on chromosome 7q21, the locus of which is often deleted
in myeloid leukemia and also in some types of solid tumors. Post-translational
modification of Dmp1 and its role in human malignancy remain to be investigated.

PMCID: PMC2077852
PMID: 17237816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Oncogene. 2006 Dec 14;25(59):7703-13. Epub 2006 Jul 31.

Expression of Dmp1 in specific differentiated, nonproliferating cells and its
regulation by E2Fs.

Mallakin A(1), Taneja P, Matise LA, Willingham MC, Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Medical
Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157-0001, USA.

Dmp1 is a Myb-like transcription factor that transmits oncogenic Ras-Raf
signaling to the Arf-p53 pathway and induces cell cycle arrest.
Immunohistochemical staining was performed to identify the pattern of Dmp1
expression in normal murine tissues compared with the proliferation marker, Ki67.
In thymus, the nuclei of mature T lymphocytes in the medulla were strongly
positive for Dmp1, whereas Ki67 was detected only in the cortex. In intestine,
Dmp1 was detected in the nuclei of superficial layers of the villi, whereas
Ki67-positive cells were confined to the lower one-third of the crypt. Double
staining for Dmp1 and Ki67 revealed that these two proteins were expressed in
mutually exclusive fashion in nearly all the tissues examined. Subsets of E2Fs
were specifically bound to the Dmp1 promoter upon mitogenic signaling and E2Fs
1-4 inhibited the Dmp1 promoter in a reporter assay. The Dmp1 promoter was
repressed when the cells entered the S to G2/M phase of the cell cycle when both 
Dmp1 and Arf expressions were downregulated. The Dmp1 mRNA was not downregulated 
by serum in E2F-DB(+) cells, suggesting that the Dmp1 promoter repression is
E2F-dependent. This explains why the Dmp1 and Ki67-positive cells are stained in 
mutually exclusive fashion in normal tissues.

PMCID: PMC2077854
PMID: 16878159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Apr 15;166(2):157-62.

Genomic array and expression analysis of frequent high-level amplifications in
adenocarcinomas of the gastro-esophageal junction.

van Dekken H(1), Vissers K, Tilanus HW, Kuo WL, Tanke HJ, Rosenberg C, Ijszenga
M, Szuhai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
h.vandekken@erasmusmc.nl

Adenocarcinomas of the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) show frequent high-level
amplifications (HLA), but the underlying genes are not well defined. We have
characterized genomic gain in 14 GEJ carcinomas by array-based comparative
genomic hybridization (aCGH). The most frequent gains and amplifications were
detected at 7q (57%), 8q (57%), 17q (64%), and 20q (79%), with minimally
amplified regions at 7q21.1, 8q24.2, 17q12, and 20q13.2. Five HLA were detected
on 7q, one on 8q, two on 17q, and three on 20q. HLA of 8q24 and 17q12 were
related to MYC and ERBB2, respectively. The HLA on 7q21 was associated
recurrently with ABCB1, whereas the amplified region on 20q13 implicated ZNF217, 
BCAS1, and CYP24. RNA expression analysis of 11 adenocarcinomas by
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction was performed for cancer-related 
genes residing at 7q21 (ABCB1, ABCB4, CDK6, HGF, DMTF1, SRI, TP53AP1) and 20q13
(ZNF217, BCAS1, CYP24, TNFRSF6B). The most frequently upregulated gene on 7q21
was HGF (45%), but there was no association with genomic amplification. The most 
frequently overexpressed gene at 20q13 was BCAS1 (27%), which was related to HLA 
of this region (P = 0.006) in all three cases. We conclude that HLA occur often
in GEJ adenocarcinomas. The gene responsible for the HLA of 7q21 requires further
investigation, whereas BCAS1 is a good candidate for the frequent amplification
of 20q13.

PMID: 16631473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact. 2004 Dec;4(4):386-7.

In vitro and in vivo study on osteocyte-specific mechanical signaling pathways.

Yang W(1), Kalajzic I, Lu Y, Guo D, Harris MA, Gluhak-Heinrich J, Bonewald LF,
Feng JQ, Rowe DW, Harris SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA.

PMID: 15758272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jan;25(1):220-32.

Ras-Raf-Arf signaling critically depends on the Dmp1 transcription factor.

Sreeramaneni R(1), Chaudhry A, McMahon M, Sherr CJ, Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, 2102 Gray
Building, Medical Center Blvd., Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Dmp1 prevents tumor formation by activating the Arf-p53 pathway. In cultured
primary cells, the Dmp1 promoter was efficiently activated by oncogenic
Ha-Ras(V12), but not by overexpressed c-Myc or E2F-1. Dmp1 promoter activation by
Ras(V12) depended on Raf-MEK-ERK signaling. Induction of p19(Arf) and p21(Cip1)
by oncogenic Raf was compromised in Dmp1-null cells, which were resistant to
Raf-mediated premature senescence. A Ras(V12)-responsive element was mapped to
the 5' leader sequence of the murine Dmp1 promoter, where endogenous Fos and Jun 
family proteins bind. Dmp1 promoter activation by Ras(V12) was strikingly
impaired in c-Jun as well as in JunB knock-down cells, suggesting the critical
role of Jun proteins in the activation of the Dmp1 promoter. A
Ras(V12)-responsive element was mapped to the unique Dmp1/Ets site on the Arf
promoter, where endogenous Dmp1 proteins bind upon oncogenic Raf activation.
Therefore, activation of Arf by Ras/Raf signaling is indirectly mediated by Dmp1,
explaining why Dmp1-null primary cells are highly susceptible to Ras-induced
transformation. Our data indicate the presence of the novel Jun-Dmp1 pathway that
directly links oncogenic Ras-Raf signaling and p19(Arf), independent of the
classical cyclin D1/Cdk4-Rb-E2F pathway.

PMCID: PMC538777
PMID: 15601844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 18;280(7):6197-203. Epub 2004 Dec 7.

Dmp1-deficient mice display severe defects in cartilage formation responsible for
a chondrodysplasia-like phenotype.

Ye L(1), Mishina Y, Chen D, Huang H, Dallas SL, Dallas MR, Sivakumar P, Kunieda
T, Tsutsui TW, Boskey A, Bonewald LF, Feng JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, School of Dentistry, University of Missouri-Kansas
City, 650 E. 25th St., Kansas City, MI 64108, USA.

Understanding the molecular mechanisms by which cartilage formation is regulated 
is essential toward understanding the physiology of both embryonic bone
development and postnatal bone growth. Although much is known about growth factor
signaling in cartilage formation, the regulatory role of noncollagenous matrix
proteins in this process are still largely unknown. In the present studies, we
present evidence for a critical role of DMP1 (dentin matrix protein 1) in
postnatal chondrogenesis. The Dmp1 gene was originally identified from a rat
incisor cDNA library and has been shown to play an important role in late stage
dentinogenesis. Whereas no apparent abnormalities were observed in prenatal bone 
development, Dmp1-deficient (Dmp1(-/-)) mice unexpectedly develop a severe defect
in cartilage formation during postnatal chondrogenesis. Vertebrae and long bones 
in Dmp1-deficient (Dmp1(-/-)) mice are shorter and wider with delayed and
malformed secondary ossification centers and an irregular and highly expanded
growth plate, results of both a highly expanded proliferation and a highly
expanded hypertrophic zone creating a phenotype resembling dwarfism with
chondrodysplasia. This phenotype appears to be due to increased cell
proliferation in the proliferating zone and reduced apoptosis in the hypertrophic
zone. In addition, blood vessel invasion is impaired in the epiphyses of
Dmp1(-/-) mice. These findings show that DMP1 is essential for normal postnatal
chondrogenesis and subsequent osteogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2647591
PMID: 15590631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Dent Res. 2004 Sep;83(9):664-70.

Expression of SIBLINGs and their partner MMPs in salivary glands.

Ogbureke KU(1), Fisher LW.

Author information: 
(1)Craniofacial and Skeletal Diseases Branch, Building 30, Room 228, National
Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health,
DHHS, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892-4320, USA.

Three members of the SIBLING family of integrin-binding phosphoglycoproteins
(bone sialoprotein, BSP; osteopontin, OPN; and dentin matrix protein-1, DMP1)
were recently shown to bind with high affinity (nM) and to activate 3 different
matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-2, MMP-3, and MMP-9, respectively) in vitro. The
current study was designed to document the possible biological relevance of the
SIBLING-MMP activation pathway in vivo by showing that these 3 SIBLINGs and their
known MMP partners are co-expressed in normal adult tissue. BSP, OPN, and DMP1
were invariably co-expressed with their partner MMPs in salivary glands of humans
and mice. The 2 SIBLING proteins without known MMP partners, dentin
sialophosphoprotein (DSPP) and matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein (MEPE),
were also expressed in salivary glands. Expression of all SIBLINGs in this
normal, non-mineralizing epithelial tissue suggests that they serve at least one 
function in vivo other than directly promoting matrix mineralization--a function 
we hypothesize involves local activation of MMPs.

PMID: 15329369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Calcif Tissue Int. 2004 Mar;74(3):213-9.

The third international conference on osteopontin and related proteins, San
Antonio, Texas, May 10-12, 2002.

Denhardt DT.

PMID: 15035246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cells Tissues Organs. 2004;176(1-3):120-33.

New insight into progenitor/stem cells in dental pulp using Col1a1-GFP
transgenes.

Mina M(1), Braut A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, Conn., USA. mina@nso1.uchc.edu

In recent years there has been increasing progress in identifying stem cells from
adult tissues and their potential application in tissue engineering. These
advances provide a promising future for tooth replacement/regeneration. Essential
for this approach is the identification of donor stem cells for various
components of the teeth. Our studies show that pOBCol3.6GFPtpz and
pOBCol2.3GFPemd transgenic animals provide a unique model to gain insight into
stem cells in the dental pulp. Our in vivo studies of the developing teeth of
these transgenic lines show both Col1a1-GFP transgenes are expressed in
functional and fully differentiated odontoblasts. The patterns of expression of
Col1a1-GFP transgenes during odontoblast differentiation correlates with the
expression of DSPP. In the developing craniofacial bones both Col1a1-GFP
transgenes are also expressed in osteoblasts and osteocytes of alveolar and
calvarial bones. In the alveolar bones, the expression of Col1a1-GFP in
osteocytes correlates with the expression of DMP1. Col1a1-3.6-GFP is expressed in
the entire layer of the periosteum and in suture mesenchyme containing
osteoprogenitor cells. On the other hand, Col1a1-2.3- GFP expression was limited 
to the osteoblastic layer of the periosteum and was not detected in the
fibroblastic layer of the periosteum or in the suture mesenchyme. These
observations indicate that Col1a1-3.6-GFP and Col1a1-2.3-GFP transgenes identify 
different subpopulations of cells during intramembranous ossification. By using
the coronal portion of dental pulps isolated from postnatal transgenic mice our
observations also provide direct evidence that the dental pulp contains
progenitor/stem cells capable of giving rise to a new generation of
odontoblast-like cells, as well as osteoblast-like cells.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14745241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 31;278(44):42750-60. Epub 2003 Aug 12.

Alternative splicing of the human cyclin D-binding Myb-like protein (hDMP1)
yields a truncated protein isoform that alters macrophage differentiation
patterns.

Tschan MP(1), Fischer KM, Fung VS, Pirnia F, Borner MM, Fey MF, Tobler A, Torbett
BE.

Author information: 
(1)Scripps Research Institute, Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine,
La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

We have cloned two novel, alternatively spliced messages of human cyclin
D-binding Myb-like protein (hDMP1). The known, full-length protein has been named
hDMP1alpha and the new isoforms, hDMP1beta and hDMP1gamma. The hDMP1alpha, -beta,
and -gamma splice variants have unique expression patterns in normal
hematopoietic cells; hDMP1beta mRNA transcripts are strongly expressed in
quiescent CD34+ cells and freshly isolated peripheral blood leukocytes, as
compared with hDMP1alpha. In contrast, activated T-cells and developing myeloid
cells, macrophages, and granulocytes express low levels of hDMP1beta transcripts,
and hDMP1gamma is ubiquitously and weakly expressed. Mouse Dmp1 has been shown to
activate CD13/aminopeptidase N (APN) and p19ARF gene expression via binding to
canonical DNA recognition sites in the respective promoters. Assessment of
CD13/APN promoter responsiveness demonstrated that hDMP1alpha but not hDMP1beta
and -gamma, is a transcriptional activator. Furthermore, hDMP1beta was found to
inhibit the CD13/APN promoter transactivation ability of hDMP1alpha. Stable,
ectopic expression of hDMP1beta and, to a lesser extent hDMP1gamma, reduced
endogenous cell surface levels of CD13/APN in U937 cells. Moreover, stable,
ectopic expression of hDMP1beta altered phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate-induced
terminal differentiation of U937 cells to macrophages and resulted in maintenance
of proliferation. These results demonstrate that hDMP1beta antagonizes hDMP1alpha
activity and suggest that cellular functions of hDMP1 may be regulated by
cellular hDMP1 isoform levels.

PMID: 12917399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Genes Dev. 2001 Nov 15;15(22):2934-9.

Dmp1 is haplo-insufficient for tumor suppression and modifies the frequencies of 
Arf and p53 mutations in Myc-induced lymphomas.

Inoue K(1), Zindy F, Randle DH, Rehg JE, Sherr CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

Loss of Dmp1, an Arf transcriptional activator, leads to spontaneous
tumorigenesis in mice, causing death from various forms of cancer by two years of
age. Retention and expression of the wild-type Dmp1 allele in tumors arising in
Dmp1(+/-) mice demonstrate that Dmp1 can be haplo-insufficient for tumor
suppression. The mean latency of E(mu)-Myc-induced B-cell lymphomas is halved on 
a Dmp1(-/-) or Dmp1(+/-) genetic background. Although p53 mutations or Arf
deletion normally occur in approximately 50% of E(mu)-Myc-induced lymphomas, Dmp1
loss obviates selection for such mutations, indicating that Dmp1 is a potent
genetic modifier of the Arf-p53 pathway in vivo.

PMCID: PMC312824
PMID: 11711428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Genes Dev. 2001 Nov 15;15(22):2917-21.

Haplo-insufficiency? Let me count the ways.

Quon KC(1), Berns A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics and Centre for Biomedical Genetics, The
Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

PMID: 11711426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Mamm Genome. 2001 Dec;12(12):900-8.

A dual-color FISH gene map of the proximal region of rat Chromosome 4 and
comparative analysis in human and mouse.

Walentinsson A(1), Helou K, Levan G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology-Genetics, Göteborg University, Box
462, SE 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden. Anna.Walentinsson@gen.gu.se

The development and refinement of the rat genome map is a prerequisite for a
continued qualified and fruitful use of this model system for the study of
complex traits. In two distinct rat cancer models, recurrent amplification
affecting the proximal region of rat Chr 4 was detected. To further characterize 
this region, we turned to the evolutionarily conserved chromosome segments in
human Chr 7 and mouse Chrs 5 and 6 to identify functional and positional
candidate genes. By means of single- and dual-color FISH on metaphase,
prometaphase, and interphase chromatin, 15 genes in rat Chr 4q11-q23 (Cdk5, Hgf, 
Dmtf1, Abcb1, Cyp51, Cdk6, Tac1, Asns, Cav1, Met, Wnt2, Cftr, Smoh, Braf,
Arhgef5) were mapped and aligned. In the course of this work, six cancer-related 
rat genes were isolated de novo and partly sequenced. Ten loci were also mapped
by FISH in the mouse. The map provides the framework for a more detailed genetic 
characterization of individual tumor amplicons, but may also be valuable for the 
analysis of this region in other rat models of human complex disease. In
addition, our data facilitate the analysis of events in mammalian chromosomal
evolution affecting the region. In a comparison with human sequence data, we
found that there is considerable conservation in this region both in gene order
and in distances between genes. There is a single evolutionary breakpoint between
rat and mouse and two between rat and human. Since our analysis shows that the
three breaks all occurred in different positions, they must be independent of one
another. The data tend to support the notion that the genomic configuration in
rat Chr 4 is ancestral compared with that in humans and mice.

PMID: 11707776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001;1471(2):M63-71.

Regulation of the p53 pathway by Ras, the plot thickens.

McMahon M(1), Woods D.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, UCSF/Mt. Zion Comprehensive Cancer Center, San
Francisco, CA 94115, USA. mcmahon@cc.ucsf.edu

PMID: 11342185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Genes Dev. 2000 Jul 15;14(14):1797-809.

Disruption of the ARF transcriptional activator DMP1 facilitates cell
immortalization, Ras transformation, and tumorigenesis.

Inoue K(1), Wen R, Rehg JE, Adachi M, Cleveland JL, Roussel MF, Sherr CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The DMP1 transcription factor induces the ARF tumor suppressor gene in mouse
fibroblasts, leading to cell cycle arrest in a p53-dependent manner. We disrupted
sequences encoding the DNA-binding domain of DMP1 in mouse embryonic stem cells
and derived animals lacking the functional protein. DMP1-null animals are small
at birth, and males develop more slowly than their wild-type littermates. Some
adult animals exhibit seizures and/or obstuctive uropathy, each of unknown cause.
The growth of explanted DMP1-null mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) is
progressively retarded as cells are passaged in culture on defined transfer
protocols; but, unlike the behavior of normal cells, p19(ARF), Mdm2, and p53
levels remain relatively low and DMP1-null MEFs do not senesce. Whereas the
establishment of cell lines from MEFs is usually always accompanied by either p53
or ARF loss of function, continuously passaged DMP1-null cells readily give rise 
to established 3T3 and 3T9 cell lines that retain wild-type ARF and functional
p53 genes. Early-passage DMP1-null cells, like MEFs from either ARF-null or
p53-null mice, can be morphologically transformed by oncogenic Ha-Ras (Val-12)
alone. Splenic lymphocytes harvested from both DMP1-null and ARF-null mice
exhibit enhanced proliferative responses in long-term cultures when stimulated to
divide with antibody to CD3 and interleukin-2. Although only 1 of 40 DMP1-null
animals spontaneously developed a tumor in the first year of life, neonatal
treatment with dimethylbenzanthracene or ionizing radiation induced tumors of
various histologic types that were not observed in similarly treated DMP1(+/+)
animals. Karyotypic analyses of MEFs and lymphomas from DMP1-null animals
revealed pseudodiploid chromosome numbers, consistent with the retention of
wild-type p53. Together, these data suggest that ARF function is compromised, but
not eliminated, in animals lacking functional DMP1.

PMCID: PMC316790
PMID: 10898794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Mar 30;96(7):3993-8.

Induction of ARF tumor suppressor gene expression and cell cycle arrest by
transcription factor DMP1.

Inoue K(1), Roussel MF, Sherr CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Expression of the DMP1 transcription factor, a cyclin D-binding Myb-like protein,
induces growth arrest in mouse embryo fibroblast strains but is devoid of
antiproliferative activity in primary diploid fibroblasts that lack the ARF tumor
suppressor gene. DMP1 binds to a single canonical recognition site in the ARF
promoter to activate gene expression, and in turn, p19(ARF) synthesis causes
p53-dependent cell cycle arrest. Unlike genes such as Myc, adenovirus E1A, and
E2F-1, which, when overexpressed, activate the ARF-p53 pathway and trigger
apoptosis, DMP1, like ARF itself, does not induce programmed cell death.
Therefore, apart from its recently recognized role in protecting cells from
potentially oncogenic signals, ARF can be induced in response to
antiproliferative stimuli that do not obligatorily lead to apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC22408
PMID: 10097151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Gene. 1999 Mar 18;229(1-2):223-8.

Cloning and chromosomal localization of the gene encoding human cyclin D-binding 
Myb-like protein (hDMP1).

Bodner SM(1), Naeve CW, Rakestraw KM, Jones BG, Valentine VA, Valentine MB,
Luthardt FW, Willman CL, Raimondi SC, Downing JR, Roussel MF, Sherr CJ, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

The murine transcription factor murine cyclin D-binding Myb-like protein (mDmp1) 
arrests the cell cycle in G1 phase, through an activity that can be overridden by
direct interaction with the D-type cyclins. Here, we describe the identification,
sequence, chromosomal localization, and expression of the human cognate, hDMP1.
The hDMP1 cDNA contains a 2280bp open reading frame that shares a high degree of 
identity with the mDmp1 coding region. The 4.4kb hDMP1 messenger RNA is
ubiquitously expressed in normal human tissues, with highest levels in testis and
substructures within the brain. By use of fluorescence in situ hybridization with
a human genomic P1 probe, we assigned hDMP1 to chromosome 7, band q21. This
chromosomal region is frequently deleted as part of the 7q-minus and monosomy 7
abnormalities of human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome 
(MDS). We analyzed hDMP1 copy number by fluorescence in situ hybridization in
leukemic blasts from nine patients with abnormalities of the long arm of
chromosome 7, and in each case one allele of the hDMP1 gene was deleted.
Functional analysis of the mDmp1 protein has shown that it negatively regulates
cell proliferation, which suggests that this gene is a candidate suppressor of
malignant transformation. Further study will be needed to determine whether
gene-specific mutations implicate hDMP1 as a tumor suppressor in acute leukemias 
with deletions of the long arm of chromosome 7 or in other types of human
malignancy.

PMID: 10095122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 30;273(44):29188-94.

Regulation of the CD13/aminopeptidase N gene by DMP1, a transcription factor
antagonized by D-type cyclins.

Inoue K(1), Sherr CJ, Shapiro LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The binding of the Myb-like DMP1 transcription factor to DNA consensus sequences 
[CCCG(G/T)ATGT] in artificial promoters is antagonized by D-type cyclins with no 
requirement for their catalytic partners, cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4 and
CDK6. The subset of DMP1 binding sites containing the GGA core can bind Ets
family transcription factors Ets-1 and Ets-2. Screening of a series of natural
promoters revealed that the CD13/aminopeptidase N (APN; EC 3.4.11.2) promoter
could bind and be activated by DMP1. Activation of CD13/APN required both the
intact DNA binding and transactivation domains of DMP1 and was inhibited by
D-type cyclins, but not by cyclins A, B, C, or H, in a CDK-independent manner.
CD13/APN is transactivated by a cooperative interaction between c-Myb bound to
its cognate site and Ets-1 tethered to one of three GGA core-containing sites
located 30-50 base pairs downstream. DMP1 binds to one of the Ets binding sites
(designated Ets C) and synergizes with c-Myb in activating CD13/APN expression.
Analysis of nuclear lysates from KG1a early myeloid cells using an
oligonucleotide probe containing only the DMP1/Ets C binding site indicated that 
endogenous DMP1 and a putative Ets family member bind this element in vivo.
DMP1-DNA complexes were significantly more stable than those containing the Ets
factor. These data indicate that two different Myb family proteins collaborate in
regulating APN gene expression and point to a role for DMP1 in normal myeloid
cell development.

PMID: 9786929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Mar;18(3):1590-600.

Gene expression and cell cycle arrest mediated by transcription factor DMP1 is
antagonized by D-type cyclins through a cyclin-dependent-kinase-independent
mechanism.

Inoue K(1), Sherr CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

A novel 761-amino-acid transcription factor, DMP1, contains a central DNA binding
domain that includes three imperfect myb repeats flanked by acidic
transactivating domains at the amino and carboxyl termini. D-type cyclins
associate with a region of the DMP1 DNA binding domain immediately adjacent to
the myb repeats to form heteromeric complexes which detectably interact neither
with cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) nor with DNA. The segment of D-type cyclins
required for its interaction with DMP1 falls outside the "cyclin box," which
contains the residues predicted to contact CDK4. Hence, D-type cyclin point
mutants that do not interact with CDK4 can still bind to DMP1. Enforced
coexpression of either of three D-type cyclins (D1, D2, or D3) with DMP1 in
mammalian cells canceled its ability to activate gene expression. This property
was not shared by cyclins A, B, C, or H; did not depend upon CDK4 or CDK2
coexpression; was not subverted by a mutation in cyclin D1 that prevents its
interaction with CDK4; and was unaffected by inhibitors of CDK4 catalytic
activity. Introduction of DMP1 into mouse NIH 3T3 fibroblasts inhibited entry
into S phase. Cell cycle arrest depended upon the ability of DMP1 to bind to DNA 
and to transactivate gene expression and was specifically antagonized by
coexpression of D-type cyclins, including a D1 point mutant that does not bind to
CDK4. Taken together, these findings suggest that DMP1 induces genes that inhibit
S phase entry and that D-type cyclins can override DMP1-mediated growth arrest in
a CDK-independent manner.

PMCID: PMC108874
PMID: 9488476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Nov;16(11):6457-67.

Interaction of D-type cyclins with a novel myb-like transcription factor, DMP1.

Hirai H(1), Sherr CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The cyclin D-dependent kinases CDK4 and CDK6 trigger phosphorylation of the
retinoblastoma protein (RB) late in G1 phase, helping to cancel its
growth-suppressive function and thereby facilitating S-phase entry. Although
specific inhibition of cyclin D-dependent kinase activity in vivo can prevent
cells from entering S phase, it does not affect S-phase entry in cells lacking
functional RB, implying that RB may be the only substrate of CDK4 and CDK6 whose 
phosphorylation is necessary for G1 exit. Using a yeast two-hybrid interactive
screen, we have now isolated a novel cyclin D-interacting myb-like protein
(designated DMP1), which binds specifically to the nonamer DNA consensus
sequences CCCG(G/T)ATGT to activate transcription. A subset of these DMP1
recognition sequences containing a GGA trinucleotide core can also function as
Ets-responsive elements. DMP1 mRNA and protein are ubiquitously expressed
throughout the cell cycle in mouse tissues and in representative cell lines. DMP1
binds to D-type cyclins directly in vitro and when coexpressed in insect Sf9
cells. In both settings, it can be phosphorylated by cyclin D-dependent kinases, 
suggesting that its transcriptional activity may normally be regulated through
such mechanisms. These results raise the possibility that cyclin D-dependent
kinases regulate gene expression in an RB independent manner, thereby serving to 
link other genetic programs to the cell cycle clock.

PMCID: PMC231647
PMID: 8887674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


