
1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2006 Nov;63(22):2560-70.

The diversity of the DnaJ/Hsp40 family, the crucial partners for Hsp70
chaperones.

Qiu XB(1), Shao YM, Miao S, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, PR China.
xqiu@ibms.pumc.edu.cn

DnaJ/Hsp40 (heat shock protein 40) proteins have been preserved throughout
evolution and are important for protein translation, folding, unfolding,
translocation, and degradation, primarily by stimulating the ATPase activity of
chaperone proteins, Hsp70s. Because the ATP hydrolysis is essential for the
activity of Hsp70s, DnaJ/Hsp40 proteins actually determine the activity of Hsp70s
by stabilizing their interaction with substrate proteins. DnaJ/Hsp40 proteins all
contain the J domain through which they bind to Hsp70s and can be categorized
into three groups, depending on the presence of other domains. Six DnaJ homologs 
have been identified in Escherichia coli and 22 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Genome-wide analysis has revealed 41 DnaJ/Hsp40 family members (or putative
members) in humans. While 34 contain the typical J domains, 7 bear partially
conserved J-like domains, but are still suggested to function as DnaJ/ Hsp40
proteins. DnaJA2b, DnaJB1b, DnaJC2, DnaJC20, and DnaJC21 are named for the first 
time in this review; all other human DnaJ proteins were dubbed according to their
gene names, e.g. DnaJA1 is the human protein named after its gene DNAJA1. This
review highlights the progress in studying the domains in DnaJ/Hsp40 proteins,
introduces the mechanisms by which they interact with Hsp70s, and stresses their 
functional diversity.

PMID: 16952052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


