
1. Gene. 2015 Jul 10;565(2):235-41. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.04.016. Epub 2015 Apr
9.

Evaluation of housekeeping genes for normalizing real-time quantitative PCR
assays in pig skeletal muscle at multiple developmental stages.

Wang Y(1), Zhao Y(1), Li J(1), Liu H(1), Ernst CW(2), Liu X(3), Liu G(1), Xi
Y(1), Lei M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Swine Genetics and Breeding of Ministry of Agriculture, Key Lab of 
Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry of Education,
College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong (Central China) Agricultural
University, Wuhan, Hubei, PR China. (2)Department of Animal Science, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, MI, United States. (3)China Education Ministry's 
Key Laboratory in Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction,
College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan
430070, PR China. (4)Key Lab of Swine Genetics and Breeding of Ministry of
Agriculture, Key Lab of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction
of Ministry of Education, College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong
(Central China) Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, PR China. Electronic
address: leimg@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Quantitative PCR (qPCR) requires a constantly expressed housekeeping gene as an
internal control, the expression of which is similar in different biological
samples. In the present study, we evaluated the applicability and compared the
consistency of the gene expression of 16 reference genes, i.e., 10 common and 6
candidate genes, through qPCR assays in pig skeletal muscles at multiple
developmental stages. The stability of these 16 potential reference genes was
investigated using the geNorm and NormFinder methods. Our results indicated that 
DRAP1 and RNF7 were the most appropriate combination to normalize gene expression
in the Yorkshire samples, the combination of DRAP1 and WSB2 were appropriate in
the Tongcheng samples, H3F3A and DRAP1 in prenatal periods, DRAP1 and RNF7 in
postnatal periods, and the combination of DRAP1 and WSB2 was most suitable for
accurate normalization in whole samples. This result provides a strong basis for 
similar studies in pigs that explore the molecular mechanisms underlying skeletal
muscle development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25865298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Dev Biol. 2010 Oct 1;346(1):25-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.07.008. Epub 2010
Jul 14.

O-fucosylation of thrombospondin type 1 repeats restricts epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) and maintains epiblast pluripotency during mouse
gastrulation.

Du J(1), Takeuchi H, Leonhard-Melief C, Shroyer KR, Dlugosz M, Haltiwanger RS,
Holdener BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Institute for Cell and
Developmental Biology, Center for Developmental Genetics, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY 11794-5215, USA.

Thrombospondin type 1 repeat (TSR) superfamily members regulate diverse
biological activities ranging from cell motility to inhibition of angiogenesis.
In this study, we verified that mouse protein O-fucosyltransferase-2 (POFUT2)
specifically adds O-fucose to TSRs. Using two Pofut2 gene-trap lines, we
demonstrated that O-fucosylation of TSRs was essential for restricting epithelial
to mesenchymal transition in the primitive streak, correct patterning of
mesoderm, and localization of the definitive endoderm. Although Pofut2 mutant
embryos established anterior/posterior polarity, they underwent extensive
mesoderm differentiation at the expense of maintaining epiblast pluripotency.
Moreover, mesoderm differentiation was biased towards the vascular endothelial
cell lineage. Localization of Foxa2 and Cer1 expressing cells within the interior
of Pofut2 mutant embryos suggested that POFUT2 activity was also required for the
displacement of the primitive endoderm by definitive endoderm. Notably, Nodal,
BMP4, Fgf8, and Wnt3 expression were markedly elevated and expanded in Pofut2
mutants, providing evidence that O-fucose modification of TSRs was essential for 
modulation of growth factor signaling during gastrulation. The ability of Pofut2 
mutant embryos to form teratomas comprised of tissues from all three germ layer
origins suggested that defects in Pofut2 mutant embryos resulted from
abnormalities in the extracellular environment. This prediction is consistent
with the observation that POFUT2 targets are constitutive components of the
extracellular matrix (ECM) or associate with the ECM. For this reason, the Pofut2
mutants represent a valuable tool for studying the role of O-fucosylation in ECM 
synthesis and remodeling, and will be a valuable model to study how
post-translational modification of ECM components regulates the formation of
tissue boundaries, cell movements, and signaling.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2937101
PMID: 20637190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Mar;38(4):1228-39. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp1102. Epub 2009
Dec 3.

Dr1 (NC2) is present at tRNA genes and represses their transcription in human
cells.

Kantidakis T(1), White RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Garscube Estate, Switchback Road,
Bearsden, Glasgow, G61 1BD, UK.

Dr1 (also known as NC2beta) was identified as a repressor of RNA polymerase (pol)
II transcription. It was subsequently shown to inhibit pol III transcription when
expressed at high levels in vitro or in yeast cells. However, endogenous Dr1 was 
not detected at pol III-transcribed genes in growing yeast. In contrast, we
demonstrate that endogenous Dr1 is present at pol III templates in human cells,
as is its dimerization partner DRAP1 (also called NC2alpha). Expression of tRNA
by pol III is selectively enhanced by RNAi-mediated depletion of endogenous human
Dr1, but we found no evidence that DRAP1 influences pol III output in vivo. A
stable association was detected between endogenous Dr1 and the pol III-specific
transcription factor Brf1. This interaction may recruit Dr1 to pol III templates 
in vivo, as crosslinking to these sites increases following Brf1 induction. On
the basis of these data, we conclude that the physiological functions of human
Dr1 include regulation of pol III transcription.

PMCID: PMC2831321
PMID: 19965767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009 Aug 1;74(5):1431-40. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.10.021. Epub 2009 Feb 11.

To bleed or not to bleed. A prediction based on individual gene profiling
combined with dose-volume histogram shapes in prostate cancer patients undergoing
three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy.

Valdagni R(1), Rancati T, Ghilotti M, Cozzarini C, Vavassori V, Fellin G, Fiorino
C, Girelli G, Barra S, Zaffaroni N, Pierotti MA, Gariboldi M.

Author information: 
(1)Prostate Program, Fondazione IRCCS-Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano,
Italy. riccardo.valdagni@istitutotumori.mi.it

PURPOSE: The main purpose of this work was to try to elucidate why, despite
excellent rectal dose-volume histograms (DVHs), some patients treated for
prostate cancer exhibit late rectal bleeding (LRB) and others with poor DVHs do
not. Thirty-five genes involved in DNA repair/radiation response were analyzed in
patients accrued in the AIROPROS 0101 trial, which investigated the correlation
between LRB and dosimetric parameters.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Thirty patients undergoing conformal radiotherapy with
prescription doses higher than 70 Gy (minimum follow-up, 48 months) were
selected: 10 patients in the low-risk group (rectal DVH with the percent volume
of rectum receiving more than 70 Gy [V70Gy] < 20% and the percent volume of
rectum receiving more than 50 Gy [V50Gy] < 55%) with Grade 2 or Grade 3 (G2-G3)
LRB, 10 patients in the high-risk group (V70Gy > 25% and V50Gy > 60%) with G2-G3 
LRB, and 10 patients in the high-risk group with no toxicity. Quantitative
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction was performed on RNA from
lymphoblastoid cell lines obtained from Epstein-Barr virus-immortalized
peripheral-blood mononucleated cells and on peripheral blood mononucleated cells.
Interexpression levels were compared by using the Kruskal-Wallis test.
RESULTS: Intergroup comparison showed many constitutive differences: nine genes
were significantly down-regulated in the low-risk bleeder group vs. the high-risk
bleeder and high-risk nonbleeder groups: AKR1B1 (p = 0.019), BAZ1B (p = 0.042),
LSM7 (p = 0.0016), MRPL23 (p = 0.015), NUDT1 (p = 0.0031), PSMB4 (p = 0.079),
PSMD1 (p = 0.062), SEC22L1 (p = 0.040), and UBB (p = 0.018). Four genes were
significantly upregulated in the high-risk nonbleeder group than in the other
groups: DDX17 (p = 0.048), DRAP1 (p = 0.0025), RAD23 (p = 0.015), and SRF (p =
0.024). For most of these genes, it was possible to establish a cut-off value
that correctly classified most patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The predictive value of sensitivity and resistance to LRB of the
genes identified by the study is promising and should be tested in a larger data 
set.

PMID: 19211196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 3;284(14):9382-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805694200. Epub 2009
Feb 9.

Regulation of nuclear import and export of negative cofactor 2.

Kahle J(1), Piaia E, Neimanis S, Meisterernst M, Doenecke D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Department of Molecular 
Biology, Georg-August-University, Humboldtalle 23, 37073 Göttingen, Germany.

The negative cofactor 2 (NC2) is a protein complex composed of two subunits,
NC2alpha and NC2beta, and plays a key role in transcription regulation. Here we
investigate whether each subunit contains a nuclear localization signal (NLS)
that permits individual crossing of the nuclear membrane or whether nuclear
import of NC2alpha and NC2beta depends on heterodimerization. Our results from in
vitro binding studies and transfection experiments in cultured cells show that
each subunit contains a classical NLS (cNLS) that is recognized by the importin
alpha/beta heterodimer. Regardless of the individual cNLSs the two NC2 subunits
are translocated as a preassembled complex as co-transfection experiments with
wild-type and cNLS-deficient NC2 subunits demonstrate. Ran-dependent binding of
the nuclear export receptor Crm1/exportin 1 confirmed the presence of a
leucine-rich nuclear export signal (NES) in NC2beta. In contrast, NC2alpha does
not exhibit a NES. Our results from interspecies heterokaryon assays suggest that
heterodimerization with NC2alpha masks the NES in NC2beta, which prevents nuclear
export of the NC2 complex. A mutation in either one of the two cNLSs decreases
the extent of importin alpha/beta-mediated nuclear import of the NC2 complex. In 
addition, the NC2 complex can enter the nucleus via a second pathway, facilitated
by importin 13. Because importin 13 binds exclusively to the NC2 complex but not 
to the individual subunits this alternative import pathway depends on sequence
elements distributed among the two subunits.

PMCID: PMC2666590
PMID: 19204005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Feb;36(2):539-49. Epub 2007 Nov 29.

The dual control of TFIIB recruitment by NC2 is gene specific.

Masson P(1), Leimgruber E, Creton S, Collart MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, CMU, 1 rue Michel Servet
1211, Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Negative co-factor 2 (NC2) is a conserved eukaryotic complex composed of two
subunits, NC2alpha (Drap1) and NC2beta (Dr1) that associate through a
histone-fold motif. In this work, we generated mutants of NC2, characterized
target genes for these mutants and studied the assembly of NC2 and general
transcription factors on target promoters. We determined that the two NC2
subunits mostly function together to be recruited to DNA and regulate gene
expression. We found that NC2 strongly controls promoter association of TFIIB,
both negatively and positively. We could attribute the gene-specific repressor
effect of NC2 on TFIIB to the C-terminal domain of NC2beta, and define that it
requires ORF sequences of the target gene. In contrast, the positive function of 
NC2 on TFIIB targets is more general and requires adequate levels of the NC2
histone-fold heterodimer on promoters. Finally, we determined that NC2 becomes
limiting for TATA-binding protein (TBP) association with a heat inducible
promoter under heat stress. This study demonstrates an important positive role of
NC2 for formation of the pre-initiation complex on promoters, under normal
conditions through control of TFIIB, or upon activation by stress via control of 
TBP.

PMCID: PMC2241854
PMID: 18048413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 24;282(34):24767-76. Epub 2007 Jun 21.

The initiator core promoter element antagonizes repression of TATA-directed
transcription by negative cofactor NC2.

Malecová B(1), Gross P, Boyer-Guittaut M, Yavuz S, Oelgeschläger T.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, The Chart, Oxted,
Surrey RH8 0TL, United Kingdom.

Core promoter regions of protein-coding genes in metazoan genomes are
structurally highly diverse and can contain several distinct core promoter
elements, which direct accurate transcription initiation and determine basal
promoter strength. Diversity in core promoter structure is an important aspect of
transcription regulation in metazoans as it provides a basis for gene-selective
function of activators and repressors. The basal activity of TATA box-containing 
promoters is dramatically enhanced by the initiator element (INR), which can
function in concert with the TATA box in a synergistic manner. Here we report
that a functional INR provides resistance to NC2 (Dr1/DRAP1), a general repressor
of TATA promoters. INR-mediated resistance to NC2 is established during
transcription initiation complex assembly and requires TBP-associated factors
(TAFs) and TAF- and INR-dependent cofactor activity. Remarkably, the INR appears 
to stimulate TATA-dependent transcription similar to activators by strongly
enhancing recruitment of TFIIA and TFIIB and, at the same time, by compromising
NC2 binding.

PMID: 17584739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jun 12;104(24):10000-5. Epub 2007 Jun 4.

Global distribution of negative cofactor 2 subunit-alpha on human promoters.

Albert TK(1), Grote K, Boeing S, Stelzer G, Schepers A, Meisterernst M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Expression and Gene Vectors, GSF-National Research Center
for Environment and Health, Marchioninistrasse 25, 81377 Munich, Germany.

Negative cofactor 2 (NC2) forms a stable complex with TATA-binding protein (TBP) 
on promoters in vitro. Its association with TBP prevents the binding of TFIIB and
leads to inhibition of preinitiation complex formation. Here, we investigate the 
association of NC2 subunit-alpha with human RNA polymerase II promoter regions by
using gene-specific ChIP and genome-wide promoter ChIPchip analyses. We find
NC2alpha associated with a large number of human promoters, where it peaks close 
to the core regions. NC2 occupancy in vivo positively correlates with mRNA
levels, which perhaps reflects its capacity to stabilize TBP on promoter regions.
In single gene analyses, we confirm core promoter binding and in addition map the
NC2 complex to enhancer proximal regions. High-occupancy histone genes display a 
stable NC2/TFIIB ratio during the cell cycle, which otherwise varies markedly
from one gene to another. The latter is at least in part explained by an observed
negative correlation of NC2 occupancy with the presence of the TFIIB recognition 
element in core promoter regions. Our data establish the genome-wide basis for
general and gene-specific functions of NC2 in mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC1891239
PMID: 17548813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2005 Sep 1;61(Pt 9):812-7. Epub
2005 Aug 31.

The structure at 2.5 A resolution of human basophilic leukemia-expressed protein 
BLES03.

Bitto E(1), Bingman CA, Robinson H, Allard ST, Wesenberg GE, Phillips GN Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Eukaryotic Structural Genomics, Department of Biochemistry,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.

The crystal structure of the human basophilic leukemia-expressed protein (BLES03,
p5326, Hs.433573) was determined by single-wavelength anomalous diffraction and
refined to an R factor of 18.8% (Rfree = 24.5%) at 2.5 A resolution. BLES03 shows
no detectable sequence similarity to any functionally characterized proteins
using state-of-the-art sequence-comparison tools. The structure of BLES03 adopts 
a fold similar to that of eukaryotic transcription initiation factor 4E (eIF4E), 
a protein involved in the recognition of the cap structure of eukaryotic mRNA. In
addition to fold similarity, the electrostatic surface potentials of BLES03 and
eIF4E show a clear conservation of basic and acidic patches. In the crystal
lattice, the acidic amino-terminal helices of BLES03 monomers are bound within
the basic cavity of symmetry-related monomers in a manner analogous to the
binding of mRNA by eIF4E. Interestingly, the gene locus encoding BLES03 is
located between genes encoding the proteins DRAP1 and FOSL1, both of which are
involved in transcription initiation. It is hypothesized that BLES03 itself may
be involved in a biochemical process that requires recognition of nucleic acids.

PMCID: PMC1978119
PMID: 16511166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 14;281(15):9869-81. Epub 2006 Feb 16.

FEZ1 dimerization and interaction with transcription regulatory proteins involves
its coiled-coil region.

Assmann EM(1), Alborghetti MR, Camargo ME, Kobarg J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biologia Molecular Estrutural, Laboratório Nacional de Luz
Síncrotron, Rua Giuseppe Máximo Scolfaro 10.000, CP 6192, 13084-971 Campinas, SP,
Brasil.

The fasciculation and elongation protein zeta1 (FEZ1) is a mammalian orthologue
of the Caenorhabditis elegans protein UNC-76, which is necessary for axon growth 
in that nematode. In previous studies FEZ1 has been found to interact with
protein kinase Czeta, DISC1, the agnoprotein of the human polyomavirus JC virus, 
and E4B, a U-box-type ubiquitin-protein isopeptide ligase. We reported previously
that FEZ1 and its paralogue FEZ2 are proteins that interact with NEK1, a protein 
kinase involved in polycystic kidney disease and DNA repair mechanisms at the
G(2)/M phase of the cell cycle. Here we report the identification of 16 proteins 
that interact with human FEZ1-(221-396) in a yeast two-hybrid assay of a human
fetal brain cDNA library. The 13 interacting proteins of known functions take
part either in transcription regulation and chromatin remodeling (6 proteins),
the regulation of neuronal cell development (2 proteins) and cellular transport
mechanisms (3 proteins) or participate in apoptosis (2 proteins). We were able to
confirm eight of the observed interactions by in vitro pull-down assays with
recombinant fusion proteins. The confirmed interacting proteins include FEZ1
itself and three transcription controlling proteins (SAP30L, DRAP1, and BAF60a). 
In mapping studies we found that the C-terminal regions of FEZ1, and especially
its coiled-coil region, are involved in its dimerization, its heterodimerization 
with FEZ2, and in the interaction with 10 of the identified interacting proteins.
Our results give further support to the previous speculation of the functional
involvement of FEZ1 in neuronal development but suggest further that FEZ1 may
also be involved in transcriptional control.

PMID: 16484223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Nov;24(22):10072-82.

NC2alpha interacts with BTAF1 and stimulates its ATP-dependent association with
TATA-binding protein.

Klejman MP(1), Pereira LA, van Zeeburg HJ, Gilfillan S, Meisterernst M, Timmers
HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Division of Biomedical Genetics,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Transcriptional activity of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) is controlled by a
variety of proteins. The BTAF1 protein (formerly known as TAF(II)170/TAF-172 and 
the human ortholog of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Mot1p) and the NC2 complex
composed of NC2alpha (DRAP1) and NC2beta (Dr1) are able to bind to TBP directly
and regulate RNA polymerase II transcription both positively and negatively.
Here, we present evidence that the NC2alpha subunit interacts with BTAF1. In
contrast, the NC2beta subunit is not able to associate with BTAF1 and seems to
interfere with the BTAF1-TBP interaction. Addition of NC2alpha or the NC2 complex
can stimulate the ability of BTAF1 to interact with TBP. This function is
dependent on the presence of ATP in cell extracts but does not involve the ATPase
activity of BTAF1 nor phosphorylation of NC2alpha. Together, our results
constitute the first evidence of the physical cooperation between BTAF1 and
NC2alpha in TBP regulation and provide a framework to understand transcription
functions of NC2alpha and NC2beta in vivo.

PMCID: PMC525489
PMID: 15509807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2003;19:589-621.

Nodal signaling in vertebrate development.

Schier AF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine,
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.
schier@saturn.med.nyu.edu

TGFss signals belonging to the Nodal family set up the embryonic axes, induce
mesoderm and endoderm, pattern the nervous system, and determine left-right
asymmetry in vertebrates. Nodal signaling activates a canonical TGFss pathway
involving activin receptors, Smad2 transcription factors, and FoxH1 coactivators.
In addition, Nodal signaling is dependent on coreceptors of the EGF-CFC family
and antagonized by the Lefty and Cerberus families of secreted factors.
Additional modulators of Nodal signaling include convertases that regulate the
generation of the mature signal, and factors such as Arkadia and DRAP1 that
regulate the cellular responses to the signal. Complex regulatory cascades and
autoregulatory loops coordinate Nodal signaling during early development. Nodals 
have concentration-dependent roles and can act both locally and at a distance.
These studies demonstrate that Nodal signaling is modulated at almost every level
to precisely orchestrate tissue patterning during vertebrate embryogenesis.

PMID: 14570583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Exp Mol Med. 2002 Sep 30;34(4):259-64.

The DPE, a core promoter element for transcription by RNA polymerase II.

Kadonaga JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA 92093-0347, USA. jkadonaga@ucsd.edu

The core promoter is an important yet often overlooked component in the
regulation of transcription by RNA polymerase II. In fact, the core promoter is
the ultimate target of action of all of the factors and coregulators that control
the transcriptional activity of every gene. In this review, I describe our
current knowledge of a downstream core promoter element termed the DPE, which is 
a TFIID recognition site that is conserved from Drosophila to humans. The DPE is 
located from +28 to +32 relative to the +1 transcription start site, and is
mainly present in core promoters that lack a TATA box motif. Moreover, in
Drosophila, the DPE appears to be about as common as the TATA box. There are
distinct mechanisms of basal transcription from DPE- versus TATA-dependent core
promoters. For instance, NC2/Dr1-Drap1 is a repressor of TATA-dependent
transcription and an activator of DPE-dependent transcription. In addition,
DPE-specific and TATA-specific transcriptional enhancers have been identified.
These findings further indicate that the core promoter is an active participant
in the regulation of eukaryotic gene expression.

PMID: 12515390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 21;278(8):5744-9. Epub 2002 Dec 10.

Hypoxia actively represses transcription by inducing negative cofactor 2
(Dr1/DrAP1) and blocking preinitiation complex assembly.

Denko N(1), Wernke-Dollries K, Johnson AB, Hammond E, Chiang CM, Barton MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Division of Radiation and Cancer Biology,
Stanford University Medical School, Stanford, California 94305-5152, USA.

Hypoxia is a growth inhibitory stress associated with multiple disease states. We
find that hypoxic stress actively regulates transcription not only by activation 
of specific genes but also by selective repression. We reconstituted this bimodal
response to hypoxia in vitro and determined a mechanism for hypoxia-mediated
repression of transcription. Hypoxic cell extracts are competent for transcript
elongation, but cannot assemble a functional preinitiation complex (PIC) at a
subset of promoters. PIC assembly and RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain (CTD)
phosphorylation were blocked by hypoxic induction and core promoter binding of
negative cofactor 2 protein (NC2 alpha/beta, Dr1/DrAP1). Immunodepletion of NC2
beta/Dr1 protein complexes rescued hypoxic-repressed transcription without
alteration of normoxic transcription. Physiological regulation of NC2 activity
may represent an active means of conserving energy in response to hypoxic stress.

PMID: 12477712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Science. 2002 Dec 6;298(5600):1996-9.

Inhibition of excess nodal signaling during mouse gastrulation by the
transcriptional corepressor DRAP1.

Iratni R(1), Yan YT, Chen C, Ding J, Zhang Y, Price SM, Reinberg D, Shen MM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biochemistry, Division of
Nucleic Acids Enzymology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

The formation and patterning of mesoderm during mammalian gastrulation require
the activity of Nodal, a secreted mesoderm-inducing factor of the transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) family. Here we show that the transcriptional
corepressor DRAP1 has a very specific role in regulation of Nodal activity during
mouse embryogenesis. We find that loss of Drap1 leads to severe gastrulation
defects that are consistent with increased expression of Nodal and can be
partially suppressed by Nodal heterozygosity. Biochemical studies indicate that
DRAP1 interacts with and inhibits DNA binding by the winged-helix transcription
factor FoxH1 (FAST), a critical component of a positive feedback loop for Nodal
activity. We propose that DRAP1 limits the spread of a morphogenetic signal by
down-modulating the response to the Nodal autoregulatory loop.

PMID: 12471260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Plant Cell. 2002 Jan;14(1):181-95.

Functional dissection of a Rice Dr1/DrAp1 transcriptional repression complex.

Song W(1), Solimeo H, Rupert RA, Yadav NS, Zhu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Central Research and Development, DuPont Company, P.O. Box 80402, Wilmington, 
DE 19880-0402, USA.

We characterized rice cDNA sequences for OsDr1 and OsDrAp1, which encode
structural homologs of the eukaryotic general repressors Dr1 and DrAp1,
respectively. OsDr1 and OsDrAp1 are nuclear proteins that interact with each
other and with the TATA binding protein/DNA complex. In vitro and in vivo
functional analyses showed that OsDrAp1 functions as a repressor, unlike its role
in other eukaryotic systems, in which DrAp1 is a corepressor. OsDr1 and OsDrAp1
functioned together as a much stronger repressor than either one alone.
Functional dissections revealed that the N-terminal histone-fold domains of OsDr1
and OsDrAp1 were necessary and sufficient for their repression and
protein-protein interaction with each other. The unique glutamine- and
proline-rich domain of OsDr1 had no repression activity. The basic amino
acid-rich region and an arginine and glycine repeat domain of OsDrAp1 enhanced
its repression activity. Thus, although OsDr1 and OsDrAp1 function as repressors,
the functions of the two components are reversed compared with those of their
nonplant counterparts.

PMCID: PMC150559
PMID: 11826307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;21(8):2736-42.

Yeast NC2 associates with the RNA polymerase II preinitiation complex and
selectively affects transcription in vivo.

Geisberg JV(1), Holstege FC, Young RA, Struhl K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

NC2 (Dr1-Drap1 or Bur6-Ydr1) has been characterized in vitro as a general
negative regulator of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription that interacts
with TATA-binding protein (TBP) and inhibits its function. Here, we show that NC2
associates with promoters in vivo in a manner that correlates with
transcriptional activity and with occupancy by basal transcription factors. NC2
rapidly associates with promoters in response to transcriptional activation, and 
it remains associated under conditions in which transcription is blocked after
assembly of the Pol II preinitiation complex. NC2 positively and negatively
affects approximately 17% of Saccharomyces cerevisiae genes in a pattern that
resembles the response to general environmental stress. Relative to TBP, NC2
occupancy is high at promoters where NC2 is positively required for normal levels
of transcription. Thus, NC2 is associated with the Pol II preinitiation complex, 
and it can play a direct and positive role at certain promoters in vivo.

PMCID: PMC86904
PMID: 11283253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Science. 2000 Nov 3;290(5493):982-5.

A basal transcription factor that activates or represses transcription.

Willy PJ(1), Kobayashi R, Kadonaga JT.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Biology and Center for Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0347, USA.

We have identified an activity that is required for transcription of downstream
promoter element (DPE)-containing core promoters in vitro. The purified factor
was found to be the Drosophila homolog of the transcriptional repressor known as 
NC2 or Dr1-Drap1. Purified recombinant dNC2 activates DPE-driven promoters and
represses TATA-driven promoters. A mutant version of dNC2 can activate DPE
promoters but is unable to repress TATA promoters. Thus, the activation and
repression functions are distinct. These studies reveal that NC2 (Dr1-Drap1) is a
bifunctional basal transcription factor that differentially regulates gene
transcription through DPE or TATA box motifs.

PMID: 11062130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Jun 20;97(13):7184-9.

The C-terminal domain-phosphorylated IIO form of RNA polymerase II is associated 
with the transcription repressor NC2 (Dr1/DRAP1) and is required for
transcription activation in human nuclear extracts.

Castaño E(1), Gross P, Wang Z, Roeder RG, Oelgeschläger T.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Gene Regulation Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, The
Chart, Oxted, Surrey RH8 0TL, United Kingdom.

Activation of class II gene transcription may involve alleviation of
transcription repression as well as stimulation of the assembly and function of
the general RNA polymerase (RNAP) II transcription machinery. Here, we
investigated whether activator-reversible transcription repression by NC2
(Dr1/DRAP1) contributes to maximum induction levels in unfractionated HeLa
nuclear extracts. Surprisingly, we found that depletion of NC2 does not
significantly affect basal transcription, but dramatically reduces activated
transcription. Immunoblot analyses revealed that the loss of activator function
coincides with selective removal of the C-terminal domain
(CTD)-hyperphosphorylated RNAP IIO along with NC2. Coimmunoprecipitation
experiments with purified factors confirmed that NC2 interacts with RNAP IIO, but
not with the unphosphorylated or hypophosphorylated RNAP IIA or CTD-less RNAP IIB
forms. Finally, we demonstrate that, in contrast to previously published
observations in cell-free systems reconstituted with purified factors, only the
CTD-phosphorylated form of RNAP II can mediate activator function in the context 
of unfractionated HeLa nuclear extracts. These findings reveal an unexpected link
between NC2 and transcription activation and suggest that regulation of RNAP II
transcription through reversible CTD phosphorylation might be more complex than
previously proposed.

PMCID: PMC16520
PMID: 10852970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Microbiol. 2000 Apr;36(1):163-73.

The NC2 repressor is dispensable in yeast mutated for the Sin4p component of the 
holoenzyme and plays roles similar to Mot1p in vivo.

Lemaire M(1), Xie J, Meisterernst M, Collart MA.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie Médicale, CMU, 1 rue Michel Servet, 1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland.

NC2 (Dr1/DRAP1) and Mot1p are global repressors of transcription that have been
isolated in both Saccharomyces cerevisiae and humans. NC2 is a dimeric
histone-fold complex that represses RNA polymerase II transcription through
binding to TBP and inhibition of TFIIA and TFIIB. Mot1p is an ATPase that removes
DNA-bound TBP upon ATP hydrolysis. In this work, we studied the core promoter
specificity of NC2 in vivo using a strain that carries mutated NC2beta activity. 
We show that NC2, like Mot1p, is required for transcription of the HIS3 and HIS4 
TATA-less core promoters. Furthermore, whereas neither Mot1p nor NC2 appear to
function as repressors of the HIS3 gene in cells growing exponentially in
glucose, we find that both are required for repression of the HIS3 TATA promoter 
when cells go through the diauxic shift. Thus, the activity of these factors is
similarly regulated depending upon the physiological conditions, and it appears
that core promoters activated or repressed by them in vivo might be
distinguishable by whether or not they contain a canonical TATA sequence.
Finally, although NC2 is an essential factor for yeast viability, we isolated a
mutation in a non-essential component of the holoenzyme, Sin4p, that bypasses the
requirement for NC2.

PMID: 10760173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Apr;20(7):2455-65.

Genetic analysis of the YDR1-BUR6 repressor complex reveals an intricate balance 
among transcriptional regulatory proteins in yeast.

Kim S(1), Cabane K, Hampsey M, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854-5635, USA.

A transcriptional repressor complex encoded by two essential genes, YDR1 and
BUR6, was isolated from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and shown to be the functional
counterpart of the human repressor complex Dr1-DRAP1. To elucidate the mechanism 
of repression by this complex, altered forms of Ydr1 and Bur6 were studied in
vitro and in vivo. Deletion of the C-terminal 41 amino acids of Ydr1 resulted in 
loss of repressor activity and a growth defect, suggesting that the C-terminal
domain of Ydr1 functions as a potent transcriptional repressor. A screen for
extragenic suppressors of a cold-sensitive ydr1 (ydr1(cs)) mutant led to the
identification of recessive mutations in the SIN4 gene, which encodes a component
of the SRB-MED complex. The sin4 alleles suppressed not only ydr1(cs) mutations
but also bur6(cs) mutations. In contrast, deletion of the gal11 gene, whose
product is also a member of the SRB-MED complex, failed to suppress ydr1(cs) and 
bur6(cs) mutations, indicating that suppression is not due to general defects in 
the SRB-MED complex. Moreover, one of the sin4 alleles, but not the sin4
deletion, was found to specifically suppress the inviability of a ydr1 deletion, 
demonstrating that the essential function of Ydr1 becomes dispensable in a sin4
mutant background. Biochemical analysis of the SRB-MED complex from the sin4
suppressor strain revealed a structurally distinct form of the SRB-MED complex
that lacks a subset of mediator subunits. These results define a delicate balance
between positive and negative regulators of transcription operating through the
Ydr1-Bur6 repressor complex.

PMCID: PMC85436
PMID: 10713169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 10;274(50):36009-14.

The assembly of the CAAT-box binding complex at a photosynthesis gene promoter is
regulated by light, cytokinin, and the stage of the plastids.

Kusnetsov V(1), Landsberger M, Meurer J, Oelmüller R.

Author information: 
(1)Timiriazev Institute of Plant Physiology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow 
127276, Russia.

A functionally important region in the promoter of the spinach photosynthesis
gene AtpC, which encodes the subunit gamma of the chloroplast ATP synthase, is
located immediately upstream of the CAAT-box. A single nucleotide exchange in
this region (AAAATTCAAT --> AAGATCAAT) uncouples the expression of an AtpC
promoter::uidA gene fusion from the regulation by light, cytokinin, and
functional plastids and results in a high constitutive expression of the reporter
gene. By screening an Arabidopsis thaliana expression library with a
double-stranded wild-type oligonucleotide from this promoter region, we have
isolated cDNAs from Arabidopsis libraries that code for plant homologs of the
CAAT-box binding factor (CBF)-C. Binding occurs only in the presence of nuclear
extracts, consistent with reports from metazoa CBFs that the subunits A and B in 
addition to C are required for the formation of the CBF-DNA complex. At least
eight genes with homologies to CBF-C are present in the Arabidopsis genome; one
of them exhibits striking similarities to the gene for the human global
transcriptional repressor Drap1. In gel mobility shift assays, low binding
activity of CBF to the wild-type AtpC promoter sequence was observed with nuclear
extracts from tissue with low AtpC expression levels, i.e. extracts from
etiolated and photobleached seedlings, whereas high binding activity was
detectable with extracts from tissues with high AtpC expression levels, i.e.
extracts from light-grown seedlings and etiolated seedlings treated with
cytokinin. Binding to the mutant sequence, which directs constitutive high level 
uidA expression in vivo, is significantly stronger than to the wild-type
sequence. The data are consistent with the idea that the assembly of CBF at the
AtpC promoter is regulated in response to light and cytokinin and that the low
level of expression in etiolated and photobleached material is caused by an
inhibitory effect. The structure/function relationships of the Arabidopsis CBFs
are discussed in relation to their regulatory function in AtpC gene expression.

PMID: 10585491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Jan 1;26(1):372-5.

Histone Sequence Database: new histone fold family members.

Baxevanis AD(1), Landsman D.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Searches of the major public protein databases with core and linker chicken and
human histone sequences have resulted in the compilation of an annotated set of
histone protein sequences. In addition, new database searches with two distinct
motif search algorithms have identified several members of the histone fold
family, including human DRAP1 and yeast CSE4. Database resources include
information on conflicts between similar sequence entries in different source
databases, multiple sequence alignments, links to the Entrez integrated
information retrieval system, structures for histone and histone fold proteins,
and the ability to visualize structural data through Cn3D. The database currently
contains >1000 protein sequences, which are searchable by protein type, accession
number, organism name, or any other free text appearing in the definition line of
the entry. All sequences and alignments in this database are available through
the World Wide Web at http://www.nhgri.nih. gov/DIR/GTB/HISTONES or
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov/Baxevani/HISTONES

PMCID: PMC147196
PMID: 9399877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jan;18(1):10-8.

Involvement of negative cofactor NC2 in active repression by zinc
finger-homeodomain transcription factor AREB6.

Ikeda K(1), Halle JP, Stelzer G, Meisterernst M, Kawakami K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Jichi Medical School, Kawachi, Tochigi, Japan.

The transcription factor AREB6 contains a homeodomain flanked by two clusters of 
Krüppel type C2H2 zinc fingers. AREB6 binds to the E-box consensus sequence,
CACCTGT, through either the N- or the C-terminal zinc finger cluster. To gain
insights into the molecular mechanism by which AREB6 activates and represses gene
expression, we analyzed the domain structure of AREB6 in the context of a
heterologous DNA-binding domain by transient-transfection assays. The C-terminal 
region spanning amino acids 1011 to 1124 was identified as a conventional acidic 
activation domain. The region containing amino acids 754 to 901, which was
identified as a repression domain, consists of 40% hydrophobic amino acids
displaying no sequence similarities to other known repression domains. This
region repressed transcription in vitro in a HeLa nuclear extract but not in
reconstituted transcription systems consisting of transcription factor IID
(TFIID), TFIIB, TFIIE, TFIIH/F, and RNA polymerase II. The addition of
recombinant negative cofactor NC2 (NC2alpha/DRAP1 and NC2beta/Dr1) to the
reconstituted transcription system restored the activity of the AREB6 repression 
domain. We further demonstrated interactions between the AREB6 repression domain 
and NC2alpha in yeast two-hybrid assay. Our findings suggest a mechanism of
transcriptional repression that is mediated by the general cofactor NC2.

PMCID: PMC121442
PMID: 9418848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Apr;17(4):2057-65.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae BUR6 encodes a DRAP1/NC2alpha homolog that has both
positive and negative roles in transcription in vivo.

Prelich G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
New York 10461, USA. Prelich@aecom.yu.edu

BUR3 and BUR6 were identified previously by selecting for mutations that increase
transcription from an upstream activating sequence (UAS)-less promoter in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The bur3-1 and bur6-1 mutations are recessive, increase
transcription from a suc2 delta uas allele, and cause other mutant phenotypes,
suggesting that Bur3p and Bur6p function as general repressors of the basal
transcriptional machinery. The molecular cloning and characterization of BUR3 and
BUR6 are presented here. BUR3 is identical to MOT1, a previously characterized
essential gene that encodes an ATP-dependent inhibitor of the TATA box-binding
protein. Cloning and nucleotide sequence analysis reveals that BUR6 encodes a
homolog of DRAP1 (also called NC2alpha), a mammalian repressor of basal
transcription. Strains that contain a bur6 null allele are viable but grow
extremely poorly, demonstrating that BUR6 is critical for normal cell growth in
yeast. The Bur6p histone fold domain is required for function; an extensive
nonoverlapping set of deletion alleles throughout the histone fold domain impairs
BUR6 function in vivo, whereas mutations in the amino- and carboxy-terminal tails
have no detectable effect. BUR6 and BUR3/MOT1 have different functions depending 
on promoter context: although the bur3-1 and bur6-1 mutations increase
transcription from delta uas promoters, they result in reduced transcription from
the wild-type GAL1 and GAL10 promoters. This transcriptional defect is due to the
inability of the GAL10 UAS to function in bur6-1 strains. The similar phenotypes 
of bur6 and bur3 (mot1) mutations suggest that Bur6p and Mot1p have related, but 
not identical, functions in modulating the activity of the general transcription 
machinery in vivo.

PMCID: PMC232053
PMID: 9121454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Apr 1;94(7):3145-50.

Functional antagonism between RNA polymerase II holoenzyme and global negative
regulator NC2 in vivo.

Gadbois EL(1), Chao DM, Reese JC, Green MR, Young RA.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Activation of eukaryotic class II gene expression involves the formation of a
transcription initiation complex that includes RNA polymerase II, general
transcription factors, and SRB components of the holoenzyme. Negative regulators 
of transcription have been described, but it is not clear whether any are general
repressors of class II genes in vivo. We reasoned that defects in truly global
negative regulators should compensate for deficiencies in SRB4 because SRB4 plays
a positive role in holoenzyme function. Genetic experiments reveal that this is
indeed the case: a defect in the yeast homologue of the human negative regulator 
NC2 (Dr1 x DRAP1) suppresses a mutation in SRB4. Global defects in mRNA synthesis
caused by the defective yeast holoenzyme are alleviated by the NC2 suppressing
mutation in vivo, indicating that yeast NC2 is a global negative regulator of
class II transcription. These results imply that relief from repression at class 
II promoters is a general feature of gene activation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC20336
PMID: 9096360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Feb 4;94(3):820-5.

The Dr1/DRAP1 heterodimer is a global repressor of transcription in vivo.

Kim S(1), Na JG, Hampsey M, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, University of 
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Piscataway 08854-5635, USA.

A general repressor extensively studied in vitro is the human Dr1/DRAP1
heterodimeric complex. To elucidate the function of Dr1 and DRAP1 in vivo, the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae Dr1/DRAP1 repressor complex was identified. The
repressor complex is encoded by two essential genes, designated YDR1 and BUR6.
The inviability associated with deletion of the yeast genes can be overcome by
expressing the human genes. However, the human corepressor DRAP1 functions in
yeast only when human Dr1 is coexpressed. The yDr1/Bur6 complex represses
transcription in vitro in a reconstituted RNA polymerase II transcription system.
Repression of transcription could be overcome by increasing the concentration of 
TATA-element binding protein (TBP). Consistent with the in vitro results,
overexpression of YDR1 in vivo resulted in decreased mRNA accumulation.
Furthermore, YDR1 overexpression impaired cell growth, an effect that could be
rescued by overexpression of TBP. In agreement with our previous studies in
vitro, we found that overexpression of Dr1 in vivo also affected the accumulation
of RNA polymerase III transcripts, but not of RNA polymerase I transcripts. Our
results demonstrate that Dr1 functions as a repressor of transcription in vivo
and, moreover, directly targets TBP, a global regulator of transcription.

PMCID: PMC19597
PMID: 9023340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jan;17(1):36-45.

Functional dissection of a human Dr1-DRAP1 repressor complex.

Yeung K(1), Kim S, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey,
Piscataway 08854-5635, USA.

The heterotetrameric Dr1-DRAP1 transcriptional repressor complex was functionally
dissected. Dr1 was found to contain two domains required for repression of
transcription. The tethering domain interacts with the TATA box binding protein
and directs the repressor complex to the promoter. This tethering domain can be
replaced by a domain conferring sequence-specific recognition to the repressor
complex. In the absence of the tethering domain, Dr1 interacts with its
corepressor DRAP1, but this interaction is not functional. The enhancement of
Dr1-mediated repression of transcription by DRAP1 requires the tethering domain. 
The second domain of Dr1 is the repression domain, which is glutamine-alanine
rich. A 65-amino-acid polypeptide containing the repression domain fused to the
Ga14 DNA binding domain repressed transcription when directed to TATA-containing 
and TATA-less promoters. This repression domain was also found to functionally
and directly interact with the TATA box binding protein.

PMCID: PMC231727
PMID: 8972183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Genes Dev. 1996 Apr 15;10(8):1033-48.

Requirement of a corepressor for Dr1-mediated repression of transcription.

Mermelstein F(1), Yeung K, Cao J, Inostroza JA, Erdjument-Bromage H, Eagelson K, 
Landsman D, Levitt P, Tempst P, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey,
Piscataway 08854-5635, USA.

A Dr1-associated polypeptide (DRAP1) was isolated from HeLa cells and found to
function as a corepressor of transcription. Corepressor function requires an
interaction between DRAP1 and Dr1. Heterodimer formation was dependent on a
histone fold motif present at the amino terminus of both polypeptides.
Association of DRAP1 with Dr1 results in higher stability of the Dr1-TBP-TATA
motif complex and precluded the entry of TFIIA and/or TFIIB to preinitiation
complexes. DRAP1 was found to be expressed in all tissues analyzed with higher
levels in tissues with a low mitotic index. Analysis of DRAP1 in the developing
brain of rat demonstrated undetectable levels of DRAP1 in actively dividing cells
but high levels of DRAP1 expression in differentiated non dividing cells. Dr1 was
immunodetected in all cells analyzed. A model for DRAP1-dependent, Dr1-mediated
repression of transcription is proposed.

PMID: 8608938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


