
1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Dec;69:11-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.10.004.
Epub 2015 Oct 13.

A role for dZIP89B in Drosophila dietary zinc uptake reveals additional
complexity in the zinc absorption process.

Richards CD(1), Warr CG(1), Burke R(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Monash University, Victoria, Australia.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Monash University, Victoria, Australia.
Electronic address: richard.burke@monash.edu.

Dietary zinc is the principal source of zinc in eukaryotes, with its uptake and
distribution controlled by a complex network of numerous membrane-spanning
transport proteins. Dietary absorption is achieved by members of the SLC39A (ZIP)
gene family, which encode proteins that are generally responsible for the
movement of zinc into the cytosol. ZIP4 is thought to be the primary mammalian
zinc uptake gene in the small intestine, with mutations in this gene causing the 
zinc deficiency disease Acrodermatitis enteropathica. In Drosophila, dual
knockdown of the major dietary zinc uptake genes dZIP42C.1 (dZIP1) and dZIP42C.2 
(dZIP2) results in a severe sensitivity to zinc-deficient media. However, the
symptoms associated with ZIP4 loss can be reversed by zinc supplementation and
dZIP42C.1 and 2 knockdown has minimal effect under normal dietary conditions,
suggesting that additional pathways for zinc absorption exist in both mammals and
flies. This study provides evidence that dZIP89B is an ideal candidate for this
role in Drosophila, encoding a low-affinity zinc uptake transporter active in the
posterior midgut. Flies lacking dZIP89B, while viable and apparently healthy,
show indications of low midgut zinc levels, including reduced metallothionein B
expression and compensatory up-regulation of dZIP42C.1 and 2. Furthermore dZIP89B
mutants display a dramatic resistance to toxic dietary zinc levels which is
abrogated by midgut-specific restoration of dZIP89B activity. We postulate that
dZIP89B works in concert with the closely related dZIP42C.1 and 2 to ensure
optimal zinc absorption under a range of dietary conditions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26545796  [PubMed - in process]


2. Biometals. 2015 Dec;28(6):967-74. doi: 10.1007/s10534-015-9881-5. Epub 2015 Sep
28.

Local and systemic effects of targeted zinc redistribution in Drosophila neuronal
and gastrointestinal tissues.

Richards CD(1), Burke R(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Monash University, Wellington Rd., Clayton,
VIC, 3800, Australia. (2)School of Biological Sciences, Monash University,
Wellington Rd., Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia. richard.burke@monash.edu.

While the effects of systemic zinc ion deficiency and toxicity on animal health
are well documented, the impacts of localized, tissue-specific disturbances in
zinc homeostasis are less well understood. Previously we have identified zinc
dyshomeostasis scenarios caused by the targeted manipulation of zinc transport
genes in the Drosophila eye. Over expression of the uptake transporter dZIP42C.1 
(dZIP1) combined with knockdown of the efflux transporter dZNT63C (dZNT1) causes 
a zinc toxicity phenotype, as does over expression of dZIP71B or dZNT86D.
However, all three genotypes result in different morphologies, responses to
dietary zinc, and genetic interactions with the remaining zinc transport genes,
indicating that each causes a different redistribution of zinc within affected
cells. dZNT86D (eGFP) over expression generates a completely different phenotype,
interpreted as a Golgi zinc deficiency. Here we assess the effect of each of
these transgenes when targeted to a range of Drosophila tissues. We find that
dZIP71B is a particularly potent zinc uptake gene, causing early developmental
lethality when targeted to multiple different tissue types. dZNT86D over
expression (Golgi-only zinc toxicity) is less deleterious, but causes highly
penetrant adult cuticle, sensory bristle and wing expansion defects. The
dZIP42C.1 over expression, dZNT63C knockdown combination causes only moderate
adult cuticle defects and sensitivity to dietary zinc when expressed in the
midgut. The Golgi-only zinc deficiency caused by dZNT86D (eGFP) expression
results in mild cuticle defects, highly penetrant wing expansion defects and
developmental lethality when targeted to the central nervous system and,
uniquely, the fat bodies.

PMID: 26411574  [PubMed - in process]


3. PLoS Biol. 2015 Apr 10;13(4):e1002129. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002129.
eCollection 2015.

GSK3ß-Dzip1-Rab8 cascade regulates ciliogenesis after mitosis.

Zhang B(1), Zhang T(1), Wang G(1), Wang G(1), Chi W(1), Jiang Q(1), Zhang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation of the Ministry
of Education and the State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane
Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

The primary cilium, which disassembles before mitotic entry and reassembles after
mitosis, organizes many signal transduction pathways that are crucial for cell
life and individual development. However, how ciliogenesis is regulated during
the cell cycle remains largely unknown. Here we show that GSK3ß, Dzip1, and Rab8 
co-regulate ciliogenesis by promoting the assembly of the ciliary membrane after 
mitosis. Immunofluorescence and super-resolution microscopy showed that Dzip1 was
localized to the periciliary diffusion barrier and enriched at the mother
centriole. Knockdown of Dzip1 by short hairpin RNAs led to failed ciliary
localization of Rab8, and Rab8 accumulation at the basal body. Dzip1
preferentially bound to Rab8GDP and promoted its dissociation from its inhibitor 
GDI2 at the pericentriolar region, as demonstrated by sucrose gradient
centrifugation of purified basal bodies, immunoprecipitation, and
acceptor-bleaching fluorescence resonance energy transfer assays. By means of in 
vitro phosphorylation, in vivo gel shift, phospho-peptide identification by mass 
spectrometry, and GST pulldown assays, we demonstrated that Dzip1 was
phosphorylated by GSK3ß at S520 in G0 phase, which increased its binding to GDI2 
to promote the release of Rab8GDP at the cilium base. Moreover, ciliogenesis was 
inhibited by overexpression of the GSK3ß-nonphosphorylatable Dzip1 mutant or by
disabling of GSK3ß by specific inhibitors or knockout of GSK3ß in cells.
Collectively, our data reveal a unique cascade consisting of GSK3ß, Dzip1, and
Rab8 that regulates ciliogenesis after mitosis.

PMCID: PMC4393111
PMID: 25860027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015 Mar 1;91(3):650-8. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.11.013. Epub 2015 Jan 30.

Epigenetic regulation of KLHL34 predictive of pathologic response to preoperative
chemoradiation therapy in rectal cancer patients.

Ha YJ(1), Kim CW(2), Roh SA(1), Cho DH(3), Park JL(4), Kim SY(4), Kim JH(5), Choi
EK(6), Kim YS(7), Kim JC(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; 
Institute of Innovative Cancer Research and Asan Institute for Life Sciences,
Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Surgery, University of Ulsan 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Institute of Innovative Cancer Research and
Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea; Graduate
School of East-West Medical Science, Kyung Hee University, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.
(4)Medical Genomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience &
Biotechnology, Daejeon, Korea. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (6)Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Institute of Innovative
Cancer Research and Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, Seoul,
Korea. (7)Medical Genomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience & Biotechnology, Daejeon, Korea; Institute of Innovative Cancer
Research and Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
Electronic address: yongsung@kribb.re.kr. (8)Department of Surgery, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Institute of Innovative Cancer Research 
and Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
Electronic address: jckim@amc.seoul.kr.

PURPOSE: Prediction of individual responsiveness to preoperative chemoradiation
therapy (CRT) is urgently needed in patients with poorly responsive locally
advanced rectal cancer (LARC).
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Candidate methylation genes associated with
radiosensitivity were identified using a 3-step process. In the first step,
genome-wide screening of methylation genes was performed in correlation with
histopathologic tumor regression grade in 45 patients with LARC. In the second
step, the methylation status of selected sites was analyzed by pyrosequencing in 
67 LARC patients, including 24 patients analyzed in the first step. Finally,
colorectal cancer cell clones with stable KLHL34 knockdown were generated and
tested for cellular sensitivity to radiation.
RESULTS: Genome-wide screening identified 7 hypermethylated CpG sites (DZIP1
cg24107021, DZIP1 cg26886381, ZEB1 cg04430381, DKK3 cg041006961, STL cg00991794, 
KLHL34 cg01828474, and ARHGAP6 cg07828380) associated with preoperative CRT
responses. Radiosensitivity in patients with hypermethylated KLHL34 cg14232291
was confirmed by pyrosequencing in additional cohorts. Knockdown of KLHL34
significantly reduced colony formation (KLHL34 sh#1: 20.1%, P=.0001 and KLHL34
sh#2: 15.8%, P=.0002), increased the cytotoxicity (KLHL34 sh#1: 14.8%, P=.019 and
KLHL34 sh#2: 17.9%, P=.007) in LoVo cells, and increased radiation-induced
caspase-3 activity and the sub-G1 population of cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The methylation status of KLHL34 cg14232291 may be a predictive
candidate of sensitivity to preoperative CRT, although further validation is
needed in large cohorts using various cell types.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25680604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Mar;60:23-33. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.12.017.
Epub 2015 Jan 3.

Compartmentalized zinc deficiency and toxicities caused by ZnT and Zip gene over 
expression result in specific phenotypes in Drosophila.

Dechen K(1), Richards CD(2), Lye JC(2), Hwang JE(2), Burke R(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Monash University, Victoria, Australia.
Electronic address: kesang.sherubtse@rub.edu.bt. (2)School of Biological
Sciences, Monash University, Victoria, Australia. (3)School of Biological
Sciences, Monash University, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address:
richard.burke@monash.edu.

Movement of zinc ions across cellular membranes is achieved mainly by two
families of zinc transport genes encoding multi-transmembrane domain proteins.
Members of the Zip family generally transport zinc into the cytosol, either from 
outside the cell or from the lumen of subcellular organelles such as the
endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi, endosomes or storage vacuoles. ZnT proteins move
zinc in the opposite direction, resulting in efflux from the cell or uptake into 
organelles. Zinc homeostasis at both the cellular and systemic level is achieved 
by the coordinated action of numerous Zip and ZnT proteins, twenty-four in
mammals and seventeen in the vinegar fly Drosophila melanogaster. Previously, we 
have identified a zinc toxicity phenotype in the Drosophila eye, caused by
targeted over expression of dZip42C.1 (dZip1) combined with knockdown of dZnT63C 
(dZnT1). In general, this phenotype was rescued by increased zinc efflux or
decreased uptake and was exacerbated by decreased efflux or increased uptake. Now
we have identified three additional zinc dyshomeostasis phenotypes caused by over
expression of dZnT86D, dZnT86D(eGFP) and dZip71B(FLAG). Genetic and dietary
manipulation experiments showed that these three phenotypes all differ both from 
each other and from our original zinc toxicity phenotype. Based on these data and
the approximate subcellular localization of each zinc transport protein, we
propose that each phenotype represents a different redistribution of zinc within 
these cells, resulting in a Golgi zinc toxicity, a Golgi zinc deficiency and a
combined Golgi/other organelle zinc toxicity respectively. We are able to group
the remaining Drosophila Zip and ZnT genes into several functional categories
based on their interaction with the three novel zinc dyshomeostasis phenotypes,
allowing the role of each zinc transport protein to be defined in greater detail.
This research highlights the differential effects that redistribution of zinc can
have within a particular tissue and identifies the Golgi as being particularly
sensitive to both excess and insufficient zinc.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25562517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Dev Dyn. 2015 Feb;244(2):211-23. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24237. Epub 2015 Jan 8.

Comparative analysis of genes regulated by Dzip1/iguana and hedgehog in
zebrafish.

Arnold CR(1), Lamont RE, Walker JT, Spice PJ, Chan CK, Ho CY, Childs SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Alberta Children's
Hospital Research Institute, University of Calgary, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The zebrafish genetic mutant iguana (igu) has defects in the ciliary 
basal body protein Dzip1, causing improper cilia formation. Dzip1 also interacts 
with the downstream transcriptional activators of Hedgehog (Hh), the Gli
proteins, and Hh signaling is disrupted in igu mutants. Hh governs a wide range
of developmental processes, including stabilizing developing blood vessels to
prevent hemorrhage. Using igu mutant embryos and embryos treated with the Hh
pathway antagonist cyclopamine, we conducted a microarray to determine genes
involved in Hh signaling mediating vascular stability.
RESULTS: We identified 40 genes with significantly altered expression in both igu
mutants and cyclopamine-treated embryos. For a subset of these, we used in situ
hybridization to determine localization during embryonic development and confirm 
the expression changes seen on the array.
CONCLUSIONS: Through comparing gene expression changes in a genetic model of
vascular instability with a chemical inhibition of Hh signaling, we identified a 
set of 40 differentially expressed genes with potential roles in vascular
stabilization.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25476803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. BMC Mol Biol. 2014 Jul 3;15:12. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-15-12.

Ribonomic analysis of human DZIP1 reveals its involvement in ribonucleoprotein
complexes and stress granules.

Shigunov P, Sotelo-Silveira J, Stimamiglio MA, Kuligovski C, Irigoín F, Badano
JL, Munroe D, Correa A, Dallagiovanna B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cells Basic Biology Laboratory, Instituto Carlos Chagas, FIOCRUZ, Algacyr
Munhoz Mader 3775, Curitiba 81350-010, Brazil. brunod@tecpar.br.

BACKGROUND: DZIP1 (DAZ-interacting protein 1) has been described as a component
of the Hh signaling pathway with a putative regulatory role in ciliogenesis.
DZIP1 interacts with DAZ RNA binding proteins in embryonic stem cells and human
germ cells suggesting a role in mRNA regulation.
RESULTS: We investigated DZIP1 function in HeLa cells and its involvement in
ribonucleoprotein complexes. DZIP1 was predominantly located in granules in the
cytoplasm. Under oxidative stress conditions, DZIP1 re-localized to stress
granules. DZIP appears to be important for the formation of stress granules
during the stress response. We used immunoprecipitation assays with antibodies
against DZIP1 and microarray hybridization to identify mRNAs associated with
DZIP1. The genetic networks formed by the DZIP1-associated mRNAs were involved in
cell cycle and gene expression regulation. DZIP1 is involved in the Hedgehog
signaling pathway. We used cyclopamine, a specific inhibitor of this pathway, to 
analyze the expression of DZIP1 and its associated mRNAs. The abundance of
DZIP1-associated mRNAs increased with treatment; however, the silencing or
overexpression of DZIP1 in HeLa cells had no effect on the accumulation of the
associated mRNAs. Polysomal profile analysis by sucrose gradient centrifugation
demonstrated the presence of DZIP1 in the polysomal fraction.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that DZIP1 is part of an RNP complex that
occupies various subcellular locations. The diversity of the mRNAs associated
with DZIP1 suggests that this protein is a component of different RNPs associated
with translating polysomes and with RNA granules.

PMCID: PMC4091656
PMID: 24993635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 8;288(45):32809-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.512962. Epub 2013
Sep 26.

Stabilization of speckle-type POZ protein (Spop) by Daz interacting protein 1
(Dzip1) is essential for Gli turnover and the proper output of Hedgehog
signaling.

Schwend T(1), Jin Z, Jiang K, Mitchell BJ, Jia J, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Comparative Biosciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61802.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is essential for embryonic development and adult tissue
homeostasis. The Gli/Cubitus interruptus (Ci) family of transcription factors
acts at the downstream end of the pathway to mediate Hh signaling. Both
Hh-dependent and -independent Gli regulatory mechanisms are important for the
output of Hh signaling. Daz interacting protein 1 (Dzip1) has bipartite positive 
and negative functions in the Hh pathway. The positive Hh regulatory function
appears to be attributed to a requirement for Dzip1 during ciliogenesis. The
mechanism by which Dzip1 inhibits Hh signaling, however, remains largely unclear.
We recently found that Dzip1 is required for Gli turnover, which may account for 
its inhibitory function in Hh signaling. Here, we report that Dzip1 regulates
Gli/Ci turnover by preventing degradation of speckle-type POZ protein (Spop), a
protein that promotes proteasome-dependent turnover of Gli proteins. We provide
evidence that Dzip1 regulates the stability of Spop independent of its function
in ciliogenesis. Partial knockdown of Dzip1 to levels insufficient for perturbing
ciliogenesis, sensitized Xenopus embryos to Hh signaling, leading to phenotypes
that resemble activation of Hh signaling. Importantly, overexpression of Spop was
able to restore proper Gli protein turnover and rescue phenotypes in
Dzip1-depleted embryos. Consistently, depletion of Dzip1 in Drosophila S2 cells
destabilized Hh-induced BTB protein (HIB), the Drosophila homolog of Spop, and
increased the level of Ci. Thus, Dzip1-dependent stabilization of Spop/HIB is
evolutionarily conserved and essential for proper regulation of Gli/Ci proteins
in the Hh pathway.

PMCID: PMC3820914
PMID: 24072710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. BMC Biol. 2013 Sep 24;11:101. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-11-101.

Functional studies of Drosophila zinc transporters reveal the mechanism for
dietary zinc absorption and regulation.

Qin Q(1), Wang X, Zhou B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, School of Life
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
zhoubing@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Zinc is key to the function of many proteins, but the process of
dietary zinc absorption is not well clarified. Current knowledge about dietary
zinc absorption is fragmented, and mostly derives from incomplete mammalian
studies. To gain a comprehensive picture of this process, we systematically
characterized all zinc transporters (that is, the Zip and ZnT family members) for
their possible roles in dietary zinc absorption in a genetically amenable model
organism, Drosophila melanogaster.
RESULTS: A set of plasma membrane-resident zinc transporters was identified to be
responsible for absorbing zinc from the lumen into the enterocyte and the
subsequent exit of zinc to the circulation. dZip1 and dZip2, two functionally
overlapping zinc importers, are responsible for absorbing zinc from the lumen
into the enterocyte. Exit of zinc to the circulation is mediated through another 
two functionally overlapping zinc exporters, dZnT1, and its homolog CG5130
(dZnT77C). Somewhat surprisingly, it appears that the array of intracellular ZnT 
proteins, including the Golgi-resident dZnT7, is not directly involved in dietary
zinc absorption. By modulating zinc status in different parts of the body, we
found that regulation of dietary zinc absorption, in contrast to that of iron, is
unresponsive to bodily needs or zinc status outside the gut. The zinc
transporters that are involved in dietary zinc absorption, including the
importers dZip1 and dZip2, and the exporter dZnT1, are respectively regulated at 
the RNA and protein levels by zinc in the enterocyte.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study using the model organism Drosophila thus starts to reveal 
a comprehensive sketch of dietary zinc absorption and its regulatory control, a
process that is still incompletely understood in mammalian organisms. The
knowledge gained will act as a reference for future mammalian studies, and also
enable an appreciation of this important process from an evolutionary
perspective.

PMCID: PMC4015762
PMID: 24063361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 11;288(41):29518-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.492066. Epub
2013 Aug 16.

Centrosomal protein DZIP1 regulates Hedgehog signaling by promoting cytoplasmic
retention of transcription factor GLI3 and affecting ciliogenesis.

Wang C(1), Low WC, Liu A, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Genetic Medicine and.

The primary cilium is required for Hedgehog signaling. So far, all known
ciliogenic proteins regulate Hedgehog signaling through their role in
ciliogenesis. Here we show that the mouse DZIP1 regulates Hedgehog signaling
through two mechanisms. First, DZIP1 interacts with GLI3, a transcriptional
regulator for Hedgehog signaling, and prevents GLI3 from entering the nucleus.
Second, DZIP1 is required for ciliogenesis. We show that DZIP1 colocalizes and
interacts with CEP164, a protein localizing at appendages of the mother
centrioles, and IFT88, a component of the intraflagellar transport (IFT)
machinery. Functionally, both CEP164 and Ninein appendage proteins fail to
localize to ciliary appendages in Dzip1 mutant cells; IFT components are not
recruited to the basal body of cilia. Importantly, the accumulation of GLI3 in
the nucleus is independent of loss of primary cilia in Dzip1 mutant cells.
Therefore, DZIP1 is the first known ciliogenic protein that regulates Hedgehog
signaling through a dual mechanism and that biochemically links IFT machinery
with Hedgehog pathway components.

PMCID: PMC3795250
PMID: 23955340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2012 May;18(5):466-71.

[GTW-induced abnormal expressions of testicular reproduction-related genes and
intervention with kidney-tonifying Chinese herbs].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang XX(1), Huang D, Liu NN, Li J, Lin RY, Zhang XZ, Wu F, He LQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology/Shanghai Key Clinical Laboratory of Traditional
Chinese Medicine/Shanghai Higher Education Innovation Group, Shanghai Shuguang
Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Shanghai 200021, China. yinglianz@sohu.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore the abnormal expressions of testicular reproduction-related
genes induced by glycosides of Tripterygium wilfordii (GTW) and the intervention 
with kidney-tonifying Chinese herbs.
METHODS: Adult Balb/C male mice were fed on GTW at 30 mg per kg per d for 3 weeks
to establish a model of reproductive dysfunction. The model mice were divided
into different groups to receive intragastrical administration of saline (0.25
ml/d), GTW (30 mg per kg per d), Cistanche (10 g per kg per d), Rehmannia (10 g
per kg per d), and Rehmannia + Cistanche (20 g per kg per d), respectively, once 
a day for 3 weeks. And a Cistanches pretreatment group was treated with GTW (30
mg per kg per d) and Cistanche (10 g per kg per d) for the same length of time.
Then we detected the changed expressions of testicular reproduction-related genes
Dzip1, Fas, c-jun and Wnt4 in each group.
RESULTS: The model mice showed an obviously down-regulated expression of the Y
chromosome microdeletion-related gene Dzip1, and up-regulated expressions of the 
germ cell apoptosis-related gene Fas, proto-oncogene c-jun, and signal
transduction-related gene Wnt4. Intervention with Chinese herbs achieved
different degrees of improvement of the mice's reproductivity, and the most
obvious efficacy was observed with the combined use of kidney-yang tonifying
Cistanche and kidney-yin nourishing Rehmannia.
CONCLUSION: GTW exerts significant impact on reproduction-related genes. Both the
kidney-yang tonifying drug Cistanche and kidney-yin nourishing drug Rehmannia can
counteract some of the reproductive toxicity of GTW, while the combination of the
two can further enhance the effect.

PMID: 22741448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(4):e1002683. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002683. Epub 2012 Apr 
26.

Genetic inhibition of solute-linked carrier 39 family transporter 1 ameliorates
aß pathology in a Drosophila model of Alzheimer's disease.

Lang M(1), Wang L, Fan Q, Xiao G, Wang X, Zhong Y, Zhou B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, School of Life
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. mail: langminglin@tsinghua.org

The aggregation or oligomerization of amyloid-ß (Aß) peptide is thought to be the
primary causative event in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Considerable in vitro evidence indicates that the aggregation/oligomerization of 
Aß is promoted in the presence of Zn; however, the functional role of Zn in AD
pathogenesis is still not well clarified in vivo. Zn is imported into the brain
mainly through the solute-linked carrier (Slc) 39 family transporters. Using a
genetically tractable Drosophila model, we found that the expression of dZip1,
the orthologue of human Slc39 family transporter hZip1 in Drosophila, was altered
in the brains of Aß42-expressing flies, and Zn homeostasis could be modulated by 
forcible dZip1 expression changes. An array of phenotypes associated with Aß
expression could be modified by altering dZip1 expression. Importantly, Aß42
fibril deposits as well as its SDS-soluble form were dramatically reduced upon
dZip1 inhibition, resulting in less neurodegeneration, significantly improved
cognitive performance, and prolonged lifespan of the Aß42-transgenic flies. These
findings suggest that zinc contributes significantly to the Aß pathology, and
manipulation of zinc transporters in AD brains may provide a novel therapeutic
strategy.

PMCID: PMC3343105
PMID: 22570624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cancer Lett. 2012 Sep 28;322(2):204-12. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.03.016. Epub
2012 Mar 17.

Development of a novel approach, the epigenome-based outlier approach, to
identify tumor-suppressor genes silenced by aberrant DNA methylation.

Kikuyama M(1), Takeshima H, Kinoshita T, Okochi-Takada E, Wakabayashi M,
Akashi-Tanaka S, Ogawa T, Seto Y, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epigenomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tsukiji,
Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Identification of tumor-suppressor genes (TSGs) silenced by aberrant methylation 
of promoter CpG islands (CGIs) is important, but hampered by a large number of
genes methylated as passengers of carcinogenesis. To overcome this issue, we here
took advantage of the fact that the vast majority of genes methylated in cancers 
lack, in normal cells, RNA polymerase II (Pol II) and have trimethylation of
histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) in their promoter CGIs. First, we demonstrated
that three of six known TSGs in breast cancer and two of three in colon cancer
had Pol II and lacked H3K27me3 in normal cells, being outliers to the general
rule. BRCA1, HOXA5, MLH1, and RASSF1A had high Pol II, but were expressed only at
low levels in normal cells, and were unlikely to be identified as outliers by
their expression statuses in normal cells. Then, using epigenome statuses (Pol II
binding and H3K27me3) in normal cells, we made a genome-wide search for outliers 
in breast cancers, and identified 14 outlier promoter CGIs. Among these, DZIP1,
FBN2, HOXA5, and HOXC9 were confirmed to be methylated in primary breast cancer
samples. Knockdown of DZIP1 in breast cancer cell lines led to increases of their
growth, suggesting it to be a novel TSG. The outliers based on their epigenome
statuses contained unique TSGs, including DZIP1, compared with those identified
by the expression microarray data. These results showed that the epigenome-based 
outlier approach is capable of identifying a different set of TSGs, compared to
the expression-based outlier approach.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22433712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Sci Rep. 2012;2:256. doi: 10.1038/srep00256. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

Rare coding SNP in DZIP1 gene associated with late-onset sporadic Parkinson's
disease.

Valente AX, Shin JH, Sarkar A, Gao Y.

An association between a rare, coding, non-synonymous SNP variant in the gene
DZIP1 and Parkinson's disease was found, based on an analysis of the existing
NGRC genome-wide association study dataset. The statistical analysis utilized the
hypothesis-rich, targeted search unbiased assessment approach, rather than the
hypothesis-free, genome-wide agnostic search paradigm. The association of DZIP1
with Parkinson's disease is discussed in the context of a Parkinson's disease
stem-cell ageing theory.

PMCID: PMC3277088
PMID: 22355768  [PubMed]


15. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 21;286(42):36171-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.274761. Epub 2011
Aug 30.

The antagonistic action of B56-containing protein phosphatase 2As and casein
kinase 2 controls the phosphorylation and Gli turnover function of Daz
interacting protein 1.

Jin Z(1), Mei W, Strack S, Jia J, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)The Research Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital, Department of
Pediatrics, the Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43205, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is evolutionarily conserved and plays critical roles
during embryonic development and adult tissue homeostasis. Defective Hh signaling
has been linked to a wide range of birth defects and cancers. Hh family proteins 
regulate the expression of their downstream target genes through the control of
proteolytic processing and the transcriptional activation function of Gli
transcription factors. Although Hh-dependent regulation of Gli has been studied
extensively, other Gli regulatory mechanisms remain relatively unappreciated.
Here we report our identification of a novel signaling cascade that controls the 
stability of Gli proteins. This cascade consists of Daz interacting protein 1
(Dzip1), casein kinase 2 (CK2), and B56 containing protein phosphatase 2As
(PP2As). We provide evidence that Dzip1 is involved in a novel Gli turnover
pathway. We show that CK2 directly phosphorylates Dzip1 at four serine residues, 
Ser-664/665/706/714. B56-containing PP2As, through binding to a domain located
between amino acid residue 474 and 550 of Dzip1, dephosphorylate Dzip1 on these
CK2 sites. Our mutagenesis analysis further demonstrates that the
unphosphorylatable form of Dzip1 is more potent in promoting Gli turnover.
Consistently, we found that the stability of Gli proteins was decreased upon CK2 
inhibition and increased by inhibition of B56-containing PP2As. Thus, reversible 
phosphorylation of Dzip1, which is controlled by the antagonistic action of CK2
and B56-containing PP2As, has an important impact on the stability of Gli
transcription factors and Hh signaling.

PMCID: PMC3196143
PMID: 21878643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. BMC Biol. 2010 Apr 19;8:65. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-8-65.

Gli2a protein localization reveals a role for Iguana/DZIP1 in primary
ciliogenesis and a dependence of Hedgehog signal transduction on primary cilia in
the zebrafish.

Kim HR(1), Richardson J, van Eeden F, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental & Biomedical Genetics, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

Comment in
    BMC Biol. 2010;8:102.

BACKGROUND: In mammalian cells, the integrity of the primary cilium is critical
for proper regulation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signal transduction pathway. Whether
or not this dependence on the primary cilium is a universal feature of vertebrate
Hedgehog signalling has remained contentious due, in part, to the apparent
divergence of the intracellular transduction pathway between mammals and teleost 
fish.
RESULTS: Here, using a functional Gli2-GFP fusion protein, we show that, as in
mammals, the Gli2 transcription factor localizes to the primary cilia of cells in
the zebrafish embryo and that this localization is modulated by the activity of
the Hh pathway. Moreover, we show that the Igu/DZIP1protein, previously
implicated in the modulation of Gli activity in zebrafish, also localizes to the 
primary cilium and is required for its proper formation.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate a conserved role of the primary cilium in
mediating Hedgehog signalling activity across the vertebrate phylum and validate 
the use of the zebrafish as a representative model for the in vivo analysis of
vertebrate Hedgehog signalling.

PMCID: PMC2890509
PMID: 20487519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mech Dev. 2010 Apr;127(3-4):159-68. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2010.02.001. Epub 2010 Feb
13.

Hedgehog signaling via angiopoietin1 is required for developmental vascular
stability.

Lamont RE(1), Vu W, Carter AD, Serluca FC, MacRae CA, Childs SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, 3330 Hospital Dr
NW, Calgary, AB, Canada T2N 4N1.

The molecular pathways by which newly formed, immature endothelial cell tubes
remodel to form a mature network of vessels supported by perivascular mural cells
are not well understood. The zebrafish iguana (igu) genetic mutant has a mutation
in the daz-interacting protein 1 (dzip1), a member of the hedgehog signaling
pathway. Loss of dzip1 results in decreased size of the cranial dorsal aortae,
ultrastructural defects in perivascular mural cell recruitment and subsequent
hemorrhage. Although hedgehog signaling is disrupted in igu mutants, we find no
defects in vessel patterning or artery-vein specification. Rather, we show that
the loss of angiopoietin1 (angpt1) expression in ventral perivascular mesenchyme 
is responsible for vascular instability in igu mutants. Over-expression of angpt1
or partial down-regulation of the endogenous Angpt1 antagonist angpt2 rescues
hemorrhage. This is the first direct in vivo link between hedgehog signaling and 
the induction of vascular stability by recruitment of perivascular mural cells
through angiopoietin signaling.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20156556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Dev Dyn. 2010 Feb;239(2):527-34. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22199.

The iguana/DZIP1 protein is a novel component of the ciliogenic pathway essential
for axonemal biogenesis.

Tay SY(1), Yu X, Wong KN, Panse P, Ng CP, Roy S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Cancer and Developmental Cell Biology
Division, Proteos, Singapore.

Cilia play important roles in many developmental and physiological processes.
However, the genetic and cell biological control of ciliogenesis remains poorly
understood. Here, we show that the zebrafish iguana gene is required for
differentiation of primary cilia. iguana encodes a zinc finger and coiled-coil
containing protein, previously implicated in Hedgehog signaling. We now argue
that aberrant Hedgehog activity in iguana -deficient zebrafish arises from their 
profound lack of primary cilia. By contrast, the requirement of iguana for motile
cilia formation is less obligatory. In the absence of iguana function, basal
bodies can migrate to the cell surface and appear to engage with the apical
membrane. However, formation of ciliary pits and axonemal outgrowth is completely
inhibited. Iguana localizes to the base of primary and motile cilia, in the
immediate vicinity or closely associated with the basal bodies. These findings
identify the Iguana protein as a novel and critical component of ciliogenesis.

PMID: 20014402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Dev Biol. 2010 Jan 1;337(1):148-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.025. Epub 2009
Oct 21.

The Zn finger protein Iguana impacts Hedgehog signaling by promoting
ciliogenesis.

Glazer AM(1), Wilkinson AW, Backer CB, Lapan SW, Gutzman JH, Cheeseman IM,
Reddien PW.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA.

Hedgehog signaling is critical for metazoan development and requires cilia for
pathway activity. The gene iguana was discovered in zebrafish as required for
Hedgehog signaling, and encodes a novel Zn finger protein. Planarians are
flatworms with robust regenerative capacities and utilize epidermal cilia for
locomotion. RNA interference of Smed-iguana in the planarian Schmidtea
mediterranea caused cilia loss and failure to regenerate new cilia, but did not
cause defects similar to those observed in hedgehog(RNAi) animals. Smed-iguana
gene expression was also similar in pattern to the expression of multiple other
ciliogenesis genes, but was not required for expression of these ciliogenesis
genes. iguana-defective zebrafish had too few motile cilia in pronephric ducts
and in Kupffer's vesicle. Kupffer's vesicle promotes left-right asymmetry and
iguana mutant embryos had left-right asymmetry defects. Finally, human Iguana
proteins (dZIP1 and dZIP1L) localize to the basal bodies of primary cilia and,
together, are required for primary cilia formation. Our results indicate that a
critical and broadly conserved function for Iguana is in ciliogenesis and that
this function has come to be required for Hedgehog signaling in vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC2799895
PMID: 19852954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Sep;9(6):391-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2009.06.006. Epub
2009 Jun 21.

Expression of zebrafish hip: response to Hedgehog signalling, comparison with
ptc1 expression, and possible role in otic patterning.

Hammond KL(1), Whitfield TT.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics and Department of
Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, SHEFFIELD, S10 2TN, UK.

In zebrafish, Hedgehog (Hh) signalling is required to specify posterior otic
identity. This presents a conundrum, as the nearest source of Hh to the
developing inner ear is the ventral midline, in the notochord and floorplate. How
can a source of Hh that is ostensibly constant with respect to the
anteroposterior axis of the otic vesicle specify posterior otic identity? One
possibility is that localised inhibition of Hh signalling is involved. Here we
show that genes coding for three inhibitors of Hh signalling, su(fu), dzip1 and
hip, are expressed in and around the developing otic vesicle. su(fu) and dzip1
are ubiquitously expressed and unaffected by Hh levels. The expression of hip,
however, is positively regulated by Hh signalling and has a complex, dynamic
pattern. It is detectable in the neural tube, otic vesicle, statoacoustic
ganglion, brain, fin buds, mouth, somites, pronephros and branchial arches. These
expression domains bear some similarity, but are not identical, to those of ptc1,
a Hh receptor gene that is also positively regulated by Hh signalling. In the
neural tube, for instance, hip is expressed in a subset of the ptc1 expression
domain, while in other regions, including the otic vesicle, hip and ptc1
expression domains differ. Significantly, we find that initial expression of hip 
is higher in and adjacent to anterior otic regions, while ptc1 expression becomes
progressively restricted to the posterior of the ear. Hip-mediated inhibition of 
Hh signalling may therefore be important in restricting the effects of Hh to
posterior regions of the developing inner ear.

PMID: 19540935  [PubMed]


21. Genesis. 2008 Mar;46(3):177-83. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20380.

Regulation and function of foxe3 during early zebrafish development.

Swindell EC(1), Zilinski CA, Hashimoto R, Shah R, Lane ME, Jamrich M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

In this article, we investigate the expression, regulation, and function of the
zebrafish forkhead gene foxe3. In wild type embryos, foxe3 is first expressed in 
a crescent-shaped area at the anterior end of the prechordal plate, corresponding
to the polster. At later stages, the hatching gland, the lens, and the anterior
pituitary express this gene. Using morpholinos against the zinc finger
Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) we show that foxe3 is regulated differently in the
polster and in the lens. In the absence of KLF4, expression of foxe3 in the
polster is not activated, whereas in the lens placode the expression of KLF4 is
not required for the transcription of foxe3. The expression of foxe3 is also
regulated by the hedgehog and nodal signaling pathways. foxe3 expression is
altered in the hedgehog pathway mutants iguana and you-too and the nodal pathway 
mutant cyclops. foxe3 function is necessary for the execution of lens-specific
gene expression and lens morphogenesis, as the knockdown of foxe3 results in a
loss of platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (pdgfralpha) expression and
in the vacuolization of the lens.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18327772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Dec;18(6):1019-23.

Hedgehog signaling pathway and gastrointestinal stem cell signaling network
(review).

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Hedgehog, BMP/TGFbeta, FGF, WNT and Notch signaling pathways constitute the stem 
cell signaling network, which plays a key role in a variety of processes, such as
embryogenesis, maintenance of adult tissue homeostasis, tissue repair during
chronic persistent inflammation, and carcinogenesis. Sonic hedgehog (SHH), Indian
hedgehog (IHH) and Desert hedgehog (DHH) bind to PTCH1/PTCH or PTCH2 receptor to 
release Smoothened (SMO) signal transducer from Patched-dependent suppression.
SMO then activates STK36 serine/threonine kinase to stabilize GLI family members 
and to phosphorylate SUFU for nuclear accumulation of GLI. Hedgehog signaling
activation leads to GLI-dependent transcriptional activation of target genes,
such as GLI1, PTCH1, CCND2, FOXL1, JAG2 and SFRP1. GLI1-dependent positive
feedback loop combined with PTCH1-dependent negative feedback loop gives rise to 
transient proliferation of Hedgehog target cells. Iguana homologs (DZIP1 and
DZIP1L) and Costal-2 homologs (KIF7 and KIF27) are identified by comparative
integromics. SHH-dependent parietal cell proliferation is implicated in gastric
mucosal repair during chronic Helicobacter pylori infection. BMP-RUNX3 signaling 
induces IHH expression in surface differentiated epithelial cells of stomach and 
intestine. Hedgehog signals from epithelial cells then induces FOXL1-mediated
BMP4 upregulation in mesenchymal cells. Hedgehog signaling is frequently
activated in esophageal cancer, gastric cancer and pancreatic cancer due to
transcriptional upregulation of Hedgehog ligands and epigenetic silencing of
HHIP1/HHIP gene, encoding the Hedgehog inhibitor. However, Hedgehog signaling is 
rarely activated in colorectal cancer due to negative regulation by the canonical
WNT signaling pathway. Hedgehog signaling molecules or targets, such as SHH, IHH,
HHIP1, PTCH1 and GLI1, are applied as biomarkers for cancer diagnostics,
prognostics and therapeutics. Small-molecule inhibitors for SMO or STK36 are
suitable to be used for treatment of Hedgehog-dependent cancer.

PMID: 17089004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. BMC Dev Biol. 2006 Oct 30;6:50.

Differential regulation of the zebrafish orthopedia 1 gene during fate
determination of diencephalic neurons.

Del Giacco L(1), Sordino P, Pistocchi A, Andreakis N, Tarallo R, Di Benedetto B, 
Cotelli F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Celoria 26,
Milano, 20133, Italy. luca.delgiacco@unimi.it

BACKGROUND: The homeodomain transcription factor Orthopedia (Otp) is essential in
restricting the fate of multiple classes of secreting neurons in the
neuroendocrine hypothalamus of vertebrates. However, there is little information 
on the intercellular factors that regulate Otp expression during development.
RESULTS: Here, we identified two otp orthologues in zebrafish (otp1 and otp2) and
explored otp1 in the context of the morphogenetic pathways that specify
neuroectodermal regions. During forebrain development, otp1 is expressed in
anterior groups of diencephalic cells, positioned in the preoptic area (PO)
(anterior alar plate) and the posterior tuberculum (PT) (posterior basal plate). 
The latter structure is characterized by Tyrosine Hydroxylase (TH)-positive
cells, suggesting a role for otp1 in the lineage restriction of catecholaminergic
(CA) neurons. Disruptions of Hedgehog (HH) and Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF)
pathways point to the ability of SHH protein to trigger otp1 expression in PO
presumptive neuroblasts, with the attenuating effect of Dzip1 and FGF8. In
addition, our data disclose otp1 as a determinant of CA neurons in the PT, where 
otp1 activity is strictly dependent on Nodal signaling and it is not responsive
to SHH and FGF.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we pinpoint the evolutionary importance of otp1
transcription factor in cell states of the diencephalon anlage and early neuronal
progenitors. Furthermore, our data indicate that morphogenetic mechanisms
differentially regulate otp1 expression in alar and basal plates.

PMCID: PMC1635040
PMID: 17074092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Dev Biol. 2006 Sep 1;297(1):1-13. Epub 2006 Jul 12.

A screen for mutations in zebrafish that affect myelin gene expression in Schwann
cells and oligodendrocytes.

Kazakova N(1), Li H, Mora A, Jessen KR, Mirsky R, Richardson WD, Smith HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

Myelin is the multi-layered glial sheath around axons in the vertebrate nervous
system. Myelinating glia develop and function in intimate association with
neurons and neuron-glial interactions control much of the life history of these
cells. However, many of the factors that regulate key aspects of myelin
development and maintenance remain unknown. To discover new molecules that are
important for glial development and myelination, we undertook a screen of
zebrafish mutants with previously characterized neural defects. We screened for
myelin basic protein (mbp) mRNA by in situ hybridization and identified four
mutants (neckless, motionless, iguana and doc) that lacked mbp expression in
parts of the peripheral and central nervous systems (PNS or CNS), despite the
presence of axons. In all four mutants electron microscopy revealed that
myelin-forming glia were present and had formed loose wraps around axons but did 
not form compact myelin. We found that addition of exogenous retinoic acid (RA)
rescued mbp expression in neckless mutant embryos, which lack endogenous RA
synthesis. Timed application of the RA synthesis inhibitor DEAB to wild type
embryos showed that RA signalling is required at least 48 h before the onset of
myelin protein synthesis in both CNS and PNS.

PMID: 16839543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Genomics. 2006 Feb;87(2):275-85. Epub 2005 Dec 20.

Characterization of structure and expression of the Dzip1 gene in the rat and
mouse.

Curry BJ(1), Holt JE, McLaughlin EA, Aitken RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Science Group, Discipline of Biological Science, School of
Environmental and Life Sciences, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW 2308,
Australia.

A transcript encoding a rat homologue of DZIP1 (DAZ-interacting protein) was
isolated from testis RNA. Like human DZIP1, it contains a C(2)H(2) zinc finger
domain. A predicted mouse homologue of DZIP1 was found in the GenBank database.
Genome analysis indicated that while DZIP1 and mouse Dzip1 contain 22 and 20
exons, respectively, the rat sequence was intronless, confirmed by PCR on genomic
DNA. This rat Dzip1 sequence is homologous to mouse Dzip1 exons 1-6 and DZIP1
exons 5-9. As this rat sequence was shorter than DZIP1 it was designated rat
Dzip1S. The rat genome also contained a further predicted homologue of DZIP1
displaying conserved linkage homology with mouse Dzip1 and DZIP1. This sequence, 
if expressed, is the true rat homologue of DZIP1, designated rat Dzip1. Rat
Dzip1S mRNA was present in all tissues examined by qualitative RT-RCR, and in
situ hybridization of rat testis confirmed that expression of rat Dzip1S mRNA was
confined to the spermatogenic lineage, specifically premeiotic spermatogonia.

PMID: 16368222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Jan;17(1):171-5.

WNT antagonist, SFRP1, is Hedgehog signaling target.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M and M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Hedgehog and WNT signaling pathways network together during embryogenesis and
carcinogenesis. Hedgehog signaling in intestinal epithelium represses canonical
WNT signaling to restrict expression of WNT target genes to stem or progenitor
cells; however, the mechanism remains unclear. The Hedgehog signal is transduced 
to GLI family transcription factors though Patched receptor, Smoothened signal
transducer, and other signaling components, such as KIF27, KIF7, STK36, SUFU, and
DZIP1. Here, we searched for the GLI-binding site within the promoter region of
genes encoding secreted-type WNT signal inhibitors, including SFRP1, SFRP2,
SFRP3, SFRP4, SFRP5, DKK1, DKK2, DKK3, DKK4, and WIF1. The GLI-binding site was
identified within the human SFRP1 promoter based on bioinformatics and human
intelligence. The chimpanzee SFRP1 gene was identified within the NW_110515.1
genome sequence. The GLI-binding site of the human SFRP1 promoter was conserved
in chimpanzee SFRP1, mouse Sfrp1, and rat Sfrp1 promoters. SFRP1 is the
evolutionarily conserved target of the Hedgehog-GLI signaling pathway. Expression
domain analyses based on text mining revealed that Indian Hedgehog (IHH), SFRP1, 
and WNT6 are expressed in differentiated intestinal epithelial cells, mesenchymal
cells, and stem/progenitor cells, respectively. Hedgehog is secreted from
differentiated epithelial cells to induce SFRP1 expression in mesenchymal cells, 
which keeps differentiated epithelial cells away from the effects of canonical
WNT signaling. These facts indicate that SFRP1 is the Hedgehog target to confine 
canonical WNT signaling within stem or progenitor cells. Therefore, epigenetic
CpG hypermethylation of the SFRP1 promoter during chronic persistent inflammation
and aging leads to the occurrence of gastrointestinal cancers, such as colorectal
cancer and gastric cancer, through the breakdown of Hedgehog-dependent WNT signal
inhibition.

PMID: 16328026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cancer Biol Ther. 2005 Oct;4(10):1050-4. Epub 2005 Oct 18.

Hedgehog signaling pathway and gastric cancer.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo, Japan.

Hedgehog, WNT, FGF and BMP signaling pathways network together during
embryogenesis, tissue regeneration, and carcinogenesis. Aberrant activation of
Hedgehog signaling pathway leads to pathological consequences in a variety of
human tumors, such as gastric cancer and pancreatic cancer. Endoscopic mucosal
resection (EMR), endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD), surgical gastrectomy and
chemotherapy are therapeutic options for gastric cancer; however, prognosis of
advanced gastric cancer patient is still poor. Here, Hedgehog signaling pathway
in human gastric cancer and its clinical applications will be reviewed. Human
SHH, IHH, DHH (Hedgehog homologs), HHAT (Hedgehog acyltransferase), HHIP
(Hedgehog-interacting protein), DISP1, DISP2, DISP3 (Dispatched homologs), PTCH1,
PTCH2 (Patched homologs), SMO (Smoothened homolog), KIF27, KIF7 (Costal-2
homologs), STK36 (Fused homolog), SUFU (SuFu homolog), DZIP1 (Iguana homolog),
GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 (Cubitus interruptus homologs) are implicated in the Hedgehog
signaling. PTCH1, FOXM1 and CCND2 are direct transcriptional targets of Hedgehog 
signaling. Hedgehog signaling activation leads to cell proliferation through cell
cycle regulation. SHH regulates growth and differentiation within gastric mucosa 
through autocrine loop and FOXL1-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal interaction. SHH
is implicated in stem/progenitor cell restitution of damaged gastric mucosa
during chronic infection with Helicobacter pylori. SHH up-regulation, IHH
upregulation and HHIP down-regulation lead to aberrant activation of Hedgehog
signaling through PTCH1 to GLI1 in gastric cancer. Small molecule compounds
targeted to SMO (KADD-cyclopamine, SANT1-4, Cur61414) as well as humanized
anti-SHH antibodies are potent anti-cancer drugs for gastric cancer. Cocktail of 
Hedgehog inhibitors would be developed as novel therapeutics for gastric cancer. 
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and copy number polymorphism (CNP) of
Hedgehog signaling genes would be utilized for genetic screening of gastric
cancer, while cDNA-PCR, microarray and ELISA detecting aberrant Hedgehog
signaling activation would be utilized for therapeutic optional choice. Genetic
screening and precise selection of therapeutic options would contribute to the
realization of personalized medicine.

PMID: 16258256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Dev Biol. 2005 Dec 1;288(1):206-20. Epub 2005 Oct 21.

Differential susceptibility of midbrain and spinal cord patterning to floor plate
defects in the talpid2 mutant.

Agarwala S(1), Aglyamova GV, Marma AK, Fallon JF, Ragsdale CW.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Neurobiology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712-0248,
USA. agarwala@mail.utexas.edu

The chick talpid2 mutant displays polydactylous digits attributed to defects of
the Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway. We examined the talpid2 neural tube and show
that patterning defects in the spinal cord and the midbrain are distinct from
each other and from the limb. Unlike the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) source in the limb,
the SHH-rich floor plate (FP) is reduced in the talpid2 midbrain. This is
accompanied by a severe depletion of medial cell populations that encounter high 
concentrations of SHH, an expansion of lateral cell populations that experience
low concentrations of SHH and a broad deregulation of HH's principal effectors
(PTC1, GLI1, GLI2, GLI3). Together with the failure of SHH misexpression to
rescue the talpid2 phenotype, these results suggest that talpid2 is likely to
have a tissue-autonomous, bidirectional (positive and negative) role in HH
signaling that cannot be attributed to the altered expression of several newly
cloned HH pathway genes (SUFU, DZIP1, DISP1, BTRC). Strikingly, FP defects in the
spinal cord are accompanied by relatively normal patterning in the talpid2
mutant. We propose that this differential FP dependence may be due to the
prolonged apposition of the notochord to the spinal cord, but not the midbrain
during development.

PMID: 16246323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Curr Biol. 2004 Aug 24;14(16):R668-70.

Hedgehog signaling: iguana debuts as a nuclear gatekeeper.

Vokes SA(1), McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 16 Divinity 
Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA. vokes@mcb.harvard.edu

The intracellular pathway that controls the cytoplasmic versus nuclear
distribution of Gli transcriptional regulators in response to Hedgehog signaling 
remains poorly understood. Iguana appears to play a role in regulating this
process independently of Hedgehog signaling.

PMID: 15324687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Genes Dev. 2004 Jul 1;18(13):1565-76. Epub 2004 Jun 15.

iguana encodes a novel zinc-finger protein with coiled-coil domains essential for
Hedgehog signal transduction in the zebrafish embryo.

Wolff C(1), Roy S, Lewis KE, Schauerte H, Joerg-Rauch G, Kirn A, Weiler C,
Geisler R, Haffter P, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Genetics, School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences,
University of Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

Signaling by lipid-modified secreted glycoproteins of the Hedgehog family play
fundamental roles during pattern formation in animal development and in humans;
dysfunction of Hedgehog pathway components is frequently associated with a
variety of congenital abnormalities and cancer. Transcriptional regulation of
Hedgehog target genes is mediated by members of the Gli zinc-finger transcription
factors. The relative nuclear concentrations of Gli activator (Gli(act)) and
repressor (Gli(rep)) forms, together with their nucleocytoplasmic trafficking,
appear to be critical determinants for target gene expression. Whereas such
stringent controls of Gli activity are critical in ensuring appropriate levels of
pathway activation, the mechanisms by which these processes are regulated remain 
inadequately understood. Here, using genetic analysis, we show that the zebrafish
iguana gene product acts downstream of the Smoothened protein to modulate Gli
activity in the somites of the developing embryo. Positional cloning reveals that
iguana encodes the zebrafish ortholog of Dzip1, a novel zinc-finger/coiled-coil
domain protein that we show can shuttle between the cytoplasm and nucleus in a
manner correlated with Hedgehog pathway activity.

PMCID: PMC443519
PMID: 15198976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Development. 2004 Jun;131(11):2521-32. Epub 2004 Apr 28.

The zebrafish iguana locus encodes Dzip1, a novel zinc-finger protein required
for proper regulation of Hedgehog signaling.

Sekimizu K(1), Nishioka N, Sasaki H, Takeda H, Karlstrom RO, Kawakami A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Members of the Hedgehog (Hh) family of intercellular signaling molecules play
crucial roles in animal development. Aberrant regulation of Hh signaling in
humans causes developmental defects, and leads to various genetic disorders and
cancers. We have characterized a novel regulator of Hh signaling through the
analysis of the zebrafish midline mutant iguana (igu). Mutations in igu lead to
reduced expression of Hh target genes in the ventral neural tube, similar to the 
phenotype seen in zebrafish mutants known to affect Hh signaling. Contradictory
at first sight, igu mutations lead to expanded Hh target gene expression in
somites. Genetic and pharmacological analyses revealed that the expression of Hh 
target genes in igu mutants requires Gli activator function but does not depend
on Smoothened function. Our results show that the ability of Gli proteins to
activate Hh target gene expression in response to Hh signals is generally reduced
in igu mutants both in the neural tube and in somites. Although this reduced Hh
signaling activity leads to a loss of Hh target gene expression in the neural
tube, the same low levels of Hh signaling appear to be sufficient to activate Hh 
target genes throughout somites because of different threshold responses to Hh
signals. We also show that Hh target gene expression in igu mutants is resistant 
to increased protein kinase A activity that normally represses Hh signaling.
Together, our data indicate that igu mutations impair both the full activation of
Gli proteins in response to Hh signals, and the negative regulation of Hh
signaling in tissues more distant from the source of Hh. Positional cloning
revealed that the igu locus encodes Dzip1, a novel intracellular protein that
contains a single zinc-finger protein-protein interaction domain. Overexpression 
of Igu/Dzip1 proteins suggested that Igu/Dzip1 functions in a permissive way in
the Hh signaling pathway. Taken together, our studies show that Igu/Dzip1
functions as a permissive factor that is required for the proper regulation of Hh
target genes in response to Hh signals.

PMID: 15115751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Genomics. 2004 May;83(5):834-43.

Identification of a novel gene, DZIP (DAZ-interacting protein), that encodes a
protein that interacts with DAZ (deleted in azoospermia) and is expressed in
embryonic stem cells and germ cells.

Moore FL(1), Jaruzelska J, Dorfman DM, Reijo-Pera RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of 
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0546, USA.

Evidence from diverse organisms, including humans, suggests that the DAZ (Deleted
in Azoospermia) gene and a closely related homolog, DAZL (DAZ-like), are required
early in germ cell development to maintain initial germ cell populations. Here we
report the identification and characterization of the DZIP (DAZ-Interacting
Protein) gene, which encodes at least three different protein isoforms that
contain a C2H2 zinc-finger domain. The DZIP gene is expressed predominantly in
human embryonic stem cells and fetal and adult germ cells; moreover, two DZIP
protein isoforms colocalize with DAZ and/or DAZL proteins in these tissues.
Finally, we provide evidence indicating that DZIP may associate with DAZ and its 
other cofactors in an RNA-binding protein complex that functions in both ES cells
and germ cells.

PMID: 15081113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


