
1. Hum Pathol. 2016 Apr;50:118-26. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.11.011. Epub 2015 Nov
30.

miR-31 and miR-17-5p levels change during transformation of follicular lymphoma.

Thompson MA(1), Edmonds MD(1), Liang S(1), McClintock-Treep S(1), Wang X(1), Li
S(1), Eischen CM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232. (2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and
Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232. Electronic
address: christine.eischen@vanderbilt.edu.

The 30% of patients whose indolent follicular lymphoma transforms to aggressive
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) have poor survival. Reliable predictors of 
follicular B-cell lymphoma transformation to DLBCL are lacking, and diagnosis of 
those that will progress is challenging. MicroRNA, which regulates gene
expression, has critical functions in the growth and progression of many cancers 
and contributes to the pathogenesis of lymphoma. Using 5 paired samples from
patients who presented with follicular lymphoma and progressed to DLBCL, we
identified specific microRNA differentially expressed between the two.
Specifically, miR-17-5p levels were low in follicular lymphoma and increased as
the disease transformed. In contrast, miR-31 expression was high in follicular
lymphoma and decreased as the lymphoma progressed. These results were confirmed
in additional unpaired cases of low-grade follicular lymphoma (n = 13) and
high-grade follicular lymphoma grade 3 or DLBCL (n = 17). Loss of miR-31
expression in DLBCL was not due to deletion of the locus. Changes in miR-17-5p
and miR-31 were not correlated with immunophenotype, genetics, or status of the
MYC oncogene. However, increased miR-17-5p expression did significantly correlate
with increased expression of p53 protein, which is indicative of mutant TP53. Two
pro-proliferative genes, E2F2 and PI3KC2A, were identified as direct messenger
RNA targets of miR-31, suggesting that these may contribute to follicular
lymphoma transformation. Our results indicate that changes in miR-31 and
miR-17-5p reflect the transformation of follicular lymphoma to an aggressive
large B-cell lymphoma and may, along with their targets, be viable markers for
this process.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4804154 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26997445  [PubMed - in process]


2. J Appl Toxicol. 2016 Mar 14. doi: 10.1002/jat.3316. [Epub ahead of print]

Different mechanisms of action of 2, 2', 4, 4'-tetrabromodiphenyl ether (BDE-47) 
and its metabolites (5-OH-BDE-47 and 6-OH-BDE-47) on cell proliferation in
OVCAR-3 ovarian cancer cells and MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Karpeta A(1,)(2), Maniecka A(1), Gregoraszczuk EL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Toxicology of Reproduction, Institute of Zoology,
Jagiellonian University in Krakow, Krakow, Poland. (2)Department of Animal
Physiology and Endocrinology, University of Agriculture in Krakow, Poland.

Data concerning the possible action of polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) in 
hormone-dependent cancer are scarce. Some data showed that PBDEs may directly
affect breast cancer cells formation and only one research showed increased
proliferation of the OVCAR-3 cells, but the results are ambiguous and the
mechanisms are not clear. There is growing evidence that not only parent
compounds but also its metabolites may be involved in cancer development. The
present study was, therefore, designed to determine the effect of BDE-47 and its 
metabolites (2.5 to 50<U+2009>ng<U+2009>ml(-1) ) on proliferation (BrdU), cell-cycle genes
(real-time PCR) and protein expression (Western blot), protein expression of
oestrogen receptors (a ß), extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2
(ERK1/2) and protein kinase Ca (PKCa) in OVCAR-3 ovarian and MCF-7 breast cancer 
cells. In OVCAR-3 cells, the parent compound stimulated cell proliferation by
activating CDK1, CDK7, E2F1 and E2F2. Independent of time of exposure, BDE-47 had
no effect on ERa and ERß protein expression and ERK1/2 and PKCa phosphorylation. 
Metabolites had no effect on cell proliferation but increased both ERs protein
expression and ERK1/2 and PKCa phosphorylation. In MCF-7 cells, the parent
compound displayed no effect on cell proliferation but decreased ERa and
increased ERß protein expression with concomitant induction of PKCa
phosphorylation. Both metabolites increased MCF-7 cell proliferation, ERK1/2 and 
PKCa phosphorylation and decreased ERa and ERß protein expression.We suggest that
studies concerning PBDEs with fewer bromine atoms should be continued to
understand environmental links to different hormone-dependent cancers. Copyright 
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26988655  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 7. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7951. [Epub ahead of print]

miR-155 regulates the proliferation and invasion of clear cell renal cell
carcinoma cells by targeting E2F2.

Gao Y(1,)(2), Ma X(1,)(2), Yao Y(1,)(2), Li H(1,)(2), Fan Y(1,)(2), Zhang
Y(1,)(2), Zhao C(1,)(2), Wang L(1,)(2), Ma M(1,)(2), Lei Z(1,)(2), Zhang
X(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Chinese PLA General Hospital/Chinese PLA Medical
School, Beijing, 100853, P. R. China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Kidney Diseases,
Chinese PLA General Hospital/Chinese PLA Medical School, Beijing, 100853, P. R.
China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged as critical modulators of carcinogenesis and
tumor progression. In the present work, we sought to identify the biological
function of miR-155 as well as its underlying mechanism in clear cell renal cell 
carcinoma (ccRCC). We examined the expression of miR-155 in clear cell RCC
(ccRCC) and adjacent normal tissues and then explored the roles of miR-155 both
in vitro and in vivo. The results of this analysis indicated that miR-155
activity was significantly upregulated in ccRCC tissues compared with the
corresponding normal tissues. miR-155 was associated with ccRCC aggressiveness in
both cell lines and clinical specimens, and a specific and inverse correlation
between miR-155 and E2F2 expression was found in human ccRCC samples.
Overexpression of miR-155 in 786-O cells decreased E2F2 expression while
reduction of miR-155 by anti-miR-155 in ACHN cells elevated E2F2 expression.
Re-expression of E2F2 in 786-O cells repressed the cell migration/invasion
abilities elevated by miR-155, whereas knockdown of E2F2 in ACHN cells restored
these cellular functions hampered by the miR-155 inhibitor. Using Western blot
and luciferase reporter assays, we determined that E2F2 was a direct target of
miR-155. Taken together, the in vitro and in vivo results demonstrate that
miR-155 functions as a tumor-promoting miRNA by targeting E2F2 in ccRCC.

PMID: 26967247  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 1. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7114. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of cis- and trans-acting elements regulating calretinin expression
in mesothelioma cells.

Kresoja-Rakic J(1), Kapaklikaya E(1), Ziltener G(1), Dalcher D(2), Santoro R(2), 
Christensen BC(3), Johnson KC(3), Schwaller B(4), Weder W(5), Stahel RA(1),
Felley-Bosco E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Clinic of Oncology, University Hospital
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. (2)Institute of Veterinary Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. (3)Departments of
Epidemiology, Pharmacology and Toxicology and Community and Family Medicine,
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA. (4)Anatomy, Department 
of Medicine, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland. (5)Division of
Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.

Calretinin (CALB2) is a diagnostic marker for epithelioid mesothelioma. It is
also a prognostic marker since patients with tumors expressing high calretinin
levels have better overall survival. Silencing of calretinin decreases viability 
of epithelioid mesothelioma cells. Our aim was to elucidate mechanisms regulating
calretinin expression in mesothelioma. Analysis of calretinin transcript and
protein suggested a control at the mRNA level. Treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and analysis of TCGA data indicated that promoter
methylation is not likely to be involved. Therefore, we investigated CALB2
promoter by analyzing ~1kb of genomic sequence surrounding the transcription
start site (TSS) + 1 using promoter reporter assay. Deletion analysis of CALB2
proximal promoter showed that sequence spanning the -161/+80bp region sustained
transcriptional activity. Site-directed analysis identified important
cis-regulatory elements within this -161/+80bp CALB2 promoter. EMSA and ChIP
assays confirmed binding of NRF-1 and E2F2 to the CALB2 promoter and siRNA
knockdown of NRF-1 led to decreased expression of calretinin. Cell
synchronization experiment showed that calretinin expression was cell cycle
regulated with a peak of expression at G1/S phase. This study provides the first 
insight in the regulation of CALB2 expression in mesothelioma cells.

PMID: 26848772  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 Jan;95(4):e2592. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002592.

Relationship of Focally Amplified Long Noncoding on Chromosome 1 (FAL1) lncRNA
with E2F Transcription Factors in Thyroid Cancer.

Jeong S(1), Lee J, Kim D, Seol MY, Lee WK, Jeong JJ, Nam KH, Jung SG, Shin DY,
Lee EJ, Chung WY, Jo YS.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Internal Medicine (SJ, DK, WKL, DYS, EJL, YSJ) and
Surgery (JL, M-YS, JJJ, K-HN, WYC), Open NBI Convergence Technology Research
Laboratory, Severance Hospital, Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University College
of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea; and Department of Gynecological Oncology,
Bundang CHA Medical Center, CHA University, Gyeonggi-do, South Korea (SGJ).

Recent functional genomic studies revealed that the oncogenic activity of focally
amplified lncRNA on chromosome 1 (FAL1, ENSG00000228126) contributes to tumor
growth by p21 repression in human cancers. However, the expression of FAL1 was
not investigated in papillary thyroid cancer (PTC).We aimed to determine if FAL1 
was up-regulated in PTC compared to paired contralateral normal thyroid tissues, 
and to investigate the potential targets of this lncRNA and its
clinicopathological significance in PTC.We analyzed FAL1 and p21 expression
levels in 100 PTC samples and matched normal thyroid tissue by qRT-PCR. Using
lncRNA microarray data from the Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no. GSE61763),
we explored potential targets of FAL1 by Gene Set Enrichment Analysis, followed
by verification by qRT-PCR in our PTC samples. A cross-sectional observational
study was conducted to investigate the relationship between patients'
clinicopathological features and FAL1 expression.FAL1 expression was
significantly higher in PTC than in paired normal thyroid tissues (paired t test,
P<U+200A><<U+200A>0.001). p21 mRNA expression was also increased, not decreased, in PTC, and
had no correlation with FAL1 expression (r<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0897, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.4002). Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis, using publicly available microarray data, indicated that a
gene set related to the cell cycle, including E2F transcription factors 1 and 2, 
and cyclin D1, was coordinately enriched among samples with high FAL1 expression.
A volcano plot showed that E2F1, E2F2, and VEGFA mRNAs were increased in the high
FAL1 samples. In clinicopathological analyses, multifocality was more frequently 
observed in PTC patients with high FAL1 (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.018). Multivariate analysis showed
that high FAL1 expression increased the risk of multifocality (after adjustment
for clinical variables, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.019, CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.041-11.020, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.043).FAL1 may have a
role in cell-cycle progression and may be associated with aggressive tumor
behavior in PTC.

PMID: 26825907  [PubMed - in process]


6. Nat Commun. 2016 Jan 29;7:10509. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10509.

E2F function in muscle growth is necessary and sufficient for viability in
Drosophila.

Zappia MP(1), Frolov MV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 900 S Ashland Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

The E2F transcription factor is a key cell cycle regulator. However, the
inactivation of the entire E2F family in Drosophila is permissive throughout most
of animal development until pupation when lethality occurs. Here we show that E2F
function in the adult skeletal muscle is essential for animal viability since
providing E2F function in muscles rescues the lethality of the whole-body
E2F-deficient animals. Muscle-specific loss of E2F results in a significant
reduction in muscle mass and thinner myofibrils. We demonstrate that E2F is
dispensable for proliferation of muscle progenitor cells, but is required during 
late myogenesis to directly control the expression of a set of muscle-specific
genes. Interestingly, E2f1 provides a major contribution to the regulation of
myogenic function, while E2f2 appears to be less important. These findings
identify a key function of E2F in skeletal muscle required for animal viability, 
and illustrate how the cell cycle regulator is repurposed in post-mitotic cells.

PMCID: PMC4740182
PMID: 26823289  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Feb;101(2):513-22. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-3324. Epub 
2015 Dec 22.

The Cables1 Gene in Glucocorticoid Regulation of Pituitary Corticotrope Growth
and Cushing Disease.

Roussel-Gervais A(1), Couture C(1), Langlais D(1), Takayasu S(1), Balsalobre
A(1), Rueda BR(1), Zukerberg LR(1), Figarella-Branger D(1), Brue T(1), Drouin
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire (A.R.-G., C.C., D.L., S.T., A.B., J.D.), 
Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec H2W 1R7, Canada;
Massachusetts General Hospital (B.R.R., L.R.Z., J.D.), Boston, Massachusetts
02114; Aix-Marseille Université (D.F.-B., T.B.), Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique, Center for Research in Neurobiology and Neurophysiology of
Marseille, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7286, 13344 Marseille, France; and Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille (D.F.-B., T.B.), Hôpital Conception, Service
d'Endocrinologie, Diabète et Maladies Métaboliques, Centre de Référence des
Maladies Rares d'Origine Hypophysaire, 13285 Marseille, France.

CONTEXT: Cushing disease (CD) is due to pituitary corticotrope adenomas that
produce unrestrained ACTH secretion and have lost the negative feedback exerted
by glucocorticoids (GCs). GCs also restrain corticotrope proliferation, and the
mechanisms of this inhibition are poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to identify cell cycle regulatory genes that 
are regulated by GCs and the glucocorticoid receptor and to assess regulatory
genes that have a rate-limiting action on corticotrope proliferation and may be
disregulated in CD.
DESIGN: The mouse corticotrope tumor cells AtT-20 were used to identify
GC-regulated genes that contribute to control of cell cycle progression. Surgery 
sections from patients with CD were used to assess expression of CABLES1 in
corticotrope adenomas.
METHODS: Gene expression profiling, small interfering RNA knockdowns, cell cycle 
analyses, and genetic manipulations were performed in AtT-20 cells. Sequencing of
chromatin immunoprecipitation for pituitary-restricted transcription factors and 
RNA polymerase II were used to identify regulatory elements and genes that bind
GR and are direct transcriptional targets. A panel of previously
well-characterized corticotrope adenomas was used to correlate expression of
CABLES1 with that of other markers.
RESULTS: GCs altered expression of 3 positive and 3 negative regulators of cell
cycle progression. Two Myc genes (L-Myc and N-Myc) and E2F2 are repressed by GCs,
whereas genes for the negative regulators of the cell cycle, Gadd45ß, Gadd45<U+03B3>,
and Cables1 are activated by GCs. Cables1 small interfering RNA knockdown
strongly stimulates AtT-20 cell proliferation and antagonizes the growth
inhibition produced by GCs. The Gadd45 and Cables1 genes have the hallmarks of
direct GC targets. CABLES1 is expressed in normal human pituitary cells, but
expression is lost in ~55% of corticotrope adenomas, and this is strongly
correlated with the loss of p27(Kip1) expression.
CONCLUSIONS: CABLES1 is a critical regulator of corticotrope proliferation that
defines a pathway often inactivated in CD and links proliferation to GC
resistance.

PMID: 26695862  [PubMed - in process]


8. Oncoscience. 2015 Nov 10;2(10):867-71. eCollection 2015.

Conserved E2F mediated metastasis in mouse models of breast cancer and HER2
positive patients.

Rennhack J(1), Andrechek E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.

To improve breast cancer patient outcome work must be done to understand and
block tumor metastasis. This study leverages bioinformatics techniques and
traditional genetic screens to create a novel method of discovering potential
contributors of tumor progression with a focus on tumor metastasis. A database of
1172 of expression data from a variety of mouse models of breast cancer was
assembled and queried using previously defined oncogenic activity signatures.
This analysis revealed high activity of the E2F family of transcription factors
in the MMTV-Neu mouse model. A genetic cross of MMTV-Neu mice into an E2F1 null, 
E2F2 null, or E2F3 heterozygous background revealed significant changes in tumor 
progression specifically reductions in tumor latency and metastasis with E2F1 or 
E2F2 loss. These findings were found to be conserved in human HER2 positive
patients. Patients with high E2F1 activity were shown to have worse outcomes such
as relapse free survival and distant metastasis free survival. This study shows
conserved mechanisms of tumor progression in human breast cancer subtypes and
analogous mouse models and underlies the importance of increased research into
the characterization of and comparisons between mouse and human tumors to
identify which mouse models resemble each subtype of human breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4671953
PMID: 26682278  [PubMed]


9. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Dec 17. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25291. [Epub ahead of print]

Let-7d miRNA Shows Both Antioncogenic and Oncogenic Functions in
Osteosarcoma-Derived 3AB-OS Cancer Stem Cells.

Di Fiore R(1), Drago-Ferrante R(1), Pentimalli F(2), Di Marzo D(2), Forte IM(2), 
Carlisi D(3), De Blasio A(1), Tesoriere G(4), Giordano A(4), Vento R(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Biological, Chemical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences and Technologies, University of Palermo, Polyclinic,
Palermo, Italy. (2)Oncology Research Center of Mercogliano (CROM), Istituto
Nazionale per lo Studio e la Cura dei Tumori "Fondazione Giovanni Pascale",
IRCCS, Naples, Italy. (3)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Experimental
Biomedicine and Clinical Neurosciences, University of Palermo, Polyclinic,
Palermo, Italy. (4)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine,
Center for Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Osteosarcoma (OS), an aggressive highly invasive and metastatic bone-malignancy, 
shows therapy resistance and recurrence, two features that likely depend on
cancer stem cells (CSCs), which hold both self-renewing and malignant potential. 
So, effective anticancer therapies against OS should specifically target and
destroy CSCs. We previously found that the let-7d microRNA was downregulated in
the 3AB-OS-CSCs, derived from the human OS-MG63 cells. Here, we aimed to assess
whether let-7d modulation affected tumorigenic and stemness properties of these
OS-CSCs. We found that let-7d-overexpression reduced cell proliferation by
decreasing CCND2 and E2F2 cell-cycle-activators and increasing p21 and p27
CDK-inhibitors. Let-7d also decreased sarcosphere-and-colony forming ability, two
features associated with self-renewing, and it reduced the expression of stemness
genes, including Oct3/4, Sox2, Nanog, Lin28B, and HMGA2. Moreover, let-7d induced
mesenchymal-to-epithelial-transition, as shown by both
N-Cadherin-E-cadherin-switch and decrease in vimentin. Surprisingly, such switch 
was accompanied by enhanced migratory/invasive capacities, with a strong increase
in MMP9, CXCR4 and VersicanV1. Let-7d- overexpression also reduced cell
sensitivity to apoptosis induced by both serum-starvation and various
chemotherapy drugs, concomitant with decrease in caspase-3 and increase in BCL2
expression. Our data suggest that let-7d in 3AB-OS-CSCs could induce
plastic-transitions from CSCs-to-non-CSCs and vice-versa. To our knowledge this
is the first study to comprehensively examine the expression and functions of
let-7d in OS-CSCs. By showing that let-7d has both tumor suppressor and oncogenic
functions in this context, our findings suggest that, before prospecting new
therapeutic strategies based on let-7d modulation, it is urgent to better define 
its multiple functions. J. Cell. Physiol. 9999: 1-10, 2016. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26679758  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Nat Genet. 2016 Jan;48(1):59-66. doi: 10.1038/ng.3457. Epub 2015 Nov 30.

Integrated genomic characterization of IDH1-mutant glioma malignant progression.

Bai H(1,)(2), Harmanci AS(2,)(3), Erson-Omay EZ(2,)(3), Li J(4), Coskun S(2,)(3),
Simon M(5), Krischek B(6), Özduman K(7), Omay SB(2,)(3), Sorensen EA(8), Turcan
S(9), Bakirciglu M(7), Carrión-Grant G(2,)(3), Murray PB(10), Clark
VE(1,)(2,)(3), Ercan-Sencicek AG(2,)(3), Knight J(1,)(11), Sencar L(2,)(3),
Altinok S(2,)(3), Kaulen LD(2,)(3), Gülez B(2,)(3), Timmer M(6), Schramm J(5),
Mishra-Gorur K(1,)(2,)(3,)(12,)(13), Henegariu O(1,)(2,)(3,)(12,)(13), Moliterno 
J(2,)(3), Louvi A(3,)(12,)(13), Chan TA(9,)(14), Tannheimer SL(8), Pamir MN(7),
Vortmeyer AO(4), Bilguvar K(1,)(2,)(11,)(13), Yasuno K(2,)(3), Günel
M(1,)(2,)(3,)(12,)(13,)(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA. 
(2)Program in Brain Tumor Research, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut, USA. (5)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Bonn
Medical School, Bonn, Germany. (6)Department of General Neurosurgery, University 
Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. (7)Department of Neurosurgery, Acibadem
University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. (8)Translational Medicine,
Biomarkers, Gilead Sciences, Inc., Foster City, California, USA. (9)Human
Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, New York, USA. (10)Department of Pharmacology, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut, USA. (11)Yale Center for Genome Analysis, Yale School of
Medicine, Orange, Connecticut, USA. (12)Department of Neurobiology, Yale School
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA. (13)Yale Program on Neurogenetics, Yale
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA. (14)Department of Medicine,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. (15)Yale
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut,
USA.

Gliomas represent approximately 30% of all central nervous system tumors and 80% 
of malignant brain tumors. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the 
malignant progression of low-grade gliomas with mutations in IDH1 (encoding
isocitrate dehydrogenase 1), we studied paired tumor samples from 41 patients,
comparing higher-grade, progressed samples to their lower-grade counterparts.
Integrated genomic analyses, including whole-exome sequencing and copy number,
gene expression and DNA methylation profiling, demonstrated nonlinear clonal
expansion of the original tumors and identified oncogenic pathways driving
progression. These include activation of the MYC and RTK-RAS-PI3K pathways and
upregulation of the FOXM1- and E2F2-mediated cell cycle transitions, as well as
epigenetic silencing of developmental transcription factor genes bound by
Polycomb repressive complex 2 in human embryonic stem cells. Our results not only
provide mechanistic insight into the genetic and epigenetic mechanisms driving
glioma progression but also identify inhibition of the bromodomain and
extraterminal (BET) family as a potential therapeutic approach.

PMID: 26618343  [PubMed - in process]


11. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Sep 1;8(9):10545-54. eCollection 2015.

E2F2 induction in related to cell proliferation and poor prognosis in non-small
cell lung carcinoma.

Chen L(1), Yu JH(2), Lu ZH(1), Zhang W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University
China. (2)Department of Oncology, Jiangxi Provincial People's Hospital Nanchang, 
China. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Nanchang University China.

E2F transcription factors regulate a wide range of biological processes,
including cell cycle, apoptosis and DNA damage response. In the present study, we
examined whether E2F2 is related to the poor prognosis of NSCLC and its role in
progress of NSCLC. Firstly, we analyzed 86 NSCLC samples by immunohistochemistry 
and found that E2F2 expression was markedly increased in 62.8% (54/86) of all
samples compared with the normal tissues. Further study showed that E2F2
expression was closely associated with clinical stage (P = 0.039) and tumor size 
(P = 0.045). Furthermore, Kaplan-Meier analysis indicated that high Bad
expression was significantly correlated to overall survival (P = 0.045) but not
disease-free survival (P = 0.288). In addition, our results showed that knockdown
E2F2 expression could reduce cell viability and colony formation in NSCLC cells. 
The results in our study for the first time revealed that E2F2 act as an
activator in tumor progress of NSCLC and could become a promising marker for the 
prognosis of patients with NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4637579
PMID: 26617764  [PubMed - in process]


12. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 10;6(35):37316-34. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5686.

Silencing of E2F3 suppresses tumor growth of Her2+ breast cancer cells by
restricting mitosis.

Lee M(1), Oprea-Ilies G(2), Saavedra HI(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory
University School of Medicine, Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA.
(3)Department of Basic Sciences, Pharmacology Division, Ponce Health Sciences
University, Ponce Research Institute, Ponce, P.R. 00716-2348, USA.

The E2F transcriptional activators E2F1, E2F2 and E2F3a regulate many important
cellular processes, including DNA replication, apoptosis and centrosome
duplication. Previously, we demonstrated that silencing E2F1 or E2F3 suppresses
centrosome amplification (CA) and chromosome instability (CIN) in Her2+ breast
cancer cells without markedly altering proliferation. However, it is unknown
whether and how silencing a single E2F activator, E2F3, affects malignancy of
human breast cancer cells. Thus, we injected HCC1954 Her2+ breast cancer cells
silenced for E2F3 into mammary fat pads of immunodeficient mice and demonstrated 
that loss of E2F3 retards tumor growth. Surprisingly, silencing of E2F3 led to
significant reductions in mitotic indices relative to vector controls, while the 
percentage of cells undergoing S phase were not affected. Nek2 is a mitotic
kinase commonly upregulated in breast cancers and a critical regulator of Cdk4-
or E2F-mediated CA. In this report, we found that Nek2 overexpression rescued
back the CA caused by silencing of shE2F3. However, the effects of Nek2
overexpression in affecting tumor growth rates of shE2F3 and shE2F3; GFP cells
were inconclusive. Taken together, our results indicate that E2F3 silencing
decreases mammary tumor growth by reducing percentage of cells undergoing
mitosis.

PMCID: PMC4741932
PMID: 26512919  [PubMed - in process]


13. Cell Cycle. 2015 Dec 2;14(23):3698-712. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1104436.

Ablation of the transcription factors E2F1-2 limits neuroinflammation and
associated neurological deficits after contusive spinal cord injury.

Wu J(1,)(2), Sabirzhanov B(1), Stoica BA(1,)(2), Lipinski MM(1,)(2), Zhao Z(1),
Zhao S(1), Ward N(1), Yang D(1), Faden AI(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Anesthesiology and Center for Shock ; Trauma and
Anesthesiology Research (STAR); University of Maryland School of Medicine ;
Baltimore , MD USA. (2)b Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology ; University of
Maryland School of Medicine ; Baltimore , MD USA.

Traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI) induces cell cycle activation (CCA) that
contributes to secondary injury and related functional impairments such as motor 
deficits and hyperpathia. E2F1 and E2F2 are members of the activator sub-family
of E2F transcription factors that play an important role in proliferating cells
and in cell cycle-related neuronal death, but no comprehensive study have been
performed in SCI to determine the relative importance of these factors. Here we
examined the temporal distribution and cell-type specificity of E2F1 and E2F2
expression following mouse SCI, as well as the effects of genetic deletion of
E2F1-2 on neuronal cell death, neuroinflammation and associated neurological
dysfunction. SCI significantly increased E2F1 and E2F2 expression in active
caspase-3(+) neurons/oligodendrocytes as well as in activated
microglia/astrocytes. Injury-induced up-regulation of cell cycle-related genes
and protein was significantly reduced by intrathecal injection of high
specificity E2F decoy oligodeoxynucleotides against the E2F-binding site or in
E2F1-2 null mice. Combined E2F1+2 siRNA treatment show greater neuroprotection in
vivo than E2F1 or E2F2 single siRNA treatment. Knockout of both E2F1 and E2F2
genes (E2Fdko) significantly reduced neuronal death, neuroinflammation, and
tissue damage, as well as limiting motor dysfunction and hyperpathia after SCI.
Both CCA reduction and functional improvement in E2Fdko mice were greater than
those in E2F2ko model. These studies demonstrate that SCI-induced activation of
E2F1-2 mediates CCA, contributing to gliopathy and neuronal/tissue loss
associated with motor impairments and post-traumatic hyperesthesia. Thus, E2F1-2 
provide a therapeutic target for decreasing secondary tissue damage and promoting
recovery of function after SCI.

PMID: 26505089  [PubMed - in process]


14. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 5;7(1):929-45. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6137.

miR-214/199a/199a* cluster levels predict poor survival in hepatocellular
carcinoma through interference with cell-cycle regulators.

Wang P(1,)(2), Chen S(3), Fang H(4), Wu X(1), Chen D(1), Peng L(1), Gao Z(1,)(2),
Xie C(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China. (2)Key Laboratory of
Tropical Disease Control, Ministry of Education, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China. (3)Department of Radiology, Guangzhou Red
Cross Hospital/The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University Medical
College, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China. (4)Department of Burn Surgery,
Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

AIMS: To identify the clinical and functional association of miR-214/199a/199a*
cluster in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and to clarify the mechanism of
miR-214.
METHODS: Kaplan-Meier and Cox proportional regression analyses were used to
determine the association of miR-214/199a/199a* cluster levels with the survival 
of HCC patients. The role of miR-214 in regulating HCC cell proliferation was
studied with miR-214 mimics/inhibitor-treated cells. Furthermore, the inhibition 
effect of miR-214 on E2F2, cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 3 and CDK6 expression
was assessed in HCC cell lines with miR-214 mimics/inhibitors to
increase/decrease miR-214 expression. Direct binding of miR-214 to the
3'-untranslated regions of E2F2, CDK3, and CDK6 was verified by dual-luciferase
reporter assay.
RESULTS: In analyzing HCC clinical specimens and cell lines, we discovered a
uniform decrease in miR-214/199a/199a* expression in comparison with noncancerous
tissue or normal liver epithelial cell lines. Higher miR-214 levels were related 
with improved patient survival. Overexpression of miR-214 in HCC cells inhibited 
proliferation by inducing G1-S checkpoint arrest. Conversely, RNA
interference-mediated silencing of miR-214 promoted cell-cycle progression and
accelerated the proliferation of HCC cells. E2F2, CDK3 and CDK6 were each
directly targeted for inhibition by miR-214, and restoring their expression
reversed miR-214 inhibition of cell-cycle progression. The relationship between
expression of miR-214 and its targets was confirmed in HCC tumor xenografts and
clinical specimens.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that miR-214 has tumor-suppressive activity 
in HCC through inhibition of E2F2, CDK3 and CDK6.

PMID: 26498144  [PubMed - in process]


15. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 10;6(35):38210-24. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5690.

Increased metastasis with loss of E2F2 in Myc-driven tumors.

Yuwanita I(1), Barnes D(1), Monterey MD(1), O'Reilly S(1), Andrechek ER(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI48824,
Michigan, USA.

In human breast cancer, mortality is associated with metastasis to distant sites.
Therefore, it is critical to elucidate the biological mechanisms that underlie
tumor progression and metastasis. Using signaling pathway signatures we
previously predicted a role for E2F transcription factors in Myc induced tumors. 
To test this role we interbred MMTV-Myc transgenic mice with E2F knockouts.
Surprisingly, we observed that the loss of E2F2 sharply increased the percentage 
of lung metastasis in MMTV-Myc transgenic mice. Examining the gene expression
profile from these tumors, we identified genetic components that were potentially
involved in mediating metastasis. These genes were filtered to uncover the genes 
involved in metastasis that also impacted distant metastasis free survival in
human breast cancer. In order to elucidate the mechanism by which E2F2 loss
enhanced metastasis we generated knockdowns of E2F2 in MDA-MB-231 cells and
observed increased migration in vitro and increased lung colonization in vivo. We
then examined genes that were differentially regulated between tumors from
MMTV-Myc, MMTV-Myc E2F2-/-, and lung metastases samples and identified PTPRD. To 
test the role of PTPRD in E2F2-mediated breast cancer metastasis, we generated a 
knockdown of PTPRD in MDA-MB-231 cells. We noted that decreased levels of PTPRD
resulted in decreased migration in vitro and decreased lung colonization in vivo.
Taken together, these data indicate that E2F2 loss results in increased
metastasis in breast cancer, potentially functioning through a PTPRD dependent
mechanism.

PMCID: PMC4741994
PMID: 26474282  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Oct 14;34:121. doi: 10.1186/s13046-015-0235-5.

The candidate oncogene (MCRS1) promotes the growth of human lung cancer cells via
the miR-155-Rb1 pathway.

Liu M(1,)(2), Zhou K(3,)(4), Huang Y(5), Cao Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Experimental Pathology, Kunming Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China. L-M-X101@163.com.
(2)Kunming College of Life Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Kunming, China. L-M-X101@163.com. (3)Laboratory of Molecular and Experimental
Pathology, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming,
China. zhoukecheng1988@gmail.com. (4)Kunming College of Life Science, University 
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China. zhoukecheng1988@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, The Third Affiliated
Hospital of Kunming Medical University (Yunnan Tumor Hospital), Kunming, China.
huangych2001@aliyun.com. (6)Laboratory of Molecular and Experimental Pathology,
Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
caoy@mail.kiz.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Microspherule protein 1 (MCRS1) is a candidate oncogene and
participates in various cellular processes, including growth, migration,
senescence and transformation. MCRS1 is overexpressed in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) and promotes the growth of cancer cells. However, the mechanisms
driving these processes are not fully understood.
METHODS: Retrovirus-mediated RNA interference was employed to knockdown MCRS1
expression in cell lines. Cell proliferation assays and animal experiments were
respectively performed to evaluate the growth of NSCLC cells in vitro and in
vivo. Microarray analysis was carried out for mRNA profiling. Luciferase reporter
assay and microRNA (miRNA) transfection were used to investigate the interaction 
between miRNA and gene.
RESULTS: Stably knocking down MCRS1 expression inhibited the proliferation of
NSCLC cells in vitro and in vivo. By comparing the mRNA expression profiles of
NSCLC cells with or without MCRS1 silencing, we found that MCRS1 regulated
expressions of various genes related to cell proliferation, including Rb1, TP53, 
cell cycle-related genes, MYC, E2F2, PCNA, and Ki67. However, MCRS1 did not
directly bind to these differentially expressed genes. Here, we confirmed that
Rb1, an important tumor suppression gene (TSG), is a direct target of miR-155
which is directly up-regulated by MCRS1. Furthermore, the level of Rb1 expression
in NSCLC tissues was inversely correlated with those of miR-155 and MCRS1, and
MCRS1 regulated expression of Rb1 via miR-155. Additionally, we found that the
DNA copy number of the MCRS1 gene played a role in MCRS1 overexpression in
NSCLCs.
CONCLUSION: MCRS1 overexpression induced NSCLC proliferation through the
miR-155-Rb1 pathway and DNA copy-number amplification is one of the mechanisms
underlying MCRS1 overexpression in NSCLC. Moreover, we put forward the hypothesis
that there are regulatory relationships between oncogenes and TSGs apart from the
functional synergy of both; the oncogene-miRNA-TSG networks are one of mechanisms
among the regulatory relationships; the regulatory relationships and the networks
might play active roles in the development and progression of cancer.

PMCID: PMC4606992
PMID: 26467212  [PubMed - in process]


17. Saudi J Gastroenterol. 2015 Sep-Oct;21(5):313-9. doi: 10.4103/1319-3767.166206.

MiR-26a enhances the sensitivity of gastric cancer cells to cisplatin by
targeting NRAS and E2F2.

Wen L, Cheng F, Zhou Y(1), Yin C.

Author information: 
(1)Intensive Care Unit, the Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan Province, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: MiR-26a has been identified as a tumor suppressor in various
tumors, but the relationship between miR-26a and the sensitivity of gastric
cancer to chemotherapies has not been established. The present study was
performed to investigate the effect of miR-26a on drug sensitivity in gastric
cancer (GC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The expression level of miRNA-26a in cisplatin-resistant
SGC-7901/DDP cells and parent SGC-7901 cells was evaluated by qRT-PCR. The effect
of miR-26a on sensitivity of GC cells to cisplatin was assayed using MTS method. 
The effect of miR-26a on cisplatin-induced apoptosis were determined by Annexin
V/propidium iodide (PI) double staining method and flow cytometry. The targets of
miR-26a were identified using a luciferase activity assay and miR-26a-mediated
target genes expression analysis. Furthermore, the role of the targets
neuroblastoma RAS viral (v-ras) oncogene homolog (NRAS) and E2F2 on sensitivity
of chemotherapy in GC by MTS and apoptotic cell analysis was assessed.
RESULTS: We found that miR-26a was downregulated in cisplatin-resistant
SGC-7901/DDP cells compared with SGC-7901 cells. Using both gain- and
loss-of-function analyses, we further revealed that miR-26a could improve the
sensitivity of GC cells to cisplatin. Furthermore, miR-26a has target sites in
the 3'-UTR of NRAS and E2F2 by luciferase reporter assay and reduces the
expression levels of NRAS and E2F2. In addition, knockdown of NRAS or E2F2
sensitize GC cells to cisplatin.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that miR-26a can improve the sensitivity of GC
cells to cisplatin-based chemotherapies through targeting NRAS and E2F2, and
provide the first evidence of the potential utility of miR-26a as a sensitizer in
chemotherapy for GC.

PMCID: PMC4632257
PMID: 26458859  [PubMed - in process]


18. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Nov;36(11):1341-53. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv138. Epub 2015
Sep 29.

Common variants at the CHEK2 gene locus and risk of epithelial ovarian cancer.

Lawrenson K, Iversen ES, Tyrer J, Weber RP, Concannon P, Hazelett DJ, Li Q, Marks
JR, Berchuck A, Lee JM, Aben KK, Anton-Culver H, Antonenkova N; Australian Cancer
Study (Ovarian Cancer); Australian Ovarian Cancer Study Group, Bandera EV, Bean
Y, Beckmann MW, Bisogna M, Bjorge L, Bogdanova N, Brinton LA, Brooks-Wilson A,
Bruinsma F, Butzow R, Campbell IG, Carty K, Chang-Claude J, Chenevix-Trench G,
Chen A, Chen Z, Cook LS, Cramer DW, Cunningham JM, Cybulski C, Plisiecka-Halasa
J, Dennis J, Dicks E, Doherty JA, Dörk T, du Bois A, Eccles D, Easton DT, Edwards
RP, Eilber U, Ekici AB, Fasching PA, Fridley BL, Gao YT, Gentry-Maharaj A, Giles 
GG, Glasspool R, Goode EL, Goodman MT, Gronwald J, Harter P, Hasmad HN, Hein A,
Heitz F, Hildebrandt MA, Hillemanns P, Hogdall E, Hogdall C, Hosono S, Jakubowska
A, Paul J, Jensen A, Karlan BY, Kjaer SK, Kelemen LE, Kellar M, Kelley JL,
Kiemeney LA, Krakstad C, Lambrechts D, Lambrechts S, Le ND, Lee AW, Cannioto R,
Leminen A, Lester J, Levine DA, Liang D, Lissowska J, Lu K, Lubinski J, Lundvall 
L, Massuger LF, Matsuo K, McGuire V, McLaughlin JR, Nevanlinna H, McNeish I,
Menon U, Modugno F, Moysich KB, Narod SA, Nedergaard L, Ness RB, Noor Azmi MA,
Odunsi K, Olson SH, Orlow I, Orsulic S, Pearce CL, Pejovic T, Pelttari LM,
Permuth-Wey J, Phelan CM, Pike MC, Poole EM, Ramus SJ, Risch HA, Rosen B, Rossing
MA, Rothstein JH, Rudolph A, Runnebaum IB, Rzepecka IK, Salvesen HB, Budzilowska 
A, Sellers TA, Shu XO, Shvetsov YB, Siddiqui N, Sieh W, Song H, Southey MC,
Sucheston L, Tangen IL, Teo SH, Terry KL, Thompson PJ, Timorek A, Tworoger SS,
Van Nieuwenhuysen E, Vergote I, Vierkant RA, Wang-Gohrke S, Walsh C, Wentzensen
N, Whittemore AS, Wicklund KG, Wilkens LR, Woo YL, Wu X, Wu AH, Yang H, Zheng W, 
Ziogas A, Coetzee GA, Freedman ML, Monteiro AN, Moes-Sosnowska J, Kupryjanczyk J,
Pharoah PD, Gayther SA, Schildkraut JM.

Genome-wide association studies have identified 20 genomic regions associated
with risk of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC), but many additional risk variants
may exist. Here, we evaluated associations between common genetic variants
[single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and indels] in DNA repair genes and EOC
risk. We genotyped 2896 common variants at 143 gene loci in DNA samples from 15
397 patients with invasive EOC and controls. We found evidence of associations
with EOC risk for variants at FANCA, EXO1, E2F4, E2F2, CREB5 and CHEK2 genes (P =
0.001). The strongest risk association was for CHEK2 SNP rs17507066 with serous
EOC (P = 4.74 x 10(-7)). Additional genotyping and imputation of genotypes from
the 1000 genomes project identified a slightly more significant association for
CHEK2 SNP rs6005807 (r (2) with rs17507066 = 0.84, odds ratio (OR) 1.17, 95% CI
1.11-1.24, P = 1.1×10(-7)). We identified 293 variants in the region with
likelihood ratios of less than 1:100 for representing the causal variant.
Functional annotation identified 25 candidate SNPs that alter transcription
factor binding sites within regulatory elements active in EOC precursor tissues. 
In The Cancer Genome Atlas dataset, CHEK2 gene expression was significantly
higher in primary EOCs compared to normal fallopian tube tissues (P =
3.72×10(-8)). We also identified an association between genotypes of the
candidate causal SNP rs12166475 (r (2) = 0.99 with rs6005807) and CHEK2
expression (P = 2.70×10(-8)). These data suggest that common variants at 22q12.1 
are associated with risk of serous EOC and CHEK2 as a plausible target
susceptibility gene.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4635670 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26424751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 28;6(25):20933-45.

The TRAF-interacting protein (TRAIP) is a novel E2F target with peak expression
in mitosis.

Chapard C(1), Hohl D(1), Huber M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service of Dermatology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.

The TRAF-interacting protein (TRAIP) is an E3 ubiquitin ligase required for cell 
proliferation. TRAIP mRNA is downregulated in human keratinocytes after
inhibition of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling. Since E2F transcription factors are
downstream of PI3K/AKT/mTOR we investigated whether they regulate TRAIP
expression. E2F1 expression significantly increased the TRAIP mRNA level in HeLa 
cells. Reporter assays with the 1400 bp 5'-upstream promoter in HeLa cells and
human keratinocytes showed that E2F1-, E2F2- and E2F4-induced upregulation of
TRAIP expression is mediated by 168 bp upstream of the translation start site.
Mutating the E2F binding site within this fragment reduced the E2F1- and
E2F2-dependent promoter activities and protein-DNA complex formation in gel shift
assays. Abundance of TRAIP mRNA and protein was regulated by the cell cycle with 
a peak in G2/M. Expression of GFP and TRAIP-GFP demonstrated that TRAIP-GFP
protein has a lower steady-state concentration than GFP despite similar mRNA
levels. Cycloheximide inhibition experiments indicated that the TRAIP protein has
a half-life of around four hours. Therefore, the combination of cell
cycle-dependent transcription of the TRAIP gene by E2F and rapid protein
degradation leads to cell cycle-dependent expression with a maximum in G2/M.
These findings suggest that TRAIP has important functions in mitosis and
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4673240
PMID: 26369285  [PubMed - in process]


20. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Aug;17(8):1036-48. doi: 10.1038/ncb3210. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

Redeployment of Myc and E2f1-3 drives Rb-deficient cell cycles.

Liu H(1), Tang X(1), Srivastava A(1), Pécot T(1), Daniel P(1), Hemmelgarn B(1),
Reyes S(1), Fackler N(1), Bajwa A(1), Kladney R(1), Koivisto C(1), Chen Z(2),
Wang Q(2), Huang K(3), Machiraju R(4), Sáenz-Robles MT(5), Cantalupo P(5), Pipas 
JM(5), Leone G(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, College 
of Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA [2] Department 
of Molecular Genetics, College of Biological Sciences, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA [3] Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Virology,
Immunology and Medical Genetics, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA. (3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA. (4)Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15260, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Aug;17(8):968-9.
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Sep;16(9):516-7.

Robust mechanisms to control cell proliferation have evolved to maintain the
integrity of organ architecture. Here, we investigated how two critical
proliferative pathways, Myc and E2f, are integrated to control cell cycles in
normal and Rb-deficient cells using a murine intestinal model. We show that Myc
and E2f1-3 have little impact on normal G1-S transitions. Instead, they
synergistically control an S-G2 transcriptional program required for normal cell 
divisions and maintaining crypt-villus integrity. Surprisingly, Rb deficiency
results in the Myc-dependent accumulation of E2f3 protein and chromatin
repositioning of both Myc and E2f3, leading to the 'super activation' of a G1-S
transcriptional program, ectopic S phase entry and rampant cell proliferation.
These findings reveal that Rb-deficient cells hijack and redeploy Myc and E2f3
from an S-G2 program essential for normal cell cycles to a G1-S program that
re-engages ectopic cell cycles, exposing an unanticipated addiction of Rb-null
cells on Myc.

PMCID: PMC4526313
PMID: 26192440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;36(4):1552-62.

MiR-378 Plays an Important Role in the Differentiation of Bovine Preadipocytes.

Liu SY, Zhang YY, Gao Y, Zhang LJ, Chen HY, Zhou Q, Chai ML, Li QY, Jiang H, Yuan
B, Dai LS, Zhang JB.

BACKGROUND: Adipocyte, the main cellular component of white adipose tissue, plays
a vital role in energy balance in higher eukaryotes. In recent years, adipocytes 
have also been identified as a major endocrine organ involved in immunological
responses, vascular diseases, and appetite regulation. In farm animals, fat
content and categories are closely correlated with meat quality. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs), a class of endogenous single-stranded non-coding RNA molecules,
participate in the regulation of adipocyte differentiation and adipogenesis
through regulating the transcription or translation of target mRNAs. MiR-378
plays an important role in a number of biological processes, including cell
growth, cell differentiation, tumor cell survival and angiogenesis.
METHODS: In the present study, bioinformatics analysis and dual-luciferase
reporter assay were used to identify and validate the target genes of miR-378. In
vitro cell transfection, quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-qPCR), western blot analysis, Oil Red O staining, and triglyceride
content measurement were conducted to analyze the effects of miR-378 on bovine
preadipocyte differentiation.
RESULTS: MiR-378 was induced during adipocyte differentiation. In the
differentiated adipocytes overexpressing miR- 378, the volume of lipid droplets
was enlarged, and the triglyceride content was increased. Moreover, the mRNA
expression levels of the adipocyte differentiation marker genes, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>) and sterol regulatory
element-binding protein (SREBP), were significantly elevated in the
differentiated, mature adipocytes. In contrast, the mRNA expression level of
preadipocyte factor 1 (Pref-1) was markedly reduced. E2F transcription factor 2
(E2F2) and Ras-related nuclear (RAN)-binding protein 10 (RANBP10) were the two
target genes of miR-378. The mRNA expression levels of E2F2 and RANBP10 did not
significantly change in bovine preadipocytes overexpressing miR-378. However, the
protein expression levels of E2F2 and RANBP10 were markedly reduced.
CONCLUSION: MiR-378 promoted the differentiation of bovine preadipocytes. E2F2
and RANBP10 were the two target genes of miR-378, and might involve in the
effects of miR-378 on the bovine preadipocyte differentiation.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26159460  [PubMed - in process]


22. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 6;10(7):e0131573. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131573.
eCollection 2015.

Exploring Genetic Factors Involved in Huntington Disease Age of Onset: E2F2 as a 
New Potential Modifier Gene.

Valcárcel-Ocete L(1), Alkorta-Aranburu G(2), Iriondo M(1), Fullaondo A(1),
García-Barcina M(3), Fernández-García JM(4), Lezcano-García E(5), Losada-Domingo 
JM(5), Ruiz-Ojeda J(6), Álvarez de Arcaya A(7), Pérez-Ramos JM(8), Roos RA(9),
Nielsen JE(10), Saft C(11); REGISTRY investigators of the European Huntington's
Disease Network, Zubiaga AM(1), Aguirre A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology,
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain. (2)Department of Human 
Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, United States of America. (3)Genetics
Unit, Basurto University Hospital, Bilbao, Spain. (4)Neurology Service, Basurto
University Hospital, Bilbao, Spain. (5)Department of Neurology, Cruces University
Hospital, Barakaldo, Spain. (6)Department of Neurology, Galdakao-Usansolo
Hospital, Galdakao, Spain. (7)Department of Neurology, Alava University Hospital,
Txagorritxu, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. (8)Department of Neurology, Alava University
Hospital, Santiago Apóstol, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. (9)Department of Neurology,
Leiden University Medical Centre (LUMC), Leiden, The Netherlands. (10)Danish
Dementia Research Centre, Neurogenetics Clinic, University Hospital of
Copenhagen- Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. (11)Huntington-Zentrum (NRW)
Bochum, St. Josef-Hospital, Bochum, Germany.

Age of onset (AO) of Huntington disease (HD) is mainly determined by the length
of the CAG repeat expansion (CAGexp) in exon 1 of the HTT gene. Additional
genetic variation has been suggested to contribute to AO, although the mechanism 
by which it could affect AO is presently unknown. The aim of this study is to
explore the contribution of candidate genetic factors to HD AO in order to gain
insight into the pathogenic mechanisms underlying this disorder. For that
purpose, two AO definitions were used: the earliest age with unequivocal signs of
HD (earliest AO or eAO), and the first motor symptoms age (motor AO or mAO).
Multiple linear regression analyses were performed between genetic variation
within 20 candidate genes and eAO or mAO, using DNA and clinical information of
253 HD patients from REGISTRY project. Gene expression analyses were carried out 
by RT-qPCR with an independent sample of 35 HD patients from Basque Country
Hospitals. We found suggestive association signals between HD eAO and/or mAO and 
genetic variation within the E2F2, ATF7IP, GRIN2A, GRIN2B, LINC01559, HIP1 and
GRIK2 genes. Among them, the most significant was the association between eAO and
rs2742976, mapping to the promoter region of E2F2 transcription factor.
Furthermore, rs2742976 T allele patient carriers exhibited significantly lower
lymphocyte E2F2 gene expression, suggesting a possible implication of
E2F2-dependent transcriptional activity in HD pathogenesis. Thus, E2F2 emerges as
a new potential HD AO modifier factor.

PMCID: PMC4493078
PMID: 26148071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Sep;12(3):4284-90. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3933. Epub 2015 Jun
15.

Microarray and ChIP-seq data analysis revealed changes in p53-mediated
transcriptional regulation in Nutlin-3-treated U2OS cells.

Zhao S(1), Niu F(1), Xu CY(2), Ye L(1), Bi GB(1), Chen L(1), Gong P(1), Tian
G(1), Nie TH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Spinal Surgery, The First Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China. (2)Department of Medical Records, The First 
Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China.

Integrative analysis of chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq) data 
and microarray data was performed to illustrate the effect of Nutlin-3 on
promoter selectivity and transcriptional regulation by the tumor suppressor p53
in U2OS human osteosarcoma cells. Raw data (accession number, GSE46642) were
downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus. Differential analyses were performed
using package limma of R software. Gene ontology enrichment and Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analyses were performed for 
the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) using the Database for Annotation,
Visualization and Integration Discovery. Integrative analysis of ChIP-seq data
and microarray data were confirmed with ChIP-Array. A total of 565 DEGs were
identified, including 373 upregulated genes and 192 downregulated genes. Genes
involved in the p53 signaling pathway, cell cycle, DNA replication,
cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and melanoma were markedly
over-represented in the DEGs. A total of 39 DEGs were directly regulated by p53
and two were the transcription factors (TFs), E2F2 and HOXA1. E2F2 regulated 25
DEGs, while HOXA1 regulated one DEG. The cell cycle, p53 signaling pathway,
melanoma and pathways involved in cancer were enriched in the direct and indirect
target genes. Changes in the p53-binding pattern induced by Nutlin-3 were
described in the present study, which may advance the understanding of the
regulatory network of p53 in osteosarcoma and aid in the development of novel
therapies.

PMCID: PMC4526040
PMID: 26080812  [PubMed - in process]


24. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Nov;35(8):1165-73. doi: 10.1007/s10571-015-0210-x. Epub 
2015 May 27.

MiR-218 Inhibited Growth and Metabolism of Human Glioblastoma Cells by Directly
Targeting E2F2.

Zhang Y(1), Han D(1), Wei W(1), Cao W(1), Zhang R(1), Dong Q(1), Zhang J(1), Wang
Y(2), Liu N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, Jiangsu Province, People's
Republic of China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital
of Nanjing Medical University, 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, Jiangsu
Province, People's Republic of China. lindsay_wang3431@126.com. (3)Department of 
Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 300
Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China.
liuning0853@126.com.

In recent years, microRNA has become a hotspot in research on diseases,
especially in the initiation and progression of different types of cancer. In
this study, we found that miR-218 could inhibit growth and metabolism in gliomas 
by directly targeting E2F2. First, we obtained data from the Chinese Glioma
Genome Atlas (CGGA) database to analyze miR-218 expression in different grades of
gliomas. The effects of miR-218 on cell cycle progression and cell proliferation 
in U87 and U251 cell lines were investigated by flow cytometry, specifically CCK8
assay and tablet cloning, respectively. Glucose consumption and lactate
production of glioma cell lines were measured by correlative test kits.
Furthermore, we used Western blot analysis and luciferase reporter assay to
identify the direct and functional target of miR-218. Data from the CGGA database
and real-time quantitative reverse transcription-PCR demonstrated that miR-218
was obviously reduced in human glioblastoma tissues, as well as in the cell
lines. When miR-218 level was elevated in vitro, cell cycle progression was
arrested in the G1 phase, and cell proliferation was dramatically inhibited. Both
glucose consumption and lactate production of glioma cells were significantly
reduced. Western blot analysis and luciferase reporter assay revealed that E2F2
was a direct target of miR-218 in glioma cells. This investigation demonstrated
that elevated E2F2 expression could partly weaken the effect of miR-218 in vitro.
This study also showed that miR-218 may be a repressor in glioma by directly
targeting E2F2, as well as a potential therapeutic target in gliomas.

PMID: 26012781  [PubMed - in process]


25. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 24;10(4):e0124266. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124266.
eCollection 2015.

MicroRNA let-7c Inhibits Cell Proliferation and Induces Cell Cycle Arrest by
Targeting CDC25A in Human Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Zhu X(1), Wu L(2), Yao J(2), Jiang H(3), Wang Q(3), Yang Z(4), Wu F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital, College of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China; Department of Oncology, Zhejiang 
Provincial People's Hospital, Hangzhou, China. (2)State key Laboratory for
Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, the First Affiliated Hospital,
College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. (3)Department of
Surgical Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. (4)Origin Biosciences Inc, Nanjing, China.

Down-regulation of the microRNA let-7c plays an important role in the
pathogenesis of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The aim of the present
study was to determine whether the cell cycle regulator CDC25A is involved in the
antitumor effect of let-7c in HCC. The expression levels of let-7c in HCC cell
lines were examined by quantitative real-time PCR, and a let-7c agomir was
transfected into HCC cells to overexpress let-7c. The effects of let-7c on HCC
proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle were analyzed. The in vivo
tumor-inhibitory efficacy of let-7c was evaluated in a xenograft mouse model of
HCC. Luciferase reporter assays and western blotting were conducted to identify
the targets of let-7c and to determine the effects of let-7c on CDC25A, CyclinD1,
CDK6, pRb and E2F2 expression. The results showed that the expression levels of
let-7c were significantly decreased in HCC cell lines. Overexpression of let-7c
repressed cell growth, induced cell apoptosis, led to G1 cell cycle arrest in
vitro, and suppressed tumor growth in a HepG2 xenograft model in vivo. The
luciferase reporter assay showed that CDC25A was a direct target of let-7c, and
that let-7c inhibited the expression of CDC25A protein by directly targeting its 
3' UTR. Restoration of CDC25A induced a let-7c-mediated G1-to-S phase transition.
Western blot analysis demonstrated that overexpression of let-7c decreased
CyclinD1, CDK6, pRb and E2F2 protein levels. In conclusion, this study indicates 
that let-7c suppresses HCC progression, possibly by directly targeting the cell
cycle regulator CDC25A and indirectly affecting its downstream target molecules. 
Let-7c may therefore be an effective therapeutic target for HCC.

PMCID: PMC4409336
PMID: 25909324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(8):1300-14. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.985031.

E2F1 and E2F2 induction in response to DNA damage preserves genomic stability in 
neuronal cells.

Castillo DS(1), Campalans A, Belluscio LM, Carcagno AL, Radicella JP, Cánepa ET, 
Pregi N.

Author information: 
(1)a Laboratorio de Biología Molecular; Departamento de Química Biológica;
Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales ; Universidad de Buenos Aires ; Ciudad
de Buenos Aires , Argentina.

E2F transcription factors regulate a wide range of biological processes,
including the cellular response to DNA damage. In the present study, we examined 
whether E2F family members are transcriptionally induced following treatment with
several genotoxic agents, and have a role on the cell DNA damage response. We
show a novel mechanism, conserved among diverse species, in which E2F1 and E2F2, 
the latter specifically in neuronal cells, are transcriptionally induced after
DNA damage. This upregulation leads to increased E2F1 and E2F2 protein levels as 
a consequence of de novo protein synthesis. Ectopic expression of these E2Fs in
neuronal cells reduces the level of DNA damage following genotoxic treatment,
while ablation of E2F1 and E2F2 leads to the accumulation of DNA lesions and
increased apoptotic response. Cell viability and DNA repair capability in
response to DNA damage induction are also reduced by the E2F1 and E2F2
deficiencies. Finally, E2F1 and E2F2 accumulate at sites of oxidative and
UV-induced DNA damage, and interact with <U+03B3>H2AX DNA repair factor. As previously
reported for E2F1, E2F2 promotes Rad51 foci formation, interacts with GCN5
acetyltransferase and induces histone acetylation following genotoxic insult. The
results presented here unveil a new mechanism involving E2F1 and E2F2 in the
maintenance of genomic stability in response to DNA damage in neuronal cells.

PMCID: PMC4614399 [Available on 2016-04-18]
PMID: 25892555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):1016-22. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3516. Epub 2015 Mar
19.

MicroRNA-218 and microRNA-520a inhibit cell proliferation by downregulating E2F2 
in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Dong Y(1), Zou J(2), Su S(2), Huang H(2), Deng Y(1), Wang B(1), Li W(1).

Author information: 
(1)The 1st Ward of the Medical Department, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510095, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Guangzhou Chest Hospital, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510095,
P.R. China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common cancer type worldwide and
the third leading cause of cancer-associated mortality. To date, its pathogenesis
has remained poorly understood. Previous studies have demonstrated that
deregulated microRNA (miR) participates in hepatocarcinogenesis. In the present
study, miR-218 and miR-520a were observed to be downregulated in human HCC cells 
relative to normal hepatic cells. Overexpression of miR-218 or miR-520a inhibited
cell proliferation and induced cell cycle arrest at the G0/G1 phase checkpoint.
Furthermore, a dual-luciferase reporter assay identified that E2F2 was a novel
direct target of miR-218 but not miR-520a in HCC. In addition, miR-218 and
miR-520a were observed to negatively regulate E2F2 mRNA and protein levels. This 
suggested that miR-218 regulated the expression of E2F2 via directly binding to
its 3'-untranslated region, whereas miR-520a affected E2F2 expression indirectly.
In conclusion, these results indicated that miR-218 and miR-520a are crucial in
the development of HCC via the inhibition of cell proliferation and cycle
progression by downregulating E2F2.

PMCID: PMC4438929
PMID: 25816091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 19;34(47):5807-20. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.33. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

MOZ (MYST3, KAT6A) inhibits senescence via the INK4A-ARF pathway.

Sheikh BN(1,)(2), Phipson B(3,)(4), El-Saafin F(1,)(2), Vanyai HK(1,)(2), Downer 
NL(1), Bird MJ(4,)(5), Kueh AJ(1), May RE(1), Smyth GK(3,)(6), Voss AK(1,)(2),
Thomas T(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Development and Cancer, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (2)Department of Medical
Biology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (3)Division of 
Bioinformatics, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (4)Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (5)Department of Paediatrics, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (6)Department of Mathematics and
Statistics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Cellular senescence is an important mechanism that restricts tumour growth. The
Ink4a-Arf locus (also known as Cdkn2a), which encodes p16(INK4A) and p19(ARF),
has a central role in inducing and maintaining senescence. Given the importance
of cellular senescence in restraining tumour growth, great emphasis is being
placed on the identification of novel factors that can modulate senescence. The
MYST-family histone acetyltransferase MOZ (MYST3, KAT6A), first identified in
recurrent translocations in acute myeloid leukaemia, has been implicated in both 
the promotion and inhibition of senescence. In this study, we investigate the
role of MOZ in cellular senescence and show that MOZ is a potent inhibitor of
senescence via the INK4A-ARF pathway. Primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) 
isolated from Moz-deficient embryos exhibit premature senescence, which was
rescued on the Ink4a-Arf(-/-) background. Importantly, senescence resulting from 
the absence of MOZ was not accompanied by DNA damage, suggesting that MOZ acts
independently of the DNA damage response. Consistent with the importance of
senescence in cancer, expression profiling revealed that genes overexpressed in
aggressive and highly proliferative cancers are expressed at low levels in
Moz-deficient MEFs. We show that MOZ is required to maintain normal levels of
histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9) and H3K27 acetylation at the transcriptional start
sites of at least four genes, Cdc6, Ezh2, E2f2 and Melk, and normal mRNA levels
of these genes. CDC6, EZH2 and E2F2 are known inhibitors of the INK4A-ARF
pathway. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, we show that MOZ occupies the Cdc6,
Ezh2 and Melk loci, thereby providing a direct link between MOZ, H3K9 and H3K27
acetylation, and normal transcriptional levels at these loci. This work
establishes that MOZ is an upstream inhibitor of the INK4A-ARF pathway, and
suggests that inhibiting MOZ may be one way to induce senescence in proliferative
tumour cells.

PMID: 25772242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Biochimie. 2015 May;112:85-95. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2015.02.015. Epub 2015 Mar
3.

Impairment of the Pin1/E2F1 axis in the anti-proliferative effect of bortezomib
in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Farra R(1), Dapas B(2), Baiz D(3), Tonon F(1), Chiaretti S(2), Del Sal G(4),
Rustighi A(4), Elvassore N(5), Pozzato G(6), Grassi M(1), Grassi G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial Engineering and Information Technology, University of
Trieste, V. Valerio 10, 34100 Trieste, Italy. (2)Department of Life Sciences,
University of Trieste, Via Giorgieri, 10, 34127 Trieste, Italy. (3)International 
Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Via E. Ramarini 32, 00016
Monterotondo Scalo, Rome, Italy. (4)Department of Life Sciences, University of
Trieste, Via Giorgieri, 10, 34127 Trieste, Italy; Laboratorio Nazionale CIB
(LNCIB), Area Science Park, Trieste, Italy. (5)Department of Industrial
Engineering, University of Padova, Via Marzolo 9, 35131 Padova, Italy; Venetian
Institute of Molecular Medicine, Via Orus 2, 35129 Padova, Italy. (6)Department
of Medical, Surgery and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, Cattinara
Hospital, Strada di Fiume 447, 34134, Trieste, Italy. (7)Department of Life
Sciences, University of Trieste, Via Giorgieri, 10, 34127 Trieste, Italy;
Department of Medical, Surgery and Health Sciences, University of Trieste,
Cattinara Hospital, Strada di Fiume 447, 34134, Trieste, Italy. Electronic
address: ggrassi@units.it.

BACKGROUND: The modest efficacy of available therapies for Hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) indicates the need to develop novel therapeutic approaches. For
the proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib (BZB), potentially attractive for HCC
treatment, the mechanism of action is largely unknown. The BZB effect on E2Fs and
the E2Fs control on the peptidylproline cis-trans isomerase (Pin1), prompted us
to explore the BZB effect on the Pin1-E2F1 axis.
METHODS: The tumorigenic cell line HuH7 together with the non-tumorigenic cells
IHH and the human pluripotent stem cell derived hepatocytes (hPSC-H), were used
as cellular models of HCC and normal liver cells, respectively.
RESULTS: BZB reduces HuH7 growth as shown by cell counting, cell vitality test
and cell cycle analysis; this is paralleled by the decrease of Pin1, E2F1, cyclin
A2 and of the hyper-phosphorylated pRB. Pin1-E2F1 axis impairment justifies the
anti-proliferative effect since Pin-E2F1 depletion decreases HuH7 growth while
the over-expression rescues BZB-induced inhibition of proliferation. Moreover,
Pin1-E2F1 promote HuH7 growth via the up-regulation of cyclin D1, cyclin E,
cyclin A2, E2F2 and in part E2F3. Finally, in the control cells IHH and hPSC-H,
BZB effect on cell vitality is not irrelevant, a fact correlated to the cellular 
proliferation rate. Thus, BZB effect on healthy liver tissue may not be entirely 
negligible hence caution should be exercised in its use in liver regeneration
processes.
CONCLUSION: For the first time we prove the functional involvement of the
Pin1-E2F1 axis in the anti-proliferative effect of BZB indicating Pin1-E2F as an 
attractive target to control HCC cell growth.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

PMID: 25742740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(8):1197-206. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1013667.

LIF-JAK1-STAT3 signaling delays contact inhibition of human corneal endothelial
cells.

Liu X(1), Tseng SC, Zhang MC, Chen SY, Tighe S, Lu WJ, Zhu YT.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Ophthalmology; Union Hospital; Tongji Medical College ;
Huazhong University of Science and Technology ; Wuhan , China.

Human corneal endothelial cells (HCECs) responsible for corneal transparency have
limited proliferative capacity in vivo because of "contact-inhibition." This
feature has hampered the ability to engineer HCECs for transplantation.
Previously we have reported an in vitro model of HCECs in which contact
inhibition was re-established at Day 21, even though cell junction and cell
matrix interaction were not perturbed during isolation. Herein, we observe that
such HCEC monolayers continue to expand and retain a normal phenotype for 2 more 
weeks if cultured in a leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF)-containing serum-free
medium. Such expansion is accompanied initially by upregulation of Cyclin E2
colocalized with nuclear translocation of phosphorylated retinoblastoma tumor
suppressor (p-Rb) at Day 21 followed by a delay in contact inhibition through
activation of LIF-Janus kinase1 (JAK1)-signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling at Day 35. The LIF-JAK1-STAT3 signaling is
coupled with upregulation of E2F2 colocalized with nuclear p-Rb and with
concomitant downregulation of p16(INK4a), of which upregulation is linked to
senescence. Hence, activation of LIF-JAK1-STAT3 signaling to delay contact
inhibition can be used as another strategy to facilitate engineering of HCEC
grafts to solve the unmet global shortage of corneal grafts.

PMCID: PMC4613548
PMID: 25695744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Oct;22(10):1577-89. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2015.4. Epub 2015
Feb 6.

E2F1 and E2F2 prevent replicative stress and subsequent p53-dependent organ
involution.

Iglesias-Ara A(1), Zenarruzabeitia O(1), Buelta L(2), Merino J(2), Zubiaga AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology,
University of the Basque Country, UPV/EHU, Bilbao, Spain. (2)University of
Cantabria-IDIVAL, Cantabria, Spain.

Tissue homeostasis requires tight regulation of cellular proliferation,
differentiation and apoptosis. E2F1 and E2F2 transcription factors share a
critical role in tissue homeostasis, since their combined inactivation results in
overall organ involution, specially affecting the pancreatic gland, which
subsequently triggers diabetes. We have examined the mechanism by which these
E2Fs regulate tissue homeostasis. We show that pancreas atrophy in E2F1/E2F2
double-knockout (DKO) mice is associated with mitochondrial apoptosis and
activation of the p53 pathway in young animals, before the development of
diabetes. A deregulated expression of E2F target genes was detected in pancreatic
cells of young DKO animals, along with unscheduled DNA replication and activation
of a DNA damage response. Importantly, suppression of DNA replication in vivo
with aphidicolin led to a significant inhibition of the p53 pathway in DKO
pancreas, implying a causal link between DNA replication stress and p53
activation in this model. We further show that activation of the p53 pathway has 
a key role in the aberrant phenotype of DKO mice, since targeted inactivation of 
p53 gene abrogated cellular apoptosis and prevented organ involution and
insulin-dependent diabetes in mice lacking E2F1/E2F2. Unexpectedly, p53
inactivation unmasked oncogenic features of E2F1/E2F2-depleted cells, as
evidenced by an accelerated tumor development in triple-knockout mice compared
with p53(-/-) mice. Collectively, our data reveal a role for E2F1 and E2F2 as
suppressors of replicative stress in differentiating cells, and uncover the
existence of a robust E2F-p53 regulatory axis to enable tissue homeostasis and
prevent tumorigenesis. These findings have implications in the design of
approaches targeting E2F for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4563787 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 25656653  [PubMed - in process]


32. Int J Oncol. 2015 Apr;46(4):1543-50. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2867. Epub 2015 Feb 3.

Tumor-suppressive microRNA-let-7a inhibits cell proliferation via targeting of
E2F2 in osteosarcoma cells.

Iwasaki T(1), Tanaka K(1), Kawano M(1), Itonaga I(1), Tsumura H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Oita University, Oita 
879-5593, Japan.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate cell proliferation and differentiation by silencing
gene expression at the post-transcriptional level; moreover, by binding to the
complementary sequences within mRNAs in cancer cells, these small non-coding RNA 
molecules can function as tumor suppressors or oncogenes. Recently, the
dysregulation of miRNA expression has been found to be associated with increased 
tumorigenicity and poor prognosis in several cancer types, including osteosarcoma
(OS). To identify potential oncogenic factors in OS, we analyzed changes in the
expression profile of miRNAs and its downstream mRNAs in five OS cell lines and
human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) by a microarray-based approach. The
expression of an miRNA-let-7a was significantly downregulated and E2F2 was
significantly upregulated in all tested OS cells compared with hMSCs. When let-7a
was transfected into OS cell lines, the expression of E2F2 in the cells was
greatly suppressed, suggesting that E2F2 is a target of miRNA-let-7a in OS cells.
The transfection of let-7a further inhibited cell cycle progression and
proliferation of OS cells. In addition, let-7a overexpression in OS cells
significantly suppressed the tumor growth in vivo. The present study demonstrates
the novel mechanism that regulates E2F2 expression via miRNA-let-7a in OS cells. 
Because E2F2 is pivotal in promoting cell growth through the regulation of
several genes, our results might facilitate the development of new therapeutic
targets for the treatment of OS.

PMID: 25647078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Genes Cancer. 2014 Nov;5(11-12):436-44.

Tumor suppression by miR-31 in esophageal carcinoma is p21-dependent.

Ning Z(1), Zhu H(2), Li F(3), Liu Q(3), Liu G(4), Tan T(2), Zhang B(2), Chen
S(5), Li G(6), Huang D(4), Meltzer SJ(7), Zhang H(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Translational Oncology basic medicine college, Hubei University
of Science and Technology, Xianning, Hubei province, China ; Department of
Biotherapy and Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of
Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong, China ; Cancer Research
Center, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Surgery, Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, the Ohio State
University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA. (3)Department of Biotherapy 
and Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Shantou
University Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong, China ; Cancer Research Center,
Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong, China. (4)Department of
Cell Biology, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong, China.
(5)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Shantou
University Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong, China. (6)Department of
Biochemistry, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong, China.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine and Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Baltimore, MD, USA. (8)Department of Biotherapy and Gastrointestinal Medical
Oncology, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Shantou University Medical College,
Shantou, Guangdong, China ; Tumor Tissue Bank, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of
Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong, China ; Cancer Research
Center, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong, China.

microRNA regulation network is important for the cancer genetic heterogeneity.
Relative to the increasing numbers of microRNA's targets identified, upstream
regulatory mechanisms that control functional microRNAs are less well-documented.
Here, we investigated the function of miR-31, a pleiotropically-acting microRNA, 
in esophageal squamous cell cancer (ESCC). We demonstrated that miR-31 only
exerted tumor-suppressive effects in TE-7 ESCC cells, but not in TE-1 ESCC cells,
although both of these cell lines harbor inactive p53. Interestingly, TE-1 cells 
highly expressed p21, while p21 levels were virtually undetectable in TE-7 cells,
suggesting a p21-dependent mechanism of miR-31-mediated tumor suppression.
Accordingly, knockdown of p21 in TE-1 cells reversed the tumor suppressive
actions of miR-31. In patient ESCC specimens, real-time RT-PCR analysis revealed 
that expression of E2F2 and STK40, two known miR-31 target oncogenes, was
negatively correlated with the expression of miR-31 in a p21-dependent manner,
supporting the conclusion that miR-31 only downregulates its target oncogenes
when p21 levels are low. Collectively, these data suggest a novel mechanism
through which the tumor-suppressive effect of miR-31 is p21-dependent. In
addition, we speculate that delivery of miR-31 could provide therapeutic benefit 
in the personalized management of a subgroup of ESCC patients with p21-deficient 
tumors.

PMCID: PMC4279440
PMID: 25568668  [PubMed]


34. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2014 Oct 21;7:26. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-7-26. eCollection
2014.

Protection of CpG islands against de novo DNA methylation during oogenesis is
associated with the recognition site of E2f1 and E2f2.

Saadeh H(1), Schulz R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical & Molecular Genetics, King's College London, 8th Floor
Tower Wing, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK ; Current address: Epigenetics
Programme, The Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, 
UK. (2)Department of Medical & Molecular Genetics, King's College London, 8th
Floor Tower Wing, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic reprogramming during early mammalian embryonic and germ
cell development is a genome-wide process. CpG islands (CGIs), central to the
regulation of mammalian gene expression, are exceptional in terms of whether,
when and how they are affected by epigenetic reprogramming.
RESULTS: We investigated the DNA sequences of CGIs in the context of genome-wide 
data on DNA methylation and transcription during oogenesis and early
embryogenesis to identify signals associated with methylation establishment and
protection from de novo methylation in oocytes and associated with
post-fertilisation methylation maintenance. We find no evidence for a
characteristic DNA sequence motif in oocyte-methylated CGIs. Neither do we find
evidence for a general role of regular CpG spacing in methylation establishment
at CGIs in oocytes. In contrast, the resistance of most CGIs to de novo
methylation during oogenesis is associated with the motif CGCGC, the recognition 
site of E2f1 and E2f2, transcription factors highly expressed specifically in
oocytes. This association is independent of prominent known
hypomethylation-associated factors: CGI promoter activity, H3K4me3, Cfp1 binding 
or R-loop formation potential.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support a DNA sequence-independent and
transcription-driven model of de novo CGI methylation during oogenesis. In
contrast, our results for CGIs that remain unmethylated are consistent with a
model of protection from methylation involving sequence recognition by
DNA-binding proteins, E2f1 and E2f2 being probable candidates.

PMCID: PMC4255709
PMID: 25478011  [PubMed]


35. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Dec 12;455(3-4):139-46. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.10.083. Epub 2014 Oct 22.

Cell cycle transcription factor E2F2 mediates non-stress temperature response of 
AtHSP70-4 in Arabidopsis.

Zhou S(1), Sun H(1), Zheng B(1), Li R(1), Zhang W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Plant Cell Biology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Bio-Energy Crops, School
of Life Sciences, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China. (2)Lab of Plant
Cell Biology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Bio-Energy Crops, School of Life
Sciences, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China. Electronic address:
zhw62207@shu.edu.cn.

AtHSP70 expression exhibits both stress and non-stress temperature response,
however, the molecular mechanisms underlying these temperature signaling pathways
remain elusive. Here we performed truncation and deletion assay to investigate
the cis-elements within the promoter region of AtHSP70-4 (AT3G12580). And found
the region between -1000 and -1100 bp from the translation initiation site (TIS) 
was indispensable for the non-stress temperature response of AtHSP70. Further
deletion assay of several candidate motifs within this region suggested that one 
'GCGCCAAA' sequence played the critical role. This motif was found as the reverse
DNA-binding motif of cell cycle transcription factor E2F family. EMSA assay
verified one number of Arabidopsis E2F family-E2F2 could bind to AtHSP70-4
promoter via this motif. These results indicated the temperature regulated
expression of AtHSP70-4 may be mediated by cell cycle transcription factors and
participate in plant acclimations to non-stress temperature changes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25451247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 14;9(11):e112620. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112620.
eCollection 2014.

The E2F2 transcription factor sustains hepatic glycerophospholipid homeostasis in
mice.

Maldonado EN(1), Delgado I(2), Furland NE(3), Buqué X(2), Iglesias A(4), Aveldaño
MI(3), Zubiaga A(4), Fresnedo O(2), Ochoa B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of the
Basque Country, Leioa, Spain; Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas de Bahía
Blanca, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas y Universidad 
Nacional del Sur, Bahía Blanca, Argentina. (2)Department of Physiology, Faculty
of Medicine and Dentistry, University of the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain.
(3)Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas de Bahía Blanca, Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas y Universidad Nacional del Sur, Bahía
Blanca, Argentina. (4)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal
Physiology, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of the Basque Country, 
Leioa, Spain.

Increasing evidence links metabolic signals to cell proliferation, but the
molecular wiring that connects the two core machineries remains largely unknown. 
E2Fs are master regulators of cellular proliferation. We have recently shown that
E2F2 activity facilitates the completion of liver regeneration after partial
hepatectomy (PH) by regulating the expression of genes required for S-phase
entry. Our study also revealed that E2F2 determines the duration of
hepatectomy-induced hepatic steatosis. A transcriptomic analysis of normal adult 
liver identified "lipid metabolism regulation" as a major E2F2 functional target,
suggesting that E2F2 has a role in lipid homeostasis. Here we use wild-type
(E2F2+/+) and E2F2 deficient (E2F2-/-) mice to investigate the in vivo role of
E2F2 in the composition of liver lipids and fatty acids in two metabolically
different contexts: quiescence and 48-h post-PH, when cellular proliferation and 
anabolic demands are maximal. We show that liver regeneration is accompanied by
large triglyceride and protein increases without changes in total phospholipids
both in E2F2+/+ and E2F2-/- mice. Remarkably, we found that the phenotype of
quiescent liver tissue from E2F2-/- mice resembles the phenotype of proliferating
E2F2+/+ liver tissue, characterized by a decreased phosphatidylcholine to
phosphatidylethanolamine ratio and a reprogramming of genes involved in
generation of choline and ethanolamine derivatives. The diversity of fatty acids 
in total lipid, triglycerides and phospholipids was essentially preserved on E2F2
loss both in proliferating and non-proliferating liver tissue, although notable
exceptions in inflammation-related fatty acids of defined phospholipid classes
were detected. Overall, our results indicate that E2F2 activity sustains the
hepatic homeostasis of major membrane glycerolipid components while it is
dispensable for storage glycerolipid balance.

PMCID: PMC4232400
PMID: 25396754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biotechnol Lett. 2015 Mar;37(3):523-32. doi: 10.1007/s10529-014-1715-y. Epub 2014
Nov 2.

miR-31 promotes proliferation of colon cancer cells by targeting E2F2.

Li T(1), Luo W, Liu K, Lv X, Xi T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, China Pharmaceutical University,
Nanjing, 210009, People's Republic of China, litong198824@163.com.

MicroRNA-31 (miR-31) plays important roles in colon cancer development. However, 
the underlying mechanism is still not clear. We have explored the functions of
miR-31 on proliferation of colon cancer cells as well as the underlying
mechanism. E2F2 was identified as a direct target of miR-31. miR-31 regulated the
proliferation of colon cancer cells by targeting E2F2. Moreover, in the present
study, E2F2 acted as a tumor suppressor in colon cancer by repressing the
expression of survivin and regulating the expression of CCNA2, C-MYC, MCM4 and
CDK2. A possible mechanism for the function of miR-31 on colon cancer
proliferation is presented and indicates that miR-31 might become a target for
anti-cancer drug design.

PMID: 25362258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Oct 7;111(40):E4234-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1416321111. Epub 2014 Sep 23.

Chromatin reader L(3)mbt requires the Myb-MuvB/DREAM transcriptional regulatory
complex for chromosomal recruitment.

Blanchard DP(1), Georlette D(1), Antoszewski L(2), Botchan MR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA 94720; and. (2)Department of Biology, Canisius College, Buffalo, NY 14208.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA 94720; and mbotchan@berkeley.edu.

Lethal malignant brain tumors (lmbt) result from the loss of the conserved
transcriptional repressor l(3)mbt, in Drosophila melanogaster. Similar mutations 
in the human homolog L3MBTL1 correlate with some cancers. The protein's
C-terminal MBT repeats bind mono and dimethylated histones in vitro, which could 
influence recruitment of L3MBTL1 to its target sites. The L(3)mbt chromatin
targeting mechanism, however, is controversial and several studies suggest
insufficiency or a minor role for histone methylation in determining the site
specificity for recruitment. We report that L(3)mbt colocalizes with core members
of the Myb-MuvB/DREAM (MMB/DREAM) transcriptional regulatory complex genome-wide,
and that L(3)mbt-mediated repression requires this complex in salivary glands and
larval brains. Loss of l(3)mbt or of MMB components through mutation cause
similar spurious expression of genes, including the transposon regulatory gene
piwi, in terminally differentiated cells. The DNA-binding MMB core component
Mip120 (Lin54) is required for L(3)mbt recruitment to chromosomes, whereas Mip130
(Lin9) (an MMB core protein) and E2f2 (an MMB transcriptional repressor) are not,
but are essential for repression. Cytolocalization experiments suggest the
presence of site-specific differential composition of MMB in polytene chromosomes
where some loci were bound by a Myb-containing or alternatively, an E2f2 and
L(3)mbt form of the complex.

PMCID: PMC4210012
PMID: 25249635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Genomics. 2014 Dec;104(6 Pt B):520-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2014.08.022. Epub 2014
Sep 9.

Regulation of the human ABCB10 gene by E2F transcription factors.

Karwaciak I(1), Pulaski L(1), Ratajewski M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transcriptional Regulation, Institute of Medical Biology, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Poland. (2)Laboratory of Transcriptional Regulation,
Institute of Medical Biology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poland. Electronic
address: mratajewski@cbm.pan.pl.

Here, we report for the first time a functional study of transcriptional
regulation of the human ABCB10 gene. We cloned a functional promoter sequence,
and then showed that E2F2, E2F3 and E2F4 can activate transcription from the
ABCB10 promoter. We identified sites responsible for this activation and
confirmed direct binding of E2F4 to these sites in EMSA and ChIP assays. Finally,
by silencing the expression of E2F factors we demonstrated their importance in
maintenance of the basal ABCB10 expression. This study provides important
atypical examples of E2F4 being a transcriptional activator rather than repressor
as well as directly binding to a promoter and regulating it through an
alternative and classical DNA consensus response element sequences. It also
provides a mechanistic link between E2F4 and ABCB10, both of which are involved
in the same physiological phenomena: erythroid lineage differentiation and
maturation as well as protection against cardiomyocyte cell death.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25220178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Oncol Lett. 2014 Oct;8(4):1487-1491. Epub 2014 Jul 22.

RNAi-mediated knockdown of E2F2 inhibits tumorigenicity of human glioblastoma
cells.

Nakahata AM(1), Suzuki DE(1), Rodini CO(2), Fiuza ML(2), Okamoto OK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Experimental Neurology Unit, Federal
University of São Paulo, São Paulo 04023-900, Brazil ; Department of Genetics and
Evolutionary Biology, Human Genome and Stem Cell Research Center, Institute of
Biosciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo 05508-090, Brazil. (2)Department 
of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, Human Genome and Stem Cell Research Center,
Institute of Biosciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo 05508-090, Brazil.

In a previous genome-wide expression profiling study, we identified E2F2 as a
hyperexpressed gene in stem-like cells of distinct glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) 
specimens. Since the encoded E2F2 transcription factor has been implicated in
both tumor suppression and tumor development, we conducted a functional study to 
investigate the pertinence of E2F2 to human gliomagenesis. E2F2 expression was
knocked down by transfecting U87MG cells with plasmids carrying a specific
silencing shRNA. Upon E2F2 silencing, in vitro cell proliferation was
significantly reduced, as indicated by a time-course analysis of viable tumor
cells. Anchorage-independent cell growth was also significantly inhibited after
E2F2 silencing, based on cell colony formation in soft agar. Subcutaneous and
orthotopic xenograft models of GBM in nude mice also indicated inhibition of
tumor development in vivo, following E2F2 silencing. As expression of the E2F2
gene is associated with glioblastoma stem cells and is involved in the
transformation of human astrocytes, the present findings suggest that E2F2 is
involved in gliomagenesis and could be explored as a potential therapeutic target
in malignant gliomas.

PMCID: PMC4156183
PMID: 25202354  [PubMed]


41. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Sep 4;5:e1405. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.372.

The pro-apoptotic activity of Drosophila Rbf1 involves dE2F2-dependent
downregulation of diap1 and buffy mRNA.

Clavier A(1), Baillet A(1), Rincheval-Arnold A(1), Coléno-Costes A(2), Lasbleiz
C(1), Mignotte B(1), Guénal I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique et Biologie Cellulaire, EA4589, Université de
Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, 2 avenue 
de la Source de la Bièvre, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France. (2)1] Laboratoire de
Biologie du Développement-Institut de Biologie Paris Seine, Sorbonne Universités,
UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR7622, Paris, France [2] CNRS, UMR7622, Laboratoire de
Biologie du Développement-Institut de Biologie Paris Seine, Paris, France.

The retinoblastoma gene, rb, ensures at least its tumor suppressor function by
inhibiting cell proliferation. Its role in apoptosis is more complex and less
described than its role in cell cycle regulation. Rbf1, the Drosophila homolog of
Rb, has been found to be pro-apoptotic in proliferative tissue. However, the way 
it induces apoptosis at the molecular level is still unknown. To decipher this
mechanism, we induced rbf1 expression in wing proliferative tissue. We found that
Rbf1-induced apoptosis depends on dE2F2/dDP heterodimer, whereas dE2F1
transcriptional activity is not required. Furthermore, we highlight that Rbf1 and
dE2F2 downregulate two major anti-apoptotic genes in Drosophila: buffy, an
anti-apoptotic member of Bcl-2 family and diap1, a gene encoding a caspase
inhibitor. On the one hand, Rbf1/dE2F2 repress buffy at the transcriptional
level, which contributes to cell death. On the other hand, Rbf1 and dE2F2
upregulate how expression. How is a RNA binding protein involved in diap1 mRNA
degradation. By this way, Rbf1 downregulates diap1 at a post-transcriptional
level. Moreover, we show that the dREAM complex has a part in these
transcriptional regulations. Taken together, these data show that Rbf1, in
cooperation with dE2F2 and some members of the dREAM complex, can downregulate
the anti-apoptotic genes buffy and diap1, and thus promote cell death in a
proliferative tissue.

PMCID: PMC4540203
PMID: 25188515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Int J Oncol. 2014 Nov;45(5):2013-23. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2618. Epub 2014 Aug
22.

MicroRNA-29b-1 impairs in vitro cell proliferation, self-renewal and
chemoresistance of human osteosarcoma 3AB-OS cancer stem cells.

Di Fiore R(1), Drago-Ferrante R(1), Pentimalli F(2), Di Marzo D(2), Forte IM(2), 
D'Anneo A(1), Carlisi D(3), De Blasio A(1), Giuliano M(1), Tesoriere G(4),
Giordano A(2), Vento R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Biological, Chemical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences and Technologies, University of Palermo, Polyclinic,
Palermo, Italy. (2)INT-CROM, 'Pascale Foundation', National Cancer Institute -
Cancer Research Center, Mercogliano, Avellino, Italy. (3)Laboratory of
Biochemistry, Department of Experimental Biomedicine and Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Palermo, Polyclinic, Palermo, Italy. (4)Institute for Cancer
Research and Molecular Medicine and Center of Biotechnology - College of Science 
and Biotechnology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common type of bone cancer, with a peak incidence
in the early childhood. Emerging evidence suggests that treatments targeting
cancer stem cells (CSCs) within a tumor can halt cancer and improve patient
survival. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been implicated in the maintenance of the CSC
phenotype, thus, identification of CSC-related miRNAs would provide information
for a better understanding of CSCs. Downregulation of miRNA-29 family members
(miR-29a/b/c; miR-29s) was observed in human OS, however, little is known about
the functions of miR-29s in human OS CSCs. Previously, during the
characterization of 3AB-OS cells, a CSC line selected from human OS MG63 cells,
we showed a potent downregulation of miR-29b. In this study, after stable
transfection of 3AB-OS cells with miR-29b-1, we investigated the role of
miR-29b-1 in regulating cell proliferation, sarcosphere-forming ability,
clonogenic growth, chemosensitivity, migration and invasive ability of 3AB-OS
cells, in vitro. We found that, miR-29b-1 overexpression consistently reduced
both, 3AB-OS CSCs growth in two- and three-dimensional culture systems and their 
sarcosphere- and colony-forming ability. In addition, while miR-29b-1
overexpression sensitized 3AB-OS cells to chemotherapeutic drug-induced
apoptosis, it did not influence their migratory and invasive capacities, thus
suggesting a context-depending role of miR-29b-1. Using publicly available
databases, we proceeded to identify potential miR-29b target genes, known to play
a role in the above reported functions. Among these targets we analyzed CD133,
N-Myc, CCND2, E2F1 and E2F2, Bcl-2 and IAP-2. We also analyzed the most important
stemness markers as Oct3/4, Sox2 and Nanog. Real-time RT-PCR and western-blot
analyses showed that miR-29b-1 negatively regulated the expression of these
markers. Overall, the results show that miR-29b-1 suppresses stemness properties 
of 3AB-OS CSCs and suggest that developing miR-29b-1 as a novel therapeutic agent
might offer benefits for OS treatment.

PMCID: PMC4432724
PMID: 25174983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Hum Pathol. 2014 Oct;45(10):1995-2005. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.06.012. Epub
2014 Jun 30.

Identification of putative pathogenic microRNA and its downstream targets in
anaplastic lymphoma kinase-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma.

Mehrotra M(1), Medeiros LJ(1), Luthra R(1), Sargent RL(1), Yao H(1), Barkoh
BA(1), Singh R(1), Patel KP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030. (2)Department of Hematopathology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030. Electronic address:
kppatel@mdanderson.org.

Anaplastic large cell lymphomas (ALCL) are tumors of T/null-cell lineage
characterized by uniform CD30 expression. The 2008 World Health Organization
classification subdivided ALCLs into 2 groups: anaplastic lymphoma kinase
(ALK)-positive (established entity) and ALK-negative (proposed new entity) ALCL. 
The genetic basis for the pathogenesis of newly categorized ALK- ALCL is poorly
understood. In this study, we used microRNA microarray analysis to identify
differentially expressed microRNAs in ALK+ and ALK- ALCL. ALK- ALCL showed
significantly higher expression of miR-155 (0.888 ± 0.228) compared with ALK+
ALCL (0.0565 ± 0.009) on microarray and by quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction in ALK- ALCL compared with ALK+ ALCL (P < .05) with a strong
correlation between the 2 platforms (R = 0.9, P < .0003). A novel in situ
hybridization method allows direct visualization of expression patterns and
relative quantitation of miR-155 (mean score, 2.3 versus 1.3; P = .01) for the
first time in tissue sections of ALCL. Among computationally predicted targets of
miR-155, we identified ZNF652 (r = -0.57, P = .05), BACH1 (r = 0.88, P = .02),
RBAK (r = 0.81, P = .05), TRIM32 (r = 0.92, P = .01), E2F2 (r = 0.81, P = .05),
and TP53INP1 (r = -0.31, P = .03) as genes whose expression by quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction correlated significantly with the level of
miR-155 in ALCL tumor tissue.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25128227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Cancer Sci. 2014 Oct;105(10):1360-8. doi: 10.1111/cas.12495. Epub 2014 Sep 29.

Novel retinoblastoma mutation abrogating the interaction to E2F2/3, but not E2F1,
led to selective suppression of thyroid tumors.

Toki H(1), Inoue M, Minowa O, Motegi H, Saiki Y, Wakana S, Masuya H, Gondo Y,
Shiroishi T, Yao R, Noda T.

Author information: 
(1)Team for Advanced Development and Evaluation of Human Disease Models, Riken
BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Mutant mouse models are indispensable tools for clarifying gene functions and
elucidating the pathogenic mechanisms of human diseases. Here, we describe novel 
cancer models bearing point mutations in the retinoblastoma gene (Rb1) generated 
by N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea mutagenesis. Two mutations in splice sites reduced Rb1
expression and led to a tumor spectrum and incidence similar to those observed in
the conventional Rb1 knockout mice. The missense mutant, Rb1(D326V/+) , developed
pituitary tumors, but thyroid tumors were completely suppressed.
Immunohistochemical analyses of thyroid tissue revealed that E2F1, but not
E2F2/3, was selectively inactivated, indicating that the mutant Rb protein (pRb) 
suppressed thyroid tumors by inactivating E2F1. Interestingly, Rb1(D326V/+) mice 
developed pituitary tumors that originated from the intermediate lobe of the
pituitary, despite selective inactivation of E2F1. Furthermore, in the anterior
lobe of the pituitary, other E2F were also inactivated. These observations show
that pRb mediates the inactivation of E2F function and its contribution to
tumorigenesis is highly dependent on the cell type. Last, by using a
reconstitution assay of synthesized proteins, we showed that the D326V missense
pRb bound to E2F1 but failed to interact with E2F2/3. These results reveal the
effect of the pRb N-terminal domain on E2F function and the impact of the protein
on tumorigenesis. Thus, this mutant mouse model can be used to investigate human 
Rb family-bearing mutations at the N-terminal region.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4462357
PMID: 25088905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Aug;42(14):8939-53. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku609. Epub 2014
Jul 22.

dREAM co-operates with insulator-binding proteins and regulates expression at
divergently paired genes.

Korenjak M(1), Kwon E(2), Morris RT(1), Anderssen E(1), Amzallag A(1), Ramaswamy 
S(1), Dyson NJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. (2)Massachusetts General Hospital, Cutaneous Biology 
Research Center, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. (3)Massachusetts General Hospital
Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA
Dyson@helix.mgh.harvard.edu.

dREAM complexes represent the predominant form of E2F/RBF repressor complexes in 
Drosophila. dREAM associates with thousands of sites in the fly genome but its
mechanism of action is unknown. To understand the genomic context in which dREAM 
acts we examined the distribution and localization of Drosophila E2F and dREAM
proteins. Here we report a striking and unexpected overlap between dE2F2/dREAM
sites and binding sites for the insulator-binding proteins CP190 and Beaf-32.
Genetic assays show that these components functionally co-operate and chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments on mutant animals demonstrate that dE2F2 is
important for association of CP190 with chromatin. dE2F2/dREAM binding sites are 
enriched at divergently transcribed genes, and the majority of genes upregulated 
by dE2F2 depletion represent the repressed half of a differentially expressed,
divergently transcribed pair of genes. Analysis of mutant animals confirms that
dREAM and CP190 are similarly required for transcriptional integrity at these
gene pairs and suggest that dREAM functions in concert with CP190 to establish
boundaries between repressed/activated genes. Consistent with the idea that dREAM
co-operates with insulator-binding proteins, genomic regions bound by dREAM
possess enhancer-blocking activity that depends on multiple dREAM components.
These findings suggest that dREAM functions in the organization of
transcriptional domains.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4132727
PMID: 25053843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Hum Pathol. 2014 Sep;45(9):1885-92. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.05.010. Epub 2014
Jun 5.

Recurrent chromosomal aberrations in intravenous leiomyomatosis of the uterus:
high-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization study.

Buza N(1), Xu F(2), Wu W(2), Carr RJ(1), Li P(2), Hui P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University, School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520-8023. (2)Department of Genetics, Yale University, School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06520-8023.

Uterine intravenous leiomyomatosis (IVL) is a distinct smooth muscle neoplasm
with a potential of clinical aggressiveness due to its ability to extend into
intrauterine and extrauterine vasculature. In this study, chromosomal alterations
analyzed by oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization were
performed in 9 cases of IVL. The analysis was informative in all cases with
multiple copy number losses and/or gains observed in each tumor. The most
frequent recurrent loss of 22q12.3-q13.1 was observed in 6 tumors (66.7%),
followed by losses of 22q11.23-q13.31, 1p36.13-p33, 2p25.3-p23.3, and
2q24.2-q32.2 and gains of 6p22.2, 2q37.3 and 10q22.2-q22.3, in decreasing order
of frequency. Copy number variants were identified at 14q11.2, 15q11.1-q11.2, and
15q26.2. Genes mapping to the regions of loss include CHEK2, EWS, NF2, PDGFB, and
MAP3K7IP1 on chromosome 22q, HEI10 on chromosome 14q, and succinate dehydrogenase
subunit B, E2F2, ARID1A KPNA6, EIF3S2 , PTCH2, and PIK3R3 on chromosome 1p.
Regional losses on chromosomes 22q and 1p and gains on chromosomes 12q showed
overlaps with those previously observed in uterine leiomyosarcomas. In addition, 
presence of multiple chromosomal aberrations implies a higher level of genetic
instability. Follow-up polymerase chain reaction (PCR) sequencing analysis of
MED12 gene revealed absence of G> A transition at nucleotides c.130 or c.131 in
all 9 cases, a frequent mutation found in uterine leiomyoma and its variants. In 
conclusion, this is the first report of high-resolution, genome-wide
investigation of IVL by oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization. 
The presence of high frequencies of recurrent regional loss involving several
chromosomes is an important finding and likely related to the pathogenesis of the
disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25033729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Bioinformatics. 2014 Nov 1;30(21):3036-43. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu400.
Epub 2014 Jul 15.

Modeling time-dependent transcription effects of HER2 oncogene and discovery of a
role for E2F2 in breast cancer cell-matrix adhesion.

Bollig-Fischer A(1), Marchetti L(1), Mitrea C(2), Wu J(1), Kruger A(2), Manca
V(2), Draghici S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute and Department of Oncology, Wayne State 
University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA, Department of Computer Science, University of
Verona, 37134 Verona, Italy, The Microsoft Research-University of Trento Centre
for Computational and Systems Biology, 38068 Rovereto, Italy, Department of
Computer Science, Wayne State University and Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA Barbara Ann Karmanos
Cancer Institute and Department of Oncology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 
48201, USA, Department of Computer Science, University of Verona, 37134 Verona,
Italy, The Microsoft Research-University of Trento Centre for Computational and
Systems Biology, 38068 Rovereto, Italy, Department of Computer Science, Wayne
State University and Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wayne State
University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. (2)Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute and 
Department of Oncology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA,
Department of Computer Science, University of Verona, 37134 Verona, Italy, The
Microsoft Research-University of Trento Centre for Computational and Systems
Biology, 38068 Rovereto, Italy, Department of Computer Science, Wayne State
University and Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wayne State University,
Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

MOTIVATION: Oncogenes are known drivers of cancer phenotypes and targets of
molecular therapies; however, the complex and diverse signaling mechanisms
regulated by oncogenes and potential routes to targeted therapy resistance remain
to be fully understood. To this end, we present an approach to infer regulatory
mechanisms downstream of the HER2 driver oncogene in SUM-225 metastatic breast
cancer cells from dynamic gene expression patterns using a succession of
analytical techniques, including a novel MP grammars method to mathematically
model putative regulatory interactions among sets of clustered genes.
RESULTS: Our method highlighted regulatory interactions previously identified in 
the cell line and a novel finding that the HER2 oncogene, as opposed to the
proto-oncogene, upregulates expression of the E2F2 transcription factor. By
targeted gene knockdown we show the significance of this, demonstrating that
cancer cell-matrix adhesion and outgrowth were markedly inhibited when E2F2
levels were reduced. Thus, validating in this context that upregulation of E2F2
represents a key intermediate event in a HER2 oncogene-directed gene
expression-based signaling circuit. This work demonstrates how predictive
modeling of longitudinal gene expression data combined with multiple
systems-level analyses can be used to accurately predict downstream signaling
pathways. Here, our integrated method was applied to reveal insights as to how
the HER2 oncogene drives a specific cancer cell phenotype, but it is adaptable to
investigate other oncogenes and model systems.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: Accessibility of various tools is listed in
methods; the Log-Gain Stoichiometric Stepwise algorithm is accessible at
http://www.cbmc.it/software/Software.php.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4201152
PMID: 25028721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Exp Med. 2014 Jul 28;211(8):1623-35. doi: 10.1084/jem.20132121. Epub 2014 Jun
30.

ETO family protein Mtg16 regulates the balance of dendritic cell subsets by
repressing Id2.

Ghosh HS(1), Ceribelli M(2), Matos I(1), Lazarovici A(3), Bussemaker HJ(3),
Lasorella A(4), Hiebert SW(5), Liu K(1), Staudt LM(2), Reizis B(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Computational Biology
and Bioinformatics, Institute for Cancer Genetics, Department of Pathology, and
Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center and Department of
Biological Sciences and Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032. (2)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892. (3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Institute for Cancer Genetics,
Department of Pathology, and Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University
Medical Center and Department of Biological Sciences and Department of Electrical
Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Institute
for Cancer Genetics, Department of Pathology, and Department of Pediatrics,
Columbia University Medical Center and Department of Biological Sciences and
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Computational Biology
and Bioinformatics, Institute for Cancer Genetics, Department of Pathology, and
Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center and Department of
Biological Sciences and Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center
for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Institute for Cancer Genetics,
Department of Pathology, and Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University
Medical Center and Department of Biological Sciences and Department of Electrical
Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Institute
for Cancer Genetics, Department of Pathology, and Department of Pediatrics,
Columbia University Medical Center and Department of Biological Sciences and
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232. (6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Institute for Cancer Genetics,
Department of Pathology, and Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University
Medical Center and Department of Biological Sciences and Department of Electrical
Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032 bvr2101@columbia.edu.

Dendritic cells (DCs) comprise two major subsets, the interferon (IFN)-producing 
plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs) and antigen-presenting classical DCs (cDCs). The
development of pDCs is promoted by E protein transcription factor E2-2, whereas E
protein antagonist Id2 is specifically absent from pDCs. Conversely, Id2 is
prominently expressed in cDCs and promotes CD8(+) cDC development. The mechanisms
that control the balance between E and Id proteins during DC subset specification
remain unknown. We found that the loss of Mtg16, a transcriptional cofactor of
the ETO protein family, profoundly impaired pDC development and pDC-dependent IFN
response. The residual Mtg16-deficient pDCs showed aberrant phenotype, including 
the expression of myeloid marker CD11b. Conversely, the development of cDC
progenitors (pre-DCs) and of CD8(+) cDCs was enhanced. Genome-wide expression and
DNA-binding analysis identified Id2 as a direct target of Mtg16. Mtg16-deficient 
cDC progenitors and pDCs showed aberrant induction of Id2, and the deletion of
Id2 facilitated the impaired development of Mtg16-deficient pDCs. Thus, Mtg16
promotes pDC differentiation and restricts cDC development in part by repressing 
Id2, revealing a cell-intrinsic mechanism that controls subset balance during DC 
development.

© 2014 Ghosh et al.

PMCID: PMC4113936
PMID: 24980046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Sep;34(17):3229-43. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00737-14. Epub 2014 Jun 
16.

The E2F transcription factors regulate tumor development and metastasis in a
mouse model of metastatic breast cancer.

Hollern DP(1), Honeysett J(1), Cardiff RD(2), Andrechek ER(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan,
USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UC Davis, Davis,
California, USA. (3)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, Michigan, USA andrech1@msu.edu.

While the E2F transcription factors (E2Fs) have a clearly defined role in cell
cycle control, recent work has uncovered new functions. Using genomic signature
methods, we predicted a role for the activator E2F transcription factors in the
mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)-polyomavirus middle T oncoprotein (PyMT) mouse
model of metastatic breast cancer. To genetically test the hypothesis that the
E2Fs function to regulate tumor development and metastasis, we interbred
MMTV-PyMT mice with E2F1, E2F2, or E2F3 knockout mice. With the ablation of
individual E2Fs, we noted alterations of tumor latency, histology, and
vasculature. Interestingly, we noted striking reductions in metastatic capacity
and in the number of circulating tumor cells in both the E2F1 and E2F2 knockout
backgrounds. Investigating E2F target genes that mediate metastasis, we found
that E2F loss led to decreased levels of vascular endothelial growth factor
(Vegfa), Bmp4, Cyr61, Nupr1, Plod 2, P4ha1, Adamts1, Lgals3, and Angpt2. These
gene expression changes indicate that the E2Fs control the expression of genes
critical to angiogenesis, the remodeling of the extracellular matrix, tumor cell 
survival, and tumor cell interactions with vascular endothelial cells that
facilitate metastasis to the lungs. Taken together, these results reveal that the
E2F transcription factors play key roles in mediating tumor development and
metastasis in addition to their well-characterized roles in cell cycle control.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4135561
PMID: 24934442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. BMC Cancer. 2014 Jun 12;14:426. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-426.

Celecoxib increases miR-222 while deterring aromatase-expressing breast tumor
growth in mice.

Wong TY, Li F, Lin SM, Chan FL, Chen S, Leung LK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Food and Nutritional Sciences Programme, School of Life Sciences, Faculty of
Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Rm,507C MMW Bldg, Shatin, Hong
Kong. laikleung@cuhk.edu.hk.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is one of the most deadly diseases in women. Inhibiting
the synthesis of estrogen is effective in treating patients with
estrogen-responsive breast cancer. Previous studies have demonstrated that use of
cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors is associated with reduced breast cancer risk.
METHODS: In the present study, we employed an established mouse model for
postmenopausal breast cancer to evaluate the potential mechanisms of the COX-2
inhibitor celecoxib. Aromatase-expressing MCF-7 cells were transplanted into
ovariectomized athymic mice. The animals were given celecoxib at 1500 ppm or
aspirin at 200 ppm by oral administration with androstenedione injection.
RESULTS: Our results showed that both COX inhibitors could suppress the cancer
xenograft growth without changing the plasma estrogen level. Protein expression
of ERa, COX-2, Cyclin A, and Bcl-xL were reduced in celecoxib-treated tumor
samples, whereas only Bcl-xL expression was suppressed in those treated with
aspirin. Among the breast cancer-related miRNAs, miR-222 expression was elevated 
in samples treated with celecoxib. Further studies in culture cells verified that
the increase in miR-222 expression might contribute to ERa downregulation but not
the growth deterrence of cells.
CONCLUSION: Overall, this study suggested that both celecoxib and aspirin could
prevent breast cancer growth by regulating proteins in the cell cycle and
apoptosis without blocking estrogen synthesis. Besides, celecoxib might affect
miR expression in an undesirable fashion.

PMCID: PMC4070644
PMID: 24923427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Oncogene. 2015 Apr 16;34(16):2125-37. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.117. Epub 2014 Jun 9.

Targeted resequencing of the microRNAome and 3'UTRome reveals functional germline
DNA variants with altered prevalence in epithelial ovarian cancer.

Chen X(1), Paranjape T(2), Stahlhut C(3), McVeigh T(4), Keane F(5), Nallur S(2), 
Miller N(4), Kerin M(4), Deng Y(6), Yao X(6), Zhao H(7), Weidhaas JB(2), Slack
FJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale
University, New Haven, CT, USA [2] Program in Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT, USA. (3)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology,
Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. (4)Discipline of Surgery, National
University of Ireland Galway and Galway University, Hospitals, Galway, Ireland.
(5)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. (6)Yale Center for
Analytical Sciences, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(7)1] Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA [2] Department of Genetics, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA [3] Department of Biostatistics, Yale
School of Public Health, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.

Ovarian cancer is a major cause of cancer deaths, yet there have been few known
genetic risk factors identified, the best known of which are disruptions in
protein coding sequences (BRCA1 and 2). Recent findings indicate that there are
powerful genetic markers of cancer risk outside of these regions, in the
noncoding mRNA control regions. To identify additional cancer-associated,
functional non-protein-coding sequence germline variants associated with ovarian 
cancer risk, we captured DNA regions corresponding to all validated human
microRNAs and the 3' untranslated regions (UTRs) of ~6000 cancer-associated genes
from 31 ovarian cancer patients. Multiple single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the 
3'UTR of the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor/FLT1, E2F2 and PCM1
oncogenes were highly enriched in ovarian cancer patients compared with the 1000 
Genome Project. Sequenom validation in a case-control study (267 cases and 89
controls) confirmed a novel variant in the PCM1 3'UTR is significantly associated
with ovarian cancer (P=0.0086). This work identifies a potential new ovarian
cancer locus and further confirms that cancer resequencing efforts should not
ignore the study of noncoding regions of cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC4326598 [Available on 2016-04-16]
PMID: 24909162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;34(15):2833-47. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01651-13. Epub 2014 May 
27.

Inactivation of Rb and E2f8 synergizes to trigger stressed DNA replication during
erythroid terminal differentiation.

Ghazaryan S(1), Sy C(1), Hu T(1), An X(2), Mohandas N(3), Fu H(4), Aladjem MI(4),
Chang VT(5), Opavsky R(6), Wu L(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers New Jersey Medical 
School Cancer Center, Newark, New Jersey, USA. (2)Membrane Biology Laboratory,
New York Blood Center, New York, New York, USA. (3)Red Cell Physiology
Laboratory, New York Blood Center, New York, New York, USA. (4)Laboratory of
Molecular Pharmacology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(5)Section of Hematology Oncology, VA New Jersey Health Care System, East Orange,
New Jersey, USA. (6)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, 
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA. (7)Department of
Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School Cancer
Center, Newark, New Jersey, USA wuli@njms.rutgers.edu.

Rb is critical for promoting cell cycle exit in cells undergoing terminal
differentiation. Here we show that during erythroid terminal differentiation, Rb 
plays a previously unappreciated and unorthodox role in promoting DNA replication
and cell cycle progression. Specifically, inactivation of Rb in erythroid cells
led to stressed DNA replication, increased DNA damage, and impaired cell cycle
progression, culminating in defective terminal differentiation and anemia.
Importantly, all of these defects associated with Rb loss were exacerbated by the
concomitant inactivation of E2f8. Gene expression profiling and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) revealed that Rb and E2F8 cosuppressed a large array
of E2F target genes that are critical for DNA replication and cell cycle
progression. Remarkably, inactivation of E2f2 rescued the erythropoietic defects 
resulting from Rb and E2f8 deficiencies. Interestingly, real-time quantitative
PCR (qPCR) on E2F2 ChIPs indicated that inactivation of Rb and E2f8 synergizes to
increase E2F2 binding to its target gene promoters. Taken together, we propose
that Rb and E2F8 collaborate to promote DNA replication and erythroid terminal
differentiation by preventing E2F2-mediated aberrant transcriptional activation
through the ability of Rb to bind and sequester E2F2 and the ability of E2F8 to
compete with E2F2 for E2f-binding sites on target gene promoters.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4135565
PMID: 24865965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jul;34(14):2581-99.

E2F activators signal and maintain centrosome amplification in breast cancer
cells.

Lee MY, Moreno CS, Saavedra HI.

Centrosomes ensure accurate chromosome segregation by directing spindle
bipolarity. Loss of centrosome regulation results in centrosome amplification,
multipolar mitosis and aneuploidy. Since centrosome amplification is common in
premalignant lesions and breast tumors, it is proposed to play a central role in 
breast tumorigenesis, a hypothesis that remains to be tested. The coordination
between the cell and centrosome cycles is of paramount importance to maintain
normal centrosome numbers, and the E2Fs may be responsible for regulating these
cycles. However, the role of E2F activators in centrosome amplification is
unclear. Because E2Fs are deregulated in Her2(+) cells displaying centrosome
amplification, we addressed whether they signal this abnormal process. Knockdown 
of E2F1 or E2F3 in Her2(+) cells decreased centrosome amplification without
significantly affecting cell cycle progression, whereas the overexpression of
E2F1, E2F2, or E2F3 increased centrosome amplification in MCF10A mammary
epithelial cells. Our results revealed that E2Fs affect the expression of
proteins, including Nek2 and Plk4, known to influence the cell/centrosome cycles 
and mitosis. Downregulation of E2F3 resulted in cell death and delays/blocks in
cytokinesis, which was reversed by Nek2 overexpression. Nek2 overexpression
enhanced centrosome amplification in Her2(+) breast cancer cells silenced for
E2F3, revealing a role for the E2F activators in maintaining centrosome
amplification in part through Nek2.

PMCID: PMC4097658
PMID: 24797070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Biotechnol Lett. 2014 Sep;36(9):1743-52. doi: 10.1007/s10529-014-1540-3. Epub
2014 May 4.

miR-155 regulates the proliferation and cell cycle of colorectal carcinoma cells 
by targeting E2F2.

Li T(1), Yang J, Lv X, Liu K, Gao C, Xing Y, Xi T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, China Pharmaceutical University,
Nanjing, 210009, People's Republic of China, litong198824@163.com.

MicroRNAs play important roles in carcinogenesis by negatively regulating the
expression of target genes. Here we explore the biological function of miR-155
and the underlying mechanism in colorectal carcinoma. We validate, for the first 
time, that E2F2 is a direct target of miR-155 using western blot and a luciferase
reporter assay and that miR-155 regulates the proliferation and cell cycle of
colorectal carcinoma cells by targeting E2F2 using siRNA technology. We also
found, for the first, time that E2F2 acts as a tumor suppressor in colorectal
carcinoma. Overall, miR-155 plays an important role in colorectal carcinoma
tumorigenesis by negative regulation of its targets including E2F2 and may be a
potential therapeutic target for colorectal carcinoma treatment.

PMID: 24793496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Exp Hematol. 2014 Jun;42(6):464-76.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2014.03.001. Epub
2014 Mar 7.

Global analysis of induced transcription factors and cofactors identifies Tfdp2
as an essential coregulator during terminal erythropoiesis.

Chen C(1), Lodish HF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. (2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA; Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Electronic address:
lodish@wi.mit.edu.

Key transcriptional regulators of terminal erythropoiesis, such as GATA-binding
factor 1 (GATA1) and T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia protein 1 (TAL1), have
been well characterized, but transcription factors and cofactors and their
expression modulations have not yet been explored on a global scale. Here, we use
global gene expression analysis to identify 28 transcription factors and 19
transcriptional cofactors induced during terminal erythroid differentiation whose
promoters are enriched for binding by GATA1 and TAL1. Utilizing protein-protein
interaction databases to identify cofactors for each transcription factor, we
pinpoint several co-induced pairs, of which E2f2 and its cofactor transcription
factor Dp-2 (Tfdp2) were the most highly induced. TFDP2 is a critical cofactor
required for proper cell cycle control and gene expression. GATA1 and TAL1 are
bound to the regulatory regions of Tfdp2 and upregulate its expression and
knockdown of Tfdp2 results in significantly reduced rates of proliferation as
well as reduced upregulation of many erythroid-important genes. Loss of Tfdp2
also globally inhibits the normal downregulation of many E2F2 target genes,
including those that regulate the cell cycle, causing cells to accumulate in S
phase and resulting in increased erythrocyte size. Our findings highlight the
importance of TFDP2 in coupling the erythroid cell cycle with terminal
differentiation and validate this study as a resource for future work on
elucidating the role of diverse transcription factors and coregulators in
erythropoiesis.

Copyright © 2014 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4071162
PMID: 24607859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Jan 21;20(3):795-803. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i3.795.

Bortezomib effect on E2F and cyclin family members in human hepatocellular
carcinoma cell lines.

Baiz D(1), Dapas B(1), Farra R(1), Scaggiante B(1), Pozzato G(1), Zanconati F(1),
Fiotti N(1), Consoloni L(1), Chiaretti S(1), Grassi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Daniele Baiz, Barbara Dapas, Bruna Scaggiante, Sara Chiaretti, Gabriele
Grassi, Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, 34100 Trieste, Italy.

AIM: To evaluate the effects of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BZB) on E2Fs
and related genes in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells.
METHODS: The mRNA levels of the E2F family members (pro-proliferative: E2F1-3 and
anti-proliferative: E2F4-8) and of their related genes cyclins and
cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks) were evaluated in two HCC cell lines following a 
single BZB administration. mRNA levels of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) genes were also measured in both cell lines after BZB treatment. The BZB
concentration (40 nmol/L) used was chosen to stay well below the maximal
amount/cm² recommended for in vivo application, and 2 d incubation was chosen as 
this time point has been found optimal to detect BZB effects in our previous
studies. The HCC cell lines, HepG2 and JHH6, were chosen as they display
different phenotypes, hepatocyte-like for HepG2 and undifferentiated for JHH6,
thus representing an in vitro model of low and high aggressive forms of HCC,
respectively. The mRNA levels of the target genes were measured by two-color
microarray-based gene expression analysis, performed according to Agilent
Technologies protocol and using an Agilent Scan B. For the E2F family members,
mRNA levels were quantified by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR). Using small interfering RNA's, the effects of E2F8 depletion
on cell number was also evaluated.
RESULTS: After BZB treatment, microarray analysis of the undifferentiated JHH6
revealed a significant decrease in the expression of the pro-proliferative E2F
member E2F2. Quantitative RT-PCR data were in keeping with the microarray
analysis, and showed a significant increase and decrease in E2F8 and E2F2 mRNA
levels, respectively. In contrast, BZB treatment of the hepatocyte-like HCC cell 
line HepG2 had a significant impact on mRNA levels of 5 of the 8 E2F members. In 
particular, mRNA levels of the pro-proliferative E2F members E2F1, E2F2, and of
the anti-proliferative member E2F8, decreased over 80%. Notably, a reduction in
E2F8 expression in HepG2 and JHH6 cells following siRNA treatment had no impact
on cell proliferation. As observed with JHH6, BZB treatment of HepG2 cells
induced a significant increase in mRNA levels of an anti-proliferative E2F
member, E2F6 in this case. As was observed with E2F's, more dramatic changes in
mRNA levels of the E2F related genes cyclins and Cdks and EMT genes were observed
after BZB treatment of HepG2 compared to JHH6.
CONCLUSION: The differential expression of E2Fs and related genes induced by BZB 
in diverse HCC cell phenotypes contribute to bortezomib's mechanism of action in 
hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3921488
PMID: 24574752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Apr;25(8):1374-83. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-09-0534. Epub 2014
Feb 19.

Transcription of the Geminin gene is regulated by a negative-feedback loop.

Ohno Y(1), Saeki K, Yasunaga S, Kurogi T, Suzuki-Takedachi K, Shirai M, Mihara K,
Yoshida K, Voncken JW, Ohtsubo M, Takihara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and 
Medicine, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3, Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553,
Japan Department of Hematology and Oncology, Research Institute for Radiation
Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3, Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima
734-8553, Japan Department of Bioscience and Genetics, National Cerebral and
Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, Suita 562-0025, Japan Department of
Life Sciences, Meiji University School of Agriculture, Kawasaki 214-8571, Japan
Department of Molecular Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, 6229ER
Maastricht, Netherlands Department of Food and Fermentation Science, Faculty of
Food Science and Nutrition, Beppu University, Beppu 874-0915, Japan.

Geminin performs a central function in regulating cellular proliferation and
differentiation in development and also in stem cells. Of interest,
down-regulation of Geminin induces gene transcription regulated by E2F,
indicating that Geminin is involved in regulation of E2F-mediated transcriptional
activity. Because transcription of the Geminin gene is reportedly regulated via
an E2F-responsive region (E2F-R) located in the first intron, we first used a
reporter vector to examine the effect of Geminin on E2F-mediated transcriptional 
regulation. We found that Geminin transfection suppressed E2F1- and E2F2-mediated
transcriptional activation and also mildly suppressed such activity in synergy
with E2F5, 6, and 7, suggesting that Geminin constitutes a negative-feedback loop
for the Geminin promoter. Of interest, Geminin also suppressed nuclease
accessibility, acetylation of histone H3, and trimethylation of histone H3 at
lysine 4, which were induced by E2F1 overexpression, and enhanced tri-methylation
of histone H3 at lysine 27 and monoubiquitination of histone H2A at lysine 119 in
E2F-R. However, Geminin5EQ, which does not interact with Brahma or Brg1, did not 
suppress accessibility to nuclease digestion or transcription but had an overall 
dominant-negative effect. These findings suggest that E2F-mediated activation of 
Geminin transcription is negatively regulated by Geminin through the inhibition
of chromatin remodeling.

PMCID: PMC3983001
PMID: 24554762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jun 15;23(12):1364-76. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0460. Epub 2014
Mar 21.

The molecular mechanism underlying the proliferating and preconditioning effect
of vitamin C on adipose-derived stem cells.

Kim JH(1), Kim WK, Sung YK, Kwack MH, Song SY, Choi JS, Park SG, Yi T, Lee HJ,
Kim DD, Seo HM, Song SU, Sung JH.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Applied Bioscience, CHA University , Seoul, Korea.

Although adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) show promise for cell therapy, there
is a tremendous need for developing ASC activators. In the present study, we
investigated whether or not vitamin C increases the survival, proliferation, and 
hair-regenerative potential of ASCs. In addition, we tried to find the molecular 
mechanisms underlying the vitamin C-mediated stimulation of ASCs.
Sodium-dependent vitamin C transporter 2 (SVCT2) is expressed in ASCs, and
mediates uptake of vitamin C into ASCs. Vitamin C increased the survival and
proliferation of ASCs in a dose-dependent manner. Vitamin C increased ERK1/2
phosphorylation, and inhibition of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathway attenuated the proliferation of ASCs. Microarray and quantitative
polymerase chain reaction showed that vitamin C primarily upregulated expression 
of proliferation-related genes, including Fos, E2F2, Ier2, Mybl1, Cdc45, JunB,
FosB, and Cdca5, whereas Fos knock-down using siRNA significantly decreased
vitamin C-mediated ASC proliferation. In addition, vitamin C-treated ASCs
accelerated the telogen-to-anagen transition in C3H/HeN mice, and conditioned
medium from vitamin C-treated ASCs increased the hair length and the
Ki67-positive matrix keratinocytes in hair organ culture. Vitamin C increased the
mRNA expression of HGF, IGFBP6, VEGF, bFGF, and KGF, which may mediate hair
growth promotion. In summary, vitamin C is transported via SVCT2, and increased
ASC proliferation is mediated by the MAPK pathway. In addition, vitamin C
preconditioning enhanced the hair growth promoting effect of ASCs. Because
vitamin C is safe and effective, it could be used to increase the yield and
regenerative potential of ASCs.

PMCID: PMC4046194
PMID: 24524758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jun 1;23(11):1266-74. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0592. Epub 2014 
Mar 3.

Knockdown of E2F2 inhibits tumorigenicity, but preserves stemness of human
embryonic stem cells.

Suzuki DE(1), Nakahata AM, Okamoto OK.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Federal University of São Paulo , 
São Paulo, Brazil .

Tumorigenicity of human pluripotent stem cells is a major threat limiting their
application in cell therapy protocols. It remains unclear, however, whether
suppression of tumorigenic potential can be achieved without critically affecting
pluripotency. A previous study has identified hyperexpressed genes in cancer stem
cells, among which is E2F2, a gene involved in malignant transformation and stem 
cell self-renewal. Here we tested whether E2F2 knockdown would affect the
proliferative capacity and tumorigenicity of human embryonic stem cells (hESC).
Transient E2F2 silencing in hESC significantly inhibited expression of the
proto-oncogenes BMI1 and HMGA1, in addition to proliferation of hESC, indicated
by a higher proportion of cells in G1, fewer cells in G2/M phase, and a reduced
capacity to generate hESC colonies in vitro. Nonetheless, E2F2-silenced cells
kept expression of typical pluripotency markers and displayed differentiation
capacity in vitro. More importantly, E2F2 knockdown in hESC significantly
inhibited tumor growth in vivo, which was considerably smaller than tumors
generated from control hESC, although displaying typical teratoma traits, a major
indicator of pluripotency retention in E2F2-silenced cells. These results suggest
that E2F2 knockdown can inhibit hESC proliferation and tumorigenicity without
significantly harming stemness, providing a rationale to future protocols aiming 
at minimizing risks related to therapeutic application of cells and/or products
derived from human pluripotent cells.

PMID: 24446828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cell Signal. 2014 May;26(5):1075-81. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.01.008. Epub
2014 Jan 16.

Promising roles of mammalian E2Fs in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhan L(1), Huang C(1), Meng XM(1), Song Y(1), Wu XQ(1), Miu CG(1), Zhan XS(1), Li
J(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Meishan Road, Hefei 230032,
China; Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui Medical University (AMU), China.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Meishan Road, Hefei 230032,
China; Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui Medical University (AMU), China.
Electronic address: lj@ahmu.edu.cn.

In mammalian cells, E2F family of transcription factors (E2Fs) traditionally
modulates assorted cellular functions related to cell cycle progression,
proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation. Eight members, E2F1 E2F8 have been 
recognized of this family so far, and the members of this family are generally
divided into activator E2F (E2F1--E2F3a), repressor E2F (E2F3b--E2F5) and
inhibitor E2F (E2F6--E2F8) subclasses based on their structur-e and function.
Studies have showed that the mammalian E2F family members represent a recent
evolutionary adaptation to malignancies besides hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
and a growing body of evidence has validated that the individual members of the
family develop a close relationship with HCC. E2F1 was identified to play
overlapping roles in HCC, while E2F2--E2F8 (except E2F6 and E2F7) showed to be
tumor-promoter in HCC. However, the mechanism underlying the mammalian E2Fs
associated with HCC is still unknown and needs further research. The aim of this 
review is to sum up the collective knowledge of E2F family and the roles of each 
member of this family in HCC. Moreover, we will discuss some novel therapeutic
target for HCC based on the complicated functions of mammalian E2Fs.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24440307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jun;59(6):1134-41. doi: 10.1007/s10620-013-3013-2. Epub 2014
Jan 16.

Melatonin attenuates dextran sodium sulfate induced colitis with sleep
deprivation: possible mechanism by microarray analysis.

Chung SH(1), Park YS, Kim OS, Kim JH, Baik HW, Hong YO, Kim SS, Shin JH, Jun JH, 
Jo Y, Ahn SB, Jo YK, Son BK, Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon,
Korea.

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory bowel disease is a chronic inflammatory condition of the
gastrointestinal tract. It can be aggravated by stress, like sleep deprivation,
and improved by anti-inflammatory agents, like melatonin. We aimed to investigate
the effects of sleep deprivation and melatonin on inflammation. We also
investigated genes regulated by sleep deprivation and melatonin.
METHODS: In the 2% DSS induced colitis mice model, sleep deprivation was induced 
using modified multiple platform water bath. Melatonin was injected after
induction of colitis and colitis with sleep deprivation. Also mRNA was isolated
from the colon of mice and analyzed via microarray and real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Sleep deprivation induced reduction of body weight, and it was difficult
for half of the mice to survive. Sleep deprivation aggravated, and melatonin
attenuated the severity of colitis. In microarrays and real-time PCR of mice
colon tissues, mRNA of adiponectin and aquaporin 8 were downregulated by sleep
deprivation and upregulated by melatonin. However, mRNA of E2F transcription
factor (E2F2) and histocompatibility class II antigen A, beta 1 (H2-Ab1) were
upregulated by sleep deprivation and downregulated by melatonin.
CONCLUSION: Melatonin improves and sleep deprivation aggravates inflammation of
colitis in mice. Adiponectin, aquaporin 8, E2F2 and H2-Ab1 may be involved in the
inflammatory change aggravated by sleep deprivation and attenuated by melatonin.

PMID: 24429513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Clin Exp Immunol. 2014 May;176(2):222-31. doi: 10.1111/cei.12268.

CD38 and E2F transcription factor 2 have uniquely increased expression in
rheumatoid arthritis synovial tissues.

Chang X(1), Yue L, Liu W, Wang Y, Wang L, Xu B, Wang Y, Pan J, Yan X.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center of Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Shandong
University, Jinan, Shandong, China.

The purpose of the current study was to find novel rheumatoid arthritis
(RA)-specific gene expression by simultaneously comparing the expression profiles
of the synovial tissues from patients with RA, osteoarthritis (OA) and ankylosing
spondylitis (AS). The Illumina Human HT-12 v4 Expression BeadChip was used to
investigate the global gene expression profiles in synovial tissues from RA
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>12), OA (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>14) and AS (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>7) patients. By comparing the profiles in
synovial tissues from RA, OA and AS, we identified the CD38, ankyrin repeat
domain 38 (ANKRD38), E2F transcription factor 2 (E2F2), craniofacial development 
protein 1 (CFDP1), cluster of differentiation (CD)7, interferon-stimulated
exonuclease gene 20<U+2009>kDa (ISG20) and interleukin-2 receptor gamma (IL)-2RG genes
as differentially expressed gene expression in RA synovial tissues. The increased
expression of CD38, E2F2 and IL-2RG, as revealed using real-time polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) with synovial tissues from RA (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>30), OA (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>26) and AS
patients (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>20), was in agreement with the microarray data.
Immunohistochemistry revealed significant CD38 expression and E2F2 in synovial
membranes from RA patients (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>5). The CD38(+) cells had high a percentage in
the RA patients' blood (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>103) and in the CD3(+) and CD56(+) subsets. The
CD38(+) cell percentage was correlated significantly with RF level (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0·026) in
RA patients. The IL-1a and IL-ß levels were depressed significantly in the
culture medium of RA synovial fibroblast cells (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>5) following treatment with
siRNAs targeting the E2F2 or CD38 genes. This study suggests that the uniquely
increased expression of CD38 and E2F2 in RA synovial tissues contribute to the
immunoactivation of the disease.

© 2014 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC3992034
PMID: 24397353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 8;34(2):217-25. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.540. Epub 2013 Dec 23.

HER2/Neu tumorigenesis and metastasis is regulated by E2F activator transcription
factors.

Andrechek ER(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.

HER2/Neu is amplified and overexpressed in a large proportion of human breast
cancers, but the signaling pathways that contribute to tumor development and
metastatic progression are not completely understood. Using gene expression data 
and pathway signatures, we predicted a role for activator E2F transcription
factors in Neu-induced tumors. This was genetically tested by interbreeding Neu
transgenics with knockouts of the three activator E2Fs. Loss of any E2F delayed
Neu-induced tumor onset. E2F1 loss accelerated tumor growth, while E2F2 and E2F3 
loss did not. Strikingly, it was observed that loss of E2F1 or E2F2 significantly
reduced the metastatic capacity of the tumor and this was associated with a
reduction in circulating tumor cells in the E2F2 knockout. Gene expression
analysis between the tumors in the various E2F-mutant backgrounds revealed that
there was extensive compensation by other E2F family members in the individual
knockouts, underscoring the importance of the E2Fs in HER2/Neu-induced tumors.
Extension to HER2-positive (HER2+) human breast cancer revealed a number of HER2+
subtypes based on E2F activity with differences in relapse-free survival times.
Taken together, these data demonstrate that the E2F transcription factors are
integral to HER2+ tumor development and progression.

PMCID: PMC4067469
PMID: 24362522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 2;34(1):119-28. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.511. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

Selective roles of E2Fs for ErbB2- and Myc-mediated mammary tumorigenesis.

Wu L(1), de Bruin A(1), Wang H(1), Simmons T(1), Cleghorn W(1), Goldenberg LE(1),
Sites E(1), Sandy A(1), Trimboli A(1), Fernandez SA(2), Eng C(3), Shapiro C(4),
Leone G(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular Genetics, College of Biological Sciences, Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH, USA [2] Human Cancer Genetics Program,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA [3]
Department of Molecular Virology Immunology and Medical Genetics, College of
Medicine, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (2)Center for Biostatistics, 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (3)Genomic Medicine Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. (4)Division of Hematology & Oncology,
College of Medicine, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.

Previous studies have demonstrated that cyclin D1, an upstream regulator of the
Rb/E2F pathway, is an essential component of the ErbB2/Ras (but not the Wnt/Myc) 
oncogenic pathway in the mammary epithelium. However, the role of specific E2fs
for ErbB2/Ras-mediated mammary tumorigenesis remains unknown. Here, we show that 
in the majority of mouse and human primary mammary carcinomas with ErbB2/HER2
overexpression, E2f3a is up-regulated, raising the possibility that E2F3a is a
critical effector of the ErbB2 oncogenic signaling pathway in the mammary gland. 
We examined the consequence of ablating individual E2fs in mice on
ErbB2-triggered mammary tumorigenesis in comparison to a comparable Myc-driven
mammary tumor model. We found that loss of E2f1 or E2f3 led to a significant
delay in tumor onset in both oncogenic models, whereas loss of E2f2 accelerated
mammary tumorigenesis driven by Myc-overexpression. Furthermore, southern blot
analysis of final tumors derived from conditionally deleted E2f3(-/loxP) mammary 
glands revealed that there is a selection against E2f3(-/-) cells from developing
mammary carcinomas, and that such selection pressure is higher in the presence of
ErbB2 activation than in the presence of Myc activation. Taken together, our data
suggest oncogenic activities of E2F1 and E2F3 in ErbB2- or Myc-triggered mammary 
tumorigenesis, and a tumor suppressor role of E2F2 in Myc-mediated mammary
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4032808
PMID: 24276244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cell Mol Immunol. 2014 Jan;11(1):79-83. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2013.51. Epub 2013 Nov
18.

MicroRNA-let-7a promotes E2F-mediated cell proliferation and NF<U+03BA>B activation in
vitro.

Chafin CB(1), Regna NL(1), Caudell DL(2), Reilly CM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences & Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland Regional
College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, VA, USA. (2)Department of Pathology/Comparative Medicine,
Wake Forest University Primate Center, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC, USA. (3)1] Department of Biomedical Sciences & Pathobiology,
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA, USA [2] Edward Via College of
Osteopathic Medicine, Blacksburg, VA, USA.

Epigenetic factors, including altered microRNA (miRNA) expression, may contribute
to aberrant immune cell function in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
MiRNA-let-7a (let-7a) has been shown to directly alter cell cycle progression and
proinflammatory cytokine production. Due to the crucial role of let-7a in cell
division and inflammation, we investigated let-7a-mediated proliferation and NF<U+03BA>B
translocation in J774A.1 macrophages and MES 13 mesangial cells in vitro. In
immune-stimulated cells transfected with let-7a, cell proliferation was
significantly increased over time. There was a significant increase in the number
of immune-stimulated cells in S and G2 phases. Immune-stimulated cells
overexpressing let-7a had increased nuclear translocation of NF<U+03BA>B.
Bioinformatical analysis revealed that the E2F family, critical regulators of the
G1-S transition, has potential binding sites for let-7a in their mRNA
transcripts. Let-7a overexpression significantly increased the expression of the 
cell cycle activator E2F2 and increased retinoblastoma protein (Rb)
phosphorylation in immune-stimulated cells. The cell cycle inhibitor E2F5 was
significantly decreased in let-7a-transfected cells that were immune-stimulated. 
Bioinformatical analysis revealed E2F2 and NF<U+03BA>B are transcription factors
predicted to regulate the let-7a promoter. We analyzed transcriptional regulation
of let-7a by real-time RT-PCR using chromatin immunoprecipitation with E2F2 and
NF<U+03BA>B antibodies. There was an increase in E2F2 and NF<U+03BA>B binding in DNA enriched
for the let-7a promoter in immune-stimulated cells. Silencing E2F2 or NF<U+03BA>B
significantly decreased let-7a expression and IL-6 production in
immune-stimulated cells. Taken together, our results suggest that overexpression 
of let-7a may contribute to hyperplasia and the proinflammatory response in SLE.

PMCID: PMC3947333
PMID: 24240124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Dec;41(22):10185-98. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt821. Epub 2013
Sep 12.

E2F2 and CREB cooperatively regulate transcriptional activity of cell cycle
genes.

Laresgoiti U(1), Apraiz A, Olea M, Mitxelena J, Osinalde N, Rodriguez JA,
Fullaondo A, Zubiaga AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology,
University of the Basque Country, UPV/EHU, Bilbao 48940, Spain and Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of the Basque Country, UPV/EHU,
Bilbao 48940, Spain.

E2F2 is essential for the maintenance of T lymphocyte quiescence. To identify the
full set of E2F2 target genes, and to gain further understanding of the role of
E2F2 in transcriptional regulation, we have performed ChIP-chip analyses across
the genome of lymph node-derived T lymphocytes. Here we show that during
quiescence, E2F2 binds the promoters of a large number of genes involved in DNA
metabolism and cell cycle regulation, concomitant with their transcriptional
silencing. A comparison of ChIP-chip data with expression profiling data on
resting E2f2(-)(/)(-) T lymphocytes identified a subset of 51 E2F2-specific
target genes, most of which are upregulated on E2F2 loss. Luciferase reporter
assays showed a retinoblastoma-independent role for E2F2 in the negative
regulation of these target genes. Importantly, we show that the DNA binding
activity of the transcription factor CREB contributes to E2F2-mediated repression
of Mcm5 and Chk1 promoters. siRNA-mediated CREB knockdown, expression of a
dominant negative KCREB mutant or disruption of CREB binding by mutating a CRE
motif on Mcm5 promoter, relieved E2F2-mediated transcriptional repression. Taken 
together, our data uncover a new regulatory mechanism for E2F-mediated
transcriptional control, whereby E2F2 and CREB cooperate in the transcriptional
repression of a subset of E2F2 target genes.

PMCID: PMC3905855
PMID: 24038359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Breast Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 20;15(3):R51. doi: 10.1186/bcr3443.

Liver × receptor ligands disrupt breast cancer cell proliferation through an
E2F-mediated mechanism.

Nguyen-Vu T, Vedin LL, Liu K, Jonsson P, Lin JZ, Candelaria NR, Candelaria LP,
Addanki S, Williams C, Gustafsson JÅ, Steffensen KR, Lin CY.

INTRODUCTION: Liver × receptors (LXRs) are members of the nuclear receptor family
of ligand-dependent transcription factors and have established functions as
regulators of cholesterol, glucose, and fatty acid metabolism and inflammatory
responses. Published reports of anti-proliferative effects of synthetic LXR
ligands on breast, prostate, ovarian, lung, skin, and colorectal cancer cells
suggest that LXRs are potential targets in cancer prevention and treatment.
METHODS: To further determine the effects of LXR ligands and identify their
potential mechanisms of action in breast cancer cells, we carried out microarray 
analysis of gene expression in four breast cancer cell lines following treatments
with the synthetic LXR ligand GW3965. Differentially expressed genes were further
subjected to gene ontology and pathway analyses, and their expression profiles
and associations with disease parameters and outcomes were examined in clinical
samples. Response of E2F target genes were validated by real-time PCR, and the
posited role of E2F2 in breast cancer cell proliferation was tested by RNA
interference experiments.
RESULTS: We observed cell line-specific transcriptional responses as well as a
set of common responsive genes. In the common responsive gene set, upregulated
genes tend to function in the known metabolic effects of LXR ligands and LXRs
whereas the downregulated genes mostly include those which function in cell cycle
regulation, DNA replication, and other cell proliferation-related processes.
Transcription factor binding site analysis of the downregulated genes revealed an
enrichment of E2F binding site sequence motifs. Correspondingly, E2F2 transcript 
levels are downregulated following LXR ligand treatment. Knockdown of E2F2
expression, similar to LXR ligand treatment, resulted in a significant disruption
of estrogen receptor positive breast cancer cell proliferation. Ligand treatment 
also decreased E2F2 binding to cis-regulatory regions of target genes.
Hierarchical clustering of breast cancer patients based on the expression
profiles of the commonly downregulated LXR ligand-responsive genes showed a
strong association of these genes with patient survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these results indicate that LXR ligands target gene 
networks, including those regulated by E2F family members, are critical for tumor
biology and disease progression and merit further consideration as potential
agents in the prevention and treatment of breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC4053202
PMID: 23809258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 14;8(6):e65755. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065755. Print 2013.

Contrasting roles of E2F2 and E2F3 in cardiac neovascularization.

Zhou J(1), Wu M, Xu S, Cheng M, Ding C, Liu Y, Yan H, Biyashev D, Kishore R, Qin 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Medicine-Cardiology,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America.

Insufficient neovascularization, characterized by poor endothelial cell (EC)
growth, contributes to the pathogenesis of ischemic heart disease and limits
cardiac tissue preservation and regeneration. The E2F family of transcription
factors are critical regulators of the genes responsible for cell-cycle
progression and growth; however, the specific roles of individual E2Fs in ECs are
not well understood. Here we investigated the roles of E2F2 and E2F3 in EC
growth, angiogenesis, and their functional impact on myocardial infarction (MI). 
An endothelial-specific E2F3-deficient mouse strain VE-Cre; E2F3(fl/fl) was
generated, and MI was surgically induced in VE-Cre; E2F3(fl/fl) and E2F2-null
(E2F2 KO) mice and their wild-type (WT) littermates, VE-Cre; E2F3(+/+) and E2F2
WT, respectively. The cardiac function, infarct size, and vascular density were
significantly better in E2F2 KO mice and significantly worse in VE-Cre;
E2F3(fl/fl) mice than in their WT littermates. The loss of E2F2 expression was
associated with an increase in the proliferation of ECs both in vivo and in
vitro, while the loss of E2F3 expression led to declines in EC proliferation.
Thus, E2F3 promotes while E2F2 suppresses ischemic cardiac repair through
corresponding changes in EC proliferation; and differential targeting of specific
E2F members may provide a novel strategy for therapeutic angiogenesis of ischemic
heart disease.

PMCID: PMC3683051
PMID: 23799044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Jun 7;19(21):3189-98. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i21.3189.

E2F transcription factors and digestive system malignancies: how much do we know?

Xanthoulis A(1), Tiniakos DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Section of Gastroenterological Surgery, Levanger
Hospital, Nord-Trøndelag Hospital Trust, 7600 Levanger, Norway.

Comment in
    World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Aug 7;20(29):10212-6.

E2F family of transcription factors regulates various cellular functions related 
to cell cycle and apoptosis. Its individual members have traditionally been
classified into activators and repressors, based on in vitro studies. However
their contribution in human cancer is more complicated and difficult to predict. 
We review current knowledge on the expression of E2Fs in digestive system
malignancies and its clinical implications for patient prognosis and treatment.
E2F1, the most extensively studied member and the only one with prognostic value,
exhibits a tumor-suppressing activity in esophageal, gastric and colorectal
adenocarcinoma, and in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), whereas in pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma and esophageal squamous cell carcinoma may function as a
tumor-promoter. In the latter malignancies, E2F1 immunohistochemical expression
has been correlated with higher tumor grade and worse patient survival, whereas
in esophageal, gastric and colorectal adenocarcinomas is a marker of increased
patient survival. E2F2 has only been studied in colorectal cancer, where its role
is not considered significant. E2F4's role in colorectal, gastric and hepatic
carcinogenesis is tumor-promoting. E2F8 is strongly upregulated in human HCC,
thus possibly contributing to hepatocarcinogenesis. Adenoviral transfer of E2F as
gene therapy to sensitize pancreatic cancer cells for chemotherapeutic agents has
been used in experimental studies. Other therapeutic strategies are yet to be
developed, but it appears that targeted approaches using E2F-agonists or
antagonists should take into account the tissue-dependent function of each E2F
member. Further understanding of E2Fs' contribution in cellular functions in vivo
would help clarify their role in carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3671070
PMID: 23745020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1832(10):1697-707. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.05.015. Epub 2013 May 22.

Suppression of tumorigenicity by microRNA-138 through inhibition of
EZH2-CDK4/6-pRb-E2F1 signal loop in glioblastoma multiforme.

Qiu S(1), Huang D, Yin D, Li F, Li X, Kung HF, Peng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Deregulation of microRNAs (miRNAs) is implicated in tumor progression. We attempt
to identify the tumor suppressive miRNA not only down-regulated in glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) but also potent to inhibit the oncogene EZH2, and then
investigate the biological function and pathophysiologic role of the candidate
miRNA in GBM. In this study, we show that miRNA-138 is reduced in both GBM
clinical specimens and cell lines, and is effective to inhibit EZH2 expression.
Moreover, high levels of miR-138 are associated with long overall and
progression-free survival of GBM patients from The Cancer Genome Atlas dataset
(TCGA) data portal. Ectopic expression of miRNA-138 effectively inhibits GBM cell
proliferation in vitro and tumorigenicity in vivo through inducing cell cycles
G1/S arrest. Mechanism investigation reveals that miRNA-138 acquires tumor
inhibition through directly targeting EZH2, CDK6, E2F2 and E2F3. Moreover, an
EZH2-mediated signal loop, EZH2-CDK4/6-pRb-E2F1, is probably involved in GBM
tumorigenicity, and this loop can be blocked by miRNA-138. Additionally,
miRNA-138 negatively correlates to mRNA levels of EZH2 and CDK6 among GBM
clinical samples from both TCGA and our small amount datasets. In conclusion, our
data demonstrate a tumor suppressive role of miRNA-138 in GBM tumorigenicity,
suggesting a potential application in GBM therapy.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23707559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2013 Jul;60:68-71. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.04.009. Epub
2013 Apr 18.

Contrasting roles of E2F2 and E2F3 in endothelial cell growth and ischemic
angiogenesis.

Zhou J(1), Cheng M, Wu M, Boriboun C, Jujo K, Xu S, Zhao TC, Tang YL, Kishore R, 
Qin G.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Medicine-Cardiology,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

The growth of new blood vessels after ischemic injury requires endothelial cells 
(ECs) to divide and proliferate, and the E2F transcription factors are key
regulators of the genes responsible for cell-cycle progression; however, the
specific roles of individual E2Fs in ECs are largely unknown. To determine the
roles of E2F2 and E2F3 in EC proliferation and the angiogenic response to
ischemic injury, hind-limb ischemia was surgically induced in E2F2(-/-) mice,
endothelial-specific E2F3-knockout (EndoE2F3(<U+2206>/<U+2206>)) mice, and their littermates
with wild-type E2F2 and E2F3 expression. Two weeks later, Laser-Doppler perfusion
measurements, capillary density, and endothelial proliferation were significantly
greater in E2F2(-/-) mice and significantly lower in EndoE2F3(<U+2206>/<U+2206>) mice than in
their littermates, and EndoE2F3(<U+2206>/<U+2206>) mice also developed toe and limb necrosis.
The loss of E2F2 expression was associated with increases in the proliferation
and G1/S-phase gene expression of isolated ECs, while the loss of E2F3 expression
led to declines in these parameters. Thus E2F2 impairs, and endothelial E2F3
promotes, the angiogenic response to peripheral ischemic injury through
corresponding changes in EC cell-cycle progression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3684263
PMID: 23603666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cell Death Differ. 2013 Jul;20(7):931-40. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.24. Epub 2013 Apr
5.

E2f2 induces cone photoreceptor apoptosis independent of E2f1 and E2f3.

Chen D(1), Chen Y, Forrest D, Bremner R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Toronto Western Research
Institute, University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

The 'activating' E2fs (E2f1-3) are transcription factors that potently induce
quiescent cells to divide. Work on cultured fibroblasts suggested they were
essential for division, but in vivo analysis in the developing retina and other
tissues disproved this notion. The retina, therefore, is an ideal location to
assess other in vivo adenovirus E2 promoter binding factor (E2f) functions. It is
thought that E2f1 directly induces apoptosis, whereas other activating E2fs only 
induce death indirectly by upregulating E2f1 expression. Indeed, mouse
retinoblastoma (Rb)-null retinal neuron death requires E2f1, but not E2f2 or
E2f3. However, we report an entirely distinct mechanism in dying cone
photoreceptors. These neurons survive Rb loss, but undergo apoptosis in the
cancer-prone retina lacking both Rb and its relative p107. We show that while
E2f1 killed Rb/p107 null rod, bipolar and ganglion neurons, E2f2 was required and
sufficient for cone death, independent of E2f1 and E2f3. Moreover, whereas
E2f1-dependent apoptosis was p53 and p73-independent, E2f2 caused p53-dependent
cone death. Our in vivo analysis of cone photoreceptors provides unequivocal
proof that E2f-induces apoptosis independent of E2f1, and reveals distinct E2f1- 
and E2f2-activated death pathways in response to a single tumorigenic insult.

PMCID: PMC3679457
PMID: 23558950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Circulation. 2013 Apr 23;127(16):1712-22. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.001337.
Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Vascular endothelial cell growth-activated XBP1 splicing in endothelial cells is 
crucial for angiogenesis.

Zeng L(1), Xiao Q, Chen M, Margariti A, Martin D, Ivetic A, Xu H, Mason J, Wang
W, Cockerill G, Mori K, Li JY, Chien S, Hu Y, Xu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, King's College London, 125 Coldharbour Lane, London, 
UK. lingfang.zeng@kcl.ac.uk or

Comment in
    Circulation. 2013 Apr 23;127(16):1644-6.

BACKGROUND: Vascular endothelial cell growth factor plays a pivotal role in
angiogenesis via regulating endothelial cell proliferation. The X-box binding
protein 1 (XBP1) is believed to be a signal transducer in the endoplasmic
reticulum stress response. It is unknown whether there is crosstalk between
vascular endothelial cell growth factor signaling and XBP1 pathway.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We found that vascular endothelial cell growth factor
induced the kinase insert domain receptor internalization and interaction through
C-terminal domain with the unspliced XBP1 and the inositol requiring enzyme 1 a
in the endoplasmic reticulum, leading to inositol requiring enzyme 1 a
phosphorylation and XBP1 mRNA splicing, which was abolished by siRNA-mediated
knockdown of kinase insert domain receptor. Spliced XBP1 regulated endothelial
cell proliferation in a PI3K/Akt/GSK3ß/ß-catenin/E2F2-dependent manner and
modulated the cell size increase in a PI3K/Akt/GSK3ß/ß-catenin/E2F2-independent
manner. Knockdown of XBP1 or inositol requiring enzyme 1 a decreased endothelial 
cell proliferation via suppression of Akt/GSK3ß phosphorylation, ß-catenin
nuclear translocation, and E2F2 expression. Endothelial cell-specific knockout of
XBP1 (XBP1ecko) in mice retarded the retinal vasculogenesis in the first 2
postnatal weeks and impaired the angiogenesis triggered by ischemia.
Reconstitution of XBP1 by Ad-XBP1s gene transfer significantly improved
angiogenesis in ischemic tissue in XBP1ecko mice. Transplantation of bone marrow 
from wild-type o XBP1ecko mice could also slightly improve the foot blood
reperfusion in ischemic XBP1ecko mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that XBP1 can function via growth factor
signaling pathways to regulate endothelial proliferation and angiogenesis.

PMID: 23529610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 May;33(9):1809-18. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01401-12. Epub 2013 Feb
25.

The complex containing Drosophila Myb and RB/E2F2 regulates cytokinesis in a
histone H2Av-dependent manner.

DeBruhl H(1), Wen H, Lipsick JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.

In Drosophila, mutation of the oncogene Myb reduced the expression of mitotic
genes, such as polo and ial, and caused multiple mitotic defects, including
disrupted chromosome condensation and abnormal spindles. We now show that
binucleate cells, the hallmark phenotype of cytokinesis failure, accumulate in
Myb-null ovarian follicle cell and wing disc epithelia. Myb functions as an
activator in the generally repressive Drosophila RBF, E2F2, and Myb
(dREAM)/Myb-MuvB complex. Absence of the dREAM subunit Mip130 or E2F2 suppressed 
the Myb-null cytokinesis defect. Therefore, we used Myb-null binucleate cells as 
a quantitative phenotypic readout of transcriptional repression by the dREAM
complex. In the absence of Myb, the complex was sensitive to the dose of the
subunits E2F2, Mip120, Caf1, and Lin-52 but not Mip130 or Mip40. Surprisingly,
reduction of the dose of His2Av/H2A.z also suppressed the Myb-null binucleate
cell phenotype, suggesting a novel role for this variant histone in
transcriptional repression by the dREAM complex.

PMCID: PMC3624180
PMID: 23438598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. BMC Bioinformatics. 2013;14 Suppl 2:S7. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-S2-S7. Epub
2013 Jan 21.

Discovery and analysis of consistent active sub-networks in cancers.

Gaire RK(1), Smith L, Humbert P, Bailey J, Stuckey PJ, Haviv I.

Author information: 
(1)NICTA, Victoria Laboratory and Department of Computing and Information
Systems, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic 3010, Australia.
rgaire@csse.unimelb.edu.au

Gene expression profiles can show significant changes when genetically diseased
cells are compared with non-diseased cells. Biological networks are often used to
identify active subnetworks (ASNs) of the diseases from the expression profiles
to understand the reason behind the observed changes. Current methodologies for
discovering ASNs mostly use undirected PPI networks and node centric approaches. 
This can limit their ability to find the meaningful ASNs when using integrated
networks having comprehensive information than the traditional protein-protein
interaction networks. Using appropriate scoring functions to assess both genes
and their interactions may allow the discovery of better ASNs. In this paper, we 
present CASNet, which aims to identify better ASNs using (i) integrated
interaction networks (mixed graphs), (ii) directions of regulations of genes, and
(iii) combined node and edge scores. We simplify and extend previous
methodologies to incorporate edge evaluations and lessen their sensitivity to
significance thresholds. We formulate our objective functions using mixed integer
programming (MIP) and show that optimal solutions may be obtained. We compare the
ASNs obtained by CASNet and similar other approaches to show that CASNet can
often discover more meaningful and stable regulatory ASNs. Our analysis of a
breast cancer dataset finds that the positive feedback loops across 7 genes, AR, 
ESR1, MYC, E2F2, PGR, BCL2 and CCND1 are conserved across the basal/triple
negative subtypes in multiple datasets that could potentially explain the
aggressive nature of this cancer subtype. Furthermore, comparison of the basal
subtype of breast cancer and the mesenchymal subtype of glioblastoma ASNs shows
that an ASN in the vicinity of IL6 is conserved across the two subtypes. This
result suggests that subtypes of different cancers can show molecular
similarities indicating that the therapeutic approaches in different types of
cancers may be shared.

PMCID: PMC3549822
PMID: 23368093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 May;12(5):1087-98. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M112.024158. Epub
2013 Jan 7.

The nuclear protein ALY binds to and modulates the activity of transcription
factor E2F2.

Osinalde N(1), Olea M, Mitxelena J, Aloria K, Rodriguez JA, Fullaondo A,
Arizmendi JM, Zubiaga AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of the Basque
Country, UPV/EHU, 48940 Leioa, Spain.

E2F transcription factors control the expression of genes involved in a variety
of essential cellular processes and consequently their activity needs to be
tightly regulated. Protein-protein interactions are thought to be key modulators 
of E2F activity. To gain insight into the mechanisms that regulate the activity
of E2F2, we searched for novel proteins that associate with this transcription
factor. We show that the nuclear protein ALY (THO complex 4), originally
described as a transcriptional co-activator, associates with DNA-bound E2F2 and
represses its transcriptional activity. The capacity of ALY to modulate gene
expression was analyzed with expression microarrays by characterizing the
transcriptome of E2F2 expressing HEK293T cells in which ALY was either
overexpressed or silenced. We show that ALY influences the expression of more
than 400 genes, including 98 genes bearing consensus E2F motifs. Thus, ALY
emerges as a novel E2F2-interacting protein and a relevant modulator of
E2F-responsive gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3650323
PMID: 23297349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Cancer Res. 2013 Feb 1;73(3):1232-44. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2968. Epub
2012 Dec 11.

Epigenetic repression of miR-31 disrupts androgen receptor homeostasis and
contributes to prostate cancer progression.

Lin PC(1), Chiu YL, Banerjee S, Park K, Mosquera JM, Giannopoulou E, Alves P,
Tewari AK, Gerstein MB, Beltran H, Melnick AM, Elemento O, Demichelis F, Rubin
MA.

Author information: 
(1)DepartmentS of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Androgen receptor signaling plays a critical role in prostate cancer
pathogenesis. Yet, the regulation of androgen receptor signaling remains elusive.
Even with stringent androgen deprivation therapy, androgen receptor signaling
persists. Here, our data suggest that there is a complex interaction between the 
expression of the tumor suppressor miRNA, miR-31, and androgen receptor
signaling. We examined primary and metastatic prostate cancer and found that
miR-31 expression was reduced as a result of promoter hypermethylation, and
importantly, the levels of miR-31 expression were inversely correlated with the
aggressiveness of the disease. As the expression of androgen receptor and miR-31 
was inversely correlated in the cell lines, our study further suggested that
miR-31 and androgen receptor could mutually repress each other. Upregulation of
miR-31 effectively suppressed androgen receptor expression through multiple
mechanisms and inhibited prostate cancer growth in vivo. Notably, we found that
miR-31 targeted androgen receptor directly at a site located in the coding
region, which was commonly mutated in prostate cancer. In addition, miR-31
suppressed cell-cycle regulators including E2F1, E2F2, EXO1, FOXM1, and MCM2.
Together, our findings suggest a novel androgen receptor regulatory mechanism
mediated through miR-31 expression. The downregulation of miR-31 may disrupt
cellular homeostasis and contribute to the evolution and progression of prostate 
cancer. We provide implications for epigenetic treatment and support clinical
development of detecting miR-31 promoter methylation as a novel biomarker.

PMCID: PMC3563734
PMID: 23233736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Genes Dev. 2012 Nov 15;26(22):2483-98. doi: 10.1101/gad.201665.112. Epub 2012 Oct
26.

Epigenetic regulation of olfactory receptor gene expression by the Myb-MuvB/dREAM
complex.

Sim CK(1), Perry S, Tharadra SK, Lipsick JS, Ray A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

In both mammals and insects, an olfactory neuron will usually select a single
olfactory receptor and repress remaining members of large receptor families. Here
we show that a conserved multiprotein complex, Myb-MuvB (MMB)/dREAM, plays an
important role in mediating neuron-specific expression of the carbon dioxide
(CO(2)) receptor genes (Gr63a/Gr21a) in Drosophila. Activity of Myb in the
complex is required for expression of Gr63a/Gr21a and acts in opposition to the
histone methyltransferase Su(var)3-9. Consistent with this, we observed
repressive dimethylated H3K9 modifications at the receptor gene loci, suggesting 
a mechanism for silencing receptor gene expression. Conversely, other complex
members, Mip120 (Myb-interacting protein 120) and E2F2, are required for
repression of Gr63a in inappropriate neurons. Misexpression in mutants is
accompanied by an increase in the H3K4me3 mark of active chromatin at the
receptor gene locus. Nuclei of CO(2) receptor-expressing neurons contain reduced 
levels of the repressive subunit Mip120 compared with surrounding neurons and
increased levels of Myb, suggesting that activity of the complex can be regulated
in a cell-specific manner. Our evidence suggests a model in which olfactory
receptors are regulated epigenetically and the MMB/dREAM complex plays a critical
role in specifying, maintaining, and modulating the receptor-to-neuron map.

PMCID: PMC3505819
PMID: 23105004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Nat Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;14(11):1192-202. doi: 10.1038/ncb2595. Epub 2012 Oct 14.

Canonical and atypical E2Fs regulate the mammalian endocycle.

Chen HZ(1), Ouseph MM, Li J, Pécot T, Chokshi V, Kent L, Bae S, Byrne M, Duran C,
Comstock G, Trikha P, Mair M, Senapati S, Martin CK, Gandhi S, Wilson N, Liu B,
Huang YW, Thompson JC, Raman S, Singh S, Leone M, Machiraju R, Huang K, Mo X,
Fernandez S, Kalaszczynska I, Wolgemuth DJ, Sicinski P, Huang T, Jin V, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Solid Tumor Biology Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and 
Medical Genetics, Department of Molecular Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The endocycle is a variant cell cycle consisting of successive DNA synthesis and 
gap phases that yield highly polyploid cells. Although essential for metazoan
development, relatively little is known about its control or physiologic role in 
mammals. Using lineage-specific cre mice we identified two opposing arms of the
E2F program, one driven by canonical transcription activation (E2F1, E2F2 and
E2F3) and the other by atypical repression (E2F7 and E2F8), that converge on the 
regulation of endocycles in vivo. Ablation of canonical activators in the two
endocycling tissues of mammals, trophoblast giant cells in the placenta and
hepatocytes in the liver, augmented genome ploidy, whereas ablation of atypical
repressors diminished ploidy. These two antagonistic arms coordinate the
expression of a unique G2/M transcriptional program that is critical for mitosis,
karyokinesis and cytokinesis. These results provide in vivo evidence for a direct
role of E2F family members in regulating non-traditional cell cycles in mammals.

PMCID: PMC3616487
PMID: 23064266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Oncogene. 2013 Aug 22;32(34):3954-64. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.428. Epub 2012 Sep
24.

NEDDylation controls the target specificity of E2F1 and apoptosis induction.

Aoki I(1), Higuchi M, Gotoh Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan.

The transcription factor E2F1 has pivotal roles in both cell proliferation and
cell death, and is an important molecular target in cancer. Under proliferative
conditions E2F1 induces the expression of genes that promote cell cycle
progression, such as E2F2, whereas under proapoptotic conditions E2F1 induces
expression of genes such as p73 that lead to apoptosis. The mechanism by which
the apoptotic function of E2F1 is activated remains unclear, however. We now show
that members of the E2F family are covalently conjugated with the ubiquitin-like 
modifier NEDD8. Overexpression of SENP8, a NEDD8-specific cysteine protease,
resulted in deNEDDylation of E2F1 and promoted its transactivation activity at
the p73 gene but not at the E2F2 gene. Knockdown of SENP8, on the other hand,
attenuated p73 expression and apoptosis induced by E2F1 or by DNA damage. SENP8
also promoted the interaction between E2F1 and its cofactor Microcephalin 1,
which is required for p73 induction. These results suggest that NEDDylation is a 
molecular trigger that modifies the target specificity of E2F1, and could have
important implications for E2F1 regulation of apoptosis.

PMID: 23001041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. FEBS Lett. 2012 Nov 2;586(21):3831-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.08.023. Epub
2012 Sep 18.

miR-125b regulates the proliferation of glioblastoma stem cells by targeting
E2F2.

Wu N(1), Xiao L, Zhao X, Zhao J, Wang J, Wang F, Cao S, Lin X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071, China.

microRNAs (miRNAs) play important role in regulating cancer stem cell
self-renewal and differentiation, but the expression prolife of miRNAs in glioma 
stem cells (GSCs) has not been addressed. Here, we found that CD133 positive GSCs
possess a unique miRNAs profile compared to CD133 negative glioblastoma cells.
miR-125b, as one of neuronal miRNAs, is the most significantly down-regulated
miRNAs and overexpression of miR-125b inhibits the proliferation of CD133
positive GSCs and reduces the expression of "stem" marker. Furthermore, two
binding sites for miR-125b are identified in the 3'UTR of E2F2 and overexpression
of miR-125b in CD133 positive GSCs represses the endogenous level of E2F2
protein. This study demonstrated that miR-125b plays important roles in
regulating the proliferation of GSCs by directly targeting E2F2.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22999819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Sep 7;425(4):711-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.103. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Sepantronium bromide (YM155) induces disruption of the ILF3/p54(nrb) complex,
which is required for survivin expression.

Yamauchi T(1), Nakamura N, Hiramoto M, Yuri M, Yokota H, Naitou M, Takeuchi M,
Yamanaka K, Kita A, Nakahara T, Kinoyama I, Matsuhisa A, Kaneko N, Koutoku H,
Sasamata M, Kobori M, Katou M, Tawara S, Kawabata S, Furuichi K.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Research, Astellas Pharma, Inc., Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki, Japan.
tomohiro.yamauchi@astellas.com

YM155, a small-molecule survivin suppressant, specifically binds to the
transcription factor ILF3, which regulates the expression of survivin[1]. In this
experiment we have demonstrated that p54(nrb) binds to the survivin promoter and 
regulates survivin expression. p54(nrb) forms a complex with ILF3, which directly
binds to YM155. YM155 induces disruption of the ILF3/p54(nrb) complex, which
results in a different subcellular localization between ILF3 and p54(nrb). Thus, 
identification of molecular targets of YM155 in suppression of the survivin
pathway, might lead to development of its use as a novel potential target in
cancers.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22842455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Biomaterials. 2012 Oct;33(28):6728-38. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.06.030.
Epub 2012 Jul 6.

Convergence of physical and chemical signaling in the modulation of vascular
smooth muscle cell cycle and proliferation by fibrillar collagen-regulated
P66Shc.

Yeh YT(1), Lee CI, Lim SH, Chen LJ, Wang WL, Chuang YJ, Chiu JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Engineering Research, National Health Research Institutes,
Miaoli 350, Taiwan.

Arterial smooth muscle cell (SMC) phenotype and proliferation is regulated by
their surrounding collagens, which transform from fibrillar to monomeric type in 
atherogenesis, and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB/interleukin (IL)-1ß. 
This study aims at elucidating the mechanisms by which physical (monomeric vs.
fibrillar collagens) and chemical (PDGF-BB/IL-1ßvs. vehicle controls) stimuli
modulate SMC cycle and proliferation. SMCs were cultured on monomeric vs.
fibrillar type I collagens. In parallel experiments, SMCs on fibrillar collagen
were co-stimulated with PDGF-BB/IL-1ß. These physical and chemical factors
induced common SMC cycle signaling events, including up-regulations of
cyclin-dependent kinase-4/6 and cyclins A/D1, phosphorylation of retinoblastoma
(Rb) and its dissociations with E2F2/3. The physical and chemical inductions of
SMC cycle signaling and progression were oppositely regulated by
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-mediated Akt and p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK). Fibrillar collagen degraded p66Shc, whose
Ser36-phosphorylation plays important roles in the modulation of SMC cycle.
Monomeric collagen and PDGF-BB/IL-1ß co-stimulation induced p66Shc expression and
Ser36-phosphorylation through ß(1) integrin and PDGF receptor-ß, respectively. In
conclusion, our results demonstrate that fibrillar collagen-regulated p66Shc
converges the physical and chemical stimuli to modulate SMC cycle and
proliferation through PI3K-mediated Akt and p38 MAPK and their opposite
regulation in downstream common cell cycle signaling cascades.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22770800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Aug;32(16):3218-27. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00432-12. Epub 2012 Jun 
11.

Drosophila lin-52 acts in opposition to repressive components of the
Myb-MuvB/dREAM complex.

Lewis PW(1), Sahoo D, Geng C, Bell M, Lipsick JS, Botchan MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Division of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA.

The Drosophila melanogaster Myb-MuvB/dREAM complex (MMB/dREAM) participates in
both the activation and repression of developmentally regulated genes and origins
of DNA replication. Mutants in MMB subunits exhibit diverse phenotypes, including
lethality, eye defects, reduced fecundity, and sterility. Here, we used P-element
excision to generate mutations in lin-52, which encodes the smallest subunit of
the MMB/dREAM complex. lin-52 is required for viability, as null mutants die
prior to pupariation. The generation of somatic and germ line mutant clones
indicates that lin-52 is required for adult eye development and for early
embryogenesis via maternal effects. Interestingly, the maternal-effect embryonic 
lethality, larval lethality, and adult eye defects could be suppressed by
mutations in other subunits of the MMB/dREAM complex. These results suggest that 
a partial MMB/dREAM complex is responsible for the lethality and eye defects of
lin-52 mutants. Furthermore, these findings support a model in which the Lin-52
and Myb proteins counteract the repressive activities of the other members of the
MMB/dREAM complex at specific genomic loci in a developmentally controlled
manner.

PMCID: PMC3434544
PMID: 22688510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2014 Jul;22(6):471-7. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3182598198.

The relationship between E2F family members and tumor growth in colorectal
adenocarcinomas: A comparative immunohistochemical study of 100 cases.

Xanthoulis A(1), Kotsinas A, Tiniakos D, Fiska A, Tentes AA, Kyroudi A, Kittas C,
Gorgoulis V.

Author information: 
(1)*Laboratory of Histology and Embryology, School of Medicine, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens Laboratory of Anatomy, School of
Medicine, Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis Department of
Surgery, Didimotichon General Hospital, Didimotichon, Greece.

The mammalian E2F family of transcription factors comprises a group of 8
proteins, which either activate or repress transcription of numerous target
genes, playing a role in cell-cycle progression and apoptosis. We have
collectively investigated the immunohistochemical expression of E2F1, E2F2, and
E2F4 transcription factors and their relation to cell kinetic parameters using
serial section analysis in a series of 100 cases of human colorectal
adenocarcinomas. E2F1 and E2F4 expressed nuclear immunopositivity in all cases.
The range of their expression was 2% to 80% (mean 21% ± 15%) and 2% to 90% (mean 
66% ± 20%), respectively. E2F2 was expressed in 41 cases at low levels (range, 1%
to 5%, mean 2% ± 9%). A statistically significant direct association between E2F4
and cell proliferation, as expressed by high levels of Ki-67 labeling index, was 
shown. A mutually exclusive immunostaining pattern between E2F1 and E2F4 and a
direct correlation of E2F1 and apoptosis were also highlighted. Our results point
to a possible direct tumor-promoting role for E2F4 in the context of colorectal
carcinogenesis. The inverse immunohistochemical relationship between E2F1 and
E2F4 indicates a possible mechanistic interlink in colorectal cancer. Low
expression of E2F2 may reflect functional redundancy between members of the E2F
family, in this case between E2F1 and E2F2.

PMID: 22688350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Oncol Rep. 2012 Aug;28(2):677-81. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1845. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

4-hexylresorcinol stimulates the differentiation of SCC-9 cells through the
suppression of E2F2, E2F3 and Sp3 expression and the promotion of Sp1 expression.

Kim SG(1), Kim AS, Jeong JH, Choi JY, Kweon H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, College of Dentistry,
Gangneung-Wonju National University, Gangneung 210-702, Republic of Korea.
epker@chollian.net

The dormancy-inducing factors of bacteria inhibit tumor cell growth. In the
present study, we evaluated the antitumor effects of the dormancy-inducing factor
4-hexylresorcinol (4-HR) using real-time cell electronic sensing (RT-CES) in
SCC-9 cells (tongue squamous cell carcinoma cells). Treatment with 4-HR
suppressed the growth of SCC-9 cells in a dose-dependent manner. We used a DNA
microarray to identify genes that showed a significant change in expression upon 
4-HR administration in SCC-9 cells. Among the differentially expressed genes, the
protein expression of several cell proliferation related factors, including E2F1,
E2F2, E2F3, E2F4, E2F5, E2F6, Sp1 and Sp3, were determined by western blot
analyses. Treatment with 4-HR strongly suppressed E2F2 and slightly suppressed
E2F3 but did not change the expression of E2F1, E2F4, E2F5 and E2F6 relative to
no treatment. Furthermore, 4-HR increased Sp1 expression in a dose-dependent
manner and decreased Sp3 expression. Therefore, the ratio of Sp1 to Sp3, an
important driving force of epithelial cell differentiation, was drastically
increased. Consistent with this observation, 4-HR increased the expression of the
epithelial cell differentiation markers involucrin and keratin 10. Together, our 
results indicate that 4-HR induces the differentiation of SCC-9 via the
modulation of the E2F-mediated signaling pathway.

PMID: 22664654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2012 Jul;23(4):276-9. doi: 10.1097/ICU.0b013e3283541eb6.

Gene therapy for corneal dystrophies and disease, where are we?

Williams KA(1), Klebe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Flinders University, Adelaide, SA 5042,
Australia. keryn.williams@flinders.edu.au

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: We assess the studies on vector systems for delivery of
transgenes to the cornea that have been published over the last year and
summarize new work on the identification of specific transgenes for corneal
diseases.
RECENT FINDINGS: Adeno-associated viral vectors are increasingly being
successfully applied to the cornea, although transgene expression requires
corneal epithelial debridement or intrastromal injection of the vector. Gene
delivery platforms based on nanoparticles of chitosan or gold also show promise. 
Overexpression of vasoinhibin-1 or decorin, or siRNA-mediated blockade of the
cannabinoid receptor CB1, can all reduce corneal neovascularization.
Overexpression of decorin or matrix metalloproteinase 14 can reduce corneal
fibrosis and haze, whereas overexpression of c-Met accelerates the epithelial
wound healing. Induction of corneal endothelial cell replication by
overexpression of E2F2, p16 or p21 can maintain or even increase corneal
endothelial cell density in eye bank corneas. Overexpression of the antiapoptotic
transgenes Bcl-xL or p35 significantly enhances corneal endothelial cell survival
and reduces apoptosis in stored human corneas.
SUMMARY: Despite a wealth of information on the methods for the delivery of
nucleic acids to the human cornea and ever-increasing information on the
transgenes with substantial therapeutic potential, gene therapy for corneal
disorders has yet to reach the clinic.

PMID: 22543480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 2012 May;28(5):243-50. doi: 10.1016/j.kjms.2011.11.007. Epub
2012 Apr 6.

Molecular markers associated with nonepithelial ovarian cancer in formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded specimens by genome wide expression profiling.

Vui-Kee K(1), Mohd Dali AZ, Mohamed Rose I, Ghazali R, Jamal R, Mokhtar NM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Nonepithelial ovarian cancer (NEOC) is a rare cancer that is often misdiagnosed
as other malignant tumors. Research on this cancer using fresh tissues is nearly 
impossible because of its limited number of samples within a limited time
provided. The study is to identify potential genes and their molecular pathways
related to NEOC using formalin-fixed paraffin embedded samples. Total RNA was
extracted from eight archived NEOCs and seven normal ovaries. The RNA samples
with RNA integrity number >2.0, purity >1.7 and cycle count value <28 cycles were
hybridized to the Illumina Whole-Genome DASL assay (cDNA-mediated annealing,
selection, extension, and ligation). We analyzed the results using the GeneSpring
GX11.0 and FlexArray software to determine the differentially expressed genes.
Microarray results were validated using an immunohistochemistry method.
Statistical analysis identified 804 differentially expressed genes with 443 and
361 genes as overexpressed and underexpressed in cancer, respectively. Consistent
findings were documented for the overexpression of eukaryotic translation
elongation factor 1 alpha 1, E2F transcription factor 2, and fibroblast growth
factor receptor 3, except for the down-regulated gene, early growth response 1
(EGR1). The immunopositivity staining for EGR1 was found in the majority of
cancer tissues. This finding suggested that the mRNA level of a transcript did
not always match with the protein expression in tissues. The current gene profile
can be the platform for further exploration of the molecular mechanism of NEOC.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22531302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biomark Insights. 2012;7:9-17. doi: 10.4137/BMI.S9003. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Detection of 1p19q deletion by real-time comparative quantitative PCR.

Chaturbedi A(1), Yu L, Linskey ME, Zhou YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, Irvine, CA.

1p/19q (1p and/or 19q) deletions are prognostic factors in oligodendroglial
tumors (OT) and predict better survival after both chemotherapy and radiotherapy.
While studying 1p/19q status as a potential variable within multivariate
prognosis models for OT, we have frequently encountered unknown 1p/19q status
within our glioma sample database due to lack of paired blood samples for loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) assay and/or failure to perform fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). We realized that a 1p and 19q deletion assay that could be 
reliably performed solely on tumor DNA samples would allow us to fill in these
molecular biology data "holes". We built recombinant DNA with fragments of the
selected "marker" genes in 1p (E2F2, NOTCH2), and 19q (PLAUR) and "reference"
genes (ERC2, SPOCK1, and SPAG16 ) and used it as quantification standard in
real-time PCR to gain absolute ratios of marker/reference gene copy numbers in
tumor DNA samples, thus called comparative quantitative PCR (CQ-PCR). Using
CQ-PCR, we identified 1p and/ or 19q deletions in majority of pure low-grade
oligodenroglioma (OG) tumors (17/21, 81%), a large portion of anaplastic
oligodendroglioma (AO) tumors (6/15, 47%), but rarely found in mixed
oligoastrcytomas (OA) tumors (1/8, 13%). These data are consistent with results
of LOH and FISH assays generally reported for these tumor types. In addition, 15 
out 18 samples showed concordant results between FISH and CQ-PCR. We conclude
that CQ-PCR is a potential means to gain 1p/19q deletion information, which
prognostic and predictive values of CQ-PCR-derived 1p/19q status will be
determined in a future study.

PMCID: PMC3290106
PMID: 22403483  [PubMed]


90. Mol Carcinog. 2012 Oct;51 Suppl 1:E132-41. doi: 10.1002/mc.21882. Epub 2012 Feb
17.

Combined effects of E2F1 and E2F2 polymorphisms on risk and early onset of
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.

Lu M(1), Liu Z, Yu H, Wang LE, Li G, Sturgis EM, Johnson DG, Wei Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Deregulated expression of most members of the E2F family has been detected in
many human cancers. We examined the association of common single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of E2F transcription factors 1 and 2 (E2F1 and E2F2) with
risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) in 1,096 SCCHN
patients and 1,090 cancer-free controls. We genotyped 10 selected SNPs in E2F1
and E2F2, including those at the near 5'-untranslated region (UTR), microRNA
(miRNA)-binding sites at the near 3'-UTR and tagSNPs according to bioinformatics 
analysis. Although none of the selected SNPs alone was significantly associated
with risk of SCCHN, there was a statistically significantly increased risk of
SCCHN associated with the combined risk genotypes (i.e., rs3213182 AA, rs3213183 
GG, rs3213180 GG, rs321318121 GG, rs2742976 GT+TT, rs6667575 GA+AA, rs3218203 CC,
rs3218148 AA, rs3218211 CC, and rs3218123 GT+TT). Compared with those with 0-4
risk genotypes, an increased risk was observed for those who carried 5-8 risk
genotypes (adjusted OR = 1.04; 95% CI = 0.86-1.26) and 9-10 risk genotypes
(adjusted OR = 1.62; 95% CI = 1.14-2.30) in a dose-response manner (P = 0.045).
Furthermore, the joint effect was more pronounced among patients with
oropharyngeal cancer, younger adults (=57 yr old), men, non-smokers,
non-drinkers, and individuals with family history of cancer in first-degree
relatives. Additionally, we also observed that those with 5-10 risk genotypes had
an earlier SCCHN onset than those with 0-4 risk genotypes, particularly for
non-smokers and/or non-drinkers. We concluded that E2F1 and E2F2 genetic variants
may jointly play important roles in head and neck carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3370129
PMID: 22344756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Oncogene. 2012 Nov 29;31(48):5019-28. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.654. Epub 2012 Jan
30.

Established and new mouse models reveal E2f1 and Cdk2 dependency of
retinoblastoma, and expose effective strategies to block tumor initiation.

Sangwan M(1), McCurdy SR, Livne-Bar I, Ahmad M, Wrana JL, Chen D, Bremner R.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Western Research Institute, University Health Network, Departments of 
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, and Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

RB(+/-) individuals develop retinoblastoma and, subsequently, many other tumors. 
The Rb relatives p107 and p130 protect the tumor-resistant Rb(-/-) mouse retina. 
Determining the mechanism underlying this tumor suppressor function may expose
novel strategies to block Rb pathway cancers. p107/p130 are best known as E2f
inhibitors, but here we implicate E2f-independent Cdk2 inhibition as the critical
p107 tumor suppressor function in vivo. Like p107 loss, deleting p27 or
inactivating its Cdk inhibitor (CKI) function (p27(CK-)) cooperated with Rb loss 
to induce retinoblastoma. Genetically, p107 behaved like a CKI because
inactivating Rb and one allele each of p27 and p107 was tumorigenic. Although Rb 
loss induced canonical E2f targets, unexpectedly p107 loss did not further induce
these genes, but instead caused post-transcriptional Skp2 induction and Cdk2
activation. Strikingly, Cdk2 activity correlated with tumor penetrance across all
the retinoblastoma models. Therefore, Rb restrains E2f, but p107 inhibits cross
talk to Cdk. While removing either E2f2 or E2f3 genes had little effect, removing
only one E2f1 allele blocked tumorigenesis. More importantly, exposing
retinoblastoma-prone fetuses to small molecule inhibitors of E2f (HLM006474) or
Cdk (R547) for merely 1 week dramatically inhibited subsequent tumorigenesis in
adult mice. Protection was achieved without disrupting normal proliferation.
Thus, exquisite sensitivity of the cell-of-origin to E2f and Cdk activity can be 
exploited to prevent Rb pathway-induced cancer in vivo without perturbing normal 
cell division. These data suggest that E2f inhibitors, never before tested in
vivo, or CKIs, largely disappointing as therapeutics, may be effective preventive
agents.

PMID: 22286767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. EMBO J. 2012 Mar 21;31(6):1494-505. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.500. Epub 2012 Jan
20.

Myeloid translocation gene 16 is required for maintenance of haematopoietic stem 
cell quiescence.

Fischer MA(1), Moreno-Miralles I, Hunt A, Chyla BJ, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN, USA.

The t(8;21) and t(16;21) that are associated with acute myeloid leukaemia disrupt
two closely related genes termed Myeloid Translocation Genes 8 (MTG8) and 16
(MTG16), respectively. Many of the transcription factors that recruit Mtg16
regulate haematopoietic stem and progenitor cell functions and are required to
maintain stem cell self-renewal potential. Accordingly, we found that Mtg16-null 
bone marrow (BM) failed in BM transplant assays. Moreover, when removed from the 
animal, Mtg16-deficient stem cells continued to show defects in stem cell
self-renewal assays, suggesting a requirement for Mtg16 in this process. Gene
expression analysis indicated that Mtg16 was required to suppress the expression 
of several key cell-cycle regulators including E2F2, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays detected Mtg16 near an E2A binding site within the
first intron of E2F2. BrdU incorporation assays indicated that in the absence of 
Mtg16 more long-term stem cells were in the S phase, even after competitive BM
transplantation where normal stem and progenitor cells are present, suggesting
that Mtg16 plays a role in the maintenance of stem cell quiescence.

PMCID: PMC3321173
PMID: 22266796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Hum Pathol. 2012 Jul;43(7):994-1002. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.08.003. Epub
2011 Dec 9.

MAPK7 and MAP2K4 as prognostic markers in osteosarcoma.

Tesser-Gamba F(1), Petrilli AS, de Seixas Alves MT, Filho RJ, Juliano Y, Toledo
SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Oncology Institute (Grupo de Apoio ao
Adolescente e à Criança com Câncer), Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, 
SP 04023-062, Brazil. francine.tesser@yahoo.com.br

Osteosarcoma is a class of cancer originating from the bone, affecting mainly
children and young adults. Cytogenetic studies showed the presence of
rearrangements and recurrent gains in specific chromosomal regions, indicating
the possible involvement of genes located in these regions during the
pathogenesis of osteosarcoma. These studies investigated expression of 10 genes
located in the chromosomal region involved in abnormalities in osteosarcoma,
1p36, 17p, and chromosome 19. The purpose of this study was to investigate the
expression profile of genes located in regions involved in chromosomal
rearrangements in osteosarcoma. We used quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction to investigate the expression of 10 genes located in 1p36.3 (MTHFR,
ERRFI1, FGR, E2F2), 17p (MAPK7, MAP2K4), and chromosome 19 (BBC3, FOSB, JUND, and
RRAS), in 70 samples taken from 30 patients (30 prechemotherapy, 30
postchemotherapy, and 10 metastases specimens) and 10 healthy bones as a control 
sample. The most interesting results showed a strong association between the
expression levels of MAPK7 and MAP2K4 genes and clinical parameters of
osteosarcoma. Overexpression of these genes was significantly associated to a
poor response to treatment (P = .0001 and P = .0049, respectively), tumor
progression, and worse overall survival (P = .0052 and P = .0085, respectively), 
suggesting that MAPK7 and MAP2K4 could play an important role in osteosarcoma
tumorigenesis. Thus, these genes could be good markers in assessing response to
treatment and development of osteosarcoma.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22154052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27723. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027723. Epub 2011 Nov 18.

Overexpression of Kpnß1 and Kpna2 importin proteins in cancer derives from
deregulated E2F activity.

van der Watt PJ(1), Ngarande E, Leaner VD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Health Sciences, Institute of
Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town,
South Africa.

The Karyopherin superfamily comprises nuclear transport proteins, involved in the
shuttling of certain cargo proteins into and out of the nucleus. Karyopherin ß1
(Kpnß1) and Karyopherin a2 (Kpna2) are importin proteins, which work in concert
to transport their cargo into the nucleus. We previously identified increased
expression of Kpnß1 and Kpna2 in cervical tumours compared to normal epithelium
and in transformed cells compared to their normal counterparts. This study
therefore aimed to identify the transcription regulatory mechanisms associated
with high Kpnß1 and Kpna2 levels in cancer cells. Kpnß1 (-2013 to +100) and Kpna2
(-1900 to +69) promoter fragments were separately cloned into the reporter
vector, pGL3-basic, and luciferase assays revealed both as significantly more
active in cancer and transformed cells compared to normal. A series of deletion
constructs identified the -637 to -271 Kpnß1 and -180 to -24 Kpna2 promoter
regions as responsible for the differential promoter activity, and a number of
highly conserved E2F binding sites were identified within these regions. Mutation
analysis confirmed the requirement of E2F sites for promoter activity, and ChIP
analysis confirmed E2F2/Dp1 binding to the Kpnß1 and Kpna2 promoters in vivo. Dp1
inhibition resulted in decreased levels of the respective proteins, confirming
the role of E2F in the overexpression of Kpnß1 and Kpna2 proteins in cancer. E2F 
activity is known to be deregulated in cervical cancer cells due to the
inhibition of its repressor, Rb, by HPV E7. The inhibition of E7 using siRNA
resulted in decreased Kpnß1 and Kpna2 promoter activities, as did the
overexpression of Rb. In conclusion, this study is a first to show that elevated 
Kpnß1 and Kpna2 expression in cancer cells correlates with altered
transcriptional regulation associated with deregulated E2F/Rb activities.

PMCID: PMC3220698
PMID: 22125623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Pak J Biol Sci. 2011 May 15;14(10):578-83.

Dichloromethane-methanol extract from Borassus aethiopumn mart. (Arecaceae)
induces apoptosis of human colon cancer HT-29 cells.

Sakandé J(1), Rouet-benzineb P, Devaud H, Nikiema JB, Lompo M, Nacoulma OG,
Guissou IP, Bado A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry (UFR SDS), University of Ouagadougou, 03 B.P. 7021,
Burkina Faso.

Borassus aetihiopum MART (Arecaceae) is a plant used in traditional herbal
medicine for the treatment of various diseases (bronchitis, laryngitis,
antiseptic). In particular, their male inflorcscences were reported to exhibit
cicatrizing, antiseptic and fungicidal properties. In the present study, the
biological activity of E2F2, an apolar extract from Borassus aethiopum male
inflorescence was investigated on colon cancer HT29 cells. Phytochemical
screening was carried according to methodology for chemical analysis for
vegetable drugs. Cells proliferation was determined by the MTT assay and cells
cycle distribution was analysed by using laser flow cytometer (Beckman coulter). 
The cytoskeleton organisation was examined under a laser scanning confocal
microscope (Zess). Preliminary phytochemical analysis of E2F2 extract revealed
the presence of sterols, triterpenes and saponosids. E2F2 extract (1 microg and
100 microg mL(-1)) significantly inhibited cell proliferation by blocking cell
population in G0/G1 phase. Flow Cytometric analysis of E2F2-treated HT29 cells
showed that hypoploïd cell population (sub G1 phase) increased with processing
time exposures. Immunofluorescence confocal analysis revealed a disrupt actin
microfilaments network in E2F2 treated-cells with a significant reduction in
actin stress fibres and appearance of a random, non-oriented distribution of
focal adhesion sites. These data indicate that E2F2 extract has
anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic activities. Further studies are required to 
unravel the mechanisms of action of E2F2 extract.

PMID: 22097093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Exp Dermatol. 2011 Dec;20(12):998-1003. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2011.01388.x.

Centella asiatica extracts modulate hydrogen peroxide-induced senescence in human
dermal fibroblasts.

Kim YJ(1), Cha HJ, Nam KH, Yoon Y, Lee H, An S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Skin Care and Beauty, Osan University, Osan Cosmetology Research
Institute, Konkuk University, Seoul, Korea.

Centella asiatica (C. asiatica) is a pharmacological plant in South Asia. It has 
been demonstrated that C. asiatica extracts containing various pentacyclic
triterpenes exert healing effects, especially wound healing and collagen
synthesis in skin. However, there are few studies on the effect of C. asiatica
extracts on stress-induced premature senescence (SIPS). To determine whether H(2)
O(2) -induced senescence is affected by C. asiatica extracts, we performed
senescence analysis on cultured human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs). We also analysed
whole gene expression level using microarrays and showed that 39 mRNAs are
differentially expressed in H(2) O(2) -induced HDFs with and without treatment
with C. asiatica extracts. These genes regulate apoptosis, gene silencing, cell
growth, transcription, senescence, DNA replication and the spindle checkpoint.
Differential expression of FOXM1, E2F2, MCM2, GDF15 and BHLHB2 was confirmed
using semi-quantitative PCR. In addition, C. asiatica extracts rescued the H(2)
O(2) -induced repression of replication in HDFs. Therefore, the findings
presented here suggest that C. asiatica extracts might regulate SIPS by
preventing repression of DNA replication and mitosis-related gene expression.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22092576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Urol. 2011 Feb;185(2):469-70. doi: 10.1016/S0022-5347(11)60151-1.

Re: Expression Signature of E2F1 and its Associated Genes Predict Superficial to 
Invasive Progression of Bladder Tumors.

Wood DP.

Comment on
    J Clin Oncol. 2010 Jun 1;28(16):2660-7.

PMID: 22088627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. FASEB J. 2011 Nov;25(11):3815-27. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-187484. Epub 2011 Jul 25.

Nuclear localization of <U+03B3>-tubulin affects E2F transcriptional activity and
S-phase progression.

Höög G(1), Zarrizi R, von Stedingk K, Jonsson K, Alvarado-Kristensson M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund
University, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.

We show that the centrosome- and microtubule-regulating protein <U+03B3>-tubulin
interacts with E2 promoter binding factors (E2Fs) to modulate E2F transcriptional
activity and thereby control cell cycle progression. <U+03B3>-Tubulin contains a
C-terminal signal that results in its translocation to the nucleus during late
G(1) to early S phase. <U+03B3>-Tubulin mutants showed that the C terminus interacts
with the transcription factor E2F1 and that the E2F1-<U+03B3>-tubulin complex is formed 
during the G(1)/S transition, when E2F1 is transcriptionally active. Furthermore,
E2F transcriptional activity is altered by reduced expression of <U+03B3>-tubulin or by 
complex formation between <U+03B3>-tubulin and E2F1, E2F2, or E2F3, but not E2F6. In
addition, the <U+03B3>-tubulin C terminus encodes a DNA-binding domain that interacts
with E2F-regulated promoters, resulting in <U+03B3>-tubulin-mediated transient
activation of E2Fs. Thus, we report a novel mechanism regulating the activity of 
E2Fs, which can help explain how these proteins affect cell cycle progression in 
mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC3205837
PMID: 21788450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Plant J. 2011 Nov;68(4):646-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04715.x. Epub 2011 
Aug 30.

The E2F transcription factor family regulates CENH3 expression in Arabidopsis
thaliana.

Heckmann S(1), Lermontova I, Berckmans B, De Veylder L, Bäumlein H, Schubert I.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research, Corrensstraße 3, 
06466 Gatersleben, Germany.

To elucidate the epigenetic maintenance mechanism for functional plant
centromeres, we studied transcriptional regulation of the centromere-specific
histone H3 variant CENH3 in Arabidopsis thaliana. We focused on the structure and
activity of the CENH3 promoter (CENH3pro) and its regulation by E2F transcription
factors. Use of CENH3pro::GUS reporter gene constructs showed that CENH3pro is
active in dividing tissues, and that full expression in root meristems depends on
intragenic regulatory elements within the second intron. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation identified CENH3 as an E2F target gene. Transient
co-expression of a CENH3pro::GUS reporter gene construct with various E2F
transcription factors in A. thaliana protoplasts showed that E2Fa and E2Fb
(preferentially with dimerization protein DPb) activate CENH3pro. Stable
over-expression of E2Fa and E2Fb increased the CENH3 transcript level in planta, 
whereas over-expression of E2Fc decreased the CENH3 transcript level.
Surprisingly, mutation of the two E2F binding sites of CENH3pro, in particular
the more upstream one (E2F2), caused an increase in CENH3pro activity, indicating
E2F-dependent transcriptional repression. CENH3pro repression may be triggered by
the interplay of typical and atypical E2Fs in a cell cycle-dependent manner,
and/or by interaction of typical E2Fs with retinoblastoma-related (RBR) protein. 
We speculate that E2Fs are involved in differential transcriptional regulation of
CENH3 versus H3, as H3 promoters lack E2F binding motifs. E2F binding motifs are 
also present in human and Drosophila CENH3pro regions, thus cell cycle-dependent 
transcriptional regulation of CENH3 may be highly conserved.

© 2011 The Authors. The Plant Journal © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21771121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2011 Jun 20;4(5):521-5. Epub 2011 Jun 7.

The role of E2F1 in the development of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Wolfram JA(1), Liner A, Richardson SL, Zhu X, Smith MA, Hoit BD, Lee HG.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and 2Medicine, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

The overexpression of the transcription factor, E2F1, induces hypertrophy and
apoptosis with cell cycle re-entry in cardiomyocytes in vitro and in vivo,
suggesting that targeting E2F1 may have therapeutic potential. Accordingly, we
tested the hypothesis that blocking the E2F1-mediated signal transduction pathway
prevents cardiac hypertrophy by treating E2F1 knockout mice (E2F1-/-) with either
isoproterenol (ISO) or Angiotensin II (ANG). Echocardi-ography was used to
measure left ventricular mass index and myocardial performance index, a measure
of combined systolic and diastolic left ventricular function. In control mice
(E2F1+/+) both ISO and ANG treatments induced cardiac hypertrophy, and impaired
ventricular function in ANG treated mice. In contrast to previously published
work, E2F1-/- mice also demonstrated a similar pattern of cardiac hypertrophy and
function after either treatment. Atrial natriuretic peptide, a molecular marker
of hypertrophy and necropsy-determined body weight-normalized left ventricle mass
were similarly increased in ISO and ANG treated E2F1+/+ and E2F-/- mice,
supporting the echocardiographic data. These data indicate that E2F1 is not
necessary for the development of cardiac hypertrophy although studies using an
overexpression approach suggest a causal role of E2F1. The reason for this
discrepancy is unclear, although it is possible that other E2F-family members
(e.g., E2F2) may play a compensatory role. In conclusion, our data demonstrate
that cardiac hypertrophy can be induced in an E2F1-independent fashion and
suggest that in contrast to previous reports, targeting E2F1 may not be a good
therapeutic approach.

PMCID: PMC3127073
PMID: 21738823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2011 Aug;20(8):1793-7. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-11-0397. Epub 2011 Jun 2.

MicroRNA processing and binding site polymorphisms are not replicated in the
Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium.

Permuth-Wey J(1), Chen Z, Tsai YY, Lin HY, Chen YA, Barnholtz-Sloan J, Birrer MJ,
Chanock SJ, Cramer DW, Cunningham JM, Fenstermacher D, Fridley BL, Garcia-Closas 
M, Gayther SA, Gentry-Maharaj A, Gonzalez-Bosquet J, Iversen E, Jim H, McLaughlin
J, Menon U, Narod SA, Phelan CM, Ramus SJ, Risch H, Song H, Sutphen R, Terry KL, 
Tyrer J, Vierkant RA, Wentzensen N, Lancaster JM, Cheng JQ, Berchuck A, Pharoah
PD, Schildkraut JM, Goode EL, Sellers TA; Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium
(OCAC).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, Moffitt Cancer Center, University of South 
Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

BACKGROUND: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in microRNA-related genes have 
been associated with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) risk in two reports, yet
associated alleles may be inconsistent across studies.
METHODS: We conducted a pooled analysis of previously identified SNPs by
combining genotype data from 3,973 invasive EOC cases and 3,276 controls from the
Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium. We also conducted imputation to obtain
dense coverage of genes and comparable genotype data for all studies. In total,
226 SNPs within 15 kb of 4 miRNA biogenesis genes (DDX20, DROSHA, GEMIN4, and
XPO5) and 23 SNPs located within putative miRNA binding sites of 6 genes (CAV1,
COL18A1, E2F2, IL1R1, KRAS, and UGT2A3) were genotyped or imputed and analyzed in
the entire dataset.
RESULTS: After adjustment for European ancestry, no overall association was
observed between any of the analyzed SNPs and EOC risk.
CONCLUSIONS: Common variants in these evaluated genes do not seem to be strongly 
associated with EOC risk.
IMPACT: This analysis suggests earlier associations between EOC risk and SNPs in 
these genes may have been chance findings, possibly confounded by population
admixture. To more adequately evaluate the relationship between genetic variants 
and cancer risk, large sample sizes are needed, adjustment for population
stratification should be carried out, and use of imputed SNP data should be
considered.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3153581
PMID: 21636674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Virus Res. 2011 Sep;160(1-2):66-73. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2011.05.009. Epub
2011 May 23.

Analysis of the cell cycle regulatory protein (E2F1) after infection of cultured 
cells with bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1) or herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1).

Workman A(1), Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Fair Street at 
East Campus Loop, Lincoln, NE 68583-0905, United States.

The E2F family of cellular transcription factors controls cell cycle progression 
and cell death. During cell cycle progression, activated cyclin-dependent kinases
phosphorylate the retinoblastoma (Rb) protein, causing the release and activation
of E2F family members. Previous studies demonstrated that bovine herpes virus 1
(BHV-1) productive infection increases E2F1 protein levels, the bICP0 early
promoter is activated more than 100 fold by E2F1 or E2F2, and silencing E2F1
reduced the efficiency of productive infection. In this study, the effect of
herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) productive infection on E2F protein levels
and regulation of E2F dependent transcription was compared to BHV-1 infection in 
the same permissive cell line, rabbit skin (RS) cells. Silencing E2F1 with a
specific siRNA reduced HSV-1 productive infection approximately 10 fold in RS
cells, and total E2F1 protein levels increased during productive infection. In
contrast to RS cells infected with BHV-1, a fraction of total E2F1 protein was
localized to the cytoplasm in HSV-1 infected RS cells. Furthermore, E2F1 did not 
efficiently trans-activate the HSV-1 ICP0 or ICP4 promoter. When RS cells were
transfected with an E2F reporter construct or the cyclin D1 promoter and then
infected with BHV-1, promoter activity increased after infection. In contrast,
HSV-1 infection of RS cells had little effect on E2F dependent transcription and 
cyclin D1 promoter activity was reduced. In summary, these studies indicated that
silencing E2F1 reduced the efficiency of HSV-1 and BHV-1 productive infection.
However, only BHV-1 productive infection induced E2F dependent transcription.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3163728
PMID: 21624405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. PLoS Pathog. 2011 May;7(5):e1001342. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001342. Epub 2011
May 12.

An E2F1-mediated DNA damage response contributes to the replication of human
cytomegalovirus.

E X(1), Pickering MT, Debatis M, Castillo J, Lagadinos A, Wang S, Lu S, Kowalik
TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of America.

DNA damage resulting from intrinsic or extrinsic sources activates DNA damage
responses (DDRs) centered on protein kinase signaling cascades. The usual
consequences of inducing DDRs include the activation of cell cycle checkpoints
together with repair of the damaged DNA or induction of apoptosis. Many DNA
viruses elicit host DDRs during infection and some viruses require the DDR for
efficient replication. However, the mechanism by which DDRs are activated by
viral infection is poorly understood. Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection
induces a DDR centered on the activation of ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)
protein kinase. Here we show that HCMV replication is compromised in cells with
inactivated or depleted ATM and that ATM is essential for the host DDR early
during infection. Likewise, a downstream target of ATM phosphorylation, H2AX,
also contributes to viral replication. The ATM-dependent DDR is detected as
discrete, nuclear <U+03B3>H2AX foci early in infection and can be activated by IE
proteins. By 24 hpi, <U+03B3>H2AX is observed primarily in HCMV DNA replication
compartments. We identified a role for the E2F1 transcription factor in mediating
this DDR and viral replication. E2F1, but not E2F2 or E2F3, promotes the
accumulation of <U+03B3>H2AX during HCMV infection or IE protein expression. Moreover,
E2F1 expression, but not the expression of E2F2 or E2F3, is required for
efficient HCMV replication. These results reveal a novel role for E2F1 in
mediating an ATM-dependent DDR that contributes to viral replication. Given that 
E2F activity is often deregulated by infection with DNA viruses, these
observations raise the possibility that an E2F1-mediated mechanism of DDR
activation may be conserved among DNA viruses.

PMCID: PMC3093362
PMID: 21589897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Int J Oncol. 2011 Oct;39(4):811-20. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1042. Epub 2011 May 13.

Identification of characteristic molecular signature of Müllerian inhibiting
substance in human HPV-related cervical cancer cells.

Hwang SJ(1), Suh MJ, Yoon JH, Kim MR, Ryu KS, Nam SW, Donahoe PK, Maclaughlin DT,
Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Müllerian inhibiting substance (MIS), also known as anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH),
is a member of the transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) superfamily that plays an
important role in the mesenchymal-epithelial interaction, cell growth and
proliferation, extracellular matrix production and tissue remodeling. Previously,
we demonstrated that MIS suppressed ovarian cancer cell growth and suggested
large-scale genetic elements that could be responsible for anti-neoplastic
effects of MIS on ovarian cancer cells. In this study, we demonstrated the
expression of MIS type II receptor (MISRII) in the human papillomavirus
(HPV)-16-related cervical cancer cell lines CaSki and SiHa, and a non-HPV-related
cervical cancer cell line, C33A. We also showed that MIS inhibited growth of
cervical cancer cells, and induced cellular apoptosis of C33A. In addition, we
identified a characteristic molecular signature of MIS in CaSki cells by using
whole genome expression analysis. Of the 1,690 genes that showed significant
expression changes by MIS, 21 genes were related to cell cycle; 13 genes to
apoptosis; and 52 genes to the cancer pathway. On performing a search for cell
cycle pathways in the KEGG pathway database, several gene expressions at the G1/S
checkpoint were found. In particular, the expression of p16 and p107 increased
and that of E2F2 and E2F3 decreased at an early stage, whereas the expression of 
E2F4 and E2F5 decreased at a later stage after MIS treatment. These data suggest 
that MIS produces activity against HPV16-related cervical cancers in vitro, and
MIS may also be an effective targeted therapy for HPV16-related cervical cancer. 
Genetic data obtained here could be useful in determining the treatment strategy 
of MISR-expressing cervical tumors in the future.

PMID: 21573503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Aging Cell. 2011 Oct;10(5):789-97. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2011.00719.x. Epub
2011 May 29.

Retinoblastoma-independent regulation of cell proliferation and senescence by the
p53-p21 axis in lamin A<U+200A>/C-depleted cells.

Moiseeva O(1), Bourdeau V, Vernier M, Dabauvalle MC, Ferbeyre G.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.

The expression of A-type lamin is downregulated in several cancers, and lamin
defects are the cause of several diseases including a form of accelerated aging. 
We report that depletion of lamin A/C expression in normal human cells leads to a
dramatic downregulation of the Rb family of tumor suppressors and a defect in
cell proliferation. Lamin A/C-depleted cells exhibited a flat morphology and
accumulated markers of cellular senescence. This senescent phenotype was
accompanied by engagement of the p53 tumor suppressor and induction of the p53
target gene p21 and was prevented by small hairpin RNAs against p53, p21, or by
the oncoprotein Mdm2. The expression of E2F target genes, normally required for
cell cycle progression, was downregulated after lamin A/C depletion but restored 
after the inactivation of p53. A similar senescence response was observed in
myoblasts from a patient with a lamin A mutation causing muscular dystrophy. We
thus reveal a previously unnoticed mechanism of controlling cell cycle genes
expression, which depends on p53 but does not require the retinoblastoma family
of tumor suppressors and that can be relevant to understand the pathogenesis of
laminopathies and perhaps aging.

© 2011 The Authors Aging Cell © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society 
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 21535365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2011 Jul;301(1):G20-31. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00481.2010. Epub 2011 Apr 28.

A role for transcription factor E2F2 in hepatocyte proliferation and timely liver
regeneration.

Delgado I(1), Fresnedo O, Iglesias A, Rueda Y, Syn WK, Zubiaga AM, Ochoa B.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of
the Basque Country, Sarriena s/n, Leioa, Spain.

E2F transcription factors are key regulators of the cell cycle although the
relative contribution of each E2F member in regulating cellular proliferation is 
still poorly defined. Present evidence suggests that E2F2 may act both as a
suppressor and promoter of proliferation, depending on the cellular context. We
used a loss-of-function mutant mouse model to investigate the function of E2F2 in
liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy, a paradigm of cell-cycle
progression. Liver mass recovery and histology were examined over 9 days in 70%
hepatectomized E2F2(-/-) and wild-type animals. Transcriptome analysis was
performed in quiescent and 48-h regenerating liver samples. TIGR MultiExperiment 
Viewer was used for the statistical analysis of microarray data, significance was
determined by Fischer, and P values were adjusted applying Benjamini-Hochberg
multiple-testing correction. We show that E2F2 is required for adult hepatocyte
proliferation and for timely liver regeneration, as disruption of the E2F2 gene
in hepatocytes leads to a reduced rate of S-phase entry and to delayed liver
regeneration. Transcriptome analysis followed by ontological classification of
differentially expressed genes and gene-interaction network analysis indicated
that the majority of genes involved in normal liver regeneration were related to 
biosynthetic and catabolic processes of all major biomolecules as well as
cellular location and intracellular transport, confirming the complex nature of
the regeneration process. Remarkably, transcripts of genes included in functional
categories that are crucial for cell cycle, apoptosis and wound-healing response,
and fibrosis were absent in the transcriptome of posthepatectomized E2F2(-/-)
mice. Our results indicate that the transcriptional activity of E2F2 contributes 
to promote adult hepatocyte proliferation and liver regeneration.

PMID: 21527726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Gastroenterology. 2011 Jul;141(1):326-37, 337.e1-3. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2011.03.047. Epub 2011 Mar 27.

The promoter of human telomerase reverse transcriptase is activated during liver 
regeneration and hepatocyte proliferation.

Sirma H(1), Kumar M, Meena JK, Witt B, Weise JM, Lechel A, Ande S, Sakk V,
Guguen-Guillouzo C, Zender L, Rudolph KL, Günes C.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institute, Hamburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Telomerase activity has not been detected in healthy human
liver biopsy samples, but it is up-regulated in most human liver tumors. It is
not clear whether telomerase is activated in response to acute or chronic liver
injury. Telomerase activity is closely associated with expression of its
catalytic subunit, telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT). We analyzed the
activity of the human TERT (hTERT) promoter during liver regeneration in vivo and
hepatocyte proliferation in vitro.
METHODS: We used hTERTp-lacZ transgenic mice, which contain an 8.0-kilobase pair 
fragment of the hTERT gene promoter, to study the role of TERT in liver
regeneration following partial hepatectomy. As an in vitro model, we used the
HepaRG cell line as a new model system for human hepatocyte proliferation and
differentiation.
RESULTS: Activity of the hTERT promoter increased significantly after partial
hepatectomy; it was also induced in hepatocytes, based on immunohistologic
analysis. Similar to the in vivo results, telomerase activity and hTERT
expression were up-regulated in proliferating HepaRG cells and repressed in
response to growth arrest and differentiation. Promoter mapping revealed that a
proximal 0.3-kilobase pair fragment contains all elements necessary for
regulation of hTERT in HepaRG cells. We identified E2F2 and E2F7 as transcription
factors that control the differential expression of hTERT in proliferating
hepatocytes, in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: hTERT is induced in hepatocytes during liver regeneration,
indicating a functional role for telomerase in human liver.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21447332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Infect Dis. 2011 Apr 1;203(7):921-9. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiq156. Epub 2011 Feb 
28.

Early patterns of gene expression correlate with the humoral immune response to
influenza vaccination in humans.

Bucasas KL(1), Franco LM, Shaw CA, Bray MS, Wells JM, Niño D, Arden N, Quarles
JM, Couch RB, Belmont JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030-2504, USA.

BACKGROUND: Annual vaccination is the primary means for preventing influenza.
However, great interindividual variability exists in vaccine responses, the
cellular events that take place in vivo after vaccination are poorly understood, 
and appropriate biomarkers for vaccine responsiveness have not been developed.
METHODS: We immunized a cohort of healthy male adults with a licensed trivalent
influenza vaccine and performed a timed assessment of global gene expression
before and after vaccination. We analyzed the relationship between gene
expression patterns and the humoral immune response to vaccination.
RESULTS: Marked up regulation of expression of genes involved in interferon
signaling, positive IL-6 regulation, and antigen processing and presentation,
were detected within 24 hours of immunization. The late vaccine response showed a
transcriptional pattern suggestive of increased protein biosynthesis and cellular
proliferation. Integrative analyses revealed a 494-gene expression
signature--including STAT1, CD74, and E2F2--which strongly correlates with the
magnitude of the antibody response. High vaccine responder status correlates with
increased early expression of interferon signaling and antigen processing and
presentation genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The results highlight the role of a systems biology approach in
understanding the molecular events that take place in vivo after influenza
vaccination and in the development of better predictors of vaccine
responsiveness.

PMCID: PMC3068032
PMID: 21357945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. BMC Cancer. 2011 Feb 19;11:78. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-78.

Genome-wide expression patterns associated with oncogenesis and sarcomatous
transdifferentation of cholangiocarcinoma.

Seol MA(1), Chu IS, Lee MJ, Yu GR, Cui XD, Cho BH, Ahn EK, Leem SH, Kim IH, Kim
DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Institute for Medical Science,
Department of Internal Medicine, Chonbuk National University Medical School and
Hospital, Jeonju, Jeonbuk, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: The molecular mechanisms of CC (cholangiocarcinoma) oncogenesis and
progression are poorly understood. This study aimed to determine the genome-wide 
expression of genes related to CC oncogenesis and sarcomatous
transdifferentiation.
METHODS: Genes that were differentially expressed between CC cell lines or
tissues and cultured normal biliary epithelial (NBE) cells were identified using 
DNA microarray technology. Expressions were validated in human CC tissues and
cells.
RESULTS: Using unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis of the cell line and
tissue samples, we identified a set of 342 commonly regulated (>2-fold change)
genes. Of these, 53, including tumor-related genes, were upregulated, and 289,
including tumor suppressor genes, were downregulated (<0.5 fold change).
Expression of SPP1, EFNB2, E2F2, IRX3, PTTG1, PPAR<U+03B3>, KRT17, UCHL1, IGFBP7 and
SPARC proteins was immunohistochemically verified in human and hamster CC
tissues. Additional unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis of sarcomatoid 
CC cells compared to three adenocarcinomatous CC cell lines revealed 292
differentially upregulated genes (>4-fold change), and 267 differentially
downregulated genes (<0.25 fold change). The expression of 12 proteins was
validated in the CC cell lines by immunoblot analysis and immunohistochemical
staining. Of the proteins analyzed, we found upregulation of the expression of
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related proteins VIM and TWIST1, and 
restoration of the methylation-silenced proteins LDHB, BNIP3, UCHL1, and NPTX2
during sarcomatoid transdifferentiation of CC.
CONCLUSION: The deregulation of oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, and
methylation-related genes may be useful in identifying molecular targets for CC
diagnosis and prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3053267
PMID: 21333016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cancer Res. 2011 Mar 1;71(5):1924-32. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2386. Epub
2011 Jan 18.

Prediction and genetic demonstration of a role for activator E2Fs in Myc-induced 
tumors.

Fujiwara K(1), Yuwanita I, Hollern DP, Andrechek ER.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University, Institute for Genome Science and Policy, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.

Advances in genomic signatures have begun to dissect breast cancer heterogeneity 
and application of these signatures will allow the prediction of which pathways
are important in tumor development. Here we used genomic signatures to predict
involvement of specific E2F transcription factors in Myc-induced tumors. We
genetically tested this prediction by interbreeding Myc transgenics with mice
lacking various activator E2F alleles. Tumor latency decreased in the E2F1 mutant
background and significantly increased in both the E2F2 and E2F3 mutants.
Investigating the mechanism behind these changes revealed a reduction in
apoptosis in the E2F1 knockout strain. E2F2 and E2F3 mutant backgrounds
alleviated Myc proliferative effects on the pregnant mammary gland, reducing the 
susceptible tumor target population. Gene expression data from tumors revealed
that the E2F2 knockout background resulted in fewer tumors with EMT,
corresponding with a reduction in probability of Ras activation. In human breast 
cancer we found that a low probability of E2F2 pathway activation was associated 
with increased relapse-free survival time. Together these data illustrate the
predictive utility of genomic signatures in deciphering the heterogeneity within 
breast cancer and illustrate the unique genetic requirements for individual E2Fs 
in mediating tumorigenesis in both mouse models and human breast cancer.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21245101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Dev Biol. 2011 Mar 1;351(1):35-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.025. Epub 2010
Dec 23.

Cell proliferation in the absence of E2F1-3.

Wenzel PL(1), Chong JL, Sáenz-Robles MT, Ferrey A, Hagan JP, Gomez YM, Rajmohan
R, Sharma N, Chen HZ, Pipas JM, Robinson ML, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

E2F transcription factors regulate the progression of the cell cycle by
repression or transactivation of genes that encode cyclins, cyclin dependent
kinases, checkpoint regulators, and replication proteins. Although some E2F
functions are independent of the Retinoblastoma tumor suppressor (Rb) and related
family members, p107 and p130, much of E2F-mediated repression of S phase entry
is dependent upon Rb. We previously showed in cultured mouse embryonic
fibroblasts that concomitant loss of three E2F activators with overlapping
functions (E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3) triggered the p53-p21(Cip1) response and caused 
cell cycle arrest. Here we report on a dramatic difference in the requirement for
E2F during development and in cultured cells by showing that cell cycle entry
occurs normally in E2f1-3 triply-deficient epithelial stem cells and progenitors 
of the developing lens. Sixteen days after birth, however, massive apoptosis in
differentiating epithelium leads to a collapse of the entire eye. Prior to this
collapse, we find that expression of cell cycle-regulated genes in E2F-deficient 
lenses is aberrantly high. In a second set of experiments, we demonstrate that
E2F3 ablation alone does not cause abnormalities in lens development but rescues 
phenotypic defects caused by loss of Rb, a binding partner of E2F known to
recruit histone deacetylases, SWI/SNF and CtBP-polycomb complexes,
methyltransferases, and other co-repressors to gene promoters. Together, these
data implicate E2F1-3 in mediating transcriptional repression by Rb during cell
cycle exit and point to a critical role for their repressive functions in cell
survival.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3868453
PMID: 21185283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 11;286(6):4783-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.182733. Epub 2010 
Nov 28.

E2f1-3 are critical for myeloid development.

Trikha P(1), Sharma N, Opavsky R, Reyes A, Pena C, Ostrowski MC, Roussel MF,
Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine and Public Health, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
43210, USA.

Hematopoietic development involves the coordinated activity of differentiation
and cell cycle regulators. In current models of mammalian cell cycle control, E2f
activators (E2f1, E2f2, and E2f3) are portrayed as the ultimate transcriptional
effectors that commit cells to enter and progress through S phase. Using
conditional gene knock-out strategies, we show that E2f1-3 are not required for
the proliferation of early myeloid progenitors. Rather, these E2fs are critical
for cell survival and proliferation at two distinct steps of myeloid development.
First, E2f1-3 are required as transcriptional repressors for the survival of
CD11b(+) myeloid progenitors, and then they are required as activators for the
proliferation of CD11b(+) macrophages. In bone marrow macrophages, we show that
E2f1-3 respond to CSF1-Myc mitogenic signals and serve to activate E2f target
genes and promote their proliferation. Together, these findings expose dual
functions for E2f1-3 at distinct stages of myeloid development in vivo, first as 
repressors in cell survival and then as activators in cell proliferation. In
summary, this work places E2f1-3 in a specific signaling cascade that is critical
for myeloid development in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3039366
PMID: 21115501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 1;5(10). pii: e13054. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013054.

cDNA microarray gene expression profiling of hedgehog signaling pathway
inhibition in human colon cancer cells.

Shi T(1), Mazumdar T, Devecchio J, Duan ZH, Agyeman A, Aziz M, Houghton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog (HH) signaling plays a critical role in normal cellular
processes, in normal mammalian gastrointestinal development and differentiation, 
and in oncogenesis and maintenance of the malignant phenotype in a variety of
human cancers. Increasing evidence further implicates the involvement of HH
signaling in oncogenesis and metastatic behavior of colon cancers. However,
genomic approaches to elucidate the role of HH signaling in cancers in general
are lacking, and data derived on HH signaling in colon cancer is extremely
limited.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To identify unique downstream targets of the GLI 
genes, the transcriptional regulators of HH signaling, in the context of colon
carcinoma, we employed a small molecule inhibitor of both GLI1 and GLI2, GANT61, 
in two human colon cancer cell lines, HT29 and GC3/c1. Cell cycle analysis
demonstrated accumulation of GANT61-treated cells at the G1/S boundary. cDNA
microarray gene expression profiling of 18,401 genes identified Differentially
Expressed Genes (DEGs) both common and unique to HT29 and GC3/c1. Analyses using 
GenomeStudio (statistics), Matlab (heat map), Ingenuity (canonical pathway
analysis), or by qRT-PCR, identified p21(Cip1) (CDKN1A) and p15(Ink4b) (CDKN2B), 
which play a role in the G1/S checkpoint, as up-regulated genes at the G1/S
boundary. Genes that determine further cell cycle progression at G1/S including
E2F2, CYCLIN E2 (CCNE2), CDC25A and CDK2, and genes that regulate passage of
cells through G2/M (CYCLIN A2 [CCNA2], CDC25C, CYCLIN B2 [CCNB2], CDC20 and CDC2 
[CDK1], were down-regulated. In addition, novel genes involved in stress
response, DNA damage response, DNA replication and DNA repair were identified
following inhibition of HH signaling.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study identifies genes that are involved in
HH-dependent cellular proliferation in colon cancer cells, and following its
inhibition, genes that regulate cell cycle progression and events downstream of
the G1/S boundary.

PMCID: PMC2948497
PMID: 20957031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Integr Cancer Ther. 2011 Jun;10(2):192-200. doi: 10.1177/1534735410386953. Epub
2010 Oct 6.

Suppression of proliferation and invasive behavior of human metastatic breast
cancer cells by dietary supplement BreastDefend.

Jiang J(1), Wojnowski R, Jedinak A, Sliva D.

Author information: 
(1)Methodist Research Institute, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

AIM: The study was to evaluate the effect of the dietary supplement BreastDefend 
(BD) on the proliferation and invasive behavior of highly metastatic human breast
cancer cells in vitro.
METHODS: Cell proliferation and cytotoxicity of BD was evaluated in MDA-MB-231
cells treated with BD (0-40 µg/mL) by MTT assay and trypan blue staining,
respectively. Expression of cell cycle regulatory genes were determined by
DNA-microarray analysis. Effect of BD on invasiveness was assessed by cellular
adhesion, migration, and invasion assays.
RESULTS: BD treatment of cells MDA-MB-231 resulted in the cytostatic inhibition
of cell proliferation with IC(50) 22.2, 19.1, and 17.5 µg/mL for 24, 48, and 72
hours, respectively. The inhibition of proliferation was mediated by the
upregulation expression of CCNG1, CHEK1, CDKN1C, GADD45A, and E2F2, whereas BD
downregulated expression of CCNA1 and CDK6 genes. The induction of expression of 
GADD45A and inhibition of expression of cyclin A1 (gene CCNA1) by BD was also
confirmed on the protein level. BD treatment suppressed the invasive behavior of 
MDA-MB-231 cells by the inhibition of cellular adhesion, migration, and invasion.
This inhibition of invasiveness was mediated by the suppression of secretion of
urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA), and by the downregulation of expression of
CXCR4 in breast cancer cells treated with BD.
CONCLUSION: BD inhibits proliferation and invasive behavior of the highly
metastatic human breast cancer cells in vitro. BD may have a therapeutic
potential for prevention or treatment of highly metastatic breast cancers.

PMID: 20926736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Biol Direct. 2010 Sep 20;5:55. doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-5-55.

The ancient function of RB-E2F pathway: insights from its evolutionary history.

Cao L(1), Peng B, Yao L, Zhang X, Sun K, Yang X, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, PR China.

BACKGROUND: The RB-E2F pathway is conserved in most eukaryotic lineages,
including animals and plants. E2F and RB family proteins perform crucial
functions in cycle controlling, differentiation, development and apoptosis.
However, there are two kinds of E2Fs (repressive E2Fs and active E2Fs) and three 
RB family members in human. Till now, the detail evolutionary history of these
protein families and how RB-E2F pathway evolved in different organisms remain
poorly explored.
RESULTS: We performed a comprehensive evolutionary analysis of E2F, RB and DP
(dimerization partners of E2Fs) protein family in representative eukaryotic
organisms. Several interesting facts were revealed. First, orthologues of RB,
E2F, and DP family are present in several representative unicellular organisms
and all multicellular organisms we checked. Second, ancestral E2F, RB genes
duplicated before placozoans and bilaterians diverged, thus E2F family was
divided into E2F4/5 subgroup (including repressive E2Fs: E2F4 and E2F5) and
E2F1/2/3 subgroup (including active E2Fs: E2F1, E2F2 and E2F3), RB family was
divided into RB1 subgroup (including RB1) and RBL subgroup (including RBL1 and
RBL2). Third, E2F4 and E2F5 share more sequence similarity with the predicted E2F
ancestral sequence than E2F1, E2F2 and E2F3; E2F4 and E2F5 also possess lower
evolutionary rates and higher purification selection pressures than E2F1, E2F2
and E2F3. Fourth, for RB family, the RBL subgroup proteins possess lower
evolutionary rates and higher purification selection pressures compared with RB
subgroup proteins in vertebrates,
CONCLUSIONS: Protein evolutionary rates and purification selection pressures are 
usually linked with protein functions. We speculated that function conducted by
E2F4/5 subgroup and RBL subgroup proteins might mainly represent the ancient
function of RB-E2F pathway, and the E2F1/2/3 subgroup proteins and RB1 protein
might contribute more to functional diversification in RB-E2F pathway. Our
results will enhance the current understanding of RB-E2F pathway and will also be
useful to further functional studies in human and other model organisms.

PMCID: PMC3224931
PMID: 20849664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 10;5(9). pii: e12667. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012667.

Claudin 13, a member of the claudin family regulated in mouse stress induced
erythropoiesis.

Thompson PD(1), Tipney H, Brass A, Noyes H, Kemp S, Naessens J, Tassabehji M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Immunogenetics, University of Manchester, St Mary's Hospital,
Manchester, United Kingdom.

Mammals are able to rapidly produce red blood cells in response to stress. The
molecular pathways used in this process are important in understanding responses 
to anaemia in multiple biological settings. Here we characterise the novel gene
Claudin 13 (Cldn13), a member of the Claudin family of tight junction proteins
using RNA expression, microarray and phylogenetic analysis. We present evidence
that Cldn13 appears to be co-ordinately regulated as part of a stress induced
erythropoiesis pathway and is a mouse-specific gene mainly expressed in tissues
associated with haematopoietic function. CLDN13 phylogenetically groups with its 
genomic neighbour CLDN4, a conserved tight junction protein with a putative role 
in epithelial to mesenchymal transition, suggesting a recent duplication event.
Mechanisms of mammalian stress erythropoiesis are of importance in anaemic
responses and expression microarray analyses demonstrate that Cldn13 is the most 
abundant Claudin in spleen from mice infected with Trypanosoma congolense. In
mice prone to anaemia (C57BL/6), its expression is reduced compared to strains
which display a less severe anaemic response (A/J and BALB/c) and is
differentially regulated in spleen during disease progression. Genes clustering
with Cldn13 on microarrays are key regulators of erythropoiesis (Tal1, Trim10,
E2f2), erythrocyte membrane proteins (Rhd and Gypa), associated with red cell
volume (Tmcc2) and indirectly associated with erythropoietic pathways (Cdca8,
Cdkn2d, Cenpk). Relationships between genes appearing co-ordinately regulated
with Cldn13 post-infection suggest new insights into the molecular regulation and
pathways involved in stress induced erythropoiesis and suggest a novel,
previously unreported role for claudins in correct cell polarisation and protein 
partitioning prior to erythroblast enucleation.

PMCID: PMC2937028
PMID: 20844758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Haematologica. 2010 Dec;95(12):2047-55. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.026831. Epub
2010 Sep 7.

Detection of genomic aberrations in molecularly defined Burkitt's lymphoma by
array-based, high resolution, single nucleotide polymorphism analysis.

Scholtysik R(1), Kreuz M, Klapper W, Burkhardt B, Feller AC, Hummel M, Loeffler
M, Rosolowski M, Schwaenen C, Spang R, Stein H, Thorns C, Trümper L, Vater I,
Wessendorf S, Zenz T, Siebert R, Küppers R; Molecular Mechanisms in Malignant
Lymphomas Network Project of Deutsche Krebshilfe.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), University of Duisburg-Essen,
Medical School, Virchowstr. 173, 45122 Essen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Knowledge about the genetic lesions that occur in Burkitt's lymphoma,
besides the pathognomonic IG-MYC translocations, is limited.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Thirty-nine molecularly-defined Burkitt's lymphomas were
analyzed with high-resolution single-nucleotide polymorphism chips for genomic
imbalances and uniparental disomy. Imbalances were correlated to expression
profiles and selected micro-RNA analysis. Translocations affecting the MYC locus 
were studied by fluorescence in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: We detected 528 copy number changes, defining 29 recurrently imbalanced 
regions. Five hundred and eighteen regions of uniparental disomy were found, but 
these were rarely recurrent. Combined imbalance mapping and expression profiling 
revealed a strong correlation between copy number and expression. Several
recurrent imbalances affected the MYC pathway: the micro-RNA-supercluster 17-92
was frequently gained and the transcription factor E2F2 was recurrently deleted. 
Molecular Burkitt's lymphoma lacking MYC translocations showed MYC gains.
Amplifications of the polymerase iota gene were associated with increased
frequency of positions scored as aberrant.
CONCLUSIONS: The present findings suggest that uniparental disomies do not play a
major role in the pathogenesis of Burkitt's lymphoma, whereas some genes may
contribute to the development of this lymphoma through gene dosage effects.
Amplifications of the polymerase iota gene may be functionally linked with
increased genomic alterations in Burkitt's lymphoma. The pattern and rarity of
chromosomal changes detectable, even at the high resolution employed here,
together with aberrations of genes regulating MYC activity, support the
hypothesis that deregulation of the MYC pathway is the major force driving the
pathogenesis of Burkitt's lymphoma, but show that this deregulation is more
complex than previously known.

PMCID: PMC2995562
PMID: 20823134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Oncogene. 2010 Oct 14;29(41):5579-90. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.296. Epub 2010 Aug 2.

Accelerated DNA replication in E2F1- and E2F2-deficient macrophages leads to
induction of the DNA damage response and p21(CIP1)-dependent senescence.

Iglesias-Ara A(1), Zenarruzabeitia O, Fernandez-Rueda J, Sánchez-Tilló E, Field
SJ, Celada A, Zubiaga AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of the Basque Country, Leioa, Bilbao,
Spain.

E2F1-3 proteins appear to have distinct roles in progenitor cells and in
differentiating cells undergoing cell cycle exit. However, the function of these 
proteins in paradigms of terminal differentiation that involve continued cell
division has not been examined. Using compound E2F1/E2F2-deficient mice, we have 
examined the effects of E2F1 and E2F2 loss on the differentiation and
simultaneous proliferation of bone-marrow-derived cells toward the macrophage
lineage. We show that E2F1/E2F2 deficiency results in accelerated DNA replication
and cellular division during the initial cell division cycles of
bone-marrow-derived cells, arguing that E2F1/E2F2 are required to restrain
proliferation of pro-monocyte progenitors during their differentiation into
macrophages, without promoting their cell cycle exit. Accelerated proliferation
is accompanied by early expression of DNA replication and cell cycle regulators. 
Remarkably, rapid proliferation of E2F1/E2F2 compound mutant cultures is
temporally followed by induction of a DNA damage response and the implementation 
of a p21(CIP1)-dependent senescence. We further show that differentiating
E2F1/E2F2-knockout macrophages do not trigger a DNA damage response pathway in
the absence of DNA replication. These findings underscore the relevance of E2F1
and E2F2 as suppressors of hematopoietic progenitor expansion. Our data indicate 
that their absence in differentiating macrophages initiates a senescence program 
that results from enforcement of a DNA damage response triggered by DNA
hyper-replication.

PMID: 20676136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Dev Biol. 2010 Oct 1;346(1):80-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.07.023. Epub 2010 Jul
24.

E2F1 and E2F2 have opposite effects on radiation-induced p53-independent
apoptosis in Drosophila.

Wichmann A(1), Uyetake L, Su TT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado, Boulder, CO 80209-0347, USA.

The ability of ionizing radiation (IR) to induce apoptosis independent of p53 is 
crucial for successful therapy of cancers bearing p53 mutations. p53-independent 
apoptosis, however, remains poorly understood relative to p53-dependent
apoptosis. IR induces both p53-dependent and p53-independent apoptoses in
Drosophila melanogaster, making studies of both modes of cell death possible in a
genetically tractable model. Previous studies have found that Drosophila E2F
proteins are generally pro-death or neutral with regard to p53-dependent
apoptosis. We report here that dE2F1 promotes IR-induced p53-independent
apoptosis in larval imaginal discs. Using transcriptional reporters, we provide
evidence that, when p53 is mutated, dE2F1 becomes necessary for the
transcriptional induction of the pro-apoptotic gene hid after irradiation. In
contrast, the second E2F homolog, dE2F2, as well as the net E2F activity, which
can be depleted by mutating the common cofactor, dDp, is inhibitory for
p53-independent apoptosis. We conclude that p53-dependent and p53-independent
apoptoses show differential reliance on E2F activity in Drosophila.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2937093
PMID: 20659447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Thyroid. 2010 Oct;20(10):1053-65. doi: 10.1089/thy.2010.0006.

Effects of silencing RET/PTC1 junction oncogene in human papillary thyroid
carcinoma cells.

Gilbert-Sirieix M(1), Ripoche H, Malvy C, Massaad-Massade L.

Author information: 
(1)UMR8203 CNRS, Institut Gustave Roussy, 114 rue Edouard Vaillant, Villejuif
Cedex, France.

Comment in
    Thyroid. 2010 Oct;20(10):1049-50.

BACKGROUND: RET/PTC1 rearrangement is the most common genetic alteration
identified to date in papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC) and represents an
interesting target for small interfering RNA (siRNA) strategies because it is
present only in the tumor cells and not in the normal cells. Our aims were (i) to
target the RET/PTC1 oncogene by siRNAs, (ii) to assess the knockdown effects on
cell growth and cell cycle regulation, and (iii) to identify genes affected by
the RET/PTC1 silencing.
METHODS: Three efficient siRNAs previously designed in our laboratory in a model 
of murine PTC (RP-1 cells) were used to knockdown RET/PTC1 in the TPC-1 cells. By
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and quantitative RT-PCR 
(Q-RT-PCR) they were found unable to silence RET/PTC1. After sequencing, we
redesigned an siRNA against RET/PTC1 (siRNARET/PTC1) and compared it for its
efficiency and specificity with an siRNA against RET (siRNARET) in the TPC-1
cells, in human cell lines that expressed RET (MCF-7 and BT-474 cells), and in
the murine RP-1 cells. The effects on cell cycle growth (MTT tests), cell cycle
(flow cytometry), and apoptosis (TUNEL method) were studied. Genes affected by
the RET/PTC1 knockdown were identified by microarray analysis followed by
Q-RT-PCR validation.
RESULTS: A mutation was found by sequencing within the H4 part of the RET/PTC1
junction leading to a ²<U+2079>7T<U+2192>G substitution. The redesigned siRNARET/PTC1 inhibits 
about 85% of the oncogene expression in the human TCP-1 cells. The specificity of
the siRNARET/PTC1 was confirmed by the absence of a silencing effect on the human
breast MCF-7 and BT-474 cells without RET/PTC1 and the murine RP-1 with ²<U+2079>7G<U+2192>T
mutation. The downregulation of RET/PTC1 modified the cell cycle and induced an
apoptotic response. Microarray analysis revealed an inhibition of E2F2
transcription factor known to be involved in the cell cycle regulation.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows the impact of a point mutation within a junction
oncogene on the siRNA design. In the case of a therapeutic approach by siRNA, the
junction oncogene must be systematically sequenced. The E2F2 gene regulation
would have a biological significance and seems to be directly mediated by
RET/PTC1.

PMID: 20615140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jul 30;398(3):565-70. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.06.119. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

The NSD3L histone methyltransferase regulates cell cycle and cell invasion in
breast cancer cells.

Zhou Z(1), Thomsen R, Kahns S, Nielsen AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark.

NSD3/WHSC1L1 histone methyltransferase gene aberrations are observed in leukemia 
and in breast and lung carcinomas, suggesting that NSD3 is implicated in
carcinogenesis. In this study we examined in human breast cancer cells the NSD3L 
isoform which contains the catalytic histone methyltransferase SET-domain. siRNA 
directed depletion of NSD3L followed by genome-wide microarray analysis
identified NSD3L regulated genes which could be functionally linked to cellular
signaling pathways such as cell growth, cell cycle, cell motility, transcription,
and apoptosis. Notably up-regulated genes are the cell cycle regulators E2F2 and 
Arl2. In accordance with a function of NSD3L in cell cycle regulation NSD3L
depletion resulted in an increase in the number of cells in the S and G2/M cell
cycle phases. Moreover, NSD3L depletion increased the invasiveness of MDA-MB-231 
breast cancer cells indicating that NSD3L normally restrain cellular metastatic
potential. Together the presented data indicates that NSD3L is a candidate tumor 
suppressor.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20599755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Sci China Life Sci. 2010 Feb;53(2):234-40. doi: 10.1007/s11427-010-0039-y. Epub
2010 Mar 7.

Exploring the structural and functional effect of pRB by significant nsSNP in the
coding region of RB1 gene causing retinoblastoma.

Rajasekaran R(1), Sethumadhavan R.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Division, School of Biotechnology, Chemical and Biomedical
Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, 632014, Tamil Nadu, India.

In this study, we identified the most deleterious nsSNP in RB1 gene through
structural and functional properties of its protein (pRB) and investigated its
binding affinity with E2F-2. Out of 956 SNPs, we investigated 12 nsSNPs in coding
region in which three of them (SNPids rs3092895, rs3092903 and rs3092905) are
commonly found to be damaged by I-Mutant 2.0, SIFT and PolyPhen programs. With
this effort, we modeled the mutant pRB proteins based on these deleterious
nsSNPs. From a comparison of total energy, stabilizing residues and RMSD of these
three mutant proteins with native pRB protein, we identified that the major
mutation is from Glutamic acid to Glycine at the residue position of 746 of pRB. 
Further, we compared the binding efficiency of both native and mutant pRB (E746G)
with E2F-2. We found that mutant pRB has less binding affinity with E2F-2 as
compared to native type. This is due to sixteen hydrogen bonding and two salt
bridges that exist between native type and E2F-2, whereas mutant type makes only 
thirteen hydrogen bonds and one salt bridge with E2F-2. Based on our
investigation, we propose that the SNP with an id rs3092905 could be the most
deleterious nsSNP in RB1 gene causing retinoblastoma.

PMID: 20596833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2010 Oct;9(10):2184-94. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M110.001263. Epub
2010 Jun 23.

Differential proteomics analysis reveals a role for E2F2 in the regulation of the
Ahr pathway in T lymphocytes.

Azkargorta M(1), Fullaondo A, Laresgoiti U, Aloria K, Infante A, Arizmendi JM,
Zubiaga AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of the Basque
Country, UPV/EHU, 48940 Leioa, Spain.

E2F transcription factors (E2F1-8) are best known for their role in cell
proliferation, although it is clear that they regulate many other biological
processes through the transcriptional modulation of distinct target genes.
However, the specific set of genes regulated by each E2F remains to be
characterized. To gain insight into the molecular pathways regulated by E2F2, we 
have analyzed the proteome of antigen receptor-activated T cells lacking E2F2. We
report that loss of E2F2 results in a deregulated Aryl-hydrocarbon-receptor
pathway. Proliferating E2F2(-/-) T lymphocytes expressed significantly higher
levels of Aip, Ahr, and Arnt relative to wild-type (WT)(1) controls. The
mechanism for increased levels of Aip appears straightforward, involving direct
regulation of the Aip gene promoter by E2F2. Although the Ahr and Arnt promoters 
also bind E2F2, their regulation appears to be more complex. Nevertheless,
exposure to the environmental xenobiotic 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD), a well-known exogenous ligand of the Ahr pathway, led to overexpression
of the Ahr target gene Cyp1a1, and to increased sensitivity to TCDD-triggered
apoptosis in E2F2(-/-) T cells compared with WT controls. These results suggest
that E2F2 modulates cellular sensitivity to xenobiotic signals through the
negative regulation of the Ahr pathway.

PMCID: PMC2953915
PMID: 20573986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cancer Res. 2010 Jun 1;70(11):4613-23. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3551. Epub
2010 May 11.

E2F3a is critically involved in epidermal growth factor receptor-directed
proliferation in ovarian cancer.

Reimer D(1), Hubalek M, Riedle S, Skvortsov S, Erdel M, Concin N, Fiegl H,
Müller-Holzner E, Marth C, Illmensee K, Altevogt P, Zeimet AG.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Radiotherapy, Innsbruck Medical
University, Innsbruck, Austria.

We describe for the first time a new integral molecular pathway, linking
transcription factor E2F3a to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation 
in ovarian cancer cells. Investigations on the role of E2F family members in
EGFR-mediated mitogenic signaling revealed that E2F3a was selectively upregulated
following EGFR activation, whereas all other E2F family members remained
unaffected. In contrast, EGF treatment of healthy ovarian surface epithelial and 
mesothelial cells yielded a selective upregulation of proliferation-promoting
E2F1 and E2F2 without influencing E2F3a expression. In ovarian cancer cell lines,
the extent of EGF-induced proliferative stimulus was closely related to the
magnitude of E2F3a increase, and proliferation inhibition by E2F3a knockdown was 
not overcome by EGF exposure. Furthermore, the EGFR-E2F3a axis was found to be
signal transducer and activator of transcription 1/3 dependent and the ratio of
IFN-regulatory factor (IRF)-1 to IRF-2 was shown to be determinative for E2F3a
control. In a pilot study on 32 primary ovarian cancer specimens, a highly
significant correlation between activated EGFR and E2F3a expression was
disclosed. This new integral pathway in the EGFR-driven mitogenic cell response, 
which through its key player E2F3a was found to be essential in triggering
proliferation in ovarian cancer cells, provides new insights into EGFR signaling 
and could represent the basis for appealing new therapeutic approaches in ovarian
cancer.

Copyright 2010 AACR.

PMID: 20460525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Jun 1;28(16):2660-7. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.25.0977. Epub 2010 
Apr 26.

Expression signature of E2F1 and its associated genes predict superficial to
invasive progression of bladder tumors.

Lee JS(1), Leem SH, Lee SY, Kim SC, Park ES, Kim SB, Kim SK, Kim YJ, Kim WJ, Chu 
IS.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2011 Feb;185(2):469-70.

PURPOSE: In approximately 20% of patients with superficial bladder tumors, the
tumors progress to invasive tumors after treatment. Current methods of predicting
the clinical behavior of these tumors prospectively are unreliable. We aim to
identify a molecular signature that can reliably identify patients with high-risk
superficial tumors that are likely to progress to invasive tumors.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Gene expression data were collected from tumor specimens
from 165 patients with bladder cancer. Various statistical methods, including
leave-one-out cross-validation methods, were applied to identify a gene
expression signature that could predict the likelihood of progression to invasive
tumors and to test the robustness of the expression signature in an independent
cohort. The robustness of the gene expression signature was validated in an
independent (n = 353) cohort.
RESULTS: Supervised analysis of gene expression data revealed a gene expression
signature that is strongly associated with invasive bladder tumors. A molecular
classifier based on this gene expression signature correctly predicted the
likelihood of progression of superficial tumor to invasive tumor.
CONCLUSION: We present a molecular signature that can predict, at diagnosis, the 
likelihood of bladder cancer progression and, possibly, lead to improvements in
patient therapy.

PMID: 20421545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 14;5(4):e10147. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010147.

MicroRNA let-7a inhibits proliferation of human prostate cancer cells in vitro
and in vivo by targeting E2F2 and CCND2.

Dong Q(1), Meng P, Wang T, Qin W, Qin W, Wang F, Yuan J, Chen Z, Yang A, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an, China. dongqc168@yahoo.com.cn

BACKGROUND: Previous work has shown reduced expression levels of let-7 in lung
tumors. But little is known about the expression or mechanisms of let-7a in
prostate cancer. In this study, we used in vitro and in vivo approaches to
investigate whether E2F2 and CCND2 are direct targets of let-7a, and if let-7a
acts as a tumor suppressor in prostate cancer by down-regulating E2F2 and CCND2.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL: Findings Real-time RT-PCR demonstrated that decreased
levels of let-7a are present in resected prostate cancer samples and prostate
cancer cell lines. Cellular proliferation was inhibited in PC3 cells and LNCaP
cells after transfection with let-7a. Cell cycle analysis showed that let-7a
induced cell cycle arrest at the G1/S phase. A dual-luciferase reporter assay
demonstrated that the 3'UTR of E2F2 and CCND2 were directly bound to let-7a and
western blotting analysis further indicated that let-7a down-regulated the
expression of E2F2 and CCND2. Our xenograft models of prostate cancer confirmed
the capability of let-7a to inhibit prostate tumor development in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These findings help to unravel the anti-proliferative
mechanisms of let-7a in prostate cancer. Let-7a may also be novel therapeutic
candidate for prostate cancer given its ability to induce cell-cycle arrest and
inhibit cell growth, especially in hormone-refractory prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2854685
PMID: 20418948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Virol. 2010 Jul;84(13):6308-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00321-10. Epub 2010 Apr 21.

Productive infection and bICP0 early promoter activity of bovine herpesvirus 1
are stimulated by E2F1.

Workman A(1), Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences and Nebraska Center for
Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln Fair Street at East Campus Loop,
Lincoln, NE 68583-0905, USA.

Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BoHV-1) is an important viral pathogen of cattle. Like
other members of the subfamily Alphaherpesvirinae, BoHV-1 establishes latency in 
sensory neurons and has the potential to reactivate from latency. Dexamethasone
(DEX) treatment of latently infected calves or rabbits consistently leads to
reactivation from latency. The BoHV-1 transcript encoding the infected cell
protein 0 (bICP0) is consistently detected during reactivation from latency, in
part because the bICP0 early promoter is activated by DEX. During DEX-induced
reactivation from latency, cyclin expression is stimulated in infected sensory
neurons. Cyclin-dependent kinase activity phosphorylates Rb (retinoblastoma tumor
suppressor gene product) family proteins and consequently releases the E2F family
of transcription factors, suggesting that E2F family members stimulate productive
infection and/or reactivation from latency. In this study, we provide evidence
that repression of E2F1 by a specific small interfering RNA (siRNA) reduced
productive infection approximately 5-fold. E2F1 or E2F2 stimulated bICP0 early
promoter activity at least 100-fold in transient transfection assays. Two
E2F-responsive regions (ERR) were identified within the early promoter, with one 
adjacent to the TATA box (ERR1) and one approximately 600 bp upstream from the
TATA box (ERR2). Mobility shift assays suggested that E2F interacts with ERR1 and
ERR2. E2F1 protein levels were increased at late times after infection, which
correlated with enhanced binding to a consensus E2F binding site, ERR1, or ERR2. 
Collectively, these studies suggest that E2F1 stimulates productive infection and
bICP0 early promoter activity, in part because E2F family members interact with
ERR1 and ERR2.

PMCID: PMC2903271
PMID: 20410283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jun;30(12):2983-95. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01372-09. Epub 2010 Apr 
19.

Multiple E2F-induced microRNAs prevent replicative stress in response to
mitogenic signaling.

Bueno MJ(1), Gómez de Cedrón M, Laresgoiti U, Fernández-Piqueras J, Zubiaga AM,
Malumbres M.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Division and Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre
(CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

Transcription of microRNAs (miRNAs) is thought to be regulated similarly to that 
of protein-coding genes. However, how miRNAs are regulated during the cell
division cycle is not well understood. We have analyzed the transcription
profiles of miRNAs in response to mitogenic stimulation in primary fibroblasts.
About 33% of the miRNAs expressed in these cells are induced upon exit from
quiescence. Many of these miRNAs are specifically induced by E2F1 or E2F3 during 
the G(1)/S transition and are repressed in E2F1/3-knockout cells. At least four
miRNA clusters, let-7a-d, let-7i, mir-15b-16-2, and mir-106b-25, are direct
targets of E2F1 and E2F3 during G(1)/S and are repressed in E2F1/3-null cells.
Interestingly, these miRNAs do not contribute to E2F-dependent entry into S phase
but rather inhibit the G(1)/S transition by targeting multiple cell cycle
regulators and E2F targets. In fact, E2F1 expression results in a significant
increase in S-phase entry and DNA damage in the absence of these microRNAs. Thus,
E2F-induced miRNAs contribute to limiting the cellular responses to E2F
activation, thus preventing replicative stress. Given the known function of E2F
of inducing other oncogenic miRNAs, control of miRNAs by E2F is likely to play
multiple roles in cell proliferation and in proliferative diseases such as
cancer.

PMCID: PMC2876680
PMID: 20404092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Mol Cancer. 2010 Mar 13;9:59. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-59.

Overexpression of the JmjC histone demethylase KDM5B in human carcinogenesis:
involvement in the proliferation of cancer cells through the E2F/RB pathway.

Hayami S(1), Yoshimatsu M, Veerakumarasivam A, Unoki M, Iwai Y, Tsunoda T, Field 
HI, Kelly JD, Neal DE, Yamaue H, Ponder BA, Nakamura Y, Hamamoto R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 108-8639,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Although an increasing number of histone demethylases have been
identified and biochemically characterized, their biological functions largely
remain uncharacterized, particularly in the context of human diseases such as
cancer. We investigated the role of KDM5B, a JmjC histone demethylase, in human
carcinogenesis. Quantitative RT-PCR and microarray analyses were used to examine 
the expression profiles of histone demethylases in clinical tissue samples. We
also examined the functional effects of KDM5B on the growth of cancer cell lines 
treated with small interfering RNAs (siRNAs). Downstream genes and signal
cascades induced by KDM5B expression were identified from Affymetrix Gene Chip
experiments, and validated by real-time PCR and reporter assays. Cell
cycle-dependent characteristics of KDM5B were identified by immunofluorescence
and FACS.
RESULTS: Quantitative RT-PCR analysis confirmed that expression levels of KDM5B
are significantly higher in human bladder cancer tissues than in their
corresponding non-neoplastic bladder tissues (P < 0.0001). The expression profile
analysis of clinical tissues also revealed up-regulation of KDM5B in various
kinds of malignancies. Transfection of KDM5B-specific siRNA into various bladder 
and lung cancer cell lines significantly suppressed the proliferation of cancer
cells and increased the number of cells in sub-G1 phase. Microarray expression
analysis indicated that E2F1 and E2F2 are downstream genes in the KDM5B pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of KDM5B may affect apoptosis and reduce growth of cancer
cells. Further studies will explore the pan-cancer therapeutic potential of KDM5B
inhibition.

PMCID: PMC2848192
PMID: 20226085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Circ Res. 2010 Apr 16;106(7):1202-11. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.213165. Epub
2010 Mar 11.

Histone deacetylase 7 controls endothelial cell growth through modulation of
beta-catenin.

Margariti A(1), Zampetaki A, Xiao Q, Zhou B, Karamariti E, Martin D, Yin X, Mayr 
M, Li H, Zhang Z, De Falco E, Hu Y, Cockerill G, Xu Q, Zeng L.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, King's College London British Heart Foundation
Centre, London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2010 Apr 16;106(7):1180-3.

RATIONALE: Histone deacetylase (HDAC)7 is expressed in the early stages of
embryonic development and may play a role in endothelial function.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the role of HDAC7 in endothelial cell 
(EC) proliferation and growth and the underlying mechanism.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Overexpression of HDAC7 by adenoviral gene transfer
suppressed human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) proliferation by
preventing nuclear translocation of beta-catenin and downregulation of T-cell
factor-1/Id2 (inhibitor of DNA binding 2) and cyclin D1, leading to G(1) phase
elongation. Further assays with the TOPFLASH reporter and quantitative RT-PCR for
other beta-catenin target genes such as Axin2 confirmed that overexpression of
HDAC7 decreased beta-catenin activity. Knockdown of HDAC7 by lentiviral short
hairpin RNA transfer induced beta-catenin nuclear translocation but downregulated
cyclin D1, cyclin E1 and E2F2, causing HUVEC hypertrophy. Immunoprecipitation
assay and mass spectrometry analysis revealed that HDAC7 directly binds to
beta-catenin and forms a complex with 14-3-3 epsilon, zeta, and eta proteins.
Vascular endothelial growth factor treatment induced HDAC7 degradation via
PLCgamma-IP3K (phospholipase Cgamma-inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate kinase) signal
pathway and partially rescued HDAC7-mediated suppression of proliferation.
Moreover, vascular endothelial growth factor stimulation suppressed the binding
of HDAC7 with beta-catenin, disrupting the complex and releasing beta-catenin to 
translocate into the nucleus.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that HDAC7 interacts with beta-catenin
keeping ECs in a low proliferation stage and provides a novel insight into the
mechanism of HDAC7-mediated signal pathways leading to endothelial growth.

PMID: 20224040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Autoimmunity. 2010 Mar;43(2):111-20. doi: 10.3109/08916930903214033.

The combined effect of BCL-2 over-expression and E2F2 deficiency induces an
autoimmune syndrome in non-susceptible mouse strain C57BL/6.

Marín-Vidalled MJ(1), Bolívar A, Zubiaga A, López-Hoyos M.

Author information: 
(1)Marqués de Valdecilla Hospital, Santander, Spain.

Multiple evidences support the notion that cell-cycle deregulation or apoptosis
alterations can lead to autoimmune syndrome (AIS). Inactivation of the cell-cycle
regulator E2F2 or over-expression of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein induces
spontaneously an AIS in certain mouse strains. In the present study, we have
examined the contribution of the genetic background on the development of
autoimmunity after E2F2 gene inactivation, and the effect that a simultaneous
inactivation of the E2F2 gene and over-expression of the Bcl-2 gene in B cells
has on lymphoid homeostasis and autoimmunity. We show that E2F2(- / - ) mice
carrying wild-type levels of Bcl-2 do not develop AIS when they are in a
non-pro-autoimmune background (C57BL/6). However, mice harboring both genetic
alterations concomitantly develop late AIS characterized by the presence of serum
anti-nuclear antibodies, double and single strand anti-DNA antibodies, and the
development of a mild glomerulonephritis with mesangial immunoglobulins, mainly
IgA, deposits. These results suggest that alterations in cell-cycle and cell
survival are critical contributing factors for the development of autoimmunity.

PMID: 20187704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Cancer Res. 2010 Mar 1;70(5):1906-15. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3875. Epub
2010 Feb 23.

Molecular profiling uncovers a p53-associated role for microRNA-31 in inhibiting 
the proliferation of serous ovarian carcinomas and other cancers.

Creighton CJ(1), Fountain MD, Yu Z, Nagaraja AK, Zhu H, Khan M, Olokpa E, Zariff 
A, Gunaratne PH, Matzuk MM, Anderson ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNA) regulate complex patterns of gene expression, and the relevance
of altered miRNA expression to ovarian cancer remains to be elucidated. By
comprehensively profiling expression of miRNAs and mRNAs in serous ovarian tumors
and cell lines and normal ovarian surface epithelium, we identified hundreds of
potential miRNA-mRNA targeting associations underlying cancer. Functional
overexpression of miR-31, the most underexpressed miRNA in serous ovarian cancer,
repressed predicted miR-31 gene targets including the cell cycle regulator E2F2. 
MIR31 and CDKN2A, which encode p14(ARF) and p16(INK4A), are located at 9p21.3, a 
genomic region commonly deleted in ovarian and other cancers. p14(ARF) promotes
p53 activity, and E2F2 overexpression in p53 wild-type cells normally leads via
p14(ARF) to an induction of p53-dependent apoptosis. In a number of serous cancer
cell lines with a dysfunctional p53 pathway (i.e., OVCAR8, OVCA433, and SKOV3),
miR-31 overexpression inhibited proliferation and induced apoptosis; however, in 
other lines (i.e., HEY and OVSAYO) with functional p53, miR-31 had no effect.
Additionally, the osteosarcoma cell line U2OS and the prostate cancer cell line
PC3 (p14(ARF)-deficient and p53-deficient, respectively) were also sensitive to
miR-31. Furthermore, miR-31 overexpression induced a global gene expression
pattern in OVCAR8 associated with better prognosis in tumors from patients with
advanced stage serous ovarian cancer, potentially affecting many genes underlying
disease progression. Our findings reveal that loss of miR-31 is associated with
defects in the p53 pathway and functions in serous ovarian cancer and other
cancers, suggesting that patients with cancers deficient in p53 activity might
benefit from therapeutic delivery of miR-31.

PMCID: PMC2831102
PMID: 20179198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Stem Cells Dev. 2010 Oct;19(10):1501-10. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0492.

Identification of a common gene expression signature associated with immature
clonal mesenchymal cell populations derived from bone marrow and dental tissues.

Menicanin D(1), Bartold PM, Zannettino AC, Gronthos S.

Author information: 
(1)Mesenchymal Stem Cell Group, Division of Haematology, Institute of Medical and
Veterinary Science/Hanson Institute/Centre for Stem Cell Research, Robinson
Institute, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.

Mesenchymal stem/stromal cell-like populations derived from adult bone marrow
(BMSC), dental pulp (DPSC), and periodontal ligament (PDLSC) have the ability to 
differentiate into cells of mesenchymal and non-mesenchymal tissues in vitro and 
in vivo. However, culture-expanded MSC-like populations are a heterogeneous mix
of stem/committed progenitor cells that exhibit altered growth and developmental 
potentials. In the present study we isolated and characterized clonal populations
of BMSCs, DPSCs, and PDLSCs to identify potential biomarkers associated with
long-lived multipotential stem cells. Microarray analysis was used to compare the
global gene expression profiles of high growth/multipotential clones with low
growth potential cell clones derived from 3 stromal tissues. Cross-comparison
analyses of genes expressed by high growth/multipotential clones derived from
bone marrow, dental pulp, and periodontal ligament identified 24 genes that are
differentially up-regulated in all tissues. Notably, the transcription factors,
E2F2, PTTG1, TWIST-1, and transcriptional cofactor, LDB2, each with critical
roles in cell growth and survival, were highly expressed in all stem cell
populations examined. These findings provide a model system for identifying a
common molecular fingerprint associated with immature mesenchymal stem-like cells
from different organs and implicate a potential role for these genes in MSC
growth and development.

PMID: 20128661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Genet Mol Biol. 2010 Jan;33(1):17-22. doi: 10.1590/S1415-47572009005000104. Epub 
2010 Mar 1.

Knockdown of E2f1 by RNA interference impairs proliferation of rat cells in
vitro.

Dos Reis Vasques L(1), Pujiz RS, Strauss BE, Krieger JE.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto do Coração, Escola de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São
Paulo, SP Brazil.

E2F1 plays a key role in cell-cycle regulation in mammals, since its
transcription factor activity controls genes required for DNA synthesis and
apoptosis. E2F1 deregulation is a common feature among different tumor types and 
can be a major cause of cell proliferation. Thus, blocking E2F1 expression by RNA
interference represents a promising therapeutic approach. In this study, the
introduction of specific short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) reduced E2f1 expression by
up to 77%, and impaired rat glioma cell proliferation by approximately 70%, as
compared to control cells. Furthermore, we investigated the expression of E2f1
target genes, Cyclin A and Cyclin E. Cyclin A was found to be down-regulated,
whereas Cyclin E had similar expression to control cells, indicating that gene(s)
other than E2f1 control its transcription. Other E2f family members, E2f2 and
E2f3, which have been classified in the same subgroup of transcriptional
activators, were also analyzed. Expression of both E2f2 and E2f3 was similar to
control cells, showing no cross-inactivation or up-regulation to compensate for
the absence of E2f1. Nevertheless, their expression was insufficient to maintain 
the initial proliferation potential. Taken together, our results suggest that
shE2f1 is a promising therapy to control tumor cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3036082
PMID: 21637599  [PubMed]


135. Nature. 2009 Dec 17;462(7275):930-4. doi: 10.1038/nature08677.

E2f1-3 switch from activators in progenitor cells to repressors in
differentiating cells.

Chong JL(1), Wenzel PL, Sáenz-Robles MT, Nair V, Ferrey A, Hagan JP, Gomez YM,
Sharma N, Chen HZ, Ouseph M, Wang SH, Trikha P, Culp B, Mezache L, Winton DJ,
Sansom OJ, Chen D, Bremner R, Cantalupo PG, Robinson ML, Pipas JM, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, College of 
Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

In the established model of mammalian cell cycle control, the retinoblastoma
protein (Rb) functions to restrict cells from entering S phase by binding and
sequestering E2f activators (E2f1, E2f2 and E2f3), which are invariably portrayed
as the ultimate effectors of a transcriptional program that commit cells to enter
and progress through S phase. Using a panel of tissue-specific cre-transgenic
mice and conditional E2f alleles we examined the effects of E2f1, E2f2 and E2f3
triple deficiency in murine embryonic stem cells, embryos and small intestines.
We show that in normal dividing progenitor cells E2f1-3 function as
transcriptional activators, but contrary to the current view, are dispensable for
cell division and instead are necessary for cell survival. In differentiating
cells E2f1-3 function in a complex with Rb as repressors to silence E2f targets
and facilitate exit from the cell cycle. The inactivation of Rb in
differentiating cells resulted in a switch of E2f1-3 from repressors to
activators, leading to the superactivation of E2f responsive targets and ectopic 
cell divisions. Loss of E2f1-3 completely suppressed these phenotypes caused by
Rb deficiency. This work contextualizes the activator versus repressor functions 
of E2f1-3 in vivo, revealing distinct roles in dividing versus differentiating
cells and in normal versus cancer-like cell cycles.

PMCID: PMC2806193
PMID: 20016602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Nature. 2009 Dec 17;462(7275):925-9. doi: 10.1038/nature08544.

Division and apoptosis of E2f-deficient retinal progenitors.

Chen D(1), Pacal M, Wenzel P, Knoepfler PS, Leone G, Bremner R.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Western Research Institute, University Health Network, Department of
Ophthalmology, and Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Ontario M5T 2S8, Canada.

The activating E2f transcription factors (E2f1, E2f2 and E2f3) induce
transcription and are widely viewed as essential positive cell cycle regulators. 
Indeed, they drive cells out of quiescence, and the 'cancer cell cycle' in Rb1
null cells is E2f-dependent. Absence of activating E2fs in flies or mammalian
fibroblasts causes cell cycle arrest, but this block is alleviated by removing
repressive E2f or the tumour suppressor p53, respectively. Thus, whether
activating E2fs are indispensable for normal division is an area of debate.
Activating E2fs are also well known pro-apoptotic factors, providing a defence
against oncogenesis, yet E2f1 can limit irradiation-induced apoptosis. In flies
this occurs through repression of hid (also called Wrinkled; Smac/Diablo in
mammals). However, in mammals the mechanism is unclear because Smac/Diablo is
induced, not repressed, by E2f1, and in keratinocytes survival is promoted
indirectly through induction of DNA repair targets. Thus, a direct pro-survival
function for E2f1-3 and/or its relevance beyond irradiation has not been
established. To address E2f1-3 function in normal cells in vivo we focused on the
mouse retina, which is a relatively simple central nervous system component that 
can be manipulated genetically without compromising viability and has provided
considerable insight into development and cancer. Here we show that unlike
fibroblasts, E2f1-3 null retinal progenitor cells or activated Müller glia can
divide. We attribute this effect to functional interchangeability with Mycn.
However, loss of activating E2fs caused downregulation of the p53 deacetylase
Sirt1, p53 hyperacetylation and elevated apoptosis, establishing a novel
E2f-Sirt1-p53 survival axis in vivo. Thus, activating E2fs are not universally
required for normal mammalian cell division, but have an unexpected pro-survival 
role in development.

PMCID: PMC2813224
PMID: 20016601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Apr 1;86(1):92-102. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvp383. Epub 2009 Dec
2.

E2F4 is required for cardiomyocyte proliferation.

van Amerongen MJ(1), Diehl F, Novoyatleva T, Patra C, Engel FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Development and Remodelling, Excellence Cluster
Cardio-Pulmonary System, Max-Planck-Institute for Heart and Lung Research,
Parkstrasse 1, Bad Nauheim 61231, Germany.

AIMS: Although the fundamental role of the E2F transcription factor family in
cell proliferation is well established, the specific function of E2F4 is unclear.
On the basis of findings from cell culture experiments, E2F4 is generally
considered as an inhibitor of cell proliferation. Accumulating evidence suggests,
however, that E2F4 acts as an activator of cell proliferation in certain
contexts. Here, we have investigated the role of E2F4 during heart development
and in proliferating cardiomyocytes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Nuclear E2F4 expression in cardiomyocytes declined during
mouse heart development, which correlates with the loss of proliferative capacity
of cardiomyocytes. Re-induction of proliferation in postnatal cardiomyocytes
increased nuclear E2F4 expression. E2F4 accumulated in the nucleus at the end of 
the S phase, remained nuclear during mitosis, and disappeared at the end of
cytokinesis. siRNA-mediated inhibition of E2F4 in proliferating postnatal
cardiomyocytes resulted in a significant reduction in mitosis, but not in DNA
synthesis. Co-staining of E2F4 and Crest revealed that E2F4 co-localizes with
kinetochores. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation showed that E2F4 binds to
centromeric alpha-satellite DNA during mitosis.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that E2F4 is required for cardiomyocyte
proliferation and suggest a function for E2F4 in mitosis.

PMID: 19955219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jan;30(2):524-36. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00938-09. Epub 2009 Nov
16.

E2F3 is a mediator of DNA damage-induced apoptosis.

Martinez LA(1), Goluszko E, Chen HZ, Leone G, Post S, Lozano G, Chen Z,
Chauchereau A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Mississippi Medical Center, 2500
North State Street, Jackson, MS 39216, USA. lmartinez@biochem.umsmed.edu

The E2F transcription factors have emerged as critical apoptotic effectors.
Herein we report that the E2F family member E2F3a can be induced by DNA damage
through transcriptional and posttranslational mechanisms. We demonstrate that the
posttranslational induction of human E2F3a is dependent on the checkpoint
kinases. Moreover, we show that human E2F3a is a substrate for the checkpoint
kinases (chk kinases) and that mutation of the chk phosphorylation site
eliminates the DNA damage inducibility of the protein. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that E2F1 and E2F2 are transcriptionally induced by DNA damage in an 
E2f3-dependent manner. Finally, using both in vitro and in vivo approaches, we
establish that E2f3 is required for DNA damage-induced apoptosis. Thus, our data 
reveal the novel ability of E2f3 to function as a master regulator of the DNA
damage response.

PMCID: PMC2798461
PMID: 19917728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Ann Surg Oncol. 2010 Feb;17(2):564-71. doi: 10.1245/s10434-009-0767-z. Epub 2009 
Oct 20.

E2F1 expression predicts outcome in Korean women who undergo surgery for breast
carcinoma.

Kwon MJ(1), Nam ES, Cho SJ, Park HR, Shin HS, Park JH, Park CH, Lee WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kangdong Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University
Medical College, Seoul, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: The transcriptional factors E2F1 and E2F2 have been reported to be
associated with improved chemosensitivity in various cancers. We aimed to
investigate whether E2F1 and E2F2 can be used as predictors of chemosensitivity
in hormone-receptor-negative breast cancers (HRNBCs), which are common in Korean 
women.
METHODS: A total of 183 patients with primary breast cancer who had undergone
surgical resection were evaluated on the basis of hormonal status, age,
histological subtype and grade, tumor size, lymph node metastasis, and stage. The
immunohistochemical expressions of E2F1 and E2F2 were analyzed for these
histopathological data and patient survival.
RESULTS: E2F1 expression was associated with low histological grade (grade 1) and
larger tumor size (>2 cm), while E2F2 expression was correlated only with large
tumor size (>2 cm). The E2F1-positive group had less tumor recurrences, lymph
node metastases during follow-up, and distant metastases than the E2F1-negative
group; E2F1 expression was found to be an independent predictive factor of more
favorable survival among HRNBC patients on univariate and multivariate analyses, 
but E2F2 expression was not.
CONCLUSIONS: E2F1 may be a potential prognostic and predictive factor for
clinical outcome and therapeutic results following adjuvant chemotherapy in HRNBC
patients.

PMID: 19841979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mol Carcinog. 2010 Feb;49(2):152-6. doi: 10.1002/mc.20584.

E2F2 suppresses Myc-induced proliferation and tumorigenesis.

Pusapati RV(1), Weaks RL, Rounbehler RJ, McArthur MJ, Johnson DG.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Science Park Research
Division, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

Deregulation of E2F transcriptional activity as a result of alterations in the
p16-cyclin D-Rb pathway is a hallmark of cancer. However, the roles of the
different E2F family members in the process of tumorigenesis are still being
elucidated. Studies in mice and humans suggest that E2F2 functions as a tumor
suppressor. Here we demonstrate that E2f2 inactivation cooperates with transgenic
expression of Myc to enhance tumor development in the skin and oral cavity. In
fact, hemizygosity at the E2f2 locus was sufficient to increase tumor incidence
in this model. Loss of E2F2 enhanced proliferation in Myc transgenic tissue but
did not affect Myc-induced apoptosis. E2F2 did not behave as a simple activator
of transcription in epidermal keratinocytes but instead appeared to
differentially regulate gene expression dependent on the individual target. E2f2 
inactivation also altered the changes in gene expression in Myc transgenic cells 
by enhancing the increase of some genes, such as cyclin E, and reversing the
repression of other genes. These findings demonstrate that E2F2 can function as a
tumor suppressor in epithelial tissues, perhaps by limiting proliferation in
response to Myc.

PMCID: PMC2813383
PMID: 19798698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Prostate. 2010 Feb 1;70(2):135-46. doi: 10.1002/pros.21045.

PTEN-mediated G1 cell-cycle arrest in LNCaP prostate cancer cells is associated
with altered expression of cell-cycle regulators.

van Duijn PW(1), Ziel-van der Made AC, van der Korput JA, Trapman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The tumor suppressor PTEN regulates many biological processes. A
well-known downstream effector of PTEN is phospho-Akt. Although PTEN is the most 
frequently inactivated gene in prostate cancer, its mode of action is not fully
understood. We studied the association of regulated PTEN expression with changes 
in biological function and gene expression profiles.
METHODS: PTEN-negative LNCaP cells were stably transfected with wild-type PTEN
cDNA under inducible control, resulting in LNCaP/PTEN cells. Microarray analysis 
was used to monitor gene expression changes upon induction of PTEN. Expression of
selected individual genes was studied in Q-PCR and siRNA experiments. Cell-cycle 
distribution was analyzed by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Induced expression of PTEN in LNCaP/PTEN cells significantly inhibited
cell proliferation, at least partly due to cell-cycle arrest at the G1 phase.
Expression profiling combined with pathway analysis revealed that PTEN-dependent 
G1 growth arrest was associated with an altered mRNA expression of the G1
cell-cycle regulators Cdc25a, E2F2, cyclin G2, and RBL2/p130. Specific inhibition
of Akt signaling by siRNA resulted in downregulation of both E2F2 and Cdc25a mRNA
expression and upregulation of the FOXO target cyclin G2, similar to the effect
observed by PTEN induction. However, Akt did not mediate the PTEN-dependent
RBL2/p130 mRNA expression in LNCaP/PTEN cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that PTEN dependent gene expression is
important in cell-cycle regulation and is mediated by both Akt-dependent and
-independent mechanisms.

PMID: 19784964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Circulation. 2009 Sep 29;120(13):1213-21. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.859207.
Epub 2009 Sep 14.

Regulation of vascular contractility and blood pressure by the E2F2 transcription
factor.

Zhou J(1), Zhu Y, Cheng M, Dinesh D, Thorne T, Poh KK, Liu D, Botros C, Tang YL, 
Reisdorph N, Kishore R, Losordo DW, Qin G.

Author information: 
(1)Assistant Professor, Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Northwestern 
University, 303 E Chicago Ave, Tarry 14-751, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have identified a polymorphism in the
endothelin-converting enzyme (ECE)-1b promoter (-338C/A) that is strongly
associated with hypertension in women. The polymorphism is located in a consensus
binding sequence for the E2F family of transcription factors. E2F proteins are
crucially involved in cell-cycle regulation, but their roles in cardiovascular
function are poorly understood. Here, we investigated the potential role of E2F2 
in blood pressure regulation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Tail-cuff measurements of systolic and diastolic blood
pressures were significantly higher in E2F2-null (E2F2(-/-)) mice than in their
wild-type littermates, and in ex vivo ring assays, aortas from the E2F2(-/-) mice
exhibited significantly greater contractility in response to big endothelin-1.
Big endothelin-1 is activated by ECE-1, and mRNA levels of ECE-1b, the repressive
ECE-1 isoform, were significantly lower in E2F2(-/-) mice than in wild-type mice.
In endothelial cells, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed that E2F2
binds the ECE-1b promoter, and promoter-reporter assays indicated that E2F2
activates ECE-1b transcription. Furthermore, loss or downregulation of E2F2 led
to a decline in ECE-1b levels, to higher levels of the membranous ECE-1 isoforms 
(ie, ECE-1a, -1c, and -1d), and to deregulated ECE-1 activity. Finally, Sam68
coimmunoprecipitated with E2F2, occupied the ECE-1b promoter (chromatin
immunoprecipitation), and repressed E2F2-mediated ECE-1b promoter activity
(promoter-reporter assays).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results identify a cell-cycle-independent mechanism by which
E2F2 regulates endothelial function, arterial contractility, and blood pressure.

PMCID: PMC2785027
PMID: 19752322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. PLoS Genet. 2009 Sep;5(9):e1000640. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000640. Epub 2009 
Sep 11.

A role for E2F activities in determining the fate of Myc-induced lymphomagenesis.

Rempel RE(1), Mori S, Gasparetto M, Glozak MA, Andrechek ER, Adler SB, Laakso NM,
Lagoo AS, Storms R, Smith C, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Department of Molecular
Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, United States of America.

The phenotypic heterogeneity that characterizes human cancers reflects the
enormous genetic complexity of the oncogenic process. This complexity can also be
seen in mouse models where it is frequently observed that in addition to the
initiating genetic alteration, the resulting tumor harbors additional,
somatically acquired mutations that affect the tumor phenotype. To investigate
the role of genetic interactions in the development of tumors, we have made use
of the Emu-myc model of pre-B and B cell lymphoma. Since various studies point to
a functional interaction between Myc and the Rb/E2F pathway, we have investigated
the role of E2F activities in the process of Myc-induced lymphomagenesis. Whereas
the absence of E2F1 and E2F3 function has no impact on Myc-mediated tumor
development, the absence of E2F2 substantially accelerates the time of tumor
onset. Conversely, tumor development is delayed by the absence of E2F4. The
enhanced early onset of tumors seen in the absence of E2F2 coincides with an
expansion of immature B lineage cells that are likely to be the target for Myc
oncogenesis. In contrast, the absence of E2F4 mutes the response of the lineage
to Myc and there is no expansion of immature B lineage cells. We also find that
distinct types of tumors emerge from the Emu-myc mice, distinguished by different
patterns of gene expression, and that the relative proportions of these tumor
types are affected by the absence of either E2F2 or E2F4. From these results, we 
conclude that there are several populations of tumors that arise from the Emu-myc
model, reflecting distinct populations of cells that are susceptible to
Myc-mediated oncogenesis and that the proportion of these cell populations is
affected by the presence or absence of E2F activities.

PMCID: PMC2729385
PMID: 19749980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Cell. 2009 Sep 11;35(5):610-25. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.08.020.

miR-24 Inhibits cell proliferation by targeting E2F2, MYC, and other cell-cycle
genes via binding to "seedless" 3'UTR microRNA recognition elements.

Lal A(1), Navarro F, Maher CA, Maliszewski LE, Yan N, O'Day E, Chowdhury D,
Dykxhoorn DM, Tsai P, Hofmann O, Becker KG, Gorospe M, Hide W, Lieberman J.

Author information: 
(1)Immune Disease Institute, Children's Hospital Boston, Department of
Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, MA 02115, USA. alal@idi.harvard.edu

miR-24, upregulated during terminal differentiation of multiple lineages,
inhibits cell-cycle progression. Antagonizing miR-24 restores postmitotic cell
proliferation and enhances fibroblast proliferation, whereas overexpressing
miR-24 increases the G1 compartment. The 248 mRNAs downregulated upon miR-24
overexpression are highly enriched for DNA repair and cell-cycle regulatory genes
that form a direct interaction network with prominent nodes at genes that enhance
(MYC, E2F2, CCNB1, and CDC2) or inhibit (p27Kip1 and VHL) cell-cycle progression.
miR-24 directly regulates MYC and E2F2 and some genes that they transactivate.
Enhanced proliferation from antagonizing miR-24 is abrogated by knocking down
E2F2, but not MYC, and cell proliferation, inhibited by miR-24 overexpression, is
rescued by miR-24-insensitive E2F2. Therefore, E2F2 is a critical miR-24 target. 
The E2F2 3'UTR lacks a predicted miR-24 recognition element. In fact, miR-24
regulates expression of E2F2, MYC, AURKB, CCNA2, CDC2, CDK4, and FEN1 by
recognizing seedless but highly complementary sequences.

PMCID: PMC2757794
PMID: 19748357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Br J Cancer. 2009 Oct 20;101(8):1461-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605284. Epub 2009
Sep 8.

Cell cycle genes and ovarian cancer susceptibility: a tagSNP analysis.

Cunningham JM(1), Vierkant RA, Sellers TA, Phelan C, Rider DN, Liebow M,
Schildkraut J, Berchuck A, Couch FJ, Wang X, Fridley BL; Ovarian Cancer
Association Consortium, Gentry-Maharaj A, Menon U, Hogdall E, Kjaer S, Whittemore
A, DiCioccio R, Song H, Gayther SA, Ramus SJ, Pharaoh PD, Goode EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. cunningham.julie@mayo.edu

BACKGROUND: Dysregulation of the cell cycle is a hallmark of many cancers
including ovarian cancer, a leading cause of gynaecologic cancer mortality
worldwide.
METHODS: We examined single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (n=288) from 39 cell 
cycle regulation genes, including cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and
CDK inhibitors, in a two-stage study. White, non-Hispanic cases (n=829) and
ovarian cancer-free controls (n=941) were genotyped using an Illumina assay.
RESULTS: Eleven variants in nine genes (ABL1, CCNB2, CDKN1A, CCND3, E2F2, CDK2,
E2F3, CDC2, and CDK7) were associated with risk of ovarian cancer in at least one
genetic model. Seven SNPs were then assessed in four additional studies with 1689
cases and 3398 controls. Association between risk of ovarian cancer and ABL1
rs2855192 found in the original population [odds ratio, OR(BB vs AA) 2.81
(1.29-6.09), P=0.01] was also observed in a replication population, and the
association remained suggestive in the combined analysis [OR(BB vs AA) 1.59
(1.08-2.34), P=0.02]. No other SNP associations remained suggestive in the
replication populations.
CONCLUSION: ABL1 has been implicated in multiple processes including cell
division, cell adhesion and cellular stress response. These results suggest that 
characterization of the function of genetic variation in this gene in other
ovarian cancer populations is warranted.

PMCID: PMC2768434
PMID: 19738611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cancer Causes Control. 2009 Nov;20(9):1769-77. doi: 10.1007/s10552-009-9416-x.
Epub 2009 Aug 19.

Genetic variants in the cell cycle control pathways contribute to early onset
colorectal cancer in Lynch syndrome.

Chen J(1), Etzel CJ, Amos CI, Zhang Q, Viscofsky N, Lindor NM, Lynch PM, Frazier 
ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Unit 1365, 1155 Pressler Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
janechen@mdanderson.org

PURPOSE: Lynch syndrome is an autosomal dominant syndrome of familial
malignancies resulting from germ line mutations in DNA mismatch repair (MMR)
genes. Our goal was to take a pathway-based approach to investigate the influence
of polymorphisms in cell cycle-related genes on age of onset for Lynch syndrome
using a tree model.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We evaluated polymorphisms in a panel of cell cycle-related 
genes (AURKA, CDKN2A, TP53, E2F2, CCND1, TP73, MDM2, IGF1, and CDKN2B) in 220 MMR
gene mutation carriers from 129 families. We applied a novel statistical
approach, tree modeling (Classification and Regression Tree), to the analysis of 
data on patients with Lynch syndrome to identify individuals with a higher
probability of developing colorectal cancer at an early age and explore the
gene-gene interactions between polymorphisms in cell cycle genes.
RESULTS: We found that the subgroup with CDKN2A C580T wild-type genotype, IGF1
CA-repeats >or=19, E2F2 variant genotype, AURKA wild-type genotype, and CCND1
variant genotype had the youngest age of onset, with a 45-year median onset age, 
while the subgroup with CDKN2A C580T wild-type genotype, IGF1 CA-repeats >or=19, 
E2F2 wild-type genotype, and AURKA variant genotype had the latest median age of 
onset, which was 70 years. Furthermore, we found evidence of a possible gene-gene
interaction between E2F2 and AURKA genes related to CRC age of onset.
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms in these cell cycle-related genes work together to
modify the age at the onset of CRC in patients with Lynch syndrome. These studies
provide an important part of the foundation for development of a model for
stratifying age of onset risk among those with Lynch syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3917505
PMID: 19690970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Aug 1;15(15):4823-8. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-3224.
Epub 2009 Jul 21.

Differential genetic and functional markers of second neoplasias in Hodgkin's
disease patients.

Lorenzo Y(1), Provencio M, Lombardía L, Díaz R, Silva J, Herrera M, García JM,
Peña C, García V, Romero J, Domínguez G, Bonilla F.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical Oncology and Radiation Oncology, Hospital Universitario
Puerta de Hierro, Majadahonda; and Molecular Diagnostic Unit, Molecular Pathology
Program, Spanish Cancer Research Center, Madrid, Spain.

PURPOSE: The mechanisms involved in the appearance of a second neoplasia in
patients with Hodgkin's disease (HD) are probably related to the genomic damage
induced by the treatments administered and its repair. Here, we searched for some
constitutive molecular mechanisms that in a basal manner may influence the
behavior of HD patients.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We aimed to evaluate with the Comet Assay whether baseline, 
induced, and unrepaired DNA damage differ between HD patients who did not develop
a second neoplasia (HD-NST), HD patients who developed a second tumor (HD-ST),
and healthy individuals; and to identify, through cDNA microarray hybridization, 
an expression signature of genes that could discriminate between the three
groups.
RESULTS: Baseline, induced, and unrepaired DNA damage was higher in HD-ST than in
HD-NST and higher in the second group than in healthy donors. The genomic
approach revealed two sets of genes that discriminated between healthy subjects
and patients and between the three sets of individuals. Hsp40, RAD50, TPMT,
Rap2a, E2F2, EPHX2, TBX21, and BATF were validated by reverse transcription-PCR.
CONCLUSIONS: Functional and genomic techniques revealed that alterations in cell 
cycle, repair, detoxification, and stress response pathways could be involved in 
the development of HD and in the occurrence of a primary second neoplasia in
these patients. Both approaches may be useful as biological markers in the
clinical setting.

PMID: 19622580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Aug;37(14):4850-61. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp500. Epub 2009
Jun 14.

Estradiol-regulated microRNAs control estradiol response in breast cancer cells.

Bhat-Nakshatri P(1), Wang G, Collins NR, Thomson MJ, Geistlinger TR, Carroll JS, 
Brown M, Hammond S, Srour EF, Liu Y, Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
IN, USA.

Estradiol (E2) regulates gene expression at the transcriptional level by
functioning as a ligand for estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) and estrogen
receptor beta (ERbeta). E2-inducible proteins c-Myc and E2Fs are required for
optimal ERalpha activity and secondary estrogen responses, respectively. We show 
that E2 induces 21 microRNAs and represses seven microRNAs in MCF-7 breast cancer
cells; these microRNAs have the potential to control 420 E2-regulated and 757
non-E2-regulated mRNAs at the post-transcriptional level. The serine/threonine
kinase, AKT, alters E2-regulated expression of microRNAs. E2 induced the
expression of eight Let-7 family members, miR-98 and miR-21 microRNAs; these
microRNAs reduced the levels of c-Myc and E2F2 proteins. Dicer, a ribonuclease
III enzyme required for microRNA processing, is also an E2-inducible gene.
Several E2-regulated microRNA genes are associated with ERalpha-binding sites or 
located in the intragenic region of estrogen-regulated genes. We propose that the
clinical course of ERalpha-positive breast cancers is dependent on the balance
between E2-regulated tumor-suppressor microRNAs and oncogenic microRNAs.
Additionally, our studies reveal a negative-regulatory loop controlling E2
response through microRNAs as well as differences in E2-induced transcriptome and
proteome.

PMCID: PMC2724297
PMID: 19528081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS Biol. 2009 Jun 9;7(6):e1000123. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000123. Epub 2009
Jun 9.

Direct binding of pRb/E2F-2 to GATA-1 regulates maturation and terminal cell
division during erythropoiesis.

Kadri Z(1), Shimizu R, Ohneda O, Maouche-Chretien L, Gisselbrecht S, Yamamoto M, 
Romeo PH, Leboulch P, Chretien S.

Author information: 
(1)CEA, Institute of Emerging Diseases and Innovative Therapies,
Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.

How cell proliferation subsides as cells terminally differentiate remains largely
enigmatic, although this phenomenon is central to the existence of multicellular 
organisms. Here, we show that GATA-1, the master transcription factor of
erythropoiesis, forms a tricomplex with the retinoblastoma protein (pRb) and
E2F-2. This interaction requires a LXCXE motif that is evolutionary conserved
among GATA-1 orthologs yet absent from the other GATA family members.
GATA-1/pRb/E2F-2 complex formation stalls cell proliferation and steers erythroid
precursors towards terminal differentiation. This process can be disrupted in
vitro by FOG-1, which displaces pRb/E2F-2 from GATA-1. A GATA-1 mutant unable to 
bind pRb fails to inhibit cell proliferation and results in mouse embryonic
lethality by anemia. These findings clarify the previously suspected
cell-autonomous role of pRb during erythropoiesis and may provide a unifying
molecular mechanism for several mouse phenotypes and human diseases associated
with GATA-1 mutations.

PMCID: PMC2684697
PMID: 19513100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Diabetes. 2009 Aug;58(8):1852-62. doi: 10.2337/db08-0759. Epub 2009 Jun 9.

The retinoblastoma protein and its homolog p130 regulate the G1/S transition in
pancreatic beta-cells.

Harb G(1), Vasavada RC, Cobrinik D, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University
of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Erratum in
    Diabetes. 2009 Oct;58(10):2425.

OBJECTIVE: The retinoblastoma protein family (pRb, p130, p107) plays a central
role in the regulation of cell cycle progression. Surprisingly, loss of pRb in
the beta-cell has no discernible effect on cell cycle control. Therefore, we
explored the effects of individual loss of either p130 or p107 in addition to the
simultaneous loss of both pRb/p130 on the beta-cell.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Adult mice deficient in either p130 or p107 or both 
pRb/p130 were examined for effects on beta-cell replication, function, and
survival. The Cre-Lox system was also used to inactivate pRb in wild-type and
p130-deficient beta-cells in vitro.
RESULTS: In vivo loss of either p107 or p130 did not affect beta-cell replication
or function. Combined pRb/p130 loss, however, resulted in dramatically
accelerated proliferation as well as apoptotic cell death. Pancreas and beta-cell
mass were significantly reduced in double mutants. Despite this, overall glucose 
tolerance was normal, except for mild postprandial hyperglycemia. Ex vivo, acute 
deletion of pRb in p130-deficient beta-cells also caused a striking increase in
proliferation. The combined deletion of pRb/p130 upregulated islet expression of 
E2F2 but not E2F1.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies define an essential role for the pocket proteins in
controlling the G(1)/S transition in beta-cells. When deficient in both pRb and
p130, beta-cells undergo unrestrained cell cycle reentry and activation of
apoptosis. These studies underscore the central role of the pRb pathway in
controlling beta-cell turnover and provide new cellular targets for beta-cell
regeneration.

PMCID: PMC2712776
PMID: 19509021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 31;284(31):20966-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.006346. Epub
2009 May 20.

EKLF/KLF1 controls cell cycle entry via direct regulation of E2f2.

Tallack MR(1), Keys JR, Humbert PO, Perkins AC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics and Development, Institute for Molecular
Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane, 4072, Australia.

Differentiation of erythroid cells requires precise control over the cell cycle
to regulate the balance between cell proliferation and differentiation. The zinc 
finger transcription factor, erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF/KLF1), is
essential for proper erythroid cell differentiation and regulates many erythroid 
genes. Here we show that loss of EKLF leads to aberrant entry into S-phase of the
cell cycle during both primitive and definitive erythropoiesis. This cell cycle
defect was associated with a significant reduction in the expression levels of
E2f2 and E2f4, key factors necessary for the induction of S-phase gene expression
and erythropoiesis. We found and validated novel intronic enhancers in both the
E2f2 and E2f4 genes, which contain conserved CACC, GATA, and E-BOX elements. The 
E2f2 enhancer was occupied by EKLF in vivo. Furthermore, we were able to
partially restore cell cycle dynamics in EKLF(-/-) fetal liver upon additional
genetic depletion of Rb, establishing a genetic causal link between reduced E2f2 
and the EKLF cell cycle defect. Finally, we propose direct regulation of the E2f2
enhancer is a generic mechanism by which many KLFs regulate proliferation and
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2742862
PMID: 19457859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Int J Cancer. 2009 May 1;124(9):2077-81. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24198.

Polymorphic loci of E2F2, CCND1 and CCND3 are associated with HER2 status of
breast tumors.

Justenhoven C(1), Pierl CB, Haas S, Fischer HP, Hamann U, Baisch C, Harth V,
Spickenheuer A, Rabstein S, Vollmert C, Illig T, Pesch B, Brüning T, Dippon J, Ko
YD, Brauch H.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart,
Germany.

Overexpression of the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) in breast
tumors is associated with bad prognosis. Therefore, it is highly relevant to
further improve understanding of the regulatory mechanisms of HER2 expression. In
addition to gene amplification, transcriptional regulation plays a crucial role
in HER2 overexpression. In this study, we analyzed 3 polymorphisms
E2F2_-5368_A>G, CCND1_870_A>G and CCND3_-677_C>T located in genes involved in
cell cycle regulation in the GENICA population-based and age-matched breast
cancer case-control study from Germany. We genotyped 1,021 cases and 1,015
controls by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). Statistical analyses were performed by conditional
logistic regression. We observed no differences in genotype frequencies between
breast cancer cases and controls. Subgroup analysis showed associations between
carriers of the E2F2_-5368_G allele (OR: 0.60, 95% CI: 0.42-0.85), carriers of
the CCND1_870_G allele (OR: 0.66, 95% CI: 0.45-0.96) and carriers of the
CCND3_-677_T allele (OR: 1.72, 95% CI: 1.20-2.49) and HER2 expression in breast
tumors. This finding points to an association of an increased expression of these
cell cycle regulators with lower expression of HER2. An explanation for this
observation might be that low expression of E2F2, CCND1 and CCND3 decrease levels
of factors down-regulating HER2. We conclude that the analyzed polymorphisms
located in E2F2, CCND1 and CCND3 are potential markers for HER2 status of breast 
tumors.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19142864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Mar 1;106(4):580-8. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22029.

Transcriptional regulation of fibrillin-2 gene by E2F family members in
chondrocyte differentiation.

Yanagino T(1), Yuasa K, Nagahama M, Matsuda Y, Tsuji A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, the University of Tokushima
Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.

Mutation in fibrillin-2, a major structural component of extracellular
microfibrils in connective tissue, results in the autosomal dominant disease
congenital contractural arachnodactyly. This genetic disease is characterized by 
dolichostenomelia and arachnodactyly, in addition to contractures of the large
joints and abnormal pinnae formation, thus indicating the significance of
fibrillin-2 in chondrogenesis. In this study, we investigated the transcriptional
regulation of fibrillin-2 in chondrogenic differentiation. Although mRNA
expression of fibrillin-1, a highly homologous protein to fibrillin-2, remained
almost unchanged during chondrogenesis of mouse ATDC5 cells, fibrillin-2 mRNA
expression varied. Fibrillin-2 was highly expressed at the early stage and
declined progressively during differentiation. The 5'-flanking region of the
fibrillin-2 gene contains potential binding sites for E2F, Runx, AP-2, and Sox
transcription factors. The promoter activity of fibrillin-2 decreased markedly
following deletion and mutagenesis of the E2F binding site between -143 and -136 
bp. Overexpression of E2F1 resulted in a marked increase in its promoter
activity, whereas expression of other transcription factors including AP-2alpha
and Runx2 had no effect. The increase in promoter activity by E2F1 was completely
suppressed by the coexpression of E2F4. E2F2 and E2F3 had positive effects on the
promoter activity. Although ATDC5 cells expressed transcripts for the E2F family 
genes at all stages of differentiation, the expression profiles differed. E2F1
expression remained almost unchanged, whereas E2F4 expression increased markedly 
at the late stage of differentiation. These results indicated that coordinated
expression of the E2F family is critical for the transcriptional regulation of
fibrillin-2 during chondrogenesis.

PMID: 19142862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. EMBO J. 2009 Mar 4;28(5):500-12. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.279. Epub 2009 Jan 8.

The Axin1 scaffold protein promotes formation of a degradation complex for c-Myc.

Arnold HK(1), Zhang X, Daniel CJ, Tibbitts D, Escamilla-Powers J, Farrell A,
Tokarz S, Morgan C, Sears RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, OR, USA.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2009 Mar 4;28(5):453-4.

Expression of the c-Myc proto-oncoprotein is tightly regulated in normal cells.
Phosphorylation at two conserved residues, threonine58 (T58) and serine62 (S62), 
regulates c-Myc protein stability. In cancer cells, c-Myc can become aberrantly
stabilized associated with altered T58 and S62 phosphorylation. A complex
signalling cascade involving GSK3beta kinase, the Pin1 prolyl isomerase, and the 
PP2A-B56alpha phosphatase controls phosphorylation at these sites. We report here
a novel role for the tumour suppressor scaffold protein Axin1 in facilitating the
formation of a degradation complex for c-Myc containing GSK3beta, Pin1, and
PP2A-B56alpha. Although knockdown of Axin1 decreases the association of c-Myc
with these proteins, reduces T58 and enhances S62 phosphorylation, and increases 
c-Myc stability, acute expression of Axin1 reduces c-Myc levels and suppresses
c-Myc transcriptional activity. Moreover, the regulation of c-Myc by Axin1 is
impaired in several tested cancer cell lines with known stabilization of c-Myc or
loss of Axin1. This study provides critical insight into the regulation of c-Myc 
expression, how this can be disrupted in three cancer types, and adds to our
knowledge of the tumour suppressor activity of Axin1.

PMCID: PMC2657573
PMID: 19131971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Cell Cycle. 2008 Dec 15;7(24):3915-27. Epub 2008 Dec 10.

E2F2 represses cell cycle regulators to maintain quiescence.

Infante A(1), Laresgoiti U, Fernández-Rueda J, Fullaondo A, Galán J, Díaz-Uriarte
R, Malumbres M, Field SJ, Zubiaga AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology,
University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain.

E2F transcription factors control diverse biological processes through regulation
of target gene expression. However, the mechanism by which this regulation is
established, and the relative contribution of each E2F member are still poorly
defined. We have investigated the role of E2F2 in regulating cellular
proliferation. We show that E2F2 is required for the normal G(0)/G(1) phase
because targeted disruption of the E2F2 gene causes T cells to enter S phase
early and to undergo accelerated cell division. A large set of E2F target genes
involved in DNA replication and cell cycle progression (such as Mcm's, cyclins
and Cdc2a) that are silent in G(0) and typically transcribed late in G(1) phase
are already actively expressed in quiescent T cells and MEFs lacking E2F2. The
classic E2F activators, E2F1 and E2F3, are largely dispensable for this process
because compound loss of E2F1(-/-) and E2F2(-/-) produces a comparably shortened 
G(0)/G(1) phase, with early S phase entry. Likewise, shRNA knockdown of E2F3 does
not alter significantly the E2F2(-/-) phenotype. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis indicates that in wild-type cells the promoters of the aberrantly
early-transcribed genes are occupied by E2F2 in G(0), suggesting a direct role
for E2F2 in transcriptional repression. We conclude that E2F2 functions to
transcriptionally repress cell cycle genes to establish the G(0) state.

PMID: 19066456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Jun;22(3):186-8.

[E2F1 upregulates endogenous XRCC1 expression].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Shi Y, Li HY, Liang LC, Ji YX, Chen DX, Chen XY, Wu H.

Author information: 
(1)Bejiing Youan Hospital Affiliated to Capital Medical University, Beijing
100069, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the regulatory effect and significance of transcription
factor E2F1 on X-ray repair cross2 complementing 1 (XRCC1).
METHODS: Saos2 cells were transfected with the E2F1 expression vectors (tet-E2F1)
and mutated E2F1 expression vectors (tet-132E). XRCC1 promotor luciferase
reporter vector was constructed and transfected into Saos2 cells together with
E2F1, E2F2, E2F3 and E2F4 expression vectors at different amount. The cells were 
collected 36 hours post-transfection for luciferase assays and absorbance was
read at 570 nm.
RESULTS: Cotransfection of increasing amounts of E2F1 expression vector with the 
XRCC1 promoter-luciferase reporter caused a dose-dependent increase in luciferase
activation. In contrast, DNA binding incompetent E2F1 (132E) could not activate
the XRCC1 promoter-luciferase reporter.
CONCLUSION: E2F1 could upregulate endogenous XRCC1 expression and stimulate the
XRCC1 promoter.

PMID: 19031698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jan;29(2):414-24. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01161-08. Epub 2008 Nov
17.

E2f3a and E2f3b contribute to the control of cell proliferation and mouse
development.

Chong JL(1), Tsai SY, Sharma N, Opavsky R, Price R, Wu L, Fernandez SA, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology
and Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The E2f3 locus encodes two Rb-binding gene products, E2F3a and E2F3b, which are
differentially regulated during the cell cycle and are thought to be critical for
cell cycle progression. We targeted the individual inactivation of E2f3a or E2f3b
in mice and examined their contributions to cell proliferation and development.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and gene expression experiments using mouse embryo 
fibroblasts deficient in each isoform showed that E2F3a and E2F3b contribute to
G(1)/S-specific gene expression and cell proliferation. Expression of E2f3a or
E2f3b was sufficient to support E2F target gene expression and cell proliferation
in the absence of other E2F activators, E2f1 and E2f2, suggesting that these
isoforms have redundant functions. Consistent with this notion, E2f3a(-/-) and
E2f3b(-/-) embryos developed normally, whereas embryos lacking both isoforms
(E2f3(-/-)) died in utero. We also find that E2f3a and E2f3b have redundant and
nonredundant roles in the context of Rb mutation. Analysis of double-knockout
embryos suggests that the ectopic proliferation and apoptosis in Rb(-/-) embryos 
is mainly mediated by E2f3a in the placenta and nervous system and by both E2f3a 
and E2f3b in lens fiber cells. Together, we conclude that the contributions of
E2F3a and E2F3b in cell proliferation and development are context dependent.

PMCID: PMC2612501
PMID: 19015245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Dec;28(24):7394-401. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01087-08. Epub 2008 Oct
13.

Failure of terminal erythroid differentiation in EKLF-deficient mice is
associated with cell cycle perturbation and reduced expression of E2F2.

Pilon AM(1), Arcasoy MO, Dressman HK, Vayda SE, Maksimova YD, Sangerman JI,
Gallagher PG, Bodine DM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoiesis Section, Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, NHGRI, NIH, 49
Convent Drive, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-44421, USA.

Erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF) is a Krüppel-like transcription factor
identified as a transcriptional activator and chromatin modifier in erythroid
cells. EKLF-deficient (Eklf(-/-)) mice die at day 14.5 of gestation from severe
anemia. In this study, we demonstrate that early progenitor cells fail to undergo
terminal erythroid differentiation in Eklf(-/-) embryos. To discover potential
EKLF target genes responsible for the failure of erythropoiesis, transcriptional 
profiling was performed with RNA from wild-type and Eklf(-/-) early erythroid
progenitor cells. These analyses identified significant perturbation of a network
of genes involved in cell cycle regulation, with the critical regulator of the
cell cycle, E2f2, at a hub. E2f2 mRNA and protein levels were markedly decreased 
in Eklf(-/-) early erythroid progenitor cells, which showed a delay in the
G(1)-to-S-phase transition. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated
EKLF occupancy at the proximal E2f2 promoter in vivo. Consistent with the role of
EKLF as a chromatin modifier, EKLF binding sites in the E2f2 promoter were
located in a region of EKLF-dependent DNase I sensitivity in early erythroid
progenitor cells. We propose a model in which EKLF-dependent activation and
modification of the E2f2 locus is required for cell cycle progression preceding
terminal erythroid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2593440
PMID: 18852285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. PLoS Genet. 2008 Oct 3;4(10):e1000205. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000205.

Context-dependent requirement for dE2F during oncogenic proliferation.

Nicolay BN(1), Frolov MV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

The Hippo pathway negatively regulates the cell number in epithelial tissue. Upon
its inactivation, an excess of cells is produced. These additional cells are
generated from an increased rate of cell division, followed by inappropriate
proliferation of cells that have failed to exit the cell cycle. We analyzed the
consequence of inactivation of the entire E2F family of transcription factors in 
these two settings. In Drosophila, there is a single activator, dE2F1, and a
single repressor, dE2F2, which act antagonistically to each other during
development. While the loss of the activator dE2F1 results in a severe impairment
in cell proliferation, this defect is rescued by the simultaneous loss of the
repressor dE2F2, as cell proliferation occurs relatively normally in the absence 
of both dE2F proteins. We found that the combined inactivation of dE2F1 and dE2F2
had no significant effect on the increased rate of cell division of Hippo pathway
mutant cells. In striking contrast, inappropriate proliferation of cells that
failed to exit the cell cycle was efficiently blocked. Furthermore, our data
suggest that such inappropriate proliferation was primarily dependent on the
activator, de2f1, as loss of de2f2 was inconsequential. Consistently, Hippo
pathway mutant cells had elevated E2F activity and induced dE2F1 expression at a 
point when wild-type cells normally exit the cell cycle. Thus, we uncovered a
critical requirement for the dE2F family during inappropriate proliferation of
Hippo pathway mutant cells.

PMCID: PMC2542417
PMID: 18833298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Oncol Rep. 2008 Oct;20(4):751-60.

Deregulation of the G1/S phase transition in cancer and squamous intraepithelial 
lesions of the uterine cervix: a case control study.

Arvanitis DA(1), Spandidos DA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Division, Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens,
Athens, Greece.

High-risk types of HPV express the oncoproteins, E6 and E7, that can inactivate
TP53 and RB1, respectively, and thus take control of both cell cycle and
apoptosis. Herein, the mRNA expression profiles of 24 G1/S checkpoint genes were 
analysed in cancer and squamous intraepithelial lesions (SIL) of the uterine
cervix. In total 35 squamous cervical carcinomas, 26 high-grade SIL (HSIL), 33
low-grade SIL (LSIL) tissues, and 28 normal uterine cervix specimens as controls 
were assessed by RT-PCR. Five genes were found to be upregulated only in tumours,
RBL2, E2F2, CDK6, CCNE1 and MYC; eight in tumours and HSILs, E2F1, E2F3, E2F5,
CCND1, CDK2, CDKN1B, PCNA and POLA, and five in tumours, HSILs and LSILs, TP53,
E2F4, CDKN1A, CDKN2A and DHFR. MDM2 was found to be upregulated in SIL, while
RBL1 was found to be downregulated in all three groups of cases. TP73 exhibited
lower levels in carcinomas; however, its exon 13-containing isoforms were
increased and exon 2-containing isoforms were reduced in both cancer and HSIL.
Three genes, RB1, CDK4 and CDKN2D, did not exhibit any significant alteration in 
gene expression. Hierarchical clustering revealed that this set of G1/S
checkpoint genes was able to discriminate the total 122 samples into groups of
disease and non-disease with only 8 exceptions (6.6%). Our data suggest that
deregulation of G1/S phase transition in cervical carcinogenesis is a progressive
process. Certain clusters of genes are activated very early in pre-cancerous SILs
while others are activated later, during malignant transformation. The ability of
this array of markers to identify disease status suggests that it could be used
for diagnostic purposes.

PMID: 18813814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mol Cell Biochem. 2008 Dec;319(1-2):189-201. doi: 10.1007/s11010-008-9892-4. Epub
2008 Aug 6.

Genomic and proteomic characterization of YDOV-157, a newly established human
epithelial ovarian cancer cell line.

Cho H(1), Kang ES, Hong SW, Oh YJ, Choi SM, Kim SW, Kim SH, Kim YT, Lee KS, Choi 
YK, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

The existence of several model systems with which to investigate a particular
disease is advantageous for researchers. This is especially true for ovarian
cancer, which, due to its complex and heterogeneous nature, inherently requires a
large number of model systems. Here, we report a new ovarian serous
adenocarcinoma cell line, designated YDOV-157, and characterized via post
genomics and post proteomics. In this study, primary culture of tumor cells from 
ascites was performed and the cells were immortalized up to at least 60 passages 
in vitro. We studied the morphologies, cell proliferation, BRCA1/2 mutations,
tumorigenesis capacity, and chemosensitivity of YDOV-157. Using a cDNA
microarray, differentially expressed genes were identified and some of them were 
validated. Using proteomic analysis, we identified proteins that were
differentially expressed in YDOV-157. The newly derived cell line, designated
YDOV-157, grew as a monolayer and the doubling time was 102 h. When transplanted 
into nude mice, it initiated the formation of tumor masses with microscopic
findings identical to those of the primary tumor. Chemosensitivity test showed
that paclitaxel induced the highest chemosensitivity index. In microarray
analysis, 2,520 probes were differently expressed, compared to human ovarian
surface epithelial cells (HOSEs). In SYBR Green real-time PCR, the expression of 
E2F2 (P = 0.040) and CRABP2 genes (P = 0.030) was significantly higher in the
ovarian cancer cell lines than in HOSEs. Furthermore, proteomic analysis showed
that expression of 28 spots was significantly altered between YDOV-157 and HOSE. 
In conclusion, the newly derived YDOV-157 cell line may be an important research 
resource for studying cancer cell biology and should also be very useful for
developing new strategies that inhibit cancer cell growth and progression.

PMID: 18682896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cardiovasc Res. 2008 Nov 1;80(2):219-26. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvn194. Epub 2008 Jul
15.

E2F2 expression induces proliferation of terminally differentiated cardiomyocytes
in vivo.

Ebelt H(1), Zhang Y, Kampke A, Xu J, Schlitt A, Buerke M, Müller-Werdan U, Werdan
K, Braun T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, University of Halle-Wittenberg,
Ernst-Grube-Strasse 40, 06097 Halle, Germany. henning.ebelt@medizin.uni-halle.de

AIMS: In previous experiments we have demonstrated that expression of the
transcription factors E2F2 and E2F4 is sufficient to induce proliferation of
isolated primary cardiomyocytes from newborn rats and mice. We now wanted to
analyse whether E2F2 or E2F4 are also able to promote cell cycle progression of
adult cardiomyocytes in vivo, which unlike cardiomyocytes from newborn rodents
lack the ability to undergo cell proliferation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: E2F2 or E2F4 was expressed in hearts of mice at different
developmental stages using adenoviral vectors. Effects regarding proliferation,
hypertrophy, and apoptosis were analysed on histological sections, and
quantitative assessment of cell cycle regulatory genes was performed by real-time
PCR (polymerase chain reaction) and western blot. We found that both E2F2 and
E2F4 can stimulate hypertrophic cell growth of cardiomyocytes. However, only
directed expression of E2F2 but not of E2F4 was sufficient to induce
proliferation of cardiomyocytes. Expression of E2F2 in vivo did not increase the 
percentage of apoptotic cardiomyocytes but down-regulated the expression of the
pro-apoptotic genes caspase-6 and apaf-1. Further analysis of the cell cycle
regulatory machinery revealed that expression of E2F2 caused a strong induction
of cyclin A and E while the expression of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
(CKIs) such as p21 was not affected.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that a limited induction of cardiomyocyte cell
proliferation can be achieved by E2F2-mediated stimulation of cyclin A and E
expression without a reduction of CKIs.

PMID: 18628254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Nature. 2008 Aug 28;454(7208):1137-41. doi: 10.1038/nature07066. Epub 2008 Jun
25.

Mouse development with a single E2F activator.

Tsai SY(1), Opavsky R, Sharma N, Wu L, Naidu S, Nolan E, Feria-Arias E, Timmers
C, Opavska J, de Bruin A, Chong JL, Trikha P, Fernandez SA, Stromberg P, Rosol
TJ, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, College of Biological Sciences, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The E2F family is conserved from Caenorhabditis elegans to mammals, with some
family members having transcription activation functions and others having
repressor functions. Whereas C. elegans and Drosophila melanogaster have a single
E2F activator protein and repressor protein, mammals have at least three
activator and five repressor proteins. Why such genetic complexity evolved in
mammals is not known. To begin to evaluate this genetic complexity, we targeted
the inactivation of the entire subset of activators, E2f1, E2f2, E2f3a and E2f3b,
singly or in combination in mice. We demonstrate that E2f3a is sufficient to
support mouse embryonic and postnatal development. Remarkably, expression of
E2f3b or E2f1 from the E2f3a locus (E2f3a(3bki) or E2f3a(1ki), respectively)
suppressed all the postnatal phenotypes associated with the inactivation of
E2f3a. We conclude that there is significant functional redundancy among
activators and that the specific requirement for E2f3a during postnatal
development is dictated by regulatory sequences governing its selective
spatiotemporal expression and not by its intrinsic protein functions. These
findings provide a molecular basis for the observed specificity among E2F
activators during development.

PMCID: PMC4288824
PMID: 18594513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Oncogene. 2008 Sep 25;27(43):5696-705. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.184. Epub 2008 Jun
9.

IKK/NF-kappaB signaling pathway inhibits cell-cycle progression by a novel
Rb-independent suppression system for E2F transcription factors.

Araki K(1), Kawauchi K, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Institute of Gerontology, Nippon Medical
School, Kanagawa, Japan.

E2Fs are key regulators of cell-cycle progression, and their transcriptional
activities are regulated by histone acetyltransferases (HATs). Retinoblastoma
(Rb) family proteins (pRb, p107 and p130) bind to E2Fs and inhibit their
transcriptional activities by disrupting HAT binding and recruitment of histone
deacetylases. In this study, we show that IkappaB kinases (IKKalpha or IKKbeta)
activation inhibits cell growth and E2F-dependent transcription in normal human
fibroblasts. The inhibition of E2F by IKKs was not observed in cells lacking
nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB/p65; however, it was observed in cells lacking three
Rb family genes. p65 disrupted the physical interaction between activator E2Fs
(F2F1, E2F2 and E2F3) and the HAT cofactor transactivation/transformation-domain 
associated protein, resulting in a reduction in E2F-responsive gene expression.
Furthermore, IKKalpha and IKKbeta directly phosphorylated E2F4, resulting in
nuclear accumulation and enhanced DNA binding of the E2F4/p130 repressor complex.
Our study describes a novel growth inhibitory system that functions by
Rb-independent suppression of E2Fs by the IKK/NF-kappaB signaling pathway.

PMID: 18542057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Immunol. 2008 May 1;180(9):5927-34.

Disruption of mutually negative regulatory feedback loop between
interferon-inducible p202 protein and the E2F family of transcription factors in 
lupus-prone mice.

Panchanathan R(1), Xin H, Choubey D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati, 3223 Eden
Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.

Studies have identified IFN-inducible Ifi202 gene as a lupus susceptibility gene 
(encoding p202 protein) in mouse models of lupus disease. However, signaling
pathways that regulate the Ifi202 expression in cells remain to be elucidated. We
found that steady-state levels of Ifi202 mRNA and protein were high in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from E2F1 knockout (E2F1(-/-)) and E2F1 and E2F2
double knockout (E2F1(-/-)E2F2(-/-)) mice than isogenic wild-type MEFs. Moreover,
overexpression of E2F1 in mouse fibroblasts decreased expression of p202.
Furthermore, expression of E2F1, but not E2F4, transcription factor in mouse
fibroblasts repressed the activity of 202-luc-reporter in promoter-reporter
assays. Interestingly, the E2F1-mediated transcriptional repression of the
202-luc-reporter was independent of p53 and pRb expression. However, the
repression was dependent on the ability of E2F1 to bind DNA. We have identified a
potential E2F DNA-binding site in the 5'-regulatory region of the Ifi202 gene,
and mutations in this E2F DNA-binding site reduced the E2F1-mediated
transcriptional repression of 202-luc-reporter. Because p202 inhibits the
E2F1-mediated transcriptional activation of genes, we compared the expression of 
E2F1 and its target genes in splenic cells from lupus-prone B6.Nba2 congenic
mice, which express increased levels of p202, with age-matched C57BL/6 mice. We
found that increased expression of Ifi202 in the congenic mice was associated
with inhibition of E2F1-mediated transcription and decreased expression of E2F1
and its target genes that encode proapoptotic proteins. Our observations support 
the idea that increased Ifi202 expression in certain strains of mice contributes 
to lupus susceptibility in part by inhibiting E2F1-mediated functions.

PMCID: PMC2810195
PMID: 18424712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Morfologiia. 2007;132(6):26-9.

[Intracerebral progression of the transplanted rat C6 glioblastoma cells
pretreated with neuropeptides and MAPK inhibitor].

[Article in Russian]

Tencheva TsS, Panov IR.

The authors have monitored C6 glioma cell invasive growth, proliferation and
transcriptional regulation after pretreatment with endothelin-1 and ERK1/2
specific inhibitor PD98059. To explore proliferation of C6 glioma cells in
different growth conditions, they were treated in vitro with endothelin-1 and
implanted into the brain. In vitro studies have indicated that PD98059 inhibited 
the proliferation of cultured C6 glioma cells and induced the activation of E2F1 
and Myc-Max transcriptional factors. Endothelin-1 strongly increased C6 glioma
cell proliferation. The model used in this study is experimental, but it may
provide an insight into the specific behavior of in vitro cultured invasive
cells.

PMID: 18411719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Immunol. 2008 Apr 15;180(8):5275-82.

The apoptotic pathway contributing to the deletion of naive CD8 T cells during
the induction of peripheral tolerance to a cross-presented self-antigen.

Redmond WL(1), Wei CH, Kreuwel HT, Sherman LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, 
USA.

The maintenance of T cell tolerance in the periphery proceeds through several
mechanisms, including anergy, immuno-regulation, and deletion via apoptosis. We
examined the mechanism underlying the induction of CD8 T cell peripheral
tolerance to a self-Ag expressed on pancreatic islet beta-cells. Following
adoptive transfer, Ag-specific clone 4 T cells underwent deletion independently
of extrinsic death receptors, including Fas, TNFR1, or TNFR2. Additional
experiments revealed that the induction of clone 4 T cell apoptosis during
peripheral tolerance occurred via an intrinsic death pathway that could be
inhibited by overexpression of Bcl-2 or targeted deletion of the proapoptotic
molecule, Bim, thereby resulting in accumulation of activated clone 4 T cells.
Over-expression of Bcl-2 in clone 4 T cells promoted the development of effector 
function and insulitis whereas Bim-/- clone 4 cells were not autoaggressive.
Examination of the upstream molecular mechanisms contributing to clone 4 T cell
apoptosis revealed that it proceeded in a p53, E2F1, and E2F2-independent manner.
Taken together, these data reveal that initiation of clone 4 T cell apoptosis
during the induction of peripheral tolerance to a cross-presented self-Ag occurs 
through a Bcl-2-sensitive and at least partially Bim-dependent mechanism.

PMID: 18390708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Diabetes. 2008 Jun;57(6):1605-17. doi: 10.2337/db07-1577. Epub 2008 Mar 28.

Critical roles for macrophages in islet angiogenesis and maintenance during
pancreatic degeneration.

Tessem JS(1), Jensen JN, Pelli H, Dai XM, Zong XH, Stanley ER, Jensen J,
DeGregori J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Program in Molecular
Biology, University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado
80045-6511, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Chronic pancreatitis, characterized by pancreatic exocrine tissue
destruction with initial maintenance of islets, eventually leads to
insulin-dependent diabetes in most patients. Mice deficient for the transcription
factors E2F1 and E2F2 suffer from a chronic pancreatitis-like syndrome and become
diabetic. Surprisingly, onset of diabetes can be prevented through bone marrow
transplantation. The goal of the described studies was to determine the
hematopoietic cell type responsible for maintaining islets and the associated
mechanism of this protection.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Mouse models of acute and chronic pancreatitis,
together with mice genetically deficient for macrophage production, were used to 
determine roles for macrophages in islet angiogenesis and maintenance.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that macrophages are essential for preventing endocrine
cell loss and diabetes. Macrophages expressing matrix metalloproteinase-9 migrate
to the deteriorating pancreas. E2f1/E2f2 mutant mice transplanted with wild-type,
but not macrophage-deficient colony stimulating factor 1 receptor mutant
(Csf1r(-/-)), bone marrow exhibit increased angiogenesis and proliferation within
islets, coinciding with increased islet mass. A similar macrophage dependency for
islet and islet vasculature maintenance is observed during caerulein-induced
pancreatitis.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that macrophages promote islet
angiogenesis and protect against islet loss during exocrine degeneration, could
explain why most patients with chronic pancreatitis develop diabetes, and suggest
an avenue for preventing pancreatitis-associated diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2575065
PMID: 18375440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 23;370(1):145-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.03.046. Epub 2008 Mar 18.

PPARgamma ligands suppress the feedback loop between E2F2 and cyclin-E1.

Komatsu Y(1), Ito I, Wayama M, Fujimura A, Akaogi K, Machida H, Nakajima Y,
Kuroda T, Ohmori K, Murayama A, Kimura K, Yanagisawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba Science City, Ibaraki 305-8572, Japan.

PPARgamma is a nuclear hormone receptor that plays a key role in the induction of
peroxisome proliferation. A number of studies showed that PPARgamma ligands
suppress cell cycle progression; however, the mechanism remains to be determined.
Here, we showed that PPARgamma ligand troglitazone inhibited G1/S transition in
colon cancer cells, LS174T. Troglitazone did not affect on either expression of
CDK inhibitor (p18) or Wnt signaling pathway, indicating that these pathways were
not involved in the troglitazone-dependent cell cycle arrest. GeneChip and RT-PCR
analyses revealed that troglitazone decreased mRNA levels of cell cycle
regulatory factors E2F2 and cyclin-E1 whose expression is activated by E2F2.
Down-regulation of E2F2 by troglitazone results in decrease of cyclin-E1
transcription, which could inhibit phosphorylation of Rb protein, and
consequently evoke the suppression of E2F2 transcriptional activity. Thus, we
propose that troglitazone suppresses the feedback loop containing E2F2,
cyclin-E1, and Rb protein.

PMID: 18355447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 May;28(10):3127-38. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02089-07. Epub 2008 Mar 
17.

p110 CUX1 cooperates with E2F transcription factors in the transcriptional
activation of cell cycle-regulated genes.

Truscott M(1), Harada R, Vadnais C, Robert F, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University, Molecular Oncology Group, 687 Pine Ave. West, Rm. H5.21,
Montreal H3A-1A1, Canada.

The transcription factor p110 CUX1 was shown to stimulate cell proliferation by
accelerating entry into S phase. As p110 CUX1 can function as a transcriptional
repressor or activator depending on promoter context, we investigated its
mechanism of transcriptional activation using the DNA polymerase alpha gene
promoter as a model system. Linker-scanning analysis revealed that a low-affinity
E2F binding site is required for transcriptional activation. Moreover,
coexpression with a dominant-negative mutant of DP-1 suggested that endogenous
E2F factors are indeed needed for p110-mediated activation. Tandem affinity
purification, coimmunoprecipitation, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and reporter 
assays indicated that p110 CUX1 can engage in weak protein-protein interactions
with E2F1 and E2F2, stimulate their recruitment to the DNA polymerase alpha gene 
promoter, and cooperate with these factors in transcriptional activation. On the 
other hand, in vitro assays suggested that the interaction between CUX1 and E2F1 
either is not direct or is regulated by posttranslational modifications.
Genome-wide location analysis revealed that targets common to p110 CUX1 and E2F1 
included many genes involved in cell cycle, DNA replication, and DNA repair.
Comparison of the degree of enrichment for various E2F factors suggested that
binding of p110 CUX1 to a promoter will favor the specific recruitment of E2F1,
and to a lesser extent E2F2, over E2F3 and E2F4. Reporter assays on a subset of
common targets confirmed that p110 CUX1 and E2F1 cooperate in their
transcriptional activation. Overall, our results show that p110 CUX1 and E2F1
cooperate in the regulation of many cell cycle genes.

PMCID: PMC2423173
PMID: 18347061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Cancer Lett. 2008 May 18;263(2):157-63. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2008.02.001. Epub
2008 Mar 10.

E2F1 in gliomas: a paradigm of oncogene addiction.

Alonso MM(1), Alemany R, Fueyo J, Gomez-Manzano C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuro-Oncology, Unit 1002, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Cancer arises as a result of a stepwise accumulation of genetic changes. One of
these changes, deregulation of the Rb/E2F1 pathway resulting from alterations in 
members of the pathway, is a hallmark of all human cancers. These mutations
promote tumor development by deregulating the E2F family of transcription
factors, which results in uncontrolled cell cycle progression. The E2F1 protein
functions as a transcription factor that enhances cell proliferation by binding
to the promoter region of several genes, including those that are involved in
cell cycle regulatory activities and DNA replication. It is now becoming clear
that the role of E2F1 in regulating transcription and cell growth is also highly 
dependent on the cellular context. This complexity is also evident from analyses 
of perturbations in E2F-modulated tumor development. For example, deregulated
E2F1 expression can either promote or inhibit tumorigenesis depending on the
nature of the other oncogenic mutations that are present. This explains the
ability of E2F1 to behave as both an oncogene and tumor suppressor gene. Here we 
focus on reviewing the most recent evidence supporting the "addiction" of gliomas
to this versatile transcription factor. We also consider the clinical relevance
of this by examining the role of E2F1 as a prognosis factor and as a target for
the development of novel strategies.

PMID: 18334281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Immunol. 2008 Mar 15;180(6):3699-707.

E2F4 modulates differentiation and gene expression in hematopoietic progenitor
cells during commitment to the lymphoid lineage.

Enos ME(1), Bancos SA, Bushnell T, Crispe IN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, David H Smith Center for Vaccine
Biology and Immunology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14620, USA.

The E2F4 protein is involved in gene repression and cell cycle exit, and also has
poorly understood effects in differentiation. We analyzed the impact of E2F4
deficiency on early steps in mouse hematopoietic development, and found defects
in early hematopoietic progenitor cells that were propagated through common
lymphoid precursors to the B and T lineages. In contrast, the defects in
erythromyeloid precursor cells were self-correcting over time. This suggests that
E2F4 is important in early stages of commitment to the lymphoid lineage. The
E2F4-deficient progenitor cells showed reduced expression of several key
lymphoid-lineage genes, and overexpression of two erythromyeloid lineage genes.
However, we did not detect effects on cell proliferation. These findings
emphasize the significance of E2F4 in controlling gene expression and cell fate.

PMID: 18322175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Genes Dev. 2008 Mar 1;22(5):601-14. doi: 10.1101/gad.1626308.

Epigenetic regulation of gene expression by Drosophila Myb and E2F2-RBF via the
Myb-MuvB/dREAM complex.

Wen H(1), Andrejka L, Ashton J, Karess R, Lipsick JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Department of Genetics, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

The Drosophila Myb oncoprotein, the E2F2 transcriptional repressor, and the RBF
and Mip130/LIN-9 tumor suppressor proteins reside in a conserved Myb-MuvB
(MMB)/dREAM complex. We now show that Myb is required in vivo for the expression 
of Polo kinase and components of the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC).
Surprisingly, the highly conserved DNA-binding domain was not essential for
assembly of Myb into MMB/dREAM, for transcriptional regulation in vivo, or for
rescue of Myb-null mutants to adult viability. E2F2, RBF, and Mip130/LIN-9 acted 
in opposition to Myb by repressing the expression of Polo and SAC genes in vivo. 
Remarkably, the absence of both Myb and Mip130, or of both Myb and E2F2, caused
variegated expression in which high or low levels of Polo were stably inherited
through successive cell divisions in imaginal wing discs. Restoration of Myb
resulted in a uniformly high level of Polo expression similar to that seen in
wild-type tissue, whereas restoration of Mip130 or E2F2 extinguished Polo
expression. Our results demonstrate epigenetic regulation of gene expression by
Myb, Mip130/LIN-9, and E2F2-RBF in vivo, and also provide an explanation for the 
ability of Mip130-null mutants to rescue the lethality of Myb-null mutants in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC2259030
PMID: 18316477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Apr;19(4):1519-28. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E07-08-0817. Epub 2008
Feb 6.

Involvement of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase alpha, beta, and gamma
isoforms in myogenic differentiation.

Wang H(1), Xu Q, Xiao F, Jiang Y, Wu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology, Clearwater Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.

We and others previously showed that p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase is
indispensable for myogenic differentiation. However, it is less clear which of
the four p38 isoforms in the mouse genome participates in this process. Using
C2C12 myogenic cells as a model, we showed here that p38alpha, beta, and gamma
are expressed with distinct expression patterns during differentiation. Knockdown
of any of them by small interfering RNA inhibits myogenic differentiation, which 
suggests that the functions of the three p38 isoforms are not completely
redundant. To further elucidate the unique role of each p38 isoform in myogenic
differentiation, we individually knocked down one p38 isoform at a time in C2C12 
cells, and we compared the whole-genome gene expression profiles by microarrays. 
We found that some genes are coregulated by all three p38 isoforms, whereas
others are uniquely regulated by one particular p38 isoform. Furthermore, several
novel p38 target genes (i.e., E2F2, cyclin D3, and WISP1) are found to be
required for myogenin expression, which provides a molecular basis to explain why
different p38 isoforms are required for myogenic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2291428
PMID: 18256287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Gene Expr Patterns. 2008 Feb;8(3):181-98. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2007.10.009. Epub
2007 Nov 4.

An in situ hybridization-based screen for heterogeneously expressed genes in
mouse ES cells.

Carter MG(1), Stagg CA, Falco G, Yoshikawa T, Bassey UC, Aiba K, Sharova LV,
Shaik N, Ko MS.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genomics and Aging Section, Laboratory of Genetics, National
Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

We previously reported that Zscan4 showed heterogeneous expression patterns in
mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. To identify genes that show similar expression
patterns, we carried out high-throughput in situ hybridization assays on ES cell 
cultures for 244 genes. Most of the genes are involved in transcriptional
regulation, and were selected using microarray-based comparisons of gene
expression profiles in ES and embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells versus
differentiated cell types. Pou5f1 (Oct4, Oct3/4) and Krt8 (EndoA) were used as
controls. Hybridization signals were detected on ES cell colonies for 147 genes
(60%). The majority (136 genes) of them showed relatively homogeneous expression 
in ES cell colonies. However, we found that two genes unequivocally showed
Zscan4-like spotted expression pattern (spot-in-colony pattern; Whsc2 and Rhox9).
We also found that nine genes showed relatively heterogeneous expression pattern 
(mosaic-in-colony pattern: Zfp42/Rex1, Rest, Atf4, Pa2g4, E2f2, Nanog,
Dppa3/Pgc7/Stella, Esrrb, and Fscn1). Among these genes, Zfp42/Rex1 showed
unequivocally heterogeneous expression in individual ES cells prepared by the
CytoSpin. These results show the presence of different types or states of cells
within ES cell cultures otherwise thought to be undifferentiated and homogeneous,
suggesting a previously unappreciated complexity in ES cell cultures.

PMCID: PMC2238805
PMID: 18178135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Genes Dev. 2007 Nov 15;21(22):2880-96. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Genomic profiling and expression studies reveal both positive and negative
activities for the Drosophila Myb MuvB/dREAM complex in proliferating cells.

Georlette D(1), Ahn S, MacAlpine DM, Cheung E, Lewis PW, Beall EL, Bell SP, Speed
T, Manak JR, Botchan MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California Berkeley,
Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

Myb-MuvB (MMB)/dREAM is a nine-subunit complex first described in Drosophila as a
repressor of transcription, dependent on E2F2 and the RBFs. Myb, an integral
member of MMB, curiously plays no role in the silencing of the test genes
previously analyzed. Moreover, Myb plays an activating role in DNA replication in
Drosophila egg chamber follicle cells. The essential functions for Myb are
executed as part of MMB. This duality of function lead to the hypothesis that
MMB, which contains both known activator and repressor proteins, might function
as part of a switching mechanism that is dependent on DNA sites and developmental
context. Here, we used proliferating Drosophila Kc tissue culture cells to
explore both the network of genes regulated by MMB (employing RNA interference
and microarray expression analysis) and the genomic locations of MMB following
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and tiling array analysis. MMB occupied 3538
chromosomal sites and was promoter-proximal to 32% of Drosophila genes. MMB
contains multiple DNA-binding factors, and the data highlighted the combinatorial
way by which the complex was targeted and utilized for regulation. Interestingly,
only a subset of chromatin-bound complexes repressed genes normally expressed in 
a wide range of developmental pathways. At many of these sites, E2F2 was critical
for repression, whereas at other nonoverlapping sites, Myb was critical for
repression. We also found sites where MMB was a positive regulator of transcript 
levels that included genes required for mitotic functions (G2/M), which may
explain some of the chromosome instability phenotypes attributed to loss of Myb
function in myb mutants.

PMCID: PMC2049191
PMID: 17978103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(24):8561-70. Epub 2007 Oct 8.

dE2F2-independent rescue of proliferation in cells lacking an activator dE2F1.

Ambrus AM(1), Nicolay BN, Rasheva VI, Suckling RJ, Frolov MV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

In Drosophila melanogaster, the loss of activator de2f1 leads to a severe
reduction in cell proliferation and repression of E2F targets. To date, the only 
known way to rescue the proliferation block in de2f1 mutants was through the
inactivation of dE2F2. This suggests that dE2F2 provides a major contribution to 
the de2f1 mutant phenotype. Here, we report that in mosaic animals, in addition
to de2f2, the loss of a DEAD box protein Belle (Bel) also rescues proliferation
of de2f1 mutant cells. Surprisingly, the rescue occurs in a dE2F2-independent
manner since the loss of Bel does not relieve dE2F2-mediated repression. In the
eye disc, bel mutant cells fail to undergo a G1 arrest in the morphogenetic
furrow, delay photoreceptor recruitment and differentiation, and show a reduction
of the transcription factor Ci155. The down-regulation of Ci155 is important
since it is sufficient to partially rescue proliferation of de2f1 mutant cells.
Thus, mutation of bel relieves the dE2F2-mediated cell cycle arrest in de2f1
mutant cells through a novel Ci155-dependent mechanism without functional
inactivation of the dE2F2 repressor.

PMCID: PMC2169406
PMID: 17923695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(24):8713-28. Epub 2007 Oct 8.

Deregulated E2f-2 underlies cell cycle and maturation defects in retinoblastoma
null erythroblasts.

Dirlam A(1), Spike BT, Macleod KF.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, Gordon Center for Integrative
Sciences, The University of Chicago, 929 East 57th Street, Chicago, IL 60637,
USA.

By assessing the contribution of deregulated E2F activity to erythroid defects in
Rb null mice, we have identified E2f-2 as being upregulated in end-stage red
cells, where we show it is the major pRb-associated E2f and the predominant E2f
detected at key target gene promoters. Consistent with its expression pattern,
E2f-2 loss restored terminal erythroid maturation to Rb null red cells, including
the ability to undergo enucleation. Deletion of E2f-2 also extended the life span
of Rb null mice despite persistent defects in placental development, indicating
that deregulated E2f-2 activity in differentiating erythroblasts contributes to
the premature lethality of Rb null mice. We show that the aberrant entry of Rb
null erythroblasts into S phase at times in differentiation when wild-type
erythroblasts are exiting the cell cycle is inhibited by E2f-2 deletion. E2f-2
loss induced cell cycle arrest in both wild-type and Rb null erythroblasts and
was associated with increased DNA double-strand breaks. These results implicate
deregulated E2f-2 in the cell cycle defects observed in Rb null erythroblasts and
reveal a novel role for E2f-2 during terminal red blood cell differentiation. The
identification of a tissue-restricted role for E2f-2 in erythropoiesis highlights
the nonredundant nature of E2f transcription factor activities in cell growth and
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2169398
PMID: 17923680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Jan;29(1):194-201. Epub 2007 Oct 4.

Survivin repression by p53, Rb and E2F2 in normal human melanocytes.

Raj D(1), Liu T, Samadashwily G, Li F, Grossman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Utah, 30 North 1900 East, Salt Lake
City, UT 84132, USA.

The inhibitor of apoptosis protein survivin is a dual mediator of apoptosis
resistance and cell cycle progression and is highly expressed in cancer. We have 
shown previously that survivin is up-regulated in melanoma compared with normal
melanocytes, is required for melanoma cell viability, and that melanocyte
expression of survivin predisposes mice to ultraviolet-induced melanoma and
metastasis. The mechanism of survivin up-regulation in the course of melanocyte
transformation and its repression in normal melanocytes, however, has not been
clearly defined. We show here that p53 and retinoblastoma (Rb), at basal levels
and in the absence of any activating stimuli, are both required to repress
survivin transcription in normal human melanocytes. Survivin repression in
melanocytes does not involve alterations in protein stability or promoter
methylation. p53 and Rb (via E2Fs) regulate survivin expression by direct binding
to the survivin promoter; p53 also affects survivin expression by activating p21.
We demonstrate a novel role for E2F2 in the negative regulation of survivin
expression. In addition, we identify a novel E2F-binding site in the survivin
promoter and show that mutation of either the p53- or E2F-binding sites is
sufficient to increase promoter activity. These studies suggest that compromise
of either p53 or Rb pathways during melanocyte transformation leads to
up-regulation of survivin expression in melanoma.

PMCID: PMC2292458
PMID: 17916908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. PLoS Genet. 2007 Sep;3(9):1757-69. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

CpG island methylation in a mouse model of lymphoma is driven by the genetic
configuration of tumor cells.

Opavsky R(1), Wang SH, Trikha P, Raval A, Huang Y, Wu YZ, Rodriguez B, Keller B, 
Liyanarachchi S, Wei G, Davuluri RV, Weinstein M, Felsher D, Ostrowski M, Leone
G, Plass C.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology
and Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Hypermethylation of CpG islands is a common epigenetic alteration associated with
cancer. Global patterns of hypermethylation are tumor-type specific and
nonrandom. The biological significance and the underlying mechanisms of
tumor-specific aberrant promoter methylation remain unclear, but some evidence
suggests that this specificity involves differential sequence susceptibilities,
the targeting of DNA methylation activity to specific promoter sequences, or the 
selection of rare DNA methylation events during disease progression. Using
restriction landmark genomic scanning on samples derived from tissue culture and 
in vivo models of T cell lymphomas, we found that MYC overexpression gave rise to
a specific signature of CpG island hypermethylation. This signature reflected
gene transcription profiles and was detected only in advanced stages of disease. 
The further inactivation of the Pten, p53, and E2f2 tumor suppressors in
MYC-induced lymphomas resulted in distinct and diagnostic CpG island methylation 
signatures. Our data suggest that tumor-specific DNA methylation in lymphomas
arises as a result of the selection of rare DNA methylation events during the
course of tumor development. This selection appears to be driven by the genetic
configuration of tumor cells, providing experimental evidence for a causal role
of DNA hypermethylation in tumor progression and an explanation for the
tremendous epigenetic heterogeneity observed in the evolution of human cancers.
The ability to predict genome-wide epigenetic silencing based on relatively few
genetic alterations will allow for a more complete classification of tumors and
understanding of tumor cell biology.

PMCID: PMC1994712
PMID: 17907813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Sep 25;104(39):15400-5. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Specific tumor suppressor function for E2F2 in Myc-induced T cell
lymphomagenesis.

Opavsky R(1), Tsai SY, Guimond M, Arora A, Opavska J, Becknell B, Kaufmann M,
Walton NA, Stephens JA, Fernandez SA, Muthusamy N, Felsher DW, Porcu P, Caligiuri
MA, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology,
and Medical Genetics, College of Medicine and Public Health, Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Deregulation of the Myc pathway and deregulation of the Rb pathway are two of the
most common abnormalities in human malignancies. Recent in vitro experiments
suggest a complex cross-regulatory relationship between Myc and Rb that is
mediated through the control of E2F. To evaluate the functional connection
between Myc and E2Fs in vivo, we used a bitransgenic mouse model of Myc-induced T
cell lymphomagenesis and analyzed tumor progression in mice deficient for E2f1,
E2f2, or E2f3. Whereas the targeted inactivation of E2f1 or E2f3 had no
significant effect on tumor progression, loss of E2f2 accelerated
lymphomagenesis. Interestingly, loss of a single copy of E2f2 also accelerated
tumorigenesis, albeit to a lesser extent, suggesting a haploinsufficient function
for this locus. The combined ablation of E2f1 or E2f3, along with E2f2, did not
further accelerate tumorigenesis. Myc-overexpressing T cells were more resistant 
to apoptosis in the absence of E2f2, and the reintroduction of E2F2 into these
tumor cells resulted in an increase of apoptosis and inhibition of tumorigenesis.
These results identify the E2f2 locus as a tumor suppressor through its ability
to modulate apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2000495
PMID: 17881568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. PLoS One. 2007 Sep 19;2(9):e912.

Comparative analysis of E2F family member oncogenic activity.

Chen C(1), Wells AD.

Author information: 
(1)Joseph Stokes, Jr. Research Institute, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

The E2F family of transcription factors consists of nine members with both
distinct and overlapping functions. These factors are situated downstream of
growth factor signaling cascades, where they play a central role in cell growth
and proliferation through their ability to regulate genes involved in cell cycle 
progression. For this reason, it is likely that the members of the E2F family
play a critical role during oncogenesis. Consistent with this idea is the
observation that some tumors exhibit deregulated expression of E2F proteins. In
order to systematically compare the oncogenic capacity of these family members,
we stably over-expressed E2F1 through 6 in non-transformed 3T3 fibroblasts and
assessed the ability of these transgenic cell lines to grow under conditions of
low serum, as well as to form colonies in soft agar. Our results show that these 
six E2F family members can be divided into three groups that exhibit differential
oncogenic capacity. The first group consists of E2F2 and E2F3a, both of which
have strong oncogenic capacity. The second group consists of E2F1 and E2F6, which
were neutral in our assays when compared to control cells transduced with vector 
alone. The third group consists of E2F4 and E2F5, which generally act to repress 
E2F-responsive genes, and in our assays demonstrated a strong capacity to inhibit
transformation. Our results imply that the pattern of expression of these six E2F
family members in a cell could exert a strong influence over its susceptibility
to oncogenic transformation.

PMCID: PMC1975672
PMID: 17878947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Virol. 2007 Dec;81(23):13191-9. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

Intestinal hyperplasia induced by simian virus 40 large tumor antigen requires
E2F2.

Sáenz-Robles MT(1), Markovics JA, Chong JL, Opavsky R, Whitehead RH, Leone G,
Pipas JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15260, USA.

The simian virus 40 large T antigen contributes to neoplastic transformation, in 
part, by targeting the Rb family of tumor suppressors. There are three known Rb
proteins, pRb, p130, and p107, all of which block the cell cycle by preventing
the transcription of genes regulated by the E2F family of transcription factors. 
T antigen interacts directly with Rb proteins and disrupts Rb-E2F complexes both 
in vitro and in cultured cells. Consequently, T antigen is thought to inhibit
transcriptional repression by the Rb family proteins by disrupting their
interaction with E2F proteins, thus allowing E2F-dependent transcription and the 
expression of cellular genes needed for entry into S phase. This model predicts
that active E2F-dependent transcription is required for T-antigen-induced
transformation. To test this hypothesis, we have examined the status of Rb-E2F
complexes in murine enterocytes. Previous studies have shown that T antigen
drives enterocytes into S phase, resulting in intestinal hyperplasia, and that
the induction of enterocyte proliferation requires T-antigen binding to Rb
proteins. In this paper, we show that normal growth-arrested enterocytes contain 
p130-E2F4 complexes and that T-antigen expression destroys these complexes, most 
likely by stimulating p130 degradation. Furthermore, unlike their normal
counterparts, enterocytes expressing T antigen contain abundant levels of E2F2
and E2F3a. Concomitantly, T-antigen-induced intestinal proliferation is reduced
in mice lacking either E2F2 alone or both E2F2 and E2F3a, but not in mice lacking
E2F1. These studies support a model in which T antigen eliminates Rb-E2F
repressive complexes so that specific activator E2Fs can drive S-phase entry.

PMCID: PMC2169091
PMID: 17855529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Gene. 2007 Nov 1;402(1-2):103-10. Epub 2007 Aug 10.

Transcriptional regulation of subtilisin-like proprotein convertase PACE4 by E2F:
possible role of E2F-mediated upregulation of PACE4 in tumor progression.

Yuasa K(1), Suzue K, Nagahama M, Matsuda Y, Tsuji A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, The University of Tokushima
Graduate School, 2-1 Minamijosanjima, Tokushima 770-8506, Japan.

PACE4, a member of the subtilisin-like proprotein convertase (SPC) family, is
expressed at high levels in certain tumor cells and plays a role in metastatic
progression through activation of matrix metalloproteinases. The mechanism
leading to overexpression of PACE4 in tumor cells remains unclear. In this study,
we show that the E2F1 transcription factor, which is implicated in carcinoma
invasiveness, upregulates the expression of PACE4. HT1080 (highly tumorigenic and
invasive) cells expressed much higher levels of PACE4 and E2F family (E2F1 and
E2F2) transcripts than IMR90 (normal fibroblast) cells. Expression levels of
other SPCs (furin and PC6) remained unchanged in these cells. Promoter analysis
indicated that two E2F consensus binding sites (-117/-110 and -86/-79) in the
5'-flanking region of the human PACE4 gene function as positive regulatory
elements. Mutation of these sites abolished PACE4 promoter response to E2F1 as
well as binding of E2F1 in electrophoretic mobility-shift assays. Other E2F
members, E2F2 and E2F3, also activated PACE4 expression, as in the case of E2F1. 
These results indicate a novel mechanism for E2F family-mediated promotion of
carcinoma invasiveness through PACE4.

PMID: 17825503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Oncogene. 2008 Jan 10;27(3):366-77. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

The AP-1 transcription factor regulates breast cancer cell growth via cyclins and
E2F factors.

Shen Q(1), Uray IP, Li Y, Krisko TI, Strecker TE, Kim HT, Brown PH.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Center, Departments of Medicine and Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

The activating protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factor transduces growth signals
through signal transduction pathways to the nucleus, leading to the expression of
genes involved in growth and malignant transformation in many cell types. We have
previously shown that overexpression of a dominant negative form of the cJun
proto-oncogene, a cJun dominant negative mutant (Tam67), blocks AP-1
transcriptional activity, induces a G(1) cell cycle block and inhibits breast
cancer cell growth in vitro and in vivo. We found that AP-1 blockade by Tam67 in 
MCF-7 breast cancer cells downregulates cyclin D1 transcriptional activity by at 
least two mechanisms: by suppressing transcription at the known AP-1 binding site
(-934/-928) and by suppressing growth factor-induced expression through
suppressing E2F activation at the E2F-responsive site (-726/-719). AP-1 blockade 
also led to reduced expression of E2F1 and E2F2, but not E2F4, at the mRNA and
protein levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and supershift assays demonstrated 
that AP-1 blockade caused decreased binding of E2F1 protein to the E2F site in
the cyclin D1 promoter. We also found that Tam67 suppressed the expression of the
E2F1 dimerizing partner, DP1 and E2F-upregulated cell cycle genes (cyclins E, A, 
B and D3) and enhanced the expression of E2F-downregulated cell cycle genes
(cyclins G(2) and I). Reduced expression of other E2F-regulated genes was also
seen with AP-1 blockade and E2F suppression. Thus, the AP-1 factor regulates the 
expression of cyclin D and E2F (the latter in turn regulates E2F-downstream
genes), leading to cell cycle progression and breast cancer cell proliferation.

PMID: 17637753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. PLoS Biol. 2007 Jul;5(7):e179. Epub 2007 Jul 3.

Rb-mediated neuronal differentiation through cell-cycle-independent regulation of
E2f3a.

Chen D(1), Opavsky R, Pacal M, Tanimoto N, Wenzel P, Seeliger MW, Leone G,
Bremner R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Development Division, Toronto Western Research Institute,
University Health Network, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

It has long been known that loss of the retinoblastoma protein (Rb) perturbs
neural differentiation, but the underlying mechanism has never been solved. Rb
absence impairs cell cycle exit and triggers death of some neurons, so
differentiation defects may well be indirect. Indeed, we show that abnormalities 
in both differentiation and light-evoked electrophysiological responses in
Rb-deficient retinal cells are rescued when ectopic division and apoptosis are
blocked specifically by deleting E2f transcription factor (E2f) 1. However,
comprehensive cell-type analysis of the rescued double-null retina exposed
cell-cycle-independent differentiation defects specifically in starburst amacrine
cells (SACs), cholinergic interneurons critical in direction selectivity and
developmentally important rhythmic bursts. Typically, Rb is thought to block
division by repressing E2fs, but to promote differentiation by potentiating
tissue-specific factors. Remarkably, however, Rb promotes SAC differentiation by 
inhibiting E2f3 activity. Two E2f3 isoforms exist, and we find both in the
developing retina, although intriguingly they show distinct subcellular
distribution. E2f3b is thought to mediate Rb function in quiescent cells.
However, in what is to our knowledge the first work to dissect E2f isoform
function in vivo we show that Rb promotes SAC differentiation through E2f3a.
These data reveal a mechanism through which Rb regulates neural differentiation
directly, and, unexpectedly, it involves inhibition of E2f3a, not potentiation of
tissue-specific factors.

PMCID: PMC1914394
PMID: 17608565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Jul-Aug;1769(7-8):437-42. Epub 2007 May 18.

Expression of HOXC9 and E2F2 are up-regulated in CD133(+) cells isolated from
human astrocytomas and associate with transformation of human astrocytes.

Okamoto OK(1), Oba-Shinjo SM, Lopes L, Nagahashi Marie SK.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Neurologia e Neurocirurgia, Universidade Federal de São
Paulo-Escola Paulista de Medicina, São Paulo, CEP 04023-900, Brazil.
keith.nexp@epm.br

Comparative analysis of cancer stem cells with their neoplastic and
non-neoplastic counterparts should help better understand the underlying
molecular events leading to transformation and tumor dissemination. Here, we
report a molecular signature comprised by genes with exclusive aberrant
expression in CD133(+) cells, a reported subpopulation of tumorigenic stem-like
cells, isolated from human glioblastomas. Microarrays covering 55,000 transcripts
were used to compare gene expression profiles in purified subpopulations of
CD133(+) and CD133(-) GBM cells. Sixteen genes, many of which not previously
associated with astrocytomas, were found aberrantly expressed in CD133(+) cells, 
but not in CD133(-), when compared with corresponding non-neoplastic controls.
Up-regulation of two of such genes, E2F2 and HOXC9, was detected in a set of 54
astrocytomas of different grades and significantly associated with malignancy.
Due to their distinctive expression in CD133(+) cells, the use of E2F2 and HOXC9 
as therapeutic targets for tumor eradication is suggested.

PMID: 17588684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2007 Apr;27(4):512-4.

[Gene expression profiles of K562 cells treated with total saponin of Panax
ginseng].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou Y(1), Ma WL, Qu RM, Xiang Z, Li CZ, Zheng WL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Engineering, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510515, China. lzhouye@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of the total saponin of Panax ginseng (TSPG)
on gene expression profile of K562 cells using microarray technique.
METHODS: The total RNA were extracted and purified from K562 cells treated by 200
microg/ml TSPG for 3 days, and untreated K562 cells cultured in parallel served
as the control. cRNAs were synthesized and labeled with Cy3 and Cy5 respectively.
The labeled cRNA fragments were hybridized with Agilent human 1B 60 mer
oligonucleotide microarray, which was then scanned to reveal the changes of gene 
expression profile in relation to TSPG treatment.
RESULTS: Totally 362 differentially expressed genes were identified in
TSPG-treated K562 cells, including 20 up-regulated ones (consisting of
metabolism-associated genes, signal transduction-associated genes and cell
receptor-associated genes etc) and 342 down-regulated ones (consisting of
immunity and defense-associated genes, DNA-binding and transcription genes,
metabolism-associated genes and cell cycle-associated genes etc). Changes in
expressions of FOSL1, E2F2, CCNE2 and ODZ1 were confirmed by semi-quantitative
RT-PCR.
CONCLUSIONS: TSPG may induce changes in the gene expression profile in k562 cells
possibly relevant to the anti-tumor mechanism of TSPG.

PMID: 17545047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Dec;1091:270-81.

Expression of the E2F family of transcription factors and its clinical relevance 
in ovarian cancer.

Reimer D(1), Sadr S, Wiedemair A, Goebel G, Concin N, Hofstetter G, Marth C,
Zeimet AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University Innsbruck,
Anichstrasse 35, A-6020 Innsbruck. daniel.reimer@uibk.ac.at

The E2F family of transcription factors plays a pivotal role in the regulation of
cellular proliferation. On the basis of sequence homology and function, eight
distinct members of E2F transcription factors (E2F-1 to E2F-8) have been
distinguished to date. The regulation of E2F transcription factors is closely
associated with the function of the retinoblastoma family of tumor suppressors
(RB pathway). In the last decade various alterations of distinct components of
the RB-E2F pathway were found to be associated with tumor progression. However,
no data on the role of E2F family members are available in tumor biology of
ovarian cancer. Here we describe an expression study of E2F transcription factors
in various human ovarian cancer cell lines; its clinical relevance was examined
in a training set of 77 ovarian cancer patients. Expression levels of E2F-1,
E2F-2, and E2F-8 were elevated in all the ovarian cancer cell lines studied when 
compared with human peritoneal mesothelial cells (HPMCs). Interestingly, EGF
treatment showed a time-dependent upregulation of the activating transcription
factor E2F-3 and a simultaneous increase of DP-1, the heterodimeric partner of
E2F-3. High expression of E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-8 was found to be associated with
histopathologic grade 3 tumors and residual tumor over 2 cm in diameter after
primary debulking surgery in ovarian cancer patients. Taken together, these data 
suggest that the proliferation-promoting E2F transcription factors E2F-1 and
especially E2F-2 play a pivotal role in tumor biology of ovarian cancer and may
be candidates for specific therapeutic targets.

PMID: 17341621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Jan 1;13(1):144-51.

Clinical relevance of E2F family members in ovarian cancer--an evaluation in a
training set of 77 patients.

Reimer D(1), Sadr S, Wiedemair A, Stadlmann S, Concin N, Hofstetter G,
Müller-Holzner E, Marth C, Zeimet AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Innsbruck Medical University,
Innsbruck, Austria.

PURPOSE: The major obstacle in treating ovarian cancer is the rapid development
of platinum resistance during therapy. Deregulation of members of the E2F family 
of transcription factors is crucially involved in carcinogenesis and probably in 
mechanisms underlying platinum resistance. We therefore investigated the
relevance of the whole set of E2F family members in predicting clinical outcome
and their significance in predicting platinum resistance.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Real-time PCR of all E2F family members was done from 77
ovarian carcinomas, defined as our training set, and 8 healthy control samples.
The correlation with clinicopathologic characteristics, platinum resistance, and 
survival was investigated. Furthermore, the cross-talk of E2F family members was 
assessed for its value in predicting survival and platinum resistance.
RESULTS: The proliferation-promoting E2F1 and E2F2 were associated with grade 3
tumors and residual disease >2 cm in diameter after initial surgery. Survival
analyses showed low expression of E2F1 or E2F2 to be significantly associated
with favorable disease-free and overall survival (E2F1, P = 0.039 and 0.047,
respectively; E2F2, P = 0.009 and 0.006, respectively). In contrast, high
expression of inhibiting E2F4 or E2F7 predicted favorable disease-free and
overall survival (E2F4, P = 0.047 and 0.042, respectively; E2F7, P = 0.048 and
0.042, respectively). A high E2F2 to E2F4 ratio was the most valuable prognostic 
variable for disease-free survival in multivariate analysis (hazard ratio, 6.494;
P = 0.002). Tumors considered platinum resistant were associated with lower E2F4 
and E2F7 expression (P = 0.012 and 0.009, respectively) compared with
platinum-sensitive tumors. Again, ratios of E2F1 or E2F2 to E2F7 were the most
favorable variables in predicting platinum resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: We here show that deregulation of both proliferation-promoting and
proliferation-inhibiting E2F transcription factors and their cross-talk is
crucially involved in the tumor biology of ovarian cancer and influences clinical
outcome. Furthermore, down-regulation of E2F7 may contribute to mechanisms
underlying platinum resistance, and calculation of ratios of
proliferation-promoting E2F1 to E2F7 could serve as a putative predictor of
platinum resistance.

PMID: 17200349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Cancer Inform. 2007 Feb 18;2:223-41.

Construction and clarification of dynamic gene regulatory network of cancer cell 
cycle via microarray data.

Li CW(1), Chu YH, Chen BS.

Author information: 
(1)Lab. of Systems biology, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, 300, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Cell cycle is an important clue to unravel the mechanism of cancer
cells. Recently, expression profiles of cDNA microarray data of Cancer cell cycle
are available for the information of dynamic interactions among Cancer cell cycle
related genes. Therefore, it is more appealing to construct a dynamic model for
gene regulatory network of Cancer cell cycle to gain more insight into the
infrastructure of gene regulatory mechanism of cancer cell via microarray data.
RESULTS: Based on the gene regulatory dynamic model and microarray data, we
construct the whole dynamic gene regulatory network of Cancer cell cycle. In this
study, we trace back upstream regulatory genes of a target gene to infer the
regulatory pathways of the gene network by maximum likelihood estimation method. 
Finally, based on the dynamic regulatory network, we analyze the regulatory
abilities and sensitivities of regulatory genes to clarify their roles in the
mechanism of Cancer cell cycle.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study presents a systematically iterative approach to discern
and characterize the transcriptional regulatory network in Hela cell cycle from
the raw expression profiles. The transcription regulatory network in Hela cell
cycle can also be confirmed by some experimental reviews. Based on our study and 
some literature reviews, we can predict and clarify the E2F target genes in G1/S 
phase, which are crucial for regulating cell cycle progression and tumorigenesis.
From the results of the network construction and literature confirmation, we
infer that MCM4, MCM5, CDC6, CDC25A, UNG and E2F2 are E2F target genes in Hela
cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC2675491
PMID: 19458769  [PubMed]


192. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jan;27(1):65-78.

E2f1, E2f2, and E2f3 control E2F target expression and cellular proliferation via
a p53-dependent negative feedback loop.

Timmers C(1), Sharma N, Opavsky R, Maiti B, Wu L, Wu J, Orringer D, Trikha P,
Saavedra HI, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology
and Medical Genetics, and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University,
410 W. 12th Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2012 May;32(9):1758.

E2F-mediated control of gene expression is believed to have an essential role in 
the control of cellular proliferation. Using a conditional gene-targeting
approach, we show that the targeted disruption of the entire E2F activator
subclass composed of E2f1, E2f2, and E2f3 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts leads to
the activation of p53 and the induction of p53 target genes, including p21(CIP1).
Consequently, cyclin-dependent kinase activity and retinoblastoma (Rb)
phosphorylation are dramatically inhibited, leading to Rb/E2F-mediated repression
of E2F target gene expression and a severe block in cellular proliferation.
Inactivation of p53 in E2f1-, E2f2-, and E2f3-deficient cells, either by
spontaneous mutation or by conditional gene ablation, prevented the induction of 
p21(CIP1) and many other p53 target genes. As a result, cyclin-dependent kinase
activity, Rb phosphorylation, and E2F target gene expression were restored to
nearly normal levels, rendering cells responsive to normal growth signals. These 
findings suggest that a critical function of the E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3 activators 
is in the control of a p53-dependent axis that indirectly regulates E2F-mediated 
transcriptional repression and cellular proliferation.

PMCID: PMC1800646
PMID: 17167174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 26;282(4):2135-43. Epub 2006 Nov 29.

An E2F/miR-20a autoregulatory feedback loop.

Sylvestre Y(1), De Guire V, Querido E, Mukhopadhyay UK, Bourdeau V, Major F,
Ferbeyre G, Chartrand P.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec H3C 3J7,
Canada.

The E2F family of transcription factors is essential in the regulation of the
cell cycle and apoptosis. While the activity of E2F1-3 is tightly controlled by
the retinoblastoma family of proteins, the expression of these factors is also
regulated at the level of transcription, post-translational modifications and
protein stability. Recently, a new level of regulation of E2Fs has been
identified, where micro-RNAs (miRNAs) from the mir-17-92 cluster influence the
translation of the E2F1 mRNA. We now report that miR-20a, a member of the
mir-17-92 cluster, modulates the translation of the E2F2 and E2F3 mRNAs via
binding sites in their 3'-untranslated region. We also found that the endogenous 
E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3 directly bind the promoter of the mir-17-92 cluster
activating its transcription, suggesting an autoregulatory feedback loop between 
E2F factors and miRNAs from the mir-17-92 cluster. Our data also point toward an 
anti-apoptotic role for miR-20a, since overexpression of this miRNA decreased
apoptosis in a prostate cancer cell line, while inhibition of miR-20a by an
antisense oligonucleotide resulted in increased cell death after doxorubicin
treatment. This anti-apoptotic role of miR-20a may explain some of the oncogenic 
capacities of the mir-17-92 cluster. Altogether, these results suggest that the
autoregulation between E2F1-3 and miR-20a is important for preventing an abnormal
accumulation of E2F1-3 and may play a role in the regulation of cellular
proliferation and apoptosis.

PMID: 17135249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Cell Cycle. 2006 Nov 1;5(21):2436-9. Epub 2006 Sep 14.

Making omelets without breaking eggs: E2F-mediated induction of cardiomyoycte
cell proliferation without stimulation of apoptosis.

Ebelt H(1), Liu Z, Müller-Werdan U, Werdan K, Braun T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, Martin-Luther-University, Halle, Germany.

The fundamental role of E2F transcription factors in the regulation of
proliferation is well established. According to a widely accepted model, E2F1,
E2F2, and E2F3 are classified as "activating" E2Fs since they induce
proliferation of quiescent cells whereas E2F4 and E2F5 do not have the power to
incite cell cycle progression but are related to differentiation processes and
were therefore considered to be "repressive". In addition, it has been postulated
that "activating" E2Fs induce apoptosis in a wide variety of cell types depending
on their expression level. However, we demonstrated recently that this 'threshold
model' does not hold true for cardiomyocytes. In a series of experiments in which
we overexpressed individual E2Fs we found that directed expression of E2F2,
unlike E2F1, E2F3 and E2F5, did not induce apoptosis but even suppressed
expression of several pro-apoptotic genes in primary cardiomyocytes. Furthermore,
we established that not only E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3 but also E2F4 was able to
induce S-phase entry of primary cardiomyocytes. Our results suggest that it is
possible to utilize the proliferation-inducing properties of the E2Fs in
cardiomyocytes without activation of potentially harmful pro-apoptotic traits.
This finding might open a new access to stimulate regeneration in postmitotic
tissues such as the heart.

PMID: 17102628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 1;66(19):9736-43.

Antitumor activity of an oncolytic adenovirus-delivered oncogene small
interfering RNA.

Zhang YA(1), Nemunaitis J, Samuel SK, Chen P, Shen Y, Tong AW.

Author information: 
(1)The Mary Crowley Medical Research Center, Dallas, Texas.

Despite successes in animal models, cancer gene therapy with small interfering
RNAs (siRNA) is hindered by the lack of an optimal delivery platform. We examined
the applicability of the replication-competent, oncolytic adenovirus, ONYX-411,
to deliver a mutant K-ras siRNA transgene to human cancer cells.
Proof-of-principle studies showed an additive tumor growth-inhibitory response
through siRNA-mediated K-ras knockdown and ONYX-411-mediated cancer cell lysis. A
novel construct, termed Internavec (for interfering RNA vector), was generated by
cloning a K-ras(v12)-specific siRNA(ras-4) hairpin construct under the control of
the human H1 promoter into the deleted E3b region of ONYX-411. Internavec
acquired an increase in potency of approximately 10-fold in human cancer cells
expressing the relevant K-ras(v12) mutation (H79, H441, and SW480), as defined by
a reduction in the effective dose needed to achieve 50% growth inhibition
(ED(50)). Internavec remained attenuated in nonmalignant epithelial cells. Daily 
intratumoral injections of Internavec (five daily injections of 1 x 10(8)
plaque-forming units) significantly reduced the growth of s.c. H79 pancreatic
cancer xenografts in nu/nu mice by 85.5%, including complete growth suppression
in three of five mice. Parental ONYX-411 or ONYX-411-siRNA(GFP) was markedly less
effective (47.8% growth reduction, P = 0.03; and 44.1% growth reduction, P =
0.03, respectively). siRNA(ras) transgene activity contributed to cell cycle
blockage, increased apoptosis, and marked down-regulation of Ras
signaling-related gene expression (AKT2, GSK3 beta, E2F2, and MAP4K5). These
findings indicate that Internavec can generate a two-pronged attack on tumor
cells through oncogene knockdown and viral oncolysis, resulting in a
significantly enhanced antitumor outcome.

PMID: 17018633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 24;281(47):36124-31. Epub 2006 Sep 27.

Control of the p53-p21CIP1 Axis by E2f1, E2f2, and E2f3 is essential for G1/S
progression and cellular transformation.

Sharma N(1), Timmers C, Trikha P, Saavedra HI, Obery A, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology,
and Medical Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors is believed to have an essential role in 
the control of cellular proliferation by regulating the transcription of genes
involved in cell cycle progression. Previous work has demonstrated that the
targeted inactivation of E2f1, E2f2, and E2f3 results in elevated p21(CIP1)
protein levels, loss of E2F target gene expression, and cell cycle arrest at G1/S
and G2/M, suggesting a strict requirement for these E2Fs in the control of normal
cellular proliferation. We now demonstrate that E2f1, E2f2, and E2f3 are also
required for oncogene-mediated transformation of mouse embryonic fibroblasts.
Analysis of synchronized populations of mouse embryonic fibroblasts revealed that
the inactivation of p21(CIP1) restores the ability of E2f1-3-deficient cells to
enter and transit through G1/S (but not G2/M). In contrast, loss of p53 restored 
the ability of these cells to progress through both G1/S and mitosis, leading to 
their continued proliferation. The inactivation of p53 (but not p21(CIP1))
rendered E2f1-3-deficient cells sensitive to transformation and tumorigenesis.
These results suggest that the negative regulation of the p53-p21(CIP1) axis by
the E2F1-3 factors is critical for cell cycle progression and cellular
transformation.

PMID: 17008321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006 Aug;5(8):2121-9.

Differential effect of silibinin on E2F transcription factors and associated
biological events in chronically UVB-exposed skin versus tumors in SKH-1 hairless
mice.

Gu M(1), Singh RP, Dhanalakshmi S, Mohan S, Agarwal R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, 4200 East Ninth Avenue, Box C238, Denver, 80262,
USA.

UVB radiation-induced DNA damage in skin activates cellular pathways involved in 
DNA repair, cell cycle regulation, and apoptosis, important events that prevent
conversion of damaged skin cells into cancer. We reported recently the efficacy
of silibinin against photocarcinogenesis along with altered molecular events in
tumors (Cancer Research, 64:6349-56, 2004). The molecular and biological events
modulated by silibinin in chronically UVB-irradiated skin leading to cancer
prevention, however, are not known. Herein, we describe effect of silibinin on
skin 15 and 25 weeks after UVB exposure and compared them with molecular
alterations in skin tumors. UVB decreased E2F1 but increased E2F2 and E2F3
protein levels in skin, and these were reversed by silibinin treatment.
Silibinin-induced E2F1 was accompanied by an inhibition of apoptosis and
decreases in p53 and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors. Silibinin-caused
decrease in E2F2 and E2F3 was accompanied by reduced levels of cyclin-dependent
kinases, cyclins, CDC25C, and mitogen-activated protein kinases and Akt signaling
and inhibition of cell proliferation. In tumorigenesis protocols, topical or
dietary silibinin significantly inhibited tumor appearance and growth. As opposed
to UVB-exposed skin, UVB-induced tumors showed elevated levels of E2F1, but these
were reduced in silibinin-treated tumors without any effect on E2F2 and E2F3.
Contrary to the inhibition of apoptosis and p53 expression in UVB-exposed skin
cells, silibinin increased these variables in tumors. These differential effects 
of silibinin on E2F1 versus E2F2 and E2F3 and their associated molecular
alterations and biological effects in chronic UVB-exposed skin suggest their role
in silibinin interference with photocarcinogenesis.

PMID: 16928834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Neurol Sci. 2006 Sep 25;247(2):192-201. Epub 2006 Jun 19.

The pattern of E2F1 and c-myb immunoreactivities in the CA1 region is different
from those in the CA2/3 region of the gerbil hippocampus induced by transient
ischemia.

Hwang IK(1), Yoo KY, Cho BM, Hwang HS, Kim SM, Oh SM, Choi SK, Hwang do Y, Won
MH, Moon SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine, Hallym University, Chunchon
200-702, South Korea.

In this study, we examined transient ischemia-induced changes in transcription
factor E2F1 and c-myb expressions in the gerbil hippocampus after 5 min of
transient forebrain ischemia. E2F1 immunoreactivity significantly increased in
the CA1 region 6-12 h after ischemia/reperfusion. c-myb immunoreactivity
increased mainly in CA1 pyramidal cells with time by 12 h after ischemia.
Thereafter, E2F1 and c-myb immunoreactivities significantly decreased compared to
those in the 12 h post-ischemic group. Four days after ischemia/reperfusion, E2F1
and c-myb immunoreactivities were detected in non-pyramidal cells. Ten days after
ischemia, c-myb immunoreactivity increased again: at this time, astrocytes as
well as non-pyramidal cells showed E2F1 and c-myb immunoreactivities. In the
CA2/3 region, E2F1 and c-myb immunoreactivities mainly changed in non-pyramidal
cells, and 10 days after ischemia, c-myb immunoreactivity was not expressed in
astrocytes. In conclusion, E2F1 and c-myb significantly alter in pyramidal cells 
and express in astrocytes in the gerbil hippocampal CA1 region after transient
ischemia. These results indicate that E2F1 and c-myb in the CA1 region after
ischemic damage may be associated with delayed neuronal death.

PMID: 16782130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Lab Invest. 2006 Aug;86(8):748-66. Epub 2006 Jun 5.

Adenovirus-mediated p53 tumor suppressor gene therapy of osteosarcoma.

Ternovoi VV(1), Curiel DT, Smith BF, Siegal GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Gene Therapy, Department of Medicine, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35233, USA.

The clinical outcome for osteosarcoma (OS) remains discouraging despite efforts
to optimize treatment using conventional modalities including surgery,
radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Novel therapeutic approaches based on our
expanding understanding of the mechanisms of tumor cell killing have the
potential to alter this situation. Tumor suppressor gene therapy aims to restore 
the function of a tumor suppressor gene lost or functionally inactivated in
cancer cells. One such molecule, the p53 tumor suppressor gene plays a critical
role in safeguarding the integrity of the genome and preventing tumorigenesis.
Introduction of wild-type (wt) p53 into transformed cells has been shown to be
lethal for most cancer cells in vitro, but clinical trials of p53 gene
replacement have had limited success. Analysis of these clinical trials
highlighted the insufficient efficacy of current vectors and low proapoptotic
activity of wt p53 as a single agent in vivo. In this review, a contemporary
summarization of the current status of adenovirus-mediated p53 gene therapy of OS
is presented. Advancement in our understanding of p53 tumor suppressor activity, 
the molecular biology of chemoresistant OS, and recent advances in tumor
targeting with adenoviral vectors are also addressed. Based on these parameters, 
prospects for future investigations are proposed.

PMID: 16751779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Jul;5(7):771-6. Epub 2006 Jul 26.

Heterogeneous cross-talk of E2F family members is crucially involved in growth
modulatory effects of interferon-gamma and EGF.

Reimer D(1), Sadr S, Wiedemair A, Concin N, Hofstetter G, Marth C, Zeimet AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynocology, Innsbruck Medical University,
Austria.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Jul;5(7):777-8.

There is growing evidence that deregulation of E2F transcription factors is
causatively involved in the patho-physiology of various tumors. However, no data 
on the role of E2F family members in tumor biology of ovarian cancer are
available. We here describe an expression study of all known E2F transcription
factors and their coactivators DP-1 and DP-2 in various human ovarian cancer cell
lines and the breast cancer cell line T47D and their involvement in pathways
affected by interferon-gamma and EGF. A significant overexpression of the
proliferation-promoting E2F1 and especially E2F2 points to a pivotal role in
modulating the uncontrolled proliferation in ovarian cancer cells. Of special
note is the fact that interferon-gamma treatment did not only caused a reduction 
of the proliferation-promoting transcription factors E2F1 and E2F2, but also
increased the inhibiting transcription factors E2F4 and E2F5, thus underlining
the importance of an E2F cross-talk in the anti-proliferative function of
interferon-gamma. Moreover, an increase in DP-1 and E2F3 is probably involved in 
the proliferation-enhancing effect of EGF. Our study provides a new insight in
the crucial role of E2F cross-talk, especially the role of the inhibiting
transcription factors E2F4 and E2F5, in the tumor biology of cancer and its
possible usefulness as targets in anti-cancer therapy.

PMID: 16721044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 15;12(8):2404-13.

Transcriptional and posttranscriptional down-regulation of the imprinted tumor
suppressor gene ARHI (DRAS3) in ovarian cancer.

Lu Z(1), Luo RZ, Peng H, Rosen DG, Atkinson EN, Warneke C, Huang M, Nishmoto A,
Liu J, Liao WS, Yu Y, Bast RC Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE: ARHI expression is lost or markedly down-regulated in the majority of
ovarian cancers. The mechanism by which ARHI is down-regulated in ovarian cancers
is still not clear. Our previous reports indicated that ARHI promoter activity
was reduced in ovarian cancer cells, due in part to the effects of negative
regulatory transcription factor(s).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND RESULTS: We now show that E2F1 and E2F4, but not E2F2,
E2F3, or E2F5, bind to the ARHI promoter and repress its activity in ovarian
cancer cells. Consistent with this observation, immunochemical staining of cell
lines and of 364 samples of ovarian cancer tissue show that the expression of
E2F1 and E2F4 proteins is much higher in ovarian cancer cells than in normal
ovarian epithelial cells, and that increased expression of E2Fs was negatively
correlated with ARHI expression (P < 0.05). Mutation of the putative E2F binding 
site in the ARHI promoter reversed this inhibitory effect and significantly
increased ARHI promoter activity. In addition to the effects of transcriptional
regulation, ARHI mRNA also exhibited a significantly reduced half-life in ovarian
cancer cells when compared with that in normal ovarian epithelial cells (P <
0.01), suggesting posttranscriptional regulation of ARHI expression. ARHI mRNA
contains AU-rich elements (ARE) in the 3'-untranslated region. We have found that
these AREs interact with HuR, an ARE-binding protein that stabilizes bound mRNAs,
possibly contributing to the rapid turnover of ARHI mRNA. Finally, reduced HuR
ARE binding activity was observed in ovarian cancer cells when compared with
normal ovarian surface epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data suggest that ARHI expression is regulated
at both the transcriptional and the posttranscriptional levels, contributing to
the dramatic decrease in ARHI expression in ovarian cancers.

PMID: 16638845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 Apr 14;34(7):2046-55. Print 2006.

Novel link between E2F1 and Smac/DIABLO: proapoptotic Smac/DIABLO is
transcriptionally upregulated by E2F1.

Xie W(1), Jiang P, Miao L, Zhao Y, Zhimin Z, Qing L, Zhu WG, Wu M.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and School of
Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China Hefei, Anhui,
230027, China.

Deregulated expression of E2F1 not only promotes S-phase entry but also induces
apoptosis. Although it has been well documented that E2F1 is able to induce
p53-dependent apoptosis via raising ARF activity, the mechanism by which E2F
induces p53-independent apoptosis remains unclear. Here we report that E2F1 can
directly bind to and activate the promoter of Smac/DIABLO, a mitochondrial
proapoptotic gene, through the E2F1-binding sites BS2 (-542 approximately -535
bp) and BS3 (-200 approximately -193 bp). BS2 and BS3 appear to be utilized in
combination rather than singly by E2F1 in activation of Smac/DIABLO. Activation
of BS2 and BS3 are E2F1-specific, since neither E2F2 nor E2F3 is able to activate
BS2 or BS3. Using the H1299 ER-E2F1 cell line where E2F1 activity can be
conditionally induced, E2F1 has been shown to upregulate the Smac/DIABLO
expression at both mRNA and protein levels upon 4-hydroxytamoxifen treatment,
resulting in an enhanced mitochondria-mediated apoptosis. Reversely, reducing the
Smac/DIABLO expression by RNA interference significantly diminishes apoptosis
induced by E2F1. These results may suggest a novel mechanism by which E2F1
promotes p53-independent apoptosis through directly regulating its downstream
mitochondrial apoptosis-inducing factors, such as Smac/DIABLO.

PMCID: PMC1440883
PMID: 16617145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 May;26(9):3468-77.

Specific role of the SR protein splicing factor B52 in cell cycle control in
Drosophila.

Rasheva VI(1), Knight D, Bozko P, Marsh K, Frolov MV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, MBRB 2352, MC 669, 900 S. Ashland Ave., Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

E2F and retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein pRB are important regulators of
cell proliferation; however, the regulation of these proteins in vivo is not well
understood. In Drosophila there are two E2F genes, an activator, de2f1, and a
repressor, de2f2. The loss of de2f1 gives rise to the G(1)/S block accompanied by
the repression of E2F-dependent transcription. These defects can be suppressed by
mutation of de2f2. In this work, we show that the de2f1 mutant phenotype is
rescued by the loss of the pre-mRNA splicing factor SR protein B52. Mutations in 
B52 restore S phase in clones of de2f1 mutant cells and phenocopy the loss of the
de2f2 function. B52 acts upstream of de2f2 and plays a specific role in
regulation of de2f2 pre-mRNA splicing. In B52-deficient cells, the level of dE2F2
protein is severely reduced and the expression of dE2F2-dependent genes is
deregulated. Reexpression of the intronless copy of dE2F2 in B52-deficient cells 
restores the dE2F2-mediated repression. These results uncover a previously
unrecognized role of the splicing factor in maintaining the G(1)/S block in vivo 
by specific regulation of the dE2F2 repressor function.

PMCID: PMC1447424
PMID: 16611989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Jan-Feb;1759(1-2):60-8. Epub 2006 Mar 24.

JPO1/CDCA7, a novel transcription factor E2F1-induced protein, possesses
intrinsic transcriptional regulator activity.

Goto Y(1), Hayashi R, Muramatsu T, Ogawa H, Eguchi I, Oshida Y, Ohtani K, Yoshida
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, School of Agriculture, Meiji University, 1-1-1
Higashimita, Tama-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 214-8571, Japan.

JPO1/CDCA7 was originally identified as a c-Myc-responsive gene that participates
in neoplastic transformation. Here, we report the identification of JPO1/CDCA7 as
a direct transcriptional target of transcription factor E2F1. We demonstrated
that overexpression of E2F1 by adenoviral-mediated gene transfer upregulated
JPO1/CDCA7 mRNA expression in human cells. Analysis of human and mouse JPO1/CDCA7
promoter constructs showed that an E2F-responsive sequence was necessary for
E2F1-induced activation of the JPO1/CDCA7 gene transcription. Among the members
of the E2F family, E2F1 to E2F4, but not E2F5 or E2F6, activated the JPO1/CDCA7
reporter construct. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated that
E2F1, E2F2, and E2F4 specifically bound to an E2F-responsive sequence of the
human JPO1/CDCA7 gene. Like JPO2/R1, which has a homologous transcriptional
regulator domain, the C-terminal cysteine-rich region of JPO1/CDCA7 protein
induced transcriptional activity in a mammalian one-hybrid assay. Taken together,
our results suggest that JPO1/CDCA7 is a unique transcription regulator whose
expression is activated by E2F1 as well as c-Myc.

PMID: 16580749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Proteomics. 2006 Apr;6 Suppl 1:S42-50.

Differential proteome profiles in E2F2-deficient T lymphocytes.

Azkargorta M(1), Arizmendi JM, Elortza F, Alkorta N, Zubiaga AM, Fullaondo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of the Basque
Country, Leioa, Spain.

E2F transcription factors are important regulators of proliferation,
differentiation and apoptosis. We have previously shown that E2F2-/- mice develop
late-onset autoimmune features, similar to systemic lupus erythematosus.
E2F2-deficient T lymphocytes exhibit enhanced T cell receptor (TCR)-stimulated
proliferation, which is presumably responsible for causing autoimmunity in
E2F2-deficient mice. The comparison of E2F2-/- and wild-type T lymphocyte
expression profiles by 2-DE followed by MS identification has revealed a set of
deregulated proteins involved in TCR-mediated signaling, cell survival and stress
responses. The deregulation of these proteins may account for the
hyperproliferative phenotype that characterizes E2F2-/- T cells. Our work shows
that proteomic analysis of gene-knockout strains can be a useful methodology to
study the functional role of specific genes.

PMID: 16544283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Feb;26(4):1527-37.

An E2F binding-deficient Rb1 protein partially rescues developmental defects
associated with Rb1 nullizygosity.

Sun H(1), Chang Y, Schweers B, Dyer MA, Zhang X, Hayward SW, Goodrich DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm 
& Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

Rb1 is essential for normal embryonic development, as null mice die in
midgestation with widespread unscheduled cell proliferation. Rb1 protein (pRb)
mediates cell cycle control by binding E2F transcription factors and repressing
expression from E2F-dependent promoters. An increasing amount of evidence
suggests that pRb loss also compromises cellular differentiation. Since
differentiation is often dependent on cell cycle exit, it is currently unclear
whether the effects of pRb on differentiation are an indirect consequence of
pRb/E2F-mediated cell cycle control or whether they reflect direct
cell-type-specific pRb functions. We have mutated Rb1 in the mouse to express a
protein (R654W) specifically deficient in binding E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3. R654W
mutant embryos exhibit cell cycle defects the same as those of Rb1 null embryos, 
reinforcing the importance of the interactions of pRb with E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3
for cell cycle control. However, R654W embryos survive at least 2 days longer
than Rb1 null embryos, and increased life span is associated with improved
erythrocyte and fetal liver macrophage differentiation. In contrast, R654W pRb
does not rescue differentiation defects associated with pRb-deficient retinae.
These data indicate that Rb1 makes important cell-type-specific contributions to 
cellular differentiation that are genetically separable from its general ability 
to stably bind E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3 and regulate the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC1367194
PMID: 16449662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. BMC Infect Dis. 2006 Jan 31;6:15.

Preliminary evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction associated with post-infective 
fatigue after acute infection with Epstein Barr virus.

Vernon SD(1), Whistler T, Cameron B, Hickie IB, Reeves WC, Lloyd A.

Author information: 
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA.
svernon@cdc.gov

BACKGROUND: Acute infectious diseases are typically accompanied by non-specific
symptoms including fever, malaise, irritability and somnolence that usually
resolve on recovery. However, in some individuals these symptoms persist in what 
is commonly termed post-infective fatigue. The objective of this pilot study was 
to determine the gene expression correlates of post-infective fatigue following
acute Epstein Barr virus (EBV) infection.
METHODS: We followed 5 people with acute mononucleosis who developed
post-infective fatigue of more than 6 months duration and 5 HLA-matched control
subjects who recovered within 3 months. Subjects had peripheral blood mononuclear
cell (PBMC) samples collected at varying time points including at diagnosis, then
every 2 weeks for 3 months, then every 3 months for a year. Total RNA was
extracted from the PBMC samples and hybridized to microarrays spotted with 3,800 
oligonucleotides.
RESULTS: Those who developed post-infective fatigue had gene expression profiles 
indicative of an altered host response during acute mononucleosis compared to
those who recovered uneventfully. Several genes including ISG20 (interferon
stimulated gene), DNAJB2 (DnaJ [Hsp40] homolog and CD99), CDK8 (cyclin-dependent 
kinase 8), E2F2 (E2F transcription factor 2), CDK8 (cyclin-dependent kinase 8),
and ACTN2 (actinin, alpha 2), known to be regulated during EBV infection, were
differentially expressed in post-infective fatigue cases. Several of the
differentially expressed genes affect mitochondrial functions including fatty
acid metabolism and the cell cycle.
CONCLUSION: These preliminary data provide insights into alterations in gene
transcripts associated with the varied clinical outcomes from acute infectious
mononucleosis.

PMCID: PMC1373655
PMID: 16448567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. PLoS Biol. 2005 Dec;3(12):e401. Epub 2005 Nov 15.

Impaired DNA replication within progenitor cell pools promotes leukemogenesis.

Bilousova G(1), Marusyk A, Porter CC, Cardiff RD, DeGregori J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

Impaired cell cycle progression can be paradoxically associated with increased
rates of malignancies. Using retroviral transduction of bone marrow progenitors
followed by transplantation into mice, we demonstrate that inhibition of
hematopoietic progenitor cell proliferation impairs competition, promoting the
expansion of progenitors that acquire oncogenic mutations which restore cell
cycle progression. Conditions that impair DNA replication dramatically enhance
the proliferative advantage provided by the expression of Bcr-Abl or mutant p53, 
which provide no apparent competitive advantage under conditions of healthy
replication. Furthermore, for the Bcr-Abl oncogene the competitive advantage in
contexts of impaired DNA replication dramatically increases leukemogenesis.
Impaired replication within hematopoietic progenitor cell pools can select for
oncogenic events and thereby promote leukemia, demonstrating the importance of
replicative competence in the prevention of tumorigenesis. The demonstration that
replication-impaired, poorly competitive progenitor cell pools can promote
tumorigenesis provides a new rationale for links between tumorigenesis and common
human conditions of impaired DNA replication such as dietary folate deficiency,
chemotherapeutics targeting dNTP synthesis, and polymorphisms in genes important 
for DNA metabolism.

PMCID: PMC1283331
PMID: 16277552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Cancer Lett. 2006 Aug 28;240(2):234-42. Epub 2005 Nov 7.

Quercetin arrests G2/M phase and induces caspase-dependent cell death in U937
cells.

Lee TJ(1), Kim OH, Kim YH, Lim JH, Kim S, Park JW, Kwon TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Chronic Disease Research Center, School of
Medicine, Keimyung University, 194 DongSan-Dong Jung-Gu, Taegu 700-712, South
Korea.

Quercetin, a natural product derived from grapes, has been shown to prevent
carcinogenesis in murine models. We report here that quercetin induces
anti-proliferation and arrests G2/M phase in U937 cells. The G2/M phase
accumulation was accompanied by an increase in the level of the cyclin B. In
contrast, the level of the cyclin D, cyclin E, E2F1, and E2F2 was marked
decreased in quercetin-treated U937 cells. Removal of quercetin from the culture 
medium stimulates U937 cells to synchronously re-enter the cell cycle, decrease
expression level of cyclin B, and increased the expression level of cyclin D and 
cyclin E. These data demonstrate that quercetin causes reversible G2/M phase
arrest, which was related with dramatic changes in the level of cyclin B, cyclin 
D, and cyclin E. Quercetin-induced down-regulation of cyclin D and cyclin E was
associated with suppression of transcriptional levels but not protein stability. 
In addition, quercetin-treated U937 cells showed DNA fragmentation, increased
sub-G1 population, and generated a 60kDa cleavage product of PLC-gamma1 in a
dose-dependent manner, which were significantly inhibited by z-VAD-fmk. These
data clearly indicate that quercetin-induced apoptosis is associated with caspase
activation. In summary, the growth inhibition of the quercetin is highly related 
to cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase and induction of caspase-dependent
apoptosis in human promonocytic U937 cells.

PMID: 16274926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Nov 1;102(44):15948-53. Epub 2005 Oct 25.

Distinctions in the specificity of E2F function revealed by gene expression
signatures.

Black EP(1), Hallstrom T, Dressman HK, West M, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Department of Molecular
Genetics and Microbiology, Medical Center, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors provides essential activities for
coordinating the control of cellular proliferation and cell fate. Both E2F1 and
E2F3 proteins have been shown to be particularly important for cell
proliferation, whereas the E2F1 protein has the capacity to promote apoptosis. To
explore the basis for this specificity of function, we used DNA microarray
analysis to probe for the distinctions in the two E2F activities. Gene expression
profiles that distinguish either E2F1- or E2F3-expressing cells from quiescent
cells are enriched in genes encoding cell cycle and DNA replication activities,
consistent with many past studies. E2F1 profile is also enriched in genes known
to function in apoptosis. We also identified patterns of gene expression that
specifically differentiate the activity of E2F1 and E2F3; this profile is
enriched in genes known to function in mitosis. The specificity of E2F function
has been attributed to protein interactions mediated by the marked box domain,
and we now show that chimeric E2F proteins generate expression signatures that
reflect the origin of the marked box, thus linking the biochemical mechanism for 
specificity of function with specificity of gene activation.

PMCID: PMC1276052
PMID: 16249342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2005 Oct;46(10):3597-603.

Induction of replication in human corneal endothelial cells by E2F2 transcription
factor cDNA transfer.

McAlister JC(1), Joyce NC, Harris DL, Ali RR, Larkin DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Ophthalmology, University
College London, UK.

PURPOSE: Corneal endothelial cells in humans do not replicate to any meaningful
extent. Diminishing density of the cell monolayer with age and in the disease
states is a major cause of loss of corneal transparency. This study was conducted
to test the hypothesis that overexpression of the transcription factor E2F2
results in replication in nonproliferating human corneal endothelial cells.
METHODS: Whole human corneas were incubated for 2 hours in a solution of
recombinant E1(-)/E3(-) adenovirus incorporating cDNA encoding E2F2 and green
fluorescent protein (GFP) under control of a bidirectional promoter and
subsequently maintained in ex vivo culture. Control specimens were incubated with
an identical virus bearing the GFP sequence only, or virus-free medium.
Efficiency of gene transfer and localization was examined by fluorescence
microscopy. En face confocal microscopy of the corneal endothelial surface was
used to image recombinant E2F2 expression. 5-bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)
incorporation was used to examine progression to the S phase. Changes in density 
of the corneal endothelium were quantified by specular microscopy and counting of
trypan-blue-stained cells. Apoptosis was tested with a TUNEL assay.
RESULTS: Recombinant proteins were expressed predominantly in the endothelium and
in a high proportion of endothelial cells in the first week after exposure to
virus, diminishing thereafter. Compared with the control, transduction with E2F2 
resulted in progression from the G(1) to the S phase in a significant number of
cells and in increased cell density. Apoptosis was not found to any significant
extent.
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of the transcription factor E2F2 in nonmitotic human 
corneal endothelial cells results in short-term expression, cell-cycle
progression, and increased monolayer cell density.

PMID: 16186339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Oncogene. 2006 Jan 12;25(2):230-9.

E2F-HDAC complexes negatively regulate the tumor suppressor gene ARHI in breast
cancer.

Lu Z(1), Luo RZ, Peng H, Huang M, Nishmoto A, Hunt KK, Helin K, Liao WS, Yu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

ARHI is a maternally imprinted tumor suppressor gene whose expression is markedly
downregulated in breast cancer. Reactivation of ARHI expression in breast cancer 
cells is associated with increased histone H3 acetylation and decreased lysine 9 
methylation of histone H3. An ARHI promoter segment that spanned bases -420 to
+58 (designated the P2 region) exhibits significantly higher promoter activity in
normal cells than in cancer cells. To better understand the molecular mechanisms 
contributing to this differential transcriptional activity, we sought to identify
transcription factors that bind to the P2 region of the ARHI promoter and
regulate its activity. Sequence analysis and oligonucleotide competition in
electrophoretic mobility shift assays identified an A2 fragment containing an
E2F-binding site. Using specific antibodies in supershift assays, we have shown
that anti-E2F1 and 4 antibodies can supershift the A2-protein complexes, whereas 
anti-E2F2 and 6 antibodies cannot, demonstrating that the A2 fragment interacts
with specific members of the E2F family proteins. When compared with normal
breast epithelial cells, breast cancer cells have significantly elevated
expression of E2F1, 4 and increased E2F DNA-binding activity. Moreover, chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that both E2F1 and 4 bind to the ARHI
promoter in breast cancer cells in vivo. This binding was reduced when the cells 
were treated with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor--trichostatin A (TSA).
When SKBr3 cells were cotransfected with an ARHI/luciferase reporter and
E2F-expression vectors, E2F1 and 4 reduced ARHI promoter activity 2-3-fold, and
this reduction could be reversed by TSA treatment. The negative regulation by
E2F-HDAC complexes could also be reduced by small interfering RNA of E2F1 and 4. 
While the retinoblastoma protein, pRB, alone had no effect on ARHI promoter
activity, repression by E2F1, but not E2F4, was enhanced by the coexpression of
pRB. Taken together, our results suggest that E2F1, 4 and their complexes with
HDAC play an important role in downregulating the expression of the tumor
suppressor gene ARHI in breast cancer cells.

PMID: 16158053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Sep 13;102(37):13005-12. Epub 2005 Sep 1.

RBR3, a member of the retinoblastoma-related family from maize, is regulated by
the RBR1/E2F pathway.

Sabelli PA(1), Dante RA, Leiva-Neto JT, Jung R, Gordon-Kamm WJ, Larkins BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.

Retinoblastoma-related (RBR) proteins regulate cell division in higher eukaryotes
by controlling the adenovirus E2 promoter binding factor (E2F)/dimerization
partner (DP) family of transcription factors that regulate expression of many
genes involved in cell-cycle progression. We identified a previously undescribed 
member of the maize RBR family, RBR3, which has the characteristic structure and 
binding activities of pocket proteins, where interaction depends on a LxCxE motif
in the partner proteins and a critical cysteine within the B pocket domain. Like 
other RBR proteins, RBR3 appears to be regulated by phosphorylation mediated by
cyclin-dependent kinases. During endosperm development, RBR3 expression is
restricted to the mitotic stage preceding the onset of endoreduplication. This
finding suggests a role distinct from RBR1, which is constitutively expressed.
Two sites in the RBR3 promoter bind to complexes containing maize E2F1 and DP
proteins. Expression of wheat dwarf virus RepA protein, which blocks RBR1
activity and stimulates cell proliferation, dramatically up-regulates RBR3, but
not RBR1, RNA in embryogenic maize calli. The results indicate that RBR3
expression is controlled by RBR1 through the activity of E2F/DP and that RBR3 is 
the maize equivalent of mammalian p107. Furthermore, maize and related grasses
might have evolved a compensatory mechanism among distinct types of RBR proteins 
to ensure robust control of pocket protein activity.

PMCID: PMC1201608
PMID: 16141340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2005 Aug;4(3):398-402.

Preparation and analysis of cSNP chip on hepatocellular carcinoma-related genes.

Wang J(1), Ni H, Chen L, Liu YX, Chen CB, Song WQ.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China.
wangjuannk@eyou.com

BACKGROUND: The understanding of cSNPs of cancer-related genes harboring in high 
frequency loss regions of tumor chromosomes can advance the disclosure of genetic
and variant mechanisms of tumorigenesis, and the investigation of cancer
susceptibility. In preparing a gene chip for detecting polymorphisms on coding
region of genes in hepatocellular carcinoma tissues, some cSNPs are of interest
for their potential links with phenotype.
METHODS: The genes harboring in loss regions with high frequency of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) were selected, the related information of cSNP
sequences was obtained from the SNP database (dbSNP) of the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Then appropriate primers and oligonucleotide
probes were designed according to the SNP sites, and a gene chip for the
detection of SNPs was constructed. The chip included 48 cSNPs of 25
hepatocellular carcinoma-related genes. The PCR products labeled by Dig-dUTP were
hybridized with the cSNP chip.
RESULTS: The sensitivity, influence by probe concentration, and reiteration of
the chip were detected, with a high sensitivity of 6X10(-3) ng/mul. The signal of
hybridization was reduced with a lower concentration of probe. Seven
polymorphisms of caspase 9 (rs2308941)C-->T and DOK2(rs2242241) T-->G, 6 of
polymorphisms of EGFL3 (rs947345)A -->G, caspase 9 ( rs2308938) C-->G and
PHGDH(rs1801955)T-->A, 5 of polymorphisms of E2F2(rs3218170) G-->A,4 of
polymorphisms of MUTYH(rs1140507)T-->C and BNIP3L(rs1055806)G-->T, and 1 of
polymorphism of TNFRSF1B (rs1061622)T-->G were detected by the chip in the
tissues of 10 HCC. Samples of caspase 9 (rs2308941G) and (rs2308941A) were
verified by PCR-SSCP and sequencing.
CONCLUSION: The cSNP chip of hepatocellular carcinoma-related genes can
accelerate the discovery of polymorphic markers on hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMID: 16109524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Cell Cycle. 2005 Sep;4(9):1272-80. Epub 2005 Sep 29.

Retinoblastoma family 2 is required in vivo for the tissue-specific repression of
dE2F2 target genes.

Stevaux O(1), Dimova DK, Ji JY, Moon NS, Frolov MV, Dyson NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown, Massachusetts
02129, USA.

In higher eukaryotes, the Retinoblastoma and E2F families of proteins control the
transcription of a large number of target genes. Here, we have mutated the second
Drosophila Retinoblastoma family gene (Rbf2), and contrasted the in vivo
molecular functions of RBF2 with dE2F2, the only E2F partner of RBF2. Previous
studies failed to uncover a unique role for RBF2 in E2F regulation. Here we find 
that RBF2 functions in concert with dE2F2 in vivo to repress the expression of
differentiation markers in ovaries and embryos where RBF2 is highly expressed. We
have compared the profiles of transcripts that are mis-expressed in ovaries,
embryos and S2 cells where RBF2 function has been ablated and find that RBF2 and 
dE2F2 control strikingly different transcriptional programs in each situation. In
vivo promoter occupancy studies point to the redistribution of dE2F/RBF complexes
to different promoters in different cell types as one mechanism governing the
tissue-specific regulation of dE2F/RBF target genes. These results demonstrate
that RBF2 has a unique function in repressing E2F-regulated differentiation
markers and that dE2F2 and RBF2 are required to regulate different sets of target
genes in different tissues.

PMID: 16082225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Oct;16(10):4765-80. Epub 2005 Jul 29.

Phosphoproteome profiling of transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta signaling:
abrogation of TGFbeta1-dependent phosphorylation of transcription factor-II-I
(TFII-I) enhances cooperation of TFII-I and Smad3 in transcription.

Stasyk T(1), Dubrovska A, Lomnytska M, Yakymovych I, Wernstedt C, Heldin CH,
Hellman U, Souchelnytskyi S.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Uppsala University, SE-751 24 Uppsala,
Sweden.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta) signaling involves activation of a
number of signaling pathways, several of which are controlled by phosphorylation 
events. Here, we describe a phosphoproteome profiling of MCF-7 human breast
epithelial cells treated with TGFbeta1. We identified 32 proteins that change
their phosphorylation upon treatment with TGFbeta1; 26 of these proteins are
novel targets of TGFbeta1. We show that Smad2 and Smad3 have different effects on
the dynamics of TGFbeta1-induced protein phosphorylation. The identified proteins
belong to nine functional groups, e.g., proteins regulating RNA processing,
cytoskeletal rearrangements, and proteasomal degradation. To evaluate the
proteomics findings, we explored the functional importance of TGFbeta1-dependent 
phosphorylation of one of the targets, i.e., transcription factor-II-I (TFII-I). 
We confirmed that TGFbeta1 stimulated TFII-I phosphorylation at serine residues
371 and 743. Abrogation of the phosphorylation by replacement of Ser371 and
Ser743 with alanine residues resulted in enhanced complex formation between
TFII-I and Smad3, and enhanced cooperation between TFII-I and Smad3 in
transcriptional regulation, as evaluated by a microarray-based measurement of
expression of endogenous cyclin D2, cyclin D3, and E2F2 genes, and by a
luciferase reporter assay. Thus, TGFbeta1-dependent phosphorylation of TFII-I may
modulate TGFbeta signaling at the transcriptional level.

PMCID: PMC1237082
PMID: 16055503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Immunol. 2005 Jul 15;175(2):647-55.

E2F1 and E2F2 are differentially required for homeostasis-driven and
antigen-induced T cell proliferation in vivo.

DeRyckere D(1), DeGregori J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

Homeostasis-driven T cell proliferation occurs in response to a lymphopenic
environment and is mediated by TCR and IL-7 signaling. In this report, we
demonstrate a defect in the proliferation of murine naive and memory T cells
lacking both E2F1 and E2F2 in response to lymphopenic conditions, suggesting that
E2F1 and E2F2 function redundantly downstream of TCR and/or IL-7 signaling during
homeostasis-driven proliferation. In contrast, T cell proliferation in response
to antigenic stimulation is either unaffected (in vivo) or potentiated (ex vivo) 
by loss of E2F1 and E2F2, indicating divergent requirements for these E2F factors
in T cell proliferation mediated by distinct stimuli. E2F1/E2F2 double knockout
(DKO) T cells enter S phase in response to homeostatic signaling, but fail to
divide, suggesting that S phase progression is either incomplete or defective. In
addition, E2F1/E2F2 DKO mice do not recover normal T cell numbers following
exposure to a sublethal dose of radiation, indicating that this defect in
homeostasis-driven proliferation is physiologically relevant. Consistent with
their failure in cell cycle progression, the differentiation of DKO T cells into 
memory T cells in response to homeostatic signals is significantly reduced. These
observations support the idea that proliferation is required for memory T cell
formation and also have implications for the development of clinical strategies
to minimize the occurrence of lymphopenia-induced autoimmunity.

PMID: 16002659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. EMBO J. 2005 May 18;24(10):1821-30. Epub 2005 Apr 28.

HPV31 E7 facilitates replication by activating E2F2 transcription through its
interaction with HDACs.

Longworth MS(1), Wilson R, Laimins LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, 303 E. Chicago Avenue, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

The E7 proteins of human papillomaviruses (HPVs) contribute to oncogenesis by
associating with Rb family members as well class I histone deacetylases (HDACs). 
The binding of HDACs is also important for the maintenance of viral episomes
during the differentiation-dependent productive life cycle. The effects of E7 and
other viral proteins on E2F family members were examined in differentiating
keratinocytes. E7 was found to specifically activate E2F2 transcription in
suprabasal keratinocytes through its ability to bind HDACs. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that, in differentiating cells, E7 acts
to inhibit HDAC binding to the E2F2 promoter resulting in activation of
expression. Reduction of E2F2 levels through the use of siRNA confirmed that E2F2
expression facilitated HPV replication but its loss did not affect cell
proliferation. Our study demonstrates a mechanism by which binding of HDACs to E7
directly modulates viral replication and identifies E2F2 as a possible target for
antiviral therapies.

PMCID: PMC1142589
PMID: 15861133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Development. 2005 Jun;132(11):2561-71. Epub 2005 Apr 27.

Multiple roles of the F-box protein Slimb in Drosophila egg chamber development.

Muzzopappa M(1), Wappner P.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Leloir and IIB, FCEyN-Universidad de Buenos Aires, Patricias
Argentinas 435, Buenos Aires, 1405, Argentina.

Substrate-specific degradation of proteins by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway is
a precise mechanism that controls the abundance of key cell regulators. SCF
complexes are a family of E3 ubiquitin ligases that target specific proteins for 
destruction at the 26S-proteasome. These complexes are composed of three constant
polypeptides--Skp1, Cullin1/3 and Roc1/Rbx1--and a fourth variable adapter, the
F-box protein. Slimb (Slmb) is a Drosophila F-Box protein that fulfills several
roles in development and cell physiology. We analyzed its participation in egg
chamber development and found that slmb is required in both the follicle cells
and the germline at different stages of oogenesis. We observed that in slmb
somatic clones, morphogenesis of the germarium and encapsulation of the cyst were
altered, giving rise to egg chambers with extra germline cells and two oocytes.
Furthermore, in slmb somatic clones, we observed ectopic Fasciclin 3 expression, 
suggesting a delay in follicle cell differentiation, which correlated with the
occurrence of ectopic polar cells, lack of interfollicular stalks and
mislocalization of the oocyte. Later in oogenesis, Slmb was required in somatic
cells to specify the position, size and morphology of dorsal appendages. Mild
overactivation of the Dpp pathway caused similar phenotypes that could be
antagonized by simultaneous overexpression of Slmb, suggesting that Slmb might
normally downregulate the Dpp pathway in follicle cells. Indeed, ectopic
expression of a dad-LacZ enhancer trap revealed that the Dpp pathway was
upregulated in slmb somatic clones and, consistent with this, ectopic
accumulation of the co-Smad protein, Medea, was recorded. By analyzing slmb
germline clones, we found that loss of Slmb provoked a reduction in E2f2 and Dp
levels, which correlated with misregulation of mitotic cycles during cyst
formation, abnormal nurse cell endoreplication and impairment of dumping of the
nurse cell content into the oocyte.

PMID: 15857915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Apr;25(8):3027-39.

dDP is needed for normal cell proliferation.

Frolov MV(1), Moon NS, Dyson NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Bldg. 149, 13th St.,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

To gain insight into the essential functions of E2F, we have examined the
phenotypes caused by complete inactivation of E2F and DP family members in
Drosophila. Our results show that dDP requires dE2F1 and dE2F2 for DNA-binding
activity in vitro and in vivo. In tissue culture cells and in mutant animals, the
levels of dE2F and dDP proteins are strongly interdependent. In the absence of
dDP, the levels of dE2F1 and dE2F2 decline dramatically, and vice versa.
Accordingly, the cell cycle and transcriptional phenotypes caused by targeting
dDP mimic the effects of targeting both dE2F1 and dE2F2 and are indistinguishable
from the effects of inactivating all three proteins. Although trans-heterozygous 
dDP mutant animals develop to late pupal stages, the analysis of somatic mutant
clones shows that dDP mutant cells are at a severe proliferative disadvantage
when compared directly with wild-type neighbors. Strikingly, the timing of
S-phase entry or exit is not delayed in dDP mutant clones, nor is the
accumulation of cyclin A or cyclin B. However, the maximal level of
bromodeoxyuridine incorporation is reduced in dDP mutant clones, and RNA
interference experiments show that dDP-depleted cells are prone to stall in S
phase. In addition, dDP mutant clones contain reduced numbers of mitotic cells,
indicating that dDP mutant cells have a defect in G2/M-phase progression. Thus,
dDP is not essential for developmental control of the G1-to-S transition, but it 
is required for normal cell proliferation, for optimal DNA synthesis, and for
efficient G2/M progression.

PMCID: PMC1069608
PMID: 15798191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Cell Death Differ. 2005 Apr;12(4):369-76.

ASPP1 and ASPP2 are new transcriptional targets of E2F.

Fogal V(1), Kartasheva NN, Trigiante G, Llanos S, Yap D, Vousden KH, Lu X.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, University College London, 91 Riding
House Street, London W1W 7BS, UK.

The E2F family of transcription factors regulates the expression of a number of
genes whose products are involved in cell cycle control, DNA replication and
apoptosis. We show here that E2F-1 binds in vivo the promoters of ASPP1 and ASPP2
genes, two activators of p53-mediated apoptosis, E2F-1, E2F-2 and E2F-3 all
activate the isolated ASPP1 and ASPP2 promoters. Overexpression or deregulation
of E2F-1 increased the expression levels of ASPP1 and ASPP2 mRNA and proteins.
The identification of ASPP1 and ASPP2 genes as transcriptional targets of E2F
provides another mechanism by which E2F cooperates with p53 to induce apoptosis.

PMID: 15731768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Hypertension. 2005 Apr;45(4):552-6. Epub 2005 Feb 21.

Cilostazol inhibits vascular smooth muscle cell growth by downregulation of the
transcription factor E2F.

Kim MJ(1), Park KG, Lee KM, Kim HS, Kim SY, Kim CS, Lee SL, Chang YC, Park JY,
Lee KU, Lee IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Keimyung University School of Medicine,
Daegu, South Korea.

Neointimal formation, the leading cause of restenosis, is caused by proliferation
of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). Patients with diabetes mellitus have
higher restenosis rates after coronary angioplasty than nondiabetic patients.
Cilostazol, a selective type 3 phosphodiesterase inhibitor, is currently used to 
treat patients with diabetic vascular complications. Cilostazol is a potent
antiplatelet agent that inhibits VSMC proliferation. In the present study, we
examine whether the antiproliferative effect of cilostazol on VSMCs is mediated
by inhibition of an important cell cycle transcription factor, E2F. Cilostazol
inhibited the proliferation of human VSMCs in response to high glucose in vitro
and virtually abolished neointimal formation in rats subjected to carotid artery 
injury in vivo. Moreover, the compound suppressed high-glucose-induced E2F-DNA
binding activity, and the expression of E2F1, E2F2, cyclin A, and PCNA proteins. 
These data suggest that the beneficial effects of cilostazol on
high-glucose-stimulated proliferation of VSMCs are mediated by the downregulation
of E2F activity and expression of its downstream target genes, including E2F1,
E2F2, cyclin A, and PCNA.

PMID: 15723965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 6;280(18):18211-20. Epub 2005 Feb 18.

Cloning and characterization of mouse E2F8, a novel mammalian E2F family member
capable of blocking cellular proliferation.

Maiti B(1), Li J, de Bruin A, Gordon F, Timmers C, Opavsky R, Patil K, Tuttle J, 
Cleghorn W, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology
and Medical Genetics, and Department of Molecular Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The E2F transcription factor family plays a crucial and well established role in 
cell cycle progression. Deregulation of E2F activities in vivo leads to
developmental defects and cancer. Based on current evidence in the field,
mammalian E2Fs can be functionally categorized into either transcriptional
activators (E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3a) or repressors (E2F3b, E2F4, E2F5, E2F6, and
E2F7). We have identified a novel E2F family member, E2F8, which is conserved in 
mice and humans and has its counterpart in Arabidopsis thaliana (E2Ls).
Interestingly, E2F7 and E2F8 share unique structural features that distinguish
them from other mammalian E2F repressor members, including the presence of two
distinct DNA-binding domains and the absence of DP-dimerization,
retinoblastoma-binding, and transcriptional activation domains. Similar to E2F7, 
overexpression of E2F8 significantly slows down the proliferation of primary
mouse embryonic fibroblasts. These observations, together with the fact that E2F7
and E2F8 can homodimerize and are expressed in the same adult tissues, suggest
that they may have overlapping and perhaps synergistic roles in the control of
cellular proliferation.

PMID: 15722552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Circ Res. 2005 Mar 18;96(5):509-17. Epub 2005 Feb 17.

Divergent siblings: E2F2 and E2F4 but not E2F1 and E2F3 induce DNA synthesis in
cardiomyocytes without activation of apoptosis.

Ebelt H(1), Hufnagel N, Neuhaus P, Neuhaus H, Gajawada P, Simm A, Müller-Werdan
U, Werdan K, Braun T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, University of Halle-Wittenberg, Germany.

Proliferation of mammalian cardiomyocytes ceases around birth when a transition
from hyperplastic to hypertrophic myocardial growth occurs. Previous studies
demonstrated that directed expression of the transcription factor E2F1 induces
S-phase entry in cardiomyocytes along with stimulation of programmed cell death. 
Here, we show that directed expression of E2F2 and E2F4 by adenovirus mediated
gene transfer in neonatal cardiomyocytes induced S-phase entry but did not result
in an onset of apoptosis whereas directed expression of E2F1 and E2F3 strongly
evoked programmed cell death concomitant with cell cycle progression. Although
both E2F2 and E2F4 induced S-phase entry only directed expression of E2F2
resulted in mitotic cell division of cardiomyocytes. Expression of E2F5 or a
control LacZ-Adenovirus had no effects on cell cycle progression. Quantitative
real time PCR revealed that E2F1, E2F2, E2F3, and E2F4 alleviate G0 arrest by
induction of cyclinA and E cyclins. Furthermore, directed expression of E2F1,
E2F3, and E2F5 led to a transcriptional activation of several proapoptotic genes,
which were mitigated by E2F2 and E2F4. Our finding that expression of E2F2
induces cell division of cardiomyocytes along with a suppression of proapoptotic 
genes might open a new access to improve the regenerative capacity of
cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 15718499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 May;16(5):2181-90. Epub 2005 Feb 16.

EAPP, a novel E2F binding protein that modulates E2F-dependent transcription.

Novy M(1), Pohn R, Andorfer P, Novy-Weiland T, Galos B, Schwarzmayr L, Rotheneder
H.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Medical Biochemistry, University
Departments at the Vienna Biocenter, Medical University of Vienna, A-1030 Vienna,
Austria.

E2F transcription factors play an essential role in cell proliferation and
apoptosis and their activity is frequently deregulated in human cancers. In a
yeast two-hybrid screen we identified a novel E2F-binding protein. Due to its
strong phosphorylation we named it EAPP (e2F-associated phosphoprotein). EAPP is 
localized in the nucleus and interacts with E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3, but not with
E2F-4. Examination of a number of human cell lines revealed that EAPP levels are 
elevated in most transformed cells. Moreover, EAPP mRNA was detected in all
investigated human tissues in varying amounts. EAPP is present throughout the
cell cycle but disappears during mitosis. In transfection assays with reporters
controlled by either an artificial E2F-dependent promoter or the murine thymidine
kinase promoter, EAPP increased the activation caused by E2F-1 but not by E2F-4. 
Surprisingly, the promoter of the p14(ARF) gene, which was also activated by
E2F-1, became repressed by EAPP. Overexpression of EAPP in U2OS cells resulted in
a significant increase of cells in S-phase, whereas RNAi-mediated knock down of
EAPP reduced the fraction of cells in S-phase. Taken together, these data suggest
that EAPP modulates E2F-regulated transcription, stimulates proliferation, and
may be involved in the malignant transformation of cells.

PMCID: PMC1087227
PMID: 15716352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Cell Death Differ. 2005 Apr;12(4):358-68.

Apoptosis-stimulating protein of p53-2 (ASPP2/53BP2L) is an E2F target gene.

Chen D(1), Padiernos E, Ding F, Lossos IS, Lopez CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, L586B,
Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

The p53 pathway is a central apoptotic regulator. Deregulation of the Rb/E2F
pathway occurs in a majority of tumors, resulting in both unrestrained
proliferation and enhanced apoptosis sensitivity via p53-dependent and
independent mechanisms. However, the mechanisms coupling the p53 and Rb/E2F
pathways remain incompletely understood. We report that ASPP2/53BP2L, a
p53/p73-binding protein that promotes p53/p73-dependent apoptosis, is an E2F
target gene. The ASPP2/53BP2L promoter was identified and ectopic expression of
transcription-competent E2F-1 (E2F-2 and E2F-3) stimulated an ASPP2/53BP2L
promoter-luciferase reporter. Mutational analysis of the ASPP2/53BP2L promoter
identified E2F-binding sites that cooperate for E2F-1 induction and basal
repression of ASPP2/53BP2L. Moreover, endogenous ASPP2/53BP2L levels increased
after E2F-1 expression, and E2F-1 bound the endogenous ASPP2/53BP2L promoter
after chromatin immunoprecipitation. Typical for an E2F target, ASPP2/53BP2L
expression was maximal in early S-phase. Thus, ASPP2/53BP2L is downstream of E2F,
suggesting that it functions as a common link between the p53/p73 and Rb/E2F
apoptotic pathways.

PMID: 15592436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jan;232(1):119-30.

Repression of fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 gene expression by E2F4 in
skeletal muscle cells.

Parakati R(1), Dimario JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Chicago Medical School, North Chicago,
Illinois.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) gene expression is positively and
negatively regulated during muscle differentiation. We recently reported that
FGFR1 gene expression was up-regulated by Sp transcription factors in
proliferating myoblasts. However, the mechanism of down-regulation of this gene
during differentiation is unknown. We have identified the transcription factor
E2F4 as a negative regulator of FGFR1 gene expression. Immunodetection studies
revealed that endogenous E2F1 and E2F2 proteins were cytoplasmic in myoblasts and
myotubes, whereas E2F4 was abundant in the nuclei of both. Upon overexpression,
E2F4 repressed FGFR1 promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner in myoblasts
and Drosophila SL2 cells, and mutation of the E2F4 binding site increased FGFR1
promoter activity and reduced E2F4-mediated repression. Gel shift assays detected
E2F4 binding to a synthetic FGFR1 E2F4 binding site and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays detected E2F4 binding to the endogenous FGFR1 promoter
in proliferating myoblasts and myotubes. The results indicate that FGFR1 promoter
activity in skeletal muscle cells is repressed by E2F4.

PMID: 15580623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Genes Dev. 2004 Dec 1;18(23):2929-40. Epub 2004 Nov 15.

Identification of a Drosophila Myb-E2F2/RBF transcriptional repressor complex.

Lewis PW(1), Beall EL, Fleischer TC, Georlette D, Link AJ, Botchan MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA 94720-3204, USA.

The Drosophila Myb complex has roles in both activating and repressing
developmentally regulated DNA replication. To further understand biochemically
the functions of the Myb complex, we fractionated Drosophila embryo extracts
relying upon affinity chromatography. We found that E2F2, DP, RBF1, RBF2, and the
Drosophila homolog of LIN-52, a class B synthetic multivulva (synMuv) protein,
copurify with the Myb complex components to form the Myb-MuvB complex. In
addition, we found that the transcriptional repressor protein, lethal (3)
malignant brain tumor protein, L(3)MBT, and the histone deacetylase, Rpd3,
associated with the Myb-MuvB complex. Members of the Myb-MuvB complex were
localized to promoters and were shown to corepress transcription of
developmentally regulated genes. These and other data now link together the Myb
and E2F2 complexes in higher-order assembly to specific chromosomal sites for the
regulation of transcription.

PMCID: PMC534653
PMID: 15545624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. EMBO J. 2004 Nov 24;23(23):4615-26. Epub 2004 Oct 28.

E2Fs link the control of G1/S and G2/M transcription.

Zhu W(1), Giangrande PH, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke Institute for Genome
Sciences and Policy, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Previous work has provided evidence for E2F-dependent transcription control of
both G1/S- and G2/M-regulated genes. Analysis of the G2-regulated cdc2 and cyclin
B1 genes reveals the presence of both positive- and negative-acting E2F promoter 
elements. Additional elements provide both positive (CCAAT and Myb) and negative 
(CHR) control. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays identify multiple
interactions of E2F proteins that include those previously shown to activate and 
repress transcription. We find that E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3 bind to the
positive-acting E2F site in the cdc2 promoter, whereas E2F4 binds to the
negative-acting site. We also find that binding of an activator E2F is dependent 
on an adjacent CCAAT site that is bound by the NF-Y transcription factor and
binding of a repressor E2F is dependent on an adjacent CHR element, suggesting a 
role for cooperative interactions in determining both activation and repression. 
Finally, the kinetics of B-Myb interaction with the G2-regulated promoters
coincides with the activation of the genes, and RNAi-mediated reduction of B-Myb 
inhibits expression of cyclin B1 and cdc2. The ability of B-Myb to interact with 
the cdc2 promoter is dependent on an intact E2F binding site. These results thus 
point to a role for E2Fs, together with B-Myb, which is an E2F-regulated gene
expressed at G1/S, in linking the regulation of genes at G1/S and G2/M.

PMCID: PMC533046
PMID: 15510213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2004 Nov;45(11):4083-90.

Chick delta1-crystallin enhancer influences mouse alphaA-crystallin promoter
activity in transgenic mice.

Reneker LW(1), Chen Q, Bloch A, Xie L, Schuster G, Overbeek PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Missouri, Columbia, 65212, USA.
renekerl@health.missouri.edu

PURPOSE: Both the -366/+43 and the -282/+43 mouse alphaA-crystallin (or alphaA)
promoters have been effective at driving transgene expression in lens fiber
cells, but not in lens epithelium. Because the chick delta1-crystallin gene is
expressed in lens epithelial cells, an enhancer was borrowed from this gene and
linked to the alphaA promoter. This heterogenic enhancer/promoter construct was
tested in transgenic mice to see whether it was active in both lens epithelium
and fiber cells while retaining lens specificity.
METHODS: The third intron of the chick delta1-crystallin gene, which contains a
lens enhancer element, was added to the 5' end of the mouse alphaA promoter. We
refer to this chimeric regulatory element as the deltaenalphaA promoter. To test 
its activity, we inserted coding sequences for five different genes. Transgenic
mice were generated by pronuclear microinjection. Transgene expression patterns
were analyzed by either X-gal staining, in situ hybridization or
immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS: When deltaenalphaA-lacZ transgenic embryos were stained with X-gal at
embryonic day (E)11.5, beta-galactosidase activity was detected only in the eye. 
Histologic sections of the stained embryos revealed that lacZ was expressed
exclusively in the lens, in both epithelial and fiber cells. Transgenic mice were
also generated using either the original alphaA- or the new deltaenalphaA
promoter linked to an insulin cDNA. In situ hybridizations confirmed that the
short alphaA promoter targeted prenatal insulin expression specifically to the
lens fiber cells, whereas the deltaenalphaA promoter was active in both lens
epithelial and fiber cells. Developmental studies of the deltaenalphaA-insulin
mice showed that the deltaenalphaA promoter became active at the lens pit stage
and remained active in all lens cells, even at postnatal ages. The deltaenalphaA 
promoter also successfully directed expression of SV40 T-antigen (TAg), human
E2F2, and dominant negative Sprouty2 (dn-Spry2) genes to lens epithelial and
fiber cells. The lens specificity of the deltaenalphaA promoter was maintained in
minigenes with different types of introns and polyadenylation signals.
CONCLUSIONS: A new lens-specific regulatory element was generated-the
deltaenalphaA promoter, which can drive high levels of transgene expression in
both lens epithelium and fiber cells throughout development. This modified
promoter can be used for future transgenic studies of signal transduction and
cell cycle regulation in lens epithelial cells.

PMID: 15505059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 24;279(52):54140-52. Epub 2004 Oct 19.

A role for 14-3-3 tau in E2F1 stabilization and DNA damage-induced apoptosis.

Wang B(1), Liu K, Lin FT, Lin WC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama 35294-3300, USA.

Genotoxic stress triggers apoptosis through multiple signaling pathways. Recent
studies have demonstrated a specific induction of E2F1 accumulation and a role
for E2F1 in apoptosis upon DNA damage. Induction of E2F1 is mediated by
phosphorylation events that are dependent on DNA damage-responsive protein
kinases, such as ATM. How ATM phosphorylation leads to E2F1 stabilization is
unknown. We now show that 14-3-3 tau, a phosphoserine-binding protein, mediates
E2F1 stabilization. 14-3-3 tau interacts with ATM-phosphorylated E2F1 during DNA 
damage and inhibits E2F1 ubiquitination. Depletion of 14-3-3 tau or E2F1, but not
E2F2 or E2F3, blocks adriamycin-induced apoptosis. 14-3-3 tau is also required
for expression and induction of E2F1 apoptotic targets, such as p73, Apaf-1, and 
caspases, during DNA damage. Together, these data demonstrate a novel function
for 14-3-3 tau in the regulation of E2F1 protein stability and apoptosis during
DNA damage.

PMCID: PMC3904440
PMID: 15494392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Oct;24(20):9124-36.

p55, the Drosophila ortholog of RbAp46/RbAp48, is required for the repression of 
dE2F2/RBF-regulated genes.

Taylor-Harding B(1), Binné UK, Korenjak M, Brehm A, Dyson NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Center for Cancer Research, Building 149, 13th
St., Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Many proteins have been proposed to be involved in retinoblastoma protein
(pRB)-mediated repression, but it is largely uncertain which cofactors are
essential for pRB to repress endogenous E2F-regulated promoters. Here we have
taken advantage of the stream-lined Drosophila dE2F/RBF pathway, which has only
two E2Fs (dE2F1 and dE2F2), and two pRB family members (RBF1 and RBF2). With RNA 
interference (RNAi), we depleted potential corepressors and looked for the
elevated expression of groups of E2F target genes that are known to be directly
regulated by RBF1 and RBF2. Previous studies have implicated histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) and SWI/SNF chromatin-modifying complexes in pRB-mediated repression.
However, our results fail to support the idea that the SWI/SNF proteins are
required for RBF-mediated repression and suggest that a requirement for HDAC
activities is likely to be limited to a subset of targets. We found that the
chromatin assembly factor p55/dCAF-1 is essential for the repression of
dE2F2-regulated targets. The removal of p55 deregulated the expression of E2F
targets that are normally repressed by dE2F2/RBF1 and dE2F2/RBF2 complexes in a
cell cycle-independent manner but had no effect on the expression of E2F targets 
that are normally coupled with cell proliferation. The results indicate that the 
mechanisms of RBF regulation at these two types of E2F targets are different and 
suggest that p55, and perhaps p55's mammalian orthologs RbAp46 and RbAp48, have a
conserved function in repression by pRB-related proteins.

PMCID: PMC517895
PMID: 15456884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 24;279(39):40511-20. Epub 2004 Jul 22.

Aberrant regulation of survivin by the RB/E2F family of proteins.

Jiang Y(1), Saavedra HI, Holloway MP, Leone G, Altura RA.

Author information: 
(1)Columbus Children's Research Institute, College of Medicine and Public Health,
Ohio State University, 43210, USA.

Survivin is a putative oncogene that is aberrantly expressed in cancer cells. It 
has been hypothesized to play a central role in cancer progression and resistance
to therapy in diverse tumor types. Although some of the transcriptional processes
regulating its expression have been established, the diversity of genes that may 
be controlling the levels of its expression in both normal cells as well as in
cancer cells has not been fully explored. The most common genetically mutated
pathways in human malignancies are the p53 tumor suppressor pathway and the
RB/E2F pathway. Both of these pathways, when intact, provide essential
checkpoints in the maintenance of normal cell growth and protect the cell from
DNA damage. Using non-transformed embryonic fibroblasts, we provide evidence of a
molecular link between the regulation of survivin transcription and the RB/E2F
family of proteins. We demonstrate that both pRB and p130 can interact with the
survivin promoter and can repress survivin transcription. We also show that the
E2F activators (E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3) can bind to the survivin promoter and
induce survivin transcription. Genetically modified cells that harbor deletions
in various members of the RB/E2F family confirm our data from the wild-type
cells. Our findings implicate several members of the RB/E2F pathway in an
intricate mechanism of survivin gene regulation that, when genetically altered
during the process of tumorigenesis, may function within cancer cells to
aberrantly alter survivin levels and enhance tumor progression.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 15271987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jun 11;318(4):868-72.

Transcriptional repression of E2F gene by proteasome inhibitors in human
osteosarcoma cells.

Lim JH(1), Chang YC, Park YB, Park JW, Kwon TK.

Author information: 
(1)Kidney Institute, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, 194 DongSan-Dong,
Taegu 700-712, Republic of Korea.

E2F family of transcription factors regulates the transcription of genes required
for DNA synthesis. E2F is itself controlled by a series of transcriptional and
post-transcriptional pathways. Here we provide evidence that proteasome
inhibitor-mediated E2F1 gene down-regulation is regulated by transcriptional
events. Using the proteasome-specific inhibitors, MG132 and lactacystin, we show 
that the p53, the cdk inhibitors p21 and p27, and cyclin A are degraded by the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in human osteosarcoma cells. Interestingly, the
expression levels of E2F1 and E2F2 are down-regulated by proteasome inhibitors.
E2F promoter and RT-PCR assay clearly demonstrated that proteasome inhibitors
could reduce E2F transcriptional activation. However, MG132-induced repression of
E2F1 and E2F2 is not associated with ROS generation.

PMID: 15147952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Clin Invest. 2004 May;113(10):1398-407.

Diabetes and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in E2F1/E2F2 double-mutant mice.

Iglesias A(1), Murga M, Laresgoiti U, Skoudy A, Bernales I, Fullaondo A, Moreno
B, Lloreta J, Field SJ, Real FX, Zubiaga AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology, Faculty
of Sciences, University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain.

E2F transcription factors are thought to be key regulators of cell growth
control. Here we use mutant mouse strains to investigate the function of E2F1 and
E2F2 in vivo. E2F1/E2F2 compound-mutant mice develop nonautoimmune
insulin-deficient diabetes and exocrine pancreatic dysfunction characterized by
endocrine and exocrine cell dysplasia, a reduction in the number and size of
acini and islets, and their replacement by ductal structures and adipose tissue. 
Mutant pancreatic cells exhibit increased rates of DNA replication but also of
apoptosis, resulting in severe pancreatic atrophy. The expression of genes
involved in DNA replication and cell cycle control was upregulated in the
E2F1/E2F2 compound-mutant pancreas, suggesting that their expression is repressed
by E2F1/E2F2 activities and that the inappropriate cell cycle found in the mutant
pancreas is likely the result of the deregulated expression of these genes.
Interestingly, the expression of ductal cell and adipocyte differentiation marker
genes was also upregulated, whereas expression of pancreatic cell marker genes
were downregulated. These results suggest that E2F1/E2F2 activity negatively
controls growth of mature pancreatic cells and is necessary for the maintenance
of differentiated pancreatic phenotypes in the adult.

PMCID: PMC406522
PMID: 15146237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2004 May;45(5):1340-8.

Effect of overexpressing the transcription factor E2F2 on cell cycle progression 
in rabbit corneal endothelial cells.

Joyce NC(1), Harris DL, Mc Alister JC, Ali RR, Larkin DF.

Author information: 
(1)Schepens Eye Research Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02114, USA. njoyce@vision.eri.harvard.edu

PURPOSE: To test the hypothesis that overexpression of the transcription factor
E2F2 promotes cell cycle progression in nonproliferating corneal endothelial
cells.
METHODS: Ex vivo rabbit corneas were transfected with a lipid transfection
reagent and either a control plasmid containing full-length cDNA for enhanced
green fluorescent protein (pIRES2-EGFP) or a plasmid containing full-length cDNA 
for both E2F2 and EGFP (pIRES2-E2F2/EGFP). Transfection control experiments
consisted of corneas incubated in buffer without transfection reagent or plasmid 
or incubated in reagent without plasmid. After transfection, corneas were
incubated for various periods in 0.1% FBS (a concentration that maintains cell
health, but does not promote proliferation). Immunocytochemical (ICC)
localization tested for overexpression of E2F2 in transfected corneal endothelial
cells and permitted calculation of transfection efficiency. Endothelial cell
viability was tested in transfected ex vivo corneas and confluent cultures by
using a cell-viability assay. Apoptosis was detected in confluent cultures by
TUNEL assay. RT-PCR tested for mRNA expression of Ki67 (a marker of actively
cycling cells) and cyclin B1 (a marker for the G2-phase of the cell cycle).
Semiquantitative densitometric analysis compared the relative amounts of PCR
reaction products.
RESULTS: ICC demonstrated the colocalization of E2F2 and EGFP in corneal
endothelium with a transfection efficiency of 10% to 12%, using the pIRES2-based 
plasmid and transfection reagent. The cell-viability assay revealed very few dead
cells in ex vivo corneal endothelium that overexpressed E2F2. Cell viability and 
TUNEL assays of confluent cultures revealed that approximately 27% of cells died 
in all cultures incubated with transfection reagent, but death appeared not to be
due to apoptosis. No additional cell death was noted by either assay in cells
that overexpressed E2F2. RT-PCR of endothelial samples obtained 48 hours after
transfection showed the presence of higher levels of reaction product for Ki67 (a
5.1-fold increase) and cyclin B1 (a 2.3-fold increase) in cells that
overexpressed E2F2 than in control samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of the transcription factor E2F2 in nonproliferating 
rabbit corneal endothelial cells induces cell cycle progression without inducing 
significant apoptosis.

PMID: 15111587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Genes Dev. 2004 Mar 15;18(6):673-86.

TopBP1 recruits Brg1/Brm to repress E2F1-induced apoptosis, a novel
pRb-independent and E2F1-specific control for cell survival.

Liu K(1), Luo Y, Lin FT, Lin WC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, AL 35294-3300, USA.

TopBP1 (DNA topoisomerase IIbeta binding protein I) contains multiple BRCT
domains and is involved in replication and the DNA damage checkpoint. Through its
BRCT domain, TopBP1 interacts with and represses exclusively E2F1 but not other
E2F factors. This regulation of E2F1 transcriptional activity is mediated by a
pRb-independent, but Brg1/Brm-dependent mechanism. TopBP1 recruits Brg1/Brm, a
central component of the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex, to E2F1-responsive
promoters and represses the activities of E2F1, but not E2F2 or E2F3. This
regulation is crucial in the control of E2F1-dependent apoptosis during normal
cell growth and DNA damage. Interestingly, TopBP1 is induced by E2F and interacts
with E2F1 during G1/S transition. Thus, TopBP1 functions as a critical modulator 
and serves as a negative feedback regulator of E2F1 by inhibiting E2F1-dependent 
apoptosis during G1/S transition as well as DNA damage to promote cell survival.

PMCID: PMC387242
PMID: 15075294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Apr;24(7):2968-77.

Apoptosis associated with deregulated E2F activity is dependent on E2F1 and
Atm/Nbs1/Chk2.

Rogoff HA(1), Pickering MT, Frame FM, Debatis ME, Sanchez Y, Jones S, Kowalik TF.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Immunology and Virology, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

The retinoblastoma protein (Rb)/E2F pathway links cellular proliferation control 
to apoptosis and is critical for normal development and cancer prevention. Here
we define a transcription-mediated pathway in which deregulation of E2F1 by
ectopic E2F expression or Rb inactivation by E7 of human papillomavirus type 16
signals apoptosis by inducing the expression of Chk2, a component of the DNA
damage response. E2F1- and E7-mediated apoptosis are compromised in cells from
patients with the related disorders ataxia telangiectasia and Nijmegen breakage
syndrome lacking functional Atm and Nbs1 gene products, respectively. Both Atm
and Nbs1 contribute to Chk2 activation and p53 phosphorylation following
deregulation of normal Rb growth control. E2F2, a related E2F family member that 
does not induce apoptosis, also activates Atm, resulting in phosphorylation of
p53. However, we found that the key commitment step in apoptosis induction is the
ability of E2F1, and not E2F2, to upregulate Chk2 expression. Our results suggest
that E2F1 plays a central role in signaling disturbances in the Rb growth control
pathway and, by upregulation of Chk2, may sensitize cells to undergo apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC371110
PMID: 15024084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 12;279(11):10476-83. Epub 2003 Dec 18.

High incidence of thymic epithelial tumors in E2F2 transgenic mice.

Scheijen B(1), Bronk M, van der Meer T, De Jong D, Bernards R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis and Center for Biomedical Genetics,
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam 1066 CX, Netherlands.

In virtually all human tumors, genetic and epigenetic alterations have been found
which affect the INK4/-CYCLIN D/RB pathway, which regulates cell cycle entry and 
exit in normal cells. E2F transcription factors are important downstream
components of this pathway, which act by controlling the expression of genes
involved in DNA replication and cell cycle progression. To determine whether E2F2
deregulation promotes proliferation and tumorigenesis in vivo, we generated E2F2 
transgenic mice, in which the Emu and murine pim1 promoter (pp) direct high
expression of E2F2 in thymic epithelial cells. Emu-pp-E2F2 mice start to develop 
cytokeratin- and ER-TR4-positive cortical thymomas from the age of 20 weeks, and 
within 1 year, nearly all mice succumb to gross thymic epithelial tumors. General
thymic morphology is largely maintained, but T cell development is perturbed in
thymomas, with proportionately less CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive thymocytes. In
the first 3 months, E2F2 transgenic thymi exhibit only mild epithelial
hyperplasia, and thereafter thymomas arise stochastically, probably following
additional mutations. Interestingly, Emu-pp-E2F1 mice do not display cortical
thymomas. These data argue that E2F2 promotes unscheduled cell division and
oncogenic transformation of thymic epithelial cells.

PMID: 14684733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Hypertens. 2003 Nov;21(11):2111-24.

Regulation of the major isoform of human endothelin-converting enzyme-1 by a
strong housekeeping promoter modulated by polymorphic microsatellites.

Funke-Kaiser H(1), Thomas A, Bremer J, Kovacevic SD, Scheuch K, Bolbrinker J,
Theis S, Lemmer J, Zimmermann A, Zollmann FS, Herrmann SM, Paul M, Orzechowski
HD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, Charité - Campus Benjamin
Franklin, Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    J Hypertens. 2003 Nov;21(11):2013-4.

BACKGROUND: Human endothelin-converting enzyme (ECE)-1, the key enzyme in
endothelin biosynthesis, shows broad cell and tissue expression within the
cardiovascular system. Expression of ECE-1c, which represents the major ECE-1
isoform, is directed by an alternative promoter, but the mechanisms of ECE-1c
promoter regulation are largely unknown. As ECE-1c transcription is initiated
from several start sites, we hypothesized that the ECE-1c promoter functions as a
housekeeping promoter.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the putative housekeeping function of the ECE-1c
promoter in vascular endothelial cells, which represent a main site of its
expression.
RESULTS: Using promoter reporter assays, gel shift and supershift assays, we have
demonstrated, in human endothelial EA.hy926 cells, functionality of cis-acting
elements for binding of the CAAT-box binding protein NF-YB, GATA-2) E2F-2, and a 
GC-box binding factor, which are spatially associated with transcriptional start 
sites of ECE-1c. In the more upstream promoter region we have identified three
highly polymorphic dinucleotide repeats, 5'-(CA)n, (CG)n and 3'-(CA)n, which
strongly affected promoter function in endothelial EA.hy926 cells (2.7-fold
activation comparing the most active to the least active allele) and, in a
similar manner, in human neuronal KELLY cells. Finally, by in-vitro methylation, 
we were able to achieve strong suppression of the ECE-1c promoter activity in
endothelial cells.
CONCLUSION: Our results provide a molecular explanation for constitutive
expression of ECE-1c mRNA. Modulation by genetic and epigenetic mechanisms as
revealed in our study may account for interindividual variation of the
constitutive endothelin system activity in humans and thus influence individual
predisposition to cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 14597855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Oct 28;100(22):12935-40. Epub 2003 Oct 17.

The development of diabetes in E2f1/E2f2 mutant mice reveals important roles for 
bone marrow-derived cells in preventing islet cell loss.

Li FX(1), Zhu JW, Tessem JS, Beilke J, Varella-Garcia M, Jensen J, Hogan CJ,
DeGregori J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, 4200 East Ninth Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

Our studies of mice deficient for the E2F1 and E2F2 transcription factors have
revealed essential roles for these proteins in the cell cycle control of
pancreatic exocrine cells and the regulation of pancreatic beta cell maintenance.
Pancreatic exocrine cells in E2f1-/-E2f2 mutant mice become increasingly
polyploid with age, coinciding with severe exocrine atrophy. Furthermore, mice
deficient for both E2F1 and E2F2 develop nonautoimmune, insulin-dependent
diabetes with high penetrance. Surprisingly, transplantation of wild-type bone
marrow can prevent or rescue diabetes in E2f1-/-E2f2-/-mice. We hypothesize that 
exocrine degeneration results in a destructive environment for beta cells, which 
can be alleviated by restoration of the hematopoietic system that is also
defective in E2f1-/-E2f2-/-mice The demonstration that beta cell maintenance
under conditions of stress is influenced by bone marrow-derived cells may provide
important insight into the design of therapies to boost islet mass and function
in diabetic patients.

PMCID: PMC240722
PMID: 14566047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Cell Death Differ. 2004 Jan;11(1):110-22.

The Drosophila wing differentiation factor vestigial-scalloped is required for
cell proliferation and cell survival at the dorso-ventral boundary of the wing
imaginal disc.

Delanoue R(1), Legent K, Godefroy N, Flagiello D, Dutriaux A, Vaudin P, Becker
JL, Silber J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, Tour 43, 2, Place Jussieu, 75251 Paris, France.

Links between genes involved in development, proliferation and apoptosis have
been difficult to establish. In the Drosophila wing disc, the vestigial (vg) and 
the scalloped (sd) gene products dimerize to form a functional transcription
factor. Ectopic expression of vg in other imaginal discs induces outgrowth and
wing tissue specification. We investigated the role of the VG-SD dimer in
proliferation and showed that vg antagonizes the effect of dacapo, the cyclin-cdk
inhibitor. Moreover, ectopic vg drives cell cycle progression and in HeLa
cultured cells, the VG-SD dimer induces cell proliferation per se. In Drosophila,
ectopic vg induces expression of dE2F1 and its targets dRNR2 and string. In
addition vg, but not dE2F1, interacts with and induces expression of
dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR). Moreover, a decrease in VG or addition of
aminopterin, a specific DHFR inhibitor, shift the dorso-ventral boundary cells of
the disc to a cell death sensitive state that is correlated with reaper induction
and DIAP1 downregulation. This indicates that vg in interaction with dE2F1 and
DHFR is a critical player for both cell proliferation and cell survival in the
presumptive wing margin area.

PMID: 14526388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Oncogene. 2003 Aug 7;22(32):4943-52.

Inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of apoptosis by novel tetravalent 
peptides inhibiting DNA binding of E2F.

Montigiani S(1), Müller R, Kontermann RE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Philipps-University, 
Emil-Mannkopff-Strasse 2, D-35033 Marburg, Germany.

We have isolated several peptides from random peptide phage display libraries
that specifically recognize the cell cycle regulatory transcription factor E2F
and inhibit DNA binding of E2F/DP heterodimers (E2F-1, E2F-2, E2F-3, E2F-4 or
E2F-5, and DP-1). The inhibitory efficiency could be strongly enhanced by
generating branched tetravalent molecules. To analyse the biological consequences
of peptide-mediated E2F inhibition, we fused two of these branched molecules to a
cell-penetrating peptide derived from the HTV-Tat protein. Incubation of human
tumor cells with these branched Tat-containing peptides led to an inhibition of
cell proliferation and induction of apoptosis. These results provide new insights
into the function of E2F and further validate E2F as a potential therapeutic
target in proliferative diseases.

PMID: 12902977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 24;278(43):42041-9. Epub 2003 Jul 31.

Identification and characterization of E2F7, a novel mammalian E2F family member 
capable of blocking cellular proliferation.

de Bruin A(1), Maiti B, Jakoi L, Timmers C, Buerki R, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology
and Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

The mammalian E2F family of transcription factors plays a crucial role in the
regulation of cellular proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation. Consistent 
with its biological role in a number of important cellular processes, E2F
regulates the expression of genes involved in cell cycle, DNA replication, DNA
repair, and mitosis. It has proven difficult, however, to determine the specific 
roles played by the various known family members in these cellular processes. The
work presented here now extends the complexity of this family even further by the
identification of a novel E2F family member, which we now term E2F7. Like the
expression of the known E2F activators, E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3, the expression of
E2F7 is growth-regulated, at least in part, through E2F binding elements on its
promoter, and its protein product is localized to the nucleus and associates with
DNA E2F recognition sites with high affinity. A number of salient features,
however, make this member unique among the E2F family. First, the E2F7 gene
encodes a protein that possesses two distinct DNA-binding domains and that lacks 
a dimerization domain as well as a transcriptional activation and a
retinoblastoma-binding domain. In contrast to the E2F activators, E2F7 can block 
the E2F-dependent activation of a subset of E2F target genes as well as mitigate 
cellular proliferation of mouse embryo fibroblasts. These findings identify E2F7 
as a novel member of the mammalian E2F transcription factor family that has
properties of a transcriptional repressor capable of negatively influencing
cellular proliferation.

PMID: 12893818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jun 10;100(12):7331-6. Epub 2003 May 30.

Transcriptional profiling of the Sonic hedgehog response: a critical role for
N-myc in proliferation of neuronal precursors.

Oliver TG(1), Grasfeder LL, Carroll AL, Kaiser C, Gillingham CL, Lin SM,
Wickramasinghe R, Scott MP, Wechsler-Reya RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology and Bioinformatics Shared
Resource, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Cerebellar granule cells are the most abundant neurons in the brain, and granule 
cell precursors (GCPs) are a common target of transformation in the pediatric
brain tumor medulloblastoma. Proliferation of GCPs is regulated by the secreted
signaling molecule Sonic hedgehog (Shh), but the mechanisms by which Shh controls
proliferation of GCPs remain inadequately understood. We used DNA microarrays to 
identify targets of Shh in these cells and found that Shh activates a program of 
transcription that promotes cell cycle entry and DNA replication. Among the genes
most robustly induced by Shh are cyclin D1 and N-myc. N-myc transcription is
induced in the presence of the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide, so it
appears to be a direct target of Shh. Retroviral transduction of N-myc into GCPs 
induces expression of cyclin D1, E2F1, and E2F2, and promotes proliferation.
Moreover, dominant-negative N-myc substantially reduces Shh-induced
proliferation, indicating that N-myc is required for the Shh response. Finally,
cyclin D1 and N-myc are overexpressed in murine medulloblastoma. These findings
suggest that cyclin D1 and N-myc are important mediators of Shh-induced
proliferation and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC165875
PMID: 12777630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Nat Genet. 2003 Jun;34(2):226-30.

Gene expression phenotypic models that predict the activity of oncogenic
pathways.

Huang E(1), Ishida S, Pittman J, Dressman H, Bild A, Kloos M, D'Amico M, Pestell 
RG, West M, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina 27710, USA.

High-density DNA microarrays measure expression of large numbers of genes in one 
assay. The ability to find underlying structure in complex gene expression data
sets and rigorously test association of that structure with biological conditions
is essential to developing multi-faceted views of the gene activity that defines 
cellular phenotype. We sought to connect features of gene expression data with
biological hypotheses by integrating 'metagene' patterns from DNA microarray
experiments in the characterization and prediction of oncogenic phenotypes. We
applied these techniques to the analysis of regulatory pathways controlled by the
genes HRAS (Harvey rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog), MYC (myelocytomatosis
viral oncogene homolog) and E2F1, E2F2 and E2F3 (encoding E2F transcription
factors 1, 2 and 3, respectively). The phenotypic models accurately predict the
activity of these pathways in the context of normal cell proliferation. Moreover,
the metagene models trained with gene expression patterns evoked by ectopic
production of Myc or Ras proteins in primary tissue culture cells properly
predict the activity of in vivo tumor models that result from deregulation of the
MYC or HRAS pathways. We conclude that these gene expression phenotypes have the 
potential to characterize the complex genetic alterations that typify the
neoplastic state, whether in vitro or in vivo, in a way that truly reflects the
complexity of the regulatory pathways that are affected.

PMID: 12754511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jun;23(11):3707-20.

Identification of E-box factor TFE3 as a functional partner for the E2F3
transcription factor.

Giangrande PH(1), Hallstrom TC, Tunyaplin C, Calame K, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Various studies have demonstrated a role for E2F proteins in the control of
transcription of genes involved in DNA replication, cell cycle progression, and
cell fate determination. Although it is clear that the functions of the E2F
proteins overlap, there is also evidence for specific roles for individual E2F
proteins in the control of apoptosis and cell proliferation. Investigating
protein interactions that might provide a mechanistic basis for the specificity
of E2F function, we identified the E-box binding factor TFE3 as an E2F3-specific 
partner. We also show that this interaction is dependent on the marked box domain
of E2F3. We provide evidence for a role for TFE3 in the synergistic activation of
the p68 subunit gene of DNA polymerase alpha together with E2F3, again dependent 
on the E2F3 marked box domain. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that
TFE3 and E2F3 were bound to the p68 promoter in vivo and that the interaction of 
either E2F3 or TFE3 with the promoter was facilitated by the presence of both
proteins. In contrast, neither E2F1 nor E2F2 interacted with the p68 promoter
under these conditions. We propose that the physical interaction of TFE3 and E2F3
facilitates transcriptional activation of the p68 gene and provides strong
evidence for the specificity of E2F function.

PMCID: PMC155231
PMID: 12748276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Cancer Cell. 2003 Apr;3(4):333-46.

Inactivation of E2F3 results in centrosome amplification.

Saavedra HI(1), Maiti B, Timmers C, Altura R, Tokuyama Y, Fukasawa K, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology
and Medical Genetics, Children's Research Institute, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors is critical for the control of cell cycle
progression. We now show that the specific inactivation of E2F3 in mouse embryo
fibroblasts (MEFs) results in a disruption of the centrosome duplication cycle.
Loss of E2F3, but not E2F1, E2F2, E2F4, or E2F5 results in unregulated cyclin
E-dependent kinase activity, defects in nucleophosmin B association with
centrosomes, and premature centriole separation and duplication. Consequently,
this defect leads to centrosome amplification, mitotic spindle defects, and
aneuploidy. Our findings implicate the E2F3 transcription factor as an important 
link that orchestrates DNA and centrosome duplication cycles, ensuring the
faithful transmission of genetic material to daughter cells.

PMCID: PMC3033013
PMID: 12726860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 May;23(10):3656-68.

Constitutive E2F1 overexpression delays endochondral bone formation by inhibiting
chondrocyte differentiation.

Scheijen B(1), Bronk M, van der Meer T, Bernards R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis and Center for Biomedical Genetics, The
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Longitudinal bone growth results from endochondral ossification, a process that
requires proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes. It has been shown
that proper endochondral bone formation is critically dependent on the
retinoblastoma family members p107 and p130. However, the precise functional
roles played by individual E2F proteins remain poorly understood. Using both
constitutive and conditional E2F1 transgenic mice, we show that ubiquitous
transgene-driven expression of E2F1 during embryonic development results in a
dwarf phenotype and significantly reduced postnatal viability. Overexpression of 
E2F1 disturbs chondrocyte maturation, resulting in delayed endochondral
ossification, which is characterized by reduced hypertrophic zones and
disorganized growth plates. Employing the chondrogenic cell line ATDC5, we
investigated the effects of enforced E2F expression on the different phases of
chondrocyte maturation that are normally required for endochondral ossification. 
Ectopic E2F1 expression strongly inhibits early- and late-phase differentiation
of ATDC5 cells, accompanied by diminished cartilage nodule formation as well as
decreased type II collagen, type X collagen, and aggrecan gene expression. In
contrast, overexpression of E2F2 or E2F3a results in only a marginal delay of
chondrocyte maturation, and increased E2F4 levels have no effect. These data are 
consistent with the notion that E2F1 is a regulator of chondrocyte
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC164752
PMID: 12724423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 May;23(10):3607-22.

Defective gene expression, S phase progression, and maturation during
hematopoiesis in E2F1/E2F2 mutant mice.

Li FX(1), Zhu JW, Hogan CJ, DeGregori J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Division of Medical
Oncology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 4200 East Ninth Avenue, 
Denver, CO 80262, USA.

E2F plays critical roles in cell cycle progression by regulating the expression
of genes involved in nucleotide synthesis, DNA replication, and cell cycle
control. We show that the combined loss of E2F1 and E2F2 in mice leads to
profound cell-autonomous defects in the hematopoietic development of multiple
cell lineages. E2F2 mutant mice show erythroid maturation defects that are
comparable with those observed in patients with megaloblastic anemia.
Importantly, hematopoietic defects observed in E2F1/E2F2 double-knockout (DKO)
mice appear to result from impeded S phase progression in hematopoietic
progenitor cells. During DKO B-cell maturation, differentiation beyond the large 
pre-BII-cell stage is defective, presumably due to failed cell cycle exit, and
the cells undergo apoptosis. However, apoptosis appears to be the consequence of 
failed maturation, not the cause. Despite the accumulation of hematopoietic
progenitor cells in S phase, the combined loss of E2F1 and E2F2 results in
significantly decreased expression and activities of several E2F target genes
including cyclin A2. Our results indicate specific roles for E2F1 and E2F2 in the
induction of E2F target genes, which contribute to efficient expansion and
maturation of hematopoietic progenitor cells. Thus, E2F1 and E2F2 play essential 
and redundant roles in the proper coordination of cell cycle progression with
differentiation which is necessary for efficient hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC164755
PMID: 12724419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 May;23(9):3287-304.

Regulation of E2F1 by BRCT domain-containing protein TopBP1.

Liu K(1), Lin FT, Ruppert JM, Lin WC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294-3300, USA.

The E2F transcription factor integrates cellular signals and coordinates cell
cycle progression. Our prior studies demonstrated selective induction and
stabilization of E2F1 through ATM-dependent phosphorylation in response to DNA
damage. Here we report that DNA topoisomerase IIbeta binding protein 1 (TopBP1)
regulates E2F1 during DNA damage. TopBP1 contains eight BRCT (BRCA1
carboxyl-terminal) motifs and upon DNA damage is recruited to stalled replication
forks, where it participates in a DNA damage checkpoint. Here we demonstrated an 
interaction between TopBP1 and E2F1. The interaction depended on the amino
terminus of E2F1 and the sixth BRCT domain of TopBP1. It was specific to E2F1 and
was not observed in E2F2, E2F3, or E2F4. This interaction was induced by DNA
damage and phosphorylation of E2F1 by ATM. Through this interaction, TopBP1
repressed multiple activities of E2F1, including transcriptional activity,
induction of S-phase entry, and apoptosis. Furthermore, TopBP1 relocalized E2F1
from diffuse nuclear distribution to discrete punctate nuclear foci, where E2F1
colocalized with TopBP1 and BRCA1. Thus, the specific interaction between TopBP1 
and E2F1 during DNA damage inhibits the known E2F1 activities but recruits E2F1
to a BRCA1-containing repair complex, suggesting a direct role of E2F1 in DNA
damage checkpoint/repair at stalled replication forks.

PMCID: PMC153207
PMID: 12697828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Neurosurgery. 2003 Apr;52(4):881-90; discussion 890-1.

Characterization of gastrin-induced cytostatic effect on cell proliferation in
experimental malignant gliomas.

Lefranc F(1), Sadeghi N, Metens T, Brotchi J, Salmon I, Kiss R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Erasmus University Hospital, Brussels, Belgium.

OBJECTIVE: Growth patterns of astrocytic tumors can be modulated in vitro by
gastrin. In this study, the influence of gastrin on the in vitro cell cycle
kinetics and the in vivo growth features of three experimental malignant gliomas 
was investigated.
METHODS: Gastrin-induced influence on overall growth was assayed in vitro by
means of the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium colorimetric
assay for human U373 and rat C6 gliomas and for rat 9L gliosarcoma. Although cell
cycle analyses were performed by means of computer-assisted microscope analyses
of Feulgen-stained nuclei, the gastrin-induced effects of the levels of
expression of cyclins D3 and E, CDK2, CDK4, CDK5, CDK7, p15, p16, E2F1, and E2F2 
were assayed by means of quantitative Western blot test. The presence of
ribonucleic acids for the CCK(B) and CCK(C) gastrin receptors in the U373, C6,
and 9L models was assayed by means of quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, and the presence or absence of
ribonucleic acids for CCK(A) receptor was checked by means of conventional
polymerase chain reaction. The influence of gastrin was also characterized in
vivo in terms of the survival periods of conventional rats orthotopically grafted
with the C6 and 9L models and nude rats with the U373 model.
RESULTS: Gastrin significantly decreased the overall growth rate in the rat C6
and the human U373 high-grade astrocytic tumor models with either CCK(B) or
CCK(C) gastrin receptor but not in the 9L rat gliosarcoma, which had no CCK(B)
gastrin receptor (but had CCK(A) receptor) and only weak amounts of CCK(C)
receptor. This effect seems to occur via a cytostatic effect; that is, an
accumulation of tumor astrocytes occurs in the G(1) cell cycle phase. The
cytostatic effect could relate to a gastrin-induced decrease in the amounts of
the cyclin D3-CDK4 complex in both C6 and U373 glioma cells. In vivo, gastrin
significantly increased the survival periods of C6 and U373 glioma-bearing rats, 
but not of 9L gliosarcoma-bearing rats.
CONCLUSION: Gastrin is able to significantly modify the growth levels of a number
of experimental gliomas.

PMID: 12657185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Gen Virol. 2003 Apr;84(Pt 4):929-38.

Stimulation of bovine herpesvirus-1 productive infection by the adenovirus E1A
gene and a cell cycle regulatory gene, E2F-4.

Geiser V(1), Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, School of Biological
Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 68583, USA.

Identifying cellular genes that promote bovine herpesvirus-1 (BHV-1) productive
infection is important, as BHV-1 is a significant bovine pathogen. Previous
studies demonstrated that BHV-1 DNA is not very infectious unless cotransfected
with a plasmid expressing bICP0, a viral protein that stimulates expression of
all classes of viral promoters. Based on these and other studies, we hypothesize 
that the ability of bICP0 to interact with and modify the function of cellular
proteins stimulates virus transcription. If this prediction is correct, cellular 
proteins that activate virus transcription could, in part, substitute for bICP0
functions. The adenovirus E1A gene and bICP0 encode proteins that are potent
activators of viral gene expression, they do not specifically bind DNA and both
proteins interact with chromatin-remodelling enzymes. Because of these functional
similarities, E1A was tested initially to see if it could stimulate BHV-1
productive infection. E1A consistently stimulates BHV-1 productive infection, but
not as efficiently as bICP0. The ability of E1A to bind Rb family members plays a
role in stimulating productive infection, suggesting that E2F family members
activate productive infection. E2F-4, but not E2F-1, E2F-2 or E2F-5, activates
productive infection with similar efficiency as E1A. Next, E2F family members
were examined for their ability to activate the BHV-1 immediate-early (IE)
transcription unit 1 (IEtu1) promoter, as it regulates IE expression of bICP0 and
bICP4. E2F-1 and E2F-2 strongly activate the IEtu1 promoter, but not a BHV-1
IEtu2 promoter or a herpes simplex virus type 1 ICP0 promoter construct. These
studies suggest that E2F family members can stimulate BHV-1 productive infection.

PMID: 12655094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Genes Dev. 2003 Mar 15;17(6):723-8.

G1 cyclin-dependent kinases are insufficient to reverse dE2F2-mediated
repression.

Frolov MV(1), Stevaux O, Moon NS, Dimova D, Kwon EJ, Morris EJ, Dyson NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Here we show that the cell cycle defects of dE2F1-depleted cells depend on the
cooperative effects of dE2F2 and DACAPO (DAP), an inhibitor of Cyclin
E/cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CycE/cdk2). The different properties of cells
lacking dE2F1/dE2F2 and dE2F1/DAP lead to the surprising observation that
dE2F2-mediated repression differs from retinoblastoma family protein 1 (RBF1)
inhibition of dE2F1, and is resistant to both CycE/cdk2 and Cyclin
D/cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CycD/cdk4). This resistance occurs even though
dE2F2/RBF1 complexes are disrupted by CycE/cdk2, and may explain why dE2F2 is so 
potent in the absence of de2f1. The implication of these results is that cells
containing dE2F2 require dE2F1 to either prevent, or reverse, dE2F-mediated
repression.

PMCID: PMC196013
PMID: 12651890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Mar;23(6):2123-34.

Transcriptional repressor functions of Drosophila E2F1 and E2F2 cooperate to
inhibit genomic DNA synthesis in ovarian follicle cells.

Cayirlioglu P(1), Ward WO, Silver Key SC, Duronio RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Individual members of the E2F/DP protein family control cell cycle progression by
acting predominantly as an activator or repressor of transcription. In Drosophila
melanogaster the E2f1, E2f2, Dp, and Rbf1 genes all contribute to replication
control in ovarian follicle cells, which become 16C polyploid and subsequently
undergo chorion gene amplification late in oogenesis. Mutation of E2f2, Dp, or
Rbf1 causes ectopic DNA replication throughout the follicle cell genome during
gene amplification cycles. Here we show by both reverse transcription-PCR and DNA
microarray analysis that the transcripts of prereplication complex (pre-RC) genes
are elevated compared to the wild type in E2f2, Dp, and Rbf1 mutant follicle
cells. For some genes the magnitude of this transcriptional derepression is
greater in Rbf1 than in E2f2 mutants. These differences correlate with
differences in the magnitude of the replication defects in follicle cells, which 
attain an inappropriate 32C DNA content in both Rbf1 and Dp mutants but not in
E2f2 mutants. The ectopic genomic replication of E2f2 mutant follicle cells can
be suppressed by reducing the Orc2, Orc5, or Mcm2 gene dose by half, indicating
that small changes in pre-RC gene expression can affect DNA synthesis in these
cells. We conclude that RBF1 forms complexes with both E2F1/DP and E2F2/DP that
cooperate to repress the expression of pre-RC genes, which helps confine DNA
synthesis to sites of gene amplification. In contrast, E2F1 and E2F2 repressors
function redundantly for some genes in the embryo. Thus, the relative functional 
contributions of E2F1 and E2F2 to gene expression and cell cycle control depends 
on the developmental context.

PMCID: PMC149482
PMID: 12612083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Feb 15;12(4):423-33.

Differential binding of transcription factor E2F-2 to the endothelin-converting
enzyme-1b promoter affects blood pressure regulation.

Funke-Kaiser H(1), Reichenberger F, Köpke K, Herrmann SM, Pfeifer J, Orzechowski 
HD, Zidek W, Paul M, Brand E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, Department of Clinical
Pharmacology, Benjamin Franklin Medical Center, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Apr 15;12(8):947.

The endothelin-converting enzyme (ECE)-1 gene is a candidate for human blood
pressure (BP) regulation and we report the identification of the new gene
variants T-839G, C-338A, L75F, A677V and C+295T. Transient transfection of the
reporter constructs containing the -338A allele showed an increase in promoter
activity compared with the wild-type promoter. EMSA revealed the specific binding
of E2F-2 to both ECE-1b promoter sequences, with the -338A allele being
associated with an increased affinity to E2F-2 compared with -338C. The clinical 
relevance of this finding was analyzed in 704 hypertensive patients. In untreated
hypertensive women, both the -338A and -839G alleles were significantly
associated with ambulatory BP values. This study provides the first evidence of a
link between the cell-cycle-associated E2F family and BP regulation via a
component of the endothelin system.

PMID: 12566389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. FASEB J. 2003 Feb;17(2):186-93.

Vascular endothelial growth factor promotes proliferation of cortical neuron
precursors by regulating E2F expression.

Zhu Y(1), Jin K, Mao XO, Greenberg DA.

Author information: 
(1)Buck Institute for Age Research, Novato, California 94945, USA.

Neurogenesis, or the production of new neurons, is regulated by physiological and
pathological processes including aging, stress, and brain injury. Many mitogenic 
and trophic factors that regulate proliferation of nonneuronal cells are also
involved in neurogenesis. These include vascular endothelial cell growth factor
(VEGF), which stimulates the incorporation of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) into
neuronal precursor cells in vitro and in the adult rat brain in vivo. Using BrdU 
labeling as an index of cell proliferation, we found that the in vitro
neuroproliferative effect of VEGF was associated with up-regulation of E2F family
transcription factors, cyclin D1, cyclin E, and cdc25. VEGF also increased
nuclear expression of E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3, consistent with regulation of the
G1/S phase transition of the cell cycle. The proliferative effect of VEGF was
inhibited by the extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitor
PD98059, the phospholipase C (PLC) inhibitor U73122, the protein kinase C (PKC)
inhibitor GF102390X, and the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor
wortmannin, indicating involvement of multiple signaling pathways. These findings
help to provide a molecular basis for some of the recently identified neuronal
effects of VEGF.

PMID: 12554697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Genes Dev. 2002 Dec 15;16(24):3199-212.

Structural basis for the recognition of the E2F transactivation domain by the
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor.

Lee C(1), Chang JH, Lee HS, Cho Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Center for Structural Biology and Department of
Life Science, Pohang University of Science and Technology, San 31, KyungBook,
South Korea.

Repression of E2F transcription activity by the retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor
suppressor through its interaction with the transactivation domain of the E2F
transcription factor is one of the central features of G1/S arrest in the
mammalian cell cycle. Deregulation of the Rb-E2F interaction results in
hyperproliferation, lack of differentiation, and apoptosis, and can lead to
cancer. The 2.2-A crystal structure of the Rb pocket complexed with an 18-residue
transactivation-domain peptide of E2F-2 reveals that the boomerang-shaped peptide
binds to the highly conserved interface between the A-box and the B-box of the Rb
pocket in a bipartite manner. The N-terminal segment of the E2F-2 peptide in an
extended beta-strand-like structure interacts with helices from the conserved
groove at the A-B interface, whereas the C-terminal segment, which contains one
3(10) helix, binds to a groove mainly formed by A-box helices. The flexibility in
the middle of the E2F-2 peptide is essential for the tight association of E2F to 
the Rb pocket. The binding of Rb to the E2F-2 peptide conceals several conserved 
residues that are crucial for transcription activation of E2F. We provide the
structural basis for the Rb-mediated repression of E2F transcription activity
without the requirement of histone-modifying enzymes.

PMCID: PMC187509
PMID: 12502741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Cancer Ther. 2002 May;1(7):525-32.

Inhibition of retinoblastoma protein (Rb) phosphorylation at serine sites and an 
increase in Rb-E2F complex formation by silibinin in androgen-dependent human
prostate carcinoma LNCaP cells: role in prostate cancer prevention.

Tyagi A, Agarwal C, Agarwal R.

Several studies have identified silibinin as an anticarcinogenic agent. Recently,
we showed that silibinin inhibits cell growth via G1 arrest, leading to
differentiation of androgen-dependent human prostate carcinoma LNCaP cells (X. Zi
and R. Agarwal, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 96: 7490-7495,1999). Here, we extend 
this study to assess the effect of silibinin on total retinoblastoma protein (Rb)
levels and its phosphorylation status, levels of E2F family members, and Rb-E2F
binding in LNCaP cells. Compared with controls, silibinin resulted in an increase
in total Rb levels that was largely attributable to an increase in
unphosphorylated Rb (up to 4.1-fold). This effect of silibinin was mainly
attributable to a large decrease (70-97%) in the amount of Rb phosphorylated at
specific serine sites. In other studies, silibinin showed a moderate effect on
E2F1 but up to 98 and 90% decreases in E2F2 and E2F3 protein levels,
respectively. Silibinin treatments also resulted in an increase in the amount of 
Rb binding to E2F1 (3.8-fold), E2F2 (2.2-fold), and E2F3 (2.2-fold).
Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), together with their catalytic subunit cyclins,
phosphorylate Rb, which makes transcription factor E2Fs free from Rb-E2F
complexes, resulting in cell growth and proliferation. Conversely, CDK inhibitors
inhibit this phosphorylation, maintaining E2Fs bound to Rb, which causes growth
inhibition. On the basis of our data showing that silibinin induces both
unphosphorylated Rb levels and Rb-E2F binding, we also assessed its effect on
upstream cell cycle regulators. Silibinin-treated cells showed up to 2.4- and
3.6-fold increases in Cip1/p21 and Kip1/p27 levels, respectively, and a decrease 
in CDK2 (80%), CDK4 (98%), and cyclin D1 (60%). Consistent with these results,
silibinin showed both G1 arrest and growth inhibition. Together, these findings
identify modulation of Rb levels and its phosphorylation status as a molecular
mechanism of silibinin-induced neuroendocrine differentiation of human prostate
carcinoma LNCaP cells and suggest that this could be a novel approach for
prostate cancer prevention by silibinin.

PMID: 12479270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 7;278(10):8826-36. Epub 2002 Dec 10.

Highly coordinated gene regulation in mouse skeletal muscle regeneration.

Yan Z(1), Choi S, Liu X, Zhang M, Schageman JJ, Lee SY, Hart R, Lin L, Thurmond
FA, Williams RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA. zhen.yan@duke.edu

Mammalian skeletal muscles are capable of regeneration after injury. Quiescent
satellite cells are activated to reenter the cell cycle and to differentiate for 
repair, recapitulating features of myogenesis during embryonic development. To
understand better the molecular mechanism involved in this process in vivo, we
employed high density cDNA microarrays for gene expression profiling in mouse
tibialis anterior muscles after a cardiotoxin injection. Among 16,267 gene
elements surveyed, 3,532 elements showed at least a 2.5-fold change at one or
more time points during a 14-day time course. Hierarchical cluster analysis and
semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR showed induction of genes important
for cell cycle control and DNA replication during the early phase of muscle
regeneration. Subsequently, genes for myogenic regulatory factors, a group of
imprinted genes and genes with functions to inhibit cell cycle progression and
promote myogenic differentiation, were induced when myogenic stem cells started
to differentiate. Induction of a majority of these genes, including E2f1 and
E2f2, was abolished in muscles lacking satellite cell activity after gamma
radiation. Regeneration was severely compromised in E2f1 null mice but not
affected in E2f2 null mice. This study identifies novel genes potentially
important for muscle regeneration and reveals highly coordinated myogenic cell
proliferation and differentiation programs in adult skeletal muscle regeneration 
in vivo.

PMID: 12477723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Plant Cell. 2002 Dec;14(12):3225-36.

Two E2F elements regulate the proliferating cell nuclear antigen promoter
differently during leaf development.

Egelkrout EM(1), Mariconti L, Settlage SB, Cella R, Robertson D, Hanley-Bowdoin
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina 27695, USA.

E2F transcription factors regulate genes expressed at the G1/S boundary of the
cell division cycle in higher eukaryotes. Although animal E2F proteins and their 
target promoters have been studied extensively, little is known about how these
factors regulate plant promoters. An earlier study identified two E2F consensus
binding sites in the promoter of a Nicotiana benthamiana gene encoding
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and showed that the proximal element
(E2F2) is required for the full repression of PCNA expression in mature leaves.
In this study, we examined the distal element (E2F1) and how it interacts with
the E2F2 site to regulate the PCNA promoter. Gel shift assays using plant nuclear
extracts or purified Arabidopsis E2F and DP proteins showed that different
complexes bind to the two E2F sites. Mutation of the E2F1 site or both sites
differentially altered PCNA promoter function in transgenic plants. As reported
previously for the E2F2 mutation, the E2F1 and E2F1+2 mutations partially
relieved the repression of the PCNA promoter in mature leaves. In young tissues, 
the E2F1 mutation resulted in a threefold reduction in PCNA promoter activity,
whereas the E2F1+2 mutation had no detectable effect. The activity of E2F1+2
mutants was indistinguishable from that of E2F2 mutants. These results
demonstrate that both E2F elements contribute to the repression of the PCNA
promoter in mature leaves, whereas the E2F1 site counters the repression activity
of the E2F2 element in young leaves.

PMCID: PMC151214
PMID: 12468739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 7;278(6):3656-63. Epub 2002 Nov 20.

Evidence that cyclin D1 mediates both growth and proliferation downstream of TOR 
in hepatocytes.

Nelsen CJ(1), Rickheim DG, Tucker MM, Hansen LK, Albrecht JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hennepin County Medical Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota
55415, USA.

Signaling through the target of rapamycin is required for increased protein
synthesis, cell growth, and proliferation in response to growth factors. However,
the downstream mediators of these responses, and the elements linking growth and 
proliferation, have not been fully elucidated. Rapamycin inhibits hepatocyte
proliferation in culture and liver regeneration in vivo. In cultured rat
hepatocytes, rapamycin prevented the up-regulation of cyclin D1 as well as
proteins acting downstream in the cell cycle. Transfection with cyclin D1 or
E2F2, but not cyclin E or activated Akt, overcame the rapamycin-mediated cell
cycle arrest. Rapamycin also inhibited the induction of global protein synthesis 
after growth factor stimulation, and cyclin D1 overcame this inhibition.
Rapamycin inhibited hepatocyte proliferation and cyclin D1 expression in the
mouse liver after 70% partial hepatectomy. In rapamycin-treated mice,
transfection with cyclin D1 induced hepatocyte proliferation, increased
hepatocyte cell size, and promoted growth of the liver. These results suggest
that cyclin D1 is a key mediator of increased protein synthesis, cell growth, and
proliferation downstream of target of rapamycin in mitogen-stimulated
hepatocytes.

PMID: 12446670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 31;278(5):2983-9. Epub 2002 Nov 15.

E2F proteins regulate MYCN expression in neuroblastomas.

Strieder V(1), Lutz W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT),
Emil-Mannkopff-Strasse 2, 35033 Marburg, Germany.

Amplification of the MYCN gene, resulting in overexpression of MYCN,
distinguishes a subset of neuroblastomas with poor prognosis. The transcription
factors driving MYCN expression in neuroblastomas are unknown. In
transient-transfection assays, E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3 activate a MYCN reporter
construct dependent on the presence of several putative E2F-binding sites. Using 
chromatin immunoprecipitation, we show that E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3 bind to the
proximal MYCN promoter in vivo, specifically in neuroblastoma cell lines
expressing MYCN. Inhibition of E2F activity in MYCN-amplified cells by the
overexpression of p16(INK4A) reduced MYCN expression. In addition, we provide
evidence that E2F proteins are involved in the negative regulation of MYCN by
TGF-beta and retinoic acid. These data suggest that E2F transcription factors are
critical for both the full activation and the repression of MYCN in
neuroblastomas.

PMID: 12438307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Cancer Res. 2002 Nov 15;62(22):6587-97.

Unbiased analysis of RB-mediated transcriptional repression identifies novel
targets and distinctions from E2F action.

Markey MP(1), Angus SP, Strobeck MW, Williams SL, Gunawardena RW, Aronow BJ,
Knudsen ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio
45267-0521, USA.

The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor, RB, is thought to inhibit cell cycle
progression through transcriptional repression. E2F-regulated genes have been
viewed as presumptive targets of RB-mediated repression. However, we found that
specific E2F targets were not regulated in a consistent manner by the action of a
RB allele that is refractory to cyclin-dependent kinase/cyclin-mediated
phosphorylation (PSM-RB) when compared with E2F2 overproduction. Therefore, we
used Affymetrix GeneChips as an unbiased approach to identify RB targets. We
found that expression of PSM-RB significantly attenuates >200 targets, the
majority of which are involved in cell cycle control (DNA replication or G2-M),
DNA repair, or transcription/chromatin structure. The observed repression was due
to the action of RB and not merely a manifestation of altered cell cycle
distribution. Additionally, the majority of RB repression targets were confirmed 
through the blockade of endogenous RB phosphorylation via p16ink4a
overexpression. Thus, these results have utility in assigning RB pathway
activation in more complex systems of cell cycle inhibition (e.g., mitogen
withdrawal, senescence, or DNA damage checkpoint). As expected, a significant
fraction of RB-repressed genes have promoters that are bound/regulated by E2F
family members. However, targets were identified that are distinct from genes
known to be stimulated by overexpression of specific E2F proteins. Moreover, the 
relative action of RB versus E2F2 overexpression on specific genes demonstrates
that a simple opposition model does not explain the relative contribution of RB
to gene regulation. Thus, this study provides the first unbiased description of
RB-repressed genes, thereby delineating new aspects of RB-mediated
transcriptional control and novel targets involved in diverse cellular processes.

PMID: 12438254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. EMBO J. 2002 Nov 1;21(21):5775-86.

Interaction of YY1 with E2Fs, mediated by RYBP, provides a mechanism for
specificity of E2F function.

Schlisio S(1), Halperin T, Vidal M, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

To explore mechanisms for specificity of function within the family of E2F
transcription factors, we have identified proteins that interact with individual 
E2F proteins. A two-hybrid screen identified RYBP (Ring1- and YY1-binding
protein) as a protein that interacts specifically with the E2F2 and E2F3 family
members, dependent on the marked box domain in these proteins. The Cdc6 promoter 
contains adjacent E2F- and YY1-binding sites, and both are required for promoter 
activity. In addition, YY1 and RYBP, in combination with either E2F2 or E2F3, can
stimulate Cdc6 promoter activity synergistically, dependent on the marked box
domain of E2F3. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we show that both
E2F2 and E2F3, as well as YY1 and RYBP, associate with the Cdc6 promoter at
G(1)/S of the cell cycle. In contrast, we detect no interaction of E2F1 with the 
Cdc6 promoter. We suggest that the ability of RYBP to mediate an interaction
between E2F2 or E2F3 and YY1 is an important component of Cdc6 activation and
provides a basis for specificity of E2F function.

PMCID: PMC131074
PMID: 12411495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. FASEB J. 2002 Dec;16(14):1943-5. Epub 2002 Oct 4.

Opposing regulatory roles of E2F in human telomerase reverse transcriptase
(hTERT) gene expression in human tumor and normal somatic cells.

Won J(1), Yim J, Kim TK.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Initiative Center for Genetic Reprogramming,
Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Korea.

Telomerase activity is closely correlated with cellular proliferative activity in
human tissues. Human cells with high proliferative potential, such as tumor cells
or stem cells, exhibit telomerase activity, whereas most normal human somatic
cells do not. Telomerase activity is tightly regulated by the expression of its
catalytic subunit human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT). Through an
expression cloning approach, we identified E2F-1 as a repressor of the hTERT gene
in human tumor cells. Ectopic expression of E2F-1 repressed hTERT promoter
activity by inhibiting Sp1 activation of the hTERT promoter. In contrast to the
repressor function of E2F-1 in human tumor cells, we demonstrated that E2F-1 is
an activator of the hTERT gene in normal human somatic cells. Ectopically
expressed E2F-1 activated the hTERT promoter through a noncanonical DNA binding
site. E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3 (but not E2F-4 and E2F-5) repressed hTERT promoter 
activity in human tumor cells, whereas they activated it in normal somatic cells.
These contrasting effects of E2F transcription factors on the hTERT promoter
could underlie the paradoxical biological activities of E2F, which can both
promote and inhibit cellular proliferation and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12368233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. EMBO J. 2002 Sep 16;21(18):4927-37.

Distinct mechanisms of E2F regulation by Drosophila RBF1 and RBF2.

Stevaux O(1), Dimova D, Frolov MV, Taylor-Harding B, Morris E, Dyson N.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Laboratory of Molecular
Oncology, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

RBF1, a Drosophila pRB family homolog, is required for cell cycle arrest and the 
regulation of E2F-dependent transcription. Here, we describe the properties of
RBF2, a second family member. RBF2 represses E2F transcription and is present at 
E2F-regulated promoters. Analysis of in vivo protein complexes reveals that RBF1 
and RBF2 interact with different subsets of E2F proteins. dE2F1, a potent
transcriptional activator, is regulated specifically by RBF1. In contrast, RBF2
binds exclusively to dE2F2, a form of E2F that functions as a transcriptional
repressor. We find that RBF2-mediated repression requires dE2F2. More over, RBF2 
and dE2F2 act synergistically to antagonize dE2F1-mediated activation, and they
co-operate to block S phase progression in transgenic animals. The network of
interactions between RBF1 or RBF2 and dE2F1 or dE2F2 reveals how the activities
of these proteins are integrated. These results suggest that there is a
remarkable degree of symmetry in the arrangement of E2F and RB family members in 
mammalian cells and in DROSOPHILA.

PMCID: PMC126297
PMID: 12234932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Biochem Pharmacol. 2002 Oct 1;64(7):1091-100.

SU9516, a cyclin-dependent kinase 2 inhibitor, promotes accumulation of high
molecular weight E2F complexes in human colon carcinoma cells.

Yu B(1), Lane ME, Wadler S.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein Comprehensive Cancer Center and the Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10463, USA.

The E2F family plays a critical role in the expression of genes required for
entry into and progression through S phase. E2F-mediated transcription is
repressed by the tumor suppressor retinoblastoma protein (pRb), which results in 
sequestration of E2F in a multiprotein complex that includes pRb. Derepression of
E2F results from a series of complex phosphorylation events mediated by cyclin
D/cdk4 and cyclin E/cdk2. We have employed a novel 3-substituted indolinone
compound,
3-[1-(3H-imidazol-4-yl)-meth-(Z)-ylidene]-5-methoxy-1,3-dihydro-indol-2-one
(SU9516), which selectively inhibits cdk2 activity (Lane et al., Cancer Res
2001;61:6170-7) to investigate these events. Electrophoretic mobility gel shift
assays were performed on SU9516-treated and -untreated HT-29, SW480, and RKO
human colon cancer cell extracts. Treatment with 5 microM SU9516 prevented
dissociation of pRb from E2F1 in all cell lines (HT-29>RKO>SW480). Treatment
effects were time-dependent, demonstrating greater inhibition at 48 hr versus
24hr in HT-29 cells. Furthermore, E2F species were sequestered in complexes with 
p107, p130, DP-1, and cyclins A and E. After a 24-hr treatment with 5 microM
SU9516, cyclin D1 and cdk2 levels decreased by 10-60%. These findings delineate a
previously undescribed mechanism for SU9516-mediated cell growth arrest through
down-regulation of cyclin D1, inhibition of cdk2 levels and activity, and
pan-sequestration of E2F.

PMID: 12234612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;22(15):5308-18.

E2F1 induces phosphorylation of p53 that is coincident with p53 accumulation and 
apoptosis.

Rogoff HA(1), Pickering MT, Debatis ME, Jones S, Kowalik TF.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Immunology and Virology, Department of Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655,
USA.

It has been proposed that the E2F1 transcription factor serves as a link between 
the Rb/E2F proliferation pathway and the p53 apoptosis pathway by inducing the
expression of p19ARF, a protein that regulates p53 stability. We find that
although p19ARF contributes to p53 accumulation in response to E2F expression,
p19ARF is not required for E2F1-mediated apoptosis. E2F1 can signal p53
phosphorylation in the absence of p19ARF, similar to the observed modifications
to p53 in response to DNA damage. These modifications are not observed in the
absence of p19ARF following expression of E2F2, an E2F family member that does
not induce apoptosis in mouse embryo fibroblasts but can induce p19ARF and p53
protein expression. p53 modification is found to be crucial for E2F1-mediated
apoptosis, and this apoptosis is compromised when E2F1 is coexpressed with a p53 
mutant lacking many N- and C-terminal phosphorylation sites. Additionally,
E2F1-mediated apoptosis is abolished in the presence of caffeine, an inhibitor of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related kinases that phosphorylate p53. These
findings suggest that p53 phosphorylation is a key step in E2F1-mediated
apoptosis and that this modification can occur in the absence of p19ARF.

PMCID: PMC133953
PMID: 12101227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 13;277(37):34471-9. Epub 2002 Jun 27.

Active nuclear import and export pathways regulate E2F-5 subcellular
localization.

Apostolova MD(1), Ivanova IA, Dagnino C, D'Souza SJ, Dagnino L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Child Health Research Institute and Lawson Health
Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C1,
Canada.

Epidermal keratinocyte differentiation is accompanied by differential regulation 
of E2F genes, including up-regulation of E2F-5 and its concomitant association
with the retinoblastoma family protein p130. This complex appears to play a role 
in irreversible withdrawal from the cell cycle in differentiating keratinocytes. 
We now report that keratinocyte differentiation is also accompanied by changes in
E2F-5 subcellular localization, from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. To define the 
molecular determinants of E2F-5 nuclear import, we tested its ability to enter
the nucleus in import assays in vitro using digitonin-permeabilized cells. We
found that E2F-5 enters the nucleus through mediated transport processes that
involve formation of nuclear pore complexes. It has been proposed that E2F-4 and 
E2F-5, which lack defined nuclear localization signal (NLS) consensus sequences, 
enter the nucleus in association with NLS-containing DP-2 or pRB family proteins.
However, we show that nuclear import of E2F-5 only requires the first N-terminal 
56 amino acid residues and is not dependent on interaction with DP or pRB family 
proteins. Because E2F-5 is predominantly cytoplasmic in undifferentiated
keratinocytes and in other intact cells, we also examined whether this protein is
subjected to active nuclear export. Indeed, E2F-5 is exported from the nucleus
through leptomycin B-sensitive, CRM1-mediated transport, through a region
corresponding to amino acid residues 130-154. This region excludes the DNA- and
the p130-binding domains. Thus, the subcellular distribution of E2F-5 is tightly 
regulated in intact cells, through multiple functional domains that direct
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of this protein.

PMID: 12089160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Oncogene. 2002 May 2;21(19):2939-47.

Activation of ARF by oncogenic stress in mouse fibroblasts is independent of E2F1
and E2F2.

Palmero I(1), Murga M, Zubiaga A, Serrano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Oncology, National Centre of Biotechnology, CSIC,
Campus de Cantoblanco, Madrid E-28049, Spain.

The ARF tumour suppressor protein (p14(ARF) in human and p19(ARF) in mouse) is a 
major mediator of the activation of p53 in response to oncogenic stress. Little
is known about the signalling pathways connecting oncogenic stimuli to the
activation of ARF. Regulation of ARF occurs primarily at the transcriptional
level and several modulators of ARF transcription have been identified. Notably, 
ectopic expression of E2F1 upregulates ARF transcriptionally, and both E2F1 and
ARF have been implicated in apoptosis and cell-cycle arrest. We have used primary
mouse fibroblasts deficient for E2F1, E2F2, or both to determine the possible
role of these E2F proteins as upstream regulators of ARF in response to oncogenic
stimuli and other stresses. In particular, we have studied the effects of
oncogenic Ras and the viral oncoprotein E1A on ARF levels, neoplastic
transformation, and sensitization to apoptosis. We have also examined the
behaviour of the E2F-deficient MEFs with respect to immortalization and
sensitivity to DNA damage. None of the ARF-mediated responses that we have
analysed is significantly affected in E2F1(-/-), E2F2(-/-) or E2F1/2(-/-) MEFs,
and ARF is upregulated normally in all cases. Taken together, our results
indicate that the activation of ARF in response to oncogenic stress can occur by 
E2F1- and E2F2-independent mechanisms. This challenges previous suggestions
implicating E2F factors as key mediators in the activation of ARF by oncogenic
stress.

PMID: 12082524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Cell Growth Differ. 2002 May;13(5):215-25.

Specificity of E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3 in mediating phenotypes induced by loss of
Rb.

Saavedra HI(1), Wu L, de Bruin A, Timmers C, Rosol TJ, Weinstein M, Robinson ML, 
Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology
and Medical Genetics and Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State
University, Columbus 43210, USA.

The Rb/E2F pathway plays a critical role in the control ofcellular proliferation.
Here, we report that E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3 make major individual contributions
toward the in vivo phenotypic consequences of Rb deficiency. In the developing
lens of Rb(-/-) embryos, loss of E2F1, E2F2, or E2F3 reduces the unscheduled
proliferation of fiber cells, with the loss of E2F3 having the most pronounced
effect. In Rb-deficient retinas, all three E2Fs contribute equally to the ectopic
proliferation of postmitotic neuronal cells. In contrast, E2F1 is unique in
mediating apoptosis in both Rb(-/-) lenses and retinas. In the central nervous
system, loss of E2F1 or E2F3 can almost completely eliminate the ectopic DNA
replication and apoptosis observed in Rb(-/-) embryos, and loss of E2F2 partially
reduces the unscheduled DNA replication and has no effect on apoptosis. These
results provide clear evidence for functional specificity among E2Fs in the
control of Rb-dependent proliferation and apoptosis in a tissue-specific manner.

PMID: 12065245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2002 Jul;283(1):H204-12.

Differences in E2F subunit expression in quiescent and proliferating vascular
smooth muscle cells.

Fujita N(1), Furukawa Y, Itabashi N, Okada K, Saito T, Ishibashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Jichi
Medical School, Tochigi, Japan.

E2F is a family of transcriptional factors that control G(1)/S transition. We
investigated how the E2F family participates in the biological responses of
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) to vasoconstrictive hormones compared with
fetal bovine serum (FBS). FBS induced upregulation of E2F-1 and E2F-5 at both
mRNA and protein levels and slightly reduced E2F-3 protein. Angiotensin II (ANG
II) and arginine vasopressin increased E2F-3 protein, but not E2F-1 and E2F-5,
without upregulating its mRNA level. FBS transactivated the E2F-1 gene through
the induction of free E2F-1 binding onto its promoter, whereas ANG II-induced
binding of E2F-3 did not result in activation of the E2F-1 promoter. These
changes are responsible for hypertrophic or hyperplastic response of VSMC to
different growth factors or stimulants. In contrast, both FBS and
vasoconstrictive hormones drove transcription of the cdc6 gene by downregulating 
p130 and recruiting free E2F-3 in the latter, which underlies the progression of 
VSMC into S phase.

PMID: 12063292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Jun 21;1602(2):131-50.

The genetics of the E2F family of transcription factors: shared functions and
unique roles.

DeGregori J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado,
Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80262, USA. james.degregori@uchsc.edu

PMID: 12020800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2002 May;43(5):1509-16.

Unique roles for E2F1 in the mouse lens in the absence of functional pRB
proteins.

Hyde RK(1), Griep AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Wisconsin Medical School, 1300 University
Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

PURPOSE: Normal lens fiber cell differentiation requires functional
retinoblastoma protein (pRB), because inactivation of this protein results in
proliferation and apoptosis in normally postmitotic, differentiating fiber cells.
Loss of either E2F1 or -3 can partially rescue the lens phenotype in Rb-deficient
mice, implying that these E2Fs may have specific targets in this system. The
purpose of this study was to determine what unique role E2F1 may play.
METHODS: Expression of E2F family members and target genes was analyzed in the
lenses of nontransgenic, E2F1-null, alphaAE7;E2F1-sufficient; and
alphaAE7;E2F1-null mice by in situ hybridization, Northern blot analysis, and
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: In lenses of E2F1-null mice, there was no change in the expression of
E2F-2 to -5 or their target genes, compared with E2F1-sufficient mice. However,
in the lens of alphaAE7 mice where pRB proteins are inactivated, expression of
E2F2 and -3a was increased. The E2F3a increase, but not that of E2F2, was
dependent on E2F1. Expression of E2F target genes was increased with expression
of E7 and expression of one of these, p19ARF, was E2F1 dependent.
CONCLUSIONS: Although in the normal lens there do not appear to be unique roles
for E2F1 that cannot be fulfilled by other E2F family members, in the absence of 
functional pRB proteins, E2F1 is specifically responsible for the increased
expression of E2F3a and p19ARF. These findings suggest that E2F1 may be the
preferred E2F regulating these target genes in the normal lens.

PMID: 11980867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Plant Physiol. 2002 Mar;128(3):833-43.

Interaction of the Arabidopsis E2F and DP proteins confers their concomitant
nuclear translocation and transactivation.

Kosugi S(1), Ohashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Department, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8602, Japan.

E2F transcription factors are required for the progression and arrest of the cell
cycle in animals. Like animals, plants have evolved to conserve the E2F family.
The Arabidopsis genome encodes E2F and DP proteins that share a high similarity
with the animal E2F and DP families. Here, we show that Arabidopsis E2F and DP
proteins are not predominantly localized to the nucleus in analyses with green
fluorescent protein, and that the complete nuclear localization of some members
is driven by the co-expression of their specific partner proteins. Both AtE2F1
and AtE2F3 were translocated to the nucleus and transactivate an E2F reporter
gene when co-expressed with DPa but not DPb. In contrast, AtE2F2 was inactive for
both nuclear translocation and transactivation even when Dpa or DPb was
co-expressed. Because the DNA binding activities of the three E2Fs are equally
stimulated by the interaction with DPa or DPb in vitro, the observed
transactivation of AtE2F1 and AtE2F3 is DPa specific and nuclear import
dependent. A green fluorescent protein fusion with an AtE2F3 mutant, in which a
conserved nuclear export signal-like sequence in the dimerization domain was
deleted, was localized to the nucleus. Thus, the concomitant nuclear
translocation seems to be conferred by the DPa interaction to release an activity
that inhibits an intrinsic nuclear import activity of AtE2Fs. Furthermore, the
nuclear translocation of AtE2F3 stimulated by DPa was abolished by the deletion
of the N-terminal region of AtE2F3, which is conserved among all the E2F proteins
identified in plants to date. Replacement of the N-terminal region of AtE2F3 with
a canonical nuclear localization signal only partially mimicked the effect of the
DPa co-expression, demonstrating the function of plant E2F distinct from that
observed for animal E2Fs. These observations suggest that the function of plant
E2F and DP proteins is primarily controlled by their nuclear localization
mediated by the interaction with specific partner proteins.

PMCID: PMC152197
PMID: 11891240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 17;277(20):17845-51. Epub 2002 Mar 7.

S phase and meristem-specific expression of the tobacco RNR1b gene is mediated by
an E2F element located in the 5' leader sequence.

Chabouté ME(1), Clément B, Philipps G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes du CNRS, Université Louis
Pasteur, 12 rue du Général Zimmer, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France.
Marie-Edith.Chaboute@ibmp-ulp.u-strasbg.fr

The RB/E2F pathway is involved in the control of the G(1)/S transition of the
eukaryotic cell cycle where various S phase genes are activated by specific E2F
factors. Ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) plays an essential role in the DNA
synthesis pathway. Earlier studies showed that there are at least two RNR1 genes 
(RNR1a and RNR1b) and one RNR2 gene in tobacco. In synchronized tobacco BY2
cells, RNR1b gene expression is at its highest level in S phase. To investigate
transcriptional regulation of the RNR1b gene, its promoter region was cloned and 
sequenced. Unlike its animal counterparts, the tobacco RNR1b promoter contains a 
consensus E2F-binding site. Surprisingly, this site is found in the leader
sequence of the gene. We show here by gel shift analysis and antibody competition
that one nuclear complex specifically binds this motif, and an E2F factor is part
of this complex. Using reporter gene analysis, tobacco RNR1b promoter activity
was detected during S phase in synchronized cells and in plant meristematic
tissues. Mutation of the E2F element substantially reduced both activities. For
the first time in plants, a single E2F motif found in the leader sequence plays
an important role in the meristem and S phase-specific expression of the tobacco 
RNR1b gene.

PMID: 11884409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Mar 15;291(5):1138-45.

Transcriptional regulation of the human tumor suppressor p14(ARF) by E2F1, E2F2, 
E2F3, and Sp1-like factors.

Parisi T(1), Pollice A, Di Cristofano A, Calabrò V, La Mantia G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, General and Molecular Biology, University of Naples
Federico II, via Mezzocannone 8, 80134 Naples, Italy.

The human ARF/INK4a locus encodes two cell cycle inhibitors, p16(INK4a) and
p14(ARF), by using separate promoters. A variety of mitogenic stimuli upregulate 
ARF but a direct modulation at the transcriptional level has been reported only
for E2F-1. We show here that the ARF promoter is strongly responsive also to E2F2
and E2F3, thus providing a strong support to their suggested role in the
induction of apoptosis. Through the usage of both deletion mutants and/or
site-directed mutants, we surprisingly found that none of the four putative E2F
consensus sites is strictly necessary for the upregulation of ARF expression, as 
a minimal deletion mutant, lacking all the putative E2F binding sites, is still
transactivated by E2F. Moreover, our data suggest that the ARF promoter is
regulated by E2F through both direct binding to the promoter sequences and
indirectly, probably by being tethered to the ARF promoter by Sp1-like factors.

(C)2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11883935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Immunity. 2001 Dec;15(6):959-70.

Mutation of E2F2 in mice causes enhanced T lymphocyte proliferation, leading to
the development of autoimmunity.

Murga M(1), Fernández-Capetillo O, Field SJ, Moreno B, Borlado LR, Fujiwara Y,
Balomenos D, Vicario A, Carrera AC, Orkin SH, Greenberg ME, Zubiaga AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Sciences, University of 
the Basque Country, Bilbao, E-48080, Spain.

E2Fs are important regulators of proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis.
Here we characterize the phenotype of mice deficient in E2F2. We show that E2F2
is required for immunologic self-tolerance. E2F2(-/-) mice develop late-onset
autoimmune features, characterized by widespread inflammatory infiltrates,
glomerular immunocomplex deposition, and anti-nuclear antibodies. E2F2-deficient 
T lymphocytes exhibit enhanced TCR-stimulated proliferation and a lower
activation threshold, leading to the accumulation of a population of autoreactive
effector/memory T lymphocytes, which appear to be responsible for causing
autoimmunity in E2F2-deficient mice. Finally, we provide support for a model to
explain E2F2's unexpected role as a suppressor of T lymphocyte proliferation.
Rather than functioning as a transcriptional activator, E2F2 appears to function 
as a transcriptional repressor of genes required for normal S phase entry,
particularly E2F1.

PMID: 11754817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Development. 2001 Dec;128(24):5085-98.

Drosophila E2f2 promotes the conversion from genomic DNA replication to gene
amplification in ovarian follicle cells.

Cayirlioglu P(1), Bonnette PC, Dickson MR, Duronio RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
USA.

Drosophila contains two members of the E2F transcription factor family (E2f and
E2f2), which controls the expression of genes that regulate the G1-S transition
of the cell cycle. Previous genetic analyses have indicated that E2f is an
essential gene that stimulates DNA replication. We show that loss of E2f2 is
viable, but causes partial female sterility associated with changes in the mode
of DNA replication in the follicle cells that surround the developing oocyte.
Late in wild-type oogenesis, polyploid follicle cells terminate a program of
asynchronous endocycles in which the euchromatin is entirely replicated, and then
confine DNA synthesis to the synchronous amplification of specific loci,
including two clusters of chorion genes that encode eggshell proteins. E2f2
mutant follicle cells terminate endocycles on schedule, but then fail to confine 
DNA synthesis to sites of gene amplification and inappropriately begin genomic
DNA replication. This ectopic DNA synthesis does not represent a continuation of 
the endocycle program, as the cells do not complete an entire additional S phase.
E2f2 mutant females display a 50% reduction in chorion gene amplification, and
lay poorly viable eggs with a defective chorion. The replication proteins ORC2,
CDC45L and ORC5, which in wild-type follicle cell nuclei localize to sites of
gene amplification, are distributed throughout the entire follicle cell nucleus
in E2f2 mutants, consistent with their use at many genomic replication origins
rather than only at sites of gene amplification. RT-PCR analyses of RNA purified 
from E2f2 mutant follicle cells indicate an increase in the level of Orc5 mRNA
relative to wild type. These data indicate that E2f2 functions to inhibit
widespread genomic DNA synthesis in late stage follicle cells, and may do so by
repressing the expression of specific components of the replication machinery.

PMID: 11748144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Nature. 2001 Nov 22;414(6862):457-62.

The E2F1-3 transcription factors are essential for cellular proliferation.

Wu L(1), Timmers C, Maiti B, Saavedra HI, Sang L, Chong GT, Nuckolls F,
Giangrande P, Wright FA, Field SJ, Greenberg ME, Orkin S, Nevins JR, Robinson ML,
Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Cancer Genetics, Department of Molecular Virology,
Immunology and Medical Genetics, and Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The retinoblastoma tumour suppressor (Rb) pathway is believed to have a critical 
role in the control of cellular proliferation by regulating E2F activities. E2F1,
E2F2 and E2F3 belong to a subclass of E2F factors thought to act as
transcriptional activators important for progression through the G1/S transition.
Here we show, by taking a conditional gene targeting approach, that the combined 
loss of these three E2F factors severely affects E2F target expression and
completely abolishes the ability of mouse embryonic fibroblasts to enter S phase,
progress through mitosis and proliferate. Loss of E2F function results in an
elevation of p21Cip1 protein, leading to a decrease in cyclin-dependent kinase
activity and Rb phosphorylation. These findings suggest a function for this
subclass of E2F transcriptional activators in a positive feedback loop, through
down-modulation of p21Cip1, that leads to the inactivation of Rb-dependent
repression and S phase entry. By targeting the entire subclass of E2F
transcriptional activators we provide direct genetic evidence for their essential
role in cell cycle progression, proliferation and development.

PMID: 11719808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Dec;21(24):8547-64.

E2F1 and E2F2 determine thresholds for antigen-induced T-cell proliferation and
suppress tumorigenesis.

Zhu JW(1), Field SJ, Gore L, Thompson M, Yang H, Fujiwara Y, Cardiff RD,
Greenberg M, Orkin SH, DeGregori J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, 4200 E. Ninth Ave., Denver, CO 80262, USA.

E2F activity is critical for the control of the G(1) to S phase transition. We
show that the combined loss of E2F1 and E2F2 results in profound effects on
hematopoietic cell proliferation and differentiation, as well as increased
tumorigenesis and decreased lymphocyte tolerance. The loss of E2F1 and E2F2
impedes B-cell differentiation, and hematopoietic progenitor cells in the bone
marrow of mice lacking E2F1 and E2F2 exhibit increased cell cycling. Importantly,
we show that E2F1 and E2F2 double-knockout T cells exhibit more rapid entry into 
S phase following antigenic stimulation. Furthermore, T cells lacking E2F1 and
E2F2 proliferate much more extensively in response to subthreshold antigenic
stimulation. Consistent with these observations, E2F1/E2F2 mutant mice are highly
predisposed to the development of tumors, and some mice exhibit signs of
autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC100017
PMID: 11713289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Exp Cell Res. 2001 Nov 1;270(2):268-76.

Reconstitution of dna synthetic capacity in senescent normal human fibroblasts by
expressing cellular factors E2F and Mdm2.

Sarraj S(1), Farb R, Martell RE.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Research and Education Clinical Center, VA Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina 27705, USA.

Unraveling the mechanisms underlying cellular senescence will contribute to the
understanding of processes involved in aging and cancer. We sought to determine
whether expression of cellular factors in senescent WI-38 human fibroblasts was
sufficient to induce nuclear DNA synthesis. Expression by recombinant adenovirus 
of E2F1, E2F2, E2F3, cyclin E/cdk2, and Mdm2 individually resulted in DNA
synthesis in 10-30% of cells. However, combination of Mdm2 with E2F or cyclin
E/cdk2 resulted in 50 to 75% of cells synthesizing DNA. DNA synthesis occurred
approximately 30 h following infection. We conclude that expression of normal
cellular factors is sufficient to induce DNA synthesis in senescent normal human 
fibroblasts.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11640890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Cancer Res. 2001 Sep 15;61(18):6693-7.

Transfer of E2F-1 to human glioma cells results in transcriptional up-regulation 
of Bcl-2.

Gomez-Manzano C(1), Mitlianga P, Fueyo J, Lee HY, Hu M, Spurgers KB, Glass TL,
Koul D, Liu TJ, McDonnell TJ, Yung WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuro-Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Strong evidence exists to support the tenet that activation of E2F transcription 
factors, via alterations in the p16-cyclin D-Rb pathway, is a key event in the
malignant progression of most human malignant gliomas. The oncogenic ability of
E2F has been related to the E2F-mediated up-regulation of several proteins that
positively regulate cell proliferation. However, E2F may indirectly enhance
proliferation by activating antiapoptotic molecules. In this work, we sought to
ascertain whether E2F-1-mediated events involve the up-regulation of the
antiapoptotic molecule Bcl-2. Western blot analyses showed up-regulation of Bcl-2
but not of Bcl-x(L) by 24 h after the transfer of E2F-1. Northern blot studies
showed that transfer of E2F-1 also up-regulated Bcl-2 RNA. In support of these
findings and the concept that E2F-1 has a direct effect in the induction of
Bcl-2, we found a putative E2F binding site within the Bcl-2 sequence. Subsequent
gel-mobility shift and supershift experiments involving the CTCCGCGC site in the 
bcl-2 promoter showed that E2F-1 bound Bcl-2. Transactivation experiments
consistently showed that ectopic E2F-1 activated responsive elements located in
the -1448/-1441 region in the P1 promoter region of the bcl-2 gene. As expected, 
other members of the E2F family of transcription factors such as E2F-2 and E2F-4 
also transactivated the bcl-2 promoter. Our results demonstrate that E2F-1
modulates the expression of the antiapoptotic molecule Bcl-2 and suggest that
up-regulation of Bcl-2 may favor the oncogenic role of E2F-1 and other members of
the E2F family of transcription factors.

PMID: 11559537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Oncogene. 2001 Aug 23;20(37):5124-31.

E2F2 converts reversibly differentiated PC12 cells to an irreversible,
neurotrophin-dependent state.

Persengiev SP(1), Li J, Poulin ML, Kilpatrick DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, 55 Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

E2Fs play a central role in cell proliferation and growth arrest through their
ability to regulate genes involved in cell cycle progression, arrest and
apoptosis. Recent studies further indicate that this family of transcriptional
regulators participate in cell fate/differentiation events. They are thus likely 
to have a prominent role in controlling the terminal differentiation process and 
its irreversibility. Here we have specifically examined the role of E2F2 in
neuronal differentiation using a gain-of-function approach. Endogenous E2F2
increased in PC12 cells in response to nerve growth factor (NGF) and was also
expressed in cerebellar granule neurons undergoing terminal differentiation.
While PC12 cells normally undergo reversible dedifferentiation and cell cycle
re-entry upon NGF removal, forced expression of E2F2 inhibited these events and
induced apoptosis. Thus, E2F2 converted PC12-derived neurons from a reversible to
a 'terminally' differentiated, NGF-dependent state, analogous to postmitotic
sympathetic neurons. This contrasts with the effects of E2F4, which enhances the 
differentiation state of PC12 cells without affecting cell cycle parameters or
survival. These results indicate that E2F2 may have a unique role in maintaining 
the postmitotic state of terminally differentiated neurons, and may participate
in apoptosis in neurons attempting to re-enter the cell cycle. It may also be
potentially useful in promoting the terminally arrested/differentiated state of
tumor cells.

PMID: 11526501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Genes Dev. 2001 Aug 15;15(16):2146-60.

Functional antagonism between E2F family members.

Frolov MV(1), Huen DS, Stevaux O, Dimova D, Balczarek-Strang K, Elsdon M, Dyson
NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown, Massachusetts
02129, USA.

E2F is a heterogenous transcription factor and its role in cell cycle control
results from the integrated activities of many different E2F family members.
Unlike mammalian cells, that have a large number of E2F-related genes, the
Drosophila genome encodes just two E2F genes, de2f1 and de2f2. Here we show that 
de2f1 and de2f2 provide different elements of E2F regulation and that they have
opposing functions during Drosophila development. dE2F1 and dE2F2 both
heterodimerize with dDP and bind to the promoters of E2F-regulated genes in vivo.
dE2F1 is a potent activator of transcription, and the loss of de2f1 results in
the reduced expression of E2F-regulated genes. In contrast, dE2F2 represses the
transcription of E2F reporters and the loss of de2f2 function results in
increased and expanded patterns of gene expression. The loss of de2f1 function
has previously been reported to compromise cell proliferation. de2f1 mutant
embryos have reduced expression of E2F-regulated genes, low levels of DNA
synthesis, and hatch to give slow-growing larvae. We find that these defects are 
due in large part to the unchecked activity of dE2F2, since they can be
suppressed by mutation of de2f2. Examination of eye discs from de2f1; de2f2
double-mutant animals reveals that relatively normal patterns of DNA synthesis
can occur in the absence of both E2F proteins. This study shows how repressor and
activator E2Fs are used to pattern transcription and how the net effect of E2F on
cell proliferation results from the interplay between two types of E2F complexes 
that have antagonistic functions.

PMCID: PMC312757
PMID: 11511545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Mol Cell. 2001 Jul;8(1):105-13.

Myc requires distinct E2F activities to induce S phase and apoptosis.

Leone G(1), Sears R, Huang E, Rempel R, Nuckolls F, Park CH, Giangrande P, Wu L, 
Saavedra HI, Field SJ, Thompson MA, Yang H, Fujiwara Y, Greenberg ME, Orkin S,
Smith C, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Cancer Genetics, Department of Molecular Virology, Ohio
State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Previous work has shown that the Myc transcription factor induces transcription
of the E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3 genes. Using primary mouse embryo fibroblasts deleted
for individual E2F genes, we now show that Myc-induced S phase and apoptosis
requires distinct E2F activities. The ability of Myc to induce S phase is
impaired in the absence of either E2F2 or E2F3 but not E2F1 or E2F4. In contrast,
the ability of Myc to induce apoptosis is markedly reduced in cells deleted for
E2F1 but not E2F2 or E2F3. From this data, we propose that the induction of
specific E2F activities is an essential component in the Myc pathways that
control cell proliferation and cell fate decisions.

PMID: 11511364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Ann Oncol. 2001 Jun;12(6):779-85.

Rb, mcl-1 and p53 expression correlate with clinical outcome in patients with
liver metastases from colorectal cancer.

Backus HH(1), van Riel JM, van Groeningen CJ, Vos W, Dukers DF, Bloemena E,
Wouters D, Pinedo HM, Peters GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Vrije Universiteit,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Thymidylate synthase (TS) has been associated with clinical outcome
in disseminated colorectal cancer. However, many patients with low TS expression 
still fail to respond to treatment. Therefore, we studied the cell cycle
proteins, Rb, E2F2, Ki67, p21 and p53 and the apoptotic proteins, mcl-1, hax,
bcl-xl, bcl-2, Fas receptor, Fas ligand, caspase-3, M30 and PARP as potential
predictive factors.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In biopsy specimens of liver metastases from 31 colorectal 
cancer patients, protein expression was retrospectively determined by
immunohistochemistry and related to response to hepatic arterial or intravenous
(i.v.) 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) treatment, time to tumour progression (TTP) and
overall survival.
RESULTS: Expression of both p53 and Rb correlated with survival benefit after
5-FU treatment. A median survival time of 79 weeks was found in patients with
high levels of p53 or Rb compared to 36 and 44 weeks for patients expressing low 
levels of p53 (P = 0.027) or Rb (P = 0.030), respectively. Multivariate analysis 
showed that p53 was the best predictor of survival independent of sex, age or
prior treatment. Following 5-FU hepatic arterial infusion, patients with a high
TS expression had a shorter survival time than those with a low expression (P =
0.025). The anti-apoptotic protein mcl-1 was the only factor, which correlated
with response to 5-FU treatment. Thirty-five percent of patients with a diffuse
mcl-1 expression responded whereas ninety percent of patients with a peri-nuclear
expression responded (P = 0.041).
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that besides TS, also Rb, p53 and mcl-1 are
correlated with clinical outcome in patients with liver metastases from
colorectal cancer.

PMID: 11484952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Ann Oncol. 2001 Feb;12(2):209-16.

5-Fluorouracil induced Fas upregulation associated with apoptosis in liver
metastases of colorectal cancer patients.

Backus HH(1), Dukers DF, van Groeningen CJ, Vos W, Bloemena E, Wouters D, van
Riel JM, Smid K, Giaccone G, Pinedo HM, Peters GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Vrije Universiteit,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: In vitro, thymidylate synthase (TS) inhibition by 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU) induces thymineless apoptosis possibly via Fas receptor Fas ligand
interactions and cell-cycle arrest. In colorectal cancer patients we evaluated
whether 5-FU administration also resulted in apoptosis and cell-cycle arrest and 
which proteins might be involved.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Biopsy specimens were taken from 36 patients 2, 22 or 46
hours after administration of 500 mg/m2 5-FU, and from 12 control patients who
did not receive 5-FU. In frozen tissue-sections from liver metastases
immunohistochemistry was performed with antibodies directed against p53, p21,
E2F2, Rb, Ki67 and TS (cell-cycle related) and bax, BCL-2, BCL-x, mcl-1, PARP,
caspase-3, Fas receptor and Fas ligand (apoptosis related). Apoptosis was
determined by M30 immunostaining, which recognises a cleavage product of
cytokeratin 18.
RESULTS: Fas receptor expression was 50% higher (P = 0.036) 46 hours after 5-FU
administration compared to the control group. This was associated with a 12%
increase (P < 0.02) in M30 positive tumour cells and with elevation of caspase-3 
and PARP expression. The expression of Ki67 and E2F2 was 30% lower after 46 hours
compared to the control group, whereas TS was 56% lower after 2 hours and 32%
higher again after 46 hours. No differences in the expression of the other
proteins were found.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that 5-FU decreases proliferation status and
induces apoptosis possibly via the Fas pathway. Since Fas mediated cell killing
is important for cytotoxic T cells this indicates that clinical studies combining
immunotherapy for activation of T cells and chemotherapy using 5-FU might be very
effective.

PMID: 11300326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Genes Dev. 2001 Feb 15;15(4):386-91.

E2F3 contributes both to the inappropriate proliferation and to the apoptosis
arising in Rb mutant embryos.

Ziebold U(1), Reza T, Caron A, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

The E2F transcription factors are thought to be key downstream targets of the
retinoblastoma protein (pRB) tumor suppressor. It is widely believed that E2F1,
E2F2, and E2F3 can all activate cellular proliferation but that E2F1 is the
specific inducer of apoptosis. Here we show that the E2f3 mutation completely
suppresses both the inappropriate proliferation and the p53-dependent apoptosis
arising in the Rb mutant embryos. Through the analysis of Rb(-/-);E2f3(+/-)
embryos, we have been able to separate E2F3's role in the induction of apoptosis 
from its ability to induce proliferation. Thus, contrary to the prevailing view
of E2F action, E2F3 makes a major contribution to the apoptosis resulting from
pRB loss.

PMCID: PMC312633
PMID: 11230146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Int J Oncol. 2001 Feb;18(2):343-7.

Co-expression of E2F-2 enhances the p53 anti-cancer effect in human glioma cells.

Mitlianga PG(1), Kyritsis AP, Gomez-Manzano C, Lemoine MG, Hu M, Liu TJ, Yung WK,
Fueyo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuro-Oncology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Gliomas are highly resistant to conventional treatment. Improved knowledge of the
molecular defects of glioma cells offers new avenues for the development of gene 
therapy strategies. Transfer of the p53 gene has proven effective in suppressing 
proliferation in human glioma cell lines. However, several human glioma cell
lines are resistant to p53-induced cell death. The E2F family of transcription
factors are pivotal for the regulation of cell-cycle and cell-death related genes
in gliomas. In the present study, we sought a more effective strategy for glioma 
treatment by examining the therapeutic potential of the simultaneous transfer of 
p53 and E2F-2 to gliomas. Trypan blue cell viability assays and flow cytometric
cell-cycle analysis demonstrated that the transfer of both p53 and E2F-2 induced 
cell death in D-54 MG, a p53-resistant glioma cell line. In addition, transfer of
E2F-2 did not interfere with the apoptotic properties of exogenous wild-type p53 
in U-251 MG cells. Finally, the expression of E2F-2 in D-54 MG cells suppressed
the expression of the apoptotic molecule mdm-2 induced by exogenous p53 in these 
cells. These results show that co-expression of E2F-2 and p53 enhances the
anti-cancer effect of p53 in gliomas.

PMID: 11172602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Genes Dev. 2001 Feb 1;15(3):267-85.

E2Fs regulate the expression of genes involved in differentiation, development,
proliferation, and apoptosis.

Müller H(1), Bracken AP, Vernell R, Moroni MC, Christians F, Grassilli E,
Prosperini E, Vigo E, Oliner JD, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, 20141
Milan, Italy.

The retinoblastoma protein (pRB) and its two relatives, p107 and p130, regulate
development and cell proliferation in part by inhibiting the activity of
E2F-regulated promoters. We have used high-density oligonucleotide arrays to
identify genes in which expression changed in response to activation of E2F1,
E2F2, and E2F3. We show that the E2Fs control the expression of several genes
that are involved in cell proliferation. We also show that the E2Fs regulate a
number of genes involved in apoptosis, differentiation, and development. These
results provide possible genetic explanations to the variety of phenotypes
observed as a consequence of a deregulated pRB/E2F pathway.

PMCID: PMC312619
PMID: 11159908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Cell Growth Differ. 2000 Dec;11(12):625-33.

Induction of DNA replication in adult rat neurons by deregulation of the
retinoblastoma/E2F G1 cell cycle pathway.

Smith DS(1), Leone G, DeGregori J, Ahmed MN, Qumsiyeh MB, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
27710, USA.

In adult organisms, a range of proliferative capacities are exhibited by
different cell types. Stem cell populations in many tissues readily enter the
cell cycle when presented with serum growth factors or other proliferative cues, 
whereas "terminally" postmitotic cells, such as cardiac myocytes and neurons,
fail to do so. Although they rarely show evidence of a proliferative capacity in 
vivo, there is accumulating evidence to suggest that DNA synthesis can be
triggered in postmitotic cells. We now show that cultured adult rat sensory
neurons can replicate DNA in response to ectopic expression of E2F1 or E2F2 and
that this is augmented by expression of cyclin-dependent kinase activities. We
also find that addition of serum and laminin inhibits the E2F-induced S-phase in 
neurons but not in nonneuronal cells in the same cultures. We conclude that,
although terminally differentiated neurons possess the capacity to reinitiate DNA
replication in response to G1 regulatory activities, they fail to do so in the
presence of signals that do not inhibit S-phase in other cell types in the same
cultures. This suggests the existence of cell type-specific inhibitory pathways
induced by these signals.

PMID: 11149597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2000 Dec;41(13):4223-31.

Induction of cell cycle entry and cell death in postmitotic lens fiber cells by
overexpression of E2F1 or E2F2.

Chen Q(1), Hung FC, Fromm L, Overbeek PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE: Previous studies have shown that inactivation of the retinoblastoma
tumor suppressor protein (pRb) can cause lens fiber cell proliferation and
apoptosis. Because pRb is thought to block cell cycle progression by inhibition
of E2F transcription factors, experiments were conducted to test whether
overexpression of different E2F family members would be sufficient to induce
fiber cell proliferation and subsequent apoptosis. The in vivo functions of the
transcription factor E2F2 have not previously been analyzed or described in
transgenic mice.
METHODS: Human E2F1 and E2F2 cDNAs were linked to the alphaA-crystallin promoter.
Transgenic mice were generated by microinjection. Changes in cell cycle
regulation were assayed by immunohistochemistry for 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine
(BrdU) incorporation and by in situ hybridization. Cell death was assayed using
the TdT-dUTP terminal nick-end labeling (TUNEL) assay.
RESULTS: At embryonic day (E)15.5, strong expression of the E2F1 and E2F2
transgenes was detected in lens fiber cells with little or no expression in
epithelial cells. BrdU incorporation and TUNEL assays showed that overexpression 
of either E2F1 or E2F2 in lens fiber cells was sufficient to cause cell cycle
entry and subsequent apoptosis. Expression of either E2F1 or E2F2 was sufficient 
to induce the transcription of cyclins (A2, B1, and E), as well as p53 and Bax in
the lens fibercells.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of either E2F1 or E2F2 can induce postmitotic lens fiber 
cells to re-enter the cell cycle. Inappropriate cell cycle entry is recognized by
p53 in each case, and programmed cell death ensues.

PMID: 11095619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. EMBO J. 2000 Nov 1;19(21):5813-23.

Induction of cyclin E-cdk2 kinase activity, E2F-dependent transcription and cell 
growth by Myc are genetically separable events.

Beier R(1), Bürgin A, Kiermaier A, Fero M, Karsunky H, Saffrich R, Möröy T,
Ansorge W, Roberts J, Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumour Research, Emil-Mannkopff-Strabetae
2, 35033 Marburg, Germany.

The c-myc gene has been implicated in three distinct genetic programs regulating 
cell proliferation: control of cyclin E-cdk2 kinase activity, E2F-dependent
transcription and cell growth. We have now used p27(-/-) fibroblasts to dissect
these downstream signalling pathways. In these cells, activation of Myc
stimulates transcription of E2F target genes, S-phase entry and cell growth
without affecting cyclin E-cdk2 kinase activity. Both cyclin D2 and E2F2,
potential direct target genes of Myc, are induced in p27(-/-) MycER cells.
Ectopic expression of E2F2, but not of cyclin D2, induces S-phase entry, but, in 
contrast to Myc, does not stimulate cell growth. Our results show that
stimulation of cyclin E-cdk2 kinase, of E2F-dependent transcription and of cell
growth by Myc can be genetically separated from each other.

PMCID: PMC305784
PMID: 11060032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Oncogene. 2000 Oct 19;19(44):5054-62.

Dual functions of E2F-1 in a transgenic mouse model of liver carcinogenesis.

Conner EA(1), Lemmer ER, Omori M, Wirth PJ, Factor VM, Thorgeirsson SS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Division of Basic Sciences,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, MD 
20892, USA.

Deregulation of E2F transcriptional control has been implicated in oncogenic
transformation. Consistent with this idea, we recently demonstrated that during
hepatocarcinogenesis in c-myc/TGFalpha double transgenic mice, there is increased
expression of E2F-1 and E2F-2, as well as induction of putative E2F target genes.
Therefore, we generated transgenic mice expressing E2F-1 under the control of the
albumin enhancer/promoter to test the hypothesis that E2F family members may
contribute to liver tumor development. Overexpression of E2F-1 resulted in mild
but persistent increases in cell proliferation and death during postnatal liver
growth, and no increases in hepatic regenerative growth in response to partial
hepatectomy. Nevertheless, from 2 months postnatally E2F-1 transgenic mice
exhibited prominent hepatic histological abnormalities including preneoplastic
foci adjacent to portal tracts and pericentral large cell dysplasia. From 6 to 8 
months onward, there was an abrupt increase in the number of neoplastic nodules
('adenomas') with 100% incidence by 10 months. Some adenomas showed evidence of
malignant transformation, and two of six mice killed at 12 months showed
trabecular hepatocellular carcinoma. Endogenous c-myc was up-regulated in the
early stages of E2F-1 hepatocarcinogenesis, whereas p53 was overexpressed in the 
tumors, suggesting that both E2F-1-mediated proliferation and apoptosis are
operative but at different stages of hepatocarcinogenesis. In conclusion, E2F-1
overexpression in the liver causes dysplasia and tumors and suggests a
cooperation between E2F-1 and c-myc oncogenes during liver oncogenesis.

PMID: 11042693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Nature. 2000 Oct 5;407(6804):642-5.

A common E2F-1 and p73 pathway mediates cell death induced by TCR activation.

Lissy NA(1), Davis PK, Irwin M, Kaelin WG, Dowdy SF.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Pathology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis Missouri 63110, USA.

Strong stimulation of the T-cell receptor (TCR) on cycling peripheral T cells
causes their apoptosis by a process called TCR-activation-induced cell death
(TCR-AICD). TCR-AICD occurs from a late G1 phase cell-cycle check point
independently of the 'tumour suppressor' protein p53. Disruption of the gene for 
the E2F-1 transcription factor, an inducer of apoptosis, causes significant
increases in T-cell number and splenomegaly. Here we show that T cells undergoing
TCR-AICD induce the p53-related gene p73, another mediator of apoptosis, which is
hypermethylated in lymphomas. Introducing a dominant-negative E2F-1 protein or a 
dominant-negative p73 protein into T cells protects them from TCR-mediated
apoptosis, whereas dominant-negative E2F-2, E2F-4 or p53 does not. Furthermore,
E2F-1-null or p73-null primary T cells do not undergo TCR-mediated apoptosis
either. We conclude that TCR-AICD occurs from a late G1 cell-cycle checkpoint
that is dependent on both E2F-1 and p73 activities. These observations indicate
that, unlike p53, p73 serves to integrate receptor-mediated apoptotic stimuli.

PMID: 11034214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. EMBO J. 2000 Oct 16;19(20):5376-86.

A role for Ebi in neuronal cell cycle control.

Boulton SJ(1), Brook A, Staehling-Hampton K, Heitzler P, Dyson N.

Author information: 
(1)MGH Cancer Center, Laboratory of Molecular Oncology and Department of
Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Building 149, 13th Street, Charlestown, MA
02129, USA.

Mutations in ebi were isolated as enhancers of an over-proliferation phenotype
generated by elevated E2F/DP activity in the Drosophila eye. ebi alleles also
strongly suppress a phenotype caused by the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p21, restoring S phases in the second mitotic wave of the developing eye disk.
ebi mutant embryos display ectopic S phases within the peripheral nervous system 
and central nervous system at a time in development when neuronal precursor cells
would normally begin to differentiate. Consistent with this, we find that ebi
mutants have a reduced capacity to undergo neuronal differentiation, that Ebi
physically interacts with Sina and phyllopod, and that Ebi promotes Ttk88
degradation in vitro and in S2 cells. Ectopic expression of Ttk88 inhibited
differentiation in embryos and eye discs; however, this block to differentiation 
was insufficient to promote S phase entry in either of the situations where ebi
mutations gave this effect. We conclude that Ebi has two distinct functions; it
promotes the degradation of a repressor of neuronal differentiation (Ttk88), and 
has a second independent function that limits S phase entry.

PMCID: PMC314025
PMID: 11032805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Virol. 2000 Sep;74(17):7842-50.

E2F proteins are posttranslationally modified concomitantly with a reduction in
nuclear binding activity in cells infected with herpes simplex virus 1.

Advani SJ(1), Weichselbaum RR, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The transition from G(1) to S phase in the cell cycle requires sequential
activation of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (cdk4) and cdk2, which phosphorylate the 
retinoblastoma protein, causing the release of E2F. Free E2F upregulates the
transcription of genes involved in S phase and cell cycle progression. Recent
studies from this and other laboratories have shown that herpes simplex virus 1
stabilizes cyclin D3 early in infection and that early events in viral
replication are sensitive to inhibitors of some cdks. On the other hand cdk2 is
not activated. Here we report studies on the status of members of E2F family in
cycling HEp-2 and HeLa cells and quiescent serum-starved, contact-inhibited human
lung fibroblasts. The results show that (i) at 8 h postinfection or thereafter,
E2F-1 and E2F-5 were posttranslationally modified and/or translocated from
nucleus to the cytoplasm, (ii) E2F-4 was hyperphophorylated, and (iii) overall,
E2F binding to cognate DNA sites was decreased at late times after infection.
These results concurrent with those cited above indicate that late in infection
activation of S-phase genes is blocked both by posttranslational modification and
translocation of members of E2F family to inactive compartments and by the
absence of active cdk2. The observation that E2F were also posttranslationally
modified in quiescent human lung fibroblasts that were not in S phase at the time
of infection suggests that specific viral gene products are responsible for
modification of the members of E2F family and raises the possibility that in
infected cells, activation of the S phase gene is an early event in viral
infection and is then shut off at late times. This is consistent with the timing 
of stabilization of cyclin D3 and the events blocked by inhibitors of cdks.

PMCID: PMC112314
PMID: 10933691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Oncogene. 2000 Jul 6;19(29):3330-4.

A genetic screen to identify genes that rescue the slow growth phenotype of c-myc
null fibroblasts.

Berns K(1), Hijmans EM, Koh E, Daley GQ, Bernards R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, and Center for Biomedical Genetics, The 
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam.

The c-myc gene is frequently over-expressed in human cancers and is involved in
regulation of proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. c-Myc is a
transcription factor that acts primarily by regulating the expression of other
genes. However, it has been very difficult to identify bona fide c-Myc target
genes that explain its diverse biological activities. The recent generation of
c-myc deficient Rat1A fibroblasts with a profound and stable growth defect
provides a new system to search for genes that can substitute for c-myc in
proliferation. In this study, we have attempted to identify genes that rescue the
slow growth phenotype of c-myc null cells through introduction of a series of
potent cell cycle regulatory genes and several retroviral cDNA expression
libraries. None of the candidate genes tested, including SV40 T-antigen and
adenovirus E1A, caused reversal of the c-myc null growth defect. Furthermore,
extensive screens with high-complexity retroviral cDNA libraries from three
different tissue sources revealed that only c-myc and N-myc rescued the c-myc
null slow-growth phenotype. Our data support the notion that there are no
functional equivalents of the myc family of proto-oncogenes and also suggest that
there are no c-Myc-activated genes that alone can substitute for c-Myc in control
of cell proliferation.

PMID: 10918589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Int J Dev Biol. 2000 Apr;44(3):267-77.

Expression of the E2F family of transcription factors during murine development.

Kusek JC(1), Greene RM, Nugent P, Pisano MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Craniofacial Biology, ULSD, University
of Louisville Birth Defects Center, KY 40292, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors plays a crucial role in the control of
cell cycle progression and regulation of cellular proliferation, both processes
fundamental to mammalian development. In the present study, we have examined the 
levels of expression of the six currently identified E2F proteins in murine
embryos/fetuses as a function of gestational age, compared the expression of
these six proteins in selected developing and adult tissues, and examined E2F
expression in the embryonic murine palate, a tissue in which perturbation of
proliferation is associated with induction of cleft palate. Our results indicate 
that: 1) multiple forms of individual E2F family members are present in
embryonic, fetal and adult cells/tissues; 2) each of the six E2Fs is expressed in
a tissue specific manner in both adult and embryonic/fetal organs; 3) certain
forms of individual E2F family members are preferentially detected in adult
tissues, whereas others are preferentially expressed in embryonic/fetal tissues; 
4) expression of the various E2Fs and their isoforms follows distinct temporal
patterns during murine gestation; and 5) individual E2F family members also
exhibit differential patterns of temporal expression during murine palatogenesis.

PMID: 10853823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Jun 6;97(12):6481-6.

CpG methylation as a mechanism for the regulation of E2F activity.

Campanero MR(1), Armstrong MI, Flemington EK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Harvard Medical School and
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney Street, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.

Regulation of gene expression in mammals through methylation of cytosine residues
at CpG dinucleotides is involved in the development and progression of tumors.
Because many genes that are involved in the control of cell proliferation are
regulated by members of the E2F family of transcription factors and because some 
E2F DNA-binding sites are methylated in vivo, we have investigated whether CpG
methylation can regulate E2F functions. We show here that methylation of E2F
elements derived from the dihydrofolate reductase, E2F1, and cdc2 promoters
prevents the binding of all E2F family members tested (E2F1 through E2F5). In
contrast, methylation of the E2F elements derived from the c-myc and c-myb
promoters minimally affects the binding of E2F2, E2F3, E2F4, and E2F5 but
significantly inhibits the binding of E2F1. Consistent with these studies, E2F3, 
but not E2F1, activates transcription through methylated E2F sites derived from
the c-myb and c-myc genes whereas both E2F1 and E2F3 fail to transactivate a
reporter gene that is under the control of a methylated dihydrofolate reductase
E2F site. Together, these data illustrate a means through which E2F activity can 
be controlled.

PMCID: PMC18629
PMID: 10823896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(10):3633-9.

Complex transcriptional regulatory mechanisms control expression of the E2F3
locus.

Adams MR(1), Sears R, Nuckolls F, Leone G, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

E2F transcription activity has been shown to play a critical role in cell growth 
control, regulating the expression of a variety of genes that encode proteins
important for the initiation of DNA replication and cell cycle regulation. We
have shown that the E2F3 locus encodes two protein products: the E2F3a product,
which is tightly regulated by cell growth, and the E2F3b product, which is
constitutively expressed throughout the cell cycle. To further explore the
mechanism controlling the expression of the two E2F3 gene products, we analyzed
the genomic sequences flanking the 5' region of E2F3a and E2F3b. We find that a
series of E2F binding sites confer negative control on the E2F3a promoter in
quiescent cells, similar to the control of the E2F1 and E2F2 promoters. In
addition, a group of E-box elements, which are Myc binding sites, confer
responsiveness to Myc and are necessary for full activation of the E2F3a promoter
in response to growth stimulation. Based on these results and past experiments,
it appears that the E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3a genes are similarly regulated by growth
stimulation, involving a combination of E2F-dependent negative control and
Myc-mediated positive control. In contrast, the constitutive expression of the
E2F3b gene more closely reflects the control of expression of the E2F4 and E2F5
genes.

PMCID: PMC85656
PMID: 10779353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Exp Med. 2000 Mar 20;191(6):1005-16.

Deregulated E2F transcriptional activity in autonomously growing melanoma cells.

Halaban R(1), Cheng E, Smicun Y, Germino J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8059, USA. ruth.halaban@yale.edu

Inactivation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (pRb) has been
implicated in melanoma cells, but the molecular basis for this phenotype has not 
yet been elucidated, and the status of additional family members (p107 and p130, 
together termed pocket proteins) or the consequences on downstream targets such
as E2F transcription factors are not known. Because cell cycle progression is
dependent on the transcriptional activity of E2F family members (E2F1-E2F6), most
of them regulated by suppressive association with pocket proteins, we
characterized E2F-pocket protein DNA binding activity in normal versus malignant 
human melanocytes. By gel shift analysis, we show that in mitogen-dependent
normal melanocytes, external growth factors tightly controlled the levels of
growth-promoting free E2F DNA binding activity, composed largely of E2F2 and
E2F4, and the growth-suppressive E2F4-p130 complexes. In contrast, in melanoma
cells, free E2F DNA binding activity (E2F2 and E2F4, to a lesser extent E2F1,
E2F3, and occasionally E2F5), was constitutively maintained at high levels
independently of external melanocyte mitogens. E2F1 was the only family member
more abundant in the melanoma cells compared with normal melanocytes, and the
approximately fivefold increase in DNA binding activity could be accounted for
mostly by a similar increase in the levels of the dimerization partner DP1. The
continuous high expression of cyclin D1, A2, and E, the persistent
cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) and CDK2 activities, and the presence of
hyperphosphorylated forms of pRb, p107, and p130, suggest that melanoma cells
acquired the capacity for autonomous growth through inactivation of all three
pocket proteins and release of E2F activity, otherwise tightly regulated in
normal melanocytes by external growth factors.

PMCID: PMC2193116
PMID: 10727462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Cell Biol. 2000 Mar 20;148(6):1187-201.

Subcellular compartmentalization of E2F family members is required for
maintenance of the postmitotic state in terminally differentiated muscle.

Gill RM(1), Hamel PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M5S 1A8.

Maintenance of cells in a quiescent state after terminal differentiation occurs
through a number of mechanisms that regulate the activity of the E2F family of
transcription factors. We report here that changes in the subcellular
compartmentalization of the E2F family proteins are required to prevent nuclei in
terminally differentiated skeletal muscle from reentering S phase. In terminally 
differentiated L6 myotubes, E2F-1, E2F-3, and E2F-5 were primarily cytoplasmic,
E2F-2 was nuclear, whereas E2F-4 became partitioned between both compartments. In
these same cells, pRB family members, pRB, p107, and p130 were also nuclear. This
compartmentalization of the E2F-1 and E2F-4 in differentiated muscle cells grown 
in vitro reflected their observed subcellular location in situ. We determined
further that exogenous E2F-1 or E2F-4 expressed in myotubes at levels fourfold
greater than endogenous proteins compartmentalized identically to their
endogenous counterparts. Only when overexpressed at higher levels was
inappropriate subcellular location for these proteins observed. At these levels, 
induction of the E2F-regulated genes, cyclins A and E, and suppression of factors
associated with myogenesis, myogenin, and p21(Cip1) was observed. Only at these
levels of E2F expression did nuclei in these terminally differentiated cells
enter S phase. These data demonstrate that regulation of the subcellular
compartmentalization of E2F-family members is required to maintain nuclei in a
quiescent state in terminally differentiated cells.

PMCID: PMC2174298
PMID: 10725332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. DNA Cell Biol. 1999 Dec;18(12):911-22.

Differential regulation of E2F transcription factors by p53 tumor suppressor
protein.

Vaishnav YN(1), Pant V.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi,
India. yvaishnav@hotmail.com

The cell cycle is under the control of various positive and negative regulators. 
Two such regulators are the E2F family of transcription factors and the p53 tumor
suppressor protein. While E2F proteins are implicated in promoting the S phase of
the cell cycle, p53 has the potential to arrest cells in G1 phase and thereby
prevent entry into S phase. Because they perform seemingly opposite functions in 
the control of cell growth, a possibility of functional interactions between E2F 
and p53 was investigated. It was found that p53 specifically inhibited activated 
transcription by E2F-5 but not by E2F-1. Investigation into the mechanism of
action established that heterodimer formation and the DNA-binding steps were not 
significantly inhibited by p53. However, the transcriptional activation step of
E2F-5 activity, as examined by using a Gal4 DNA-binding domain chimera, was
specifically inhibited by p53. Interestingly, p53 could also inhibit
transcriptional activation by E2F-4 but not by E2F-2 or E2F-3. The results
indicate that p53 differentially regulates the activities of two subclasses
(E2F-1/-2/-3 vs. E2F-4/-5) of E2F transcription factors. Detailed analysis using 
a two-hybrid approach in mammalian cells indicated lack of physical interaction
between p53 and E2F-5, DP-1, or E2F-1. Reciprocal analysis revealed that whereas 
E2F-1 dramatically inhibited p53-activated transcription, E2F-5 or DP-1 did not. 
Thus, nonreciprocal functional interactions exist between various members of the 
E2F family of transcription factors and p53 tumor suppressor protein. The complex
interplay between various positive and negative regulators of cell growth, such
as E2F and p53 proteins, may be crucial in determining the ultimate outcome in
terms of cell cycle arrest, cell growth, or apoptosis.

PMID: 10619603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Dec 15;253(2):561-72.

Activation of a cAMP pathway and induction of melanogenesis correlate with
association of p16(INK4) and p27(KIP1) to CDKs, loss of E2F-binding activity, and
premature senescence of human melanocytes.

Haddad MM(1), Xu W, Schwahn DJ, Liao F, Medrano EE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology and Dermatology, Baylor College of Medicine and
VAMC, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

There is strong evidence that the senescent phenotype, whether induced by
telomere shortening, oxidative damage, or oncogenic stimuli, is an important
tumor suppressive mechanism. The melanocyte is a cell of neural crest origin that
produces the pigment melanin and can develop into malignant melanomas. To
understand how malignant cells escape senescence, it is first crucial to define
what genes control senescence in the normal cell. Prolonged exposure to high
levels of cAMP results in accumulation of melanin and terminal differentiation of
human melanocytes. Here we present evidence that activation of a cAMP pathway
correlates with multiple cellular changes in these cells: (1) increased
expression of the transcription factor microphthalmia; (2) increased
melanogenesis; (3) increased association of the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitors (CDK-Is) p27(KIP1) and p16(INK4) with CDK2 and CDK4, respectively; (4)
failure to phosphorylate the retinoblastoma protein (pRB); (5) decreased
expression of E2F1, E2F2, and E2F4 proteins; (6) loss of E2F DNA-binding
activity; and (7) phenotypic changes characteristic of senescent cells. Senescent
melanocytes have potent E2F inhibitory activity, because extracts from these
cells completely abolished E2F DNA-binding activity that was present in extracts 
from the early proliferative phase. We propose that increased activity of the
CDK-Is p27 and p16 and loss of E2F activity in human melanocytes characterize a
senescence program activated by the cAMP pathway. Disruption of cAMP-mediated and
melanogenesis-induced senescence may cause immortalization of human melanocytes, 
an early step in the development of melanomas.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10585280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Sep;19(9):6379-95.

CDC25A phosphatase is a target of E2F and is required for efficient E2F-induced S
phase.

Vigo E(1), Müller H, Prosperini E, Hateboer G, Cartwright P, Moroni MC, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, 20141
Milan, Italy.

Functional inactivation of the pRB pathway is a very frequent event in human
cancer, resulting in deregulated activity of the E2F transcription factors. To
understand the functional role of the E2Fs in cell proliferation, we have
developed cell lines expressing E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3 fused to the estrogen
receptor ligand binding domain (ER). In this study, we demonstrated that
activation of all three E2Fs could relieve the mitogen requirement for entry into
S phase in Rat1 fibroblasts and that E2F activity leads to a shortening of the
G(0)-G(1) phase of the cell cycle by 6 to 7 h. In contrast to the current
assumption that E2F-1 is the only E2F capable of inducing apoptosis, we showed
that deregulated E2F-2 and E2F-3 activities also result in apoptosis. Using the
ERE2F-expressing cell lines, we demonstrated that several genes containing E2F
DNA binding sites are efficiently induced by the E2Fs in the absence of protein
synthesis. Furthermore, CDC25A is defined as a novel E2F target whose expression 
can be directly regulated by E2F-1. Data showing that CDC25A is an essential
target for E2F-1, since its activity is required for efficient induction of S
phase by E2F-1, are provided. Finally, our results show that expression of two
E2F target genes, namely CDC25A and cyclin E, is sufficient to induce entry into 
S phase in quiescent fibroblasts. Taken together, our results provide an
important step in defining how E2F activity leads to deregulated proliferation.

PMCID: PMC84608
PMID: 10454584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mol Cell. 1999 Feb;3(2):169-79.

Ras enhances Myc protein stability.

Sears R(1), Leone G, DeGregori J, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Various experiments have demonstrated a collaborative action of Myc and Ras, both
in normal cell growth control as well as during oncogenesis. We now show that Ras
enhances the accumulation of Myc activity by stabilizing the Myc protein. Whereas
Myc has a very short half-life when produced in the absence of mitogenic signals,
due to degradation by the 26S proteasome, the half-life of Myc increases markedly
in growth-stimulated cells. This stabilization is dependent on the Ras/Raf/MAPK
pathway and is not augmented by proteasome inhibition, suggesting that Ras
inhibits the proteasome-dependent degradation of Myc. We propose that one aspect 
of Myc-Ras collaboration is an ability of Ras to enhance the accumulation of
transcriptionally active Myc protein.

PMID: 10078200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Oncogene. 1998 Dec 31;17(26):3463-9.

Activation and repression of p21(WAF1/CIP1) transcription by RB binding proteins.

Gartel AL(1), Goufman E, Tevosian SG, Shih H, Yee AS, Tyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at Chicago, 60607,
USA.

The Cdk inhibitor p21(WAF1/CIP1) is a negative regulator of the cell cycle,
although its expression is induced by a number of mitogens that promote cell
proliferation. We have found that E2F1 and E2F3, transcription factors that
activate genes required for cell cycle progression, are strong activators of the 
p21 promoter. In contrast, HBP1 (HMG-box protein-1), a novel retinoblastoma
protein-binding protein, can repress the p21 promoter and inhibit induction of
p21 expression by E2F. Both E2Fs and HBP1 regulate p21 transcription through
cis-acting elements located between nucleotides -119 to +16 of the p21 promoter
and the DNA binding domains of each of these proteins are required for activity. 
Sequences between -119 and -60 basepairs containing four Sp1 consensus elements
and two noncanonical E2F binding sites are of major importance for E2F
activation, although E2F1 and E2F3 differ in the extent of their ability to
activate expression when this segment is deleted. The opposing effects of E2Fs
and HBP1 on p21 promoter activity suggest that interplay between these factors
may determine the level of p21 transcription in vivo.

PMID: 10030670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Int J Cancer. 1999 Jan 5;80(1):145-54.

Frequent deregulation of p16 and the p16/G1 cell cycle-regulatory pathway in
neuroblastoma.

Diccianni MB(1), Omura-Minamisawa M, Batova A, Le T, Bridgeman L, Yu AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics/Hematology-Oncology, University of California, San
Diego 92103-8447, USA.

Alterations of the p16 gene in neuroblastoma are very rare. Pronounced expression
of p16 at both the transcript and protein levels, however, was observed in 7 of
19 (39%) neuroblastoma cell lines and 2 of 6 (33%) primary neuroblastoma samples.
As p16 expression is tightly controlled in a feedback loop with Rb, we
investigated the possibility that changes in p16 expression were reflective of
alterations of the downstream components in the G1 regulatory pathway. Two cell
lines and one primary sample highly expressing p16 were shown to harbor CDK4
amplification. The cyclin D2 gene was infrequently expressed in neuroblastoma
cell lines and did not correlate with p16 expression. Slight variations in the
expression of CDK6, cyclins D1, D3 and E; and E2F1 and E2F2 among the cell lines 
were observed, without apparent correlation with p16 status. No mutations to the 
p16-binding site of CDK4 and CDK6 nor any mutations to the coding region of p16
itself were identified in neuroblastoma cell lines. Despite frequent N-myc
amplification in these cell lines, no relationship with this gene was observed
either. All cell lines contained Rb protein with varying degrees of
phosphorylation, which bears no correlation with p16 expression. Overall,
alterations of the G1 pathway in neuroblastoma included relatively frequent p16
expression and infrequent CDK4 amplification and cyclin D2 expression. Despite a 
reported feedback relationship between p16 expression and Rb/G1 deregulation, p16
expression in neuroblastoma cell lines is independent of Rb gene and
phosphorylation status and, in contrast to other cell lines where expression of
p16 leads to G1/S arrest, neuroblastoma cell lines proliferate in the presence of
elevated levels of p16.

PMID: 9935245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):916-22.

E2F and histone deacetylase mediate transforming growth factor beta repression of
cdc25A during keratinocyte cell cycle arrest.

Iavarone A(1), Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.

cdc25A is a tyrosine phosphatase that activates G1 cyclin-dependent kinases
(Cdk's). In human keratinocytes, cdc25A expression is down-regulated after the
initial drop in Cdk activity caused by cell exposure to the antimitogenic
cytokine transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) or removal of serum factors. 
Here we show that the TGF-beta-inhibitory-response element in the cdc25A promoter
maps to an E2F site at nucleotides -62 to -55 from the transcription start site. 
This site is not required for basal transcription in keratinocytes. We provide
evidence that the cell cycle arrest program activated by TGF-beta in human
keratinocytes includes the generation of E2F4-p130 complexes that in association 
with histone deacetylase HDAC1 inhibit the activity of the cdc25A promoter from
this repressor E2F site. This mechanism is part of a program that places
keratinocytes in the quiescent state following the initial drop in Cdk activity
caused by cell exposure to TGF-beta.

PMCID: PMC83949
PMID: 9858615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):547-55.

Specification of regions of DNA replication initiation during embryogenesis in
the 65-kilobase DNApolalpha-dE2F locus of Drosophila melanogaster.

Sasaki T(1), Sawado T, Yamaguchi M, Shinomiya T.

Author information: 
(1)Mitsubishi Kasei Institute of Life Sciences, Machida, Tokyo 194-8511, Japan.

In the early stage of Drosophila embryogenesis, DNA replication initiates at
unspecified sites in the chromosome. In contrast, DNA replication initiates in
specified regions in cultured cells. We investigated when and where the
initiation regions are specified during embryogenesis and compared them with
those observed in cultured cells by two-dimensional gel methods. In the DNA
polymerase alpha gene (DNApolalpha) locus, where an initiation region, oriDalpha,
had been identified in cultured Kc cells, repression of origin activity in the
coding region was detected after formation of cellular blastoderms, and the range
of the initiation region had become confined by 5 h after fertilization. During
this work we identified other initiation regions between oriDalpha and the
Drosophila E2F gene (dE2F) downstream of DNApolalpha. At least four initiation
regions showing replication bubbles were identified in the 65-kb DNApolalpha-dE2F
locus in 5-h embryos, but only two were observed in Kc cells. These results
suggest that the specification levels of origin usage in 5-h embryos are in the
intermediate state compared to those in more differentiated cells. Further, we
found a spatial correlation between the active promoter regions for dE2F and the 
active initiation zones of replication. In 5-h embryos, two known transcripts
differing in their first exons were expressed, and two regions close to the
respective promoter regions for both transcripts functioned as replication
origins. In Kc cells, only one transcript was expressed and functional
replication origins were observed only in the region including the promoter
region for this transcript.

PMCID: PMC83912
PMID: 9858578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Pediatr Surg. 1998 Nov;33(11):1695-8.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of chromosome 1p36 deletions in human
MYCN amplified neuroblastoma.

Komuro H(1), Valentine MB, Rowe ST, Kidd VJ, Makino S, Brodeur GM, Cohn SL, Look 
AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105-2794, USA.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Deletion of the short arm of chromosome 1 (1p) is one of the 
poor prognostic factors in human neuroblastomas. Recent studies have suggested
that one or more of the neuroblastoma tumor suppressor genes reside in this
region and have identified the shortest region of overlap (SRO) on 1p36. The
purpose of this study was to examine deletions of 1p in human neuroblastomas by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
METHODS: Two-color FISH analysis was performed to detect chromosome 1p36
abnormalities in 42 MYCN-amplified neuroblastomas. Four different probes from the
1p36 region, the E2F2, NPPA, D1S160, and CDC2L1 loci were used for detection of
1p abnormalities. A repeat sequence probe, which is specific for the
heterochromatic region of chromosome 1 (pUC1.77), was used as a control.
RESULTS: Large deletions of 1p36 were observed in 31 (73.8%) of 42 tumors,
whereas the remaining 11 (26.2%) showed no deletion. In these 11 tumors, a
translocation of 1p was found in one and a duplication of 1p was detected in
another.
CONCLUSIONS: A strong correlation between 1p abnormalities and MYCN amplification
was found in this study. MYCN-amplified neuroblastomas were found to show large
deletions of 1p encompassing the SRO. FISH provided a rapid and reliable method
to detect hemizygous deletions of 1p.

PMID: 9856898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Oct 20;251(2):409-15.

dE2F2, a novel E2F-family transcription factor in Drosophila melanogaster.

Sawado T(1), Yamaguchi M, Nishimoto Y, Ohno K, Sakaguchi K, Matsukage A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Science
University of Tokyo, Japan.

Mammalian E2F transcription factors comprise a family of proteins encoded by
distinct genes which function in the form of heterodimers with DP proteins. In
Drosophila melanogaster, only a single E2F-related transcription factor, dE2F,
has been reported. We have now identified and characterized a cDNA encoding
another E2F family member in Drosophila, termed dE2F2. The predicted amino acid
sequence shares 38.8% identity with dE2F, including the QKRRIYDITNVLEGI motif
which is highly conserved in mammalian E2F family members and dE2F. The 18 amino 
acids, located in the carboxy-terminal region of the mammalian E2F family,
sufficient for binding to pRb are also conserved in dE2F2. Band mobility shift
analyses with glutathione S-transferase fusion proteins revealed dE2F2 binding to
E2F-recognition sites to be dependent on the presence of dDP protein, in apparent
contrast to dE2F. Furthermore, cotransfection experiments in Kc cells
demonstrated dE2F2 repression of the PCNA gene promoter activity, while dE2F
caused activation, the target site for the repression being identical to the
dE2F-recognition site.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9792788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Oncogene. 1998 Aug 20;17(7):867-76.

The E2F-family proteins induce distinct cell cycle regulatory factors in
p16-arrested, U343 astrocytoma cells.

Dirks PB(1), Rutka JT, Hubbard SL, Mondal S, Hamel PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

We previously demonstrated that P16Ink4a (p16) expression in p16-deficient U343
astrocytoma cells causes a G1 cell cycle arrest, profound changes in cytoskeletal
proteins and alterations in expression and activity of the pRB and E2F family
proteins. We examine here the effects of expressing wild type or mutant versions 
of the downstream targets of p16 in U343 astrocytomas. We first attempted to
block proliferation of U343 cells using the dominant mutant of pRB, deltap34.
Expression of this mutant in the human osteosarcoma, SAOS-2, potently blocked
proliferation but did not affect the cell cycle of U343 cells. We next showed
that expression of E2F-1, E2F-2, E2F-3 and E2F-4 are each able to overcome this
p16-dependent cell cycle arrest but exhibit distinct biological activities.
Adenoviral-mediated expression of E2F-1, E2F-2, E2F-3, or E2F-4 overcame the
p16-dependent cell cycle block and induced alterations in cell morphology. E2F-5,
only in conjunction with DP1, promoted cell cycle progression. For both E2F-1 and
E2F-2, but not E2F-3 or E2F-5/DP1, cell cycle re-entry was associated with almost
quantitative cell death. Only small numbers of dying cells were observed in
E2F-4-expressing cultures. Expression of the different E2F's altered the
expression of distinct sets of cell cycle regulatory proteins. E2F-1 induced
endogenous E2F-4 expression and also caused an increase in pRB, p107 and cyclin E
levels. Expression of E2F-4 caused a weak increase in E2F-1 levels but also
strongly induced pRB, p107, p130 and cyclin E. However, E2F-1 and E2F-4 clearly
regulate expression of distinct genes, demonstrated when E2F-4 caused a threefold
increase in the levels of cdk2 whereas E2F-1 failed to increase in this cyclin
dependent kinase. Similarly, expression of E2F-1 or E2F-2 were shown to have
distinct effects on the expression of cdk2, cyclin E and pRB despite both of
these closely related E2F-family members potently inducing cell death. Thus,
E2F-1, E2F-2, E2F-3 and E2F-4 are able to overcome the p16-dependent
proliferative block in U343 astrocytoma cells. While overcoming this cell cycle
block, each of the E2F's uniquely affect the expression of a number of cell cycle
regulatory proteins and have distinct abilities to promote cell death.

PMID: 9780003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc. 1998 Aug;3(1):36-40.

Aging in epidermal melanocytes: cell cycle genes and melanins.

Haddad MM(1), Xu W, Medrano EE.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging and Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine and VAMC, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

With aging, melanocytes become unevenly distributed in the epidermis. In light
skin individuals, hypopigmentation is found in association with focal
hyperpigmentation (lentigo senilis). Apparently this results from progressive
loss of active melanocytes and focal increase in melanocyte proliferation and/or 
aggregation. This paper summarizes the present knowledge on aging of melanocytes 
in vivo and in vitro, with a focus on the role of melanin as a determinant for
proliferation and terminal differentiation. We describe that excessive melanin
deposition by cyclic AMP-inducing agents results in increased expression of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p27Kp-1 and p21SDI-1/Waf-1, increased binding 
of p16 to CDK4, and terminal differentiation. Importantly, the efficiency with
which the melanocytes exit the cell cycle depends on the melanin background of
the donor's cells. Melanocytes from skin types IV-VI that accumulate large
amounts of brown black melanin (eumelanin), lose expression of the transcription 
factors E2F1 and E2F2, two key regulatory proteins, and withdraw from the cell
cycle more rapidly than melanocytes from skin types I and II that accumulate
red/yellow melanin (pheomelanin). Thus, we propose that terminal differentiation 
is a tumor suppressor mechanism that becomes less efficient under imperfect
eumelanization.

PMID: 9732055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Kokubyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1998 Jun;65(2):172-88.

[Interaction of E2F/Rb family members with factor binding to co-repressor element
on B-myb and E2F1 promoters].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakajima Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Faculty of Dentistry,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University.

The E2F transcription factor plays an important role in controlling the
expression of genes required for cell cycle progression. The transcription of a
number of these genes, including E2F1 and B-myb, is repressed in G0/early G1 at
E2F DNA binding sites mediated by interaction of E2F with the Rb family member
proteins. It was shown that a corepressor element CHR, which was originally
identified in the B-myb promoter, is also responsible for the repression of the
E2F1 promoter. The mutation of the CHR element adjacent to E2F sites leads to a
derepression of the E2F1 promoter in quiescent cells. The CHR-mutated promoter is
activated by the E2F family of proteins (E2F1, E2F2, E2F3, and E2F4) but unable
to be repressed by any of the Rb family members (Rb, p107, and p130) to the level
of the wild-type promoter activity in G0, indicating that the repression by the
Rb family members is required for the corepressor element. Moreover, it was shown
that a factor specifically bound to the CHR element is co-purified with E2F by
DNA affinity purification and co-immunoprecipitated with E2F4 and the Rb family
members. These results seggested that E2F and the Rb family member proteins
regulate the transcription of the E2F1 and B-myb genes by associating with an
additional corepressor protein.

PMID: 9711036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Aug;18(8):4565-76.

Regulation of cellular genes in a chromosomal context by the retinoblastoma tumor
suppressor protein.

Buchmann AM(1), Swaminathan S, Thimmapaya B.

Author information: 
(1)Robert H. Lurie Cancer Center and Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611-3088, USA.

The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor gene product (pRb) is involved in controlling
cell cycle progression from G1 into S. pRb functions, in part, by regulating the 
activities of several transcription factors, making pRb involved in the
transcriptional control of cellular genes. Transient-transfection assays have
implicated pRb in the transcription of several genes, including c-fos, the
interleukin-6 gene, c-myc, cdc-2, c-neu, and the transforming growth factor beta2
gene. However, these assays place the promoter in an artificial context and
exclude the effects of far 5' upstream regions and chromosomal architecture on
gene transcription. In these experiments, we have studied the role of pRb in the 
control of cell cycle-related genes within a chromosomal context and within the
context of the G1 phase of the cell cycle. We have used adenovirus vectors to
overexpress pRb in human osteosarcoma cells and breast cells synchronized in
early G1. By RNase protection assays, we have assayed the effects of this
virus-produced pRb on gene expression in these cells. These results indicate that
pRb is involved in the transcriptional downregulation of the E2F-1, E2F-2,
dihydrofolate reductase, thymidine kinase, c-myc, proliferating-cell nuclear
antigen, p107, and p21/Cip1 genes. However, it has no effect on the transcription
of the E2F-3, E2F-4, E2F-5, DP-1, DP-2, or p16/Ink4 genes. The results are
consistent with the notion that pRb controls the transcription of genes involved 
in S-phase promotion. They also suggest that pRb negatively regulates the
transcription of two of the transcription factors whose activity it also
represses, E2F-1 and E2F-2, and that it plays a role in downregulating the
immediate-early gene response to serum stimulation.

PMCID: PMC109042
PMID: 9671466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jun;18(6):3620-32.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 Tax and cell cycle progression: role of cyclin
D-cdk and p110Rb.

Neuveut C(1), Low KG, Maldarelli F, Schmitt I, Majone F, Grassmann R, Jeang KT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0460, USA.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 is etiologically linked to the development of 
adult T-cell leukemia and various human neuropathies. The Tax protein of human
T-cell leukemia virus type I has been implicated in cellular transformation. Like
other oncoproteins, such as Myc, Jun, and Fos, Tax is a transcriptional
activator. How it mechanistically dysregulates the cell cycle is unclear.
Previously, it was suggested that Tax affects cell-phase transition by forming a 
direct protein-protein complex with p16(INK4a), thereby inactivating an inhibitor
of G1-to-S-phase progression. Here we show that, in T cells deleted for
p16(INK4a), Tax can compel an egress of cells from G0/G1 into S despite the
absence of serum. We also show that in undifferentiated myocytes, expression of
Tax represses cellular differentiation. In both settings, Tax expression was
found to increase cyclin D-cdk activity and to enhance pRb phosphorylation. In T 
cells, a Tax-associated increase in steady-state E2F2 protein was also
documented. In searching for a molecular explanation for these observations, we
found that Tax forms a protein-protein complex with cyclin D3, whereas a
point-mutated and transcriptionally inert Tax mutant failed to form such a
complex. Interestingly, expression of wild-type Tax protein in cells was also
correlated with the induction of a novel hyperphosphorylated cyclin D3 protein.
Taken together, these findings suggest that Tax might directly influence cyclin
D-cdk activity and function, perhaps by a route independent of cdk inhibitors
such as p16(INK4a).

PMCID: PMC108944
PMID: 9584203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Eur J Cancer. 1997 Oct;33(12):1957-61.

Molecular analysis of the region of distal 1p commonly deleted in neuroblastoma.

White PS(1), Maris JM, Sulman EP, Jensen SJ, Kyemba SM, Beltinger CP, Allen C,
Kramer DL, Biegel JA, Brodeur GM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104-4318, USA.

Cellular, cytogenetic, and molecular evidence indicates that chromosome band 1p36
is often deleted in neuroblastoma cell lines and tumours, suggesting the presence
of one or more tumour suppressor genes in this region. We used a multifaceted
approach to analyse the commonly deleted region, 28 distal 1p-specific
polymorphic loci were used to detect loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in a panel of
primary neuroblastoma tumours. Thirty-two of 122 tumours (26%) demonstrated LOH
at three or more loci. In addition, a patient with a constitutional deletion of
1p36.2-.3 and two neuroblastoma cell lines with 1p36 abnormalities were
characterised by FISH. When combined with the LOH data, a single consensus region
of deletion was defined proximally by PLOD and distally by D1S80, a region
spanning approximately five megabases. Several proposed candidate tumour
suppressor genes, including ID3, CDC2L1, DAN, PAX7, E2F2, TNFR2 and TCEB3, map
outside of this region; however, the transcription factor HKR3 cannot be
excluded. LOH for 1p is correlated with adverse clinical and biological features 
and a poor prognosis, but 1p LOH is not an independent predictor of overall
survival. To identify additional candidate genes, an integrated physical map of
1p35-36 is being constructed. The current map includes 445 polymerase chain
reaction (PCR)-formatted markers and 608 YACs. This map will help identify
region-specific transcripts by direct selection and sequencing.

PMID: 9516832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Cell Growth Differ. 1998 Feb;9(2):113-8.

E2F1-specific induction of apoptosis and p53 accumulation, which is blocked by
Mdm2.

Kowalik TF(1), DeGregori J, Leone G, Jakoi L, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Previous work has demonstrated a role for E2F transcription factor activity in
the regulation of cell growth during the G0/G1-S phase transition. Indeed,
overexpression of E2F proteins, including the E2F1 and E2F2 products, induces DNA
synthesis in quiescent fibroblasts. Other experiments have shown that E2F1
expression also induces apoptosis, dependent on p53. Although this could
represent a response to aberrant cell cycle progression, we show that only E2F1
induces apoptosis and that this coincides with an ability of E2F1 to induce
accumulation of p53 protein. We also find that coexpression of Mdm2, which is
known to regulate p53 activity, blocks the E2F1-mediated induction of apoptosis
and also blocks the E2F1-mediated accumulation of p53. We propose that E2F1 acts 
as a specific signal for the induction of apoptosis by affecting the accumulation
of p53, which under normal proliferative conditions may be controlled by Mdm2.

PMID: 9486847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Cell Growth Differ. 1998 Jan;9(1):59-69.

E2F-1 and E2F-3 are functionally distinct in their ability to promote myeloid
cell cycle progression and block granulocyte differentiation.

Strom DK(1), Cleveland JL, Chellappan S, Nip J, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and the Vanderbilt Cancer Center, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Interleukin 3 (IL-3)-dependent 32D.3 myeloid cells are an attractive model system
for the analysis of hematopoietic cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis. In
these cells, E2F-3, E2F-4, and DP-1 are regulated by both IL-3 and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), whereas E2F-1 was expressed at low levels and 
was not regulated by either cytokine. E2F-2 and E2F-5 were not detectable. To
examine phenotypes associated with the loss of normal cell cycle regulation by
pRb, we established E2F-1- and E2F-3-overexpressing cell lines. In contrast to
E2F-1, E2F-3 overexpression did not accelerate apoptosis or promote S-phase entry
in the absence of IL-3, demonstrating that they are not functionally redundant.
In addition, when cells were cultured in G-CSF to stimulate granulocytic
differentiation, E2F-1 overexpression overrode survival functions provided by
G-CSF and serum and induced apoptosis. In contrast, cells overexpressing E2F-3
exhibited normal granulocytic differentiation. Bcl-2 coexpression blocked
E2F-1-induced apoptosis in the presence of G-CSF. However, these cells were
blocked in the granulocytic differentiation program at the metamyelocyte stage
and remained dependent on G-CSF for continuous culture. Cells overexpressing both
E2F-1 and Bcl-2 exhibited slowed but continuous cell cycling in the absence of
IL-3 until they eventually succumbed to apoptosis. Therefore, E2F-1, but not
E2F-3, can temporally replace the requirement for growth factors to promote cell 
cycle progression, and in terminally differentiating cells, this leads to a block
in differentiation and induction of apoptosis.

PMID: 9438389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Cancer Res. 1998 Jan 1;58(1):123-34.

Disruption of the pRb/E2F pathway and inhibition of apoptosis are major oncogenic
events in liver constitutively expressing c-myc and transforming growth factor
alpha.

Santoni-Rugiu E(1), Jensen MR, Thorgeirsson SS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Division of Basic Sciences,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4255, USA.

The oncogene c-myc and transforming growth factor (TGF) alpha are frequently
coexpressed in human cancers, suggesting that their interaction may be a critical
step in malignant growth. Consistent with this idea, we recently demonstrated in 
a transgenic mouse model that TGF-alpha dramatically enhances c-myc-induced
hepatocarcinogenesis. To elucidate this synergistic effect, we have now
investigated regulation of cell cycle and apoptosis during neoplastic development
in the liver of c-myc and c-myc/TGFalpha transgenic mice. Both lines displayed
dramatic increases of mitotic and apoptotic rates before the onset of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but only c-myc/TGF-alpha livers showed
significant levels of net proliferation (mitosis minus apoptosis). Subsequently, 
mitosis declined in peritumorous tissues, concomitant with the previously
reported induction of TGF-beta1, whereas c-myc and c-myc/TGFalpha HCCs maintained
mitotic hyperactivity. The c-myc/TGF-alpha HCCs were also characterized by a
particularly strong expression of TGF-alpha and very low apoptotic index in
contrast to high levels of apoptosis in peritumorous tissues and c-myc HCCs. The 
differential levels of cell proliferation in noncancerous and cancerous tissues
correlated with a stronger induction of cyclin D1 mRNA and protein in
c-myc/TGF-alpha and c-myc HCCs associated with intense pRb hyperphosphorylation. 
Severe deregulation of G1-S transition was also indicated by the dramatic
up-regulation, particularly in the HCCs, of pRb-free E2F1-DP1 and E2F2-DP1
transcription factor heterodimers, as assessed by immunoprecipitation and
immunohistochemistry. The existence of increased E2F activity during
hepatocarcinogenesis was further indicated by the transcriptional induction of
putative E2F target genes involved in cell cycle progression, such as endogenous 
c-myc, cyclin A, Cdc2, and E2F itself. Cdc2 overexpression and the elevated
mitotic indices in the HCCs correlated also with induction of cyclin B
steady-state levels. The data suggest that coexpression of c-myc and TGF-alpha
leads to a selective growth advantage for hepatic (pre)neoplastic cells by
disrupting the pRb/E2F pathway and by TGF-alpha-mediated reduction of apoptosis.

PMID: 9426068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):5227-35.

Identification of positively and negatively acting elements regulating expression
of the E2F2 gene in response to cell growth signals.

Sears R(1), Ohtani K, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Mammalian cell growth is governed by regulatory activities that include the
products of genes such as c-myc and ras that act early in G1, as well as the E2F 
family of transcription factors that accumulate later in G1 to regulate the
expression of genes involved in DNA replication. Previous work has shown that the
expression of the E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3 gene products is tightly regulated by cell
growth. To further explore the mechanisms controlling accumulation of E2F
activity, we have isolated genomic sequences flanking the 5' region of the E2F2
coding sequence. Various assays demonstrate promoter activity in this sequence
that reproduces the normal control of E2F2 expression during a growth
stimulation. Sequence comparison reveals the presence of a variety of known
transcription factor binding sites, including E-box elements that are consensus
Myc binding sites, as well as E2F binding sites. We demonstrate that the E-box
elements, which we show can function as Myc-responsive sites, contribute in a
positive fashion to promoter function. We also find that E2F-dependent negative
regulation in quiescent cells plays a significant role in the cell
growth-dependent control of the promoter, similar to the regulation of the E2F1
gene promoter.

PMCID: PMC232373
PMID: 9271400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Invest Dermatol. 1997 Aug;109(2):187-93.

E2F as a regulator of keratinocyte proliferation: implications for skin tumor
development.

Jones SJ(1), Dicker AJ, Dahler AL, Saunders NA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology and Cancer Research, University of Queensland Department
of Medicine, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Woolloonggabba, Australia.

E2F and DP family members are established regulators of the cell cycle. In this
study, we examined their activity/expression during keratinocyte growth arrest.
Treating human epidermal keratinocytes with the growth inhibitors TPA or
IFN-gamma or allowing the cells to reach confluence resulted in 90% inhibition of
DNA synthesis, whereas a keratinocyte-derived squamous carcinoma cell line
(SCC25) was resistant to growth inhibitors. Gel shift analysis of keratinocytes
using an E2F response element indicated that growth arrest was associated with a 
decrease in all E2F binding complexes. This indicates that growth inhibition is
not due to negative regulation by pocket proteins. Conversely, gel shift analysis
of growth inhibitor-resistant SCC25 cells showed no decrease in E2F binding. If
deregulated E2F expression/activity is involved in tumor development, then the
deliberate deregulation of E2F activity may make keratinocytes resistant to
growth inhibitors in much the same way as the SCC cells. The HPV16 E7 protein is 
known to activate E2F. Retroviral infection of keratinocytes with E7-expressing
constructs resulted in growth inhibitor resistance, whereas infection with E6
constructs did not. E2F is a heterodimeric complex consisting of E2F family
members (1-5) and DP proteins (1-3). Examination of the expression levels for E2F
genes and other genes associated with the cell cycle indicated that E2F1 was
profoundly decreased in growth-arrested keratinocytes (90%), whereas E2F3, E2F5, 
and DP1 were not. E2F2 and E2F4 were increased in IFN-gamma-treated keratinocytes
but not in TPA-treated or confluent keratinocytes. In contrast, SCC25 cells did
not undergo growth arrest and did not downregulate E2F1 mRNA expression in
response to growth inhibitors. Our results indicate that E2F DNA binding and in
particular E2F1 mRNA expression are associated with keratinocyte proliferation.
Our results with the SCC25 cells and the E7-infected cells are consistent with
the proposition that deregulated E2F expression/activity (in particular E2F1) may
be involved in the unregulated proliferation of skin tumor cells.

PMID: 9242506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Oncogene. 1997 Jul 10;15(2):143-57.

BRCA1 proteins are transported to the nucleus in the absence of serum and splice 
variants BRCA1a, BRCA1b are tyrosine phosphoproteins that associate with E2F,
cyclins and cyclin dependent kinases.

Wang H(1), Shao N, Ding QM, Cui J, Reddy ES, Rao VN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Allegheny University of the Health Sciences,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

BRCA1, a familial breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene encodes nuclear
phosphoproteins that function as tumor suppressors in human breast cancer cells. 
Previously, we have shown that overexpression of a BRCA1 splice variant BRCA1a
accelerates apoptosis in human breast cancer cells. In an attempt to determine
whether the subcellular localization of BRCA1 is cell cycle regulated, we have
studied the subcellular distribution of BRCA1 in asynchronous and growth arrested
normal, breast and ovarian cancer cells using different BRCA1 antibodies by
immunofluorescence and immunohistochemical staining. Upon serum starvation of
NIH3T3, some breast and ovarian cancer cells, most of the BRCA1 protein
redistributed to the nucleus revealing a new type of regulation that may modulate
the activity of BRCA1 gene. We have also characterized two new variant BRCA1
proteins (BRCA1a/p110 and BRCA1b/ p100) which are phosphoproteins containing
phosphotyrosine. Immunofluorescence and Western blotting analysis indicate
cytoplasmic and nuclear localization of BRCA1a and BRCA1b proteins. To elucidate 
the biological function of BRCA1, we created a bacterial fusion protein of
glutathione-transferase (GST) and BRCA1 zinc finger domain and detected two
cellular proteins with molecular weights of approximately 32 and 65 kD, one of
which contains phosphotyrosine designated p32 and p65 BRCA1 interacting proteins 
(BIP) that specifically interact with BRCA1. Western blot analysis of BIP with
cyclins/CDKs and E2F antisera indicated association with cdc2, cdk2, cdk4, cyclin
B, cyclin D, cyclin A and E2F-4 but not with cdk3, cdk5, cdk6, E2F-1, E2F-2,
E2F-3, E2F-5 and cyclin E. Furthermore, we have also demonstrated a direct
interaction of in vitro translated BRCA1a and BRCA1b proteins with recombinant
cyclin A, cyclin B1, cyclin D1, cdc2, cdk2 and E2F fusion proteins in vitro.
Taken together these results seem to suggest that BRCA1 could be an important
negative regulator of cell cycle that functions through interaction with E2F
transcriptional factors and phosphorylation by cyclins/cdk complexes with the
zinc ring finger functioning as a major protein-protein interaction domain. If
the interactions we observe in vitro is also seen in vivo then it may be possible
that lack or impaired binding of the disrupted BRCA1 proteins to E2F,
cyclins/CDKs in patients with mutations in the zinc finger domain could deprive
the cell of an important mechanism for braking cell proliferation leading to the 
development of breast and ovarian cancers.

PMID: 9244350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jul 8;94(14):7245-50.

Distinct roles for E2F proteins in cell growth control and apoptosis.

DeGregori J(1), Leone G, Miron A, Jakoi L, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

E2F transcription activity is composed of a family of heterodimers encoded by
distinct genes. Through the overproduction of each of the five known E2F proteins
in mammalian cells, we demonstrate that a large number of genes encoding proteins
important for cell cycle regulation and DNA replication can be activated by the
E2F proteins and that there are distinct specificities in the activation of these
genes by individual E2F family members. Coexpression of each E2F protein with the
DP1 heterodimeric partner does not significantly alter this specificity. We also 
find that only E2F1 overexpression induces cells to undergo apoptosis, despite
the fact that at least two other E2F family members, E2F2 and E2F3, are equally
capable of inducing S phase. The ability of E2F1 to induce apoptosis appears to
result from the specific induction of an apoptosis-promoting activity rather than
the lack of induction of a survival activity, because co-expression of E2F2 and
E2F3 does not rescue cells from E2F1-mediated apoptosis. We conclude that E2F
family members play distinct roles in cell cycle control and that E2F1 may
function as a specific signal for the initiation of an apoptosis pathway that
must normally be blocked for a productive proliferation event.

PMCID: PMC23805
PMID: 9207076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 May;8(5):553-63.

Expression patterns of the E2F family of transcription factors during murine
epithelial development.

Dagnino L(1), Fry CJ, Bartley SM, Farnham P, Gallie BL, Phillips RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Cancer Research, Hospital for Sick Children,
University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. ldagnino@ogh.on.ca

The E2F family of transcription factors includes five E2F and three DP forms. E2F
is involved in the regulation of cell proliferation, but little is known about
E2F function during vertebrate development. We have explored the regulation of
E2F expression during mouse organogenesis by in situ hybridization. We find
selective up-regulation of E2F-2, E2F-4, and E2F-5 transcripts in epidermis and
intestinal epithelium at important developmental stages. E2F-4 transcript levels 
are high in early, undifferentiated single-cell-layer ectoderm, and later in
13.5-14.5-day-postcoitus (dpc) embryo epithelium, which contains several layers
of proliferating cells. E2F-2 is up-regulated following the onset of E2F-4
expression and is first apparent in undifferentiated epithelium at 13.5-14.5 days
of gestation. In contrast, E2F-5 transcripts are detected later in gestation,
once the epidermis shows evidence of stratification. Stratification of the
epidermis into basal, proliferating cells and suprabasal, terminally
differentiating cells at 15.5-19.5 days of gestation coincides with expression of
E2F-2 and E2F-4 in basal cells and of E2F-5 in suprabasal cells. Similarly, in
intestinal epithelium, E2F-4 up-regulation in pseudostratified epithelium at 13.5
days of gestation precedes appearance of E2F-2 transcripts, in 14.5-dpc embryos, 
in the proliferating, intervillus epithelium. In 16.5-19.5-dpc embryos, no E2F-2 
transcripts were detected at the tip of the developing villi, which contain
terminally differentiating cells. In contrast, E2F-5 transcripts were limited to 
the upper half of the villi and were absent in the intervillus epithelium. This
suggests that E2F-2 and E2F-4 may participate in maintaining epithelial cells in 
a proliferative, undifferentiated phenotype, whereas E2F-5 may be important to
maintain the differentiated state. Thus, selective regulation of E2F forms occurs
during murine epithelial development, irrespective of the ectodermal or
endodermal origin of such epithelia.

PMID: 9149906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Cell Physiol. 1996 Sep;168(3):580-8.

Regulation of dihydrofolate reductase gene expression and E2F components in human
diploid fibroblasts during growth and senescence.

Good L(1), Dimri GP, Campisi J, Chen KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Rutgers, State University of New Jersey, Piscataway
08855-0939, USA.

The induction of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), a key enzyme in DNA biosynthesis
that is induced just before the onset of S phase, is markedly attenuated in
senescent human fibroblasts (Pang and Chen, 1994, J. Cell. Physiol.,
160:531-538). Footprinting analysis of the 365 bp promoter region of the human
DHFR gene (-381 to -17) indicated that nuclear proteins bind to a cluster of
cis-elements, including two overlapping E2F binding sequences, two Sp1 sites, and
one Yi sequence. Gel mobility shift assays were performed to assess the role of
each cis-element in the regulation of DHFR gene expression. We found that 1) Sp1 
binding activity was constitutively expressed throughout the cell cycle in early 
passage and senescent cells; 2) Yi binding activity was undetectable in both
early passage and senescent cells; and 3) E2F binding activity was
serum-inducible, senescence-dependent, and prominent in presenescent cells but
strikingly diminished in senescent cells. Northern blot analysis of the
expression of E2F and DP family members showed that the E2F-1, E2F-4, and E2F-5
mRNA was growth- and senescence-dependent, whereas E2F-3, DP-1, and DP-2
expression was constitutive and senescence-independent. In contrast, E2F-2 mRNA
was not detectable in IMR-90 or WI-38 human fibroblasts. Western blot analysis
showed that among the E2F-associated proteins, the expression of E2F-1, cyclin A,
and cyclin B but not p107 was cell cycle- and senescence-dependent. A nuclear
extract mixing experiment suggested that an inhibitory factor may further reduce 
E2F binding activity in senescent cells.

PMID: 8816912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Cell Sci. 1996 Jul;109 ( Pt 7):1717-26.

Nuclear localization of DP and E2F transcription factors by heterodimeric
partners and retinoblastoma protein family members.

Magae J(1), Wu CL, Illenye S, Harlow E, Heintz NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont, Burlington 05405, USA.

E2F is a family of transcription factors implicated in the regulation of genes
required for progression through G1 and entry into the S phase. The
transcriptionally active forms of E2F are heterodimers composed of one
polypeptide encoded by the E2F gene family and one polypeptide encoded by the DP 
gene family. The transcriptional activity of E2F/DP heterodimers is influenced by
association with the members of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein
family (pRb, p107, and p130). Here the intracellular distribution of E2F and DP
proteins was investigated in transiently transfected Chinese hamster and human
cells. In transfected cells, DP-1 did not accumulate in the nucleus unless it was
coexpressed with the heterodimeric partners E2F-1, E2F-2, or E2F-3. Domain
mapping experiments showed that regions of E2F-1 and DP-1 that are required for
stable association of the two proteins were also required for nuclear
localization of DP-1. Unlike E2F-1, -2, and -3, E2F-4 did not accumulate in the
nucleus unless it was coexpressed with DP-2, p107 and p130, but not pRb,
stimulated nuclear localization of E2F-4, either alone or in combination with
DP-2. These results indicate that DP proteins preferentially associate with
specific E2F partners, and suggest that the ability of specific E2F/DP
heterodimers to localize in the nucleus contributes to the regulation of E2F
activity.

PMID: 8832394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1659-67.

Interaction of Sp1 with the growth- and cell cycle-regulated transcription factor
E2F.

Karlseder J(1), Rotheneder H, Wintersberger E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Für Molekularbiologie, Universität Wien, Austria, USA.

Within the region around 150 bp upstream of the initiation codon, which was
previously shown to suffice for growth-regulated expression, the murine thymidine
kinase gene carries a single binding site for transcription factor Sp1; about 10 
bp downstream of this site, there is a binding motif for transcription factor
E2F. The latter protein appears to be responsible for growth regulation of the
promoter. Mutational inactivation of either the Sp1 or the E2F site almost
completely abolishes promoter activity, suggesting that the two transcription
factors interact directly in delivering an activation signal to the basic
transcription machinery. This was verified by demonstrating with the use of
glutathione S-transferase fusion proteins that E2F and Sp1 bind to each other in 
vitro. For this interaction, the C-terminal part of Sp1 and the N terminus of
E2F1, a domain also present in E2F2 and E2F3 but absent in E2F4 and E2F5, were
essential. Accordingly, E2F1 to E2F3 but not E2F4 and E2F5 were found to bind sp1
in vitro. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that complexes exist in vivo, 
and it was estabilished that the distance between the binding sites for the two
transcription factors was critical for optimal promoter activity. Finally, in
vivo footprinting experiments indicated that both the sp1 and E2F binding sites
are occupied throughout the cell cycle. Mutation of either binding motif
abolished binding of both transcription factors in vivo, which may indicate
cooperative binding of the two proteins to chromatin-organized DNA. Our data are 
in line with the hypothesis that E2F functions as a growth- and cell cycle
regulated tethering factor between Sp1 and the basic transcription machinery.

PMCID: PMC231152
PMID: 8657141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1436-49.

E2F-4 switches from p130 to p107 and pRB in response to cell cycle reentry.

Moberg K(1), Starz MA, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
02139, USA.

The E2F transcription factor couples the coordinate expression of cell cycle
proteins to their appropriate transition points. Its activity is controlled by
the cell cycle regulators pRB, p107, and p130. These bind to E2F at defined but
distinct stages of the cell cycle. Using specific antisera, we have identified
the DP and E2F components of each of these species. Although present at very
different levels, DP-1 and DP-2 are evenly distributed among each of these
complexes. In contrast, the individual E2Fs have distinctly different binding
profiles. Consistent with previous studies, E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3 bind
specifically to the retinoblastoma protein. In each case, their expression and
DNA binding activity are restricted to post-G1/S fractions. Surprisingly, E2F-1
and E2F-3 make unequal contributions to the pRB-associated and free E2F activity,
suggesting that these proteins perform different cell cycle functions. Most
significantly, this study showed E2F-4 accounts for the vast majority of the
endogenous E2F activity. In arrested cells, E2F-4 is sequestered by the p130
protein. However, as the cells pass the G1-to-S transition, the levels of pRB and
p107 increase and E2F-4 now associates with both of these regulators. Despite
this, a considerable amount of E2F-4 exists as free E2F. In G1 cells, this
accounts for almost all of the free activity. Once the cells enter S phase, free 
E2F is composed of an equal mixture of E2F-4 and E2F-1.

PMCID: PMC231128
PMID: 8657117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Genomics. 1996 Feb 15;32(1):155-8.

Cloning and characterization of CpG islands of the human chromosome 1p36 region.

Ellmeier W(1), Barnas C, Kobrna A, Kleiner E, Kurzbauer R, Weith A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.

CpG islands were identified and localized to chromosome 1p36 by means of
pulsed-field gel blot hybridization with 1p36-specific microclone probes. Five
CpG islands, designated CpG17, CpG28, CpG60, CpG112a, and CpG112b, were
molecularly cloned from corresponding cosmids. All five islands are associated
with transcribed sequences, as shown by RNA blot hybridizations. Screening of
cDNA libraries with the island-specific genomic probes led to the isolation of
two cDNA clones to date. These encode the human transcription factor E2F-2 and
the dominant-negative helix-loop-helix gene ID3, respectively. Pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis analysis also revealed that these two genes are located next to
each other at a distance of about 25 kb.

PMID: 8786109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 1996;208:31-61.

Regulatory interactions among E2Fs and cell cycle control proteins.

Cobrinik D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

PMID: 8575212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Cell Mol Biol Res. 1995;41(3):147-54.

Structural characterization and specificity of expression of E2F-5: a new member 
of the E2F family of transcription factors.

Itoh A(1), Levinson SF, Morita T, Kourembanas S, Brody JS, Mitsialis SA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biomolecular Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, MA
02118, USA.

Members of the E2F gene family are transcription factors that have been
implicated in the control of genes essential for cell cycle progression.
Regulation of E2F function is finely tuned by the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor
gene product and a small family of related "pocket proteins," with the
participation of a number of cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases. Perturbations 
of this regulatory network can lead to oncogenic transformation and, in certain
systems, to the loss of the ability to maintain terminal differentiation. We
describe here the cloning, structural characterization, and tissue expression
pattern of a new member of the E2F family, E2F-5. We show that this protein is
highly conserved between human and rat but exhibits considerable divergence from 
E2F-1, E2F-2, or E2F3. Together with the recently reported E2F-4, E2F-5 defines a
new branch of the E2F family. The distribution of E2F-5 mRNA among adult rat
tissues and the temporal pattern of its expression during the cell cycle of
vascular smooth muscle cells are distinctly different from that of E2F-1. The
structural divergence between the two branches of the E2F family may thus reflect
participation in different regulatory networks.

PMID: 8589754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Genomics. 1995 Jan 1;25(1):130-8.

Amplification of the E2F1 transcription factor gene in the HEL erythroleukemia
cell line.

Saito M(1), Helin K, Valentine MB, Griffith BB, Willman CL, Harlow E, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The E2F transcription factor plays an important regulatory role in cell
proliferation, mediating the expression of genes whose products are essential for
inducing resting cells to enter the cell cycle and synthesize DNA. To investigate
the possible involvement of E2F in hematopoietic malignancies, we isolated
genomic clones encompassing the human E2F1 gene. We then used fluorescence in
situ hybridization to localize E2F1 to human chromosome 20q11, telomeric to the
p107 locus, a gene whose product is related to the retinoblastoma gene product
(pRb). This finding contrasts with the 1p36 and 6q22 chromosomal locations
previously assigned E2F2 and E2F3, two additional members of the E2F family.
Although deletions or structural rearrangements of E2F1 were not detected in 14
primary acute leukemia or myelodysplasia samples with structural abnormalities of
chromosome 20q11, the gene was amplified and overexpressed in HEL erythroleukemia
cells and translocated to other chromosomes in several established human leukemia
cell lines. This study provides the first evidence of gene amplification
involving a member of the E2F family of transcription factors. We propose that
E2F1 overexpression in erythroid progenitors may stimulate abnormal cell
proliferation by overriding negative regulatory signals mediated by tumor
suppressor proteins such as pRb.

PMID: 7774910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Genes Dev. 1994 Nov 15;8(22):2665-79.

E2F-4, a new member of the E2F transcription factor family, interacts with p107.

Ginsberg D(1), Vairo G, Chittenden T, Xiao ZX, Xu G, Wydner KL, DeCaprio JA,
Lawrence JB, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

The E2F family of transcription factors has been implicated in the regulation of 
cell proliferation, and E2F-binding sites are present in the promoters of several
growth-regulating genes. E2F family members are functionally regulated, in part, 
by complex formation with one or more members of the nuclear pocket protein
family, RB, p107, and p130. Pocket protein regulation of E2F likely contributes
to normal cellular growth control. While the three cloned species of E2F, E2F-1, 
E2F-2, and E2F-3, are known to be targets of RB interaction, no E2F species has
yet been shown to be a specific p107 or p130 target. Here, we describe the
cloning of a new member of the E2F family, E2F-4, which forms heterodimers with a
member(s) of the DP family and, unlike some family members, is present throughout
the cell cycle and appears to be a differentially phosphorylated p107-binding
partner. p107 binding not only can be linked to the regulation of E2F-4
transcriptional activity, but also to suppression of the ability of E2F-4 to
transform an immortalized rodent cell line.

PMID: 7958924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Virol. 1994 Aug;68(8):5027-35.

Heterodimerization of the transcription factors E2F-1 and DP-1 is required for
binding to the adenovirus E4 (ORF6/7) protein.

Helin K(1), Harlow E.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown 02129.

Adenovirus infection leads to E1A-dependent activation of the transcription
factor E2F. E2F has recently been identified in complexes with cellular proteins 
such as the retinoblastoma protein (pRB) and the two pRB family members p107 and 
p130. E1A dissociates E2F from these cellular proteins, and another viral
protein, E4 (ORF6/7), can bind to E2F. The binding of E4 to E2F induces the
formation of a stable DNA-binding complex containing the two proteins, and
stimulation of the adenovirus E2 early promoter can occur. Recent studies have
shown that E2F is the combined activity of several proteins, and we demonstrate
here that heterodimerization of two of these proteins, E2F-1 and DP-1, is
required for stable binding to E4. This complex is formed independently of DNA
binding and requires the C-terminal 20 amino acids of E4. Furthermore, the
binding is dependent on a region of E2F-1 between amino acids 284 and 358. This
region of E2F-1 is conserved in E2F-2 and E2F-3, and deletion of this region
drastically reduces the transcriptional activity of the molecule without
affecting DP-1 binding, suggesting that this region of the E2F transcription
factors is involved in regulating their activity. Our experiments also
demonstrate that pRB binding to the E2F-1/DP-1 heterodimer prevents the formation
of an E2F-1/DP-1/E4 complex.

PMCID: PMC236445
PMID: 8035503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Cell Growth Differ. 1994 Aug;5(8):789-99.

Inhibition of cell growth by TGF beta 1 is associated with inhibition of B-myb
and cyclin A in both BALB/MK and Mv1Lu cells.

Satterwhite DJ(1), Aakre ME, Gorska AE, Moses HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232.

The concept of positive and negative regulation of normal cellular growth by
diffusible factors is well illustrated by the effects of epidermal growth factor 
and transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF beta 1) on mouse keratinocytes (MK)
and mink lung epithelial cells (Mv1Lu). MK and Mv1Lu are nontransformed cell
lines that reversibly arrest at a point in late G1 in response to TGF beta 1.
Previously, we have shown that expression of the protooncogene c-myc is induced
upon epidermal growth factor stimulation of quiescent MK and Mv1Lu cells and that
transcriptional suppression of c-myc by TGF beta 1 treatment is important in the 
TGF beta 1 growth inhibition pathway. Using epidermal growth factor-stimulated
synchronized MK and Mv1Lu cells, we have investigated the mRNA expression of a
large number of growth factor-inducible genes that are critical regulators of
growth in G1 and at the G1/S transition. These genes, often found to be
dysregulated in cancer, include transcription factors as well as cyclins and
their associated kinases, that promote growth, and tumor suppressor genes, that
inhibit growth. As reported here, TGF beta 1 significantly inhibited mRNA
expression of B-myb and cyclin A in both cell lines, suggesting that these may be
important common downstream targets in the growth inhibition pathway. In
contrast, the expression patterns of cyclins D1 and D2 and the transcription
factors E2F1 and E2F2 were unaffected in MK cells treated with TGF beta 1 but
were significantly inhibited in TGF beta 1-treated Mv1Lu cells. We cite the
evidence suggesting that the inhibition of B-myb and cyclin A may contribute to
the late G1 arrest caused by TGF beta 1 and that these events may be linked
through the actions of the product of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene (Rb)
or an Rb family member.

PMID: 7986745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jul 5;91(14):6359-63.

DNA-binding and trans-activation properties of Drosophila E2F and DP proteins.

Dynlacht BD(1), Brook A, Dembski M, Yenush L, Dyson N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center, Charlestown 02129.

The temporal activation of E2F transcriptional activity appears to be an
important component of the mechanisms that prepare mammalian cells for DNA
replication. Regulation of E2F activity appears to be a highly complex process,
and the dissection of the E2F pathway will be greatly facilitated by the ability 
to use genetic approaches. We report the isolation of two Drosophila genes that
can stimulate E2F-dependent transcription in Drosophila cells. One of these
genes, dE2F, contains three domains that are highly conserved in the human
homologs E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3. Interestingly, one of these domains is highly
homologous to the retinoblastoma protein (RB)-binding sequences of human E2F
genes. The other gene, dDP, is closely related to the human DP-1 and DP-2 genes. 
We demonstrate that dDP and dE2F interact and cooperate to give sequence-specific
DNA binding and optimal trans-activation. These features suggest that endogenous 
Drosophila E2F, like human E2F, may be composed of heterodimers and may be
regulated by RB-like proteins. The isolation of these genes will provide
important reagents for the genetic analysis of the E2F pathway.

PMCID: PMC44201
PMID: 8022787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Dec;13(12):7813-25.

The retinoblastoma protein binds to a family of E2F transcription factors.

Lees JA(1), Saito M, Vidal M, Valentine M, Look T, Harlow E, Dyson N, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown 02129.

E2F is a transcription factor that helps regulate the expression of a number of
genes that are important in cell proliferation. Recently, several laboratories
have isolated a cDNA clone that encodes an E2F-like protein, known as E2F-1.
Subsequent characterization of this protein showed that it had the properties of 
E2F, but it was difficult to account for all of the suggested E2F activities
through the function of this one protein. Using low-stringency hybridization, we 
have isolated cDNA clones that encode two additional E2F-like proteins, called
E2F-2 and E2F-3. The chromosomal locations of the genes for E2F-2 and E2F-3 were 
mapped to 1p36 and 6q22, respectfully, confirming their independence from E2F-1. 
However, the E2F-2 and E2F-3 proteins are closely related to E2F-1. Both E2F-2
and E2F-3 bound to wild-type but not mutant E2F recognition sites, and they bound
specifically to the retinoblastoma protein in vivo. Finally, E2F-2 and E2F-3 were
able to activate transcription of E2F-responsive genes in a manner that was
dependent upon the presence of at least one functional E2F binding site. These
observations suggest that the E2F activities described previously result from the
combined action of a family of proteins.

PMCID: PMC364853
PMID: 8246996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Dec;13(12):7802-12.

Cloning and characterization of E2F-2, a novel protein with the biochemical
properties of transcription factor E2F.

Ivey-Hoyle M(1), Conroy R, Huber HE, Goodhart PJ, Oliff A, Heimbrook DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research, Merck Research Laboratories, West Point,
Pennsylvania 19486.

E2F is a mammalian transcription factor that appears to play an important role in
cell cycle regulation. While at least two proteins (E2F-1 and DP-1) with E2F-like
activity have been cloned, studies from several laboratories suggest that
additional homologs may exist. A novel protein with E2F-like properties,
designated E2F-2, was cloned by screening a HeLa cDNA library with a DNA probe
derived from the DNA binding domain of E2F-1 (K. Helin, J. A. Lees, M. Vidal, N. 
Dyson, E. Harlow, and A. Fattaey, Cell 70:337-350, 1992). E2F-2 exhibits overall 
46% amino acid identity to E2F-1. Both the sequence and the function of the DNA
and retinoblastoma gene product binding domains of E2F-1 are conserved in E2F-2. 
The DNA binding activity of E2F-2 is dramatically enhanced by complementation
with particular sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis-purified components of HeLa cell E2F, and anti-E2F-2 antibodies
cross-react with components of purified HeLa cell E2F. These observations are
consistent with a model in which E2F binds DNA as a heterodimer of two distinct
proteins, and E2F-2 is functionally and immunologically related to one of these
proteins.

PMCID: PMC364852
PMID: 8246995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


