
1. Target Oncol. 2016 Mar 29. [Epub ahead of print]

Overexpression of Ran GTPase Components Regulating Nuclear Export, but not
Mitotic Spindle Assembly, Marks Chromosome Instability and Poor Prognosis in
Breast Cancer.

Vaidyanathan S(1), Thangavelu PU(1), Duijf PH(2).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland, University of Queensland Diamantina Institute,
Translational Research Institute, 37 Kent Street, Brisbane, QLD 4102, Australia. 
(2)The University of Queensland, University of Queensland Diamantina Institute,
Translational Research Institute, 37 Kent Street, Brisbane, QLD 4102, Australia. 
p.duijf@uq.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Ran GTPase regulates nuclear import, nuclear export, and mitotic
spindle assembly. The multifunctional involvement of seventeen Ran GTPase
components in these processes has complicated research into how each contributes 
to cancer development.
OBJECTIVE: To assess whether individual and process-specific misexpression of Ran
GTPase components contribute to chromosome instability (CIN) and worsen breast
cancer patient prognosis.
METHODS: Using publicly available datasets, we studied the degree of
misexpression of all Ran GTPase signaling components in breast cancer, assessed
their involvement in CIN and used four clinical tests to evaluate whether their
misregulation may constitute independent prognostic predictors.
RESULTS: A significant majority of Ran GTPase signaling components is
overexpressed in breast cancer. Strikingly, spindle assembly components are
overexpressed and associated with CIN with only marginal significance and four
independent tests indicate that this does not worsen patient outcome.
Overexpression of nuclear import components is neither CIN-associated nor
clinically significant. In sharp contrast, overexpression of nuclear export
components constitutes a strong independent marker for both CIN and poor patient 
prognosis. We identify Exportin 2/CSE1L, Exportin 3/XPOT, Exportin 5/XPO5, and
RANBP1 as novel potential targets.
CONCLUSIONS: We find that overexpression of Ran GTPase components involved in
nuclear export, but not nuclear import or mitotic spindle assembly, is a strong
CIN-associated marker for poor breast cancer prognosis. This could mean that
increased nuclear export (of, for instance, pRb, p53, p73, BRCA1, p21, p27, E2F4,
I<U+03BA>B, survivin), rather than spindle defects, mainly drives CIN and tumorigenesis.
Hence, selective inhibitors of nuclear export may be effective for treating the
most aggressive and chromosomally unstable breast cancers.

PMID: 27023921  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Mol Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 8. [Epub ahead of print]

Integrative Genomic Analyses Yield Cell-Cycle Regulatory Programs with Prognostic
Value.

Cheng C(1), Lou S(2), Andrews EH(2), Ung MH(2), Varn FS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, New
Hampshire. Institute for Quantitative Biomedical Sciences, Geisel School of
Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, New Hampshire. Norris Cotton Cancer Center,
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, New Hampshire.
Chao.Cheng@dartmouth.edu. (2)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Hanover, New Hampshire.

Liposarcoma is the second most common form of sarcoma, which has been categorized
into four molecular subtypes, which are associated with differential prognosis of
patients. However, the transcriptional regulatory programs associated with
distinct histologic and molecular subtypes of liposarcoma have not been
investigated. This study uses integrative analyses to systematically define the
transcriptional regulatory programs associated with liposarcoma. Likewise,
computational methods are used to identify regulatory programs associated with
different liposarcoma subtypes, as well as programs that are predictive of
prognosis. Further analysis of curated gene sets was used to identify prognostic 
gene signatures. The integration of data from a variety of sources, including
gene expression profiles, transcription factor-binding data from ChIP-Seq
experiments, curated gene sets, and clinical information of patients, indicated
discrete regulatory programs (e.g., controlled by E2F1 and E2F4), with
significantly different regulatory activity in one or multiple subtypes of
liposarcoma with respect to normal adipose tissue. These programs were also shown
to be prognostic, wherein liposarcoma patients with higher E2F4 or E2F1 activity 
associated with unfavorable prognosis. A total of 259 gene sets were
significantly associated with patient survival in liposarcoma, among which >50%
are involved in cell cycle and proliferation.IMPLICATIONS: These integrative
analyses provide a general framework that can be applied to investigate the
mechanism and predict prognosis of different cancer types.Mol Cancer Res; 14(4); 
1-12. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26856934  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Cell Cycle. 2016 Jan 17;15(2):250-60. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1121350.

E2f4 and E2f5 are essential for the development of the male reproductive system.

Danielian PS(1), Hess RA(2), Lees JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)a David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology , Cambridge , MA , USA. (2)b Reproductive Biology &
Toxicology , Department of Comparative Biosciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Illinois , Urbana , IL , USA.

The E2F transcription factors are primarily implicated in the regulation of entry
and exit from the cell cycle. However, in vivo studies have established
additional roles for E2Fs during organ development and homeostasis. With the goal
of addressing the intestinal requirements of E2f4 and E2f5, we crossed mice
carrying Vil-cre, E2f4 conditional and E2f5 germline alleles. E2f4 deletion had
no detectable effect on intestinal development. However, E2f4f/f;E2f5+/-;Vil-cre 
males, but not E2f4f/f;Vil-cre littermates, were unexpectedly sterile. This
defect was not due to defective spermatogenesis. Instead, the seminiferous
tubules and rete testes showed significant dilation, and spermatozoa accumulated 
aberrantly in the rete testis and efferent ducts. Our data show that these
problems result from defective efferent ducts, a tissue whose primary function is
to concentrate sperm through fluid absorption. First, Vil-cre expression, and
consequent E2F4 loss, was specific to the efferent ducts and not other
reproductive tract tissues. Second, the E2f4f/f;E2f5+/-;Vil-cre efferent ducts
had completely lost multiciliated cells and greatly reduced levels of critical
absorptive cell proteins: aquaporin1, a water channel protein, and clusterin, an 
endocytic marker. Collectively, the observed testis phenotypes suggest a fluid
flux defect. Remarkably, we observed rete testis dilation prior to the normal
time of seminiferous fluid production, arguing that the efferent duct defects
promote excessive secretory activity within the reproductive tract. Finally, we
also detect key aspects of these testis defects in E2f5-/- mice. Thus, we
conclude that E2f4 and E2f5 display overlapping roles in controlling the normal
development of the male reproductive system.

PMID: 26825228  [PubMed - in process]


4. Cancer Invest. 2016 Feb 7;34(2):70-9. doi: 10.3109/07357907.2015.1114120. Epub
2016 Jan 28.

Detection of Critical Genes Associated with Overall Survival (OS) and
Progression-Free Survival (PFS) in Reconstructed Canine B-Cell Lymphoma Gene
Regulatory Network (GRN).

Zamani-Ahmadmahmudi M(1), Najafi A(2), Nassiri SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Clinical Science, Shahid
Bahonar University of Kerman , Kerman , Iran. (2)b Molecular Biology Research
Center, Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences , Tehran , Iran. (3)c Faculty
of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Clinical Pathology, University of Tehran , 
Tehran , Iran.

Canine B-cell lymphoma GRN was reconstructed from gene expression data in the
STRING and MiMI databases. Critical genes of networks were identified and
correlations of critical genes with overall survival (OS) and progression-free
survival (PFS) were evaluated. Significant changes were detected in the
expressions of GLUL, CD44, CD79A, ARF3, FOS, BLOC1S1, FYN, GZMB, GALNT3, IFI44,
CD3G, GNG2, ESRP1, and CCND1 in the STRING network and of PECAM1, GLUL, CD44,
GDI1, E2F4, TLE1, CD79A, UCP2, CCND1, FYN, RHOQ, BIN1, and A2M in the MiMI
network. Final survival analysis highlighted CCND1 and FOS as genes with
significant correlations with OS and PFS.

PMID: 26818715  [PubMed - in process]


5. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 19;6:19661. doi: 10.1038/srep19661.

Characterization of the promoter region of the bovine long-chain acyl-CoA
synthetase 1 gene: Roles of E2F1, Sp1, KLF15, and E2F4.

Zhao ZD(1), Zan LS(1,)(2), Li AN(1), Cheng G(1,)(2), Li SJ(1), Zhang YR(1), Wang 
XY(1), Zhang YY(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling
712100 Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. (2)National Beef Cattle Improvement
Center, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100 Shaanxi, People's Republic of
China.

The nutritional value and eating qualities of beef are enhanced when the
unsaturated fatty acid content of fat is increased. Long-chain acyl-CoA
synthetase 1 (ACSL1) plays key roles in fatty acid transport and degradation, as 
well as lipid synthesis. It has been identified as a plausible functional and
positional candidate gene for manipulations of fatty acid composition in bovine
skeletal muscle. In the present study, we determined that bovine ACSL1was highly 
expressed in subcutaneous adipose tissue and longissimus thoracis. To elucidate
the molecular mechanisms involved in bovine ACSL1 regulation, we cloned and
characterized the promoter region of ACSL1. Applying 5'-rapid amplification of
cDNA end analysis (RACE), we identified multiple transcriptional start sites
(TSSs) in its promoter region. Using a series of 5' deletion promoter plasmids in
luciferase reporter assays, we found that the proximal minimal promoter of ACSL1 
was located within the region -325/-141 relative to the TSS and it was also
located in the predicted CpG island. Mutational analysis and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays demonstrated that E2F1, Sp1, KLF15 and E2F4 binding to the 
promoter region drives ACSL1 transcription. Together these interactions integrate
and frame a key functional role for ACSL1 in mediating the lipid composition of
beef.

PMCID: PMC4726046
PMID: 26782942  [PubMed - in process]


6. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 11;11(1):e0146645. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146645.
eCollection 2016.

The Histone Demethylase PHF8 Is Essential for Endothelial Cell Migration.

Gu L(1), Hitzel J(1,)(2), Moll F(1,)(2), Kruse C(1,)(2), Malik RA(3,)(2),
Preussner J(4,)(2), Looso M(4,)(2), Leisegang MS(1,)(2), Steinhilber D(5),
Brandes RP(1,)(2), Fork C(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cardiovascular Physiology, Medical Faculty, Goethe-University
Frankfurt, Germany. (2)German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Partner 
site RheinMain, Frankfurt, Germany. (3)Institute of Vascular Signalling, Centre
for Molecular Medicine, Goethe-University Frankfurt, Germany. (4)Max Planck
Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany. (5)Institute of
Pharmaceutical Chemistry/ZAFES, Goethe-University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany.

Epigenetic marks critically control gene expression and thus the cellular
activity state. The functions of many epigenetic modifiers in the vascular system
have not yet been studied. We screened for histone modifiers in endothelial cells
and observed a fairly high expression of the histone plant homeodomain finger
protein 8 (PHF8). Given its high expression, we hypothesize that this histone
demethylase is important for endothelial cell function. Overexpression of PHF8
catalyzed the removal of methyl-groups from histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9) and H4K20, 
whereas knockdown of the enzyme increased H3K9 methylation. Knockdown of PHF8 by 
RNAi also attenuated endothelial proliferation and survival. As a functional
readout endothelial migration and tube formation was studied. PHF8 siRNA
attenuated the capacity for migration and developing of capillary-like
structures. Given the impact of PHF8 on cell cycle genes, endothelial E2F
transcription factors were screened, which led to the identification of the gene 
repressor E2F4 to be controlled by PHF8. Importantly, PHF8 maintains E2F4 but not
E2F1 expression in endothelial cells. Consistently, chromatin immunoprecipitation
revealed that PHF8 reduces the H3K9me2 level at the E2F4 transcriptional start
site, demonstrating a direct function of PHF8 in endothelial E2F4 gene
regulation.CONCLUSION: PHF8 by controlling E2F4 expression maintains endothelial 
function.

PMCID: PMC4713448
PMID: 26751588  [PubMed - in process]


7. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2016 Feb;49:374-86. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.12.017. Epub 
2015 Dec 15.

Dietary myo-inositol modulates immunity through antioxidant activity and the Nrf2
and E2F4/cyclin signalling factors in the head kidney and spleen following
infection of juvenile fish with Aeromonas hydrophila.

Jiang WD(1), Hu K(2), Liu Y(1), Jiang J(1), Wu P(1), Zhao J(3), Zhang YA(4), Zhou
XQ(5), Feng L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Nutrition Institute, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130,
Sichuan, China; Fish Nutrition and Safety Production University Key Laboratory of
Sichuan Province, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, Sichuan,
China; Key Laboratory for Animal Disease-Resistance Nutrition of China Ministry
of Education, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, Sichuan, China.
(2)Animal Nutrition Institute, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130,
Sichuan, China; Department of Animal and Veterinary Science, Chengdu Agricultural
College, Chengdu 611130, China. (3)Animal Nutrition Institute, Sichuan
Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, Sichuan, China. (4)Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China. (5)Animal
Nutrition Institute, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, Sichuan,
China; Fish Nutrition and Safety Production University Key Laboratory of Sichuan 
Province, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, Sichuan, China; Key
Laboratory for Animal Disease-Resistance Nutrition of China Ministry of
Education, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, Sichuan, China.
Electronic address: zhouxq@sicau.edu.cn. (6)Animal Nutrition Institute, Sichuan
Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, Sichuan, China; Fish Nutrition and
Safety Production University Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Sichuan
Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, Sichuan, China; Key Laboratory for
Animal Disease-Resistance Nutrition of China Ministry of Education, Sichuan
Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, Sichuan, China. Electronic address:
fenglin@sicau.edu.cn.

This study was conducted to investigate the effects of the dietary vitamin
myo-inositol (MI), on the immunity and structural integrity of the head kidney
and spleen following infection of fish with the major freshwater pathogen
bacterial Aeromonas hydrophila. The results demonstrated for the first time that 
MI deficiency depressed the lysozyme and acid phosphatase (ACP) activities and
the complement 3 (C3) and C4 contents in the head kidney and spleen compared with
the optimal MI levels, indicating that MI deficiency decreased the immunity of
these important fish immune organs. The depression in immunity due to MI
deficiency was partially related to oxidative damage [indicated by increases in
the malondialdehyde (MDA) and protein carbonyl (PC) contents] that was in turn
partially due to the decreased glutathione (GSH) content and the disturbances in 
antioxidant enzyme activities [total superoxide dismutase (T-SOD), CuZnSOD,
MnSOD, catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPx) and glutathione reductase
(GR)]. MI deficiency inhibited the antioxidant-related gene transcription
[CuZnSOD, MnSOD, CAT, GPx1a, GR and NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)] in the head
kidney and spleen following infection of the fish with A. hydrophila. The
oxidative damage due to MI deficiency also resulted in the inhibition of
proliferation-associated signalling (cyclin D1, cyclin A, cyclin E and E2F4).
Thus, MI deficiency partially inhibited damage repair. Excessive MI exhibited
negative effects that were similar to MI deficiency, whereas the optimal MI
content reversed those indicators. These observations indicated that an MI
deficiency or excess could cause depression of the immune system that might be
partially related to oxidative damage, antioxidant disturbances, and the
inhibition of the proliferation-associated signalling in the head kidney and
spleen following infection of fish with A. hydrophila. Finally, the optimal MI
levels were 660.7 (based on ACP) and 736.8 mg kg(-1) diet (based on MDA) in the
head kidney and 770.5 (based on ACP) and 766.9 mg kg(-1) diet (based on MDA) in
the spleen of juvenile Jian carp.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26702562  [PubMed - in process]


8. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 8;6(39):41402-17. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6356.

Indirect p53-dependent transcriptional repression of Survivin, CDC25C, and PLK1
genes requires the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21/CDKN1A and CDE/CHR
promoter sites binding the DREAM complex.

Fischer M(1,)(2), Quaas M(1), Nickel A(1), Engeland K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology, Medical School, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Department of
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

The transcription factor p53 is central to cell cycle control by downregulation
of cell cycle-promoting genes upon cell stress such as DNA damage. Survivin
(BIRC5), CDC25C, and PLK1 encode important cell cycle regulators that are
repressed following p53 activation. Here, we provide evidence that p53-dependent 
repression of these genes requires activation of p21 (CDKN1A, WAF1, CIP1).
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) data indicate that promoter binding of B-MYB
switches to binding of E2F4 and p130 resulting in a replacement of the MMB
(Myb-MuvB) by the DREAM complex. We demonstrate that this replacement depends on 
p21. Furthermore, transcriptional repression by p53 requires intact DREAM binding
sites in the target promoters. The CDE and CHR cell cycle promoter elements are
the sites for DREAM binding. These elements as well as the p53 response of
Survivin, CDC25C, and PLK1 are evolutionarily conserved. No binding of p53 to
these genes is detected by ChIP and mutation of proposed p53 binding sites does
not alter the p53 response. Thus, a mechanism for direct p53-dependent
transcriptional repression is not supported by the data. In contrast, repression 
by DREAM is consistent with most previous findings and unifies models based on
p21-, E2F4-, p130-, and CDE/CHR-dependent repression by p53. In conclusion, the
presented data suggest that the p53-p21-DREAM-CDE/CHR pathway regulates
p53-dependent repression of Survivin, CDC25C, and PLK1.

PMCID: PMC4747163
PMID: 26595675  [PubMed - in process]


9. Autophagy. 2016 Feb;12(2):357-68. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1110667. Epub 2015
Nov 13.

Autophagy positively regulates DNA damage recognition by nucleotide excision
repair.

Qiang L(1), Zhao B(1), Shah P(1), Sample A(1), Yang S(1), He YY(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medicine, Section of Dermatology , University of Chicago ,
Chicago , IL , USA.

Macroautophagy (hereafter autophagy) is a cellular catabolic process that is
essential for maintaining tissue homeostasis and regulating various normal and
pathologic processes in human diseases including cancer. One cancer-driving
process is accumulation of genetic mutations due to impaired DNA damage repair,
including nucleotide excision repair. Here we show that autophagy positively
regulates nucleotide excision repair through enhancing DNA damage recognition by 
the DNA damage sensor proteins XPC and DDB2 via 2 pathways. First, autophagy
deficiency downregulates the transcription of XPC through TWIST1-dependent
activation of the transcription repressor complex E2F4-RBL2. Second, autophagy
deficiency impairs the recruitment of DDB2 to ultraviolet radiation (UV)-induced 
DNA damage sites through TWIST1-mediated inhibition of EP300. In mice, the
pharmacological autophagy inhibitor Spautin-1 promotes UVB-induced tumorigenesis,
whereas the autophagy inducer rapamycin reduces UVB-induced tumorigenesis. These 
findings demonstrate the crucial role of autophagy in maintaining proper
nucleotide excision repair in mammalian cells and suggest a previously
unrecognized tumor-suppressive mechanism of autophagy in cancer.

PMID: 26565512  [PubMed - in process]


10. Life Sci. 2015 Dec 15;143:27-34. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2015.10.005. Epub 2015 Oct
23.

Investigation of the effects of a sulfite molecule on human neuroblastoma cells
via a novel oncogene URG4/URGCP.

Dodurga Y(1), Seçme M(2), Eroglu C(2), Gündogdu G(3), Avci ÇB(4), Bagci G(2),
Küçükatay V(3), Lale Satiroglu-Tufan N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Pamukkale University School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology,
Denizli, Turkey. Electronic address: yavuzdodurga@gmail.com. (2)Pamukkale
University School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Denizli, Turkey.
(3)Pamukkale University School of Medicine, Department of Physiology, Denizli,
Turkey. (4)Ege University School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology,
Izmir, Turkey. (5)Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of Forensic
Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.

AIM: The aim of this study is to determine the anticancer effect of sulfite on
SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells in vitro conditions and elucidate underlying
molecular mechanism of sulfite and explore its therapeutic activity.
MAIN METHODS: In this study, cytotoxic effects of sulfite in SH-SY5Y cels were
detected over time in a dose dependent manner with the IC50 doses ranging from
0.5 to 10 mM. Genotoxic effect of sulfite was shown by comet assay. IC50 doses in
the SH-SY5Y cells were detected as 5 mM. Expression profiles of the target genes 
related to apoptosis and cell cycle control were determined by quantitative
RT-PCR. Protein changes were determined by western blot analysis.
KEY FINDINGS: URG4/URGCP, CCND1, CCND2, CDK4, CDK6, E2F4 and BCL-2 gene
expression levels were significantly reduced and RB1, TP53, BAX, BID, CASP2,
CASP3, CASP9 and DIABLO gene expressions were significantly increased in dose
group cells. The mechanism of this result may be related to sulfite dependent
inhibition of cell cycle at the G1 phase by down-regulating URG4/URGCP or CCND1, 
CDK4, CDK6 gene expression and stimulating apoptosis via the intrinsic pathway.
Sulfite suppressed invasion and colony formation in SH-SY5Y cell line using
matrigel invasion chamber and colony formation assay, respectively.
SIGNIFICANCE: It is thought that sulfite demonstrates anticarcinogenesis activity
by affecting cell cycle arrest, apoptosis s, invasion, and colony formation on
SH-SY5Y cells. Sulfite may be an effective agent for treatment of neuroblastoma
as a single agent or in combination with other agents.

PMID: 26506573  [PubMed - in process]


11. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Dec;12(6):7891-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4448. Epub 2015 Oct 15.

Identification of key genes associated with the human abdominal aortic aneurysm
based on the gene expression profile.

Chen X(1), Zheng C(1), He Y(1), Tian L(1), Li J(1), Li D(1), Jin W(1), Li M(1),
Zheng S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310003, P.R. China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Combined Multi-Organ Transplantation, Ministry of Public Health,
Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310003,
P.R. China.

The present study was aimed at screening the key genes associated with abdominal 
aortic aneurysm (AAA) in the neck, and to investigate the molecular mechanism
underlying the development of AAA. The gene expression profile, GSE47472,
including 14 AAA neck samples and eight donor controls, was downloaded from the
Gene Expression Omnibus database. The total AAA samples were grouped into two
types to avoid bias. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were screened in
patients with AAA and subsequently compared with donor controls using linear
models for microarray data, or the Limma package in R, followed by gene ontology 
enrichment analysis. Furthermore, a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network
based on the DEGs was constructed to detect highly connected regions using a
Cytoscape plugin. In total, 388 DEGs in the AAA samples were identified. These
DEGs were predominantly associated with limb development, including embryonic
limb development and appendage development. Nuclear receptor co-repressor 1
(NCOR1), histone 4 (H4), E2F transcription factor 4 (E2F4) and hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4a (HNF4A) were the four transcription factors associated with AAA.
Furthermore, HNF4A indirectly interacted with the other three transcription
factors. Additionally, six clusters were selected from the PPI network. The DEG
screening process and the construction of an interaction network enabled an
understanding of the mechanism of AAA to be gleaned. HNF4A may exert an important
role in AAA development through its interactions with the three other
transcription factors (E2F4, NCOR1 and H4), and the mechanism of this coordinated
regulation of the transcription factors in AAA may provide a suitable target for 
the development of therapeutic intervention strategies.

PMCID: PMC4758287
PMID: 26498477  [PubMed - in process]


12. Oncogene. 2015 Oct 19. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.390. [Epub ahead of print]

TGF-ß signaling links E-cadherin loss to suppression of nucleotide excision
repair.

Qiang L(1), Shah P(1), Barcellos-Hoff MH(2), He YY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Dermatology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology and Cell Biology, New York 
University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

E-cadherin is a cell adhesion molecule best known for its function in suppressing
tumor progression and metastasis. Here we show that E-cadherin promotes
nucleotide excision repair through positively regulating the expression of
xeroderma pigmentosum complementation group C (XPC) and DNA damage-binding
protein 1 (DDB1). Loss of E-cadherin activates the E2F4 and p130/107
transcription repressor complexes to suppress the transcription of both XPC and
DDB1 through activating the transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) pathway. Adding 
XPC or DDB1, or inhibiting the TGF-ß pathway, increases the repair of ultraviolet
(UV)-induced DNA damage in E-cadherin-inhibited cells. In the mouse skin and skin
tumors, UVB radiation downregulates E-cadherin. In sun-associated premalignant
and malignant skin neoplasia, E-cadherin is downregulated in association with
reduced XPC and DDB1 levels. These findings demonstrate a crucial role of
E-cadherin in efficient DNA repair of UV-induced DNA damage, identify a new link 
between epithelial adhesion and DNA repair and suggest a mechanistic link of
early E-cadherin loss in tumor initiation.Oncogene advance online publication, 19
October 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.390.

PMID: 26477308  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Nov;36(11):1341-53. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv138. Epub 2015
Sep 29.

Common variants at the CHEK2 gene locus and risk of epithelial ovarian cancer.

Lawrenson K, Iversen ES, Tyrer J, Weber RP, Concannon P, Hazelett DJ, Li Q, Marks
JR, Berchuck A, Lee JM, Aben KK, Anton-Culver H, Antonenkova N; Australian Cancer
Study (Ovarian Cancer); Australian Ovarian Cancer Study Group, Bandera EV, Bean
Y, Beckmann MW, Bisogna M, Bjorge L, Bogdanova N, Brinton LA, Brooks-Wilson A,
Bruinsma F, Butzow R, Campbell IG, Carty K, Chang-Claude J, Chenevix-Trench G,
Chen A, Chen Z, Cook LS, Cramer DW, Cunningham JM, Cybulski C, Plisiecka-Halasa
J, Dennis J, Dicks E, Doherty JA, Dörk T, du Bois A, Eccles D, Easton DT, Edwards
RP, Eilber U, Ekici AB, Fasching PA, Fridley BL, Gao YT, Gentry-Maharaj A, Giles 
GG, Glasspool R, Goode EL, Goodman MT, Gronwald J, Harter P, Hasmad HN, Hein A,
Heitz F, Hildebrandt MA, Hillemanns P, Hogdall E, Hogdall C, Hosono S, Jakubowska
A, Paul J, Jensen A, Karlan BY, Kjaer SK, Kelemen LE, Kellar M, Kelley JL,
Kiemeney LA, Krakstad C, Lambrechts D, Lambrechts S, Le ND, Lee AW, Cannioto R,
Leminen A, Lester J, Levine DA, Liang D, Lissowska J, Lu K, Lubinski J, Lundvall 
L, Massuger LF, Matsuo K, McGuire V, McLaughlin JR, Nevanlinna H, McNeish I,
Menon U, Modugno F, Moysich KB, Narod SA, Nedergaard L, Ness RB, Noor Azmi MA,
Odunsi K, Olson SH, Orlow I, Orsulic S, Pearce CL, Pejovic T, Pelttari LM,
Permuth-Wey J, Phelan CM, Pike MC, Poole EM, Ramus SJ, Risch HA, Rosen B, Rossing
MA, Rothstein JH, Rudolph A, Runnebaum IB, Rzepecka IK, Salvesen HB, Budzilowska 
A, Sellers TA, Shu XO, Shvetsov YB, Siddiqui N, Sieh W, Song H, Southey MC,
Sucheston L, Tangen IL, Teo SH, Terry KL, Thompson PJ, Timorek A, Tworoger SS,
Van Nieuwenhuysen E, Vergote I, Vierkant RA, Wang-Gohrke S, Walsh C, Wentzensen
N, Whittemore AS, Wicklund KG, Wilkens LR, Woo YL, Wu X, Wu AH, Yang H, Zheng W, 
Ziogas A, Coetzee GA, Freedman ML, Monteiro AN, Moes-Sosnowska J, Kupryjanczyk J,
Pharoah PD, Gayther SA, Schildkraut JM.

Genome-wide association studies have identified 20 genomic regions associated
with risk of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC), but many additional risk variants
may exist. Here, we evaluated associations between common genetic variants
[single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and indels] in DNA repair genes and EOC
risk. We genotyped 2896 common variants at 143 gene loci in DNA samples from 15
397 patients with invasive EOC and controls. We found evidence of associations
with EOC risk for variants at FANCA, EXO1, E2F4, E2F2, CREB5 and CHEK2 genes (P =
0.001). The strongest risk association was for CHEK2 SNP rs17507066 with serous
EOC (P = 4.74 x 10(-7)). Additional genotyping and imputation of genotypes from
the 1000 genomes project identified a slightly more significant association for
CHEK2 SNP rs6005807 (r (2) with rs17507066 = 0.84, odds ratio (OR) 1.17, 95% CI
1.11-1.24, P = 1.1×10(-7)). We identified 293 variants in the region with
likelihood ratios of less than 1:100 for representing the causal variant.
Functional annotation identified 25 candidate SNPs that alter transcription
factor binding sites within regulatory elements active in EOC precursor tissues. 
In The Cancer Genome Atlas dataset, CHEK2 gene expression was significantly
higher in primary EOCs compared to normal fallopian tube tissues (P =
3.72×10(-8)). We also identified an association between genotypes of the
candidate causal SNP rs12166475 (r (2) = 0.99 with rs6005807) and CHEK2
expression (P = 2.70×10(-8)). These data suggest that common variants at 22q12.1 
are associated with risk of serous EOC and CHEK2 as a plausible target
susceptibility gene.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4635670 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26424751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Dec;35(23):3934-44. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00635-15. Epub 2015 Sep 
14.

Global Transcriptome Analysis Reveals That Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase 1
Regulates Gene Expression through EZH2.

Martin KA(1), Cesaroni M(1), Denny MF(2), Lupey LN(1), Tempera I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer and Molecular Biology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (2)Section of Rheumatology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (3)Fels Institute for Cancer and
Molecular Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Department 
of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA tempera@temple.edu.

Posttranslational modifications, such as poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation (PARylation),
regulate chromatin-modifying enzymes, ultimately affecting gene expression. This 
study explores the role of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) on global gene
expression in a lymphoblastoid B cell line. We found that inhibition of PARP
catalytic activity with olaparib resulted in global gene deregulation, affecting 
approximately 11% of the genes expressed. Gene ontology analysis revealed that
PARP could exert these effects through transcription factors and
chromatin-remodeling enzymes, including the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) 
member EZH2. EZH2 mediates the trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 27
(H3K27me3), a modification associated with chromatin compaction and gene
silencing. Both pharmacological inhibition of PARP and knockdown of PARP1 induced
the expression of EZH2, which resulted in increased global H3K27me3. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation confirmed that PARP1 inhibition led to H3K27me3 deposition at
EZH2 target genes, which resulted in gene silencing. Moreover, increased EZH2
expression is attributed to the loss of the occupancy of the transcription
repressor E2F4 at the EZH2 promoter following PARP inhibition. Together, these
data show that PARP plays an important role in global gene regulation and
identifies for the first time a direct role of PARP1 in regulating the expression
and function of EZH2.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4628063 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26370511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 28;6(25):20933-45.

The TRAF-interacting protein (TRAIP) is a novel E2F target with peak expression
in mitosis.

Chapard C(1), Hohl D(1), Huber M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service of Dermatology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.

The TRAF-interacting protein (TRAIP) is an E3 ubiquitin ligase required for cell 
proliferation. TRAIP mRNA is downregulated in human keratinocytes after
inhibition of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling. Since E2F transcription factors are
downstream of PI3K/AKT/mTOR we investigated whether they regulate TRAIP
expression. E2F1 expression significantly increased the TRAIP mRNA level in HeLa 
cells. Reporter assays with the 1400 bp 5'-upstream promoter in HeLa cells and
human keratinocytes showed that E2F1-, E2F2- and E2F4-induced upregulation of
TRAIP expression is mediated by 168 bp upstream of the translation start site.
Mutating the E2F binding site within this fragment reduced the E2F1- and
E2F2-dependent promoter activities and protein-DNA complex formation in gel shift
assays. Abundance of TRAIP mRNA and protein was regulated by the cell cycle with 
a peak in G2/M. Expression of GFP and TRAIP-GFP demonstrated that TRAIP-GFP
protein has a lower steady-state concentration than GFP despite similar mRNA
levels. Cycloheximide inhibition experiments indicated that the TRAIP protein has
a half-life of around four hours. Therefore, the combination of cell
cycle-dependent transcription of the TRAIP gene by E2F and rapid protein
degradation leads to cell cycle-dependent expression with a maximum in G2/M.
These findings suggest that TRAIP has important functions in mitosis and
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4673240
PMID: 26369285  [PubMed - in process]


16. Med Clin (Barc). 2016 Mar 4;146(5):230-1. doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2015.05.017. Epub
2015 Sep 3.

[E2F4 as susceptibility factor in the early onset colorectal cancer].

[Article in Spanish]

Ríos A(1), Rodríguez JM(2), Carbonel P(3), Parrilla P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Cirugía, Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, España; Servicio de
Cirugía General y de Aparato Digestivo, Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de 
la Arrixaca, Servicio Murciano de Salud, El Palmar, Murcia, España; Instituto
Murciano de Investigación Biosanitaria Virgen de la Arrixaca (IMIB), Murcia,
España. Electronic address: arzrios@um.es. (2)Departamento de Cirugía,
Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, España; Servicio de Cirugía General y de Aparato
Digestivo, Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Servicio
Murciano de Salud, El Palmar, Murcia, España; Instituto Murciano de Investigación
Biosanitaria Virgen de la Arrixaca (IMIB), Murcia, España. (3)Centro de
Bioquímica y Genética Clínica, Instituto Murciano de Investigación Biosanitaria
Virgen de la Arrixaca (IMIB), Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la
Arrixaca, Servicio Murciano de Salud, El Palmar, Murcia, España.

PMID: 26343152  [PubMed - in process]


17. Mol Vis. 2015 Aug 28;21:955-73. eCollection 2015.

Chromatin features, RNA polymerase II and the comparative expression of lens
genes encoding crystallins, transcription factors, and autophagy mediators.

Sun J(1), Rockowitz S(2), Chauss D(3), Wang P(4), Kantorow M(3), Zheng D(5),
Cvekl A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY. (2)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY. (3)Department of Biomedical Science, Florida Atlantic
University, Boca Raton, FL. (4)Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, NY. (5)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY.

PURPOSE: Gene expression correlates with local chromatin structure. Our studies
have mapped histone post-translational modifications, RNA polymerase II (pol II),
and transcription factor Pax6 in lens chromatin. These data represent the first
genome-wide insights into the relationship between lens chromatin structure and
lens transcriptomes and serve as an excellent source for additional data analysis
and refinement. The principal lens proteins, the crystallins, are encoded by
predominantly expressed mRNAs; however, the regulatory mechanisms underlying
their high expression in the lens remain poorly understood.
METHODS: The formaldehyde-assisted identification of regulatory regions
(FAIRE-Seq) was employed to analyze newborn lens chromatin. ChIP-seq and RNA-seq 
data published earlier (GSE66961) have been used to assist in FAIRE-seq data
interpretation. RNA transcriptomes from murine lens epithelium, lens fibers,
erythrocytes, forebrain, liver, neurons, and pancreas were compared to establish 
the gene expression levels of the most abundant mRNAs versus median gene
expression across other differentiated cells.
RESULTS: Normalized RNA expression data from multiple tissues show that
crystallins rank among the most highly expressed genes in mammalian cells. These 
findings correlate with the extremely high abundance of pol II all across the
crystallin loci, including crystallin genes clustered on chromosomes 1 and 5, as 
well as within regions of "open" chromatin, as identified by FAIRE-seq. The
expression levels of mRNAs encoding DNA-binding transcription factors (e.g.,
Foxe3, Hsf4, Maf, Pax6, Prox1, Sox1, and Tfap2a) revealed that their transcripts 
form "clusters" of abundant mRNAs in either lens fibers or lens epithelium. The
expression of three autophagy regulatory mRNAs, encoding Tfeb, FoxO1, and Hif1a, 
was found within a group of lens preferentially expressed transcription factors
compared to the E12.5 forebrain.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals novel features of lens chromatin, including the
remarkably high abundance of pol II at the crystallin loci that exhibit features 
of "open" chromatin. Hsf4 ranks among the most abundant fiber cell-preferred
DNA-binding transcription factors. Notable transcripts, including Atf4, Ctcf,
E2F4, Hey1, Hmgb1, Mycn, RXRß, Smad4, Sp1, and Taf1 (transcription factors) and
Ctsd, Gabarapl1, and Park7 (autophagy regulators) have been identified with high 
levels of expression in lens fibers, which suggests specific roles in lens fiber 
cell terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4551281
PMID: 26330747  [PubMed - in process]


18. Tumour Biol. 2015 Aug 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeting polyamine biosynthetic pathway through RNAi causes the abrogation of
MCF 7 breast cancer cell line.

Gupta ED(1), Pachauri M, Ghosh PC, Rajam MV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Delhi South Campus, Benito Juarez Road, 
New Delhi, 110021, India.

The diamine putrescine and polyamines, spermidine (triamine) and spermine
(tetraamine) are small organic polycations that play an indispensable role in key
cellular processes such as the regulation of growth, differentiation, and
macromolecular functions. Elevated levels of polyamines (PAs) have been shown to 
be one of the major factors involved in carcinogenesis. In this study, specific
silencing of the expression of three genes of PA biosynthesis pathway, ornithine 
decarboxylase (ODC), S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase (SAMDC), and spermidine
synthase (SPDSYN) was achieved using RNA interference in MCF 7 breast cancer cell
line. For optimizing the effective small interfering nucleic acid (siNA), three
variants of ODC siNA [siRNA, locked nucleic acid (LNA)-modified siRNA, and
siHybrid (RNA and DNA hybrid)] were used and a dose- and time-dependent study was
conducted. The PA biosynthetic genes were targeted individually and in
combination. RNAi-mediated reduction in the expression of PA biosynthesis genes
resulted in distorted cell morphology, reduced cancer cell viability, and
migration characteristic. The most promising results were observed with the
combined treatment of siSPDSYN and siODC with 83 % cell growth inhibition. On
analyzing the messenger RNA (mRNA) expression profile of the cell cycle and
apoptosis-related genes, it was observed that RNAi against PA biosynthetic genes 
downregulated the expression of CDK8, CCNE2, CCNH, CCNT1, CCNT2, CCNF, PCNA,
CCND1, and CDK2, and upregulated the expression of E2F4, BAX, FAS, TP53, CDKN1A, 
BAK1, CDKN1B, ATM, GRANB, and ATR genes when compared with control-transfected
cells. These results suggest that the targeting polyamine biosynthesis through
RNAi approach could be a promising strategy for breast cancer therapy and might
be extended for therapy of other cancers.

PMID: 26277788  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Clin Transl Oncol. 2016 Jan;18(1):9-17. doi: 10.1007/s12094-015-1356-1. Epub 2015
Jul 22.

Trinucleotide repeat expansions in human breast cancer-susceptibility genes:
relevant targets for aspirin chemoprevention?

Altinoz MA(1), Tunali NE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Experimental Medicine Research Institute - DETAE,
Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. maltinoz@gmail.com. (2)Department of
Molecular Biology and Genetics, Halic University, Istanbul, Turkey.

PURPOSE: Defining novel molecular mechanisms pertinent to aspirin chemoprevention
of breast cancer (BC) and to explain controversial epidemiological results in
this regard.
METHODS: Literature search in relevant databases with the following key words;
aspirin, nucleotide repeat expansions, breast cancer. Human genome contains
nucleotide repeat expansions and exon-1 of the androgen receptor gene AR contains
a CAG string with an average of 20 repeats. Longer AR CAG repeats associate with 
lower AR protein functioning leading relatively higher estrogen receptor signals 
and higher risk of hormone receptor-positive BC. Nucleotide repeat expansions
also exist in E2F4 and POLG genes in BC. In cell culture models, aspirin reduces 
CAG.CTG expansions in kidney cells and restores myogenic differentiation in cells
obtained from tissues with myotonic dystrophy, a disorder caused by large CTG
expansions.
CONCLUSIONS: We hypothesize that aspirin reduction of trinucleotide repeat
expansions in breast cancer-susceptibility genes may be one of the relevant
mechanisms of its chemopreventive effects.

PMID: 26199016  [PubMed - in process]


20. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec;36(12):9717-22. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3735-1. Epub 2015
Jul 9.

Association between cell cycle gene transcription and tumor size in oral squamous
cell carcinoma.

Diniz MG(1), de Fatima Correia Silva J(2), de Souza FT(2), Pereira NB(2), Gomes
CC(3), Gomez RS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Surgery and Pathology, School of Dentistry, Universidade
Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos, 6627, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, 
cep 31270-901, Brazil. marinadiniz@gmail.com. (2)Department of Oral Surgery and
Pathology, School of Dentistry, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio
Carlos, 6627, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, cep 31270-901, Brazil. (3)Department 
of Pathology, Biological Sciences Institute, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.

Higher tumor size correlates with poor prognosis and is an independent predictive
survival factor in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) patients. However, the
molecular events underlining OSCC tumor evolution are poorly understood. We aimed
to investigate if large OSCC tumors show different cell cycle gene
transcriptional signature compared to small tumors. Seventeen fresh OSCC tumor
samples with different tumor sizes (T) were included in the study. Tumors were
from the tongue or from the floor of the mouth, and only three patients were
nonsmokers. Samples were categorized according to clinical tumor size in tumors
=2 cm (T1, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>5) or tumors >2 cm (T2, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>9; T3, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>2; T4, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1). The group of
tumors =2 cm was considered the reference group, while the larger tumors were
considered the test group. We assessed the expression of 84 cell cycle genes by
qRT-PCR array and normalized it to the expression of two housekeeping genes.
Results were analyzed according to the formula 2(^-DeltaCt). A five-fold change
cutoff was used, and p values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Ki-67 immunohistochemistry was performed to estimate cell proliferation index.
Twenty-nine genes were downregulated in the test group (larger tumors) compared
to the reference group (smaller tumors). Among these genes, 13 reached
statistical significance: ANAPC4, CUL1, SUMO1, KPNA2, MAD2L2, CCNG2, E2F4, NBN,
CUL2, PCNA, TFDP1, KNTC1, and ATR. Ki-67 labeling index was similar in both tumor
groups. Our findings suggest that the transcriptional activity of specific cell
cycle genes varies according to the size of OSCC tumor, which probably reflects
tumor molecular evolution and adaptation to the microenvironment.

PMID: 26152289  [PubMed - in process]


21. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec;36(12):9437-46. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3689-3. Epub 2015
Jun 30.

Assessment of the anticancer mechanism of ferulic acid via cell cycle and
apoptotic pathways in human prostate cancer cell lines.

Eroglu C(1), Seçme M(2), Bagci G(2), Dodurga Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Meram Medicine, Konya Necmettin
Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey. (2)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of
Medicine, Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey. (3)Department of Medical
Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey.
yavuzdodurga@gmail.com.

Studies on genetic changes underlying prostate cancer and the possible signaling 
pathways are getting increased day by day, and new treatment methods are being
searched for. The aim of the present study is to investigate the effects of
ferulic acid (FA), a phenolic compound, on cell cycle, apoptosis, invasion, and
colony formation in the PC-3 and LNCaP prostate cancer cells. The effect of FA on
cell viability was determined via a
2,3-bis-(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide (XTT)
method. Total RNA was isolated with Tri Reagent. Expression of 84 genes for both 
cell cycle and apoptosis separately was evaluated by reverse transcriptase PCR
(RT-PCR). Protein expressions were evaluated by Western blot analysis.
Furthermore, apoptotic effects of FA were observed with terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay. Effects of
FA on cell invasion and colony formation were determined using Matrigel chamber
and colony assay, respectively. The half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) 
dose of FA was found to be 300 µM in PC-3 cells and 500 µM in LNCaP cells.
According to RT-PCR results, it was observed that FA inhibited cell proliferation
by increasing the gene expressions of ATR, ATM, CDKN1A, CDKN1B, E2F4, RB1, and
TP53 and decreasing the gene expressions of CCND1, CCND2, CCND3, CDK2, CDK4, and 
CDK6 in PC-3 cells. On the other hand, it was seen that FA suppressed cell
proliferation by increasing in the gene expressions of CASP1, CASP2, CASP8, CYCS,
FAS, FASLG, and TRADD and decreasing in the gene expressions of BCL2 and XIAP in 
LNCaP cells. In this study, protein expression of CDK4 and BCL2 genes
significantly decreased in these cells. It could induce apoptosis in PC-3 and
LNCaP cells. Also, it was observed that FA suppressed the invasion in PC-3 and
LNCaP cells. Moreover, it suppressed the colony formation. In conclusion, it has 
been observed that FA may lead to cell cycle arrest in PC-3 cells while it may
cause apoptosis in LNCaP cells.

PMID: 26124008  [PubMed - in process]


22. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 19;10(6):e0130565. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130565.
eCollection 2015.

Cellular Adhesion Promotes Prostate Cancer Cells Escape from Dormancy.

Ruppender N(1), Larson S(1), Lakely B(1), Kollath L(1), Brown L(1), Coleman I(2),
Coleman R(2), Nguyen H(1), Nelson PS(3), Corey E(1), Snyder LA(4), Vessella
RL(5), Morrissey C(1), Lam HM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United
States of America. (2)Divison of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America. (3)Divison of Human
Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United
States of America; Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, United States of America. (4)Janssen Research and Development, LLC,
Spring House, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (5)Department of Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America; Department
of Urology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of
America.

Dissemination of prostate cancer (PCa) cells to the bone marrow is an early event
in the disease process. In some patients, disseminated tumor cells (DTC)
proliferate to form active metastases after a prolonged period of undetectable
disease known as tumor dormancy. Identifying mechanisms of PCa dormancy and
reactivation remain a challenge partly due to the lack of in vitro models. Here, 
we characterized in vitro PCa dormancy-reactivation by inducing cells from three 
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) lines to proliferate through tumor cell contact
with each other and with bone marrow stroma. Proliferating PCa cells demonstrated
tumor cell-cell contact and integrin clustering by immunofluorescence. Global
gene expression analyses on proliferating cells cultured on bone marrow stroma
revealed a downregulation of TGFB2 in all of the three proliferating PCa PDX
lines when compared to their non-proliferating counterparts. Furthermore,
constitutive activation of myosin light chain kinase (MLCK), a downstream
effector of integrin-beta1 and TGF-beta2, in non-proliferating cells promoted
cell proliferation. This cell proliferation was associated with an upregulation
of CDK6 and a downregulation of E2F4. Taken together, our data provide the first 
clinically relevant in vitro model to support cellular adhesion and
downregulation of TGFB2 as a potential mechanism by which PCa cells may escape
from dormancy. Targeting the TGF-beta2-associated mechanism could provide novel
opportunities to prevent lethal PCa metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4475050
PMID: 26090669  [PubMed - in process]


23. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015 Jun 18;107(9). pii: djv151. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv151.
Print 2015 Sep.

E2F8 as a Novel Therapeutic Target for Lung Cancer.

Park SA(1), Platt J(1), Lee JW(1), López-Giráldez F(1), Herbst RS(1), Koo JS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine (SAP, JWL, RSH,
JSK) and Translational Research Program (RSH, JSK), Yale Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Departments of Pathology and Medical Oncology (JP), Yale School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT; Yale Center for Genome Analysis, Yale University,
Orange, CT (FLG). (2)Section of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine
(SAP, JWL, RSH, JSK) and Translational Research Program (RSH, JSK), Yale
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Departments of Pathology and Medical Oncology (JP), 
Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT; Yale Center for Genome Analysis, Yale
University, Orange, CT (FLG). jpeter.koo@yale.edu.

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015 Sep;107(9). pii: djv180. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv180.

BACKGROUND: The E2F members have been divided into transcription activators
(E2F1-E2F3) and repressors (E2F4-E2F8). E2F8 with E2F7 has been known to play an 
important physiologic role in embryonic development and cell cycle regulation by 
repressing E2F1. However, the function of E2F8 in cancer cells is unknown.
METHODS: E2F8 expression was assessed by immunoblotting or immunofluorescence
staining in human lung cancer (LC) cells and tissues from LC patients (n = 45).
Cell proliferation, colony formation, and invasion analysis were performed to
evaluate the role of E2F8 in LC. Microarray analysis was used to determine the
target genes of E2F8. The regulation of E2F8 on the expression of ubiquitin-like 
PHD and RING domain-containing 1 (UHRF1), one of E2F8 target genes, was
determined using chromatin immunoprecipitation and promoter activity assays.
Human LC xenograft models were used to determine the effects of inhibiting E2F8
by siRNAs (n = 7 per group) or antisense morpholino (n = 8 per group) on tumor
growth. Survival was analyzed using the Kaplan-Meier method and group differences
by the Student's t test. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: LC tumors overexpressed E2F8 compared with normal lung tissues.
Depletion of E2F8 inhibited cell proliferation and tumor growth. E2F8 knockdown
statistically significantly reduced the expression of UHRF1 (~60%-70%, P < .001),
and the direct binding of E2F8 on the promoter of UHRF1 was identified.
Kaplan-Meier analysis with a public database showed prognostic significance of
aberrant E2F8 expression in LC (HR = 1.91 95% CI = 1.21 to 3.01 in chemo-naïve
patients, P = .0047).
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that E2F8 is overexpressed in LC and is required for
the growth of LC cells. These findings implicate E2F8 as a novel therapeutic
target for LC treatment.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4651101 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26089541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Aug 18;43(14):6860-73. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv593. Epub 2015
Jun 13.

p27Kip1 and p21Cip1 collaborate in the regulation of transcription by recruiting 
cyclin-Cdk complexes on the promoters of target genes.

Orlando S(1), Gallastegui E(1), Besson A(2), Abril G(1), Aligué R(1), Pujol
MJ(1), Bachs O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Immunology and Neurosciences, University of
Barcelona, 08036-Barcelona, Spain. (2)INSERM UMR1037, Cancer Research Center of
Toulouse, Toulouse, France Université de Toulouse, Toulouse, France CNRS ERL5294,
Toulouse, France. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Immunology and Neurosciences,
University of Barcelona, 08036-Barcelona, Spain obachs@ub.edu.

Transcriptional repressor complexes containing p130 and E2F4 regulate the
expression of genes involved in DNA replication. During the G1 phase of the cell 
cycle, sequential phosphorylation of p130 by cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks)
disrupts these complexes allowing gene expression. The Cdk inhibitor and tumor
suppressor p27(Kip1) associates with p130 and E2F4 by its carboxyl domain on the 
promoters of target genes but its role in the regulation of transcription remains
unclear. We report here that p27(Kip1) recruits cyclin D2/D3-Cdk4 complexes on
the promoters by its amino terminal domain in early and mid G1. In cells lacking 
p27(Kip1), cyclin D2/D3-Cdk4 did not associate to the promoters and
phosphorylation of p130 and transcription of target genes was increased. In late 
G1, these complexes were substituted by p21(Cip1)-cyclin D1-Cdk2. In p21(Cip1)
null cells cyclin D1-Cdk2 were not found on the promoters and transcription was
elevated. In p21/p27 double null cells transcription was higher than in control
cells and single knock out cells. Thus, our results clarify the role of p27(Kip1)
and p21(Cip1) in transcriptional regulation of genes repressed by p130/E2F4
complexes in which p27(Kip1) and p21(Cip1) play a sequential role by recruiting
and regulating the activity of specific cyclin-Cdk complexes on the promoters.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4538812
PMID: 26071952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Cancer Res. 2015 Sep;13(9):1316-24. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-15-0120. Epub 
2015 Jun 1.

E2F4 Program Is Predictive of Progression and Intravesical Immunotherapy Efficacy
in Bladder Cancer.

Cheng C(1), Varn FS(2), Marsit CJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, New
Hampshire. Institute for Quantitative Biomedical Sciences, Geisel School of
Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, New Hampshire. Norris Cotton Cancer Center,
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, New Hampshire.
Chao.Cheng@dartmouth.edu. (2)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Hanover, New Hampshire. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, 
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, New Hampshire.

Bladder cancer is a common malignant disease, with non-muscle-invasive bladder
cancer (NMIBC) representing the majority of tumors. This cancer subtype is
typically treated by transurethral resection. In spite of treatment, up to 70% of
patients show local recurrences. Intravesical BCG (Bacillus Calmette-Guerin)
immunotherapy has been widely used to treat NMIBC, but it fails to suppress
recurrence of bladder tumors in up to 40% of patients. Therefore, the development
of prognostic markers is needed to predict the progression of bladder cancer and 
the efficacy of intravesical BCG treatment. This study demonstrates the
effectiveness of an E2F4 signature for prognostic prediction of bladder cancer.
E2F4 scores for each sample in a bladder cancer expression dataset were
calculated by summarizing the relative expression levels of E2F4 target genes
identified by ChIP-seq, and then the scores were used to stratify patients into
good- and poor-outcome groups. The molecular signature was investigated in a
single bladder cancer dataset and then its effectiveness was confirmed in two
meta-bladder datasets consisting of specimens from multiple independent studies. 
These results were consistent in different datasets and demonstrate that the E2F4
score is predictive of clinical outcomes in bladder cancer, with patients whose
tumors exhibit an E2F4 score >0 having significantly shorter survival times than 
those with an E2F4 score <0, in both non-muscle-invasive, and muscle-invasive
bladder cancer. Furthermore, although intravesical BCG immunotherapy can
significantly improve the clinical outcome of NMIBC patients with positive E2F4
scores (E2F4>0 group), it does not show significant treatment effect for those
with negative scores (E2F4<0 group).IMPLICATIONS: The E2F4 signature can be
applied to predict the progression/recurrence and the responsiveness of patients 
to intravesical BCG immunotherapy in bladder cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4734892
PMID: 26032289  [PubMed - in process]


26. Genes Dev. 2015 May 1;29(9):961-74. doi: 10.1101/gad.257568.114. Epub 2015 Apr
27.

Structural mechanisms of DREAM complex assembly and regulation.

Guiley KZ(1), Liban TJ(1), Felthousen JG(2), Ramanan P(1), Litovchick L(3), Rubin
SM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California at Santa
Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA; (2)Division of Hematology, Oncology, and
Palliative Care, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA; Massey Cancer Center, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA. (3)Division of
Hematology, Oncology, and Palliative Care, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA; Massey 
Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA
srubin@ucsc.edu llitovchick@vcu.edu. (4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of California at Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA;
srubin@ucsc.edu llitovchick@vcu.edu.

The DREAM complex represses cell cycle genes during quiescence through
scaffolding MuvB proteins with E2F4/5 and the Rb tumor suppressor paralog p107 or
p130. Upon cell cycle entry, MuvB dissociates from p107/p130 and recruits B-Myb
and FoxM1 for up-regulating mitotic gene expression. To understand the
biochemical mechanisms underpinning DREAM function and regulation, we
investigated the structural basis for DREAM assembly. We identified a sequence in
the MuvB component LIN52 that binds directly to the pocket domains of p107 and
p130 when phosphorylated on the DYRK1A kinase site S28. A crystal structure of
the LIN52-p107 complex reveals that LIN52 uses a suboptimal LxSxExL sequence
together with the phosphate at nearby S28 to bind the LxCxE cleft of the pocket
domain with high affinity. The structure explains the specificity for p107/p130
over Rb in the DREAM complex and how the complex is disrupted by viral
oncoproteins. Based on insights from the structure, we addressed how DREAM is
disassembled upon cell cycle entry. We found that p130 and B-Myb can both bind
the core MuvB complex simultaneously but that cyclin-dependent kinase
phosphorylation of p130 weakens its association. Together, our data inform a
novel target interface for studying MuvB and p130 function and the design of
inhibitors that prevent tumor escape in quiescence.

© 2015 Guiley et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4421984
PMID: 25917549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Apr 10;17:54. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0559-2.

The E2F4 prognostic signature is also predictive of the pathological response of 
breast cancer to chemotherapy.

Bertucci F(1,)(2,)(3), Finetti P(1), Birnbaum D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Oncologie Moléculaire, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de
Marseille, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, UMR1068 Inserm, 232 boulevard de
Sainte-Marguerite, 13009, Marseille, France. bertuccif@ipc.unicancer.fr.
(2)Département d'Oncologie Médicale, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de
Marseille, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, UMR1068 Inserm, 232 boulevard de
Sainte-Marguerite, 13009, Marseille, France. bertuccif@ipc.unicancer.fr.
(3)Faculté de Médecine, 13385 Aix-Marseille Université, 27 boulevard Jean Moulin,
Marseille cedex 5, France. bertuccif@ipc.unicancer.fr.

Comment on
    Breast Cancer Res. 2014;16(6):486.

PMCID: PMC4391546
PMID: 25887620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Autophagy. 2015 Apr 3;11(4):653-69. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1034414.

Disruption of sphingolipid metabolism augments ceramide-induced autophagy in
preeclampsia.

Melland-Smith M(1), Ermini L, Chauvin S, Craig-Barnes H, Tagliaferro A, Todros T,
Post M, Caniggia I.

Author information: 
(1)a The Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute; Mount Sinai Hospital ; Toronto ,
ON Canada.

Bioactive sphingolipids including ceramides are involved in a variety of
pathophysiological processes by regulating cell death and survival. The objective
of the current study was to examine ceramide metabolism in preeclampsia, a
serious disorder of pregnancy characterized by oxidative stress, and increased
trophoblast cell death and autophagy. Maternal circulating and placental ceramide
levels quantified by tandem mass spectrometry were elevated in pregnancies
complicated by preeclampsia. Placental ceramides were elevated due to greater de 
novo synthesis via high serine palmitoyltransferase activity and reduced
lysosomal breakdown via diminished ASAH1 expression caused by TGFB3-induced E2F4 
transcriptional repression. SMPD1 activity was reduced; hence, sphingomyelin
degradation by SMPD1 did not contribute to elevated ceramide levels in
preeclampsia. Oxidative stress triggered similar changes in ceramide levels and
acid hydrolase expression in villous explants and trophoblast cells.
MALDI-imaging mass spectrometry localized the ceramide increases to the
trophophoblast layers and syncytial knots of placentae from pregnancies
complicated by preeclampsia. ASAH1 inhibition or ceramide treatment induced
autophagy in human trophoblast cells via a shift of the BOK-MCL1 rheostat toward 
prodeath BOK. Pharmacological inhibition of ASAH1 activity in pregnant mice
resulted in increased placental ceramide content, abnormal placentation, reduced 
fetal growth, and increased autophagy via a similar shift in the BOK-MCL1 system.
Our results reveal that oxidative stress-induced reduction of lysosomal hydrolase
activities in combination with elevated de novo synthesis leads to ceramide
overload, resulting in increased trophoblast cell autophagy, and typifies
preeclampsia as a sphingolipid storage disorder.

PMCID: PMC4502662 [Available on 2016-04-08]
PMID: 25853898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Biotech Histochem. 2015 Jul;90(5):353-60. doi: 10.3109/10520295.2015.1007481.
Epub 2015 Mar 24.

Identification of genes associated with disc degeneration using bioinformatics.

Ji SC(1), Han N, Liu Y, Li G, Sun Z, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Trauma Surgery, East Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine , Shanghai , China.

Intervertebral disc degeneration is a common orthopedic disease that has been
recognized as the major cause of low back pain. About 80% of the population is
affected by this disease. We explored molecular mechanisms of disc degeneration
and identified the genes associated with the disease. The transcription profile
of GSE34095 was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus database with three
degenerative disc samples and three healthy disc samples. Gene ontology and
pathway enrichment analysis were performed. We constructed a protein-protein
interaction (PPI) network and a transcription factor (TF) target network.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in normal and disc degeneration samples
were identified including 243 up-regulated genes and 351 down-regulated genes.
Meanwhile, seven Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways were
obtained by mapping the 594 DEGs to the KEGG and we found that the calcium
signaling pathway was the most significant for developing disc degeneration. The 
pathways interaction network analysis showed that the adherens junction pathway
interacted with other six pathways. In addition, the top five genes, FYN, PRKCD, 
YWHAB, YWHAZ and AR, with a high degree of interaction of 7, 4, 4, 4 and 4,
respectively, were related to the disc degeneration in the PPI network.
Furthermore, transcription factors including TFAP2A, E2F4, SP3 and AR had the
potential to regulate disc degeneration through the mitogen-activated protein
kinase, vascular endothelial growth factor and p53 pathways. The genes and
pathways that we identified may be involved in disc degeneration.

PMID: 25801299  [PubMed - in process]


30. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Mar 11;43(5):2780-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv123. Epub 2015
Feb 20.

EWS-FLI1 employs an E2F switch to drive target gene expression.

Schwentner R(1), Papamarkou T(2), Kauer MO(1), Stathopoulos V(2), Yang F(3),
Bilke S(3), Meltzer PS(3), Girolami M(2), Kovar H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna
1090, Austria. (2)Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 
7AL, UK. (3)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. 
Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna 1090, Austria Dept. of Pediatrics, Medical
University, Vienna 1090, Austria heinrich.kovar@ccri.at.

Cell cycle progression is orchestrated by E2F factors. We previously reported
that in ETS-driven cancers of the bone and prostate, activating E2F3 cooperates
with ETS on target promoters. The mechanism of target co-regulation remained
unknown. Using RNAi and time-resolved chromatin-immunoprecipitation in Ewing
sarcoma we report replacement of E2F3/pRB by constitutively expressed repressive 
E2F4/p130 complexes on target genes upon EWS-FLI1 modulation. Using mathematical 
modeling we interrogated four alternative explanatory models for the observed
EWS-FLI1/E2F3 cooperation based on longitudinal E2F target and regulating
transcription factor expression analysis. Bayesian model selection revealed the
formation of a synergistic complex between EWS-FLI1 and E2F3 as the by far most
likely mechanism explaining the observed kinetics of E2F target induction.
Consequently we propose that aberrant cell cycle activation in Ewing sarcoma is
due to the de-repression of E2F targets as a consequence of transcriptional
induction and physical recruitment of E2F3 by EWS-FLI1 replacing E2F4 on their
target promoters.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4357724
PMID: 25712098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Comp Pathol. 2015 Feb-Apr;152(2-3):119-30. doi: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2014.11.008.
Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Reconstruction of canine diffuse large B-cell lymphoma gene regulatory network:
detection of functional modules and hub genes.

Zamani-Ahmadmahmudi M(1), Najafi A(2), Nassiri SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Science, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Shahrekord
University, Shahrekord, Iran; Department of Clinical Science, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Shahid Bahonar University of Kerman, Kerman, Iran.
Electronic address: zamani_2012@alumni.ut.ac.ir. (2)Molecular Biology Research
Center, Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (3)Department 
of Clinical Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tehran,
Tehran, Iran.

Lymphoma is one of the most common malignancies in dogs. Canine lymphoma is
similar to human non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) with shared clinical presentation
and histopathological features. This study reports the construction of a
comprehensive gene regulatory network (GRN) for canine diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL), the most common type of canine lymphoma, and performs analysis 
for detection of major functional modules and hub genes (the most important genes
in a GRN). The canine DLBCL GRN was reconstructed from gene expression data (NCBI
GEO dataset: GSE30881) using the STRING and MiMI interaction databases.
Reconstructed GRNs were then assessed, using various bioinformatics programmes,
in order to analyze network topology and identify major pathways and hub genes.
The resultant network from both interaction databases had a logically scale-free 
pattern. Gene ontology (GO) analysis revealed cell activation, cell cycle phase, 
immune effector process, immune system development, immune system process,
integrin-mediated signalling pathway, intracellular protein kinase cascade,
intracellular signal transduction, leucocyte activation and differentiation,
lymphocyte activation and differentiation as major GO terms in the biological
processes of the networks. Moreover, bioinformatics analysis showed E2F1, E2F4,
PTEN, CDKN1A, PCNA, DKC1, MNAT1, NDUFB4, ATP5J, PRKDC, BRCA1, MYCN, RFC4 and
POLA1 as the most important hub genes. The phosphatidyl inositol signalling
system, P53 signalling pathway, Rac CycD pathway, G1/S checkpoint, chemokine
signalling pathway and telomere maintenance were the main signalling pathways in 
which the protein products of the hub genes are involved.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25678421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 20;6(8):5547-66.

Gain of function mutant p53 proteins cooperate with E2F4 to transcriptionally
downregulate RAD17 and BRCA1 gene expression.

Valenti F(1), Ganci F(1), Fontemaggi G(1), Sacconi A(1), Strano S(2), Blandino
G(1), Di Agostino S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Oncogenomic Unit, Molecular Medicine Area, Regina Elena National
Cancer Institute, Rome 00144, Italy. (2)Molecular Chemoprevention Group,
Molecular Medicine Area, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome 00144,
Italy.

Genomic instability (IN) is a common feature of many human cancers. The TP53
tumour suppressor gene is mutated in approximately half of human cancers. Here,
we show that BRCA1 and RAD17 genes, whose derived proteins play a pivotal role in
DNA damage repair, are transcriptional targets of gain-of-function mutant p53
proteins. Indeed, high levels of mutp53 protein facilitate DNA damage
accumulation and severely impair BRCA1 and RAD17 expression in proliferating
cancer cells. The recruitment of mutp53/E2F4 complex onto specific regions of
BRCA1 and RAD17 promoters leads to the inhibition of their expression. BRCA1 and 
RAD17 mRNA expression is reduced in HNSCC patients carrying TP53 mutations when
compared to those bearing wt-p53 gene. Furthermore, the analysis of gene
expression databases for breast cancer patients reveals that low expression of
DNA repair genes correlates significantly with reduced relapse free survival of
patients carrying TP53 gene mutations. Collectively, these findings highlight the
direct involvement of transcriptionally active gain of function mutant p53
proteins in genomic instability through the impairment of DNA repair mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4467386
PMID: 25650659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;7(1):73-87. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mju049. Epub 2014 Dec 29.

Cigarette smoke-induced cell cycle arrest in spermatocytes [GC-2spd(ts)] is
mediated through crosstalk between Ahr-Nrf2 pathway and MAPK signaling.

Esakky P(1), Hansen DA(2), Drury AM(1), Moley KH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, St. Louis, MO 63106, 
USA Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Research, Department of Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, St. Louis, MO 63106, USA. (3)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA
moleyk@wustl.edu.

Our earlier studies have demonstrated that the cigarette smoke in the form of
cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) causes growth arrest of a mouse spermatocyte
cell line [GC-2spd(ts)] through activation of the AHR-NRF2 pathway. The present
study demonstrates the CSC-activated p38 and ERK MAPK signaling in GC-2spd(ts)
via arylhydrocarbon receptor (AHR). Pharmacological inhibition by using
AHR-antagonist, or p38 MAPK and ERK (MEK1) inhibitors significantly abrogates
CSC-induced growth arrest by AHR and MAPK inactivation. QRT-PCR, western blot,
and immunofluorescence of Ahr-target of Nrf2, and stress-inducible growth
suppressive Atf3 and E2f4 following treatments indicate a crosstalk among these
pathways. Regulation of Atf3 by Nrf2 and Ahr through RNA interference suggests
the existence of a cross-regulatory loop between the targets. CSC induction of
E2f4 via Atf3 and its regulation by pharmacological inhibitors reveal a possible 
regulatory mechanism of growth inhibitory CSC. SiRNA silencing of Ahr, Nrf2,
Atf3, and E2f4 genes and downregulation of cyclins by CSC corroborate the growth 
inhibitory effect of cigarette smoke. Thus, the data obtained suggest that the
CSC-mediated MAPKs and AHR-NRF2 crosstalks lay the molecular basis for the growth
arrest and cell death of spermatocytes.

© The Author (2014). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of
Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25548370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(19):3037-58. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.949083.

The transcription factor p53: not a repressor, solely an activator.

Fischer M(1), Steiner L, Engeland K.

Author information: 
(1)a Molecular Oncology; Medical School ; University of Leipzig ; Leipzig ,
Germany.

The predominant function of the tumor suppressor p53 is transcriptional
regulation. It is generally accepted that p53-dependent transcriptional
activation occurs by binding to a specific recognition site in promoters of
target genes. Additionally, several models for p53-dependent transcriptional
repression have been postulated. Here, we evaluate these models based on a
computational meta-analysis of genome-wide data. Surprisingly, several major
models of p53-dependent gene regulation are implausible. Meta-analysis of
large-scale data is unable to confirm reports on directly repressed p53 target
genes and falsifies models of direct repression. This notion is supported by
experimental re-analysis of representative genes reported as directly repressed
by p53. Therefore, p53 is not a direct repressor of transcription, but solely
activates its target genes. Moreover, models based on interference of p53 with
activating transcription factors as well as models based on the function of
ncRNAs are also not supported by the meta-analysis. As an alternative to models
of direct repression, the meta-analysis leads to the conclusion that p53
represses transcription indirectly by activation of the p53-p21-DREAM/RB pathway.

PMCID: PMC4612452
PMID: 25486564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 2;16(6):486. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0486-7.

E2F4 regulatory program predicts patient survival prognosis in breast cancer.

Khaleel SS(1), Andrews EH(2), Ung M(3), DiRenzo J(4), Cheng C(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, 1 Rope Ferry
Road, Hanover, NH, 03755, USA. sari.s.khaleel.dm@dartmouth.edu. (2)Department of 
Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, 1 Rope Ferry Road, Hanover, NH,
03755, USA. erik.h.andrews.dm@dartmouth.edu. (3)Department of Genetics, Geisel
School of Medicine at Dartmouth, 1 Rope Ferry Road, Hanover, NH, 03755, USA.
matthew.ung@dartmouth.edu. (4)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Geisel
School of Medicine at Dartmouth, 1 Rope Ferry Road, Hanover, NH, 03755, USA.
james.direnzo@dartmouth.edu. (5)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine
at Dartmouth, 1 Rope Ferry Road, Hanover, NH, 03755, USA.
chao.cheng@dartmouth.edu. (6)Institute for Quantitative Biomedical Sciences,
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, One Medical Center Drive, Lebanon, NH,
03766, USA. chao.cheng@dartmouth.edu. (7)Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Geisel
School of Medicine at Dartmouth, One Medical Center Drive, Lebanon, NH, 03766,
USA. chao.cheng@dartmouth.edu.

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2015;17:54.

INTRODUCTION: Genetic and molecular signatures have been incorporated into cancer
prognosis prediction and treatment decisions with good success over the past
decade. Clinically, these signatures are usually used in early-stage cancers to
evaluate whether they require adjuvant therapy following surgical resection. A
molecular signature that is prognostic across more clinical contexts would be a
useful addition to current signatures.
METHODS: We defined a signature for the ubiquitous tissue factor, E2F4, based on 
its shared target genes in multiple tissues. These target genes were identified
by chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) experiments using a
probabilistic method. We then computationally calculated the regulatory activity 
score (RAS) of E2F4 in cancer tissues, and examined how E2F4 RAS correlates with 
patient survival.
RESULTS: Genes in our E2F4 signature were 21-fold more likely to be correlated
with breast cancer patient survival time compared to randomly selected genes.
Using eight independent breast cancer datasets containing over 1,900 unique
samples, we stratified patients into low and high E2F4 RAS groups. E2F4 activity 
stratification was highly predictive of patient outcome, and our results remained
robust even when controlling for many factors including patient age, tumor size, 
grade, estrogen receptor (ER) status, lymph node (LN) status, whether the patient
received adjuvant therapy, and the patient's other prognostic indices such as
Adjuvant! and the Nottingham Prognostic Index scores. Furthermore, the fractions 
of samples with positive E2F4 RAS vary in different intrinsic breast cancer
subtypes, consistent with the different survival profiles of these subtypes.
CONCLUSIONS: We defined a prognostic signature, the E2F4 regulatory activity
score, and showed it to be significantly predictive of patient outcome in breast 
cancer regardless of treatment status and the states of many other
clinicopathological variables. It can be used in conjunction with other breast
cancer classification methods such as Oncotype DX to improve clinical outcome
prediction.

PMCID: PMC4303196
PMID: 25440089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Ovarian Res. 2014 Nov 29;7:110. doi: 10.1186/s13048-014-0110-6.

The transcriptome of corona radiata cells from individual M<U+0406><U+0406> oocytes that after 
ICSI developed to embryos selected for transfer: PCOS women compared to healthy
women.

Wissing ML(1), Sonne SB(2), Westergaard D(3), Nguyen Kd(4), Belling K(5), Høst
T(6), Mikkelsen AL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology-Obstetrics, Holbaek Fertility Clinic, Holbaek
Hospital, Smedelundsgade 60, 4300, Holbaek, Denmark. mlwi@regionsjaelland.dk.
(2)Institute of Biology, University of Copenhagen, 2100, Copenhagen, Denmark.
ssonne@bio.ku.dk. (3)Department of Systems Biology, Center for Biological
Sequence Analysis, Technical University of Denmark, Kemitorvet building 208,
2800, Lyngby, Denmark. David@harsk.dk. (4)DTU Multi Assay Core, Technical
University of Denmark DTU, 2800, Lyngby, Denmark. khodo@cbs.dtu.dk. (5)Department
of Systems Biology, Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Technical University
of Denmark, Kemitorvet building 208, 2800, Lyngby, Denmark. belling@cbs.dtu.dk.
(6)Department of Gynecology-Obstetrics, Holbaek Fertility Clinic, Holbaek
Hospital, Smedelundsgade 60, 4300, Holbaek, Denmark. tht@regionsjaelland.dk.
(7)Department of Gynecology-Obstetrics, Holbaek Fertility Clinic, Holbaek
Hospital, Smedelundsgade 60, 4300, Holbaek, Denmark. aleg@regionsjaelland.dk.

BACKGROUND: Corona radiata cells (CRCs) refer to the fraction of cumulus cells
just adjacent to the oocyte. The CRCs are closely connected to the oocyte
throughout maturation and their gene expression profiles might reflect oocyte
quality. Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common cause of infertility. It is
controversial whether PCOS associate with diminished oocyte quality. The purpose 
of this study was to compare individual human CRC samples between PCOS patients
and controls.
METHODS: All patients were stimulated by the long gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
(GnRH) agonist protocol. The CRC samples originated from individual oocytes
developing into embryos selected for transfer. CRCs were isolated in a two-step
denudation procedure, separating outer cumulus cells from the inner CRCs.
Extracted RNA was amplified and transcriptome profiling was performed with Human 
Agilent® arrays.
RESULTS: The transcriptomes of CRCs showed no individual genes with significant
differential expression between PCOS and controls, but gene set enrichment
analysis identified several cell cycle- and DNA replication pathways
overexpressed in PCOS CRCs (FDR <<U+2009>0.05). Five of the genes contributing to the
up-regulated cell cycle pathways in the PCOS CRCs were selected for qRT-PCR
validation in ten PCOS and ten control CRC samples. qRT-PCR confirmed significant
up-regulation in PCOS CRCs of cell cycle progression genes HIST1H4C (FC =<U+2009>2.7),
UBE2C (FC =<U+2009>2.6) and cell cycle related transcription factor E2F4 (FC =<U+2009>2.5).
CONCLUSION: The overexpression of cell cycle-related genes and cell cycle
pathways in PCOS CRCs could indicate a disturbed or delayed final maturation and 
differentiation of the CRCs in response to the human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
surge. However, this had no effect on the in vitro development of the
corresponding embryos. Future studies are needed to clarify whether the
up-regulated cell cycle pathways in PCOS CRCs have any clinical implications.

PMCID: PMC4302704
PMID: 25432544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Nat Commun. 2014 Nov 18;5:5490. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6490.

CpG island-mediated global gene regulatory modes in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Beck S(1), Lee BK(1), Rhee C(1), Song J(2), Woo AJ(3), Kim J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas 78712, USA. (2)Texas Advanced Computing Center, The University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78758, USA. (3)School of Medicine and
Pharmacology, Royal Perth Hospital Unit, The University of Western Australia,
Perth, WA 6000, Australia. (4)1] Department of Molecular Biosciences, The
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA [2] Institute for
Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 
78712, USA [3] Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas 
at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA.

Both transcriptional and epigenetic regulations are fundamental for the control
of eukaryotic gene expression. Here we perform a compendium analysis of >200
large sequencing data sets to elucidate the regulatory logic of global gene
expression programs in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. We define four major
classes of DNA-binding proteins (Core, PRC, MYC and CTCF) based on their target
co-occupancy, and discover reciprocal regulation between the MYC and PRC classes 
for the activity of nearly all genes under the control of the CpG island
(CGI)-containing promoters. This CGI-dependent regulatory mode explains the
functional segregation between CGI-containing and CGI-less genes during early
development. By defining active enhancers based on the co-occupancy of the Core
class, we further demonstrate their additive roles in CGI-containing gene
expression and cell type-specific roles in CGI-less gene expression. Altogether, 
our analyses provide novel insights into previously unknown CGI-dependent global 
gene regulatory modes.

PMCID: PMC4236720
PMID: 25405324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Genomics. 2014 Dec;104(6 Pt B):520-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2014.08.022. Epub 2014
Sep 9.

Regulation of the human ABCB10 gene by E2F transcription factors.

Karwaciak I(1), Pulaski L(1), Ratajewski M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transcriptional Regulation, Institute of Medical Biology, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Poland. (2)Laboratory of Transcriptional Regulation,
Institute of Medical Biology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poland. Electronic
address: mratajewski@cbm.pan.pl.

Here, we report for the first time a functional study of transcriptional
regulation of the human ABCB10 gene. We cloned a functional promoter sequence,
and then showed that E2F2, E2F3 and E2F4 can activate transcription from the
ABCB10 promoter. We identified sites responsible for this activation and
confirmed direct binding of E2F4 to these sites in EMSA and ChIP assays. Finally,
by silencing the expression of E2F factors we demonstrated their importance in
maintenance of the basal ABCB10 expression. This study provides important
atypical examples of E2F4 being a transcriptional activator rather than repressor
as well as directly binding to a promoter and regulating it through an
alternative and classical DNA consensus response element sequences. It also
provides a mechanistic link between E2F4 and ABCB10, both of which are involved
in the same physiological phenomena: erythroid lineage differentiation and
maturation as well as protection against cardiomyocyte cell death.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25220178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Apr;230(4):802-5. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24805.

pRb2/p130 localizes to the cytoplasm in diffuse gastric cancer.

Cito L(1), Indovina P, Forte IM, Pentimalli F, Di Marzo D, Somma P, Barone D,
Penon A, Penon D, Ceccherini E, Micheli P, Saragoni L, Di Domenico M, Feola A,
Roviello F, Mattioli E, Giordano GG, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Center of Mercogliano (CROM), Istituto Nazionale per lo
studio e la cura dei tumori "Fondazione Giovanni Pascale"-IRCCS, Naples, Italy.

pRb2/p130 is a key tumor suppressor, whose oncosuppressive activity has mainly
been attributed to its ability to negatively regulate cell cycle by interacting
with the E2F4 and E2F5 transcription factors. Indeed, pRb2/p130 has been found
altered in various cancer types in which it functions as a valuable prognostic
marker. Here, we analyzed pRb2/p130 expression in gastric cancer tissue samples
of diffuse histotype, in comparison with their normal counterparts. We found a
cytoplasmic localization of pRb2/p130 in cancer tissue samples, whereas, in
normal counterparts, we observed the expected nuclear localization. pRb2/p130
cytoplasmic delocalization can lead to cell cycle deregulation, but considering
the emerging involvement of pRb2/p130 in other key cellular processes, it could
contribute to gastric tumorigenesis also through other mechanisms. Our data
support the necessity of further investigations to verify the possibility of
using pRb2/p130 as a biomarker or potential therapeutic target for diffuse
gastric cancer.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25205458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Aug 7;20(29):10094-107. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v20.i29.10094.

RAD51 potentiates synergistic effects of chemotherapy with PCI-24781 and
cis-diamminedichloroplatinum on gastric cancer.

He WL(1), Li YH(1), Hou WJ(1), Ke ZF(1), Chen XL(1), Lu LY(1), Cai SR(1), Song
W(1), Zhang CH(1), He YL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wei-Ling He, Shi-Rong Cai, Wu Song, Chang-Hua Zhang, Yu-Long He, Department of
Gastrointestinal and Pancreatic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, Guangdong Province, China.

AIM: To explore the efficacy of PCI-24781, a broad-spectrum, hydroxamic
acid-derived histone deacetylase inhibitor, in the treatment of gastric cancer
(GC).
METHODS: With or without treatment of PCI-24781 and/or
cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (CDDP), GC cell lines were subjected to functional
analysis, including cell growth, apoptosis and clonogenic assays. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and luciferase reporter assays were used to determine the
interacting molecules and the activity of the enzyme. An in vivo study was
carried out in GC xenograft mice. Cell culture-based assays were represented as
mean ± SD. ANOVA tests were used to assess differences across groups. All
pairwise comparisons between tumor weights among treatment groups were made using
the Tukey-Kramer method for multiple comparison adjustment to control
experimental-wise type I error rates. Significance was set at P < 0.05.
RESULTS: PCI-24781 significantly reduced the growth of the GC cells, enhanced
cell apoptosis and suppressed clonogenicity, and these effects synergized with
the effects of CDDP. PCI-24781 modulated the cell cycle and significantly reduced
the expression of RAD51, which is related to homologous recombination. Depletion 
of RAD51 augmented the biological functions of PCI-24781, CDDP and the
combination treatment, whereas overexpressing RAD51 had the opposite effects.
Increased binding of the transcription suppressor E2F4 on the RAD51 promoter
appeared to play a major role in these processes. Furthermore, significant
suppression of tumor growth and weight in vivo was obtained following PCI-24781
treatment, which synergized with the anticancer effect of CDDP.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that RAD51 potentiates the synergistic effects of 
chemotherapy with PCI-24781 and CDDP on GC.

PMCID: PMC4123338
PMID: 25110436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Gene Expr Patterns. 2014 Sep;16(1):8-22. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2014.07.002. Epub
2014 Jul 21.

Transcriptome analysis in cardiomyocyte-specific differentiation of murine
embryonic stem cells reveals transcriptional regulation network.

Gan L(1), Schwengberg S(2), Denecke B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research Aachen (IZKF Aachen), RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. (2)Axiogenesis AG, Köln, Germany.
(3)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research Aachen (IZKF Aachen), RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. Electronic address:
bernd.denecke@rwth-aachen.de.

The differentiation to cardiomyocytes is a prerequisite and an important part of 
heart development. A good understanding of the complicated cardiomyocyte
differentiation process benefits cardiogenesis study. Embryonic stem cells
(ESCs), cell lines with infinite ability to proliferate and to be differentiated 
into all cell types of the adult body, are important research tools for
investigation of differentiation and meanwhile good models for developmental
research. In the current study, genome-wide gene expression of ESCs is profiled
through high throughput platform during cardiomyocyte-specific differentiation
and maturation. Gene expression patterns of undifferentiated ESCs and ESC-derived
cardiomyocytes provide a global overview of genes involved in
cardiomyocyte-specific differentiation, whereas marker gene expression profiles
of both ESC-related genes and cardiac-specific genes presented the expression
pattern shift during differentiation in a pure ESC-derived cardiomyocyte cell
culture system. The differentiation and maturation process was completed at day
19 after initiation of differentiation, according to our gene expression profile 
results. Functional analysis of regulated genes reveals over-represented
biological processes, molecular functions and pathways during the differentiation
and maturation process. Finally, transcription factor regulation networks were
engineered based on gene expression data. Within these networks, the number of
identified important regulators (Trim28, E2f4, Foxm1, Myc, Hdac1, Rara, Mef2c,
Nkx2-5, Gata4) and possible key co-regulation modules (Nkx2-5 - Gata4 - Tbx5, Myc
- E2F4) could be expanded. We demonstrate that a more comprehensive picture of
cardiomyocyte differentiation and its regulation can be achieved solely by
studying gene expression patterns. The results from our study contribute to a
better and more accurate understanding of the regulation mechanisms during
cardiomyocyte differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25058891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Biochimie. 2014 Sep;104:36-49. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2014.05.005. Epub 2014 Jun
18.

DNMT3L interacts with transcription factors to target DNMT3L/DNMT3B to specific
DNA sequences: role of the DNMT3L/DNMT3B/p65-NF<U+03BA>B complex in the (de-)methylation
of TRAF1.

Pacaud R(1), Sery Q(1), Oliver L(1), Vallette FM(2), Tost J(3), Cartron PF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie Nantes-Angers, INSERM, U892, Equipe
Apoptose et Progression Tumorale, 8 Quai Moncousu, BP7021, 44007 Nantes, France; 
Université de Nantes, Faculté de Médecine, Département de Recherche en
Cancérologie, IFR26, F-44000 Nantes, France. (2)Centre de Recherche en
Cancérologie Nantes-Angers, INSERM, U892, Equipe Apoptose et Progression
Tumorale, 8 Quai Moncousu, BP7021, 44007 Nantes, France; Université de Nantes,
Faculté de Médecine, Département de Recherche en Cancérologie, IFR26, F-44000
Nantes, France; Institut de Cancérologie de l'Ouest - LaBCT, René Gauducheau,
Boulevard J. Monod, F-44805 St Herblain, France. (3)Laboratory for Epigenetics
and Environnement, Centre National de Génotypage, CEA - Institut de Génomique,
F-91000 Evry, France. (4)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie Nantes-Angers,
INSERM, U892, Equipe Apoptose et Progression Tumorale, 8 Quai Moncousu, BP7021,
44007 Nantes, France; Université de Nantes, Faculté de Médecine, Département de
Recherche en Cancérologie, IFR26, F-44000 Nantes, France; Institut de
Cancérologie de l'Ouest - LaBCT, René Gauducheau, Boulevard J. Monod, F-44805 St 
Herblain, France; Membre du réseau Epigénétique du Cancéropole Grand Ouest,
France. Electronic address: pierre-francois.cartron@univ-nantes.fr.

DNMT3L i.e. DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase 3-like protein, is devoid of
cytosine methyltransferase activity, despite clear homology to DNMT3A and DNMT3B,
due to the mutation of key catalytic residues. However, DNMT3L participates in de
novo methylation reactions through its direct interaction with DNMT3A and DNMT3B.
In the present study, we investigated if DNMT3L interacts also directly with
transcription factors (TFs). Using TF arrays, we identified 73 TFs that
interacted with DNMT3L, 13 of which (ASH2L, ATF1, ATF3, BLZF1, CDX2, CERM, E2F3, 
E2F4, GCNF, GTF2I, GTF3C5, NFkB-p65 and RXRa) interacted only with DNMT3L, but
not with DNMT3A/B. By focusing on the interaction with NFkB-p65, we demonstrate
that DNMT3L forms a complex with DNMT3B and NFkB-p65 and that this complex is
required for the control of DNA methylation at the TRAF1 promoter in the T98G
glioma cell line. In addition, our experiments describe the DNA methylation at
TRAF1 as being dynamic with a demethylation phase involving TET3. Thus, our data 
suggests that DNMT3L can address DNMT3A/B to specific sites by directly
interacting with TFs that do not directly interact with DNMT3A/B. In summary, our
data provide a new avenue for the direction of site-specific de novo DNA
methylation catalyzed by DNMT3A/B.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24952347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Genes Dev. 2014 Jul 1;28(13):1461-71. doi: 10.1101/gad.243832.114. Epub 2014 Jun 
16.

Multicilin drives centriole biogenesis via E2f proteins.

Ma L(1), Quigley I(1), Omran H(2), Kintner C(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla 92037, California, USA;
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Muenster, 48149 Muenster;
Germany.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2014 Aug 18;24(16):R746-9.

Multiciliate cells employ hundreds of motile cilia to produce fluid flow, which
they nucleate and extend by first assembling hundreds of centrioles. In most
cells, entry into the cell cycle allows centrioles to undergo a single round of
duplication, but in differentiating multiciliate cells, massive centriole
assembly occurs in G0 by a process initiated by a small coiled-coil protein,
Multicilin. Here we show that Multicilin acts by forming a ternary complex with
E2f4 or E2f5 and Dp1 that binds and activates most of the genes required for
centriole biogenesis, while other cell cycle genes remain off. This complex also 
promotes the deuterosome pathway of centriole biogenesis by activating the
expression of deup1 but not its paralog, cep63. Finally, we show that this
complex is disabled by mutations in human Multicilin that cause a severe
congenital mucociliary clearance disorder due to reduced generation of multiple
cilia. By coopting the E2f regulation of cell cycle genes, Multicilin drives
massive centriole assembly in epithelial progenitors in a manner required for
multiciliate cell differentiation.

© 2014 Ma et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4083089
PMID: 24934224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;33(5):1452-66. doi: 10.1159/000358710. Epub 2014 May
9.

Microarray-based gene expression profiling suggests adaptation of lung epithelial
cells subjected to chronic cyclic strain.

Weber B(1), Bader N, Lehnich H, Simm A, Silber RE, Bartling B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardio-thoracic Surgery, Heart Center of the University Hospital
Halle, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle/Saale, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Mechanical strain of the lung tissue is a physiological process 
that affects the behavior of lung cells. Since recent evidence also suggests
alterations in the expression of certain genes as a consequence of
mechanotransduction, our study aimed at the analysis of the gene expression
profile in lung epithelial cells subjected to chronic cyclic strain.
METHODS: Various human lung epithelial cell lines (A549 as principal adherent
cell line and four others) were subjected to cyclic strain (16 % surface
distension, 12 min(-1)) in a Strain Cell Culture Device for 24 h. In comparison
to static controls, expression analyses were performed by gene microarray and
qPCR.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis revealed many differences in the gene expression but
at moderate levels. Altogether 25 genes were moderately down-regulated (0.86-fold
± 0.06) and 26 genes were up-regulated (1.18-fold ± 0.10) in A549 and the others.
Strain-regulated genes often code for transcription factors, such as E2F4 and
SRF. qPCR analyses confirmed the up-regulation of both transcription factors and 
further genes, such as PLAU (urokinase-type plasminogen activator) and S100A4
(S100 protein A4). Moreover, we showed the down-regulations of AGR2 (anterior
gradient 2) and LCN2 (lipocalin 2).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified many genes of which the expression was moderately
altered in lung epithelial cells subjected to chronic cyclic strain. Although
many moderate changes in the gene expression profile might affect cellular
behavior, it also suggests an effective adaptation of cells to mechanical forces 
in long-term conditions.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24854240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Curr Opin Oncol. 2014 Jul;26(4):415-21. doi: 10.1097/CCO.0000000000000090.

The DREAM complex in antitumor activity of imatinib mesylate in gastrointestinal 
stromal tumors.

DeCaprio JA(1), Duensing A.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute bDepartment of
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts cCancer Therapeutics Program, University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute, Hillman Cancer Center dDepartment of Pathology, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Although most gastrointestinal stromal tumors respond well to 
treatment with the small molecule kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate (Gleevec),
complete remissions are rare and the majority of patients achieve disease
stabilization. Furthermore, discontinuation of treatment in the presence of
residual tumor mass almost inevitably leads to tumor progression. These
observations suggest that a subset of tumor cells not only persists under
imatinib treatment, but remains viable. The current article reviews the molecular
basis for these findings and explores strategies to exploit them therapeutically.
RECENT FINDINGS: Although imatinib induces apoptosis in a subset of
gastrointestinal stromal tumor cells, it leads to a reversible exit from the cell
division cycle and entry into G0, a cell cycle state called quiescence, in the
remaining cells. Mechanistically, this process involves the DREAM complex (DP,
p130/RBL2, E2F4 and MuvB), a newly identified key regulator of quiescence.
Interfering with DREAM complex formation either by siRNA-mediated knockdown or by
pharmacological inhibition of the regulatory kinase dual-specificity tyrosine
phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1A was shown to enhance imatinib-induced
gastrointestinal stromal tumor cell death.
SUMMARY: Targeting the DREAM complex and imatinib-induced quiescence could
provide opportunities for future therapeutic interventions toward more efficient 
imatinib responses.

PMCID: PMC4236229
PMID: 24840522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jun 27;289(26):18202-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.574145. Epub
2014 May 14.

Regulation of ischemic neuronal death by E2F4-p130 protein complexes.

Iyirhiaro GO(1), Zhang Y(1), Estey C(1), O'Hare MJ(1), Safarpour F(1), Parsanejad
M(1), Wang S(1), Abdel-Messih E(1), Callaghan SM(1), During MJ(2), Slack RS(1),
Park DS(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine and Neuroscience,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada and. (2)the Department of
Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, Neurological Surgery,
College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210. (3)From the
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine and Neuroscience, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada and dpark@uottawa.ca.

Inappropriate activation of cell cycle proteins, in particular cyclin D/Cdk4, is 
implicated in neuronal death induced by various pathologic stresses, including
DNA damage and ischemia. Key targets of Cdk4 in proliferating cells include
members of the E2F transcription factors, which mediate the expression of cell
cycle proteins as well as death-inducing genes. However, the presence of multiple
E2F family members complicates our understanding of their role in death. We
focused on whether E2F4, an E2F member believed to exhibit crucial control over
the maintenance of a differentiated state of neurons, may be critical in ischemic
neuronal death. We observed that, in contrast to E2F1 and E2F3, which sensitize
to death, E2F4 plays a crucial protective role in neuronal death evoked by DNA
damage, hypoxia, and global ischemic insult both in vitro and in vivo. E2F4
occupies promoter regions of proapoptotic factors, such as B-Myb, under basal
conditions. Following stress exposure, E2F4-p130 complexes are lost rapidly along
with the presence of E2F4 at E2F-containing B-Myb promoter sites. In contrast,
the presence of E2F1 at B-Myb sites increases with stress. Furthermore, B-Myb and
C-Myb expression increases with ischemic insult. Taken together, we propose a
model by which E2F4 plays a protective role in neurons from ischemic insult by
forming repressive complexes that prevent prodeath factors such as Myb from being
expressed.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4140295
PMID: 24828495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Biochem Soc Trans. 2014 Apr;42(2):419-24. doi: 10.1042/BST20140008.

Activity, regulation, copy number and function in the glyoxalase system.

Rabbani N(1), Xue M(1), Thornalley PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Clinical Sciences Research Laboratories, Warwick Medical School, University
of Warwick, University Hospital, Coventry CV2 2DX, U.K.

Molecular, catalytic and structural properties of glyoxalase pathway enzymes of
many species are now known. Current research has focused on the regulation of
activity and expression of Glo1 (glyoxalase I) and Glo2 (glyoxalase II) and their
role in health and disease. Human GLO1 has MRE (metal-response element), IRE
(insulin-response element), E2F4 (early gene 2 factor isoform 4), AP-2a
(activating enhancer-binding protein 2a) and ARE (antioxidant response-element)
regulatory elements and is a hotspot for copy number variation. The human Glo2
gene, HAGH (hydroxyacylglutathione hydrolase), has a regulatory p53-response
element. Glo1 is linked to healthy aging, obesity, diabetes and diabetic
complications, chronic renal disease, cardiovascular disease, other disorders and
multidrug resistance in cancer chemotherapy. Mathematical modelling of the
glyoxalase pathway predicts that pharmacological levels of increased Glo1
activity markedly decrease cellular methylglyoxal and related glycation, and
pharmacological Glo1 inhibition markedly increases cellular methylglyoxal and
related glycation. Glo1 inducers are in development to sustain healthy aging and 
for treatment of vascular complications of diabetes and other disorders, and
cell-permeant Glo1 inhibitors are in development for treatment of
multidrug-resistant tumours, malaria and potentially pathogenic bacteria and
fungi.

PMID: 24646254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Jan 21;20(3):795-803. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i3.795.

Bortezomib effect on E2F and cyclin family members in human hepatocellular
carcinoma cell lines.

Baiz D(1), Dapas B(1), Farra R(1), Scaggiante B(1), Pozzato G(1), Zanconati F(1),
Fiotti N(1), Consoloni L(1), Chiaretti S(1), Grassi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Daniele Baiz, Barbara Dapas, Bruna Scaggiante, Sara Chiaretti, Gabriele
Grassi, Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, 34100 Trieste, Italy.

AIM: To evaluate the effects of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BZB) on E2Fs
and related genes in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells.
METHODS: The mRNA levels of the E2F family members (pro-proliferative: E2F1-3 and
anti-proliferative: E2F4-8) and of their related genes cyclins and
cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks) were evaluated in two HCC cell lines following a 
single BZB administration. mRNA levels of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) genes were also measured in both cell lines after BZB treatment. The BZB
concentration (40 nmol/L) used was chosen to stay well below the maximal
amount/cm² recommended for in vivo application, and 2 d incubation was chosen as 
this time point has been found optimal to detect BZB effects in our previous
studies. The HCC cell lines, HepG2 and JHH6, were chosen as they display
different phenotypes, hepatocyte-like for HepG2 and undifferentiated for JHH6,
thus representing an in vitro model of low and high aggressive forms of HCC,
respectively. The mRNA levels of the target genes were measured by two-color
microarray-based gene expression analysis, performed according to Agilent
Technologies protocol and using an Agilent Scan B. For the E2F family members,
mRNA levels were quantified by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR). Using small interfering RNA's, the effects of E2F8 depletion
on cell number was also evaluated.
RESULTS: After BZB treatment, microarray analysis of the undifferentiated JHH6
revealed a significant decrease in the expression of the pro-proliferative E2F
member E2F2. Quantitative RT-PCR data were in keeping with the microarray
analysis, and showed a significant increase and decrease in E2F8 and E2F2 mRNA
levels, respectively. In contrast, BZB treatment of the hepatocyte-like HCC cell 
line HepG2 had a significant impact on mRNA levels of 5 of the 8 E2F members. In 
particular, mRNA levels of the pro-proliferative E2F members E2F1, E2F2, and of
the anti-proliferative member E2F8, decreased over 80%. Notably, a reduction in
E2F8 expression in HepG2 and JHH6 cells following siRNA treatment had no impact
on cell proliferation. As observed with JHH6, BZB treatment of HepG2 cells
induced a significant increase in mRNA levels of an anti-proliferative E2F
member, E2F6 in this case. As was observed with E2F's, more dramatic changes in
mRNA levels of the E2F related genes cyclins and Cdks and EMT genes were observed
after BZB treatment of HepG2 compared to JHH6.
CONCLUSION: The differential expression of E2Fs and related genes induced by BZB 
in diverse HCC cell phenotypes contribute to bortezomib's mechanism of action in 
hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3921488
PMID: 24574752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014 Sep;71(18):3583-97. doi: 10.1007/s00018-014-1588-1. Epub 
2014 Feb 28.

In vivo genome-wide binding of Id2 to E2F4 target genes as part of a reversible
program in mice liver.

Ferrer-Vicens I(1), Riffo-Campos ÁL, Zaragozá R, García C, López-Rodas G, Viña
JR, Torres L, García-Trevijano ER.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular. Facultad de Medicina.
Fundación Investigación Hospital Clínico-INCLIVA, Universidad de Valencia, Avda. 
Blasco Ibañez, 17, 46010, Valencia, Spain.

The inhibitor of differentiation Id2, a protein lacking the basic DNA-binding
domain, is involved in the modulation of a number of biological processes. The
molecular mechanisms explaining Id2 pleiotropic functions are poorly understood. 
Id2 and E2F4 are known to bind simultaneously to c-myc promoter. To study whether
Id2 plays a global role on transcriptional regulation, we performed in vivo
genome-wide ChIP/chip experiments for Id2 and E2F4 in adult mouse liver. An
Id2-containing complex was bound to a common sequence downstream from the TSS on 
a subset of 442 E2F4 target genes mainly related to cell development and
chromatin structure. We found a positive correlation between Id2 protein levels
and the expression of E2F4/Id2 targets in fetal and adult liver. Id2 protein
stability increased in fetal liver by interaction with USP1 de-ubiquitinating
enzyme, which was induced during development. In adult liver, USP1 and Id2 levels
dramatically decreased. In differentiated liver tissue, when Id2 concentration
was low, E2F4/Id2 was bound to the same region as paused Pol II and target genes 
remained transcriptionally inactive. Conversely, in fetal liver when Id2 levels
were increased, Id2 and Pol II were released from gene promoters and target genes
up-regulated. During liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy, we obtained
the same results as in fetal liver. Our results suggest that Id2 might be part of
a reversible development-related program involved in the paused-ON/OFF state of
Pol II on selected genes that would remain responsive to specific stimuli.

PMID: 24573694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Clin Invest. 2014 Mar;124(3):1083-97. doi: 10.1172/JCI70391. Epub 2014 Feb 17.

Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2B regulates efferocytosis and atherosclerosis.

Kojima Y, Downing K, Kundu R, Miller C, Dewey F, Lancero H, Raaz U, Perisic L,
Hedin U, Schadt E, Maegdefessel L, Quertermous T, Leeper NJ.

Genetic variation at the chromosome 9p21 risk locus promotes cardiovascular
disease; however, it is unclear how or which proteins encoded at this locus
contribute to disease. We have previously demonstrated that loss of one candidate
gene at this locus, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2B (Cdkn2b), in mice
promotes vascular SMC apoptosis and aneurysm progression. Here, we investigated
the role of Cdnk2b in atherogenesis and found that in a mouse model of
atherosclerosis, deletion of Cdnk2b promoted advanced development of
atherosclerotic plaques composed of large necrotic cores. Furthermore, human
carriers of the 9p21 risk allele had reduced expression of CDKN2B in
atherosclerotic plaques, which was associated with impaired expression of
calreticulin, a ligand required for activation of engulfment receptors on
phagocytic cells. As a result of decreased calreticulin, CDKN2B-deficient
apoptotic bodies were resistant to efferocytosis and not efficiently cleared by
neighboring macrophages. These uncleared SMCs elicited a series of proatherogenic
juxtacrine responses associated with increased foam cell formation and
inflammatory cytokine elaboration. The addition of exogenous calreticulin
reversed defects associated with loss of Cdkn2b and normalized engulfment of
Cdkn2b-deficient cells. Together, these data suggest that loss of CDKN2B promotes
atherosclerosis by increasing the size and complexity of the lipid-laden necrotic
core through impaired efferocytosis.

PMCID: PMC3938254
PMID: 24531546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 11;9(2):e86693. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086693. eCollection
2014.

DiME: a scalable disease module identification algorithm with application to
glioma progression.

Liu Y(1), Tennant DA(2), Zhu Z(3), Heath JK(4), Yao X(1), He S(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United
Kingdom. (2)School of Cancer Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
United Kingdom. (3)College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen
University, Shenzhen, China. (4)Centre for Systems Biology, School of Biological 
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom. (5)School of
Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom ; Centre
for Systems Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Disease module is a group of molecular components that interact intensively in
the disease specific biological network. Since the connectivity and activity of
disease modules may shed light on the molecular mechanisms of pathogenesis and
disease progression, their identification becomes one of the most important
challenges in network medicine, an emerging paradigm to study complex human
disease. This paper proposes a novel algorithm, DiME (Disease Module Extraction),
to identify putative disease modules from biological networks. We have developed 
novel heuristics to optimise Community Extraction, a module criterion originally 
proposed for social network analysis, to extract topological core modules from
biological networks as putative disease modules. In addition, we have
incorporated a statistical significance measure, B-score, to evaluate the quality
of extracted modules. As an application to complex diseases, we have employed
DiME to investigate the molecular mechanisms that underpin the progression of
glioma, the most common type of brain tumour. We have built low (grade II)--and
high (GBM)--grade glioma co-expression networks from three independent datasets
and then applied DiME to extract potential disease modules from both networks for
comparison. Examination of the interconnectivity of the identified modules have
revealed changes in topology and module activity (expression) between low- and
high- grade tumours, which are characteristic of the major shifts in the
constitution and physiology of tumour cells during glioma progression. Our
results suggest that transcription factors E2F4, AR and ETS1 are potential key
regulators in tumour progression. Our DiME compiled software, R/C++ source code, 
sample data and a tutorial are available at http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/~szh/DiME.

PMCID: PMC3921127
PMID: 24523864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Feb;42(4):2185-96. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1161. Epub 2013
Nov 21.

The chromatin remodeller CHD8 is required for E2F-dependent transcription
activation of S-phase genes.

Subtil-Rodríguez A(1), Vázquez-Chávez E, Ceballos-Chávez M, Rodríguez-Paredes M, 
Martín-Subero JI, Esteller M, Reyes JC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Department, Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina 
Regenerativa (CABIMER), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC),
Av. Americo Vespucio 41092 Seville, Spain, Cancer Epigenetics and Biology
Program, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute, L'Hospitalet, Barcelona, Spain 
and Department of Anatomic Pathology, Pharmacology and Microbiology, University
of Barcelona, Spain.

The precise regulation of S-phase-specific genes is critical for cell
proliferation. How the repressive chromatin configuration mediated by the
retinoblastoma protein and repressor E2F factors changes at the G1/S transition
to allow transcription activation is unclear. Here we show ChIP-on-chip studies
that reveal that the chromatin remodeller CHD8 binds ~ 2000 transcriptionally
active promoters. The spectrum of CHD8 target genes was enriched in E2F-dependent
genes. We found that CHD8 binds E2F-dependent promoters at the G1/S transition
but not in quiescent cells. Consistently, CHD8 was required for G1/S-specific
expression of these genes and for cell cycle re-entry on serum stimulation of
quiescent cells. We also show that CHD8 interacts with E2F1 and, importantly,
loading of E2F1 and E2F3, but not E2F4, onto S-specific promoters, requires CHD8.
However, CHD8 recruiting is independent of these factors. Recruiting of MLL
histone methyltransferase complexes to S-specific promoters was also severely
impaired in the absence of CHD8. Furthermore, depletion of CHD8 abolished E2F1
overexpression-dependent S-phase stimulation of serum-starved cells, highlighting
the essential role of CHD8 in E2F-dependent transcription activation.

PMCID: PMC3936757
PMID: 24265227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Dec;24(23):3634-50. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-05-0264. Epub 2013
Oct 9.

Identification of cell cycle-regulated genes periodically expressed in U2OS cells
and their regulation by FOXM1 and E2F transcription factors.

Grant GD(1), Brooks L 3rd, Zhang X, Mahoney JM, Martyanov V, Wood TA, Sherlock G,
Cheng C, Whitfield ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH
03755 Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA 94305.

We identify the cell cycle-regulated mRNA transcripts genome-wide in the
osteosarcoma-derived U2OS cell line. This results in 2140 transcripts mapping to 
1871 unique cell cycle-regulated genes that show periodic oscillations across
multiple synchronous cell cycles. We identify genomic loci bound by the G2/M
transcription factor FOXM1 by chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) and associate these with cell
cycle-regulated genes. FOXM1 is bound to cell cycle-regulated genes with peak
expression in both S phase and G2/M phases. We show that ChIP-seq genomic loci
are responsive to FOXM1 using a real-time luciferase assay in live cells, showing
that FOXM1 strongly activates promoters of G2/M phase genes and weakly activates 
those induced in S phase. Analysis of ChIP-seq data from a panel of cell cycle
transcription factors (E2F1, E2F4, E2F6, and GABPA) from the Encyclopedia of DNA 
Elements and ChIP-seq data for the DREAM complex finds that a set of core cell
cycle genes regulated in both U2OS and HeLa cells are bound by multiple cell
cycle transcription factors. These data identify the cell cycle-regulated genes
in a second cancer-derived cell line and provide a comprehensive picture of the
transcriptional regulatory systems controlling periodic gene expression in the
human cell division cycle.

PMCID: PMC3842991
PMID: 24109597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Int J Oncol. 2013 Dec;43(6):2015-22. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2131. Epub 2013 Oct 8.

Functional impact of colorectal cancer-associated mutations in the transcription 
factor E2F4.

Paquin MC(1), Leblanc C, Lemieux E, Bian B, Rivard N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Cancer Research Pavillon, Faculty 
of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec
J1E4K8, Canada.

The transcription factor E2F4 plays a critical role in cell cycle progression of 
normal and cancerous intestinal epithelial cells. Contrary to other E2Fs, the
coding region of the E2F4 gene contains a longer spacer segment of a CAG
trinucleotide repeat sequence encoding 13 consecutive serine residues, which is
highly vulnerable to frameshift mutations in situations of genetic instability.
Mutations in this region of the E2F4 gene have been observed in colorectal tumors
with microsatellite instability. However, the effect of these changes on its
function in colorectal cancer cells is currently unknown. We generated
E2F4(CAG)12 and E2F4(CAG)14 mutants and compared their activity to the E2F4
wild-type, E2F4(CAG)13. Luciferase assays with the thymidine kinase-luc reporter 
gene revealed that the mutants were more transcriptionally active than wild-type 
E2F4. The mechanism of increased activity of E2F4 was primarily related to
protein stability, due to a significantly enhanced half-life of E2F4 mutants
comparatively to that of wild-type E2F4. However, the association with the pocket
protein p130/RBL2 did not account for this increased protein stability.
Sequencing analysis of the endogenous E2F4 gene in a series of colorectal cancer 
cell lines showed that the microsatellite-unstable cell line SW48 exhibited a
serine deletion in this gene. Accordingly, E2F4 half-life was much more elevated 
in SW48 cells in comparison to Caco-2/15, a microsatellite-stable cell line.
Notably, in soft-agar assays, both mutants more potently increased
anchorage-independent growth in comparison to wild-type E2F4. In conclusion, our 
data demonstrate that cancer-associated E2F4 mutations enhance the capacity of
colorectal cancer cells to grow without anchorage, thereby contributing to tumor 
progression.

PMID: 24100580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Oncogene. 2014 Jul 24;33(30):3959-69. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.378. Epub 2013 Oct 7.

p53-dependent gene repression through p21 is mediated by recruitment of E2F4
repression complexes.

Benson EK(1), Mungamuri SK(1), Attie O(2), Kracikova M(1), Sachidanandam R(2),
Manfredi JJ(1), Aaronson SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, 
NY, USA. (2)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

The p53 tumor suppressor protein is a major sensor of cellular stresses, and upon
stabilization, activates or represses many genes that control cell fate
decisions. While the mechanism of p53-mediated transactivation is well
established, several mechanisms have been proposed for p53-mediated repression.
Here, we demonstrate that the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 is both
necessary and sufficient for the downregulation of known p53-repression targets, 
including survivin, CDC25C, and CDC25B in response to p53 induction. These same
targets are similarly repressed in response to p16 overexpression, implicating
the involvement of the shared downstream retinoblastoma (RB)-E2F pathway. We
further show that in response to either p53 or p21 induction, E2F4 complexes are 
specifically recruited onto the promoters of these p53-repression targets.
Moreover, abrogation of E2F4 recruitment via the inactivation of RB pocket
proteins, but not by RB loss of function alone, prevents the repression of these 
genes. Finally, our results indicate that E2F4 promoter occupancy is globally
associated with p53-repression targets, but not with p53 activation targets,
implicating E2F4 complexes as effectors of p21-dependent p53-mediated repression.

PMCID: PMC4067464
PMID: 24096481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jan;42(1):163-80. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt849. Epub 2013 Sep 
25.

Polo-like kinase 4 transcription is activated via CRE and NRF1 elements,
repressed by DREAM through CDE/CHR sites and deregulated by HPV E7 protein.

Fischer M(1), Quaas M, Wintsche A, Müller GA, Engeland K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology, Medical School, University of Leipzig, Semmelweisstr. 14, 
04103 Leipzig, Germany and Computational EvoDevo Group, Department of Computer
Science and Interdisciplinary Center for Bioinformatics, University of Leipzig,
Härtelstr. 16-18, 04107 Leipzig, Germany.

Infection by oncogenic viruses is a frequent cause for tumor formation as
observed in cervical cancer. Viral oncoproteins cause inactivation of p53
function and false transcriptional regulation of central cell cycle genes. Here
we analyze the regulation of Plk4, serving as an example of many cell cycle- and 
p53-regulated genes. Cell cycle genes are often repressed via CDE and CHR
elements in their promoters and activated by NF-Y binding to CCAAT-boxes. In
contrast, general activation of Plk4 depends on NRF1 and CRE sites. Bioinformatic
analyses imply that NRF1 and CRE are central elements of the transcriptional
network controlling cell cycle genes. We identify CDE and CHR sites in the Plk4
promoter, which are necessary for binding of the DREAM (DP, RB-like, E2F4 and
MuvB) complex and for mediating repression in G0/G1. When cells progress to G2
and mitosis, DREAM is replaced by the MMB (Myb-MuvB) complex that only requires
the CHR element for binding. Plk4 expression is downregulated by the
p53-p21(WAF1/CIP1)-DREAM signaling pathway through the CDE and CHR sites. Cell
cycle- and p53-dependent repression is abrogated by HPV E7 oncoprotein. Together 
with genome-wide analyses our results imply that many cell cycle genes
upregulated in tumors by viral infection are bound by DREAM through CDE/CHR
sites.

PMCID: PMC3874167
PMID: 24071582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jan;1840(1):262-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.09.014.
Epub 2013 Sep 17.

PDT-induced epigenetic changes in the mouse cerebral cortex: a protein microarray
study.

Demyanenko SV(1), Uzdensky AB, Sharifulina SA, Lapteva TO, Polyakova LP.

Author information: 
(1)Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don 344090, Russia. Electronic address:
demyanenkosvetlana@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is used for cancer treatment including
brain tumors. But the role of epigenetic processes in photodynamic injury of
normal brain tissue is unknown.
METHODS: 5-Aminolevulinic acid (ALA), a precursor of protoporphyrin IX (PpIX),
was used to photosensitize mouse cerebral cortex. PpIX accumulation in cortical
tissue was measured spectrofluorometrically. Hematoxylin/eosin,
gallocyanin-chromalum and immunohistochemical staining were used to study
morphological changes in PDT-treated cerebral cortex. Proteomic antibody
microarrays were used to evaluate expression of 112 proteins involved in
epigenetic regulation.
RESULTS: ALA administration induced 2.5-fold increase in the PpIX accumulation in
the mouse brain cortex compared to untreated mice. Histological study
demonstrated PDT-induced injury of some neurons and cortical vessels. ALA-PDT
induced dimethylation of histone H3, upregulation of histone deacetylases HDAC-1 
and HDAC-11, and DNA methylation-dependent protein Kaiso that suppressed
transcriptional activity. Upregulation of HDAC-1 and H3K9me2 was confirmed
immunohistochemically. Down-regulation of transcription factor FOXC2, PABP, and
hBrm/hsnf2a negatively regulated transcription. Overexpression of phosphorylated 
histone H2AX indicated activation of DNA repair, but down-regulation of
MTA1/MTA1L1 and PML - impairment of DNA repair. Overexpression of arginine
methyltransferase PRMT5 correlated with up-regulation of transcription factor
E2F4 and importin a5/7.
CONCLUSION: ALA-PDT injures and kills some but not all neurons and caused limited
microvascular alterations in the mouse cerebral cortex. It alters expression of
some proteins involved in epigenetic regulation of transcription, histone
modification, DNA repair, nuclear protein import, and proliferation.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: These data indicate epigenetic markers of photo-oxidative
injury of normal brain tissue.

© 2013.

PMID: 24055374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;9(8):e1003210. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003210. Epub
2013 Aug 29.

How microRNA and transcription factor co-regulatory networks affect osteosarcoma 
cell proliferation.

Poos K(1), Smida J, Nathrath M, Maugg D, Baumhoer D, Korsching E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.

Osteosarcomas (OS) are complex bone tumors with various genomic alterations.
These alterations affect the expression and function of several genes due to
drastic changes in the underlying gene regulatory network. However, we know
little about critical gene regulators and their functional consequences on the
pathogenesis of OS. Therefore, we aimed to determine microRNA and transcription
factor (TF) co-regulatory networks in OS cell proliferation. Cell proliferation
is an essential part in the pathogenesis of OS and deeper understanding of its
regulation might help to identify potential therapeutic targets. Based on
expression data of OS cell lines divided according to their proliferative
activity, we obtained 12 proliferation-related microRNAs and corresponding target
genes. Therewith, microRNA and TF co-regulatory networks were generated and
analyzed regarding their structure and functional influence. We identified key
co-regulators comprising the microRNAs miR-9-5p, miR-138, and miR-214 and the TFs
SP1 and MYC in the derived networks. These regulators are implicated in NFKB- and
RB1-signaling and focal adhesion processes based on their common or interacting
target genes (e.g., CDK6, CTNNB1, E2F4, HES1, ITGA6, NFKB1, NOTCH1, and SIN3A).
Thus, we proposed a model of OS cell proliferation which is primarily
co-regulated through the interactions of the mentioned microRNA and TF
combinations. This study illustrates the benefit of systems biological approaches
in the analysis of complex diseases. We integrated experimental data with
publicly available information to unravel the coordinated (post)-transcriptional 
control of microRNAs and TFs to identify potential therapeutic targets in OS. The
resulting microRNA and TF co-regulatory networks are publicly available for
further exploration to generate or evaluate own hypotheses of the pathogenesis of
OS (http://www.complex-systems.uni-muenster.de/co_networks.html).

PMCID: PMC3757060
PMID: 24009496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. BMC Cell Biol. 2013 Aug 6;14:33. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-14-33.

ERK-associated changes in E2F4 phosphorylation, localization and transcriptional 
activity during mitogenic stimulation in human intestinal epithelial crypt cells.

Paquin MC(1), Cagnol S, Carrier JC, Leblanc C, Rivard N.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Anatomie et Biologie Cellulaire, Cancer Research Pavillon,
Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, 3201, 
Jean-Mignault, Sherbrooke, J1E4K8, QC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor E2F4 controls proliferation of normal and
cancerous intestinal epithelial cells. E2F4 localization in normal human
intestinal epithelial cells (HIEC) is cell cycle-dependent, being cytoplasmic in 
quiescent differentiated cells but nuclear in proliferative cells. However, the
intracellular signaling mechanisms regulating such E2F4 localization remain
unknown.
RESULTS: Treatment of quiescent HIEC with serum induced ERK1/2 activation, E2F4
phosphorylation, E2F4 nuclear translocation and G1/S phase transition while
inhibition of MEK/ERK signaling by U0126 prevented these events. Stimulation of
HIEC with epidermal growth factor (EGF) also led to the activation of ERK1/2 but,
in contrast to serum or lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), EGF failed to induce E2F4
phosphorylation, E2F4 nuclear translocation and G1/S phase transition.
Furthermore, Akt and GSK3ß phosphorylation levels were markedly enhanced in
serum- or LPA-stimulated HIEC but not by EGF. Importantly, E2F4 phosphorylation, 
E2F4 nuclear translocation and G1/S phase transition were all observed in
response to EGF when GSK3 activity was concomitantly inhibited by SB216763.
Finally, E2F4 was found to be overexpressed, phosphorylated and nuclear localized
in epithelial cells from human colorectal adenomas exhibiting mutations in APC
and KRAS or BRAF genes, known to deregulate GSK3/ß-catenin and MEK/ERK signaling,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The present results indicate that MEK/ERK activation and GSK3
inhibition are both required for E2F4 phosphorylation as well as its nuclear
translocation and S phase entry in HIEC. This finding suggests that dysregulated 
E2F4 nuclear localization may be an instigating event leading to
hyperproliferation and hence, of tumor initiation and promotion in the colon and 
rectum.

PMCID: PMC3750237
PMID: 23919615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Bioinform Biol Insights. 2013 Jul 14;7:193-216. doi: 10.4137/BBI.S12205. Print
2013.

Bioinformatics and Gene Network Analyses of the Swine Mammary Gland Transcriptome
during Late Gestation.

Zhao W(1), Shahzad K, Jiang M, Graugnard DE, Rodriguez-Zas SL, Luo J, Loor JJ,
Hurley WL.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest Agricultural and Forestry 
University, YangLing, Shaanxi, China. ; Department of Animal Sciences, University
of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA.

We used the newly-developed Dynamic Impact Approach (DIA) and gene network
analysis to study the sow mammary transcriptome at 80, 100, and 110 days of
pregnancy. A swine oligoarray with 13,290 inserts was used for transcriptome
profiling. An ANOVA with false discovery rate (FDR < 0.15) correction resulted in
1,409 genes with a significant time effect across time comparisons. The DIA
uncovered that Fatty acid biosynthesis, Interleukin-4 receptor binding, Galactose
metabolism, and mTOR signaling were among the most-impacted pathways. IL-4
receptor binding, ABC transporters, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, and
Jak-STAT signaling were markedly activated at 110 days compared with 80 and 100
days. Epigenetic and transcription factor regulatory mechanisms appear important 
in coordinating the final stages of mammary development during pregnancy. Network
analysis revealed a crucial role for TP53, ARNT2, E2F4, and PPARG. The
bioinformatics analyses revealed a number of pathways and functions that perform 
an irreplaceable role during late gestation to farrowing.

PMCID: PMC3728096
PMID: 23908586  [PubMed]


61. Cell Cycle. 2013 Aug 15;12(16):2691-702. doi: 10.4161/cc.25834. Epub 2013 Jul 29.

Overexpression of E2F3 promotes proliferation of functional human ß cells without
induction of apoptosis.

Rady B(1), Chen Y, Vaca P, Wang Q, Wang Y, Salmon P, Oberholzer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
USA.

The mechanisms that control proliferation, or lack thereof, in adult human ß
cells are poorly understood. Controlled induction of proliferation could
dramatically expand the clinical application of islet cell transplantation and
represents an important component of regenerative approaches to a functional cure
of diabetes. Adult human ß cells are particularly resistant to common
proliferative targets and often dedifferentiate during proliferation. Here we
show that expression of the transcription factor E2F3 has a role in regulating
ß-cell quiescence and proliferation. We found human islets have virtually no
expression of the pro-proliferative G 1/S transcription factors E2F1-3, but an
abundance of inhibitory E2Fs 4-6. In proliferative human insulinomas, inhibitory 
E2Fs were absent, while E2F3 is expressed. Using this pattern as a "roadmap" for 
proliferation, we demonstrated that ectopic expression of nuclear E2F3 induced
significant expansion of insulin-positive cells in both rat and human islets.
These cells did not undergo apoptosis and retained their glucose-responsive
insulin secretion, showing the ability to reverse diabetes in mice. Our results
suggest that E2F4-6 may help maintain quiescence in human ß cells and identify
E2F3 as a novel target to induce proliferation of functional ß cells. Refinement 
of this approach may increase the islets available for cell-based therapies and
research and could provide important cues for understanding in vivo proliferation
of ß cells.

PMCID: PMC3865059
PMID: 23907129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Genes Cells. 2013 Oct;18(10):839-49. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12079. Epub 2013 Jul 24.

Inorganic arsenic exposure induces E2F-dependent G0/G1 arrest via an increase in 
retinoblastoma family protein p130 in B-cell lymphoma A20 cells.

Okamura K(1), Miki D, Nohara K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Health Sciences, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, Tsukuba, 305-8506, Japan; Graduate School of Life and Environmental
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, 305-8577, Japan.

Inorganic arsenic exerts toxic effect on multiple systems including the immune
system. We previously showed in a study on mouse thymocytes and B-cell lymphoma
A20 cells that arsenite induces cell cycle arrest at G0/G1 by suppressing
expression of E2F-target genes. In this study, we furthermore investigated the
involvement of retinoblastoma (RB) family proteins in E2F-dependent cell cycle
arrest by arsenite. Arsenite exposure of A20 cells was showed to increase the
protein level of p130, a RB family member, without changing the mRNA level.
Suppression of arsenite-induced p130 by siRNA reduced the G0/G1 phase, indicating
that p130 accumulation is responsible for arsenite-induced G0/G1 arrest. The
accumulated p130 was shown to increase the p130 complex with E2F4, a
transcription-suppressing E2F. Comparison by Western blotting of arsenite-induced
p130 and p130 accumulated by a proteasome inhibitor suggested that
arsenite-induced p130 is hypophosphorylated and hypoubiquitinated and refractory 
to proteasome-dependent degradation. We also showed that arsenite increases mRNA 
and protein of p16(INK4a), an inhibitor of CDK4/6 that phosphorylates p130.
Down-regulation of arsenite-induced p16(INK4a) by siRNA suppressed the p130
accumulation. We propose a novel mechanism in which arsenite inhibits
phosphorylation/ubiquitin-dependent proteasome degradation of p130 by inducing
p16(INK4a) and the accumulated p130 causes cell cycle arrest with E2F4.

© 2013 The Authors Genes to Cells © 2013 by the Molecular Biology Society of
Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23890198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 23;288(34):24581-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.467506. Epub 2013
Jul 13.

Interaction of E2F7 transcription factor with E2F1 and C-terminal-binding protein
(CtBP) provides a mechanism for E2F7-dependent transcription repression.

Liu B(1), Shats I, Angus SP, Gatza ML, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Department of Molecular
Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
27708, USA.

Previous work has identified distinct functions for E2F proteins during a
cellular proliferative response including a role for E2F1-3 in the activation of 
transcription at G1/S and a role for E2F4-8 in repressing the same group of
E2F1-3 target genes as cells progress through S phase. We now find that E2F7 and 
E2F8, which are induced by E2F1-3 at G1/S, can form a heterodimer with E2F1
through interactions involving the DNA-binding domains of the two proteins. In
vitro DNA interaction assays demonstrate the formation of an E2F1-E2F7 complex,
as well as an E2F7-E2F7 complex on adjacent E2F-binding sites. We also show that 
E2F7 recruits the co-repressor C-terminal-binding protein (CtBP) and that CtBP2
is essential for E2F7 to repress E2F1 transcription. Taken together, these
findings suggest a mechanism for the repression of transcription by E2F7.

PMCID: PMC3750156
PMID: 23853115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;33(16):3330-42. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00082-13. Epub 2013 Jun 
17.

Activation of p107 by fibroblast growth factor, which is essential for
chondrocyte cell cycle exit, is mediated by the protein phosphatase 2A/B55a
holoenzyme.

Kurimchak A(1), Haines DS, Garriga J, Wu S, De Luca F, Sweredoski MJ, Deshaies
RJ, Hess S, Graña X.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

The phosphorylation state of pocket proteins during the cell cycle is determined 
at least in part by an equilibrium between inducible cyclin-dependent kinases
(CDKs) and serine/threonine protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A). Two trimeric
holoenzymes consisting of the core PP2A catalytic/scaffold dimer and either the
B55a or PR70 regulatory subunit have been implicated in the activation of
p107/p130 and pRB, respectively. While the phosphorylation state of p107 is very 
sensitive to forced changes of B55a levels in human cell lines, regulation of
p107 in response to physiological modulation of PP2A/B55a has not been
elucidated. Here we show that fibroblast growth factor 1 (FGF1), which induces
maturation and cell cycle exit in chondrocytes, triggers rapid accumulation of
p107-PP2A/B55a complexes coinciding with p107 dephosphorylation. Reciprocal
solution-based mass spectrometric analysis identified the PP2A/B55a complex as a 
major component in p107 complexes, which also contain E2F/DPs, DREAM subunits,
and/or cyclin/CDK complexes. Of note, p107 is one of the preferred partners of
B55a, which also associates with pRB in RCS cells. FGF1-induced dephosphorylation
of p107 results in its rapid accumulation in the nucleus and formation of larger 
complexes containing p107 and enhances its interaction with E2F4 and other p107
partners. Consistent with a key role of B55a in the rapid activation of p107 in
chondrocytes, limited ectopic expression of B55a results in marked
dephosphorylation of p107 while B55a knockdown results in hyperphosphorylation.
More importantly, knockdown of B55a dramatically delays FGF1-induced
dephosphorylation of p107 and slows down cell cycle exit. Moreover,
dephosphorylation of p107 in response to FGF1 treatment results in early
recruitment of p107 to the MYC promoter, an FGF1/E2F-regulated gene. Our results 
suggest a model in which FGF1 mediates rapid dephosphorylation and activation of 
p107 independently of the CDK activities that maintain p130 and pRB
hyperphosphorylation for several hours after p107 dephosphorylation in maturing
chondrocytes.

PMCID: PMC3753905
PMID: 23775125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS One. 2013 May 31;8(5):e65614. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065614. Print 2013.

Latent transforming growth factor ß-binding protein 4 is downregulated in
esophageal cancer via promoter methylation.

Bultmann I(1), Conradi A, Kretschmer C, Sterner-Kock A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Medicine, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany.

Latent transforming growth factor ß-binding protein 4 (LTBP4) is an extracellular
matrix molecule that is a member of important connective tissue networks and is
needed for the correct folding and the secretion of TGF-ß1. LTBP4 is
downregulated in carcinomas of various tissues. Here we show that LTBP4 is also
downregulated in adenocarcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas of the esophagus in
vitro and in vivo. Re-expression of LTBP4 in esophageal cancer cell lines reduced
cell migration ability, whereas cell viability and cell proliferation remained
unchanged. Hypermethylation of the promoter regions of the two main human LTBP4
transcriptional forms, LTBP4L and LTBP4S, was found to be involved in LTBP4
silencing. Detailed investigations of the methylation patterns of the promoter
regions of LTBP4L and LTBP4S identified GATA1, SP1, E2F4 and SMAD3 as potential
transcription factors involved in LTBP4 expression. In in vitro transcription
factor activity studies we discovered E2F4 as novel powerful regulator for LTBP4S
expression.

PMCID: PMC3669142
PMID: 23741501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell. 2013 May 23;50(4):552-64. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.04.029.

Coordinate transcriptional and translational repression of p53 by TGF-ß1 impairs 
the stress response.

López-Díaz FJ(1), Gascard P, Balakrishnan SK, Zhao J, Del Rincon SV, Spruck C,
Tlsty TD, Emerson BM.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Cellular stress results in profound changes in RNA and protein synthesis. How
cells integrate this intrinsic, p53-centered program with extracellular signals
is largely unknown. We demonstrate that TGF-ß1 signaling interferes with the
stress response through coordinate transcriptional and translational repression
of p53 levels, which reduces p53-activated transcription, and apoptosis in
precancerous cells. Mechanistically, E2F-4 binds constitutively to the TP53 gene 
and induces transcription. TGF-ß1-activated Smads are recruited to a composite
Smad/E2F-4 element by an E2F-4/p107 complex that switches to a Smad corepressor, 
which represses TP53 transcription. TGF-ß1 also causes dissociation of ribosomal 
protein RPL26 and elongation factor eEF1A from p53 mRNA, thereby reducing p53
mRNA association with polyribosomes and p53 translation. TGF-ß1 signaling is
dominant over stress-induced transcription and translation of p53 and prevents
stress-imposed downregulation of Smad proteins. Thus, crosstalk between the TGF-ß
and p53 pathways defines a major node of regulation in the cellular stress
response, enhancing drug resistance.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3735454
PMID: 23706820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 15;73(14):4337-48. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4454. Epub 
2013 May 6.

Loss of ARF sensitizes transgenic BRAFV600E mice to UV-induced melanoma via
suppression of XPC.

Luo C(1), Sheng J, Hu MG, Haluska FG, Cui R, Xu Z, Tsichlis PN, Hu GF, Hinds PW.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genetics, Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences, 
Tufts University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Both genetic mutations and UV irradiation (UVR) can predispose individuals to
melanoma. Although BRAF(V600E) is the most prevalent oncogene in melanoma, the
BRAF(V600E) mutant is not sufficient to induce tumors in vivo. Mutation at the
CDKN2A locus is another melanoma-predisposing event that can disrupt the function
of both p16(INK4a) and ARF. Numerous studies have focused on the role of
p16(INK4a) in melanoma, but the involvement of ARF, a well-known p53 activator,
is still controversial. Using a transgenic BRAF(V600E) mouse model previously
generated in our laboratory, we report that loss of ARF is able to enhance
spontaneous melanoma formation and cause profound sensitivity to neonatal UVB
exposure. Mechanistically, BRAF(V600E) and ARF deletion synergize to inhibit
nucleotide excision repair by epigenetically repressing XPC and inhibiting the
E2F4/DP1 complex. We suggest that the deletion of ARF promotes melanomagenesis
not by abrogating p53 activation but by acting in concert with BRAF(V600E) to
increase the load of DNA damage caused by UVR.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3715591
PMID: 23650282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Br J Cancer. 2013 May 28;108(10):2013-20. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.189. Epub 2013
Apr 30.

212Pb-radioimmunotherapy potentiates paclitaxel-induced cell killing efficacy by 
perturbing the mitotic spindle checkpoint.

Yong KJ(1), Milenic DE, Baidoo KE, Brechbiel MW.

Author information: 
(1)Radioimmune and Inorganic Chemistry Section, Radiation Oncology Branch,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892-1002, USA.

BACKGROUND: Paclitaxel has recently been reported by this laboratory to
potentiate the high-LET radiation therapeutic (212)Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab, which
targets HER2. To elucidate mechanisms associated with this therapy, targeted
a-particle radiation therapeutic (212)Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab together with
paclitaxel was investigated for the treatment of disseminated peritoneal cancers.
METHODS: Mice bearing human colon cancer LS-174T intraperitoneal xenografts were 
pre-treated with paclitaxel, followed by treatment with (212)Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab 
and compared with groups treated with paclitaxel alone, (212)Pb-TCMC-HuIgG,
(212)Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab and (212)Pb-TCMC-HuIgG after paclitaxel pre-treatment.
RESULTS: (212)Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab with paclitaxel given 24<U+2009>h earlier induced
increased mitotic catastrophe and apoptosis. The combined modality of paclitaxel 
and (212)Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab markedly reduced DNA content in the S-phase of the
cell cycle with a concomitant increase observed in the G2/M-phase. This treatment
regimen also diminished phosphorylation of histone H3, accompanied by an increase
in multi-micronuclei, or mitotic catastrophe in nuclear profiles and positively
stained <U+03B3>H2AX foci. The data suggests, possible effects on the mitotic spindle
checkpoint by the paclitaxel and (212)Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab treatment. Consistent
with this hypothesis, (212)Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab treatment in response to
paclitaxel reduced expression and phosphorylation of BubR1, which is likely
attributable to disruption of a functional Aurora B, leading to impairment of the
mitotic spindle checkpoint. In addition, the reduction of BubR1 expression may be
mediated by the association of a repressive transcription factor, E2F4, on the
promoter region of BubR1 gene.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that the sensitisation to therapy of
(212)Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab by paclitaxel may be associated with perturbation of the
mitotic spindle checkpoint, leading to increased mitotic catastrophe and cell
death.

PMCID: PMC3670476
PMID: 23632482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 4;8(4):e61196. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061196. Print 2013.

p15(PAF) is an Rb/E2F-regulated S-phase protein essential for DNA synthesis and
cell cycle progression.

Chang CN(1), Feng MJ, Chen YL, Yuan RH, Jeng YM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Pathology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

The p15(PAF)/KIAA0101 protein is a proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA)-associated protein overexpressed in multiple types of cancer. Attenuation 
of p15(PAF) expression leads to modifications in the DNA repair process,
rendering cells more sensitive to ultraviolet-induced cell death. In this study, 
we identified that p15(PAF) expression peaks during the S phase of the cell
cycle. We observed that p15(PAF) knockdown markedly inhibited cell proliferation,
S-phase progression, and DNA synthesis. Depletion of p15(PAF) resulted in p21
upregulation, especially chromatin-bound p21. We further identified that the
p15(PAF) promoter contains 3 E2F-binding motifs. Loss of Rb-mediated
transcriptional repression resulted in upregulated p15(PAF) expression. Binding
of E2F4 and E2F6 to the p15(PAF) promoter caused transcriptional repression.
Overall, these results indicate that p15(PAF) is tightly regulated by the Rb/E2F 
complex. Loss of Rb/E2F-mediated repression during the G1/S transition phase
leads to p15(PAF) upregulation, which facilitates DNA synthesis and S-phase
progression.

PMCID: PMC3617190
PMID: 23593430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Apr;40(4):3043-8. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2378-1. Epub 2012
Dec 25.

Leukemogenesis as a new approach to investigate the correlation between up
regulated gene 4/upregulator of cell proliferation (URG4/URGCP) and signal
transduction genes in leukemia.

Dodurga Y(1), Oymak Y, Gündüz C, Satiroglu-Tufan NL, Vergin C, Cetingül N, Biray 
Avci C, Topçuoglu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine, Pamukkale University,
Kinikli Kampüsü Morfoloji Binasi Kat:3, Kinikli/Denizli, Turkey.
yavuzdodurga@gmail.com

The aim of the study is to the determine the profiles of cell cycle genes and a
new candidate oncogene of URG4/URGCP which play role in leukemia, establishing
the association between the early prognosis of cancer and the quantitation of
genetic changes, and bringing a molecular approach to definite diagnosis. In this
study, 36 newly diagnosed patients' with ALL-AML in the range of 0-18 years and
six control group patients' bone marrow samples were included. Total RNA was
isolated from samples and then complementary DNA synthesis was performed. The
obtained cDNAs have been installed 96 well plates after prepared appropriate
mixtures and assessed with LightCycler(®) 480 Real-Time PCR quantitatively.
CHEK1, URG4/URGCP, CCNG1, CCNC, CDC16, KRAS, CDKN2D genes in the T-ALL group;
CCND2, ATM, CDK8, CHEK1, TP53, CHEK2, CCNG2, CDK4, CDKN2A, E2F4, CCNC, KRAS genes
in the precursor B-ALL group and CCND2, CDK6 genes in the AML group have shown
significant increase in mRNA expression level. In the featured role of acute
leukemia the regulating signaling pathways of leukemogenesis partially defined,
although identification of new genetic markers in acute leukemia subgroups, will 
allow the development of early diagnostic and new treatment protocols.

PMID: 23266667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2013 Jan;20(1):119-26. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2448. Epub 2012 Dec
9.

Multilayered chromatin analysis reveals E2f, Smad and Zfx as transcriptional
regulators of histones.

Gokhman D(1), Livyatan I, Sailaja BS, Melcer S, Meshorer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences,
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

Histones, the building blocks of eukaryotic chromatin, are essential for genome
packaging, function and regulation. However, little is known about their
transcriptional regulation. Here we conducted a comprehensive computational
analysis, based on chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing and -microarray
analysis (ChIP-seq and ChIP-chip) data of over 50 transcription factors and
histone modifications in mouse embryonic stem cells. Enrichment scores supported 
by gene expression data from gene knockout studies identified E2f1 and E2f4 as
master regulators of histone genes, CTCF and Zfx as repressors of core and linker
histones, respectively, and Smad1, Smad2, YY1 and Ep300 as restricted or cell
type-specific regulators. We propose that histone gene regulation is
substantially more complex than previously thought, and that a combination of
factors orchestrate histone gene regulation, from strict synchronization with S
phase to targeted regulation of specific histone subtypes.

PMID: 23222641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Dec 7;11(6):845-52. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.09.014.

p27(Kip1) directly represses Sox2 during embryonic stem cell differentiation.

Li H(1), Collado M, Villasante A, Matheu A, Lynch CJ, Cañamero M, Rizzoti K,
Carneiro C, Martínez G, Vidal A, Lovell-Badge R, Serrano M.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Suppression Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre, Madrid,
E28029, Spain.

The mechanisms responsible for the transcriptional silencing of pluripotency
genes in differentiated cells are poorly understood. We have observed that cells 
lacking the tumor suppressor p27 can be reprogrammed into induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs) in the absence of ectopic Sox2. Interestingly, cells and
tissues from p27 null mice, including brain, lung, and retina, present an
elevated basal expression of Sox2, suggesting that p27 contributes to the
repression of Sox2. Furthermore, p27 null iPSCs fail to fully repress Sox2 upon
differentiation. Mechanistically, we have found that upon differentiation p27
associates to the SRR2 enhancer of the Sox2 gene together with a p130-E2F4-SIN3A 
repressive complex. Finally, Sox2 haploinsufficiency genetically rescues some of 
the phenotypes characteristic of p27 null mice, including gigantism, pituitary
hyperplasia, pituitary tumors, and retinal defects. Collectively, these results
demonstrate an unprecedented connection between p27 and Sox2 relevant for
reprogramming and cancer and for understanding human pathologies associated with 
p27 germline mutations.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3549496
PMID: 23217425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Cell Cycle. 2012 Dec 15;11(24):4661-72. doi: 10.4161/cc.22917. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

p53 can repress transcription of cell cycle genes through a
p21(WAF1/CIP1)-dependent switch from MMB to DREAM protein complex binding at CHR 
promoter elements.

Quaas M(1), Müller GA, Engeland K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Medical School, University of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Jan 1;12(1):11.

The tumor suppressor p53 plays an important role in cell cycle arrest by
downregulating transcription. Many genes repressed by p53 code for proteins with 
functions in G2/M. A large portion of these genes is controlled by cell
cycle-dependent elements (CDE) and cell cycle genes homology regions (CHR) in
their promoters. Cyclin B2 is an example of such a gene, with a function at the
transition from G2 to mitosis. We find that p53-dependent downregulation of
cyclin B2 promoter activity is dependent on an intact CHR element. In the
presence of high levels of p53 or p21(WAF1/CIP1), protein binding to the CHR
switches from MMB to DREAM complex by shifting MuvB core-associated proteins from
B-Myb to E2F4/DP1/p130. The results suggest a model for p53-dependent
transcriptional repression by which p53 directly activates p21(WAF1/CIP1). The
inhibitor then prevents further phosphorylation of p130 by cyclin-dependent
kinases. The presence of hypophosphorylated pocket proteins shifts the
equilibrium for complex formation from MMB to DREAM. In the case of promoters
that do not hold CDE or E2F elements, binding of DREAM and MMB solely relies on a
CHR site. Thus, p53 can repress target genes indirectly through CHR elements.

PMCID: PMC3562311
PMID: 23187802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(9):4607-11.

Weighted gene co-expression network analysis in identification of endometrial
cancer prognosis markers.

Zhu XL(1), Ai ZH, Wang J, Xu YL, Teng YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most common gynecologic malignancy.
Identification of potential biomarkers of EC would be helpful for the detection
and monitoring of malignancy, improving clinical outcomes.
METHODS: The Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis method was used to
identify prognostic markers for EC in this study. Moreover, underlying molecular 
mechanisms were characterized by KEGG pathway enrichment and transcriptional
regulation analyses.
RESULTS: Seven gene co-expression modules were obtained, but only the turquoise
module was positively related with EC stage. Among the genes in the turquoise
module, COL5A2 (collagen, type V, alpha 2) could be regulated by PBX (pre-B-cell 
leukemia homeobox 1)1/2 and HOXB1(homeobox B1) transcription factors to be
involved in the focal adhesion pathway; CENP-E (centromere protein E, 312kDa) by 
E2F4 (E2F transcription factor 4, p107/p130-binding); MYCN (v-myc
myelocytomatosis viral related oncogene, neuroblastoma derived [avian]) by PAX5
(paired box 5); and BCL-2 (B-cell CLL/ lymphoma 2) and IGFBP-6 (insulin-like
growth factor binding protein 6) by GLI1. They were predicted to be associated
with EC progression via Hedgehog signaling and other cancer related-pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: These data on transcriptional regulation may provide a better
understanding of molecular mechanisms and clues to potential therapeutic targets 
in the treatment of EC.

PMID: 23167388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Dev Biol. 2013 Jan 15;373(2):442-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.10.025. Epub 2012 
Nov 1.

The Retinoblastoma pathway regulates stem cell proliferation in freshwater
planarians.

Zhu SJ(1), Pearson BJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, Program in Developmental and Stem Cell
Biology, 101 College St. MaRS East Rm 11-704, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G1L7.

Freshwater planarians are flatworms of the Lophotrochozoan superphylum and are
well known for their regenerative abilities, which rely on a large population of 
pluripotent adult stem cells. However, the mechanisms by which planarians
maintain a precise population of adult stem cells while balancing proliferation
and cell death, remain to be elucidated. Here we have identified, characterized, 
and functionally tested the core Retinoblastoma (Rb) pathway components in
planarian adult stem cell biology. The Rb pathway is an ancient and conserved
mechanism of proliferation control from plants to animals and is composed of
three core components: an Rb protein, and a transcription factor heterodimer of
E2F and DP proteins. Although the planarian genome contains all components of the
Rb pathway, we found that they have undergone gene loss from the ancestral state,
similar to other species in their phylum. The single Rb homolog (Smed-Rb) was
highly expressed in planarian stem cells and was required for stem cell
maintenance, similar to the Rb-homologs p107 and p130 in vertebrates. We show
that planarians and their phylum have undergone the most severe reduction in E2F 
genes observed thus far, and the single remaining E2F was predicted to be a
repressive-type E2F (Smed-E2F4-1). Knockdown of either Smed-E2F4-1 or its
dimerization partner Dp (Smed-Dp) by RNAi resulted in temporary
hyper-proliferation. Finally, we showed that known Rb-interacting genes in other 
systems, histone deacetylase 1 and cyclinD (Smed-HDAC1; Smed-cycD), were similar 
to Rb in expression and phenotypes when knocked down by RNAi, suggesting that
these established interactions with Rb may also be conserved in planarians.
Together, these results showed that planarians use the conserved components of
the Rb tumor suppressor pathway to control proliferation and cell survival.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23123964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biomark Insights. 2012;7:127-41. doi: 10.4137/BMI.S7799. Epub 2012 Oct 15.

Knowledge building insights on biomarkers of arsenic toxicity to keratinocytes
and melanocytes.

Isokpehi RD(1), Udensi UK, Anyanwu MN, Mbah AN, Johnson MO, Edusei K, Bauer MA,
Hall RA, Awofolu OR.

Author information: 
(1)RCMI Center for Environmental Health, College of Science, Engineering and
Technology, Jackson State University, Jackson, MS, USA. ; Center for
Bioinformatics & Computational Biology, Department of Biology, Jackson State
University, Jackson, MS, USA.

Exposure to inorganic arsenic induces skin cancer and abnormal pigmentation in
susceptible humans. High-throughput gene transcription assays such as DNA
microarrays allow for the identification of biological pathways affected by
arsenic that lead to initiation and progression of skin cancer and abnormal
pigmentation. The overall purpose of the reported research was to determine
knowledge building insights on biomarker genes for arsenic toxicity to human
epidermal cells by integrating a collection of gene lists annotated with
biological information. The information sets included toxicogenomics
gene-chemical interaction; enzymes encoded in the human genome; enriched
biological information associated with genes; environmentally relevant gene
sequence variation; and effects of non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) on protein function. Molecular network construction for arsenic
upregulated genes TNFSF18 (tumor necrosis factor [ligand] superfamily member 18) 
and IL1R2 (interleukin 1 Receptor, type 2) revealed subnetwork interconnections
to E2F4, an oncogenic transcription factor, predominantly expressed at the onset 
of keratinocyte differentiation. Visual analytics integration of gene information
sources helped identify RAC1, a GTP binding protein, and TFRC, an iron uptake
protein as prioritized arsenic-perturbed protein targets for biological processes
leading to skin hyperpigmentation. RAC1 regulates the formation of dendrites that
transfer melanin from melanocytes to neighboring keratinocytes. Increased
melanocyte dendricity is correlated with hyperpigmentation. TFRC is a key
determinant of the amount and location of iron in the epidermis. Aberrant TFRC
expression could impair cutaneous iron metabolism leading to abnormal
pigmentation seen in some humans exposed to arsenicals. The reported findings
contribute to insights on how arsenic could impair the function of genes and
biological pathways in epidermal cells. Finally, we developed visual analytics
resources to facilitate further exploration of the information and knowledge
building insights on arsenic toxicity to human epidermal keratinocytes and
melanocytes.

PMCID: PMC3480875
PMID: 23115478  [PubMed]


77. Cancer Res. 2013 Jan 15;73(2):706-15. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3270. Epub
2012 Oct 29.

Nitric oxide-dependent downregulation of BRCA1 expression promotes genetic
instability.

Yakovlev VA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth 
University, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA. vayakovlev@vcu.edu

Elevated levels of nitric oxide (NO) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) may link
inflammation to the initiation, promotion, and progression of cancer.
Traditionally, this link has been thought to be mediated by the effects of NO/RNS
in generating DNA damage. However, this damage also stimulates DNA repair
responses with subsequent blocks to cell proliferation and apoptosis, thereby
preventing accumulation of NO/RNS-generated mutations. In addressing this
conundrum, I describe here an alternative mechanism for understanding mutagenesis
by NO/RNS. Moderate NO/RNS concentrations stimulated mutagenesis not directly by 
generating DNA damage but indirectly by modifying the activities of DNA repair
and genome stability factors without affecting cell proliferation. NO/RNS at
concentrations physiologically relevant to inflammation stimulated PP2A activity,
leading to dephosphorylation of RBL2, its accumulation in the nucleus, and
formation of RBL2/E2F4 complexes. RBL2/E2F4 formation in turn led to a shift in
BRCA1 promoter occupancy from complexes containing activator E2F1 to complexes
containing repressor E2F4, downregulating BRCA1 expression. By inhibiting BRCA1
expression, NO/RNS thereby reduces the ability of cells to repair DNA
double-strand breaks through homologous recombination repair, increasing the
involvement of error-prone nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ). In summary, NO/RNS
stimulates genetic instability by inhibiting BRCA1 expression and shifting DNA
repair from high fidelity to error-prone mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3549017
PMID: 23108140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 6;109(45):18499-504. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1216724109. Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Coordinated repression of cell cycle genes by KDM5A and E2F4 during
differentiation.

Beshiri ML(1), Holmes KB, Richter WF, Hess S, Islam AB, Yan Q, Plante L,
Litovchick L, Gévry N, Lopez-Bigas N, Kaelin WG Jr, Benevolenskaya EV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois,
Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

Epigenetic regulation underlies the robust changes in gene expression that occur 
during development. How precisely epigenetic enzymes contribute to development
and differentiation processes is largely unclear. Here we show that one of the
enzymes that removes the activating epigenetic mark of trimethylated lysine 4 on 
histone H3, lysine (K)-specific demethylase 5A (KDM5A), reinforces the effects of
the retinoblastoma (RB) family of transcriptional repressors on differentiation. 
Global location analysis showed that KDM5A cooccupies a substantial portion of
target genes with the E2F4 transcription factor. During ES cell differentiation, 
knockout of KDM5A resulted in derepression of multiple genomic loci that are
targets of KDM5A, denoting a direct regulatory function. In terminally
differentiated cells, common KDM5A and E2F4 gene targets were bound by the
pRB-related protein p130, a DREAM complex component. KDM5A was recruited to the
transcription start site regions independently of E2F4; however, it cooperated
with E2F4 to promote a state of deepened repression at cell cycle genes during
differentiation. These findings reveal a critical role of H3K4 demethylation by
KDM5A in the transcriptional silencing of genes that are suppressed by RB family 
members in differentiated cells.

PMCID: PMC3494949
PMID: 23093672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47967. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047967. Epub 2012 Oct 17.

E2F6 associates with BRG1 in transcriptional regulation.

Leung JY(1), Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina, USA.

The E2F6 protein functions as an Rb-independent repressor of gene transcription. 
We have previously provided evidence suggesting a role for E2F6 in repression of 
E2F-responsive genes at S phase. Here, we have identified BRG1, the ATPase
subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex, as an E2F6 interacting
protein. Immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate that BRG1 binds specifically
to E2F6 and E2F4 but not the activator E2Fs. E2F6 was also able to interact with 
BAF155, a BRG1-associated factor, in the SWI/SNF complex. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays demonstrate the binding of BRG1 coincident with E2F6
on G1/S gene promoters during S phase. Collectively, our studies suggest that
E2F6 may recruit BRG1 in transcriptional regulation of genes important for G1/S
phase transition of the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC3474740
PMID: 23082233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mol Vis. 2012;18:2420-37. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Molecular deregulation induced by silencing of the high mobility group protein A2
gene in retinoblastoma cells.

Venkatesan N(1), Krishnakumar S, Deepa PR, Deepa M, Khetan V, Reddy MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ocular pathology, Vision Research Foundation, Sankara
Nethralaya, Chennai, India.

AIM: To explore the molecular mechanisms deregulated by high mobility group
protein A2 (HMGA2) gene silencing in retinoblastoma (RB) cells.
METHODS: Synthetic anti-HMGA2 short interfering RNA (siRNA) was used to silence
the HMGA2 gene in cultured Y79 RB cells that were subjected to whole genome
microarray analysis. The expression of differentially regulated key genes was
confirmed with quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR) in post-silenced RB cell lines (Y79 and WERI Rb1). These deregulated
genes were compared for their constitutive expression in primary RB tumors
(n=10). Zymographic determination of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity was 
performed in RB cells. A cell cycle assay and a proliferation assay were
performed in post-transfected RB cells.
RESULTS: HMGA2 gene silencing in cultured RB cells results in reduced cell
proliferation and transition in the G1/S phase. The whole genome microarray
analysis of HMGA2 silenced Y79 cells revealed overall upregulation of 1,132 genes
(= 1.0 fold) and downregulation of 1,562 genes (= -1.0 fold). Specific
quantitative pathway analysis of the deregulated genes (using Biointerpreter)
revealed 150 upregulated genes and 77 downregulated genes (= 1.0 fold) involved
in vital pathways, namely, mitogen-activated protein kinase, Janus kinase/signal 
transducers and activators of transcription, Ras pathway, Ras-induced
extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases 1 and 2, and tumor protein p53.
The differential expression of genes obtained from microarray analysis (Homo
sapiens ELK1, member of ETS oncogene family [ELK1], Homo sapiens cyclin-dependent
kinase 6 [CDK6], Homo sapiens E2F transcription factor 4, p107/p130-binding
[E2F4], Homo sapiens G-2 and S-phase expressed 1 [GTSE1], Damage-regulated
autophagy modulator [DRAM], Homo sapiens cadherin 1, type 1,E-cadherin
(epithelial) [CDH1], Homo sapiens snail homolog 1 (Drosophila) [SNAI1], Homo
sapiens matrix metallopeptidase 2 [MMP2], and Homo sapiens matrix
metallopeptidase 9 [MMP9]) was confirmed with quantitative reverse-transcriptase 
polymerase chain reaction in post-silenced RB cells. Zymographic analysis
revealed that the increase in MMP mRNA expression in the post-silenced RB cells
did not correlate with corresponding enzyme activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study revealed molecular regulatory changes induced by HMGA2
silencing in RB cancer cells, offering mechanistic insights into the anticancer
potential. HMGA2 may be considered a promising candidate for gene silencing
therapy in RB.

PMCID: PMC3472926
PMID: 23077401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 23;287(48):40106-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.380865. Epub
2012 Oct 11.

Tripartite motif containing 28 (Trim28) can regulate cell proliferation by
bridging HDAC1/E2F interactions.

Chen L(1), Chen DT, Kurtyka C, Rawal B, Fulp WJ, Haura EB, Cress WD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

BACKGROUND: Trim28 appears up-regulated in many cancers.
RESULTS: In early stage lung tumors high Trim28 correlates with increased overall
survival and Trim28 reduces cell proliferation in model lung cancer cell lines
through E2F interactions.
CONCLUSION: Trim28 may have a tumor suppressing role in the early stages of lung 
cancer.
SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest a complex role for Trim28 in lung cancer.
Trim28 is a poorly understood transcriptional co-factor with pleiotropic
biological activities. Although Trim28 mRNA is found in many studies to be
up-regulated in both lung and breast cancer tissues relative to normal adjacent
tissue, we found that within a panel of early-stage lung adenocarcinomas high
levels of Trim28 protein correlate with better overall survival. This surprising 
observation suggests that Trim 28 may have anti-proliferative activity within
tumors. To test this hypothesis, we used shRNAi to generate Trim28-knockdown
breast and lung cancer cell lines and found that Trim28 depletion led to
increased cell proliferation. Likewise, overexpression of Trim28 led to decreased
cell proliferation. Confocal microscopy indicated co-localization of E2F3 and
E2F4 with Trim28 within the cell nucleus, and co-immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated that Trim28 can bind both E2F3 and E2F4. Trim28 overexpression
inhibited the transcriptional activity of E2F3 and E2F4, whereas Trim28
deficiency enhanced their activity. Co-immunoprecipitations further indicated
that Trim28 bridges an interaction between E2Fs 3 and 4 and HDAC1.
Promoter-reporter assays demonstrated that the ability of HDAC1 to repress E2F3
and E2F4-driven transcription is dependent on Trim28. Trim28 depletion increased 
E2F3 and E2F4 DNA binding activity, as measured by chromatin-immunoprecipitation 
(ChIP) assays while simultaneously reducing HDAC1 binding. Finally, ChIP-ReChIP
experiments demonstrated that Trim/E2F complexes exist on several E2F-regulated
promoters. Taken together, these results suggest that Trim28 has
anti-proliferative activity in lung cancers via repression of members of the E2F 
family that are critical for cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3504725
PMID: 23060449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Dec;39(12):10373-82. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1916-1. Epub 2012
Oct 9.

Toxicogenomic activity of gemcitabine in two TP53-mutated bladder cancer cell
lines: special focus on cell cycle-related genes.

da Silva GN(1), de Camargo EA, Salvadori DM.

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina de Botucatu, Departamento de Patologia,
UNESP-Universidade Estadual Paulista, Rubião Junior, Botucatu, SP 18618-000,
Brazil. nicioli@fmb.unesp.br

Because of its lower toxicity and good tolerability and response, gemcitabine has
been described as one of the most highly promising drugs for urinary bladder
cancer therapy. Its phosphorylated active-dFdCTP metabolite can incorporate into 
DNA, causing replication blockage. Additionally, it is known that mutations in
the TP53 gene are related to the high recurrence rate of these neoplasias. Based 
on these premises, we investigated the effects of gemcitabine on the expression
of the cell cycle-related genes in two different TP53-mutated bladder
transitional carcinoma cell lines-5637 (from a moderate-grade tumor with a TP53
allele carrying two mutations) and T24 (from an invasive tumor with a TP53 allele
encoding an in-frame deletion). Cell viability and morphology analyses
(phase-contrast photomicrographs), Nuclear Division Index and pathway-specific
quantitative RT-PCR gene arrays were performed. Treatment with gemcitabine led to
the following results: (1) a significant decrease of viable T24 cells after
treatment at the highest concentration (3.12 µM) tested; (2) scattered, elongated
and vacuolated 5637 and T24 cells; (3) a cytostatic effect in both cell lines;
and (4) significant upregulation of the BRCA1, CCNE1, CDK2, CDK6, CDKN1A, CDKN2B,
E2F4, GADD45A, MAD2L2, CCNH, SERTAD1, CDC1, and CHEK1 genes. Gemcitabine had
distinct toxicogenomic effects in the bladder transitional carcinoma cell lines
with two different TP53 mutations. However, independent of the type of mutation
and tumor grade, gemcitabine induced cell cycle arrest; upregulation of DNA
repair-related genes, G1/S transition, apoptosis and activation of transcription 
factors, mainly by upregulation of the CCNE1, CDKN1A and GADD45A genes.

PMID: 23053941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Int J Biol Markers. 2012 Oct 8;27(3):e219-26. doi: 10.5301/JBM.2012.9583.

Microsatellite polymorphisms in the EGFR, NOTCH4 and E2F4 genes and their
association with breast cancer risk.

González-Hernández A(1), Henríquez-Hernández LA, Cabrera de León A,
Rodríguez-Pérez Mdel C, Murias-Rosales A, Domínguez-Coello S, Brito-Díaz B,
Almeida-González D, Aguirre-Jaime A, Díaz-Chico BN.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Ntra. Sra. de Candelaria, Tenerife,
Canary Islands, Spain. anagonzalezy@yahoo.es

BACKGROUND: The sequences of many human genes that encode proteins involved in
cancer contain polymorphic microsatellites. Variations in microsatellite length
may constitute risk factors in several human diseases, a possibility that has
been little explored in breast cancer. Among the genes that contain polymorphic
microsatellites are EGFR, NOTCH4 and E2F4. The length of some of these
microsatellites has been associated with breast cancer risk.
PURPOSE AND METHODS: To determine whether the length of the microsatellites (CA)n
in EGFR, (CTG)n in NOTCH4 and (AGC)n in E2F4 was associated with breast cancer
risk, we genotyped these 3 microsatellites in 212 women with breast cancer and a 
control group of 308 women from the general population who did not have this
disease.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The allelic distribution observed for the 3
microsatellites matched that found in other white populations, with the exception
of some (AGC)n alleles in E2F4, which have not been described previously. The
length of (CA)n in EGFR and (CTG)n in NOTCH4 was not associated with breast
cancer (OR=0.99; 95% CI 0.59-1.37; p=0.619 and OR=1.08; 95% CI 0.71-1.65;
p=0.725, respectively). Short alleles (<13 repeats) of (AGC)n in E2F4 were less
frequent in women with cancer than in the control sample.

PMID: 23015403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2012 Oct;25(4):793-801.

Exploration of potential ligands against cancer-causing transcription factor
E2F3.

Hussain M(1), Javeed A, Ashraf M, Siddique S, Riaz A, Mukhtar MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Veterinary and Animal
Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan.

The transcription factor-based therapeutic approaches are the mainstay of current
anticancer drug design options to develop highly selective agents with novel
modes of action. In this paper, a homology model of DNA-binding domain of
transcription factor E2F3 was generated according to X-ray structure of E2F4. As 
a first step of our proposed project aspired towards exploration of highly
selective potential E2F3 ligands, we performed structure-based virtual screening 
of ZINC 3D chemical database by using Dock Blaster server. Then 31 compounds,
selected by filtration step, were docked against the prominent DNA binding site
residues of E2F3 model. Two of them have shown a promising interaction with
respect to binding poses. The aim is to propose new active ligands against
neoplasias characterized by overexpression of E2F3 transcription factor.

PMID: 23009996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Oncol Rep. 2012 Dec;28(6):2156-62. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.2050. Epub 2012 Sep 20.

Covariation of copy number located at 16q22.1: new evidence in mammary ductal
carcinoma.

Sun Q(1), Yang YM, Yu SH, Zhang YX, He XG, Sun SS, Liang XS, Pang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin 150081, PR China.

Copy number variation (CNV) is crucial for gene regulation in humans. A number of
studies have revealed that CNV contributes to the initiation and progression of
cancer. In this study, we analysed four breast cancer cell lines and six fresh
frozen tissues from patients to evaluate the CNV present in the genome using
microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH). Six genes located at
16q22.1 were analysed by real-time PCR. The real-time PCR analysis revealed that 
the loss of CDH1/E2F4 may be associated with worse clinical and pathological
findings. Interestingly, covariation of CDH1, CDH3, CTCF and E2F4 was found to be
associated with triple negative breast cancer and HER-2 receptor status. In
conclusion, our study supports the idea that CNV at 16q22.1 in breast cancer is a
frequent event; furthermore, it reveals the covariation of CDH1, CDH3, CTCF and
E2F4. The role of the covariation is more complex than a simple additive effect
of these four separate genes, which may provide a novel target for breast cancer.

PMID: 23007606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012 Dec;53(6):820-8. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2012.09.004. Epub 
2012 Sep 15.

Anti-apoptotic function of the E2F transcription factor 4 (E2F4)/p130, a member
of retinoblastoma gene family in cardiac myocytes.

Dingar D(1), Konecny F, Zou J, Sun X, von Harsdorf R.

Author information: 
(1)University Health Network, Toronto, Canada. ddingar@uhnresearch.ca

The E2F4-p130 transcriptional repressor complex is a cell-cycle inhibitor in
mitotic cells. However, the role of E2F4/p130 in differentiated cells is largely 
unknown. We investigated the role of E2F4/p130 in the regulation of apoptosis in 
postmitotic cardiomyocytes. Here we demonstrate that E2F4 can inhibit
hypoxia-induced cell death in isolated ventricular cardiomyocytes. As analyzed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation, the E2F4-p130-repressor directly blocks
transcription of essential apoptosis-related genes, E2F1, Apaf-1, and p73a
through recruitment of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). In contrast, diminution of 
the E2F4-p130-HDAC1-repressor and recruitment of E2F1 and histone acetylase
activity to these E2F-regulated promoters is required for the execution of cell
death. Expression of kinase-dead HDAC1.H141A or HDAC-binding deficient p130<U+0394>HDAC1
abolishes the antiapoptotic effect of E2F4. Moreover, histological examination of
E2F4(-/-) hearts revealed a markedly enhanced degree of cardiomyocyte apoptosis. 
Taken together, our genetic and biochemical data delineate an essential negative 
function of E2F4 in cardiac myocyte apoptosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22985930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Insect Sci. 2012;12:60. doi: 10.1673/031.012.6001.

Validation of reference genes for quantitative expression analysis by real-time
rt-PCR in four lepidopteran insects.

Teng X(1), Zhang Z, He G, Yang L, Li F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, College of Plant Protection, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing, China. 2009102089@njau.edu.cn

Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) is an efficient and
widely used technique to monitor gene expression. Housekeeping genes (HKGs) are
often empirically selected as the reference genes for data normalization.
However, the suitability of HKGs used as the reference genes has been seldom
validated. Here, six HKGs were chosen (actin A3, actin A1, GAPDH, G3PDH, E2F,
rp49) in four lepidopteran insects Bombyx mori L. (Lepidoptera: Bombycidae),
Plutella xylostella L. (Plutellidae), Chilo suppressalis Walker (Crambidae), and 
Spodoptera exigua Hübner (Noctuidae) to study their expression stability. The
algorithms of geNorm, NormFinder, stability index, and <U+0394>Ct analysis were used to 
evaluate these HKGs. Across different developmental stages, actin A1 was the most
stable in P. xylostella and C. suppressalis, but it was the least stable in B.
mori and S. exigua. Rp49 and GAPDH were the most stable in B. mori and S. exigua,
respectively. In different tissues, GAPDH, E2F, and Rp49 were the most stable in 
B. mori, S. exigua, and C. suppressalis, respectively. The relative abundances of
Siwi genes estimated by 2(-<U+0394><U+0394>Ct) method were tested with different HKGs as the
reference gene, proving the importance of internal controls in qPCR data
analysis. The results not only presented a list of suitable reference genes in
four lepidopteran insects, but also proved that the expression stabilities of
HKGs were different among evolutionarily close species. There was no single
universal reference gene that could be used in all situations. It is
indispensable to validate the expression of HKGs before using them as the
internal control in qPCR.

PMCID: PMC3481461
PMID: 22938136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(8):e1002847. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002847. Epub 2012 Aug 
2.

A general G1/S-phase cell-cycle control module in the flowering plant Arabidopsis
thaliana.

Zhao X(1), Harashima H, Dissmeyer N, Pusch S, Weimer AK, Bramsiepe J, Bouyer D,
Rademacher S, Nowack MK, Novak B, Sprunck S, Schnittger A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Phenotypic Plasticity, Institut de
Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

The decision to replicate its DNA is of crucial importance for every cell and, in
many organisms, is decisive for the progression through the entire cell cycle. A 
comparison of animals versus yeast has shown that, although most of the involved 
cell-cycle regulators are divergent in both clades, they fulfill a similar role
and the overall network topology of G1/S regulation is highly conserved. Using
germline development as a model system, we identified a regulatory cascade
controlling entry into S phase in the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana,
which, as a member of the Plantae supergroup, is phylogenetically only distantly 
related to Opisthokonts such as yeast and animals. This module comprises the
Arabidopsis homologs of the animal transcription factor E2F, the plant homolog of
the animal transcriptional repressor Retinoblastoma (Rb)-related 1 (RBR1), the
plant-specific F-box protein F-BOX-LIKE 17 (FBL17), the plant specific
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors KRPs, as well as CDKA;1, the plant
homolog of the yeast and animal Cdc2<U+207A>/Cdk1 kinases. Our data show that the
principle of a double negative wiring of Rb proteins is highly conserved, likely 
representing a universal mechanism in eukaryotic cell-cycle control. However,
this negative feedback of Rb proteins is differently implemented in plants as it 
is brought about through a quadruple negative regulation centered around the
F-box protein FBL17 that mediates the degradation of CDK inhibitors but is itself
directly repressed by Rb. Biomathematical simulations and subsequent experimental
confirmation of computational predictions revealed that this regulatory circuit
can give rise to hysteresis highlighting the here identified dosage sensitivity
of CDK inhibitors in this network.

PMCID: PMC3410867
PMID: 22879821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Aug;135(1):307-18. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2177-3. 
Epub 2012 Jul 26.

Feature extraction via composite scoring and voting in breast cancer.

Koch M(1), Hanl M, Wiese M.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Institute, University Bonn, An der Immenburg 4, 53121 Bonn,
Germany.

Identification and characterization of tumor subtypes using gene expression
profiles of triple negative breast cancer patients. Microarray data of four
breast cancer studies were pooled and evaluated. Molecular subtype classification
was performed using random forest and a novel algorithm for feature extraction
via composite scoring and voting. Biological and clinical properties were
evaluated via GSEA, functional annotation clustering and clinical endpoint
analysis. The subtype signatures are highly predictive for distant metastasis
free survival of tamoxifen-treated patients. Consensus clustering and the novel
algorithm proposed three triple negative subtypes. One subtype shows low E2F4
gene expression and is predictive for survival of ER negative breast cancer
patients. The other two subtypes share commonalities with luminal B tumors.
Classification of breast cancer expression profiles may reveal novel tumor
subtypes, possessing clinical impact. Furthermore, subtype characterizing gene
signatures might hold potential for novel strategies in cancer therapy.

PMID: 22833200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Oncogene. 2013 Jun 27;32(26):3198-206. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.325. Epub 2012 Jul
23.

Gene expression of the lysophosphatidic acid receptor 1 is a target of
transforming growth factor beta.

Wu J(1), Mukherjee A, Lebman DA, Fang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth
University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA.

The lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) receptor LPA1/Edg2 is the first identified LPA
receptor. Although its wide tissue distribution and biological functions have
been well studied, little is known about how LPA1 is transcriptionally regulated.
In the current study, we showed that LPA1 is a physiological target of
transforming growth factor beta (TGFß)-mediated repression. In both normal and
neoplastic cells, TGFß inhibits LPA1 promoter activity, LPA1 mRNA expression and 
LPA1-dependent chemotaxis and tumor cell invasion. Knockdown of the TGFß
intracellular effector Smad3 or Smad4 with lentivirally transduced short hairpin 
RNA relieved these inhibitory effects of TGFß. Interestingly, the LPA1 promoter
contains two potential TGFß inhibitory elements (TIEs), each consisting of a
Smad-binding site and an adjacent E2F4/5 element, structurally similar to the TIE
found on the promoter of the well-defined TGFß target gene c-myc. Deletion and
point mutation analyses indicate that the distal TIE located at 401<U+2009>bp from the
transcription initiation site, is required for TGFß repression of the LPA1
promoter. A DNA pull-down assay showed that the -401 TIE was capable of binding
Samd3 and E2F4 in TGFß-treated cells. TGFß-induced binding of the Smad complex to
the native -401 TIE sequence of the LPA1 gene promoter was further verified by
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. We therefore identified a novel role of
TGFß in the control of LPA1 expression and LPA1-coupled biological functions,
adding LPA1 to the list of TGFß-repressed target genes.

PMCID: PMC3480976
PMID: 22824789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Int J Cancer. 2013 Feb 1;132(3):568-79. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27699. Epub 2012 Jul 20.

Proteomic analysis of oropharyngeal carcinomas reveals novel HPV-associated
biological pathways.

Slebos RJ(1), Jehmlich N, Brown B, Yin Z, Chung CH, Yarbrough WG, Liebler DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. r.slebos@vanderbilt.edu

Oropharyngeal carcinoma (OPC) can be classified into two equally prevalent
subtypes depending on the presence of human papillomavirus (HPV). Patients with
HPV-positive (HPV+) OPC represent a unique cohort with a distinct tumor biology
and clinical behavior compared to HPV-negative (HPV-) OPC. Genetic studies have
demonstrated chromosomal and gene expression changes associated with distinct
subclasses of OPC; however, the proteomic consequences of HPV infection are not
known. We analyzed sets of ten HPV+ and ten HPV- OPCs and ten normal adult oral
epithelia using a standardized global proteomic analysis platform. This analysis 
yielded a total of 2,653 confidently identified proteins from which we chose 31
proteins on the basis of expression differences between HPV+, HPV- and normal
epithelium for targeted protein quantitation. Analysis of differentially
expressed proteins by HPV status revealed enrichment of proteins involved in
epithelial cell development, keratinization and extracellular matrix organization
in HPV- OPC, whereas enrichment of proteins in DNA initiation and replication and
cell cycle control was found for HPV+ OPC. Enrichment analysis for transcription 
factor targets identified transcription factors E2F1 and E2F4 to be highly
expressed in HPV+ OPC. We also found high expression of argininosuccinate
synthase 1 in HPV+ OPC, suggesting that HPV+ OPC is more dependent on
conditionally essential amino acid, arginine, and this was confirmed on a
OPC-specific tissue microarray. These identified proteomic changes reveal novel
driving molecular pathways for HPV+ and HPV- OPCs that may be pertinent in
therapeutic strategies and outcomes of OPC.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3479311
PMID: 22733545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jul 1;11(13):2557-66. doi: 10.4161/cc.20944. Epub 2012 Jul 1.

Overexpression of cyclin E/CDK2 complexes overcomes FGF-induced cell cycle arrest
in the presence of hypophosphorylated Rb proteins.

Kolupaeva V(1), Basilico C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, New York University School of Medicine, NY, USA.
victoria.kolupaeva@nyumc.org

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Aug 15;11(16):2978.

FGF signaling inhibits chondrocyte proliferation and requires the function of the
p107 and p130 members of the Rb protein family to execute growth arrest. p107
dephosphorylation plays a critical role in the chondrocyte response to FGF, as
overexpression of cyclin D1/CDK4 complexes (the major p107 kinase) in rat
chondrosarcoma (RCS) cells overcomes FGF-induced p107 dephosphorylation and
growth arrest. In cells overexpressing cyclin D1/CDK4, FGF-induced downregulation
of cyclin E/CDK2 activity was absent. To examine the role of cyclin E/CDK2
complexes in mediating FGF-induced growth arrest, this kinase was overexpressed
in RCS cells. FGF-induced dephosphorylation of either p107 or p130 was not
prevented by overexpressing cyclin E/CDK2 complexes. Unexpectedly, however,
FGF-treated cells exhibited sustained proliferation even in the presence of
hypophosphorylated p107 and p130. Both pocket proteins were able to form
repressive complexes with E2F4 and E2F5 but these repressors were not
translocated into the nucleus and therefore were unable to occupy their
respective target DNA sites. Overexpressed cyclin E/CDK2 molecules were stably
associated with p107 and p130 in FGF-treated cells in the context of E2F
repressive complexes. Taken together, our data suggest a novel mechanism by which
cyclin E/CDK2 complexes can promote cell cycle progression in the presence of
dephosphorylated Rb proteins and provide a novel insight into the key
Retinoblastoma/E2F/cyclin E pathway. Our data also highlight the importance of
E2F4/p130 complexes for FGF-mediated growth arrest in chondrocytes.

PMCID: PMC3404882
PMID: 22713240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2014 Jul;22(6):471-7. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3182598198.

The relationship between E2F family members and tumor growth in colorectal
adenocarcinomas: A comparative immunohistochemical study of 100 cases.

Xanthoulis A(1), Kotsinas A, Tiniakos D, Fiska A, Tentes AA, Kyroudi A, Kittas C,
Gorgoulis V.

Author information: 
(1)*Laboratory of Histology and Embryology, School of Medicine, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens Laboratory of Anatomy, School of
Medicine, Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis Department of
Surgery, Didimotichon General Hospital, Didimotichon, Greece.

The mammalian E2F family of transcription factors comprises a group of 8
proteins, which either activate or repress transcription of numerous target
genes, playing a role in cell-cycle progression and apoptosis. We have
collectively investigated the immunohistochemical expression of E2F1, E2F2, and
E2F4 transcription factors and their relation to cell kinetic parameters using
serial section analysis in a series of 100 cases of human colorectal
adenocarcinomas. E2F1 and E2F4 expressed nuclear immunopositivity in all cases.
The range of their expression was 2% to 80% (mean 21% ± 15%) and 2% to 90% (mean 
66% ± 20%), respectively. E2F2 was expressed in 41 cases at low levels (range, 1%
to 5%, mean 2% ± 9%). A statistically significant direct association between E2F4
and cell proliferation, as expressed by high levels of Ki-67 labeling index, was 
shown. A mutually exclusive immunostaining pattern between E2F1 and E2F4 and a
direct correlation of E2F1 and apoptosis were also highlighted. Our results point
to a possible direct tumor-promoting role for E2F4 in the context of colorectal
carcinogenesis. The inverse immunohistochemical relationship between E2F1 and
E2F4 indicates a possible mechanistic interlink in colorectal cancer. Low
expression of E2F2 may reflect functional redundancy between members of the E2F
family, in this case between E2F1 and E2F2.

PMID: 22688350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oncol Rep. 2012 Aug;28(2):677-81. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1845. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

4-hexylresorcinol stimulates the differentiation of SCC-9 cells through the
suppression of E2F2, E2F3 and Sp3 expression and the promotion of Sp1 expression.

Kim SG(1), Kim AS, Jeong JH, Choi JY, Kweon H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, College of Dentistry,
Gangneung-Wonju National University, Gangneung 210-702, Republic of Korea.
epker@chollian.net

The dormancy-inducing factors of bacteria inhibit tumor cell growth. In the
present study, we evaluated the antitumor effects of the dormancy-inducing factor
4-hexylresorcinol (4-HR) using real-time cell electronic sensing (RT-CES) in
SCC-9 cells (tongue squamous cell carcinoma cells). Treatment with 4-HR
suppressed the growth of SCC-9 cells in a dose-dependent manner. We used a DNA
microarray to identify genes that showed a significant change in expression upon 
4-HR administration in SCC-9 cells. Among the differentially expressed genes, the
protein expression of several cell proliferation related factors, including E2F1,
E2F2, E2F3, E2F4, E2F5, E2F6, Sp1 and Sp3, were determined by western blot
analyses. Treatment with 4-HR strongly suppressed E2F2 and slightly suppressed
E2F3 but did not change the expression of E2F1, E2F4, E2F5 and E2F6 relative to
no treatment. Furthermore, 4-HR increased Sp1 expression in a dose-dependent
manner and decreased Sp3 expression. Therefore, the ratio of Sp1 to Sp3, an
important driving force of epithelial cell differentiation, was drastically
increased. Consistent with this observation, 4-HR increased the expression of the
epithelial cell differentiation markers involucrin and keratin 10. Together, our 
results indicate that 4-HR induces the differentiation of SCC-9 via the
modulation of the E2F-mediated signaling pathway.

PMID: 22664654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37964. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037964. Epub 2012 May 24.

Human papillomavirus type 18 E6 and E7 genes integrate into human hepatoma
derived cell line Hep G2.

Ma T(1), Su Z, Chen L, Liu S, Zhu N, Wen L, Yuan Y, Lv L, Chen X, Huang J, Chen
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Shantou University Medical College,
Guangdong Province, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Human papillomaviruses have been linked causally to
some human cancers such as cervical carcinoma, but there is very little research 
addressing the effect of HPV infection on human liver cells. We chose the human
hepatoma derived cell line Hep G2 to investigate whether HPV gene integration
took place in liver cells as well.
METHODS: We applied PCR to detect the possible integration of HPV genes in Hep G2
cells. We also investigated the expression of the integrated E6 and E7 genes by
using RT-PCR and Western blotting. Then, we silenced E6 and E7 expression and
checked the cell proliferation and apoptosis in Hep G2 cells. Furthermore, we
analyzed the potential genes involved in cell cycle and apoptosis regulatory
pathways. Finally, we used in situ hybridization to detect HPV 16/18 in
hepatocellular carcinoma samples.
RESULTS: Hep G2 cell line contains integrated HPV 18 DNA, leading to the
expression of the E6 and E7 oncogenic proteins. Knockdown of the E7 and E6 genes 
expression reduced cell proliferation, caused the cell cycle arrest at the S
phase, and increased apoptosis. The human cell cycle and apoptosis real-time PCR 
arrays analysis demonstrated E6 and E7-mediated regulation of some genes such as 
Cyclin H, UBA1, E2F4, p53, p107, FASLG, NOL3 and CASP14. HPV16/18 was found in
only 9% (9/100) of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.
CONCLUSION: Our investigations showed that HPV 18 E6 and E7 genes can be
integrated into the Hep G2, and we observed a low prevalence of HPV 16/18 in
hepatocellular carcinoma samples. However, the precise risk of HPV as causative
agent of hepatocellular carcinoma needs further study.

PMCID: PMC3360009
PMID: 22655088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jul;32(14):2722-37. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00239-12. Epub 2012 May 
14.

Nerve growth factor-induced cell cycle reentry in newborn neurons is triggered by
p38MAPK-dependent E2F4 phosphorylation.

Morillo SM(1), Abanto EP, Román MJ, Frade JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Neurobiology, Cajal
Institute, IC-CSIC, Madrid, Spain.

Cumulative evidence indicates that activation of cyclin D-dependent kinase 4/6
(cdk4/6) represents a major trigger of cell cycle reentry and apoptosis in
vertebrate neurons. We show here the existence of another mechanism triggering
cell cycle reentry in differentiating chick retinal neurons (DCRNs), based on
phosphorylation of E2F4 by p38(MAPK). We demonstrate that the activation of
p75(NTR) by nerve growth factor (NGF) induces nuclear p38(MAPK) kinase activity, 
which leads to Thr phosphorylation and subsequent recruitment of E2F4 to the
E2F-responsive cdc2 promoter. Inhibition of p38(MAPK), but not of cdk4/6,
specifically prevents NGF-dependent cell cycle reentry and apoptosis in DCRNs.
Moreover, a constitutively active form of chick E2F4 (Thr261Glu/Thr263Glu)
stimulates G(1)/S transition and apoptosis, even after inhibition of p38(MAPK)
activity. In contrast, a dominant-negative E2F4 form (Thr261Ala/Thr263Ala)
prevents NGF-induced cell cycle reactivation and cell death in DCRNs. These
results indicate that NGF-induced cell cycle reentry in neurons depends on the
activation of a novel, cdk4/6-independent pathway that may participate in
neurodegeneration.

PMCID: PMC3416181
PMID: 22586272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35423. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035423. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

A systems biology approach to characterize the regulatory networks leading to
trabectedin resistance in an in vitro model of myxoid liposarcoma.

Uboldi S(1), Calura E, Beltrame L, Fuso Nerini I, Marchini S, Cavalieri D, Erba
E, Chiorino G, Ostano P, D'Angelo D, D'Incalci M, Romualdi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research,
Milan, Italy.

Trabectedin, a new antitumor compound originally derived from a marine tunicate, 
is clinically effective in soft tissue sarcoma. The drug has shown a high
selectivity for myxoid liposarcoma, characterized by the translocation
t(12;16)(q13; p11) leading to the expression of FUS-CHOP fusion gene. Trabectedin
appears to act interfering with mechanisms of transcription regulation. In
particular, the transactivating activity of FUS-CHOP was found to be impaired by 
trabectedin treatment. Even after prolonged response resistance occurs and thus
it is important to elucidate the mechanisms of resistance to trabectedin. To this
end we developed and characterized a myxoid liposarcoma cell line resistant to
trabectedin (402-91/ET), obtained by exposing the parental 402-91 cell line to
stepwise increases in drug concentration. The aim of this study was to compare
mRNAs, miRNAs and proteins profiles of 402-91 and 402-91/ET cells through a
systems biology approach. We identified 3,083 genes, 47 miRNAs and 336 proteins
differentially expressed between 402-91 and 402-91/ET cell lines. Interestingly
three miRNAs among those differentially expressed, miR-130a, miR-21 and miR-7,
harbored CHOP binding sites in their promoter region. We used computational
approaches to integrate the three regulatory layers and to generate a molecular
map describing the altered circuits in sensitive and resistant cell lines. By
combining transcriptomic and proteomic data, we reconstructed two different
networks, i.e. apoptosis and cell cycle regulation, that could play a key role in
modulating trabectedin resistance. This approach highlights the central role of
genes such as CCDN1, RB1, E2F4, TNF, CDKN1C and ABL1 in both pre- and
post-transcriptional regulatory network. The validation of these results in in
vivo models might be clinically relevant to stratify myxoid liposarcoma patients 
with different sensitivity to trabectedin treatment.

PMCID: PMC3327679
PMID: 22523595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jul;32(13):2454-66. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06663-11. Epub 2012 Apr 
16.

Regulation of a novel androgen receptor target gene, the cyclin B1 gene, through 
androgen-dependent E2F family member switching.

Li Y(1), Zhang DY, Ren Q, Ye F, Zhao X, Daniels G, Wu X, Dynlacht B, Lee P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York
Harbor Healthcare System, NY, USA.

The malignant transformation of human prostatic epithelium is associated with the
loss of androgen receptor (AR) in the surrounding stroma. However, the function
and mechanisms of AR signaling in prostate cancer (PCa) stroma remain elusive.
Here we report, by using proteomics pathway array analysis (PPAA), that androgen 
and its receptor inhibit the proliferation of prostate stromal cells through
transcriptional suppression of cyclin B1, and we confirmed our findings at mRNA
and protein levels using AR-negative or -positive primary prostate stromal cells.
Furthermore, AR showed a negative correlation with cyclin B1 expression in stroma
of human PCa samples in vivo. Mechanistically, we identify cyclin B1 as a bona
fide AR target gene in prostate stromal cells. The negative regulation of cyclin 
B1 by AR is mediated through switching between E2F1 and E2F4 on the promoter of
cyclin B1. E2F1 binds to the cyclin B1 promoter and maintains its expression and 
subsequent cell cycle progression in AR-negative stromal cells or AR-positive
stromal cells when androgens are depleted. Upon stimulation with androgen in
AR-positive stromal cells, E2F1 is displaced from the binding site by AR and
replaced with E2F4, leading to the recruitment of the silencing mediator for
retinoid and thyroid hormone receptor (SMRT)/histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3)
corepressor complex and repression of cyclin B1 at the chromatin level. The
switch between E2F1 and E2F4 at the E2F binding site of the cyclin B1 promoter
coincides with an androgen-dependent interaction between AR and E2F1 as well as
the cytoplasmic-to-nuclear translocation of E2F4. Thus, we identified a novel
mechanism for E2F factors in the regulation of cell cycle gene expression and
cell cycle progression under the control of AR signaling.

PMCID: PMC3434485
PMID: 22508987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Leukemia. 2012 Oct;26(10):2277-85. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.99. Epub 2012 Apr 5.

E2F4 plays a key role in Burkitt lymphoma tumorigenesis.

Molina-Privado I(1), Jiménez-P R, Montes-Moreno S, Chiodo Y, Rodríguez-Martínez
M, Sánchez-Verde L, Iglesias T, Piris MA, Campanero MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto 
Sols, CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain.

Sporadic Burkitt lymphoma (sBL) is a rapidly growing B-cell non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma whose treatment requires highly aggressive therapies that often result
severely toxic. Identification of proteins whose expression or function is
deregulated in sBL and play a role in its formation could facilitate development 
of less toxic therapies. We have previously shown that E2F1 expression is
deregulated in sBL. We have now investigated the mechanisms underlying E2F1
deregulation and found that the E2F sites in its promoter fail to repress its
transcriptional activity in BL cells and that the transcriptional repressor E2F4 
barely interacts with these sites. We also have found that E2F4 protein levels,
but not those of its mRNA, are reduced in sBL cell lines relative to immortal
B-cell lines. E2F4 protein expression is also decreased in 24 of 26 sBL tumor
samples from patients compared with control tissues. Our data demonstrate that
enforced E2F4 expression in BL cells not only diminishes E2F1 levels, but also
reduces selectively the tumorigenic properties and proliferation of BL cells,
while increasing their accumulation in G(2)/M. Our results therefore point to
E2F4 as a target for developing novel and less toxic treatments for sBL.

PMID: 22475873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jun;32(11):2065-82. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00092-12. Epub 2012 Apr 
2.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ß/d cross talks with E2F and
attenuates mitosis in HRAS-expressing cells.

Zhu B(1), Khozoie C, Bility MT, Ferry CH, Blazanin N, Glick AB, Gonzalez FJ,
Peters JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences and Center for Molecular
Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, The Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, Pennsylvania, USA.

The role of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ß/d (PPARß/d) in Harvey
sarcoma ras (Hras)-expressing cells was examined. Ligand activation of PPARß/d
caused a negative selection with respect to cells expressing higher levels of the
Hras oncogene by inducing a mitotic block. Mitosis-related genes that are
predominantly regulated by E2F were induced to a higher level in HRAS-expressing 
Pparß/d-null keratinocytes compared to HRAS-expressing wild-type keratinocytes.
Ligand-activated PPARß/d repressed expression of these genes by direct binding
with p130/p107, facilitating nuclear translocation and increasing promoter
recruitment of p130/p107. These results demonstrate a novel mechanism of PPARß/d 
cross talk with E2F signaling. Since cotreatment with a PPARß/d ligand and
various mitosis inhibitors increases the efficacy of increasing G2/M arrest,
targeting PPARß/d in conjunction with mitosis inhibitors could become a suitable 
option for development of new multitarget strategies for inhibiting RAS-dependent
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3372236
PMID: 22473992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Jun;5(6):1475-80. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.846. Epub 2012 Mar 23.

Zbtb7 suppresses the expression of CDK2 and E2F4 in liver cancer cells:
implications for the role of Zbtb7 in cell cycle regulation.

Yang X(1), Zu X, Tang J, Xiong W, Zhang Y, Liu F, Jiang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Nanhuan Hospital, University of South China, Hengyang, Hunan, People's
Republic of China.

Zbtb7, a member of the POK protein family, is involved in tumorigenesis and
cellular differentiation by acting as a crucial transcription factor, but its
role in cell cycle modulation remains uncharacterized. In the present study, CDK2
and E2F4, two cell cycle regulators, are shown to be downregulated at the mRNA
and protein levels by Zbtb7 in HepG2 and QGY7703 cells. Moreover, we demonstrate 
that the activities of CDK2 and E2F4 promoters were suppressed by the modulation 
of Zbtb7 levels and that Zbtb7 represses promoter activities through a mechanism 
involving direct binding of Zbtb7 to the promoters. Furthermore, it was
identified that the site at -259 to -252 within the CDK2 promoter is responsible 
for Zbtb7-induced repression of the promoter activity. It was found that
siRNA-induced knockdown of Zbtb7 resulted in the suppression of cell cycle
progression in HepG2 and QGY7703 cells. Collectively, these data indicate that
CDK2 and E2F4 are the downstream targets of Zbtb7, and Zbtb7 may be a cell cycle 
modulator by regulating the expression of cell cycle-associated genes in liver
cancer cells.

PMID: 22447046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Genes Dev. 2012 Mar 1;26(5):474-89. doi: 10.1101/gad.181933.111.

The MuvB complex sequentially recruits B-Myb and FoxM1 to promote mitotic gene
expression.

Sadasivam S(1), Duan S, DeCaprio JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Cell cycle progression is dependent on two major waves of gene expression. Early 
cell cycle gene expression occurs during G1/S to generate factors required for
DNA replication, while late cell cycle gene expression begins during G2 to
prepare for mitosis. Here we demonstrate that the MuvB complex-comprised of LIN9,
LIN37, LIN52, LIN54, and RBBP4-serves an essential role in three distinct
transcription complexes to regulate cell cycle gene expression. The MuvB complex,
together with the Rb-like protein p130, E2F4, and DP1, forms the DREAM complex
during quiescence and represses expression of both early and late genes. Upon
cell cycle entry, the MuvB complex dissociates from p130/DREAM, binds to B-Myb,
and reassociates with the promoters of late genes during S phase. MuvB and B-Myb 
are required for the subsequent recruitment of FoxM1 to late gene promoters
during G2. The MuvB complex remains bound to FoxM1 during peak late cell cycle
gene expression, while B-Myb binding is lost when it undergoes
phosphorylation-dependent, proteasome-mediated degradation during late S phase.
Our results reveal a novel role for the MuvB complex in recruiting B-Myb and
FoxM1 to promote late cell cycle gene expression and in regulating cell cycle
gene expression from quiescence through mitosis.

PMCID: PMC3305985
PMID: 22391450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. DNA Repair (Amst). 2012 Apr 1;11(4):401-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2012.01.007.
Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Release from quiescence stimulates the expression of human NEIL3 under the
control of the Ras dependent ERK-MAP kinase pathway.

Neurauter CG(1), Luna L, Bjørås M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Oslo, Oslo University Hospital,
Rikshospitalet, Norway.

Base excision repair (BER) is believed to be the predominant pathway for the
repair of oxidative DNA damage. BER is initiated by lesion-specific DNA
glycosylases that recognize and remove the damaged base. NEIL1, NEIL2 and NEIL3
are three mammalian members of the Fpg/Nei DNA glycosylase family with similar
enzymatic properties. In this study we showed that both the transcription and
protein levels of hNEIL3 fluctuated during the cell cycle. Based on predicted
promoter elements of cell cycle-regulated genes and microarray data from various 
reports, we suggest that hNEIL3 repression in quiescent cells might be mediated
by the DREAM (DP1, RB p130, E2F4 and MuvB core complex) complex. Release from G0 
by mitogenic stimulation showed an induction of hNEIL3 in early S phase under the
control of the Ras dependent ERK-MAP kinase pathway. In contrast, the total
expression of hNEIL1 was downregulated upon release from quiescence while the
expression of hNEIL2 was cell cycle independent. Notably, hNEIL3 showed a similar
regulation pattern as the replication protein hFEN1 supporting a function of
hNEIL3 in replication associated repair. Thus, it appears that specialized
functions of the NEILs are ensured by their expression patterns.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22365498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2011 Nov;29(11):812-5.

[The roles of activated protein-1 and cell cycle protein in silica-induced cell
cycle changes].

[Article in Chinese]

Jia XW(1), Liu BC, Ye M, Liu HF, Zhang FM.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Occupation Health and Poison Control, Chinese Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 100050, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the roles of cyclin D1 and CDK4 in the cell cycle
changes of human embryonic lung fibroblasts (HELFs) exposed to silica.
METHODS: HELFs were divided into 4 groups: control group, curcumin (20 µmol/L for
1 h) group, silica (200 µg/ml for 24 h) group and curcumin plus silica group,
i.e. after exposure to 20 µmol/L curcumin for 1h, the HELFs were treated with 200
µg/ml silica for 24 h. Western blot and Immunofluorescence assays were utilized
to detect the expression levels of cyclin D1, CDK4 and E2F1/4. Flow cytometry was
used to detect the cell cycle progression, the RNA transfection technique was
used to investigate the silica-induced signal pathway and the roles of which in
silica-induced cell cycle changes.
RESULTS: The expression levels of cyclin D1 and CDK4 significantly increased and 
the expression level of E2F-4 decreased obviously, but the expression level of
E2F-1 did not significantly change in silica group. The proportion of G1 phase
cells obviously decreased and the proportion of S phase cells significantly
increased in silica group, as compared with control group (P < 0.05). When
suppressing the expression of cyclin D1 or CDK4, the proportions of cells in G1
phase in anti-D1 plus silica group and anti-K4 plus silica group did not
obviously change, as compared with control group. When suppressing AP-1 activity,
the cyclin D1 and CDK4 expression levels decreased and the E2F-4 expression level
increased in curcumin plus silica group, as compared with silica group.
CONCLUSION: The results of present suggested that 200 µg/ml silica could induce
the high expression of cyclin D1 and CDK4 and the low expression of E2F-4,
resulting in the cell cycle changes by AP-1/cyclin D1 pathway in HELFs.

PMID: 22357515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Oncogene. 2012 Sep 20;31(38):4207-20. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.582. Epub 2011 Dec
19.

p27Kip1 represses transcription by direct interaction with p130/E2F4 at the
promoters of target genes.

Pippa R(1), Espinosa L, Gundem G, García-Escudero R, Dominguez A, Orlando S,
Gallastegui E, Saiz C, Besson A, Pujol MJ, López-Bigas N, Paramio JM, Bigas A,
Bachs O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Immunology and Neurosciences, University of
Barcelona, IDIBAPS, and Institut Municipal d' Investigacions Mèdiques-Hospital
del Mar, Barcelona, Spain.

The cyclin-cdk (cyclin-dependent kinase) inhibitor p27Kip1 (p27) has a crucial
negative role on cell cycle progression. In addition to its classical role as a
cyclin-cdk inhibitor, it also performs cyclin-cdk-independent functions as the
regulation of cytoskeleton rearrangements and cell motility. p27 deficiency has
been associated with tumor aggressiveness and poor clinical outcome, although the
mechanisms underlying this participation still remain elusive. We report here a
new cellular function of p27 as a transcriptional regulator in association with
p130/E2F4 complexes that could be relevant for tumorigenesis. We observed that
p27 associates with specific promoters of genes involved in important cellular
functions as processing and splicing of RNA, mitochondrial organization and
respiration, translation and cell cycle. On these promoters p27 co-localizes with
p130, E2F4 and co-repressors as histone deacetylases (HDACs) and mSIN3A. p27
co-immunoprecipitates with these proteins and by affinity chromatography, we
demonstrated a direct interaction of p27 with p130 and E2F4 through its
carboxyl-half. We have also shown that p130 recruits p27 on the promoters, and
there p27 is needed for the subsequent recruitment of HDACs and mSIN3A.
Expression microarrays and luciferase assays revealed that p27 behaves as
transcriptional repressor of these p27-target genes (p27-TGs). Finally, in human 
tumors, we established a correlation with overexpression of p27-TGs and poor
survival. Thus, this new function of p27 as a transcriptional repressor could
have a role in the major aggressiveness of tumors with low levels of p27.

PMID: 22179826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2013 Jan-Feb;9(1):94-9. doi: 10.1016/j.soard.2011.10.014.
Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Necdin-E2F4 interaction provides insulin-sensitizing effect after weight loss
induced by gastric bypass surgery.

Pamuklar ZN(1), Chen J, Muehlbauer M, Spagnoli A, Torquati A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North
Carolina 27704, USA.

BACKGROUND: The insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) signaling pathway promotes
adipocyte differentiation and, therefore, insulin sensitivity by suppression of
necdin expression, which represses peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma promoter activity by interaction with E2F4 in mouse adipocytes.
The aim of the present study was to test the hypothesis that this pathway
represents one of the mechanisms by which Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery (RYGB)
induces resolution of insulin resistance.
METHODS: Clinical samples were collected and the key biomarkers measured to test 
the hypothesis that the IGF-1 pathway represents 1 of the mechanisms by which
RYGB induces resolution of insulin resistance in obese individuals.
RESULTS: Free IGF-1 levels were significantly greater in the post-RYGB patients
than in the pre-RYGB obese patients (2.55 ± 1.54 versus 1.32 ± .65 µg/L, P = .03)
and similar to that in normal weight controls (2.54 ± 1.27 µg/L). Necdin and E2F4
gene expression in the adipose tissue was significantly downregulated after RYGB 
compared with obese and were similar to the levels observed in the controls. In
mature human adipocytes cultured in vitro, treatment with des-IGF-1 induced
downregulation of necdin and E2F4 gene expression in a dose-dependent manner (P =
.01).
CONCLUSION: After RYGB, the insulin/IGF-1 signaling pathway is activated and
could account for the observed decrease in the expression of necdin, which
represses peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma promoter activity by
interaction with E2F4. This could represent one of the mechanisms that induce
resolution of insulin resistance after RYGB.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery. Published 
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3302937
PMID: 22138333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Feb;40(4):1561-78. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr793. Epub 2011 Nov
7.

The CHR promoter element controls cell cycle-dependent gene transcription and
binds the DREAM and MMB complexes.

Müller GA(1), Quaas M, Schümann M, Krause E, Padi M, Fischer M, Litovchick L,
DeCaprio JA, Engeland K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology, Medical School, University of Leipzig, Semmelweisstrasse
14, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.

Cell cycle-dependent gene expression is often controlled on the transcriptional
level. Genes like cyclin B, CDC2 and CDC25C are regulated by cell cycle-dependent
element (CDE) and cell cycle genes homology region (CHR) promoter elements mainly
through repression in G(0)/G(1). It had been suggested that E2F4 binding to CDE
sites is central to transcriptional regulation. However, some promoters are only 
controlled by a CHR. We identify the DREAM complex binding to the CHR of mouse
and human cyclin B2 promoters in G(0). Association of DREAM and cell
cycle-dependent regulation is abrogated when the CHR is mutated. Although E2f4 is
part of the complex, a CDE is not essential but can enhance binding of DREAM. We 
show that the CHR element is not only necessary for repression of gene
transcription in G(0)/G(1), but also for activation in S, G(2) and M phases. In
proliferating cells, the B-myb-containing MMB complex binds the CHR of both
promoters independently of the CDE. Bioinformatic analyses identify many genes
which contain conserved CHR elements in promoters binding the DREAM complex. With
Ube2c as an example from that screen, we show that inverse CHR sites are
functional promoter elements that can bind DREAM and MMB. Our findings indicate
that the CHR is central to DREAM/MMB-dependent transcriptional control during the
cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC3287175
PMID: 22064854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Feb;131(3):1039-47. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1826-2.
Epub 2011 Oct 26.

Prognostic impact of polymorphisms in the MYBL2 interacting genes in breast
cancer.

Shi H(1), Bevier M, Johansson R, Enquist-Olsson K, Henriksson R, Hemminki K,
Lenner P, Försti A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 580, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.

MYBL2 is a transcription factor, which regulates the expression of genes involved
in cancer progression. In this study, we investigated whether putative functional
variants in genes regulating MYBL2 (E2F1, E2F3 and E2F4) or in genes, which are
regulated by MYBL2 (BCL2, BIRC5, COL1A1, COL1A2, COL5A2, ERBB2, CLU, LIN9 and
TOP2A) affect breast cancer (BC) susceptibility and clinical outcome.
Twenty-eight SNPs were genotyped in a population-based series of 782 Swedish BC
cases and 1,559 matched controls. BC-specific survival analysis of BIRC5
suggested that carriers of the minor allele of rs8073069 and rs1042489 have a
worse survival compared with the major homozygotes (HR 2.46, 95% CI 1.39-4.36 and
HR 1.81, 95% CI 1.01-3.25, respectively). The poor survival was observed
especially in women with aggressive tumours. Multivariate analysis supported the 
role of rs8073069 as an independent prognostic marker. For BCL2, minor allele
carriers of rs1564483 were more likely to have hormone receptor-positive tumours 
than the major homozygotes. Another SNP in BCL2, rs4987852, was associated with
tumour stages II-IV and histologic grade 3. In CLU, the minor allele carriers of 
rs9331888 were more likely to have tumours with regional lymph node metastasis
and stages II-IV than the major homozygotes. In conclusion, our study suggests a 
role of genetic variation in BIRC5, BCL2 and CLU as progression and prognostic
markers for BC, supporting previous studies based on the expression of the genes.

PMID: 22037783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. EMBO J. 2012 Jan 4;31(1):95-109. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.370. Epub 2011 Oct 14.

Physical and functional interaction between PML and TBX2 in the establishment of 
cellular senescence.

Martin N(1), Benhamed M, Nacerddine K, Demarque MD, van Lohuizen M, Dejean A,
Bischof O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Infection, Nuclear Organisation and Oncogenesis
Laboratory, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Cellular senescence acts as a potent barrier for tumour initiation and
progression. Previous studies showed that the PML tumour suppressor promotes
senescence, although the precise mechanisms remain to be elucidated. Combining
gene expression profiling with chromatin-binding analyses and promoter reporter
studies, we identify TBX2, a T-box transcription factor frequently overexpressed 
in cancer, as a novel and direct PML-repressible E2F-target gene in senescence
but not quiescence. Recruitment of PML to the TBX2 promoter is dependent on a
functional p130/E2F4 repressor complex ultimately implementing a
transcriptionally inactive chromatin environment at the TBX2 promoter. TBX2
repression actively contributes to senescence induction as cells depleted for
TBX2 trigger PML pro-senescence function(s) and enter senescence. Reciprocally,
elevated TBX2 levels antagonize PML pro-senescence function through direct
protein-protein interaction. Collectively, our findings indicate that PML and
TBX2 act in an autoregulatory loop to control the effective execution of the
senescence program.

PMCID: PMC3252579
PMID: 22002537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Gen Virol. 2011 Nov;92(Pt 11):2620-7. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.035352-0. Epub 2011
Aug 3.

Disruption of repressive p130-DREAM complexes by human papillomavirus 16 E6/E7
oncoproteins is required for cell-cycle progression in cervical cancer cells.

Nor Rashid N(1), Yusof R, Watson RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Virology, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, 
UK.

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) with tropism for mucosal epithelia are the major
aetiological factors in cervical cancer. Most cancers are associated with
so-called high-risk HPV types, in particular HPV16, and constitutive expression
of the HPV16 E6 and E7 oncoproteins is critical for malignant transformation in
infected keratinocytes. E6 and E7 bind to and inactivate the cellular tumour
suppressors p53 and Rb, respectively, thus delaying differentiation and inducing 
proliferation in suprabasal keratinocytes to enable HPV replication. One member
of the Rb family, p130, appears to be a particularly important target for E7 in
promoting S-phase entry. Recent evidence indicates that p130 regulates cell-cycle
progression as part of a large protein complex termed DREAM. The composition of
DREAM is cell cycle-regulated, associating with E2F4 and p130 in G0/G1 and with
the B-myb transcription factor in S/G2. In this study, we addressed whether
p130-DREAM is disrupted in HPV16-transformed cervical cancer cells and whether
this is a critical function for E6/E7. We found that p130-DREAM was greatly
diminished in HPV16-transformed cervical carcinoma cells (CaSki and SiHa)
compared with control cell lines; however, when E6/E7 expression was targeted by 
specific small hairpin RNAs, p130-DREAM was reformed and the cell cycle was
arrested. We further demonstrated that the profound G1 arrest in E7-depleted
CaSki cells was dependent on p130-DREAM reformation by also targeting the
expression of the DREAM component Lin-54 and p130. The results show that
continued HPV16 E6/E7 expression is necessary in cervical cancer cells to prevent
cell-cycle arrest by a repressive p130-DREAM complex.

PMID: 21813705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Virol. 2011 Sep;85(17):8841-51. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00539-11. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Adenovirus E1A directly targets the E2F/DP-1 complex.

Pelka P(1), Miller MS, Cecchini M, Yousef AF, Bowdish DM, Dick F, Whyte P, Mymryk
JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, MG DeGroote Institute for
Infectious Disease Research, McMaster University, MDCL 4077, 1280 Main Street
West, Hamilton, ON, Canada L8S 4K1. peter.pelka@gmail.com

Deregulation of the cell cycle is of paramount importance during adenovirus
infection. Adenovirus normally infects quiescent cells and must initiate the cell
cycle in order to propagate itself. The pRb family of proteins controls entry
into the cell cycle by interacting with and repressing transcriptional activation
by the E2F transcription factors. The viral E1A proteins indirectly activate
E2F-dependent transcription and cell cycle entry, in part, by interacting with
pRb and family members to free the E2Fs. We report here that an E1A 13S isoform
can unexpectedly activate E2F-responsive gene expression independently of binding
to the pRb family of proteins. We demonstrate that E1A binds to E2F/DP-1
complexes through a direct interaction with DP-1. E1A appears to utilize this
binding to recruit itself to E2F-regulated promoters, and this allows the E1A 13S
protein, but not the E1A 12S protein, to activate transcription independently of 
interaction with pRb. Importantly, expression of E1A 13S, but not E1A 12S, led to
significant enhancement of E2F4 occupancy of E2F sites of two E2F-regulated
promoters. These observations identify a novel mechanism by which adenovirus
deregulates the cell cycle and suggest that E1A 13S may selectively activate a
subset of E2F-regulated cellular genes during infection.

PMCID: PMC3165805
PMID: 21715488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Cell Cycle. 2011 Aug 1;10(15):2549-60. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

A dual role for A-type lamins in DNA double-strand break repair.

Redwood AB(1), Perkins SM, Vanderwaal RP, Feng Z, Biehl KJ, Gonzalez-Suarez I,
Morgado-Palacin L, Shi W, Sage J, Roti-Roti JL, Stewart CL, Zhang J, Gonzalo S.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation and Cancer Biology Division, Department of Radiation Oncology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Oct 15;10(20):3426.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Oct 1;10(19):3236.

A-type lamins are emerging as regulators of nuclear organization and function.
Changes in their expression are associated with cancer and mutations are linked
to degenerative diseases -laminopathies-. Although a correlation exists between
alterations in lamins and genomic instability, the molecular mechanisms remain
largely unknown. We previously found that loss of A-type lamins leads to
degradation of 53BP1 protein and defective long-range non-homologous end-joining 
(NHEJ) of dysfunctional telomeres. Here, we determined how loss of A-type lamins 
affects the repair of short-range DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) induced by
ionizing radiation (IR). We find that lamins deficiency allows activation of the 
DNA damage response, but compromises the accumulation of 53BP1 at IR-induced foci
(IRIF), hindering the fast phase of repair corresponding to classical-NHEJ.
Importantly, reconstitution of 53BP1 is sufficient to rescue long-range and
short-range NHEJ. Moreover, we demonstrate an unprecedented role for A-type
lamins in the maintenance of homologous recombination (HR). Depletion of lamins
compromises HR by a mechanism involving transcriptional downregulation of BRCA1
and RAD51 by the repressor complex formed by the Rb family member p130 and E2F4. 
In line with the DNA repair defects, lamins-deficient cells exhibit increased
radiosensitivity. This study demonstrates that A-type lamins promote genomic
stability by maintaining the levels of proteins with key roles in DNA DSBs repair
by NHEJ and HR. Our results suggest that silencing of A-type lamins by DNA
methylation in some cancers could contribute to the genomic instability that
drives malignancy. In addition, lamins-deficient tumor cells could represent a
good target for radiation therapy.

PMCID: PMC3180193
PMID: 21701264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 12;286(32):27867-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C111.255091. Epub
2011 Jun 17.

Tissue-specific gene targeting by the multiprotein mammalian DREAM complex.

Flowers S(1), Beck GR Jr, Moran E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, New Jersey Medical School-University Hospital
Cancer Center, University of Medicine and Dentistry, New Jersey, Newark, New
Jersey 07103, USA.

The mammalian DP, RB-like, E2F, and MuvB-like proteins (DREAM) complex, whose key
components include p130 and E2F4, plays a fundamental role in repression of cell 
cycle-specific genes during growth arrest. Mammalian DREAM is well conserved with
Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans complexes that repress pivotal
developmental genes, but the mammalian complex has been thought to exist only in 
quiescent cells and not to be linked with development. However, new findings here
identify tissue-specific promoters repressed by DREAM in proliferating
precursors, revealing a new connection between control of growth arrest and
terminal differentiation. Mechanistically, tissue-specific promoter occupation by
DREAM is dependent on the integrity of a repressor form of the SWI/SNF
chromatin-remodeling complex.

PMCID: PMC3151031
PMID: 21685383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Aug;31(16):3339-50. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01121-10. Epub 2011 Jun 
13.

Hypoxia-induced epigenetic regulation and silencing of the BRCA1 promoter.

Lu Y(1), Chu A, Turker MS, Glazer PM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Therapeutic Radiology and Genetics, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Disruption of the BRCA1 tumor suppressor can be caused not only by inherited
mutations in familial cancers but also by BRCA1 gene silencing in sporadic
cancers. Hypoxia, a key feature of the tumor microenvironment, has been shown to 
downregulate BRCA1 at the transcriptional level via repressive E2F4/p130
complexes. Here we showed that hypoxia also drives epigenetic modification of the
BRCA1 promoter, with decreased H3K4 methylation as a key repressive modification 
produced by the lysine-specific histone demethylase LSD1. We also observed
increased H3K9 methylation coupled with decreased H3K9 acetylation. Similar
modifications were seen in the RAD51 promoter, which is also downregulated by
hypoxia, whereas exactly opposite changes were seen in the promoter of the
hypoxia-inducible gene VEGF. In cells containing the BRCA1 promoter driving a
selectable HPRT gene, long-term silencing of the promoter was observed following 
exposure to hypoxic stress. Clones with silenced BRCA1 promoters were detected at
frequencies of 2% or more following hypoxia, but at less than 6 × 10(-5) without 
hypoxia. The silenced clones showed decreased H3K4 methylation and decreased H3K9
acetylation in the BRCA1 promoters, consistent with the acute effects of hypoxic 
stress. Hypoxia-induced BRCA1 promoter silencing persisted in subsequent normoxic
conditions but could be reversed by treatment with a histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor but not with a DNA methylation inhibitor. Interestingly, treatment of
cells with inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) can cause short-term 
repression of BRCA1 expression, but such treatment does not produce H3K4 or H3K9 
histone modification or BRCA1 promoter silencing. These results suggest that
hypoxia is a driving force for long-term silencing of BRCA1, thereby promoting
genome instability and tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC3147797
PMID: 21670155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e19778. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019778. Epub 2011 Jun 2.

Genome-wide profiling of H3K56 acetylation and transcription factor binding sites
in human adipocytes.

Lo KA(1), Bauchmann MK, Baumann AP, Donahue CJ, Thiede MA, Hayes LS, des Etages
SA, Fraenkel E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

The growing epidemic of obesity and metabolic diseases calls for a better
understanding of adipocyte biology. The regulation of transcription in adipocytes
is particularly important, as it is a target for several therapeutic approaches. 
Transcriptional outcomes are influenced by both histone modifications and
transcription factor binding. Although the epigenetic states and binding sites of
several important transcription factors have been profiled in the mouse 3T3-L1
cell line, such data are lacking in human adipocytes. In this study, we
identified H3K56 acetylation sites in human adipocytes derived from mesenchymal
stem cells. H3K56 is acetylated by CBP and p300, and deacetylated by SIRT1, all
are proteins with important roles in diabetes and insulin signaling. We found
that while almost half of the genome shows signs of H3K56 acetylation, the
highest level of H3K56 acetylation is associated with transcription factors and
proteins in the adipokine signaling and Type II Diabetes pathways. In order to
discover the transcription factors that recruit acetyltransferases and
deacetylases to sites of H3K56 acetylation, we analyzed DNA sequences near H3K56 
acetylated regions and found that the E2F recognition sequence was enriched.
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing, we
confirmed that genes bound by E2F4, as well as those by HSF-1 and C/EBPa, have
higher than expected levels of H3K56 acetylation, and that the transcription
factor binding sites and acetylation sites are often adjacent but rarely overlap.
We also discovered a significant difference between bound targets of C/EBPa in
3T3-L1 and human adipocytes, highlighting the need to construct species-specific 
epigenetic and transcription factor binding site maps. This is the first
genome-wide profile of H3K56 acetylation, E2F4, C/EBPa and HSF-1 binding in human
adipocytes, and will serve as an important resource for better understanding
adipocyte transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC3107206
PMID: 21655096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Mar 1;21(4):589-97. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0048. Epub 2011
Jul 22.

Induction of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in mouse mesenchymal stem cells is
associated with activation of the p130 and E2f4 and formation of the
p130/Gsk3ß/ß-catenin complex.

Petrov N(1), Zhidkova O, Serikov V, Zenin V, Popov B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Pathology, Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of
Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russia.

Proteins p130 and E2f4, members of the retinoblastoma protein (pRb) family/E2F
transcription factor family, are the key elements in regulation of cell cycle and
differentiation. The functional role of the p130/E2f4 in mesenchymal stem cells
(MSC) is unclear. We demonstrate here that activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway in mouse MSC is associated with accumulation of active forms of the p130,
E2f4, and ß-catenin but does not result in inhibition of cell cycle progression. 
The levels and phosphorylation patterns of p130, E2f4, and ß-catenin in MSC do
not change during cell cycle progression. This is different from control T98G
glyoblastoma cells that accumulated differently phosphorylated forms of the p130 
in quiescence, and under active proliferation. In MSC, synchronized at G0/G1 and 
S cell cycle phases, the p130 and ß-catenin physically interact each other,
whereas Gsk3ß was associated and co-precipitated with both p130 and ß-catenin.
Our results indicate that Wnt/ß-catenin and pRb signal pathways interact with
each other and form common p130/Gsk3ß/ß-catenin complex during MSC cycle
progression. Physiological relevance of such complex may be associated with
coupling of the cell cycle and differentiation in MSC, which is related to a wide
differentiation potential of these stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3280596
PMID: 21631154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. BMC Med Genomics. 2011 May 16;4:41. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-4-41.

Molecular conservation of estrogen-response associated with cell cycle
regulation, hormonal carcinogenesis and cancer in zebrafish and human cancer cell
lines.

Lam SH(1), Lee SG, Lin CY, Thomsen JS, Fu PY, Murthy KR, Li H, Govindarajan KR,
Nick LC, Bourque G, Gong Z, Lufkin T, Liu ET, Mathavan S.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, #02-01Genome, 60 Biopolis Street, 138672
Singapore.

BACKGROUND: The zebrafish is recognized as a versatile cancer and drug screening 
model. However, it is not known whether the estrogen-responsive genes and
signaling pathways that are involved in estrogen-dependent carcinogenesis and
human cancer are operating in zebrafish. In order to determine the potential of
zebrafish model for estrogen-related cancer research, we investigated the
molecular conservation of estrogen responses operating in both zebrafish and
human cancer cell lines.
METHODS: Microarray experiment was performed on zebrafish exposed to estrogen
(17ß-estradiol; a classified carcinogen) and an anti-estrogen (ICI 182,780).
Zebrafish estrogen-responsive genes sensitive to both estrogen and anti-estrogen 
were identified and validated using real-time PCR. Human homolog mapping and
knowledge-based data mining were performed on zebrafish estrogen responsive genes
followed by estrogen receptor binding site analysis and comparative transcriptome
analysis with estrogen-responsive human cancer cell lines (MCF7, T47D and
Ishikawa).
RESULTS: Our transcriptome analysis captured multiple estrogen-responsive genes
and signaling pathways that increased cell proliferation, promoted DNA damage and
genome instability, and decreased tumor suppressing effects, suggesting a common 
mechanism for estrogen-induced carcinogenesis. Comparative analysis revealed a
core set of conserved estrogen-responsive genes that demonstrate enrichment of
estrogen receptor binding sites and cell cycle signaling pathways.
Knowledge-based and network analysis led us to propose that the mechanism
involving estrogen-activated estrogen receptor mediated down-regulation of human 
homolog HES1 followed by up-regulation cell cycle-related genes (human homologs
E2F4, CDK2, CCNA, CCNB, CCNE), is highly conserved, and this mechanism may
involve novel crosstalk with basal AHR. We also identified mitotic roles of
polo-like kinase as a conserved signaling pathway with multiple entry points for 
estrogen regulation.
CONCLUSION: The findings demonstrate the use of zebrafish for characterizing
estrogen-like environmental carcinogens and anti-estrogen drug screening. From an
evolutionary perspective, our findings suggest that estrogen regulation of cell
cycle is perhaps one of the earliest forms of steroidal-receptor controlled
cellular processes. Our study provides first evidence of molecular conservation
of estrogen-responsiveness between zebrafish and human cancer cell lines, hence
demonstrating the potential of zebrafish for estrogen-related cancer research.

PMCID: PMC3114699
PMID: 21575170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Int J Oncol. 2011 Oct;39(4):811-20. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1042. Epub 2011 May 13.

Identification of characteristic molecular signature of Müllerian inhibiting
substance in human HPV-related cervical cancer cells.

Hwang SJ(1), Suh MJ, Yoon JH, Kim MR, Ryu KS, Nam SW, Donahoe PK, Maclaughlin DT,
Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Müllerian inhibiting substance (MIS), also known as anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH),
is a member of the transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) superfamily that plays an
important role in the mesenchymal-epithelial interaction, cell growth and
proliferation, extracellular matrix production and tissue remodeling. Previously,
we demonstrated that MIS suppressed ovarian cancer cell growth and suggested
large-scale genetic elements that could be responsible for anti-neoplastic
effects of MIS on ovarian cancer cells. In this study, we demonstrated the
expression of MIS type II receptor (MISRII) in the human papillomavirus
(HPV)-16-related cervical cancer cell lines CaSki and SiHa, and a non-HPV-related
cervical cancer cell line, C33A. We also showed that MIS inhibited growth of
cervical cancer cells, and induced cellular apoptosis of C33A. In addition, we
identified a characteristic molecular signature of MIS in CaSki cells by using
whole genome expression analysis. Of the 1,690 genes that showed significant
expression changes by MIS, 21 genes were related to cell cycle; 13 genes to
apoptosis; and 52 genes to the cancer pathway. On performing a search for cell
cycle pathways in the KEGG pathway database, several gene expressions at the G1/S
checkpoint were found. In particular, the expression of p16 and p107 increased
and that of E2F2 and E2F3 decreased at an early stage, whereas the expression of 
E2F4 and E2F5 decreased at a later stage after MIS treatment. These data suggest 
that MIS produces activity against HPV16-related cervical cancers in vitro, and
MIS may also be an effective targeted therapy for HPV16-related cervical cancer. 
Genetic data obtained here could be useful in determining the treatment strategy 
of MISR-expressing cervical tumors in the future.

PMID: 21573503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Tsitologiia. 2011;53(2):107-15.

[The cell cycle regulator p130 and beta-catenin form a complex in mesenchymal
stem cells].

[Article in Russian]

Petrov NS, Zhidkova OV, Zenin VV, Rozanov IuM, Popov BV.

Suppressor complex p130/E2f4 inhibits transcription of multiple genes proteins
regulating cell cycle progression and induces cell cycle arrest at G0/G1 required
for induction of cell differentiation in cells of many tissues in vivo and
various cell lineages in vitro. We found here that, in mesenchymal stem cells,
(MSC) activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin signal pathway induced by MSC coculture 
with the A-549 cell line or by growth in the medium containing Li+ ions, which
resulted in the accumulation of active forms of the p130, E2f4 and beta-catenin, 
was not coupled with inhibition of cell cycle progression. Cell cycle
synchronization of the MSC induced by thymidine and nocodazol was not resulted in
change of the levels and phosphorylation pattern of the p130 in contrast to mouse
hepatocytes and T98G cells which showed accumulation of the p130 form p1 and p2
in quiescence and form p3 under active proliferative. Antibody to p130
precipitated from extracts of MSC activated by Li+ ions beta the p130 form 2 and 
hyperphosphorilated beta-catenin. The results obtained suggest that Gsk3beta,
p130 and beta-catenin form in MSC a complex the functional role of which may be
associated with activation of differentiation not coupled to cell cycle arrest.

PMID: 21516817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Genes Dev. 2011 Apr 15;25(8):801-13. doi: 10.1101/gad.2034211.

DYRK1A protein kinase promotes quiescence and senescence through DREAM complex
assembly.

Litovchick L(1), Florens LA, Swanson SK, Washburn MP, DeCaprio JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2011 May 1;25(9):889-94.

In the absence of growth signals, cells exit the cell cycle and enter into G0 or 
quiescence. Alternatively, cells enter senescence in response to inappropriate
growth signals such as oncogene expression. The molecular mechanisms required for
cell cycle exit into quiescence or senescence are poorly understood. The DREAM
(DP, RB [retinoblastoma], E2F, and MuvB) complex represses cell cycle-dependent
genes during quiescence. DREAM contains p130, E2F4, DP1, and a stable core
complex of five MuvB-like proteins: LIN9, LIN37, LIN52, LIN54, and RBBP4. In
mammalian cells, the MuvB core dissociates from p130 upon entry into the cell
cycle and binds to BMYB during S phase to activate the transcription of genes
expressed late in the cell cycle. We used mass spectroscopic analysis to identify
phosphorylation sites that regulate the switch of the MuvB core from BMYB to
DREAM. Here we report that DYRK1A can specifically phosphorylate LIN52 on serine 
residue 28, and that this phosphorylation is required for DREAM assembly.
Inhibiting DYRK1A activity or point mutation of LIN52 disrupts DREAM assembly and
reduces the ability of cells to enter quiescence or undergo Ras-induced
senescence. These data reveal an important role for DYRK1A in the regulation of
DREAM activity and entry into quiescence.

PMCID: PMC3078706
PMID: 21498570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011 Jun;68(11):1883-96. doi: 10.1007/s00018-011-0666-x. Epub 
2011 Mar 25.

S-phase-coupled apoptosis in tumor suppression.

Cho YJ(1), Liang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. y.cho@vanderbilt.edu

DNA replication is essential for accurate transmission of genomic information
from parental to daughter cells. DNA replication is licensed once per cell
division cycle. This process is highly regulated by both positive and negative
regulators. Over-replication, under-replication, as well as DNA damage in a cell 
all induce the activation of checkpoint control pathways such as ATM/ATR, CHK
kinases, and the tumor suppressor protein p53, which provide "damage controls"
via either DNA repairs or apoptosis. This review focuses on accumulating
evidence, with the emphasis on recently discovered Killin, that S-phase
checkpoint control is crucial for a mammalian cell to make a life and death
decision in order to safeguard genome integrity.

PMID: 21437646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cell Biol Int. 2011 Jul;35(7):697-704. doi: 10.1042/CBI20100298.

Roles of the ERK, JNK/AP-1/cyclin D1-CDK4 pathway in silica-induced cell cycle
changes in human embryo lung fibroblast cells.

Jia X(1), Liu B, Shi X, Ye M, Zhang F, Liu H.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Occupation Health and Poison Control, Chinese Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, Peoples Republic of China.

Silica is a potent occupational fibrogenic agent capable of inducing lung
fibrosis and many other lung diseases. Our current study focused on the
signalling pathways regulating cell cycle changes in HELF (human embryo lung
fibroblast) after silica (a-quartz) exposure. Our results showed silica exposure 
could lead to cell cycle changes. The cell cycle alternations were accompanied
with overexpression of cyclin D1 and CDK4 (cyclin-dependent kinase 4) in a
time-dependent manner. Silica exposure also decreased E2F-4 expression in HELF.
These changes were blocked by overexpression of dominant-negative mutants of ERK 
(extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase) or the JNK (stress-activated
c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase), respectively. Moreover, pretreatment of cells with
curcumin, an activation of AP-1 (activator protein-1) inhibitor, inhibited
silica-induced cell cycle alteration, the decreased expression of E2F-4 and
overexpression of cyclin D1 and CDK4. Furthermore, both antisense cyclin D1 and
antisense CDK4 can block silica-induced cell cycle changes. These results suggest
that silica exposure can induce cell cycle changes, which may be mediated through
ERK, JNK/AP-1/cyclin D1-CDK4-dependent pathway.

PMID: 21314641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Korean J Physiol Pharmacol. 2010 Dec;14(6):391-7. doi:
10.4196/kjpp.2010.14.6.391. Epub 2010 Dec 31.

Curcumin Induces Downregulation of E2F4 Expression and Apoptotic Cell Death in
HCT116 Human Colon Cancer Cells; Involvement of Reactive Oxygen Species.

Kim KC(1), Lee C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Catholic University of
Daegu, Daegu 705-718, Korea.

E2F transcription factors and their target genes have been known to play an
important role in cell growth control. We found that curcumin, a polyphenolic
phytochemical isolated from the plant Curcuma longa, markedly suppressed E2F4
expression in HCT116 colon cancer cells. Hydrogen peroxide was also found to
decrease E2F4 protein level, indicating the involvement of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) in curucmin-induced downregulation of E2F4 expression. Involvement 
of ROS in E2F4 downregulation in response to curcumin was confirmed by the result
that pretreatment of cells with N-acetylcystein (NAC) before exposure of curcumin
almost completely blocked the reduction of E2F4 expression at the protein as well
as mRNA level. Anti-proliferative effect of curcumin was also suppressed by NAC
which is consistent to previous reports showing curcumin-superoxide production
and induction of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) cleavage as well as
apoptosis. Expression of several genes, cyclin A, p21, and p27, which has been
shown to be regulated in E2F4-dependent manner and involved in the cell cycle
progression was also affected by curcumin. Moreover, decreased (cyclin A) and
increased (p21 and p27) expression of these E2F4 downstream genes by curcumin was
restored by pretreatment of cells with NAC and E2F4 overexpression which is
induced by doxycycline. In addition, E2F4 overexpression was observed to
partially ameliorate curcumin-induced growth inhibition by cell viability assay. 
Taken together, we found curcumin-induced ROS down-regulation of E2F4 expression 
and modulation of E2F4 target genes which finally lead to the apoptotic cell
death in HCT116 colon cancer cells, suggesting that E2F4 appears to be a novel
determinant of curcumin-induced cytotoxicity.

PMCID: PMC3034119
PMID: 21311680  [PubMed]


124. Cell Cycle. 2011 Mar 1;10(5):733-4. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Cell cycle control by a methylation-phosphorylation switch.

Carr SM, La Thangue NB.

PMCID: PMC3100787
PMID: 21311233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. PLoS Genet. 2011 Jan 13;7(1):e1001271. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001271.

Zebrafish usp39 mutation leads to rb1 mRNA splicing defect and pituitary lineage 
expansion.

Ríos Y(1), Melmed S, Lin S, Liu NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Loss of retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor suppressor function is associated with human
malignancies. Molecular and genetic mechanisms responsible for tumorigenic Rb
downregulation are not fully defined. Through a forward genetic screen and
positional cloning, we identified and characterized a zebrafish ubiquitin
specific peptidase 39 (usp39) mutation, the yeast and human homolog of which
encodes a component of RNA splicing machinery. Zebrafish usp39 mutants exhibit
microcephaly and adenohypophyseal cell lineage expansion without apparent changes
in major hypothalamic hormonal and regulatory signals. Gene expression profiling 
of usp39 mutants revealed decreased rb1 and increased e2f4, rbl2 (p130), and
cdkn1a (p21) expression. Rb1 mRNA overexpression, or antisense morpholino
knockdown of e2f4, partially reversed embryonic pituitary expansion in usp39
mutants. Analysis of pre-mRNA splicing status of critical cell cycle regulators
showed misspliced Rb1 pre-mRNA resulting in a premature stop codon. These studies
unravel a novel mechanism for rb1 regulation by a neuronal mRNA splicing factor, 
usp39. Zebrafish usp39 regulates embryonic pituitary homeostasis by targeting rb1
and e2f4 expression, respectively, contributing to increased adenohypophyseal
sensitivity to these altered cell cycle regulators. These results provide a
mechanism for dysregulated rb1 and e2f4 pathways that may result in pituitary
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3020934
PMID: 21249182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Invest Dermatol. 2011 May;131(5):1077-84. doi: 10.1038/jid.2010.430. Epub 2011 
Jan 20.

Loss of E2F7 expression is an early event in squamous differentiation and causes 
derepression of the key differentiation activator Sp1.

Hazar-Rethinam M(1), Cameron SR, Dahler AL, Endo-Munoz LB, Smith L, Rickwood D,
Saunders NA.

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Pathobiology Group, Diamantina Institute, Princess Alexandra
Hospital, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Squamous differentiation is controlled by key transcription factors such as Sp1
and E2F. We have previously shown that E2F1 can suppress transcription of the
differentiation-specific gene, transglutaminase type 1 (TG1), by an indirect
mechanism mediated by Sp1. Transient transfection of E2F1-E2F6 indicated that
E2F-mediated reduction of Sp1 transcription was not responsible for E2F-mediated 
suppression of squamous differentiation. However, we found that E2F4 and E2F7,
but not E2Fs 1, 2, 3, 5, or 6, could suppress the activation of the Sp1 promoter 
in differentiated keratinocytes (KCs). E2F4-mediated suppression could not be
antagonized by E2Fs 1, 2, 3, 5, or 6 and was localized to a region of the human
Sp1 promoter spanning -139 to + 35 bp. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis, as
well as transient overexpression and short hairpin RNA knockdown experiments
indicate that E2F7 binds to a unique binding site located between -139 and -119
bp of the Sp1 promoter, and knockdown of E2F7 in proliferating KCs leads to a
derepression of Sp1 expression and the induction of TG1. In contrast, E2F4
knockdown in proliferating KCs did not alter Sp1 expression. These data indicate 
that loss of E2F7 during the initiation of differentiation leads to the
derepression of Sp1 and subsequent transcription of differentiation-specific
genes such as TG1.

PMID: 21248772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 May;39(9):3558-73. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1313. Epub 2011
Jan 18.

Wide-ranging functions of E2F4 in transcriptional activation and repression
revealed by genome-wide analysis.

Lee BK(1), Bhinge AA, Iyer VR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors has important roles in cell cycle
progression. E2F4 is an E2F family member that has been proposed to be primarily 
a repressor of transcription, but the scope of its binding activity and functions
in transcriptional regulation is not fully known. We used ChIP sequencing
(ChIP-seq) to identify around 16,000 E2F4 binding sites which potentially
regulate 7346 downstream target genes with wide-ranging functions in DNA repair, 
cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, and other processes. While half of all E2F4
binding sites (56%) occurred near transcription start sites (TSSs), ~20% of sites
occurred more than 20 kb away from any annotated TSS. These distal sites showed
histone modifications suggesting that E2F4 may function as a long-range
regulator, which we confirmed by functional experimental assays on a subset.
Overexpression of E2F4 and its transcriptional cofactors of the retinoblastoma
(Rb) family and its binding partner DP-1 revealed that E2F4 acts as an activator 
as well as a repressor. E2F4 binding sites also occurred near regulatory elements
for miRNAs such as let-7a and mir-17, suggestive of regulation of miRNAs by E2F4.
Taken together, our genome-wide analysis provided evidence of versatile roles of 
E2F4 and insights into its functions.

© The Author(s) 2011. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC3089461
PMID: 21247883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mamm Genome. 2011 Feb;22(1-2):66-82. doi: 10.1007/s00335-010-9295-1. Epub 2010
Nov 25.

Unraveling the genetics of otitis media: from mouse to human and back again.

Rye MS(1), Bhutta MF, Cheeseman MT, Burgner D, Blackwell JM, Brown SD, Jamieson
SE.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute for Child Health Research, Centre for Child Health
Research, The University of Western Australia, Subiaco, WA 6008, Australia.

Otitis media (OM) is among the most common illnesses of early childhood,
characterised by the presence of inflammation in the middle ear cavity. Acute OM 
and chronic OM with effusion (COME) affect the majority of children by school age
and have heritability estimates of 40-70%. However, the majority of genes
underlying this susceptibility are, as yet, unidentified. One method of
identifying genes and pathways that may contribute to OM susceptibility is to
look at mouse mutants displaying a comparable phenotype. Single-gene mouse
mutants with OM have identified a number of genes, namely, Eya4, Tlr4, p73,
MyD88, Fas, E2f4, Plg, Fbxo11, and Evi1, as potential and biologically relevant
candidates for human disease. Recent studies suggest that this "mouse-to-human"
approach is likely to yield relevant data, with significant associations reported
between polymorphisms at the FBXO11, TLR4, and PAI1 genes and disease in humans. 
An association between TP73 and chronic rhinosinusitis has also been reported. In
addition, the biobanks of available mouse mutants provide a powerful resource for
functional studies of loci identified by future genome-wide association studies
of OM in humans. Mouse models of OM therefore are an important component of
current approaches attempting to understand the complex genetic susceptibility to
OM in humans, and which aim to facilitate the development of preventative and
therapeutic interventions for this important and common disease.

PMID: 21107580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Mol Cancer. 2010 Oct 14;9:274. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-274.

Synergistic epigenetic reactivation of estrogen receptor-a (ERa) by combined
green tea polyphenol and histone deacetylase inhibitor in ERa-negative breast
cancer cells.

Li Y(1), Yuan YY, Meeran SM, Tollefsbol TO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1300 University
Boulevard Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

BACKGROUND: The status of estrogen receptor-a (ERa) is critical to the clinical
prognosis and therapeutic approach in breast cancer. ERa-negative breast cancer
is clinically aggressive and has a poor prognosis because of the lack of hormone 
target-directed therapies. Previous studies have shown that epigenetic regulation
plays a major role in ERa silencing in human breast cancer cells. Dietary green
tea polyphenol, (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), is believed to be an
anticancer agent in part through its regulation of epigenetic processes.
RESULTS: In our current studies, we found that EGCG can reactivate ERa expression
in ERa-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Combination studies using EGCG
with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), revealed a
synergistic effect of reactivation of ERa expression in ERa-negative breast
cancer cells. Reactivation of ERa expression by EGCG and TSA treatment was found 
to sensitize ERa-dependent cellular responses to activator 17ß-estradiol (E2) and
antagonist tamoxifen in ERa-negative breast cancer cells. We also found that EGCG
can lead to remodeling of the chromatin structure of the ERa promoter by altering
histone acetylation and methylation status thereby resulting in ERa reactivation.
A decreased binding of the transcription repressor complex,
Rb/p130-E2F4/5-HDAC1-SUV39H1-DNMT1, in the regulatory region of the ERa promoter 
also contributes to ERa transcriptional activation through treatment with EGCG
and/or TSA.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these studies show that green tea EGCG can restore ERa
expression by regulating epigenetic mechanisms, and this effect is enhanced when 
combined with an HDAC inhibitor. This study will facilitate more effective uses
of combination approaches in breast cancer therapy and will help to explore more 
effective chemotherapeutic strategies toward hormone-resistant breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2967543
PMID: 20946668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cell Biochem Funct. 2010 Oct;28(7):613-9. doi: 10.1002/cbf.1699.

Silica induces cell cycle changes through PI-3K/AP-1 pathway in human embryo lung
fibroblast cells.

Jia X(1), Liu B, Ye M, Liu H, Shi X.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Occupation Health and Poison Control, Chinese Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.

Exposure to silica is associated with progressive pulmonary inflammation and
fibrosis. Our previous study had demonstrated silica exposure could cause cell
cycle alternation and activator protein-1 (AP-1) activation. This study showed
that silica exposure induced phosphorylation of p70S6 kinase (p70S6K) and Akt in 
human embryo lung fibroblasts (HELFs). These changes were blocked by
overexpression of dominant-negative mutants of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase
(<U+0394>p85) or Akt (DN-Akt), respectively. Moreover, pretreatment of cells with
rapamycin, a specific p70S6K inhibitor, could inhibit silica-induced cell cycle
alteration, AP-1 activation, and phosphorylation of p70S6K, but had no effect on 
Akt phosphorylation. This suggested that phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase
(PI-3K)/AP-1 pathway was likely responsible for cell cycle changes. Furthermore, 
we observed the effect of the pathway on cell cycle regulatory proteins. Our
results indicated that inactivation of PI-3K, Akt, or p70S6K could inhibit
silica-induced overexpression of cyclin D1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4)
and decreased expression of E2F-4. Taken together, silica could induce cell cycle
changes through PI-3K/ AP-1 pathway in HELFs.

Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 20941752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Clin Invest. 2010 Oct;120(10):3530-44. doi: 10.1172/JCI41805. Epub 2010 Sep 20.

Human parvovirus B19 causes cell cycle arrest of human erythroid progenitors via 
deregulation of the E2F family of transcription factors.

Wan Z(1), Zhi N, Wong S, Keyvanfar K, Liu D, Raghavachari N, Munson PJ, Su S,
Malide D, Kajigaya S, Young NS.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-1652, USA.

Human parvovirus B19 (B19V) is the only human pathogenic parvovirus. It causes a 
wide spectrum of human diseases, including fifth disease (erythema infectiosum)
in children and pure red cell aplasia in immunocompromised patients. B19V is
highly erythrotropic and preferentially replicates in erythroid progenitor cells 
(EPCs). Current understanding of how B19V interacts with cellular factors to
regulate disease progression is limited, due to a lack of permissive cell lines
and animal models. Here, we employed a recently developed primary human CD36(+)
EPC culture system that is highly permissive for B19V infection to identify
cellular factors that lead to cell cycle arrest after B19V infection. We found
that B19V exploited the E2F family of transcription factors by downregulating
activating E2Fs (E2F1 to E2F3a) and upregulating repressive E2Fs (E2F4 to E2F8)
in the primary CD36(+) EPCs. B19V nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) was a key viral
factor responsible for altering E2F1-E2F5 expression, but not E2F6-E2F8
expression. Interaction between NS1 and E2F4 or E2F5 enhanced the nuclear import 
of these repressive E2Fs and induced stable G2 arrest. NS1-induced G2 arrest was 
independent of p53 activation and increased viral replication. Downstream
E2F4/E2F5 targets, which are potentially involved in the progression from G2 into
M phase and erythroid differentiation, were identified by microarray analysis.
These findings provide new insight into the molecular pathogenesis of B19V in
highly permissive erythroid progenitors.

PMCID: PMC2947219
PMID: 20890043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Int J Cancer. 2011 Jul 15;129(2):307-18. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25692. Epub 2010 Nov
18.

Transient arrest in a quiescent state allows ovarian cancer cells to survive
suboptimal growth conditions and is mediated by both Mirk/dyrk1b and p130/RB2.

Hu J(1), Nakhla H, Friedman E.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Upstate Medical University, State University of New
York, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.

Some ovarian cancer cells in vivo are in a reversible quiescent state where they 
can contribute to cancer spread under favorable growth conditions. The
serine/threonine kinase Mirk/dyrk1B was expressed in each of seven ovarian cancer
cell lines and in 21 of 28 resected human ovarian cancers, and upregulated in 60%
of the cancers. Some ovarian cancer cells were found in a G0 quiescent state,
with the highest fraction in a line with an amplified Mirk gene. Suboptimal
culture conditions increased the G0 fraction in SKOV3 and TOV21G, but not OVCAR4 
cultures. Less than half as many OVCAR4 cells survived under suboptimal culture
conditions as shown by total cell numbers, dye exclusion viability studies, and
assay of cleaved apoptotic marker proteins. G0 arrest in TOV21G and SKOV3 cells
led to increased levels of Mirk, the CDK inhibitor p27, p130/Rb2, and p130/Rb2
complexed with E2F4. The G0 arrest was transient, and cells exited G0 when fresh 
nutrients were supplied. Depletion of p130/Rb2 reduced the G0 fraction, increased
cell sensitivity to serum-free culture and to cisplatin, and reduced Mirk levels.
Mirk contributed to G0 arrest by destabilization of cyclin D1. In TOV21G cells,
but not in normal diploid fibroblasts, Mirk depletion led to increased apoptosis 
and loss of viability. Because Mirk is expressed at low levels in most normal
adult tissues, the elevated Mirk protein levels in ovarian cancers may present a 
novel therapeutic target, in particular for quiescent tumor cells which are
difficult to eradicate by conventional therapies targeting dividing cells.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMID: 20857490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Biol Direct. 2010 Sep 20;5:55. doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-5-55.

The ancient function of RB-E2F pathway: insights from its evolutionary history.

Cao L(1), Peng B, Yao L, Zhang X, Sun K, Yang X, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, PR China.

BACKGROUND: The RB-E2F pathway is conserved in most eukaryotic lineages,
including animals and plants. E2F and RB family proteins perform crucial
functions in cycle controlling, differentiation, development and apoptosis.
However, there are two kinds of E2Fs (repressive E2Fs and active E2Fs) and three 
RB family members in human. Till now, the detail evolutionary history of these
protein families and how RB-E2F pathway evolved in different organisms remain
poorly explored.
RESULTS: We performed a comprehensive evolutionary analysis of E2F, RB and DP
(dimerization partners of E2Fs) protein family in representative eukaryotic
organisms. Several interesting facts were revealed. First, orthologues of RB,
E2F, and DP family are present in several representative unicellular organisms
and all multicellular organisms we checked. Second, ancestral E2F, RB genes
duplicated before placozoans and bilaterians diverged, thus E2F family was
divided into E2F4/5 subgroup (including repressive E2Fs: E2F4 and E2F5) and
E2F1/2/3 subgroup (including active E2Fs: E2F1, E2F2 and E2F3), RB family was
divided into RB1 subgroup (including RB1) and RBL subgroup (including RBL1 and
RBL2). Third, E2F4 and E2F5 share more sequence similarity with the predicted E2F
ancestral sequence than E2F1, E2F2 and E2F3; E2F4 and E2F5 also possess lower
evolutionary rates and higher purification selection pressures than E2F1, E2F2
and E2F3. Fourth, for RB family, the RBL subgroup proteins possess lower
evolutionary rates and higher purification selection pressures compared with RB
subgroup proteins in vertebrates,
CONCLUSIONS: Protein evolutionary rates and purification selection pressures are 
usually linked with protein functions. We speculated that function conducted by
E2F4/5 subgroup and RBL subgroup proteins might mainly represent the ancient
function of RB-E2F pathway, and the E2F1/2/3 subgroup proteins and RB1 protein
might contribute more to functional diversification in RB-E2F pathway. Our
results will enhance the current understanding of RB-E2F pathway and will also be
useful to further functional studies in human and other model organisms.

PMCID: PMC3224931
PMID: 20849664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Oncogene. 2010 Dec 16;29(50):6603-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.406. Epub 2010 Sep 6.

Redox-dependent Brca1 transcriptional regulation by an NADH-sensor CtBP1.

Deng Y(1), Liu J, Han G, Lu SL, Wang SY, Malkoski S, Tan AC, Deng C, Wang XJ,
Zhang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado, Denver, Aurora, CO 80045,
USA.

C-terminal binding protein 1 (CtBP1) is a transcriptional co-repressor and
metabolic sensory protein, which often represses tumor suppressor genes. Hence,
we sought to determine if CtBP1 affects expression of the tumor suppressor Brca1 
in head and neck tissue, as downregulation of Brca1 begins at the early stages of
head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs). We found that CtBP1 represses
Brca1 transcription by binding to the E2F4 site of the Brca1 promoter.
Additionally, the recruitment of CtBP1 to the Brca1 promoter is redox-dependent, 
that is, increased at high NADH levels in hypoxic conditions. Further,
immunostaining using a human HNSCC tissue array revealed that nuclear CtBP1
staining began to accumulate in hyperplasic lesions and HNSCCs, this staining
correlated with Brca1 downregulation in these lesions. Pharmacological disruption
of CtBP1 binding to Brca1 promoter by the antioxidant Tempol, which reduces NADH 
levels, relieved CtBP1-mediated repression of Brca1, leading to increased DNA
repair in HNSCC cells. As tumor cells are generally hypoxic with increased NADH
levels, the dynamic control of Brca1 by a 'metabolic switch' found in this study 
not only provides an important link between tumor metabolism and tumor suppressor
expression but also suggests a potential chemo preventative or therapeutic
strategy for HNSCC by blocking NADH-dependent CtBP1 activity at early stages of
HNSCC carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3081720
PMID: 20818429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Cell Biol. 2010 Aug 23;190(4):651-62. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201005076. Epub 2010 Aug
16.

Oxidative status of muscle is determined by p107 regulation of PGC-1alpha.

Scimè A(1), Soleimani VD, Bentzinger CF, Gillespie MA, Le Grand F, Grenier G,
Bevilacqua L, Harper ME, Rudnicki MA.

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Health Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

Mice lacking p107 exhibit a white adipose deficiency yet do not manifest the
metabolic changes typical for lipodystrophy, and instead exhibit low levels of
serum triglycerides and a normal liver phenotype. When fed a high fat diet,
p107-null mice still did not accumulate fat in the liver, and display markedly
elevated energy expenditures together with an increased energy preference for
lipids. Skeletal muscle was therefore examined, as this is normally the major
tissue involved in whole body lipid metabolism. Notably, p107-deficient muscle
express increased levels of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
co-activator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha) and contained increased numbers of the
pro-oxidative type I and type IIa myofibers. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
revealed binding of p107 and E2F4 to the PGC-1alpha proximal promoter, and this
binding repressed promoter activity in transient transcription assays. Ectopic
expression of p107 in muscle tissue in vivo results in a pronounced 20% decrease 
in the numbers of oxidative type IIa myofibers. Lastly, isolated p107-deficient
muscle tissue display a threefold increase in lipid metabolism. Therefore, p107
determines the oxidative state of multiple tissues involved in whole body fat
metabolism, including skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC2928004
PMID: 20713602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 22;285(43):33134-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.143461. Epub
2010 Aug 16.

RB·E2F1 complex mediates DNA damage responses through transcriptional regulation 
of ZBRK1.

Liao CC(1), Tsai CY, Chang WC, Lee WH, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.

RB plays an essential role in DNA damage-induced growth arrest and regulates the 
expression of several factors essential for DNA repair machinery. However, how RB
coordinates DNA damage response through transcriptional regulation of genes
involved in growth arrest remains largely unexplored. We examined whether RB can 
mediate the response to DNA damage through modulation of ZBRK1, a zinc
finger-containing transcriptional repressor that can modulate the expression of
GADD45A, a DNA damage response gene, to induce cell cycle arrest in response to
DNA damage. We found that the ZBRK1 promoter contains an authentic
E2F-recognition sequence that specifically binds E2F1, but not E2F4 or E2F6,
together with chromatin remodeling proteins CtIP and CtBP to form a repression
complex that suppresses ZBRK1 transcription. Furthermore, loss of RB-mediated
transcriptional repression led to an increase in ZBRK1 transcript levels,
correlating with increased sensitivity to ultraviolet (UV) and methyl
methanesulfonate-induced DNA damage. Taken together, these results suggest that
the RB·CtIP (CtBP interacting protein)/CtBP (C terminus-binding protein) /E2F1
complex plays a critical role in ZBRK1 transcriptional repression, and loss of
this repression may contribute to cellular sensitivity of DNA damage, ultimately 
leading to carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2963368
PMID: 20713352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Oncogene. 2010 Sep 9;29(36):5061-70. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.246. Epub 2010 Jul 19.

The E2F5 repressor is an activator of E6/E7 transcription and of the S-phase
entry in HPV18-associated cells.

Teissier S(1), Pang CL, Thierry F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biology, A-STAR, Singapore.

High-risk papillomavirus type 18 (HPV18) is one of the less represented HPV types
in low-grade lesions of the anogenital tract, whereas it occupies the second
place in cervical cancer, where it can be found in 16% of the cases worldwide,
after HPV16 present in 54% of them. These epidemiological data indicate that
HPV18 infection is more prone to carcinogenic progression. The main oncogenic
proteins, E6 and E7 of HPV18, are functionally comparable to the homologous
proteins of the other high-risk viruses, including HPV16. In this work, we
investigated the possibility that the higher oncogenic potential of HPV18 might
be due to transcriptional regulation of the E6/E7 oncogenes. By comparing the
E6/E7 promoter and enhancer sequences of the mucosal HPV genomes, we identified
E2F binding sites specific for HPV18. The E2F family of transcription factors
contains activators (E2F1-3) and repressors (E2F4-8) that regulate the
transcription of S-phase and mitotic genes and thereby have a crucial role in
cell-cycle progression. Surprisingly, we identified E2F5 as a direct activator of
HPV18 E6/E7 transcription by sequential silencing of E2F members in HeLa cells.
In addition, we could show that E2F5 positively regulates S-phase entry in HeLa
cells and that this activation of the cell cycle by a member of the E2F repressor
family is specific for HPV18-expressing cells. Diverting the function of E2F5
from a cell-cycle repressor into an activator might contribute to the higher
oncogenic potential of HPV18 when compared with other high-risk HPV types.

PMID: 20639900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2010 Mar-Apr;44(2):323-34.

[A pocket pRb mutation induces the increase in its affinity to E2F4 coupled with 
activation of muscle differentiation].

[Article in Russian]

Popov BV, Watt SM, Rozanov IuM, Chang L-.

Co-ordination of proliferation and differentiation in cells committed to muscle
fate requires the interaction of the retinoblastoma gene product (pRb) with
transcription factors of the E2F family. pRb has different affinities for
distinct E2Fs, however, the mechanism involved in pRb-E2Fs interaction has not
been completely investigated. We have found that pRb carrying a small deletion at
the end of the T antigen binding region (deltaS/N), and unable to interact with
large T antigen, could induce acute cell cycle block, stable prolongation of the 
cell cycle in G0/G1 and G2/M phases and suppression of the growth of tumor cells.
The deltaS/N showed increased affinity for E2F4, bound hyperphosphorylated forms 
of E2F4 and induced its nuclear compartmentalization. The ability of deltaS/N to 
form complexes with E2F4 on DNA was associated with an increase in formation of
"free" E2F4 and transsuppression of the specific reporter through preferential
binding to E2F4 but not t o E2F1. Stable expression of deltaS/N in multi-potent
fibroblasts promoted early muscle commitment. The results obtained suggest that a
mutation in the T antigen binding region may increase in affinity of the pRb for 
E2F4 combined with activation of muscle differentiation.

PMID: 20586193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Cell Cycle. 2010 Jul 1;9(13):2620-8. doi: 10.4161/cc.9.13.12108.

Disruption of calvarial ossification in E2f4 mutant embryos correlates with
increased proliferation and progenitor cell populations.

Miller ES(1), Berman SD, Yuan TL, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, MIT, Cambridge, MA,
USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors, in association with pocket protein
family members, are important for regulating genes required for cellular
proliferation. The most abundant E2F, E2F4, is implicated in maintaining the
G(0)/G(1) cell cycle state via transcriptional repression of genes that encode
proteins required for S-phase progression. Here, we investigate E2F4's role in
bone development using E2f4 germline mutant mice. We find that mutation of E2f4
impairs the formation of several bones that arise through intramembranous or
endochondral ossification. The most severe defect occurred in the calvarial bones
of the skull where we observed a striking delay in their ossification. In vivo
and in vitro analyses established that E2F4 loss did not block the intrinsic
differentiation potential of calvarial osteoblast progenitors. However, our data 
showed that E2f4 mutation elevated proliferation in the developing calvaria in
vivo and it increased the endogenous pool of undifferentiated progenitor cells.
These data suggest that E2F4 plays an important role in enabling osteoblast
progenitors to exit the cell cycle and subsequently differentiate thereby
contributing to the commitment of these cells to the bone lineage.

© 2010 Landes Bioscience

PMCID: PMC3322454
PMID: 20581455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 20;5(4):e10243. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010243.

Capsaicin displays anti-proliferative activity against human small cell lung
cancer in cell culture and nude mice models via the E2F pathway.

Brown KC(1), Witte TR, Hardman WE, Luo H, Chen YC, Carpenter AB, Lau JK, Dasgupta
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Physiology and Toxicology, Joan C. Edwards School 
of Medicine, Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is characterized by rapid progression
and low survival rates. Therefore, novel therapeutic agents are urgently needed
for this disease. Capsaicin, the active ingredient of chilli peppers, displays
anti-proliferative activity in prostate and epidermoid cancer in vitro. However, 
the anti-proliferative activity of capsaicin has not been studied in human SCLCs.
The present manuscript fills this void of knowledge and explores the
anti-proliferative effect of capsaicin in SCLC in vitro and in vivo.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: BrdU assays and PCNA ELISAs showed that capsaicin
displays robust anti-proliferative activity in four human SCLC cell lines.
Furthermore, capsaicin potently suppressed the growth of H69 human SCLC tumors in
vivo as ascertained by CAM assays and nude mice models. The second part of our
study attempted to provide insight into molecular mechanisms underlying the
anti-proliferative activity of capsaicin. We found that the anti-proliferative
activity of capsaicin is correlated with a decrease in the expression of
E2F-responsive proliferative genes like cyclin E, thymidylate synthase, cdc25A
and cdc6, both at mRNA and protein levels. The transcription factor E2F4 mediated
the anti-proliferative activity of capsaicin. Ablation of E2F4 levels by siRNA
methodology suppressed capsaicin-induced G1 arrest. ChIP assays demonstrated that
capsaicin caused the recruitment of E2F4 and p130 on E2F-responsive proliferative
promoters, thereby inhibiting cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings suggest that the anti-proliferative
effects of capsaicin could be useful in the therapy of human SCLCs.

PMCID: PMC2857654
PMID: 20421925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2010;2010:935764. doi: 10.1155/2010/935764. Epub 2010 Mar
22.

JAK3/STAT5/6 pathway alterations are associated with immune deviation in CD8 T
cells in renal cell carcinoma patients.

Cavalcanti E(1), Gigante M, Mancini V, Battaglia M, Ditonno P, Capobianco C,
Cincione RI, Selvaggi FP, Herr W, Storkus WJ, Gesualdo L, Ranieri E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, University of Bari, Bari,
Italy.

To investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying altered T cell response in
renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients, we compared autologous and allogeneic CD8(+)
T cell responses against RCC line from RCC patients and their HLA-matched donors,
using mixed lymphocyte/tumor cell cultures (MLTCs). In addition, we analyzed the 
expression of molecules associated with cell cycle regulation. Autologous MLTC
responder CD8(+) T cells showed cytotoxic activity against RCC cell lines;
however the analysis of the distribution of CD8(+) T-cell subsets revealed that
allogenic counterparts mediate superior antitumor efficacy. In RCC patients, a
decreased proliferative response to tumor, associated with defects in
JAK3/STAT5/6 expression that led to increased p27KIP1 expression and alterations 
in the cell cycle, was observed. These data define a molecular pathway involved
in cell cycle regulation that is associated with the dysfunction of
tumor-specific CD8(+) effector cells. If validated, this may define a therapeutic
target in the setting of patients with RCC.

PMCID: PMC2843943
PMID: 20339477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Oncogene. 2010 May 13;29(19):2853-63. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.42. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

Induced G1 cell-cycle arrest controls replication-dependent histone mRNA 3' end
processing through p21, NPAT and CDK9.

Pirngruber J(1), Johnsen SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Göttingen Center for Molecular Biosciences, 
University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

Proper cell cycle-dependent expression of replication-dependent histones is
essential for packaging of DNA into chromatin during replication. We previously
showed that cyclin-dependent kinase-9 (CDK9) controls histone H2B
monoubiquitination (H2Bub1) to direct the recruitment of specific mRNA 3' end
processing proteins to replication-dependent histone genes and promote proper
pre-mRNA 3' end processing. We now show that p53 decreases the expression of the 
histone-specific transcriptional regulator Nuclear Protein, Ataxia-Telangiectasia
Locus (NPAT) by inducing a G1 cell-cycle arrest, thereby affecting E2F-dependent 
transcription of the NPAT gene. Furthermore, NPAT is essential for histone mRNA
3' end processing and recruits CDK9 to replication-dependent histone genes.
Reduced NPAT expression following p53 activation or small interfering RNA
knockdown decreases CDK9 recruitment and replication-dependent histone gene
transcription but increases the polyadenylation of remaining histone mRNAs. Thus,
we present evidence that the induction of a G1 cell-cycle arrest (for example,
following p53 accumulation) alters histone mRNA 3' end processing and uncover the
first mechanism of a regulated switch in the mode of pre-mRNA 3' end processing
during a normal cellular process, which may be altered during tumorigenesis.

PMID: 20190802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Feb 15;16(4):1094-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0787.
Epub 2010 Feb 9.

Targeting the RB-pathway in cancer therapy.

Knudsen ES(1), Wang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

The RB-pathway, consisting of inhibitors and activators of cyclin-dependent
kinases, the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor (RB), and the E2F-family of
transcription factors, plays critical roles in the regulation of cell cycle
progression and cell death. Components of this pathway, particularly p16Ink4a,
cyclin D1, and RB, are frequently altered in sporadic human cancers to promote
deregulated cellular proliferation. The consistent disruption of the RB-pathway
in human cancers raises the possibility of exploiting tumor-specific RB-pathway
defects to improve the efficacy of current therapies and to develop new
therapeutic strategies. This article discusses how the RB-pathway status impacts 
the cellular responses to cytotoxic, cytostatic, and hormone therapies, and how
the components of the RB-pathway may be directly targeted to treat cancer.

PMCID: PMC2822892
PMID: 20145169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 2;107(5):2201-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0904783107.
Epub 2010 Jan 19.

Inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase down-regulates BRCA1 and RAD51 in a
pathway mediated by E2F4 and p130.

Hegan DC(1), Lu Y, Stachelek GC, Crosby ME, Bindra RS, Glazer PM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) are in clinical trials for
cancer therapy, on the basis of the role of PARP in recruitment of base excision 
repair (BER) factors to sites of DNA damage. Here we show that PARP inhibition to
block BER is toxic to hypoxic cancer cells, in which homology-dependent repair
(HDR) is known to be down-regulated. However, we also report the unexpected
finding that disruption of PARP, itself, either via chemical PARP inhibitors or
siRNAs targeted to PARP-1, can inhibit HDR by suppressing expression of BRCA1 and
RAD51, key factors in HDR of DNA breaks. Mechanistically, PARP inhibition was
found to cause increased occupancy of the BRCA1 and RAD51 promoters by repressive
E2F4/p130 complexes, a pathway prevented by expression of HPV E7, which disrupts 
p130 activity, or by siRNAs to knock down p130 expression. Functionally,
disruption of p130 by E7 expression or by siRNA knockdown also reverses the
cytotoxicity and radiosensitivity associated with PARP inhibition, suggesting
that the down-regulation of BRCA1 and RAD51 is central to these effects. Direct
measurement of HDR using a GFP-based assay demonstrates reduced HDR in cells
treated with PARP inhibitors. This work identifies a mechanism by which PARP
regulates DNA repair and suggests new strategies for combination cancer
therapies.

PMCID: PMC2836641
PMID: 20133863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Virol. 2010 Apr;84(8):4050-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02131-09. Epub 2010 Jan 20.

E1A interacts with two opposing transcriptional pathways to induce quiescent
cells into S phase.

Sha J(1), Ghosh MK, Zhang K, Harter ML.

Author information: 
(1)Case Western Reserve University, Department of Biochemistry, 10900 Euclid
Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. ml.nikki.harter@case.edu

Despite data suggesting that the adenovirus E1A protein of 243 amino acids
creates an S-phase environment in quiescent cells by overcoming the nucleosomal
repression of E2F-regulated genes, the precise mechanisms underlying E1A's
ability in this process have not yet been defined at the biochemical level. In
this study, we show by kinetic analysis that E1A, as opposed to an E1A mutant
failing to bind p130, can temporally eliminate corepressor complexes consisting
of p130-E2F4 and HDAC1/2-mSin3B from the promoters of E2F-regulated genes in
quiescent cells. Once the complexes are removed, the di-methylation of H3K9 at
these promoters becomes dramatically diminished, and this in turn allows for the 
acetylation of H3K9/14 and the recruitment of activating E2F family members,
which is then followed by the transcriptional activity of the E2F-regulated
genes. Remarkably, although an E1A mutant that can no longer bind to a histone
acetyltransferase (PCAF) is as capable as wild-type E1A in eliminating
corepressor complexes and methyl groups from the promoters of these genes, it
cannot mediate the acetylation of H3K9/14 or induce their transcription. These
findings suggest that corepressors as well as coactivators are acted upon by E1A 
to derepress E2F-regulated genes in quiescent cells. Thus, our results highlight 
for the first time a functional relationship between E1A and two transcriptional 
pathways of differing functions for transitioning cells out of quiescence and
into S phase.

PMCID: PMC2849484
PMID: 20089639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cell Cycle. 2010 Jan 15;9(2):371-6. Epub 2010 Jan 29.

pRB and E2F4 play distinct cell-intrinsic roles in fetal erythropoiesis.

Zhang J(1), Lee EY, Liu Y, Berman SD, Lodish HF, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge,
MA, USA.

The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein pRB functions, at least in part, by
directly binding to and modulating the activity of the E2F transcription factors.
Previous studies have shown that both E2F4 and pRB play important roles in fetal 
erythropoiesis. Given that these two proteins interact directly we investigated
the overlap of E2F4 and pRB function in this process by analyzing E2f4(-/-),
conditional Rb knockout (Rb(1lox/1lox)), and compound E2f4(-/-);Rb(1lox/1lox)
embryos. At E15.5 E2f4(-/-) and Rb(1lox/1lox) fetal erythroid cells display
distinct abnormalities in their differentiation profiles. When cultured in vitro,
both E2f4(-/-) and Rb(1lox/1lox) erythroid cells show defects in cell cycle
progression. Surprisingly, analysis of cell cycle profiling suggests that E2F4
and pRB control cell cycle exit through different mechanisms. Moreover, only pRB,
but not E2F4, promotes cell survival in erythroid cells. We observed an additive 
rather than a synergistic impact upon the erythroid defects in the compound
E2f4(-/-);Rb(1lox/1lox) embryos. We further found that fetal liver macrophage
development is largely normal regardless of genotype. Taken together, our results
show that E2F4 and pRB play independent cell-intrinsic roles in fetal
erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3931422
PMID: 20023434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cell Cycle. 2010 Jan 1;9(1):86-9.

Tumor suppression by ARF: gatekeeper and caretaker.

Dominguez-Brauer C(1), Brauer PM, Chen YJ, Pimkina J, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois
College of Medicine, UIC Cancer Center, Chicago, IL USA.

ARF is a vital tumor suppressor and its loss contributes significantly to cancer.
The frequency in which ARF is mutated, deleted or silenced is second to the loss 
of p53. The most documented and widely accepted activity of ARF is mediated
through its activation of the p53 transcriptional program by inhibiting MDM2
function. However, several lines of evidence have surfaced demonstrating that ARF
possesses p53-independent functions. One of these p53-independent functions is
ARF's regulation of the E2F family. The E2F/DP transcription factor is critical
for cell cycle progression. The balance between activator and repressor E2Fs
regulates the expression of E2F target genes and thus cell proliferation as well 
as other cellular functions such as checkpoint, chromosome assembly and repair.
Through its ability to bind directly to DP1, ARF can cause dissociation of both
activator and repressor E2Fs. While the regulation of the activator E2Fs is
related to cell cycle arrest, there is evidence that the regulation of the
repressors, E2F4 and E2F5, is significant in maintaining genomic stability.

PMID: 20016279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010 Jan 1;76(1):212-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.08.015.

Distinct signaling pathways after higher or lower doses of radiation in three
closely related human lymphoblast cell lines.

Lu TP(1), Lai LC, Lin BI, Chen LH, Hsiao TH, Liber HL, Cook JA, Mitchell JB, Tsai
MH, Chuang EY.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Electronics and Bioinformatics, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: The tumor suppressor p53 plays an essential role in cellular responses
to DNA damage caused by ionizing radiation; therefore, this study aims to further
explore the role that p53 plays at different doses of radiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The global cellular responses to higher-dose (10 Gy) and
lower dose (iso-survival dose, i.e., the respective D0 levels) radiation were
analyzed using microarrays in three human lymphoblast cell lines with different
p53 status: TK6 (wild-type p53), NH32 (p53-null), and WTK1 (mutant p53). Total
RNAs were extracted from cells harvested at 0, 1, 3, 6, 9, and 24 h after higher 
and lower dose radiation exposures. Template-based clustering, hierarchical
clustering, and principle component analysis were applied to examine the
transcriptional profiles.
RESULTS: Differential expression profiles between 10 Gy and iso-survival
radiation in cells with different p53 status were observed. Moreover, distinct
gene expression patterns were exhibited among these three cells after 10 Gy
radiation treatment, but similar transcriptional responses were observed in TK6
and NH32 cells treated with iso-survival radiation.
CONCLUSIONS: After 10 Gy radiation exposure, the p53 signaling pathway played an 
important role in TK6, whereas the NFkB signaling pathway appeared to replace the
role of p53 in WTK1. In contrast, after iso-survival radiation treatment, E2F4
seemed to play a dominant role independent of p53 status. This study dissected
the impacts of p53, NFkB and E2F4 in response to higher or lower doses of
gamma-irradiation.

PMID: 20005454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Apr 1;86(1):92-102. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvp383. Epub 2009 Dec
2.

E2F4 is required for cardiomyocyte proliferation.

van Amerongen MJ(1), Diehl F, Novoyatleva T, Patra C, Engel FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Development and Remodelling, Excellence Cluster
Cardio-Pulmonary System, Max-Planck-Institute for Heart and Lung Research,
Parkstrasse 1, Bad Nauheim 61231, Germany.

AIMS: Although the fundamental role of the E2F transcription factor family in
cell proliferation is well established, the specific function of E2F4 is unclear.
On the basis of findings from cell culture experiments, E2F4 is generally
considered as an inhibitor of cell proliferation. Accumulating evidence suggests,
however, that E2F4 acts as an activator of cell proliferation in certain
contexts. Here, we have investigated the role of E2F4 during heart development
and in proliferating cardiomyocytes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Nuclear E2F4 expression in cardiomyocytes declined during
mouse heart development, which correlates with the loss of proliferative capacity
of cardiomyocytes. Re-induction of proliferation in postnatal cardiomyocytes
increased nuclear E2F4 expression. E2F4 accumulated in the nucleus at the end of 
the S phase, remained nuclear during mitosis, and disappeared at the end of
cytokinesis. siRNA-mediated inhibition of E2F4 in proliferating postnatal
cardiomyocytes resulted in a significant reduction in mitosis, but not in DNA
synthesis. Co-staining of E2F4 and Crest revealed that E2F4 co-localizes with
kinetochores. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation showed that E2F4 binds to
centromeric alpha-satellite DNA during mitosis.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that E2F4 is required for cardiomyocyte
proliferation and suggest a function for E2F4 in mitosis.

PMID: 19955219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jan;30(2):524-36. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00938-09. Epub 2009 Nov
16.

E2F3 is a mediator of DNA damage-induced apoptosis.

Martinez LA(1), Goluszko E, Chen HZ, Leone G, Post S, Lozano G, Chen Z,
Chauchereau A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Mississippi Medical Center, 2500
North State Street, Jackson, MS 39216, USA. lmartinez@biochem.umsmed.edu

The E2F transcription factors have emerged as critical apoptotic effectors.
Herein we report that the E2F family member E2F3a can be induced by DNA damage
through transcriptional and posttranslational mechanisms. We demonstrate that the
posttranslational induction of human E2F3a is dependent on the checkpoint
kinases. Moreover, we show that human E2F3a is a substrate for the checkpoint
kinases (chk kinases) and that mutation of the chk phosphorylation site
eliminates the DNA damage inducibility of the protein. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that E2F1 and E2F2 are transcriptionally induced by DNA damage in an 
E2f3-dependent manner. Finally, using both in vitro and in vivo approaches, we
establish that E2f3 is required for DNA damage-induced apoptosis. Thus, our data 
reveal the novel ability of E2f3 to function as a master regulator of the DNA
damage response.

PMCID: PMC2798461
PMID: 19917728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jan;38(3):e13. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp1012. Epub 2009 Nov
11.

Sole-Search: an integrated analysis program for peak detection and functional
annotation using ChIP-seq data.

Blahnik KR(1), Dou L, O'Geen H, McPhillips T, Xu X, Cao AR, Iyengar S, Nicolet
CM, Ludäscher B, Korf I, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of California-Davis, Davis, CA
95616, USA.

Next-generation sequencing is revolutionizing the identification of transcription
factor binding sites throughout the human genome. However, the bioinformatics
analysis of large datasets collected using chromatin immunoprecipitation and
high-throughput sequencing is often a roadblock that impedes researchers in their
attempts to gain biological insights from their experiments. We have developed
integrated peak-calling and analysis software (Sole-Search) which is available
through a user-friendly interface and (i) converts raw data into a format for
visualization on a genome browser, (ii) outputs ranked peak locations using a
statistically based method that overcomes the significant problem of false
positives, (iii) identifies the gene nearest to each peak, (iv) classifies the
location of each peak relative to gene structure, (v) provides information such
as the number of binding sites per chromosome and per gene and (vi) allows the
user to determine overlap between two different experiments. In addition, the
program performs an analysis of amplified and deleted regions of the input
genome. This software is web-based and automated, allowing easy and immediate
access to all investigators. We demonstrate the utility of our software by
collecting, analyzing and comparing ChIP-seq data for six different human
transcription factors/cell line combinations.

PMCID: PMC2817454
PMID: 19906703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Virol. 2009 Dec;83(24):12671-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01422-09. Epub 2009 Oct 14.

Transcriptional downregulation of p27KIP1 through regulation of E2F function
during LMP1-mediated transformation.

Everly DN Jr(1), Mainou BA, Raab-Traub N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind
Franklin University of Medicine and Science, 3333 Green Bay Road, North Chicago, 
IL 60064, USA. david.everly@rosalindfranklin.edu

LMP1 induces the phenotypic transformation of fibroblasts and affects regulators 
of the cell cycle during this process. LMP1 decreases expression of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27 and increases the levels and
phosphorylation of cyclin-dependent kinase 2 and the retinoblastoma protein. In
the present study, the effects of LMP1 on cell cycle progression and the
mechanism of p27 downregulation by LMP1 were determined. Although p27 is
frequently regulated at the posttranscriptional level during cell cycle
progression and in cancer, LMP1 did not decrease ectopically expressed p27.
However, LMP1 did decrease p27 RNA levels and inhibited the activity of p27
promoter reporters. The LMP1-regulated promoter element was mapped to a region
containing two E2F sites. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays determined that
the regulated cis element bound an inhibitory E2F complex containing E2F4 and
p130. These findings indicate that LMP1 decreases p27 transcription through
effects on E2F family transcription factors. This property likely contributes to 
the ability of LMP1 to stimulate cell cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC2786828
PMID: 19828622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. PLoS Genet. 2009 Sep;5(9):e1000640. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000640. Epub 2009 
Sep 11.

A role for E2F activities in determining the fate of Myc-induced lymphomagenesis.

Rempel RE(1), Mori S, Gasparetto M, Glozak MA, Andrechek ER, Adler SB, Laakso NM,
Lagoo AS, Storms R, Smith C, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Department of Molecular
Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, United States of America.

The phenotypic heterogeneity that characterizes human cancers reflects the
enormous genetic complexity of the oncogenic process. This complexity can also be
seen in mouse models where it is frequently observed that in addition to the
initiating genetic alteration, the resulting tumor harbors additional,
somatically acquired mutations that affect the tumor phenotype. To investigate
the role of genetic interactions in the development of tumors, we have made use
of the Emu-myc model of pre-B and B cell lymphoma. Since various studies point to
a functional interaction between Myc and the Rb/E2F pathway, we have investigated
the role of E2F activities in the process of Myc-induced lymphomagenesis. Whereas
the absence of E2F1 and E2F3 function has no impact on Myc-mediated tumor
development, the absence of E2F2 substantially accelerates the time of tumor
onset. Conversely, tumor development is delayed by the absence of E2F4. The
enhanced early onset of tumors seen in the absence of E2F2 coincides with an
expansion of immature B lineage cells that are likely to be the target for Myc
oncogenesis. In contrast, the absence of E2F4 mutes the response of the lineage
to Myc and there is no expansion of immature B lineage cells. We also find that
distinct types of tumors emerge from the Emu-myc mice, distinguished by different
patterns of gene expression, and that the relative proportions of these tumor
types are affected by the absence of either E2F2 or E2F4. From these results, we 
conclude that there are several populations of tumors that arise from the Emu-myc
model, reflecting distinct populations of cells that are susceptible to
Myc-mediated oncogenesis and that the proportion of these cell populations is
affected by the presence or absence of E2F activities.

PMCID: PMC2729385
PMID: 19749980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. FEBS J. 2009 Oct;276(19):5703-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07261.x. Epub
2009 Sep 2.

LIN54 is an essential core subunit of the DREAM/LINC complex that binds to the
cdc2 promoter in a sequence-specific manner.

Schmit F(1), Cremer S, Gaubatz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry I, Biocenter, University of Wuerzburg,
Germany.

Recently, the conserved human LINC/DREAM complex has been described as an
important regulator of cell cycle genes. LINC consists of a core module that
dynamically associates with E2F transcription factors, p130 and the B-MYB
transcription factor in a cell cycle-dependent manner. In this study, we analyzed
the evolutionary conserved LIN54 subunit of LINC. We found that LIN54 is required
for cell cycle progression. Protein interaction studies demonstrated that a
predicted helix-coil-helix motif is required for the interaction of LIN54 with
p130 and B-MYB. In addition, we found that the cysteine-rich CXC domain of LIN54 
is a novel DNA-binding domain that binds to the cdc2 promoter in a
sequence-specific manner. We identified two binding sites for LIN54 in the cdc2
promoter, one of which overlaps with the cell cycle homology region at the
transcriptional start site. Gel shift assays suggested that, in quiescent cells, 
the binding of LIN54 at the cell cycle homology region is stabilized by the
binding of E2F4 to the adjacent cell cycle-dependent element. Our data
demonstrate that LIN54 is an important and integral subunit of LINC.

PMID: 19725879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. EMBO Rep. 2009 Sep;10(9):1036-42. doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.139. Epub 2009 Jul 31.

ARF stimulates XPC to trigger nucleotide excision repair by regulating the
repressor complex of E2F4.

Dominguez-Brauer C(1), Chen YJ, Brauer PM, Pimkina J, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois,
College of Medicine, M/C 669, 900 S. Ashland Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60607,
USA.

The tumour suppressor ARF (alternative reading frame), which is mutated or
silenced in various tumours, has a crucial role in tumour surveillance to
suppress unwarranted cell growth and proliferation. ARF has also been linked to
the DNA-damage-induced response of p53 because of its ability to inhibit murine
double minute 2 (MDM2). Here, however, we provide genetic evidence for a role of 
ARF in nucleotide excision repair (NER) that is independent of p53. Cells lacking
ARF are deficient in NER. Expression of ARF restores the repair activity, which
coincides with increased expression of the damaged-DNA recognition protein
xeroderma pigmentosum, complementation group C (XPC). We provide evidence that,
by disrupting the interaction between E2F transcription factor 4 (E2F4) and DRTF 
polypeptide 1 (DP1), ARF reduces the interaction of the E2F4-p130 repressor
complex with the promoter of XPC to ensure high-level expression of XPC.
Together, our results point to an important 'care-taker'-type tumour-suppression 
function for ARF in NER through the increased expression of XPC.

PMCID: PMC2750060
PMID: 19644500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Oct 15;315(17):2914-20. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.07.014. Epub
2009 Jul 18.

Deletion of the p107/p130-binding domain of Mip130/LIN-9 bypasses the requirement
for CDK4 activity for the dissociation of Mip130/LIN-9 from p107/p130-E2F4
complex.

Sandoval R(1), Pilkinton M, Colamonici OR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Mip130/LIN-9 is part of a large complex that includes homologs of the Drosophila 
dREAM (drosophila RB-like, E2F, and Myb) and C. elegans DRM complexes. This
complex also includes proteins such as Mip40/LIN-37, Mip120/LIN-54, and LIN-52.
In mammalian cells, Mip130/LIN-9 specifically associates with the p107/p130-E2F4 
repressor complex in G0/G1 and with B-Myb in S-phase. However, little is known
about how the transition occurs and whether Mip130/LIN-9 contributes to the
repressor effect of p107/p130. In this report, we demonstrate that Mip130/LIN-9, 
Mip40/LIN-37, Mip120/LIN-54, and Sin3b form a core complex, the Mip Core Complex 
or LIN Complex (MCC/LINC), which is detectable in all phases of the cell cycle.
This complex specifically recruits transcriptional repressors such as p107, p130,
E2F4 and HDAC1 in G0/G1, and B-Myb in S-phase. Importantly, we provide strong
evidence that the transition between repressors and activators of transcription
is mediated by CDK4, through the phosphorylation of the pocket proteins, p107 and
p130. The requirement for CDK4 activity is bypassed by the deletion of the first 
84 amino acids (Mip130/LIN-9(Delta84)), since this mutant is unable to interact
with p107/p130 in G0/G1, while maintaining its association with B-Myb.
Importantly, the Mip130/LIN-9(Delta84) allele rescues the low expression of G1/S 
genes observed in CDK4(-/-) MEFs demonstrating that Mip130/LIN-9 contributes to
the repression of these E2F-regulated genes in G0/G1.

PMCID: PMC2757496
PMID: 19619530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Int J Cancer. 2009 Nov 1;125(9):2086-94. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24559.

E2F4 and ribonucleotide reductase mediate S-phase arrest in colon cancer cells
treated with chlorophyllin.

Chimploy K(1), Díaz GD, Li Q, Carter O, Dashwood WM, Mathews CK, Williams DE,
Bailey GS, Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331-6512,
USA.

Chlorophyllin (CHL) is a water-soluble derivative of chlorophyll that exhibits
cancer chemopreventive properties, but which also has been studied for its
possible cancer therapeutic effects. We report here that human colon cancer cells
treated with CHL accumulate in S-phase of the cell cycle, and this is associated 
with reduced expression levels of p53, p21, and other G(1)/S checkpoint controls.
At the same time, E2F1 and E2F4 transcription factors become elevated and exhibit
increased DNA binding activity. In CHL-treated colon cancer cells,
bromodeoxyuridine pulse-chase experiments provided evidence for the inhibition of
DNA synthesis. Ribonucleotide reductase (RR), a pivotal enzyme for DNA synthesis 
and repair, was reduced at the mRNA and protein level after CHL treatment, and
the enzymatic activity was inhibited in a concentration-dependent manner both in 
vitro and in vivo. Immunoblotting revealed that expression levels of RR subunits 
R1, R2, and p53R2 were reduced by CHL treatment in HCT116 (p53(+/+)) and HCT116
(p53(-/-)) cells, supporting a p53-independent mechanism. Prior studies have
shown that reduced levels of RR small subunits can increase the sensitivity of
colon cancer cells to clinically used DNA-damaging agents and RR inhibitors. We
conclude that by inhibiting R1, R2, and p53R2, CHL has the potential to be
effective in the clinical setting, when used alone or in combination with
currently available cancer therapeutic agents.

(c) 2009 UICC.

PMCID: PMC2753276
PMID: 19585502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Cell Physiol. 2009 Nov;221(2):350-8. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21859.

E2F4 expression is required for cell cycle progression of normal intestinal crypt
cells and colorectal cancer cells.

Garneau H(1), Paquin MC, Carrier JC, Rivard N.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Team on Digestive Epithelium, Département d'Anatomie et Biologie
Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la Santé, Université de
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.

The generation of knock-out mice for E2F4 gene expression has suggested a role
for this transcription factor in establishing and/or maintaining the intestinal
crypt compartment. Having previously demonstrated that E2F4 is cytoplasmic in
quiescent-differentiated cells but nuclear in growth factor-stimulated
proliferative cells, the present study was aimed at determining the role of E2F4 
in the control of human intestinal epithelial proliferation. Results herein
demonstrate that lentiviral infection of an shRNA which specifically knocked-down
E2F4 expression slowed down G1/S phase transition and the proliferation rate of
normal human intestinal epithelial cells (HIEC) and of colon cancer cells.
Protein expression of Cdk2, cyclins D1 and A, Cdc25A and c-myc was markedly
down-regulated in shE2F4-expressing cells; by contrast, expression of the cell
cycle inhibitors p21(Cip/Waf) and p27(Kip1) was increased. In addition, the
expression of many genes involved in DNA synthesis was down-regulated in
shE2F4-expressing cells, whereas no modulation in E2F1 expression was observed. A
decrease in E2F4 in colon cancer cell lines also resulted in a reduction in
soft-agar growth capacity. Immunofluorescence experiments in human fetal
intestine revealed that cells expressing high nuclear levels of E2F4 also
expressed cyclin A protein. Lastly, E2F4 and its target cyclin A were
up-regulated and mostly nuclear in human colorectal tumor cells in comparison to 
the corresponding benign epithelium. These results indicate that nuclear E2F4 may
be determinant in the promotion of proliferation of human intestinal epithelial
crypt cells and colorectal cancer cells.

PMID: 19562678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biol Chem. 2009 Aug 21;284(34):22916-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.035519. Epub
2009 Jun 19.

Mirk regulates the exit of colon cancer cells from quiescence.

Jin K(1), Ewton DZ, Park S, Hu J, Friedman E.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Upstate Medical University of the State University of
New York, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.

Mirk/Dyrk1B is a serine/threonine kinase widely expressed in colon cancers. Serum
starvation induced HD6 colon carcinoma cells to enter a quiescent G0 state,
characterized by a 2N DNA content and a lower RNA content than G1 cells. Compared
with cycling cells, quiescent cells exhibited 16-fold higher levels of the
retinoblastoma protein p130/Rb2, which sequesters E2F4 to block entry into G1,
10-fold elevated levels of the CDK inhibitor p27kip1, and 10-fold higher levels
of Mirk. However, depletion of Mirk did not prevent entry into G0, but enabled
quiescent HD6, SW480, and colo320 colon carcinoma cells to acquire some
biochemical characteristics of G1 cells, including increased levels of cyclin D1 
and cyclin D3 because of slower turnover, increased activity of their CDK4/cyclin
D complexes, and increased phosphorylation and decreased E2F4 sequestering
ability of the CDK4 target, p130/Rb2. As a result, depletion of Mirk allowed some
cells to escape quiescence and enabled cells released from quiescence to traverse
G1 more quickly. The kinase activity of Mirk was increased by the
chemotherapeutic drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Treatment of p53 mutant colon cancer
cells with 5-FU led to an elongated G1 in a Mirk-dependent manner, as G1 was
shortened by ectopic overexpression of cyclin D1 mutated at the Mirk
phosphorylation site (T288A), but not by wild-type cyclin D1. Mirk, through
regulating cyclin D turnover, and the CDK inhibitor p27, as shown by depletion
studies, functioned independently and additively to regulate the exit of tumor
cells from quiescence.

PMCID: PMC2755699
PMID: 19542220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Aug 15;107(6):1182-8. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22222.

Changes in expression of cell-cycle-related genes in PC-3 prostate cancer cells
caused by ovine uterine serpin.

Padua MB(1), Hansen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
32611-0910, USA.

The hormonal-regulated serpin, ovine uterine serpin (OvUS), also called uterine
milk protein (UTMP), inhibits proliferation of lymphocytes and prostate cancer
(PC-3) cells by blocking cell-cycle progression. The present aim was to identify 
cell-cycle-related genes regulated by OvUS in PC-3 cells using the quantitative
human cell-cycle RT(2) Profiler PCR array. Cells were cultured +/-200 microg/ml
recombinant OvUS (rOvUS) for 12 and 24 h. At 12 h, rOvUS increased expression of 
three genes related to cell-cycle checkpoints and arrest (CDKN1A, CDKN2B, and
CCNG2). Also, 14 genes were down-regulated including genes involved in
progression through S (MCM3, MCM5, PCNA), M (CDC2, CKS2, CCNH, BIRC5, MAD2L1,
MAD2L2), G(1) (CDK4, CUL1, CDKN3) and DNA damage checkpoint and repair genes RAD1
and RBPP8. At 24 h, rOvUS decreased expression of 16 genes related to regulation 
and progression through M (BIRC5, CCNB1, CKS2, CDK5RAP1, CDC20, E2F4, MAD2L2) and
G(1) (CDK4, CDKN3, TFDP2), DNA damage checkpoints and repair (RAD17, BRCA1,
BCCIP, KPNA2, RAD1). Also, rOvUS down-regulated the cell proliferation marker
gene MKI67, which is absent in cells at G(0). Results showed that OvUS blocks
cell-cycle progression through upregulation of cell-cycle checkpoint and arrest
genes and down-regulation of genes involved in cell-cycle progression.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19530225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Lung Cancer. 2010 Feb;67(2):151-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.04.010. Epub 2009 
May 26.

Identification of genes associated with non-small-cell lung cancer promotion and 
progression.

Bankovic J(1), Stojsic J, Jovanovic D, Andjelkovic T, Milinkovic V, Ruzdijic S,
Tanic N.

Author information: 
(1)University of Belgrade, Institute for Biological Research, Department of
Neurobiology, Bulevar Despota Stefana 142, 11060 Belgrade, Serbia.

Lung cancer is the most common cause of neoplasia-related death worldwide. One of
the crucial early events in carcinogenesis is the induction of genomic
instability and mutator phenotype. We investigated genomic instability in 30
patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) by comparing DNA fingerprints of
paired tumor and normal tissues using arbitrarily primed polymerase chain
reaction (AP-PCR). Selected 21 DNA bands with altered mobility were isolated from
polyacrylamide gels, cloned and sequenced. Obtained sequences were submitted to
homology search in GenBank database which revealed the following genes: TSPAN14, 
CDH12, RDH10, CYP4Z1, KIR, E2F4, PHACTR3, PHF20, PRAME family member and SLC2A13.
Following the identification of these genes we examined their relation to the
clinicopathological parameters and survival of the patients. Our study revealed
that genetic alterations of TSPAN14, SLC2A13 and PHF20 appeared prevalently in
tumors of grade 1, stage I suggesting that structural changes of these genes
could play a role in NSCLC promotion. Contrary to this CYP4Z1, KIR and RDH10 were
prevalently mutated in tumors of grade 3, stage III suggesting that they could
play a role in NSCLC progression. E2F4, PHACTR3, PRAME family member and CDH12
most probably play important role in NSCLC geneses. In conclusion, our study
revealed altered genes previously not described in regard to this type of cancer.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19473719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 31;284(31):20966-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.006346. Epub
2009 May 20.

EKLF/KLF1 controls cell cycle entry via direct regulation of E2f2.

Tallack MR(1), Keys JR, Humbert PO, Perkins AC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics and Development, Institute for Molecular
Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane, 4072, Australia.

Differentiation of erythroid cells requires precise control over the cell cycle
to regulate the balance between cell proliferation and differentiation. The zinc 
finger transcription factor, erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF/KLF1), is
essential for proper erythroid cell differentiation and regulates many erythroid 
genes. Here we show that loss of EKLF leads to aberrant entry into S-phase of the
cell cycle during both primitive and definitive erythropoiesis. This cell cycle
defect was associated with a significant reduction in the expression levels of
E2f2 and E2f4, key factors necessary for the induction of S-phase gene expression
and erythropoiesis. We found and validated novel intronic enhancers in both the
E2f2 and E2f4 genes, which contain conserved CACC, GATA, and E-BOX elements. The 
E2f2 enhancer was occupied by EKLF in vivo. Furthermore, we were able to
partially restore cell cycle dynamics in EKLF(-/-) fetal liver upon additional
genetic depletion of Rb, establishing a genetic causal link between reduced E2f2 
and the EKLF cell cycle defect. Finally, we propose direct regulation of the E2f2
enhancer is a generic mechanism by which many KLFs regulate proliferation and
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2742862
PMID: 19457859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Dev Biol. 2009 Aug 1;332(1):104-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.05.541. Epub 2009
May 9.

E2F4 cooperates with pRB in the development of extra-embryonic tissues.

Lee EY(1), Yuan TL, Danielian PS, West JC, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)David H Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The retinoblastoma gene, RB-1, was the first identified tumor suppressor. Rb(-/-)
mice die in mid-gestation with defects in proliferation, differentiation and
apoptosis. The activating E2F transcription factors, E2F1-3, contribute to these 
embryonic defects, indicating that they are key downstream targets of the
retinoblastoma protein, pRB. E2F4 is the major pRB-associated E2F in vivo, yet
its role in Rb(-/-) embryos is unknown. Here we establish that E2f4 deficiency
reduced the lifespan of Rb(-/-) embryos by exacerbating the Rb mutant placental
defect. We further show that this reflects the accumulation of trophectoderm-like
cells in both Rb and Rb;E2f4 mutant placentas. Thus, Rb and E2f4 play cooperative
roles in placental development. We used a conditional mouse model to allow
Rb(-/-);E2f4(-/-) embryos to develop in the presence of Rb wild-type placentas.
Under these conditions, Rb(-/-);E2f4(-/-) mutants survived to birth. These
Rb(-/-);E2f4(-/-) embryos exhibited all of the defects characteristic of the Rb
and E2f4 single mutants and had no novel defects. Taken together, our data show
that pRB and E2F4 cooperate in placental development, but play largely
non-overlapping roles in the development of many embryonic tissues.

PMCID: PMC2832217
PMID: 19433082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Cancer Res. 2009 May 1;69(9):4073-80. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4156. Epub
2009 Apr 21.

B-MYB is required for recovery from the DNA damage-induced G2 checkpoint in p53
mutant cells.

Mannefeld M(1), Klassen E, Gaubatz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry I, Biocenter, University of Würzburg,
Würzburg, Germany.

In response to DNA damage, several signaling pathways that arrest the cell cycle 
in G(1) and G(2) are activated. The down-regulation of mitotic genes contributes 
to the stable maintenance of the G(2) arrest. The human LINC or DREAM complex,
together with the B-MYB transcription factor, plays an essential role in the
expression of G(2)-M genes. Here, we show that DNA damage results in the
p53-dependent binding of p130 and E2F4 to LINC and the dissociation of B-MYB from
LINC. We find that B-MYB fails to dissociate from LINC in p53 mutant cells, that 
this contributes to increased G(2)-M gene expression in response to DNA damage in
these cells, and, importantly, that B-MYB is required for recovery from the G(2) 
DNA damage checkpoint in p53-negative cells. Reanalysis of microarray expression 
data sets revealed that high levels of B-MYB correlate with a p53 mutant status
and an advanced tumor stage in primary human breast cancer. Taken together, these
data suggest that B-MYB/LINC plays an important role in the DNA damage response
downstream of p53.

PMID: 19383908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Prostate. 2009 Jun 15;69(9):1001-16. doi: 10.1002/pros.20947.

In prostate cancer C/EBPalpha promotes cell growth by the loss of interactions
with CDK2, CDK4, and E2F and by activation of AKT.

Yin H(1), Lowery M, Glass J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Feist-Weiller Cancer Center, LSU Health Sciences
Center, Shreveport, Louisiana 71130-3932, USA. hyin@lsuhsc.edu

BACKGROUND: The CCAAT/Enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha) is an important
transcription factor for granulopoiesis and adipogenesis. While decreased
expression and mutation of C/EBPalpha has been found in several types of tumors, 
the role of C/EBPalpha in prostate cancer has not been well characterized.
METHODS: We quantitatively analyzed the immunochemical staining of prostate
cancer tissue and examined the growth properties of prostate cancer cells stably 
expressing C/EBPalpha by measure growth curve, cell cycle, and anchorage
independent colony formation, investigated the association of C/EBPalpha with
E2Fs and CDKs by co-immunoprecipitation and examined the expression of CDKs and
activation of AKT by Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: The ratio of C/EBPalpha expression between cancer cells close to the
pseudolumen of glands and those nearer the basal cell layer was more than
threefold greater than that seen in the normal prostate epithelium. Further, this
ratio increased with increased Gleason score of the prostate cancer. Forced
expression of C/EBPalpha in prostate cancer cell lines accelerated cell growth,
stimulated cells into the S and G2 phases of cell cycle, and enhanced
anchorage-independent colony formation. Simultaneously, forced expression of
C/EBPalpha increased expression of CDK2/CDK4 and nuclear PP2A, and activated AKT.
In addition, C/EBPalpha was no longer found associated with E2F1/E2F4 and
CDK2/CDK4. AKT and PPA2 inhibitors restored both the anti-proliferation function 
of C/EBPalpha and the interaction between C/EBPalpha and E2F1/E2F4.
CONCLUSION: In prostate cancer cells C/EBPalpha cannot function as a tumor
suppressor.

PMID: 19347879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Dev Neurosci. 2009;31(3):238-46. doi: 10.1159/000210186. Epub 2009 Mar 27.

E2F4 is required for early eye patterning.

Ruzhynsky VA(1), Furimsky M, Park DS, Wallace VA, Slack RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ont.,
Canada.

Increasingly, studies reveal novel functions for cell cycle proteins during
development. Here, we investigated the role of E2F4 in eye development.
E2F4-deficient mouse embryos exhibit severe early eye patterning defects, which
are evident from embryonic day 11.5 and characterized by aberrant shape of the
optic cup, coloboma as well as abnormal eye pigmentation. Loss of E2F4 is
associated with proximal-distal patterning defects in the optic vesicle. These
defects are characterized by the expansion of optic stalk marker gene expression 
to the optic cup and reduced expression of ventral optic cup markers. These
defects are associated with a split of Shh expression domain at the ventral
midline of the forebrain and expansion of the Shh activity into the ventral optic
cup. Despite these patterning defects, early neuronal differentiation and Shh
expression in the retina are not affected by E2F4 deletion. Overall, the results 
of our studies show a novel role of E2F4 in the early eye development.

2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19325228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Cell Immunol. 2009;257(1-2):44-54. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2009.02.006.

Dysfunctional memory CD8+ T cells after priming in the absence of the cell cycle 
regulator E2F4.

Bancos S(1), Cao Q, Bowers WJ, Crispe IN.

Author information: 
(1)David H Smith Center for Vaccine Biology and Immunology, University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642USA. simona_bancos@urmc.rochester.edu

The transcriptional repressor E2F4 is important for cell cycle exit and terminal 
differentiation in epithelial cells, neuronal cells and adipocytes but its role
in T lymphocytes proliferation and memory formation is not known. Herein, we
investigated the function of E2F4 protein for the formation of functional murine 
memory T cells. Murine transgenic CD8+ T cells were infected in vitro with
lentivirus vector expressing a shRNA targeted against E2F4 followed by in vitro
stimulation with SIINFEKL antigenic peptide. For in vivo assays, transduced cells
were injected into congenic mice which were then infected with HSV-OVA. The
primary response, memory formation and secondary stimulation were determined for 
CD8+ lentivirus transduced cells. In the absence of E2F4 cell cycle repressor,
activated CD8+ T cells underwent intensive proliferation in vitro and in vivo.
These cells had the ability to differentiate into memory cells in vivo, but they 
were defective in recall proliferation. We show that transient suppression of
E2F4 during CD8+ T cell priming enhances primary proliferation and has a negative
effect on secondary stimulation. These findings demonstrate that the cell cycle
repressor E2F4 is essential for the formation of functional memory T cells. A
decrease in CD8+ T-lymphocyte compartment would diminish our capacity to control 
viral infections.

PMCID: PMC2727064
PMID: 19306992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Oncogene. 2009 Apr 16;28(15):1737-47. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.22. Epub 2009 Mar 2.

A Lin-9 complex is recruited by B-Myb to activate transcription of G2/M genes in 
undifferentiated embryonal carcinoma cells.

Knight AS(1), Notaridou M, Watson RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, 
UK.

It has recently been discovered that cell-cycle gene transcription is regulated
by a core complex named LINC that switches from a transcriptionally repressive
complex in G(0)-G(1) with the p130 or p107 pocket proteins and E2F4 to a
transcriptionally active complex in S-G(2) containing B-Myb. We have studied the 
function of LINC in F9 embryonal carcinoma cells, which are distinguished by a
rapid cell cycle resulting from an extremely short G(1) phase. We show that
suppressing expression of the LINC component, Lin-9, in F9 cells causes arrest in
mitosis, and we have used this system to screen for transcriptional targets. In
these cells, B-Myb was found in complexes with Lin-9 and several other LINC
constituents, however, the pocket proteins did not associate with LINC unless F9 
cells were differentiated. Lin-9 and B-Myb were both required for transcription
of G(2)/M genes such as Cyclin B1 and Survivin. Moreover, B-Myb was demonstrated 
to recruit Lin-9 to the Survivin promoter through multiple Myb-binding sites. The
demonstration that a B-Myb/LINC complex is vital for progression through mitosis 
in cells lacking a G(1)/S checkpoint has implications for both undifferentiated
embryonal cells and for cancers in which pocket protein function is compromised.

PMID: 19252525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Mol Aspects Med. 2009 Feb-Apr;30(1-2):77-85. doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2009.01.001. Epub
2009 Jan 9.

Role of nuclear glutathione as a key regulator of cell proliferation.

Pallardó FV(1), Markovic J, García JL, Viña J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Valencia, Av.
Blasco Ibañez 15, E-46010 Valencia, Spain; CIBERER, Av. Blasco Ibañez 15, E-46010
Valencia, Spain.

Glutathione (GSH) is essential for survival of eukaryotic but not in prokaryotic 
cells. Its functions in nucleated cells are far from being known. In fact GSH
plays an important role in cell proliferation. The purpose of the present review 
is to summarize the relationship between glutathione and the important events
that take place in the nucleus during the cell cycle. Most GSH co-localizes with 
nuclear DNA when cells are proliferating. However, when cells were confluent no
differences between nucleus and cytoplasm could be seen. A number of relevant
nuclear proteins are strictly dependent on nuclear redox status. For instance, we
found that telomerase is regulated by shifts in glutathione redox potential
within values similar to those found in vivo, and alterations in telomerase
activity are coordinated with changes in critical cell cycle proteins,
particularly Id2 and E2F4. More studies are required to establish the role of
nuclear glutathione in the epigenetic control of histone function. The
information provided in the present review suggests an important role of nuclear 
glutathione as a key regulator of epigenetic events that may be critical in the
regulation of cell proliferation.

PMID: 19232542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Mar 1;106(4):580-8. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22029.

Transcriptional regulation of fibrillin-2 gene by E2F family members in
chondrocyte differentiation.

Yanagino T(1), Yuasa K, Nagahama M, Matsuda Y, Tsuji A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, the University of Tokushima
Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.

Mutation in fibrillin-2, a major structural component of extracellular
microfibrils in connective tissue, results in the autosomal dominant disease
congenital contractural arachnodactyly. This genetic disease is characterized by 
dolichostenomelia and arachnodactyly, in addition to contractures of the large
joints and abnormal pinnae formation, thus indicating the significance of
fibrillin-2 in chondrogenesis. In this study, we investigated the transcriptional
regulation of fibrillin-2 in chondrogenic differentiation. Although mRNA
expression of fibrillin-1, a highly homologous protein to fibrillin-2, remained
almost unchanged during chondrogenesis of mouse ATDC5 cells, fibrillin-2 mRNA
expression varied. Fibrillin-2 was highly expressed at the early stage and
declined progressively during differentiation. The 5'-flanking region of the
fibrillin-2 gene contains potential binding sites for E2F, Runx, AP-2, and Sox
transcription factors. The promoter activity of fibrillin-2 decreased markedly
following deletion and mutagenesis of the E2F binding site between -143 and -136 
bp. Overexpression of E2F1 resulted in a marked increase in its promoter
activity, whereas expression of other transcription factors including AP-2alpha
and Runx2 had no effect. The increase in promoter activity by E2F1 was completely
suppressed by the coexpression of E2F4. E2F2 and E2F3 had positive effects on the
promoter activity. Although ATDC5 cells expressed transcripts for the E2F family 
genes at all stages of differentiation, the expression profiles differed. E2F1
expression remained almost unchanged, whereas E2F4 expression increased markedly 
at the late stage of differentiation. These results indicated that coordinated
expression of the E2F family is critical for the transcriptional regulation of
fibrillin-2 during chondrogenesis.

PMID: 19142862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Genes Cells. 2009 Jan;14(1):89-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01248.x. Epub
2008 Dec 10.

E2F-like elements in p27(Kip1) promoter specifically sense deregulated E2F
activity.

Ozono E(1), Komori H, Iwanaga R, Ikeda MA, Iseki S, Ohtani K.

Author information: 
(1)Human Gene Sciences Center, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45,
Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

The transcription factor E2F, the main target of the RB tumor suppressor pathway,
plays crucial roles not only in cell proliferation but also in tumor suppression.
The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1) gene, an upstream negative
regulator of E2F, is induced by ectopically expressed E2F1 but not by normal
growth stimulation that physiologically activates endogenous E2F. This suggests
that the gene can discriminate between deregulated and physiological E2F
activity. To address this issue, we examined regulation of the p27(Kip1) gene by 
E2F. Here we show that p27(Kip1) promoter specifically senses deregulated E2F
activity through elements similar to typical E2F sites. This E2F-like elements
were activated by deregulated E2F activity induced by forced inactivation of pRb 
but not by physiological E2F activity induced by serum stimulation, contrary to
typical E2F sites activated by both E2F activity. The endogenous p27(Kip1) gene
responded to deregulated and physiological E2F activity in the same manner to the
E2F-like elements. Moreover, the E2F-like elements bound ectopically expressed
E2F1 but not physiologically activated E2F1 or E2F4 in vivo. These results
suggest that the p27(Kip1) gene specifically senses deregulated E2F activity
through the E2F-like elements to suppress inappropriate cell cycle progression in
response to loss of pRb function.

PMID: 19077036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Jun;22(3):186-8.

[E2F1 upregulates endogenous XRCC1 expression].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Shi Y, Li HY, Liang LC, Ji YX, Chen DX, Chen XY, Wu H.

Author information: 
(1)Bejiing Youan Hospital Affiliated to Capital Medical University, Beijing
100069, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the regulatory effect and significance of transcription
factor E2F1 on X-ray repair cross2 complementing 1 (XRCC1).
METHODS: Saos2 cells were transfected with the E2F1 expression vectors (tet-E2F1)
and mutated E2F1 expression vectors (tet-132E). XRCC1 promotor luciferase
reporter vector was constructed and transfected into Saos2 cells together with
E2F1, E2F2, E2F3 and E2F4 expression vectors at different amount. The cells were 
collected 36 hours post-transfection for luciferase assays and absorbance was
read at 570 nm.
RESULTS: Cotransfection of increasing amounts of E2F1 expression vector with the 
XRCC1 promoter-luciferase reporter caused a dose-dependent increase in luciferase
activation. In contrast, DNA binding incompetent E2F1 (132E) could not activate
the XRCC1 promoter-luciferase reporter.
CONCLUSION: E2F1 could upregulate endogenous XRCC1 expression and stimulate the
XRCC1 promoter.

PMID: 19031698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Thyroid Res. 2008 Oct 13;1(1):5. doi: 10.1186/1756-6614-1-5.

Thyroid hormone - triiodothyronine - has contrary effect on proliferation of
human proximal tubules cell line (HK2) and renal cancer cell lines (Caki-2,
Caki-1) - role of E2F4, E2F5 and p107, p130.

Poplawski P(1), Nauman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Medical Centre of
Postgraduate Education, Warsaw, Poland. anauman@cmkp.edu.pl.

BACKGROUND: Triiodothyronine regulates proliferation acting as stimulator or
inhibitor. E2F4 and E2F5 in complexes with pocket proteins p107 or p130 stop
cells in G1, repressing transcription of genes important for cell cycle
progression. p107 and p130 inhibits activity of cyclin/cdk2 complexes. Expression
of all those proteins could be regulated by triiodothyronine. In clear cell renal
cell carcinoma many disturbances in T3 signaling pathway was described, in that
type of cancer also expression of some key G1 to S phase progression regulators
was shown.
METHODS: We investigated role of T3 and its receptors in regulation of
proliferation of HK2, Caki-2, Caki-1 cell lines (cell counting, cytometric
analysis of DNA content) and expression of thyroid hormone receptors, E2F4, E2F5,
p107 and p130 (western blot and semi-quantitative real time PCR). Statistical
analysis was performed using one-way ANOVA.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: We show that T3 inhibits proliferation of HK2, and
stimulates it in Caki lines. Those differences are result of disturbed expression
of TR causing improper regulation of E2F4, E2F5, p107 and p130 in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2583984
PMID: 19014670  [PubMed]


174. Oncogene. 2009 Jan 29;28(4):500-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.406. Epub 2008 Nov 10.

Inhibition of pituitary tumors in Rb mutant chimeras through E2f4 loss reveals a 
key suppressive role for the pRB/E2F pathway in urothelium and ganglionic
carcinogenesis.

Parisi T(1), Bronson RT, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, David H Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research 
at MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The retinoblastoma protein pRB suppresses tumorigenesis largely through
regulation of the E2F transcription factors. E2F4, the most abundant E2F protein,
is thought to act in cooperation with pRB to restrain cell proliferation. In this
study, we analyse how loss of E2f4 affects the tumorigenicity of pRB-deficient
tissues. As Rb(-/-);E2f4(-/-) germline mice die in utero, we generated
Rb(-/-);E2f4(-/-) chimeric animals to allow examination of adult tumor
phenotypes. We found that loss of E2f4 had a differential effect on known
Rb-associated neuroendocrine tumors. It did not affect thyroid and adrenal glands
tumors but partially suppressed lung neuroendocrine hyperplasia. The most
striking effect was in the pituitary where E2F4 loss delayed the development, and
reduced the incidence, of Rb mutant tumors. This tumor suppression increased the 
longevity of the Rb(-/-);E2f4(-/-) chimeric animals allowing us to identify novel
tumor types. We observed ganglionic neuroendocrine neoplasms, lesions not
associated earlier with mutation of either Rb or E2f4. Moreover, a subset of the 
Rb(-/-);E2f4(-/-) chimeras developed either low- or high-grade carcinomas in the 
urothelium transitional epithelium supporting a key role for Rb in bladder
cancer.

PMCID: PMC2633419
PMID: 18997819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Mol Cell. 2008 Nov 7;32(3):359-70. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.10.015.

A role for mammalian Sin3 in permanent gene silencing.

van Oevelen C(1), Wang J, Asp P, Yan Q, Kaelin WG Jr, Kluger Y, Dynlacht BD.

Author information: 
(1)New York University School of Medicine, NYU Cancer Institute, 522 1st Avenue, 
New York, NY 10016, USA.

The multisubunit Sin3 corepressor complex regulates gene transcription through
deacetylation of nucleosomes. However, the full range of Sin3 activities and
targets is not well understood. Here, we have investigated genome-wide binding of
mouse Sin3 and RBP2 as well as histone modifications and nucleosome positioning
as a function of myogenic differentiation. Remarkably, we find that Sin3
complexes spread immediately downstream of the transcription start site on
repressed and transcribed genes during differentiation. We show that RBP2 is part
of a Sin3 complex and that on a subset of E2F4 target genes, the coordinated
activity of Sin3 and RBP2 leads to deacetylation, demethylation, and
repositioning of nucleosomes. Our work provides evidence for coordinated binding 
of Sin3, chromatin modifications, and chromatin remodeling within discrete
regulatory regions, suggesting a model in which spreading of Sin3 binding is
ultimately linked to permanent gene silencing on a subset of E2F4 target genes.

PMCID: PMC3100182
PMID: 18995834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Genome Res. 2008 Nov;18(11):1763-77. doi: 10.1101/gr.080622.108. Epub 2008 Oct 3.

E2F in vivo binding specificity: comparison of consensus versus nonconsensus
binding sites.

Rabinovich A(1), Jin VX, Rabinovich R, Xu X, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and the Genome Center, University of
California-Davis, Davis, California 95616, USA.

We have previously shown that most sites bound by E2F family members in vivo do
not contain E2F consensus motifs. However, differences between in vivo target
sites that contain or lack a consensus E2F motif have not been explored. To
understand how E2F binding specificity is achieved in vivo, we have addressed how
E2F family members are recruited to core promoter regions that lack a consensus
motif and are excluded from other regions that contain a consensus motif. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with DNA microarray analysis (ChIP-chip)
assays, we have shown that the predominant factors specifying whether E2F is
recruited to an in vivo binding site are (1) the site must be in a core promoter 
and (2) the region must be utilized as a promoter in that cell type. We have
tested three models for recruitment of E2F to core promoters lacking a consensus 
site, including (1) indirect recruitment, (2) looping to the core promoter
mediated by an E2F bound to a distal motif, and (3) assisted binding of E2F to a 
site that weakly resembles an E2F motif. To test these models, we developed a new
in vivo assay, termed eChIP, which allows analysis of transcription factor
binding to isolated fragments. Our findings suggest that in vivo (1) a consensus 
motif is not sufficient to recruit E2Fs, (2) E2Fs can bind to isolated regions
that lack a consensus motif, and (3) binding can require regions other than the
best match to the E2F motif.

PMCID: PMC2577861
PMID: 18836037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 Sep 29;9:404. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-404.

Integrative bioinformatics analysis of transcriptional regulatory programs in
breast cancer cells.

Niida A(1), Smith AD, Imoto S, Tsutsumi S, Aburatani H, Zhang MQ, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 110-0032, Japan.
niida@iam.u-tokyo.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Microarray technology has unveiled transcriptomic differences among
tumors of various phenotypes, and, especially, brought great progress in
molecular understanding of phenotypic diversity of breast tumors. However,
compared with the massive knowledge about the transcriptome, we have surprisingly
little knowledge about regulatory mechanisms underling transcriptomic diversity.
RESULTS: To gain insights into the transcriptional programs that drive tumor
progression, we integrated regulatory sequence data and expression profiles of
breast cancer into a Bayesian Network, and searched for cis-regulatory motifs
statistically associated with given histological grades and prognosis. Our
analysis found that motifs bound by ELK1, E2F, NRF1 and NFY are potential
regulatory motifs that positively correlate with malignant progression of breast 
cancer.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that these 4 motifs are principal regulatory
motifs driving malignant progression of breast cancer. Our method offers a more
concise description about transcriptome diversity among breast tumors with
different clinical phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC2572072
PMID: 18823535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Oncol Rep. 2008 Oct;20(4):751-60.

Deregulation of the G1/S phase transition in cancer and squamous intraepithelial 
lesions of the uterine cervix: a case control study.

Arvanitis DA(1), Spandidos DA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Division, Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens,
Athens, Greece.

High-risk types of HPV express the oncoproteins, E6 and E7, that can inactivate
TP53 and RB1, respectively, and thus take control of both cell cycle and
apoptosis. Herein, the mRNA expression profiles of 24 G1/S checkpoint genes were 
analysed in cancer and squamous intraepithelial lesions (SIL) of the uterine
cervix. In total 35 squamous cervical carcinomas, 26 high-grade SIL (HSIL), 33
low-grade SIL (LSIL) tissues, and 28 normal uterine cervix specimens as controls 
were assessed by RT-PCR. Five genes were found to be upregulated only in tumours,
RBL2, E2F2, CDK6, CCNE1 and MYC; eight in tumours and HSILs, E2F1, E2F3, E2F5,
CCND1, CDK2, CDKN1B, PCNA and POLA, and five in tumours, HSILs and LSILs, TP53,
E2F4, CDKN1A, CDKN2A and DHFR. MDM2 was found to be upregulated in SIL, while
RBL1 was found to be downregulated in all three groups of cases. TP73 exhibited
lower levels in carcinomas; however, its exon 13-containing isoforms were
increased and exon 2-containing isoforms were reduced in both cancer and HSIL.
Three genes, RB1, CDK4 and CDKN2D, did not exhibit any significant alteration in 
gene expression. Hierarchical clustering revealed that this set of G1/S
checkpoint genes was able to discriminate the total 122 samples into groups of
disease and non-disease with only 8 exceptions (6.6%). Our data suggest that
deregulation of G1/S phase transition in cervical carcinogenesis is a progressive
process. Certain clusters of genes are activated very early in pre-cancerous SILs
while others are activated later, during malignant transformation. The ability of
this array of markers to identify disease status suggests that it could be used
for diagnostic purposes.

PMID: 18813814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cancer Res. 2008 Aug 1;68(15):6292-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0121.

A small-molecule E2F inhibitor blocks growth in a melanoma culture model.

Ma Y(1), Kurtyka CA, Boyapalle S, Sung SS, Lawrence H, Guida W, Cress WD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

HLM006474 was identified using a computer-based virtual screen and the known
crystal structure of the DNA-bound E2F4/DP2 heterodimer. Treatment of multiple
cell lines with HLM006474 resulted in the loss of intracellular E2F4 DNA-binding 
activity as measured by electrophoretic mobility shift assay within hours.
Overnight exposure to HLM006474 resulted in down-regulation of total E2F4 protein
as well as known E2F targets. The effects of HLM006474 treatment on different
cell lines varied but included a reduction in cell proliferation and an increase 
in apoptosis. HLM006474 induced apoptosis in a manner distinct from cisplatin and
doxorubicin. E2F4-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts were less sensitive than
wild-type counterparts to the apoptosis-inducing activity of the compound,
revealing its biological specificity. A375 cells were extremely sensitive to the 
apoptosis-inducing activity of the compound in two-dimensional culture, and
HLM006474 was a potent inhibitor of melanocytes proliferation and subsequent
invasion in a three-dimensional tissue culture model system. Together, these
results suggest that interference with E2F activity using small molecules may
have clinical application in cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3615411
PMID: 18676853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Cardiovasc Res. 2008 Nov 1;80(2):219-26. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvn194. Epub 2008 Jul
15.

E2F2 expression induces proliferation of terminally differentiated cardiomyocytes
in vivo.

Ebelt H(1), Zhang Y, Kampke A, Xu J, Schlitt A, Buerke M, Müller-Werdan U, Werdan
K, Braun T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, University of Halle-Wittenberg,
Ernst-Grube-Strasse 40, 06097 Halle, Germany. henning.ebelt@medizin.uni-halle.de

AIMS: In previous experiments we have demonstrated that expression of the
transcription factors E2F2 and E2F4 is sufficient to induce proliferation of
isolated primary cardiomyocytes from newborn rats and mice. We now wanted to
analyse whether E2F2 or E2F4 are also able to promote cell cycle progression of
adult cardiomyocytes in vivo, which unlike cardiomyocytes from newborn rodents
lack the ability to undergo cell proliferation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: E2F2 or E2F4 was expressed in hearts of mice at different
developmental stages using adenoviral vectors. Effects regarding proliferation,
hypertrophy, and apoptosis were analysed on histological sections, and
quantitative assessment of cell cycle regulatory genes was performed by real-time
PCR (polymerase chain reaction) and western blot. We found that both E2F2 and
E2F4 can stimulate hypertrophic cell growth of cardiomyocytes. However, only
directed expression of E2F2 but not of E2F4 was sufficient to induce
proliferation of cardiomyocytes. Expression of E2F2 in vivo did not increase the 
percentage of apoptotic cardiomyocytes but down-regulated the expression of the
pro-apoptotic genes caspase-6 and apaf-1. Further analysis of the cell cycle
regulatory machinery revealed that expression of E2F2 caused a strong induction
of cyclin A and E while the expression of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
(CKIs) such as p21 was not affected.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that a limited induction of cardiomyocyte cell
proliferation can be achieved by E2F2-mediated stimulation of cyclin A and E
expression without a reduction of CKIs.

PMID: 18628254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Oncogene. 2008 Sep 25;27(43):5696-705. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.184. Epub 2008 Jun
9.

IKK/NF-kappaB signaling pathway inhibits cell-cycle progression by a novel
Rb-independent suppression system for E2F transcription factors.

Araki K(1), Kawauchi K, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Institute of Gerontology, Nippon Medical
School, Kanagawa, Japan.

E2Fs are key regulators of cell-cycle progression, and their transcriptional
activities are regulated by histone acetyltransferases (HATs). Retinoblastoma
(Rb) family proteins (pRb, p107 and p130) bind to E2Fs and inhibit their
transcriptional activities by disrupting HAT binding and recruitment of histone
deacetylases. In this study, we show that IkappaB kinases (IKKalpha or IKKbeta)
activation inhibits cell growth and E2F-dependent transcription in normal human
fibroblasts. The inhibition of E2F by IKKs was not observed in cells lacking
nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB/p65; however, it was observed in cells lacking three
Rb family genes. p65 disrupted the physical interaction between activator E2Fs
(F2F1, E2F2 and E2F3) and the HAT cofactor transactivation/transformation-domain 
associated protein, resulting in a reduction in E2F-responsive gene expression.
Furthermore, IKKalpha and IKKbeta directly phosphorylated E2F4, resulting in
nuclear accumulation and enhanced DNA binding of the E2F4/p130 repressor complex.
Our study describes a novel growth inhibitory system that functions by
Rb-independent suppression of E2Fs by the IKK/NF-kappaB signaling pathway.

PMID: 18542057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Oncogene. 2008 Sep 11;27(40):5326-38. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.165. Epub 2008 May
26.

Rb/E2F4 and Smad2/3 link survivin to TGF-beta-induced apoptosis and tumor
progression.

Yang J(1), Song K, Krebs TL, Jackson MW, Danielpour D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Medical Sciences-Oncology, Case School of Medicine, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA

Survivin is a prosurvival protein overexpressed in many cancers through
mechanisms that remain poorly explored, and is implicated in control of tumor
progression and resistance to cancer chemotherapeutics. Here, we report a
critical role for survivin in the induction of apoptosis by transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-beta). We show that TGF-beta rapidly downregulates survivin
expression in prostate epithelial cells, through a unique mechanism of
transcriptional suppression involving Smads 2 and 3, Rb/E2F4, and the cell-cycle 
repressor elements CDE and CHR. This TGF-beta response is triggered through a
Smad2/3-dependent hypophosphorylation of Rb and the subsequent association of the
Rb/E2F4 repressive complex to CDE/CHR elements in the proximal region of the
survivin promoter. Viral-mediated gene delivery experiments, involving
overexpressing or silencing survivin, reveal critical roles of survivin in
apoptosis induced by TGF-beta alone or in cooperation with cancer therapeutic
agents. We propose a novel TGF-beta/Rb/survivin axis with a putative role in the 
functional switch of TGF-beta from tumor suppressor to tumor promoter.

PMCID: PMC2762862
PMID: 18504435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Biomed Environ Sci. 2008 Feb;21(1):30-6. doi: 10.1016/S0895-3988(08)60004-5.

Different patterns of cyclin D1/CDK4-E2F-1/4 pathways in human embryo lung
fibroblasts treated by benzo[a]pyrene at different doses.

Ye M(1), Liu BC, Shi XL, You BR, Du HJ, Jia XW, Shen FH.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Occupational Health and Poison Control, Chinese Center
for Disease Control and Prevention, 29 Nanwei Road, Beijing 100050, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the roles of the cyclin D1/CDK4 and E2F-1/4 pathways
and compare their work patterns in cell cycle changes induced by different doses 
of B[a]P.
METHODS: Human embryo lung fibroblasts (HELFs) were treated with 2 micromol/L or 
100 micromol/L B[a]P which were provided with some characteristics of transformed
cells (T-HELFs). Cyclin D1, CDK4 and E2F-1/4 expressions were determined by
Western blotting. Flow cytometry was used to detect the distribution of cell
cycle.
RESULTS: After B[a]P treatment, the proportion of the first gap (G1) phase cells 
decreased. CDK4 and E2F-4 expression did not change significantly. In 2
micromol/L treated cells, a marked overexpression of cyclin D1 and E2F-1 was
observed. However, in T-HELFs overexpression was limited to cyclin D1 only, and
no overexpression of E2F-1 was observed. The decreases of G1 phase in response to
B[a]P treatment were blocked in antisense cyclin D1 and antisense CDK4
transfected HELFs (A-D1 and A-K4) and T-HELFs (T-A-D1 and T-A-K4). After 2
micromol/L B[a]P treatment, overexpression of E2F-1 was attenuated in A-D1, and
E2F-4 expression was decreased significantly in A-K4. In T-A-D1 and T-A-K4, E2F-4
expression was increased significantly, compared with T-HELFs. The E2F-1
expression remained unchanged in T-A-D1 and T-A-K4.
CONCLUSIONS: Cyclin D1/CDK4-E2F-1/4 pathways work in different patterns in
response to low dose and high dose B[a]P treatment. In HELFs treated with 2
micromol/L B[a]P, cyclin D1 positively regulates the E2F-1 expression while CDK4 
negatively regulates the E2F-4 expression; however, in HELFs treated with 100
micromol/L B[a]P, both cyclin D1 and CDK4 negatively regulate the E2F-4
expression.

PMID: 18478976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2008 Feb;26(2):72-6.

[Activated protein 1-cyclin D1/E2F 1 pathways involved in cell cycle changes
induced by benzo (a) pyrene].

[Article in Chinese]

Ye M(1), Liu BC, Jia XW, Gao A, Jiao S, Zhang FM.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Occupation Health and Poison Control, Chinese Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 100050, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the roles of activated protein 1 (AP-1) in cell cycle
changes on human embryo lung fibroblasts (HELF) induced by benzo (a) pyrene [B
(a) P], and relationships between AP-1 and cyclin D1/CDK4-E2F-1/4.
METHODS: Cells transfected with AP-1 luciferase reporter plasmid (AP-H) were
cultured with serum-free RPMI1640 for 48 h, and treated with 2 micromol/L B (a) P
for 24 h. AP-1 relative activity was detected by luciferase assay. Changes of
cell cycle and the expression of cyclin D1, CDK4 and E2F-1/4 were checked using
the flow cytometer and Western blot assay.
RESULTS: After B (a) P was treated for 24 h, the ratio of G1 phase cells (71 +/- 
2)% was decreased to (48 +/- 3)% (P < 0.05), and an increase was observed in the 
ratio of S phase. AP-1 activity and cyclin D1/E2F-1 expression were increased
significantly, but CDK4/E2F-4 expression did not change after B (a) P treatment. 
When AP-1 activity was inhibited by curcumin, decreases of G1 phase in response
to B (a) P treatment were blocked, and overexpression of cyclin D1/E2F-1 was
attenuated, but CDK4/E2F-4 expression was not changed significantly.
CONCLUSION: AP-1 is involved in B (a) P induced cell cycle changes, and is the
upstream signals of cyclin D1/E2F-1, but not CDK4/E2F-4.

PMID: 18445313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Genet Genomics. 2008 Apr;35(4):215-24. doi: 10.1016/S1673-8527(08)60030-2.

Transcriptional regulation of human polo-like kinases and early mitotic
inhibitor.

Tategu M(1), Nakagawa H, Sasaki K, Yamauchi R, Sekimachi S, Suita Y, Watanabe N, 
Yoshid K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Meiji University School of Agriculture, 1-1-1
Higashimita, Tama-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 214-8571, Japan.

Human polo-like kinases (PLK1-PLK4) have been implicated in mitotic regulation
and carcinogenesis. PLK1 phosphorylates early mitotic inhibitor 1 (Emi1) to
ensure mitosis entry, whereas Emi2 plays a key role during the meiotic cell
cycle. Transcription factor E2F is primarily considered to regulate the G(1)/S
transition of the cell cycle but its involvement in the regulation of mitosis has
also been recently suggested. A gap still exists between the molecular basis of
E2F and mitotic regulation. The present study was designed to characterize the
transcriptional regulation of human PLK and Emi genes. Adenoviral overexpression 
of E2F1 increased PLK1 and PLK3 mRNA levels in A549 cells. A reporter gene assay 
revealed that the putative promoter regions of PLK1, PLK3, and PLK4 genes were
responsive to activators E2F, E2F1-E2F3. We further characterized the putative
promoter regions of Emi1 and Emi2 genes, and these could be regulated by
activators E2F and E2F1-E2F4, respectively. Finally, PLK1-PLK4, Emi1, and Emi2
mRNA expression levels in human adult, fetal tissues, and several cell lines
indicated that each gene has a unique expression pattern but is uniquely
expressed in common tissues and cells such as the testes and thymus.
Collectively, these results indicate that E2F can integrate G(1)/S and G(2)/M to 
oscillate the cell cycle by regulating mitotic genes PLK and Emi, leading to
determination of the cell fate.

PMID: 18439978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Immunol. 2008 May 1;180(9):5927-34.

Disruption of mutually negative regulatory feedback loop between
interferon-inducible p202 protein and the E2F family of transcription factors in 
lupus-prone mice.

Panchanathan R(1), Xin H, Choubey D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati, 3223 Eden
Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.

Studies have identified IFN-inducible Ifi202 gene as a lupus susceptibility gene 
(encoding p202 protein) in mouse models of lupus disease. However, signaling
pathways that regulate the Ifi202 expression in cells remain to be elucidated. We
found that steady-state levels of Ifi202 mRNA and protein were high in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from E2F1 knockout (E2F1(-/-)) and E2F1 and E2F2
double knockout (E2F1(-/-)E2F2(-/-)) mice than isogenic wild-type MEFs. Moreover,
overexpression of E2F1 in mouse fibroblasts decreased expression of p202.
Furthermore, expression of E2F1, but not E2F4, transcription factor in mouse
fibroblasts repressed the activity of 202-luc-reporter in promoter-reporter
assays. Interestingly, the E2F1-mediated transcriptional repression of the
202-luc-reporter was independent of p53 and pRb expression. However, the
repression was dependent on the ability of E2F1 to bind DNA. We have identified a
potential E2F DNA-binding site in the 5'-regulatory region of the Ifi202 gene,
and mutations in this E2F DNA-binding site reduced the E2F1-mediated
transcriptional repression of 202-luc-reporter. Because p202 inhibits the
E2F1-mediated transcriptional activation of genes, we compared the expression of 
E2F1 and its target genes in splenic cells from lupus-prone B6.Nba2 congenic
mice, which express increased levels of p202, with age-matched C57BL/6 mice. We
found that increased expression of Ifi202 in the congenic mice was associated
with inhibition of E2F1-mediated transcription and decreased expression of E2F1
and its target genes that encode proapoptotic proteins. Our observations support 
the idea that increased Ifi202 expression in certain strains of mice contributes 
to lupus susceptibility in part by inhibiting E2F1-mediated functions.

PMCID: PMC2810195
PMID: 18424712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Circ Res. 2008 May 23;102(10):1222-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.107.163550. Epub
2008 Apr 17.

A cyclin D2-Rb pathway regulates cardiac myocyte size and RNA polymerase III
after biomechanical stress in adult myocardium.

Angelis E(1), Garcia A, Chan SS, Schenke-Layland K, Ren S, Goodfellow SJ, Jordan 
MC, Roos KP, White RJ, MacLellan WR.

Author information: 
(1)The Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, Department of Medicine, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1760, USA.

Normally, cell cycle progression is tightly coupled to the accumulation of cell
mass; however, the mechanisms whereby proliferation and cell growth are linked
are poorly understood. We have identified cyclin (Cyc)D2, a G(1) cyclin
implicated in mediating S phase entry, as a potential regulator of hypertrophic
growth in adult post mitotic myocardium. To examine the role of CycD2 and its
downstream targets, we subjected CycD2-null mice to mechanical stress.
Hypertrophic growth in response to transverse aortic constriction was attenuated 
in CycD2-null compared with wild-type mice. Blocking the increase in CycD2 in
response to hypertrophic agonists prevented phosphorylation of CycD2-target Rb
(retinoblastoma gene product) in vitro, and mice deficient for Rb had potentiated
hypertrophic growth. Hypertrophic growth requires new protein synthesis and
transcription of tRNA genes by RNA polymerase (pol) III, which increases with
hypertrophic signals. This load-induced increase in RNA pol III activity is
augmented in Rb-deficient hearts. Rb binds and represses Brf-1 and TATA box
binding protein (TBP), subunits of RNA pol III-specific transcription factor B,
in adult myocardium under basal conditions. However, this association is
disrupted in response to transverse aortic constriction. RNA pol III activity is 
unchanged in CycD2(-/-) myocardium after transverse aortic constriction, and
there is no dissociation of TBP from Rb. These investigations identify an
essential role for the CycD2-Rb pathway as a governor of cardiac myocyte
enlargement in response to biomechanical stress and, more fundamentally, as a
regulator of the load-induced activation of RNA pol III.

PMCID: PMC2447867
PMID: 18420946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Mol Med (Berl). 2008 May;86(5):597-608. doi: 10.1007/s00109-008-0326-2. Epub
2008 Mar 27.

Transcription factor FBI-1 acts as a dual regulator in adipogenesis by
coordinated regulation of cyclin-A and E2F-4.

Laudes M(1), Bilkovski R, Oberhauser F, Droste A, Gomolka M, Leeser U, Udelhoven 
M, Krone W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II and Centre of Molecular Medicine Cologne
(CMMC), University of Cologne, Kerpener Strasse 62, 50937 Cologne, Germany.
matthias.laudes@uk-koeln.de

Generation of new adipocytes plays a major role in the development of obesity. We
previously have shown that transcriptional repressor factor that binds to IST
(FBI)-1 exerts a dual effect in the process of adipogenesis by inhibiting
proliferation and promoting differentiation of preadipocytes. The aim of the
present study was to identify FBI-1 regulated molecular effectors that could
account for these effects. Overexpressing FBI-1 in preadipocytes resulted in
reduced expression of the cell cycle regulator cyclin A, which may explain FBI-1 
induced inhibition of proliferation. Interestingly, FBI-1 repressed cyclin A
promoter activity through an indirect mechanisms that did not involve direct
binding of FBI-1 to the promoter sequence, but rather FBI-1 inhibition of
transcriptional activator Sp1 binding to a regulatory element at -452 to -443. We
also show that FBI-1 promotes terminal preadipocyte differentiation through a
mechanism involving decreased levels of expression of the PPARgamma inhibitor
E2F-4. FBI-1 significantly reduced E2F-4 promoter activity. Contrary to cyclin A,
we found FBI-1-induced repression of E2F-4 is mediated by a direct mechanism via 
a FBI-1 regulatory element at -11 to -5. As function of transcriptional
repressors normally depends on the presence of regulatory co-factors we also
performed expression profiling of potential FBI-1 co-repressors throughout
adipogenesis. In these experiments Sin3A and histon deacetylase (HDAC)-1 showed a
similar expression pattern compared to FBI-1. Strikingly, co-immunoprecipitation 
studies revealed that FBI-1 binds Sin3A and HDAC-1 to form a repressor complex.
Furthermore, by mutational analysis the amino terminal Poxvirus (POZ) domain of
FBI-1 was found to be important for Sin3A and HDAC-1 binding. Taken together,
FBI-1 is the first transcriptional repressor shown to act as a dual regulator in 
adipogenesis exerting repressor activities on target genes by both, direct and
indirect mechanisms.

PMID: 18368381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 May;28(10):3127-38. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02089-07. Epub 2008 Mar 
17.

p110 CUX1 cooperates with E2F transcription factors in the transcriptional
activation of cell cycle-regulated genes.

Truscott M(1), Harada R, Vadnais C, Robert F, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University, Molecular Oncology Group, 687 Pine Ave. West, Rm. H5.21,
Montreal H3A-1A1, Canada.

The transcription factor p110 CUX1 was shown to stimulate cell proliferation by
accelerating entry into S phase. As p110 CUX1 can function as a transcriptional
repressor or activator depending on promoter context, we investigated its
mechanism of transcriptional activation using the DNA polymerase alpha gene
promoter as a model system. Linker-scanning analysis revealed that a low-affinity
E2F binding site is required for transcriptional activation. Moreover,
coexpression with a dominant-negative mutant of DP-1 suggested that endogenous
E2F factors are indeed needed for p110-mediated activation. Tandem affinity
purification, coimmunoprecipitation, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and reporter 
assays indicated that p110 CUX1 can engage in weak protein-protein interactions
with E2F1 and E2F2, stimulate their recruitment to the DNA polymerase alpha gene 
promoter, and cooperate with these factors in transcriptional activation. On the 
other hand, in vitro assays suggested that the interaction between CUX1 and E2F1 
either is not direct or is regulated by posttranslational modifications.
Genome-wide location analysis revealed that targets common to p110 CUX1 and E2F1 
included many genes involved in cell cycle, DNA replication, and DNA repair.
Comparison of the degree of enrichment for various E2F factors suggested that
binding of p110 CUX1 to a promoter will favor the specific recruitment of E2F1,
and to a lesser extent E2F2, over E2F3 and E2F4. Reporter assays on a subset of
common targets confirmed that p110 CUX1 and E2F1 cooperate in their
transcriptional activation. Overall, our results show that p110 CUX1 and E2F1
cooperate in the regulation of many cell cycle genes.

PMCID: PMC2423173
PMID: 18347061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Immunol. 2008 Mar 15;180(6):3699-707.

E2F4 modulates differentiation and gene expression in hematopoietic progenitor
cells during commitment to the lymphoid lineage.

Enos ME(1), Bancos SA, Bushnell T, Crispe IN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, David H Smith Center for Vaccine
Biology and Immunology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14620, USA.

The E2F4 protein is involved in gene repression and cell cycle exit, and also has
poorly understood effects in differentiation. We analyzed the impact of E2F4
deficiency on early steps in mouse hematopoietic development, and found defects
in early hematopoietic progenitor cells that were propagated through common
lymphoid precursors to the B and T lineages. In contrast, the defects in
erythromyeloid precursor cells were self-correcting over time. This suggests that
E2F4 is important in early stages of commitment to the lymphoid lineage. The
E2F4-deficient progenitor cells showed reduced expression of several key
lymphoid-lineage genes, and overexpression of two erythromyeloid lineage genes.
However, we did not detect effects on cell proliferation. These findings
emphasize the significance of E2F4 in controlling gene expression and cell fate.

PMID: 18322175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 2;369(2):277-80. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.051. Epub 2008 Feb 21.

TGFbeta-mediated formation of pRb-E2F complexes in human myeloid leukemia cells.

Hu XT(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Natural and Health Science, Barry University, 11300 Northeast Second
Avenue, Miami Shores, FL 33161, USA.

TGFbeta is well known for its inhibitory effect on cell cycle G1 checkpoint
kinases. However, its role in the control of pRb-E2F complexes is not well
established. TGFbeta inhibits phosphorylation of pRb at several serine and
threonine residues and regulates the association of E2F transcription factors
with pRb family proteins. Recent studies found that predominantly E2F-4, p130,
and histone deacetylase (HDAC) are found to bind to corresponding E2F-responsive 
promoters in G0/G1 phase. As cells progress through mid-G1, p130-E2F4 complex are
replaced by p107-E2F4 followed by activators E2F1, 2, and 3. pRb was not
detectable in the promoters containing the E2F-responsive site in cycling cells
but was associated with E2F4-p130 complexes or E2F4-p107 complexes during G0/G1
phase. In human myeloid leukemia cell line, MV4-11, TGFbeta upregulated pRb-E2F-4
and p130-E2F-4, and downregulated p107-E2F-4 complexes. However, pRB-E2F1 and
pRb-E2F3 complexes were found in proliferating cells but not in TGFbeta arrested 
G1 cells. In addition, electrophoretic gel mobility shift assay (EMSA) could not 
detect pRb-E2F DNA-binding activities either in S or G1 phase but exhibited the
existence of p107-E2F4 in proliferating cells and p130-E2F4 complexes in
TGFbeta-arrested G1 cells, respectively. Our data suggest that p107 and p130, but
not pRb, and the repressor E2F, but not activator E2Fs, play a critical role in
regulating E2F-responsive gene expression in TGFbeta-mediated cell cycle control 
in human myeloid leukemia cells.

PMID: 18294958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. PLoS One. 2008 Jan 23;3(1):e1484. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001484.

Transcriptional regulation of an evolutionary conserved intergenic region of
CDT2-INTS7.

Nakagawa H(1), Tategu M, Yamauchi R, Sasaki K, Sekimachi S, Yoshida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Meiji University School of Agriculture, Kawasaki,
Kanagawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In the mammalian genome, a substantial number of gene pairs
(approximately 10%) are arranged head-to-head on opposite strands within 1,000
base pairs, and separated by a bidirectional promoter(s) that generally drives
the co-expression of both genes and results in functional coupling. The
significance of unique genomic configuration remains elusive.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we report on the identification of an
intergenic region of non-homologous genes, CDT2, a regulator of DNA replication, 
and an integrator complex subunit 7 (INTS7), an interactor of the largest subunit
of RNA polymerase II. The CDT2-INTS7 intergenic region is 246 and 245 base pairs 
long in human and mouse respectively and is evolutionary well-conserved among
several mammalian species. By measuring the luciferase activity in A549 cells,
the intergenic human sequence was shown to be able to drive the reporter gene
expression in either direction and notably, among transcription factors E2F, E2F1
approximately E2F4, but not E2F5 and E2F6, this sequence clearly up-regulated the
reporter gene expression exclusively in the direction of the CDT2 gene. In
contrast, B-Myb, c-Myb, and p53 down-regulated the reporter gene expression in
the transcriptional direction of the INTS7 gene. Overexpression of E2F1 by
adenoviral-mediated gene transfer resulted in an increased CDT2, but not INTS7,
mRNA level. Real-time polymerase transcription (RT-PCR) analyses of the
expression pattern for CDT2 and INTS7 mRNA in human adult and fetal tissues and
cell lines revealed that transcription of these two genes are asymmetrically
regulated. Moreover, the abundance of mRNA between mouse and rat tissues was
similar, but these patterns were quite different from the results obtained from
human tissues.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These findings add a unique example and help to
understand the mechanistic insights into the regulation of gene expression
through an evolutionary conserved intergenic region of the mammalian genome.

PMCID: PMC2194621
PMID: 18213392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Nov;1119:147-64.

Ghrelin receptor (GHS-R1A) agonists show potential as interventive agents during 
aging.

Smith RG(1), Sun Y, Jiang H, Albarran-Zeckler R, Timchenko N.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, MS: 
BCM M230, Houston, TX 77030, USA. rsmith@bcm.tmc.edu

Administration of an orally active agonist (MK-0677) of the growth hormone
secretagogue receptor (GHS-R1a) to elderly subjects restored the amplitude of
endogenous episodic growth hormone (GH) release to that of young adults.
Functional benefits include increased lean mass and bone density and modest
improvements in strength. In old mice, a similar agonist partially restored
function to the thymus and reduced tumor cell growth and metastasis. Treatment of
old mice with the endogenous GHS-R1a agonist ghrelin restored a young liver
phenotype. The mechanism involves inhibition of cyclin D3:cdk4/cdk6 activity and 
increased protein phosphatase-2A (PP2A) activity in liver nuclei, which
stabilizes the dephosphorylated form of the transcription factor C/EBPalpha
preventing the age-dependent formation of the C/EBPalpha-Rb-E2F4-Brm nuclear
complex. By inhibiting formation of this complex, repression of E2F target genes 
is de-repressed and C/EBPalpha regulated expression of Pepck, a regulator of
gluconeogenesis, is normalized, thereby restoring a young liver phenotype. In the
brain, aging is associated with decline in dopamine function. We investigated the
potential neuromodulatory role of GHS-R1a on dopamine action. Neurons were
identified in the hippocampus, cortex, substantia nigra, and ventral tegmental
areas that coexpressed GHS-R1a and dopamine receptor subtype-1 (D1R). Cell
culture studies showed that, in the presence of ghrelin and dopamine, GHS-R and
D1R form heterodimers, which modified G-protein signal transduction resulting in 
amplification of dopamine signaling. We speculate that aging is associated with
deficient endogenous ghrelin signaling that can be rescued by intervention with
GHS-R1a agonists to improve quality of life and maintain independence.

PMID: 18056963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2008 Mar;7(3):459-72. Epub 2007 Nov 27.

Quantitative proteomics analysis demonstrates post-transcriptional regulation of 
embryonic stem cell differentiation to hematopoiesis.

Williamson AJ(1), Smith DL, Blinco D, Unwin RD, Pearson S, Wilson C, Miller C,
Lancashire L, Lacaud G, Kouskoff V, Whetton AD.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Leukemia Proteomics Laboratory, Faculty of Medical and Human
Sciences, University of Manchester, Kinnaird House, Kinnaird Road, Manchester M20
4QL, United Kingdom.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells can differentiate in vitro to produce the endothelial
and hematopoietic precursor, the hemangioblasts, which are derived from the
mesoderm germ layer. Differentiation of Bry(GFP/+) ES cell to hemangioblasts can 
be followed by the expression of the Bry(GFP/+) and Flk1 genes. Proteomic and
transcriptomic changes during this differentiation process were analyzed to
identify mechanisms for phenotypic change during early differentiation. Three
populations of differentiating Bry(GFP) ES cells were obtained by flow cytometric
sorting, GFP-Flk1- (epiblast), GFP+Flk1- (mesoderm), and GFP+Flk1+
(hemangioblast). Microarray analyses and relative quantification two-dimensional 
LCLC-MS/MS on nuclear extracts were performed. We identified and quantified 2389 
proteins, 1057 of which were associated to their microarray probe set. These
included a variety of low abundance transcription factors, e.g. UTF1, Sox2, Oct4,
and E2F4, demonstrating a high level of proteomic penetrance. When paired
comparisons of changes in the mRNA and protein expression levels were performed
low levels of correlation were found. A strong correlation between isobaric
tag-derived relative quantification and Western blot analysis was found for a
number of nuclear proteins. Pathway and ontology analysis identified proteins
known to be involved in the regulation of stem cell differentiation, and proteins
with no described function in early ES cell development were also shown to change
markedly at the proteome level only. ES cell development is regulated at the mRNA
and protein level.

PMID: 18045800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Cancer Res. 2007 Nov 1;67(21):10148-58.

A cell proliferation and chromosomal instability signature in anaplastic thyroid 
carcinoma.

Salvatore G(1), Nappi TC, Salerno P, Jiang Y, Garbi C, Ugolini C, Miccoli P,
Basolo F, Castellone MD, Cirafici AM, Melillo RM, Fusco A, Bittner ML, Santoro M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Studi delle Istituzioni e dei Sistemi Territoriali,
Universita' Parthenope, Naples, Italy.

Here, we show that the anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) features the
up-regulation of a set of genes involved in the control of cell cycle progression
and chromosome segregation. This phenotype differentiates ATC from normal tissue 
and from well-differentiated papillary thyroid carcinoma. Transcriptional
promoters of the ATC up-regulated genes are characterized by a modular
organization featuring binding sites for E2F and NF-Y transcription factors and
cell cycle-dependent element (CDE)/cell cycle gene homology region (CHR)
cis-regulatory elements. Two protein kinases involved in cell cycle regulation,
namely, Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) and T cell tyrosine kinase (TTK), are part of
the gene set that is up-regulated in ATC. Adoptive overexpression of p53, p21
(CIP1/WAF1), and E2F4 down-regulated transcription from the PLK1 and TTK
promoters in ATC cells, suggesting that these genes might be under the negative
control of tumor suppressors of the p53 and pRB families. ATC, but not normal
thyroid, cells depended on PLK1 for survival. RNAi-mediated PLK1 knockdown caused
cell cycle arrest associated with 4N DNA content and massive mitotic cell death. 
Thus, thyroid cell anaplastic transformation is accompanied by the overexpression
of a cell proliferation/genetic instability-related gene cluster that includes
PLK1 kinase, which is a potential molecular target for ATC treatment.

PMID: 17981789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Dec 28;364(4):1050-5. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

Interaction of E2F-Rb family members with corepressors binding to the adjacent
E2F site.

Nakajima Y(1), Yamada S, Kamata N, Ikeda MA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and 
Dental University, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan.

Cell cycle-dependent transcriptional repression of the E2F1 and B-myb promoters
is mediated through E2F-binding sites and adjacent corepressor site (cell cycle
gene homology region (CHR)/downstream repression site (DRS)). Here, we show that 
a factor binding to the B-myb CHR is co-purified with E2F DNA-binding activity,
and coimmunoprecipitated with components of E2F/Rb-family repressor complexes,
E2F4 and retinoblastoma (Rb) family proteins. In spite of structural and
functional similarities, however, the E2F1 and B-myb CHRs exhibited distinct
factor-binding specificities. Furthermore, substitution of E2F1 CHR with the
B-myb CHR in the E2F1 promoter revealed that the B-myb CHR was unable to repress 
the E2F1 promoter completely in the G0 phase. These results suggest that
transcriptional repression of the E2F1 and B-myb promoters is mediated by
physical interaction of E2F/Rb-family repressor complexes with promoter-specific 
corepressors.

PMID: 17976373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Genes Immun. 2008 Jan;9(1):38-46. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Innate immune response gene expression profiles characterize primary
antiphospholipid syndrome.

Bernales I(1), Fullaondo A, Marín-Vidalled MJ, Ucar E, Martínez-Taboada V,
López-Hoyos M, Zubiaga AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology,
University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain.

Primary antiphospholipid syndrome (PAPS) is a systemic autoimmune disorder
characterized by thromboembolic episodes and pregnant morbidity with an
increasing clinical importance. To gain insight into the pathogenesis of PAPS, we
have investigated the gene expression profiles that characterize peripheral blood
mononuclear cells derived from PAPS patients. We show that the transcriptional
activity of genes involved in innate immune responses, such as toll-like receptor
8 and CD14, as well as downstream genes of this pathway, such as STAT1, OAS2,
TNFSF13 and PLSCR1 are significantly increased in PAPS patients. In addition, the
expression of monocyte-specific cytokines is also elevated in PAPS mononuclear
cells stimulated in vitro with lipopolysaccharide. Taken together, these results 
reveal a 'response to pathogen' signature in PAPS, which could reflect an altered
monocyte activity. Finally, microarray analyses also revealed a reduced
expression of genes coding for proteins involved in transcriptional control.
Interestingly, a significant proportion of them exhibit E2F-binding sites in
their promoter, suggesting that a deregulated RB/E2F activity could play a role
in the pathogenesis of antiphospholipid syndrome.

PMID: 17960154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. PLoS One. 2007 Oct 24;2(10):e1061.

Cell cycle genes are the evolutionarily conserved targets of the E2F4
transcription factor.

Conboy CM(1), Spyrou C, Thorne NP, Wade EJ, Barbosa-Morais NL, Wilson MD,
Bhattacharjee A, Young RA, Tavaré S, Lees JA, Odom DT.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK-Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Maintaining quiescent cells in G0 phase is achieved in part through the
multiprotein subunit complex known as DREAM, and in human cell lines the
transcription factor E2F4 directs this complex to its cell cycle targets. We
found that E2F4 binds a highly overlapping set of human genes among three diverse
primary tissues and an asynchronous cell line, which suggests that
tissue-specific binding partners and chromatin structure have minimal influence
on E2F4 targeting. To investigate the conservation of these transcription factor 
binding events, we identified the mouse genes bound by E2f4 in seven primary
mouse tissues and a cell line. E2f4 bound a set of mouse genes that was common
among mouse tissues, but largely distinct from the genes bound in human. The
evolutionarily conserved set of E2F4 bound genes is highly enriched for
functionally relevant regulatory interactions important for maintaining cellular 
quiescence. In contrast, we found minimal mRNA expression perturbations in this
core set of E2f4 bound genes in the liver, kidney, and testes of E2f4 null mice. 
Thus, the regulatory mechanisms maintaining quiescence are robust even to
complete loss of conserved transcription factor binding events.

PMCID: PMC2020443
PMID: 17957245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Genome Res. 2007 Nov;17(11):1550-61. Epub 2007 Oct 1.

A comprehensive ChIP-chip analysis of E2F1, E2F4, and E2F6 in normal and tumor
cells reveals interchangeable roles of E2F family members.

Xu X(1), Bieda M, Jin VX, Rabinovich A, Oberley MJ, Green R, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California-Davis, Davis, California 
95616, USA.

Using ChIP-chip assays (employing ENCODE arrays and core promoter arrays), we
examined the binding patterns of three members of the E2F family in five cell
types. We determined that most E2F1, E2F4, and E2F6 binding sites are located
within 2 kb of a transcription start site, in both normal and tumor cells. In
fact, the majority of promoters that are active (as defined by TAF1 or POLR2A
binding) in GM06990 B lymphocytes and Ntera2 carcinoma cells were also bound by
an E2F. This very close relationship between E2F binding sites and binding sites 
for general transcription factors in both normal and tumor cells suggests that a 
chromatin-bound E2F may be a signpost for active transcription initiation
complexes. In general, we found that several E2Fs bind to a given promoter and
that there is only modest cell type specificity of the E2F family. Thus, it is
difficult to assess the role of any particular E2F in transcriptional regulation,
due to extreme redundancy of target promoters. However, Ntera2 carcinoma cells
were exceptional in that a large set of promoters were bound by E2F6, but not by 
E2F1 or E2F4. It has been proposed that E2F6 contributes to gene silencing by
recruiting enzymes involved in methylating histone H3. To test this hypothesis,
we created Ntera2 cell lines harboring shRNAs to E2F6. We found that reduction of
E2F6 only induced minimal alteration of the transcriptome of Ntera2
transcriptome. Our results support the concept of functional redundancy in the
E2F family and suggest that E2F6 is not critical for histone methylation.

PMCID: PMC2045138
PMID: 17908821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Mar;214(3):568-81.

Cyclin D1/cdk4 can interact with E2F4/DP1 and disrupts its DNA-binding capacity.

Scimè A(1), Li L, Ciavarra G, Whyte P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Main
Street West, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The E2F family of transcription factors regulate the expression of many
growth-related genes in a cell cycle-dependent manner. These transcription
factors can activate or, in conjunction with an Rb-related protein, repress
transcription. E2F transcriptional activity is regulated at several different
levels that are each linked to cell cycle progression. In many cell types, E2F4
and E2F5 are the predominant E2F species during G(0) and early G(1) and function 
primarily as repressors of E2F-regulated genes. In this study,
co-immunoprecipitation techniques were used to demonstrate that cyclins D1, D2,
and D3 are capable of interacting with E2F4, E2F5, and DP1. Overexpression of
cyclin D1/cdk4 reduced E2F4-mediated transcription in a simple reporter gene
assay and electrophoretic mobility shift analyses using nuclear extracts from
transfected cells indicated that cyclin D1/cdk4 disrupts the DNA-binding ability 
of E2F4. Cell cycle analysis following stimulation of serum-starved 3T3 cells
indicated that E2F4 undergoes changes in its phosphorylation pattern coincident
with the synthesis of cyclin D1. Examination of a series of E2F4 deletion mutants
indicated that a cyclin D1-binding site located close to the carboxyl terminus of
E2F4 was critical for the disruption of DNA binding by cyclin D1/cdk4. These data
support a model in which E2F4 DNA binding is abolished during mid-G(1) at the
same time when E2F interactions with pRb-related proteins are disrupted by cyclin
D1/cdk4.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17894419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. PLoS One. 2007 Sep 19;2(9):e912.

Comparative analysis of E2F family member oncogenic activity.

Chen C(1), Wells AD.

Author information: 
(1)Joseph Stokes, Jr. Research Institute, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

The E2F family of transcription factors consists of nine members with both
distinct and overlapping functions. These factors are situated downstream of
growth factor signaling cascades, where they play a central role in cell growth
and proliferation through their ability to regulate genes involved in cell cycle 
progression. For this reason, it is likely that the members of the E2F family
play a critical role during oncogenesis. Consistent with this idea is the
observation that some tumors exhibit deregulated expression of E2F proteins. In
order to systematically compare the oncogenic capacity of these family members,
we stably over-expressed E2F1 through 6 in non-transformed 3T3 fibroblasts and
assessed the ability of these transgenic cell lines to grow under conditions of
low serum, as well as to form colonies in soft agar. Our results show that these 
six E2F family members can be divided into three groups that exhibit differential
oncogenic capacity. The first group consists of E2F2 and E2F3a, both of which
have strong oncogenic capacity. The second group consists of E2F1 and E2F6, which
were neutral in our assays when compared to control cells transduced with vector 
alone. The third group consists of E2F4 and E2F5, which generally act to repress 
E2F-responsive genes, and in our assays demonstrated a strong capacity to inhibit
transformation. Our results imply that the pattern of expression of these six E2F
family members in a cell could exert a strong influence over its susceptibility
to oncogenic transformation.

PMCID: PMC1975672
PMID: 17878947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Physiol Genomics. 2007 Dec 19;32(1):64-73. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

Osteopenia in Sparc (osteonectin)-deficient mice: characterization of phenotypic 
determinants of femoral strength and changes in gene expression.

Mansergh FC(1), Wells T, Elford C, Evans SL, Perry MJ, Evans MJ, Evans BA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff. manserghf@tcd.ie

Sparc null mutants have been generated independently via targeted mutations in
exons 4 and 6. Previous studies have identified low-turnover osteopenia in the
129Sv/C57BL/6 exon 4 knockout. Since both Sparc null mutations result in complete
absence of Sparc protein, similar phenotypic outcomes are likely. However,
genetic background (strain) and/or linkage disequilibrium effects can influence
phenotype. Different inactivating mutations should be tested in various mouse
strains; similar phenotypic outcomes can then confidently be assigned to the
mutated gene. We have evaluated the bone phenotype in the 129Sv/EvSparc(tm1cam)
exon 6 knockout at 4 and 9 mo, using physical measurement, mechanical strength
tests, and DXA scanning. We have also quantified bone marrow adiposity and
circulating leptin levels to assess adipose tissue metabolism.
129Sv/EvSparc(tm1cam) null mice show decreased bone mineral density and bone
mineral content and increased mechanical fragility of bone, in line with previous
studies. Differences were also noted. Increased body weight and levels of bone
marrow adiposity but decreased circulating leptin concentrations were identified 
at 4, but not 9 mo, and 129Sv/EvSparc(tm1cam) null mice also had shorter femurs. 
Molecular phenotyping was carried out using mouse HGMP NIA microarrays with
cortical femur samples at various ages, using semiquantitative RT-PCR validation.
We identified 429 genes highly expressed in normal bone. Six genes (Sparc,
Zfp162, Bysl, E2F4, two ESTs) are differentially regulated in
129Sv/EvSparc(tm1cam) cortical femur vs. 129Sv/Ev controls. We confirm
low-turnover osteopenia as a feature of the Sparc null phenotype, identifying the
usefulness of this mouse as a model for human osteoporosis.

PMCID: PMC2323447
PMID: 17878319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Virol. 2007 Dec;81(23):13191-9. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

Intestinal hyperplasia induced by simian virus 40 large tumor antigen requires
E2F2.

Sáenz-Robles MT(1), Markovics JA, Chong JL, Opavsky R, Whitehead RH, Leone G,
Pipas JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15260, USA.

The simian virus 40 large T antigen contributes to neoplastic transformation, in 
part, by targeting the Rb family of tumor suppressors. There are three known Rb
proteins, pRb, p130, and p107, all of which block the cell cycle by preventing
the transcription of genes regulated by the E2F family of transcription factors. 
T antigen interacts directly with Rb proteins and disrupts Rb-E2F complexes both 
in vitro and in cultured cells. Consequently, T antigen is thought to inhibit
transcriptional repression by the Rb family proteins by disrupting their
interaction with E2F proteins, thus allowing E2F-dependent transcription and the 
expression of cellular genes needed for entry into S phase. This model predicts
that active E2F-dependent transcription is required for T-antigen-induced
transformation. To test this hypothesis, we have examined the status of Rb-E2F
complexes in murine enterocytes. Previous studies have shown that T antigen
drives enterocytes into S phase, resulting in intestinal hyperplasia, and that
the induction of enterocyte proliferation requires T-antigen binding to Rb
proteins. In this paper, we show that normal growth-arrested enterocytes contain 
p130-E2F4 complexes and that T-antigen expression destroys these complexes, most 
likely by stimulating p130 degradation. Furthermore, unlike their normal
counterparts, enterocytes expressing T antigen contain abundant levels of E2F2
and E2F3a. Concomitantly, T-antigen-induced intestinal proliferation is reduced
in mice lacking either E2F2 alone or both E2F2 and E2F3a, but not in mice lacking
E2F1. These studies support a model in which T antigen eliminates Rb-E2F
repressive complexes so that specific activator E2Fs can drive S-phase entry.

PMCID: PMC2169091
PMID: 17855529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 12;282(41):30285-94. Epub 2007 Aug 14.

The RAS-dependent ERF control of cell proliferation and differentiation is
mediated by c-Myc repression.

Verykokakis M(1), Papadaki C, Vorgia E, Le Gallic L, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, University of Crete and Institute of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, Crete,
710 03, Greece.

The ERF transcriptional repressor is a downstream effector of the RAS/ERK pathway
that interacts with and is directly phosphorylated by ERKs in vivo and in vitro. 
This phosphorylation results in its cytoplasmic export and inactivation, although
lack of ERK activity allows its immediate nuclear accumulation and repressor
function. Nuclear ERFs arrest cell cycle progression in G(1) and can suppress
ras-dependent tumorigenicity. Here we provide evidence that ERF function is
mediated by its ability to repress transcription of c-Myc. Promoter reporter
assays indicate a DNA binding-dependent and repressor domain-dependent Myc
transcriptional repression. Chromatin immunoprecipitations in primary cells
suggest that ERF specifically binds on the c-Myc promoter in an E2F4/5-dependent 
manner and only under conditions that the physiological c-Myc transcription is
stopped. Cellular systems overexpressing nuclear ERF exhibit reduced c-Myc mRNA
and tumorigenic potential. Elimination of Erf in animal models results in
increased c-Myc expression, whereas Erf(-)(/)(-) primary fibroblasts fail to
down-regulate Myc in response to growth factor withdrawal. Finally, elimination
of c-Myc in primary mouse embryo fibroblasts negates the ability of nuclear ERF
to suppress proliferation. Thus Erf provides a direct link between the RAS/ERK
signaling and the transcriptional regulation of c-Myc and suggests that RAS/ERK
attenuation actively regulates cell fate.

PMID: 17699159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Cell Cycle. 2007 Aug 1;6(15):1903-13. Epub 2007 May 25.

LINC, a human complex that is related to pRB-containing complexes in
invertebrates regulates the expression of G2/M genes.

Schmit F(1), Korenjak M, Mannefeld M, Schmitt K, Franke C, von Eyss B, Gagrica S,
Hänel F, Brehm A, Gaubatz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry I, Biocenter, University of Würzburg,
Würzburg, Germany.

Here we report the identification of the LIN complex (LINC), a human multiprotein
complex that is required for transcriptional activation of G2/M genes. LINC is
related to the recently identified dREAM and DRM complexes of Drosophila and C.
elegans that contain homologs of the mammalian retinoblastoma tumor suppressor
protein. The LINC core complex consists of at least five subunits including the
chromatin-associated LIN-9 and RbAp48 proteins. LINC dynamically associates with 
pocket proteins, E2F and B-MYB during the cell cycle. In quiescent cells, LINC
binds to p130 and E2F4. During cell cycle entry, E2F4 and p130 dissociate and
LINC switches to B-MYB and p107. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation experiments
demonstrate that LINC associates with a large number of E2F-regulated promoters
in quiescent cells. However, RNAi experiments reveal that LINC is not required
for repression. In S-phase, LINC selectively binds to the promoters of G2/M genes
whose products are required for mitosis and plays an important role in their cell
cycle dependent activation.

PMID: 17671431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Oct;293(4):G758-72. Epub 2007 Jul
26.

Nuclear expression of E2F4 induces cell death via multiple pathways in normal
human intestinal epithelial crypt cells but not in colon cancer cells.

Garneau H(1), Alvarez L, Paquin MC, Lussier C, Rancourt C, Tremblay E, Beaulieu
JF, Rivard N.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Anatomie et de Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des
Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, J1H5N4, Canada.

E2F transcription factors control cell cycle progression. The localization of
E2F4 in intestinal epithelial cells is cell cycle dependent, being cytoplasmic in
quiescent differentiated cells but nuclear in proliferative cells. However,
whether nuclear translocation of E2F4 alone is sufficient to trigger intestinal
epithelial cell proliferation remains to be established. Adenoviruses expressing 
fusion proteins between green fluorescent protein (GFP) and wild-type (wt)E2F4 or
GFP and nuclear localization signal (NLS)-tagged E2F4 were used to infect normal 
human intestinal epithelial crypt cells (HIEC). In contrast to expression of
wtE2F4, persistent expression of E2F4 into the nucleus of HIEC triggered
phosphatidylserine exposure, cytoplasmic shrinkage, zeiosis, formation of
apoptotic bodies, and activation of caspase 9 and caspase 3. Inhibition of
caspase activities by zVAD-fmk partially inhibited cell death induced by
E2F4-NLS. An induction of p53, phosphorylated Ser15-p53, PUMA, FAS, BAX, RIP, and
phosphorylated JNK1 was also observed in HIEC expressing E2F4-NLS compared with
wtE2F4-expressing cells. E2F1 and p14ARF expression remained unaltered.
Downregulation of p53 expression by RNA interference attenuated cell death
induced by E2F4-NLS. By contrast, the level of cell death was negligible in colon
cancer cells despite the strong expression of E2F4 into the nucleus. In
conclusion, deregulated nuclear E2F4 expression induces apoptosis via multiple
pathways in normal intestinal epithelial cells but not in colon cancer cells.
Hence, mutations that deregulate E2F4 localization may provide an initial
proliferative advantage but at the same time accelerate cell death. However,
intestinal cells acquiring mutations (e.g., p53, Bax loci, etc.) may escape
apoptosis, thereby revealing the full mitogenic potential of the E2F4
transcription factor.

PMID: 17656449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Aug 7;104(32):12988-93. Epub 2007 Jul 25.

Distinct roles of E2F proteins in vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation and
intimal hyperplasia.

Giangrande PH(1), Zhang J, Tanner A, Eckhart AD, Rempel RE, Andrechek ER, Layzer 
JM, Keys JR, Hagen PO, Nevins JR, Koch WJ, Sullenger BA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Iowa, Department of Internal Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Intimal hyperplasia (IH) and restenosis limit the long-term utility of bypass
surgery and angioplasty due to pathological proliferation and migration of
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) into the intima of treated vessels.
Consequently, much attention has been focused on developing inhibitory agents
that reduce this pathogenic process. The E2F transcription factors are key cell
cycle regulators that play important roles in modulating cell proliferation and
cell fate. Nonselective E2F inhibitors have thus been extensively evaluated for
this purpose. Surprisingly, these E2F inhibitors have failed to reduce IH. These 
findings prompted us to evaluate the roles of different E2Fs during IH to
determine how selective targeting of E2F isoforms impacts VSMC proliferation.
Importantly, we show that E2F3 promotes proliferation of VSMCs leading to
increased IH, whereas E2F4 inhibits this pathological response. Furthermore, we
use RNA probes to show that selective inhibition of E2F3, not global inhibition
of E2F activity, significantly reduces VSMC proliferation and limits IH in murine
bypass grafts.

PMCID: PMC1941807
PMID: 17652516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Oncogene. 2008 Jan 10;27(3):366-77. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

The AP-1 transcription factor regulates breast cancer cell growth via cyclins and
E2F factors.

Shen Q(1), Uray IP, Li Y, Krisko TI, Strecker TE, Kim HT, Brown PH.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Center, Departments of Medicine and Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

The activating protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factor transduces growth signals
through signal transduction pathways to the nucleus, leading to the expression of
genes involved in growth and malignant transformation in many cell types. We have
previously shown that overexpression of a dominant negative form of the cJun
proto-oncogene, a cJun dominant negative mutant (Tam67), blocks AP-1
transcriptional activity, induces a G(1) cell cycle block and inhibits breast
cancer cell growth in vitro and in vivo. We found that AP-1 blockade by Tam67 in 
MCF-7 breast cancer cells downregulates cyclin D1 transcriptional activity by at 
least two mechanisms: by suppressing transcription at the known AP-1 binding site
(-934/-928) and by suppressing growth factor-induced expression through
suppressing E2F activation at the E2F-responsive site (-726/-719). AP-1 blockade 
also led to reduced expression of E2F1 and E2F2, but not E2F4, at the mRNA and
protein levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and supershift assays demonstrated 
that AP-1 blockade caused decreased binding of E2F1 protein to the E2F site in
the cyclin D1 promoter. We also found that Tam67 suppressed the expression of the
E2F1 dimerizing partner, DP1 and E2F-upregulated cell cycle genes (cyclins E, A, 
B and D3) and enhanced the expression of E2F-downregulated cell cycle genes
(cyclins G(2) and I). Reduced expression of other E2F-regulated genes was also
seen with AP-1 blockade and E2F suppression. Thus, the AP-1 factor regulates the 
expression of cyclin D and E2F (the latter in turn regulates E2F-downstream
genes), leading to cell cycle progression and breast cancer cell proliferation.

PMID: 17637753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Mol Cell. 2007 Jul 6;27(1):107-19.

E2F activation of S phase promoters via association with HCF-1 and the MLL family
of histone H3K4 methyltransferases.

Tyagi S(1), Chabes AL, Wysocka J, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Génopode, 1015
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2007 Jul 20;27(2):176-7.

E2F transcriptional regulators control human-cell proliferation by repressing and
activating the transcription of genes required for cell-cycle progression,
particularly the S phase. E2F proteins repress transcription in association with 
retinoblastoma pocket proteins, but less is known about how they activate
transcription. Here, we show that the human G1 phase regulator HCF-1 associates
with both activator (E2F1 and E2F3a) and repressor (E2F4) E2F proteins,
properties that are conserved in insect cells. Human HCF-1-E2F interactions are
versatile: their associations and binding to E2F-responsive promoters are
cell-cycle selective, and HCF-1 displays coactivator properties when bound to the
E2F1 activator and corepressor properties when bound to the E2F4 repressor.
During the G1-to-S phase transition, HCF-1 recruits the mixed-lineage leukemia
(MLL) and Set-1 histone H3 lysine 4 methyltransferases to E2F-responsive
promoters and induces histone methylation and transcriptional activation. These
results suggest that HCF-1 induces cell-cycle-specific transcriptional activation
by E2F proteins to promote cell proliferation.

PMID: 17612494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Genome Res. 2007 Jun;17(6):818-27.

Transcription factor binding and modified histones in human bidirectional
promoters.

Lin JM(1), Collins PJ, Trinklein ND, Fu Y, Xi H, Myers RM, Weng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston,
Massachusetts, 02215, USA.

Bidirectional promoters have received considerable attention because of their
ability to regulate two downstream genes (divergent genes). They are also highly 
abundant, directing the transcription of approximately 11% of genes in the human 
genome. We categorized the presence of DNA sequence motifs, binding of
transcription factors, and modified histones as overrepresented, shared, or
underrepresented in bidirectional promoters with respect to unidirectional
promoters. We found that a small set of motifs, including GABPA, MYC, E2F1, E2F4,
NRF-1, CCAAT, YY1, and ACTACAnnTCC are overrepresented in bidirectional
promoters, while the majority (73%) of known vertebrate motifs are
underrepresented. We performed chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP), followed by 
quantitative PCR for GABPA, on 118 regions in the human genome and showed that it
binds to bidirectional promoters more frequently than unidirectional promoters,
and its position-specific scoring matrix is highly predictive of binding.
Signatures of active transcription, such as occupancy of RNA polymerase II and
the modified histones H3K4me2, H3K4me3, and H3ac, are overrepresented in regions 
around bidirectional promoters, suggesting that a higher fraction of divergent
genes are transcribed in a given cell than the fraction of other genes.
Accordingly, analysis of whole-genome microarray data indicates that 68% of
divergent genes are transcribed compared with 44% of all human genes. By
combining the analysis of publicly available ENCODE data and a detailed study of 
GABPA, we survey bidirectional promoters with breadth and depth, leading to
biological insights concerning their motif composition and bidirectional
regulatory mode.

PMCID: PMC1891341
PMID: 17568000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Oncogene. 2007 Nov 29;26(54):7535-43. Epub 2007 Jun 11.

Mammalian Mip/LIN-9 interacts with either the p107, p130/E2F4 repressor complex
or B-Myb in a cell cycle-phase-dependent context distinct from the Drosophila
dREAM complex.

Pilkinton M(1), Sandoval R, Colamonici OR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Mammalian Mip/LIN-9 is a cell cycle regulatory protein that is negatively
regulated by CDK4/cyclin D. It has been demonstrated that Mip/LIN-9 collaborates 
with B-Myb during S and G(2)/M in the induction of cyclins A and B, and CDK1. The
ortholog of Mip/LIN-9 in Drosophila, Mip130, is part of a large multisubunit
protein complex that includes RBF, repressor E2Fs and Myb, in what was termed the
dREAM complex. A similar complex, although lacking B-Myb, was also described in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Here, we demonstrate that unlike Drosophila, Mip/LIN-9
has mutually exclusive and cell cycle-phase-specific interactions with the
mammalian orthologs of the dREAM complex. In G(0)/early G(1), Mip/LIN-9 forms a
complex with E2F4 and p107 or p130, while in late G(1)/S phase, it associates
with B-Myb. The separation of Mip/LIN-9 from p107,p130/E2F4 is likely driven by
phosphorylation of the pocket proteins by CDK4 since Mip/LIN-9 fails to interact 
with phosphorylated forms of p107,p130. Importantly, the repressor complex that
Mip/LIN-9 forms with p107 takes functional precedence over the transcriptional
activation linked to the Mip/LIN-9 and B-Myb interaction since expression of p107
blocks the activation of the cyclin B promoter triggered by B-Myb and Mip/LIN-9.

PMID: 17563750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Neurosci. 2007 May 30;27(22):5926-35.

Cell cycle regulator E2F4 is essential for the development of the ventral
telencephalon.

Ruzhynsky VA(1), McClellan KA, Vanderluit JL, Jeong Y, Furimsky M, Park DS,
Epstein DJ, Wallace VA, Slack RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Ottawa Health Research
Institute, Neuroscience Program, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
K1H 8M5.

Early forebrain development is characterized by extensive proliferation of neural
precursors coupled with complex structural transformations; however, little is
known regarding the mechanisms by which these processes are integrated. Here, we 
show that deficiency of the cell cycle regulatory protein, E2F4, results in the
loss of ventral telencephalic structures and impaired self-renewal of neural
precursor cells. The mechanism underlying aberrant ventral patterning lies in a
dramatic loss of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression specifically in this region. The
E2F4-deficient phenotype can be recapitulated by interbreeding mice heterozygous 
for E2F4 with those lacking one allele of Shh, suggesting a genetic interaction
between these pathways. Treatment of E2F4-deficient cells with a Hh agonist
rescues stem cell self-renewal and cells expressing the homeodomain proteins that
specify the ventral telencephalic structures. Finally, we show that E2F4
deficiency results in impaired activity of Shh forebrain-specific enhancers. In
conclusion, these studies establish a novel requirement for the cell cycle
regulatory protein, E2F4, in the development of the ventral telencephalon.

PMID: 17537963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mol Cell. 2007 May 25;26(4):539-51.

Evolutionarily conserved multisubunit RBL2/p130 and E2F4 protein complex
represses human cell cycle-dependent genes in quiescence.

Litovchick L(1), Sadasivam S, Florens L, Zhu X, Swanson SK, Velmurugan S, Chen R,
Washburn MP, Liu XS, DeCaprio JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 44 Binney Street,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The mammalian Retinoblastoma (RB) family including pRB, p107, and p130 represses 
E2F target genes through mechanisms that are not fully understood. In D.
melanogaster, RB-dependent repression is mediated in part by the multisubunit
protein complex Drosophila RBF, E2F, and Myb (dREAM) that contains homologs of
the C. elegans synthetic multivulva class B (synMuvB) gene products. Using an
integrated approach combining proteomics, genomics, and bioinformatic analyses,
we identified a p130 complex termed DP, RB-like, E2F, and MuvB (DREAM) that
contains mammalian homologs of synMuvB proteins LIN-9, LIN-37, LIN-52, LIN-54,
and LIN-53/RBBP4. DREAM bound to more than 800 human promoters in G0 and was
required for repression of E2F target genes. In S phase, MuvB proteins
dissociated from p130 and formed a distinct submodule that bound MYB. This work
reveals an evolutionarily conserved multisubunit protein complex that contains
p130 and E2F4, but not pRB, and mediates the repression of cell cycle-dependent
genes in quiescence.

PMID: 17531812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Cell Cycle. 2007 May 15;6(10):1147-52. Epub 2007 May 11.

E2F4 function in G2: maintaining G2-arrest to prevent mitotic entry with damaged 
DNA.

Plesca D(1), Crosby ME, Gupta D, Almasan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland, Ohio
44195, USA.

Mammalian cells undergo cell cycle arrest in response to DNA damage through
multiple checkpoint mechanisms. One such checkpoint pathway maintains genomic
integrity by delaying mitotic progression in response to genotoxic stress.
Transition though the G2 phase and entry into mitosis is considered to be
regulated primarily by cyclin B1 and its associated catalytically active partner 
Cdk1. While not necessary for its initiation, the p130 and Rb-dependent target
genes have emerged as being important for stable maintenance of a G2 arrest. It
was recently demonstrated that by interacting with p130, E2F4 is present in the
nuclei and plays a key role in the maintenance of this stable G2 arrest.
Increased E2F4 levels and its translocation to the nucleus following genotoxic
stress result in downregulation of many mitotic genes and as a result promote a
G0-like state. Irradiation of E2F4-depleted cells leads to enhanced cellular DNA 
double-strand breaks that may be measured by comet assays. It also results in
cell death that is characterized by caspase activation, sub-G1 and sub-G2 DNA
content, and decreased clonogenic cell survival. Here we review these recent
findings and discuss the mechanisms of G2 phase checkpoint activation and
maintenance with a particular focus on E2F4.

PMCID: PMC2596058
PMID: 17507799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Jul;212(1):96-104.

Interplay between the retinoblastoma related pRb2/p130 and E2F-4 and -5 in
relation to JCV-TAg.

Caracciolo V(1), Reiss K, Crozier-Fitzgerald C, De Pascali F, Macaluso M, Khalili
K, Giordano A, Claudio PP.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center for
Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

Erratum in
    J Cell Physiol. 2010 Jun;223(3):827. Claudio, Pier Paolo [added].

Human polyomaviruses, which include JC virus (JCV) and BK virus (BKV), as well as
the simian virus 40 (SV40), have been associated with human tumors and have been 
shown to be highly tumorigenic in experimental animal models. Although the
mechanism by which JCV induces tumorigenesis is not entirely clear, earlier
studies point to the involvement of the viral early protein T-antigen which has
the ability to bind and inactivate tumor suppressors and cell cycle regulatory
proteins, such as the retinoblastoma family proteins and p53. We investigated if 
the distribution between nucleus and cytoplasm of the transcription factors E2F4 
and E2F5 is mediated by pRb2/p130 and if the presence of JCV T-antigen may impair
this shuttling by sequestering pRb2/p130. The results showed that E2F4 was
prevalently localized in the nucleus of both T-antigen positive and -negative
R503 cells independently of the cell cycle phase. E2F5 instead was prevalently
localized in the cytoplasmic fraction in G(0)/G(1), S-phase synchronized, and
asynchronous R503 and R503 T-Ag positive cells. The presence of T-antigen did not
influence the subcellular localization of these transcription factors E2F4 and
E2F5, at least in this murine cellular model. Moreover, Small interference RNA
experiments directed toward silencing the Rb2/p130 gene demonstrated that
pRb2/p130 does not play a predominant role in the nuclear transportation of E2F4 
and E2F5.

PMID: 17385710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Dev Biol. 2007 May 15;305(2):564-76. Epub 2007 Mar 3.

E2f4 is required for normal development of the airway epithelium.

Danielian PS(1), Bender Kim CF, Caron AM, Vasile E, Bronson RT, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77
Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The airway epithelium is comprised of specialized cell types that play key roles 
in protecting the lungs from environmental insults. The cellular composition of
the murine respiratory epithelium is established during development and different
cell types populate specific regions along the airway. Here we show that
E2f4-deficiency leads to an absence of ciliated cells from the entire airway
epithelium and the epithelium of the submucosal glands in the paranasal sinuses. 
This defect is particularly striking in the nasal epithelium of E2f4-/- mice
where ciliated cells are replaced by columnar secretory cells that produce
mucin-like substances. In addition, in the proximal lung, E2f4 loss causes a
reduction in Clara cell marker expression indicating that Clara cell development 
is also affected. These defects arise during embryogenesis and, in the nasal
epithelium, appear to be independent of any changes in cell proliferation, the
principal process regulated by members of the E2f family of transcription
factors. We therefore conclude that E2f4 is required to determine the appropriate
development of the airway epithelium. Importantly, the combination of no ciliated
cells and excess mucous cells can account for the chronic rhinitis and increased 
susceptibility to opportunistic infections that causes the postnatal lethality of
E2f4 mutant mice.

PMCID: PMC1939821
PMID: 17383628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007;39(4):842-50. Epub 2007 Jan 20.

Transcription of the MAT2A gene, coding for methionine adenosyltransferase, is
up-regulated by E2F and Sp1 at a chromatin level during proliferation of liver
cells.

Rodríguez JL(1), Boukaba A, Sandoval J, Georgieva EI, Latasa MU, García-Trevijano
ER, Serviddio G, Nakamura T, Avila MA, Sastre J, Torres L, Mato JM, López-Rodas
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Valencia,
Spain.

Methionine adenosyltransferase (MAT) is an essential enzyme because it catalyzes 
the formation of S-adenosylmethionine, the main methyl donor. Two MAT-encoding
genes (MAT1A, MAT2A) are found in mammals. The latter is expressed in
proliferating liver, dedifferentiation and cancer, whereas MAT1A is expressed in 
adult quiescent hepatocytes. Here, we report studies on the molecular mechanisms 
controlling the induction of MAT2A in regenerating rat liver and in proliferating
hepatocytes. The MAT2A is up-regulated at two discrete moments during liver
regeneration, as confirmed by RNApol-ChIP analysis. The first one coincides with 
hepatocyte priming (i.e. G0-G1 transition), while the second one takes place at
the G1-S interface. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that a putative 
E2F sequence present in MAT2A promoter binds this factor and ChIP assays
confirmed that E2F1, E2F3 and E2F4, as well as the pocket protein p130, are bound
to the promoter in quiescent liver. MAT2A activation is accompanied by changes in
the binding of histone-modifying enzymes to the promoter. Interestingly, p130 is 
not displaced from MAT2A promoter during hepatocyte priming, but it is in the
late expression of the gene at the G1-S transition. Finally, the transcription
factor Sp1 seems to play a decisive role in MAT2A induction, as it binds the
promoter when the gene is being actively transcribed. In summary, the present
work shows that the molecular mechanism of MAT2A expression is different during
G0-G1 or G1-S transition and this may be related to the distinct requirements of 
S-adenosylmethionine during liver regeneration.

PMID: 17317269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Int J Cancer. 2007 Apr 15;120(8):1664-8.

Multiple histone deacetylases repress tumor suppressor gene ARHI in breast
cancer.

Feng W(1), Lu Z, Luo RZ, Zhang X, Seto E, Liao WS, Yu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

ARHI is a maternally imprinted tumor suppressor gene that is expressed in normal 
breast and ovarian epithelial cells but not in most breast and ovarian cancers.
Our earlier studies showed that histone deacetylases (HDACs) in complexes with
transcription factors E2F1 and E2F4 play an important role in downregulating ARHI
expression in breast cancer cells. To determine which HDAC or HDACs are
responsible for repressing ARHI, we cotransfected vectors expressing HDACs 1-11
with an ARHI/luciferase reporter into SKBr3 and MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
Expression of multiple HDACs consistently reduced ARHI promoter activity in a
dose-dependent manner. We also found that the expression level of HDACs 1-3 was
higher in breast cancer cell lines than in normal breast epithelial cells. In
agreement with their repressive function, depletion of HDACs 1, 3 and 11 not only
significantly increased the ARHI promoter activity of the transfected reporter
but also activated the transcription of the endogenous ARHI gene. Furthermore,
depletion or inhibition of HDACs by small interfering RNA of HDAC11 or by
trichostatin A, respectively, increased E2F acetylation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed that HDACs 1 and 3 are bound to the ARHI
promoter. Taken together, our results suggest that the activity of multiple HDACs
contributes to the repression of the ARHI tumor suppressor gene in breast cancer 
cells. Since HDAC inhibitors are now being used to treat breast cancer, the
reactivation of ARHI in these cancer cells may serve as a new biomarker with
which to monitor the treatment effects.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17230502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Apr;1772(4):392-401. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

Cell cycle molecules define a pathway required for neuron death in development
and disease.

Greene LA(1), Liu DX, Troy CM, Biswas SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Columbia
University College of Physicians and Surgeons, 630 W. 168th Street, New York, NY 
10032, USA. Lag3@columbia.edu

We review here evidence defining a molecular pathway that includes cell
cycle-related molecules and that appears to play a required role in neuron death 
during normal development as well as in disease and trauma. The pathway starts
with inappropriate activation of cyclin dependent kinase 4 (Cdk4) in neurons
which leads to hyper-phosphorylation of the pRb family member p130. This in turn 
results in dissociation of p130 and its associated chromatin modifiers Suv39H1
and HDAC1 from the transcription factor E2F4. Dissociation of this complex
results in de-repression of genes with E2F binding sites including those encoding
the transcription factors B- and C-Myb. Once elevated in neurons, B- and C-Myb
proteins bind to the promoter for the pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein Bim and
promote its induction. Bim then interacts with the core cellular apoptotic
machinery, leading to caspase activation and apoptotic death. This pathway is
supported by a variety of observations and experimental findings that implicate
it as a required element for neuron loss in development and in many nervous
system traumas and disorders. The components of this pathway appear to represent 
potential therapeutic targets for prevention of disease-associated neuron death.

PMCID: PMC1885990
PMID: 17229557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Jan 1;13(1):144-51.

Clinical relevance of E2F family members in ovarian cancer--an evaluation in a
training set of 77 patients.

Reimer D(1), Sadr S, Wiedemair A, Stadlmann S, Concin N, Hofstetter G,
Müller-Holzner E, Marth C, Zeimet AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Innsbruck Medical University,
Innsbruck, Austria.

PURPOSE: The major obstacle in treating ovarian cancer is the rapid development
of platinum resistance during therapy. Deregulation of members of the E2F family 
of transcription factors is crucially involved in carcinogenesis and probably in 
mechanisms underlying platinum resistance. We therefore investigated the
relevance of the whole set of E2F family members in predicting clinical outcome
and their significance in predicting platinum resistance.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Real-time PCR of all E2F family members was done from 77
ovarian carcinomas, defined as our training set, and 8 healthy control samples.
The correlation with clinicopathologic characteristics, platinum resistance, and 
survival was investigated. Furthermore, the cross-talk of E2F family members was 
assessed for its value in predicting survival and platinum resistance.
RESULTS: The proliferation-promoting E2F1 and E2F2 were associated with grade 3
tumors and residual disease >2 cm in diameter after initial surgery. Survival
analyses showed low expression of E2F1 or E2F2 to be significantly associated
with favorable disease-free and overall survival (E2F1, P = 0.039 and 0.047,
respectively; E2F2, P = 0.009 and 0.006, respectively). In contrast, high
expression of inhibiting E2F4 or E2F7 predicted favorable disease-free and
overall survival (E2F4, P = 0.047 and 0.042, respectively; E2F7, P = 0.048 and
0.042, respectively). A high E2F2 to E2F4 ratio was the most valuable prognostic 
variable for disease-free survival in multivariate analysis (hazard ratio, 6.494;
P = 0.002). Tumors considered platinum resistant were associated with lower E2F4 
and E2F7 expression (P = 0.012 and 0.009, respectively) compared with
platinum-sensitive tumors. Again, ratios of E2F1 or E2F2 to E2F7 were the most
favorable variables in predicting platinum resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: We here show that deregulation of both proliferation-promoting and
proliferation-inhibiting E2F transcription factors and their cross-talk is
crucially involved in the tumor biology of ovarian cancer and influences clinical
outcome. Furthermore, down-regulation of E2F7 may contribute to mechanisms
underlying platinum resistance, and calculation of ratios of
proliferation-promoting E2F1 to E2F7 could serve as a putative predictor of
platinum resistance.

PMID: 17200349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Funct Integr Genomics. 2007 Jul;7(3):193-205. Epub 2006 Dec 21.

Pathway analysis identifies perturbation of genetic networks induced by butyrate 
in a bovine kidney epithelial cell line.

Li CJ(1), Li RW, Wang YH, Elsasser TH.

Author information: 
(1)Growth Biology Laboratory, Animal and Natural Resources Institute/ARS, U.S.
Derpartment of Agriculture, 10300 Baltimore Avenue, BARC East, Beltsville, MD
20705, USA. cli@anri.barc.usda.gov

Ruminant species have evolved to metabolize the short-chain volatile fatty acids 
(VFA), acetate, propionate, and butyrate, to fulfill up to 70% of their nutrient 
energy requirements. The inherent VFA dependence of ruminant cells was exploited 
to add a level of increased sensitivity to the study of the role of butyrate
gene-response elements in regulatory biochemical pathways. Global gene expression
profiles of the bovine kidney epithelial cells regulated by sodium butyrate were 
investigated with high-density oligonucleotide microarrays. The detailed
mechanisms by which butyrate induces cell growth arrest and apoptosis were
analyzed using the Ingenuity Pathways Knowledge Base. The functional category and
pathway analyses of the microarray data revealed that four canonical pathways
(Cell cycles: G2/M DNA damage checkpoint, and pyrimidine metabolism; G1/S
checkpoint regulation and purine metabolism) were significantly perturbed. The
biologically relevant networks and pathways of these genes were also identified. 
IGF2, TGFB1, TP53, E2F4, and CDC2 were established as being centered in these
genomic networks. The present findings provide a basis for understanding the full
range of the biological roles and the molecular mechanisms that butyrate may play
in animal cell growth, proliferation, and energy metabolisms.

PMID: 17186197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Dec 5;103(49):18580-5. Epub 2006 Nov 28.

Smad4 cooperates with lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1/T cell-specific factor
to increase c-myc expression in the absence of TGF-beta signaling.

Lim SK(1), Hoffmann FM.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research and Laboratory of Genetics, University 
of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The c-myc protooncogene is a key regulator of cell proliferation whose expression
is reduced in normal epithelial cells in response to the growth inhibitory
cytokine TGF-beta. Smad4 mediates this inhibitory effect of TGF-beta by forming a
complex with Smad3, E2F4/5, and p107 at the TGF-beta inhibitory element (TIE)
element on the c-myc promoter. In contrast, cell proliferation and c-myc
expression are increased in response to Wnt ligands; this effect is mediated
through the lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1/T cell-specific factor (LEF/TCF)
family of transcription factors on the c-myc promoter LEF/TCF-binding elements
(TBE1 and TBE2). We report that a peptide aptamer designed to inhibit the binding
between Smad4 and LEF/TCF reduced c-myc expression and the growth rate of HepG2
cells. Further analysis demonstrated that, in the absence of TGF-beta, Smad4 was 
bound to the positive regulatory element TBE1 from the c-myc promoter and
activated c-myc promoter activity. Smad4 binding to the positive TBE1 c-myc
element was reduced by TGF-beta, consistent with Smad4's inhibitory role on c-myc
expression in response to TGF-beta. Reduction of Smad4 levels by RNAi knockdown
also reduced c-myc expression levels and sensitized hepatocytes to cell death by 
serum deprivation. Two tumor-derived mutant Smad4 proteins that fail to mediate
TGF-beta responses were still competent to cooperate with LEF1 to activate the
c-myc promoter. These results support a previously unreported
TGF-beta-independent function for Smad4 in cooperating with LEF/TCF to activate
c-myc expression.

PMCID: PMC1693705
PMID: 17132729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 12;282(2):871-8. Epub 2006 Nov 22.

An antisense transcript induced by Wnt/beta-catenin signaling decreases E2F4.

Yochum GS(1), Cleland R, McWeeney S, Goodman RH.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute, Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health and
Preventative Medicine, OHSU Cancer Institute, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland 97239, USA. yochumg@ohsu.edu

Wnt signaling induces the nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin and transcription 
of specific target genes via the DNA-binding proteins TCF/Lef. Although all known
beta-catenin target genes encode proteins, genome-wide RNA profiling studies
indicate that many transcripts do not have this capability. Transcription
factor-binding sites associated with these noncoding transcripts can be
identified using unbiased techniques such as serial analysis of chromatin
occupancy (SACO). We used this method to identify a beta-catenin-regulated
antisense RNA expressed in HCT116 colorectal carcinoma cells, a cellular model of
activated beta-catenin signaling. Genomic signature tags designating putative
beta-catenin-binding sites mapped to the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of the
E2F4 gene. We showed that both beta-catenin and TCF4 bind to the E2F4 3'-UTR site
in vivo, inducing expression of an E2F4 antisense transcript. LiCl, which mimics 
Wnt signaling, also induced expression of the E2F4 antisense transcript and
decreased E2F4 protein levels. This effect was blocked by a cDNA expressing the
E2F4 3'-UTR sense strand. The antisense-mediated decrease in E2F4 protein was
reflected by reduced E2F4 association with specific target genes, including
CCNA2, CDC2, PCNA, and Rad54. We propose that Wnt/beta-catenin signaling may
contribute to colorectal carcinogenesis by reducing the level of the E2F4 cell
cycle repressor via an antisense mechanism.

PMID: 17121828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Oct;5(10):1400-7. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

Basal repression of BRCA1 by multiple E2Fs and pocket proteins at adjacent E2F
sites.

Bindra RS(1), Glazer PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520-8040, USA.

The BRCA1 gene is rarely mutated in sporadic tumors, although numerous studies
suggest that the expression of this critical tumor suppressor gene is frequently 
downregulated in tumors derived from a wide range of tissues. However, little is 
known regarding the mechanisms by which BRCA1 is transcriptionally regulated in
human cells in vivo. We have shown recently that the tumor microenvironmental
stress of hypoxia induces an E2F-dependent repression of BRCA1 in cancer cells.
Here, we report that multiple E2Fs and associated factors bind the BRCA1 promoter
at two adjacent E2F sites in the proximal promoter region of the gene, as
detected by quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis.
Intriguingly, our data suggest that E2F1 and E2F4 bind the BRCA1 proximal
promoter simultaneously at the two E2F sites, although E2F4 appears to be the
predominant E2F bound in log-phase cells. In contrast to previous studies, we
have also detected promoter occupancy by the pocket proteins p130 and p107, but
not Rb, our data indicate that E2F4 and p130/p107 complexes basally repress the
BRCA1 promoter. We find that binding by these factors requires both intact E2F
sites, which suggests a novel interaction between adjacent promoter elements.
Taken together, these findings provide an enhanced molecular portrait of BRCA1
transcriptional regulation by E2Fs and pocket proteins, they enhance our
understanding of regulation by repressive E2F complexes at target genes in vivo. 
Furthermore, the identification of E2F4 and p130/p107 complexes as basal
repressors of BRCA1 expression may facilitate the development of strategies based
on disruption of these interactions to rescue BRCA1 expression in human tumors.

PMID: 17106239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Cell Cycle. 2006 Nov 1;5(21):2436-9. Epub 2006 Sep 14.

Making omelets without breaking eggs: E2F-mediated induction of cardiomyoycte
cell proliferation without stimulation of apoptosis.

Ebelt H(1), Liu Z, Müller-Werdan U, Werdan K, Braun T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, Martin-Luther-University, Halle, Germany.

The fundamental role of E2F transcription factors in the regulation of
proliferation is well established. According to a widely accepted model, E2F1,
E2F2, and E2F3 are classified as "activating" E2Fs since they induce
proliferation of quiescent cells whereas E2F4 and E2F5 do not have the power to
incite cell cycle progression but are related to differentiation processes and
were therefore considered to be "repressive". In addition, it has been postulated
that "activating" E2Fs induce apoptosis in a wide variety of cell types depending
on their expression level. However, we demonstrated recently that this 'threshold
model' does not hold true for cardiomyocytes. In a series of experiments in which
we overexpressed individual E2Fs we found that directed expression of E2F2,
unlike E2F1, E2F3 and E2F5, did not induce apoptosis but even suppressed
expression of several pro-apoptotic genes in primary cardiomyocytes. Furthermore,
we established that not only E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3 but also E2F4 was able to
induce S-phase entry of primary cardiomyocytes. Our results suggest that it is
possible to utilize the proliferation-inducing properties of the E2Fs in
cardiomyocytes without activation of potentially harmful pro-apoptotic traits.
This finding might open a new access to stimulate regeneration in postmitotic
tissues such as the heart.

PMID: 17102628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Feb;210(2):517-26.

Establishment of histone gene regulation and cell cycle checkpoint control in
human embryonic stem cells.

Becker KA(1), Stein JL, Lian JB, van Wijnen AJ, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Rapid self-renewal of human embryonic stem (ES) cells (NIH designation WA01 and
WA09) is accommodated by an abbreviated cell cycle due to a reduction in the G1
phase. Thus, molecular mechanisms operative in ES cells may expedite the cellular
commitment to progress into S phase to initiate replication of DNA and
biosynthesis of histone proteins to form new chromatin. Here we show that the
selective cell cycle regulated expression of individual histone H4 gene copies,
which is typical for somatic cell types, is already firmly established in human
ES cells. This early establishment of H4 gene regulation, which is E2F
independent, is consistent with co-expression of the cognate transcriptional
regulators HiNF-P and p220(NPAT). Human ES cells differ from somatic cells in the
expression of members of the E2F family and RB-related pocket proteins
(p105(RB1), p107(RBL1), and p130(RBL2/RB2)) that control expression of genes
encoding enzymes for nucleotide metabolism and DNA synthesis. Human ES cells
rapidly and robustly (>200-fold) induce the cyclin dependent kinase (CDK)
inhibitor p21(WAF1/CIP1) upon gamma-irradiation. This DNA damage response
promptly reduces histone gene expression as well as mRNA levels for HiNF-P and
p220(NPAT) and causes accumulation of unprocessed histone H4 precursor RNAs.
Furthermore, while E2F4, E2F5 and p130(RBL2/RB2) are the major E2F and pocket
protein mRNAs in actively proliferating ES cells, expression levels of E2F5,
E2F6, and p105(RB1) are most strongly elevated during cell cycle arrest in cells 
responding to DNA damage. Our data suggest that the brief G1 phase of ES cells is
supported by a potent p21(WAF1/CIP1) related DNA damage response that functions
through several mechanisms to rapidly inhibit cell cycle progression. This
response may alter the E2F/pocket protein combinations that control E2F dependent
genes and block H4 gene expression by inhibiting histone-specific transcription
factors and processing of histone gene transcripts, as well as by destabilizing
histone mRNAs.

PMID: 17096384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Oncol Rep. 2006 Dec;16(6):1245-52.

Molecular mechanisms underlying the tumorigenesis of colorectal adenomas:
correlation to activated K-ras oncogene.

Wang JY(1), Wang YH, Jao SW, Lu CY, Kuo CH, Hu HM, Hsieh JS, Chong IW, Cheng TL, 
Lin SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, College of Medicine, and Kaohsiung
Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Mutations of K-ras gene have been demonstrated in 40-50% of colorectal cancer and
large adenoma (>1 cm). This study was intended to clarify the correlation between
the existence of K-ras oncogene and the pathological features of colorectal
adenomas using our recently developed membrane arrays. Moreover, the downstream
genes regulated by K-ras oncogene were explored to serve as potential biomarkers 
in the early diagnosis and risk assessment of patients with colorectal adenoma.
Specimens were collected from 70 patients with colorectal adenoma. The
alterations of K-ras oncogene were analyzed by direct sequencing and our
constructed membrane arrays, respectively. The results of direct sequencing
showed that 21 of 70 samples (30%) had K-ras gene mutations. The most frequently 
mutated sites included codons 12, 13, 15 and 18. Furthermore, activated K-ras
oncogene was identified in 18 of 70 (25.7%) adenoma by membrane arrays.
Statistical analyses showed that the membrane array had the accuracy of 90.0%,
sensitivity of 88.9%, and specificity of 90.4%. The frequency of the mutational
sites of K-ras gene was located as follows: codon 12, 100% (4/4); codon 13, 100% 
(4/4); codon 15, 75% (6/8); and codon 18, 100% (2/2). The analysis of the
correlation between the experimental data and pathological characteristics of
adenoma showed that activated K-ras oncogenes were significantly associated with 
the size, number and histology of adenomas (all P<0.001). Finally, we found the
downstream genes activated by K-ras oncogene, including B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2
(BCL2), Homo sapiens H2A histone family, member Z (H2AFZ), Homo sapiens RAP1B,
member of RAS oncogene family (RAP1B), Homo sapiens T-box 19 (TBX19), Homo
sapiens E2F transcription factor 4, p107/p130-binding (E2F4) and matrix
metallopeptidase 1 (MMP1), of which were overexpressed in most of all examined
adenomas. These genes were then suggested to have functions involved in cell
growth. The preliminary results indicated that the accuracy of membrane arrays
was comparable to conventional DNA sequencing in the detection of activated K-ras
oncogenes. Therefore, we propose that activated K-ras oncogene in colorectal
adenomas may play an important role in the subsequent colorectal carcinogenesis
through a group of K-ras-related molecular targets.

PMID: 17089045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Oncogene. 2007 Mar 22;26(13):1897-909. Epub 2006 Oct 9.

E2F4 regulates a stable G2 arrest response to genotoxic stress in prostate
carcinoma.

Crosby ME(1), Jacobberger J, Gupta D, Macklis RM, Almasan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland, OH, USA.

The retinoblastoma (pRB) family proteins regulate the E2F transcription factors; 
their complexes regulate critical transitions through the cell cycle. The
function of these pRB family/E2F complexes, which includes p130/E2F4, in response
to genotoxic agents, is not well understood. We investigated the role of E2F4 in 
the genotoxic stress response. Following radiation treatment, E2F4 colocalized
with p130 in the nucleus during a radiation-induced stable G(2)-phase arrest.
Arrested cells had significantly decreased expression of Cyclins A2 and B1 and
decreased phosphorylation of mitotic protein monoclonal-2 (MPM-2) mitotic
proteins. Small interference RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of E2F4 sensitized
cells to subsequent irradiation, resulting in enhanced cellular DNA damage and
cell death, as determined by caspase activation and decreased clonogenic cell
survival. Downstream E2F4 targets potentially involved in the progression from
G(2) into M phase were identified by oligonucleotide microarray expression
profiling. Chromatin immunoprecipitation localized E2F4 at promoter regions of
the Bub3 and Pttg1 mitotic genes following irradiation, which were among the
downregulated genes identified by the microarray. These data suggest that in
response to radiation, E2F4 becomes active in the nucleus, enforces a stable G(2)
arrest by target gene repression, and thus provides increased cell survival
ability by minimizing propagation of cells that have irreparable DNA damage.

PMCID: PMC2593901
PMID: 17043659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Neurochem Res. 2007 Apr-May;32(4-5):639-44. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

Increased expression of p130 in Alzheimer disease.

Previll LA(1), Crosby ME, Castellani RJ, Bowser R, Perry G, Smith MA, Zhu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, 2103 Cornell Road,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

A number of recent findings support the notion of mechanistic parallels between
Alzheimer disease (AD) and oncogenic processes, specifically, that neurons in AD,
like cancer cells, display aberrant mitotic cell cycle re-entry. However, the
mechanism that drives postmitotic neurons to reenter cell cycle remains elusive. 
In this study, we focused on the retinoblastoma-related protein p130 in AD. p130 
is a transcriptional regulator that complexes with E2F4/5 in the nucleus and
suppresses genes that regulate entry into the cell cycle. Interestingly, our
results show that there are increases in p130 in cytoplasm of susceptible
pyramidal neurons as well as neuroglia, often surrounding senile plaques, and
within Hirano bodies in AD. By marked contrast, p130 is found at background
levels in non-diseased, age-matched controls. Our data suggest that, despite its 
upregulation, the aberrant localization of p130 to the neuronal cytoplasm
facilitates neuronal cell cycle re-entry in AD.

PMID: 17006760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Oncogene. 2007 Mar 29;26(14):2048-57. Epub 2006 Sep 25.

Repression of RAD51 gene expression by E2F4/p130 complexes in hypoxia.

Bindra RS(1), Glazer PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06520-8040, USA.

We and others have shown that the dysregulation of DNA repair pathways can
contribute to the phenomenon of hypoxia-induced genetic instability within the
tumor microenvironment. Several studies have revealed that the recombinational
repair genes, RAD51 and BRCA1, and the DNA mismatch repair genes, MLH1 and MSH2, 
are decreased in expression in response to hypoxic stress, prompting interest in 
elucidating the mechanistic basis for these responses. Here we report that the
downregulation of RAD51 by hypoxia is specifically mediated by repressive
E2F4/p130 complexes that bind to a single E2F site in the proximal promoter of
the gene. Intriguingly, this E2F site is conserved in the promoter of the BRCA1
gene, which is also regulated by a similar mechanism in hypoxia. Mechanistically,
we have found that hypoxia induces substantial p130 dephosphorylation and nuclear
accumulation, leading to the formation of E2F4/p130 complexes and increased
occupancy of E2F4 and p130 at the RAD51 and BRCA1 promoters. These findings
reveal a coordinated transcriptional program mediated by the formation of
repressive E2F4/p130 complexes that represents an integral response to hypoxic
stress. In addition, this co-regulation of key factors within the
homology-dependent DNA repair pathway provides a further basis for understanding 
genetic instability in tumors and may guide the design of new therapeutic
strategies for cancer.

PMID: 17001309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 24;281(47):35633-48. Epub 2006 Sep 19.

CDCA4 is an E2F transcription factor family-induced nuclear factor that regulates
E2F-dependent transcriptional activation and cell proliferation.

Hayashi R(1), Goto Y, Ikeda R, Yokoyama KK, Yoshida K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Life Sciences,
School of Agriculture, Meiji University, 1-1-1 Higashimita, Kawasaki, Kanagawa
214-8571, Japan.

The TRIP-Br1/p34(SEI-1) family proteins participate in cell cycle progression by 
coactivating E2F1- or p53-dependent transcriptional activation. Here, we report
the identification of human CDCA4 (also know as SEI-3/Hepp) as a novel target
gene of transcription factor E2F and as a repressor of E2F-dependent
transcriptional activation. Analysis of CDCA4 promoter constructs showed that an 
E2F-responsive sequence in the vicinity of the transcription initiation site is
necessary for the E2F1-4-induced activation of CDCA4 gene transcription.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated that E2F1 and E2F4 bound to
an E2F-responsive sequence of the human CDCA4 gene. Like TRIP-Br1/p34(SEI-1) and 
TRIP-Br2 (SEI-2), the transactivation domain of CDCA4 was mapped within
C-terminal acidic region 175-241. The transactivation function of the CDCA4
protein was inhibited by E2F1-4 and DP2, but not by E2F5-8. Inhibition of CDCA4
transactivation activity by E2F1 partially interfered with retinoblastoma protein
overexpression. Conversely, CDCA4 suppressed E2F1-3-induced reporter activity.
CDCA4 (but not acidic region-deleted CDCA4) suppressed E2F1-regulated gene
promoter activity. These findings suggest that the CDCA4 protein functions as a
suppressor at the E2F-responsive promoter. Small interfering RNA-mediated
knockdown of CDCA4 expression in cancer cells resulted in up-regulation of cell
growth rates and DNA synthesis. The CDCA4 protein was detected in several human
cells and was induced as cells entered the G1/S phase of the cell cycle. Taken
together, our results suggest that CDCA4 participates in the regulation of cell
proliferation, mainly through the E2F/retinoblastoma protein pathway.

PMID: 16984923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Cancer Cell. 2006 Sep;10(3):203-14.

C/EBPbeta at the core of the TGFbeta cytostatic response and its evasion in
metastatic breast cancer cells.

Gomis RR(1), Alarcón C, Nadal C, Van Poznak C, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Breast cancers may evade the growth-inhibitory action of TGFbeta by accumulating 
defects of unknown nature that selectively eliminate cytostatic gene responses.
We found the transcription factor C/EBPbeta to be essential for TGFbeta induction
of the cell cycle inhibitor p15INK4b by a FoxO-Smad complex and repression of
c-MYC by an E2F4/5-Smad complex in human epithelial cells. These cytostatic
responses are selectively missing in metastatic breast cancer cells from half of 
the patients that we tested. The basis for this loss was traced to an excess of
the C/EBPbeta inhibitory isoform LIP. We suggest that C/EBPbeta plays a key role 
in the coordination of TGFbeta cytostatic gene responses, and its malfunction may
trigger evasion of these responses in breast cancer.

PMID: 16959612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Biomed Environ Sci. 2006 Jun;19(3):239-44.

Vitamin C inhibits benzo[a]pyrene-induced cell cycle changes partly via cyclin
D1/E2F pathway in human embryo lung fibroblasts.

Gao A(1), Liu BC, Shit XL, Huang CS, Jia XW, You BR, Ye M, Shen FH, Du HJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Occupation Health and Poison Control, Chinese Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the molecular mechanism of the inhibitory effects of vitamin 
C on benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P)-induced changes of cell cycle in human embryo lung
fibroblast (HELF) cells.
METHODS: The stable transfectants, HELF transfected with antisense cyclin D1 and 
antisense CDK4, were established. Cells were cultured and pretreated with vitamin
C before stimulation with B[a]P for 24 h. The expression levels of cyclin D1,
CDK4, E2F1, and E2F4 were determined by Western blot. Flow cytometric analysis
was employed to detect the distributions of cell cycle.
RESULTS: B[a]P significantly elevated the expression levels of cyclin D1, E2F1,
and E2F4 in HELF cells. Vitamin C decreased the expression levels of cyclin D1,
E2F1, and E2F4 in B[a]P-stimulated HELF cells. Dose-dependent relationships were 
not found between the different concentrations of vitamin C (10, 100, 500, 1000, 
and 5000 micromol/L) and the expression levels of cyclin D1, E2F1, and E2F4 in
HELF cells. The expression levels of cyclin D1, E2F1, and E2F4 in B[a]P-treated
transfectants were lower than those in B[a]P-treated HELF cells. The expression
levels of cyclin D1 and E2F4 treated with vitamin C and antisense cyclin D1 were 
decreased compared with those treated with antisense cyclin D1 alone. The effects
of vitamin C combined with antisense CDK4 on the expression levels of cyclin D1
and E2F1/E2F4 were similar to those of antisense CDK4 alone. B[a]P progressed
HELF cells from G1 to S phase. Both vitamin C and antisense cyclin D1 suppressed 
the changes of cell cycle progressed by B[a]P. However, antisense CDK4 did not
attenuate the above changes. Vitamin C combined with antisense CDK4 markedly
suppressed B[a]P-induced changes of cell cycle as compared with antisense CDK4.
But the inhibitory effects of vitamin C combined with antisense cyclin D1 on
B[a]P-induced changes of cell cycle were similar to those of vitamin C alone or
antisense cyclin D1 alone.
CONCLUSIONS: B[a]P progressed HELF cells from G1 to S phase via intracellular
signaling pathway of cyclin D1/E2F. Vitamin C may modulate this signaling pathway
to protect cells from injury caused by B[a]P.

PMID: 16944783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Blood. 2006 Aug 1;108(3):886-95.

E2f4 regulates fetal erythropoiesis through the promotion of cellular
proliferation.

Kinross KM(1), Clark AJ, Iazzolino RM, Humbert PO.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Cycle and Cancer Genetics Laboratory, Trescowthick Research Laboratories,
Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Locked Bag 1, A'Beckett Street, Melbourne VIC
8006, Australia.

The E2F proteins are major regulators of the transcriptional program required to 
coordinate cell cycle progression and exit. In particular, E2f4 has been proposed
to be the principal family member responsible for the regulation of cell cycle
exit chiefly through its transcriptional repressive properties. We have
previously shown that E2f4(-/-) mice display a marked macrocytic anemia
implicating E2f4 in the regulation of erythropoiesis. However, these studies
could not distinguish whether E2f4 was required for differentiation, survival, or
proliferation control. Here, we describe a novel function for E2f4 in the
promotion of erythroid proliferation. We show that loss of E2f4 results in an
impaired expansion of the fetal erythroid compartment in vivo that is associated 
with impaired cell cycle progression and decreased erythroid proliferation.
Consistent with these observations, cDNA microarray analysis reveals cell cycle
control genes as one of the major class of genes down-regulated in E2f4(-/-) FLs,
and we provide evidence that E2f4 may directly regulate the transcriptional
expression of a number of these genes. We conclude that the macrocytic anemia of 
E2f4(-/-) mice results primarily from impaired cellular proliferation and that
the major role of E2f4 in fetal erythropoiesis is to promote cell cycle
progression and cellular proliferation.

PMID: 16861343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2006 Jul;15(7):1250-6.

Cell cycle regulators p105, p107, Rb2/p130, E2F4, p21CIP1/WAF1, cyclin A in
predicting cervical intraepithelial neoplasia, high-risk human papillomavirus
infections and their outcome in women screened in three new independent states of
the former Soviet Union.

Santopietro R(1), Shabalova I, Petrovichev N, Kozachenko V, Zakharova T, Pajanidi
J, Podistov J, Chemeris G, Sozaeva L, Lipova E, Tsidaeva I, Ivanchenko O,
Pshepurko A, Zakharenko S, Nerovjna R, Kljukina L, Erokhina O, Branovskaja M,
Nikitina M, Grunberga V, Grunberg A, Juschenko A, Cintorino M, Tosi P, Syrjänen
K, Syrjänen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology and Oncology, University of Siena, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The growth-controlling functions of the high-risk human
papillomaviruses (HPV) depend on their ability to interact with several cellular 
proteins, including the key regulatory proteins of the cell cycle. We have
examined the value of cell cycle regulatory proteins as predictors of the
intermediate end point markers in cervical carcinogenesis: (a) grade of cervical 
intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN), (b) high-risk HPV type, (c)
clearance/persistence of high-risk HPV, and (d) disease outcome in women
participating in a multicenter follow-up study in three New Independent States
countries.
METHODS: Totally, 232 biopsy samples tested high-risk HPV-positive and/or
Papanicolaou smear-positive women were immunohistochemically stained for the
following cell cycle markers: p105, p107, p130, E2F4, p21(CIP1/WAF1/SDI1), cyclin
A, and Ki-67. In addition, apoptotic index (AI) and mitotic index (MI) were
determined in H&E-stained sections. Prospective follow-up data were available to 
disclose the clinical and virological outcome of the lesions.
RESULTS: The expression of Ki-67, p21(CIP1/WAF1/SDI1), and cyclin A and AI and MI
values were markedly increased in high-grade lesions, but only MI was an
independent predictor of CIN3 in multivariate analysis. Cyclin A was the only
independent predictor of high-risk HPV (odds ratio, 1.09; 95% confidence
interval, 1.01-1.18; P = 0.021), exceeding the predictive power of CIN grade and 
high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion Papanicolaou smears. None of these
markers provided any useful predictive information as to the clinical and
virological outcomes during the follow-up. Highly significant correlations (P =
0.0001) were found between AI and MI as well as between MI and cyclin A, Ki-67
and p21(CIP1/WAF1/SDI1), Ki-67 and cyclin A, and p21(CIP1/WAF1/SDI1) and cyclin A
followed by that between p105 and cyclin A (P = 0.001) and p105 and p130 (P =
0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: All tested factors related to cell cycle were increased, but only MI
and cyclin A was an independent predictor of CIN3 and high-risk HPV carriage,
respectively.

PMID: 16835319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Biochem J. 2006 Sep 15;398(3):431-7.

Id2 leaves the chromatin of the E2F4-p130-controlled c-myc promoter during
hepatocyte priming for liver regeneration.

Rodríguez JL(1), Sandoval J, Serviddio G, Sastre J, Morante M, Perrelli MG,
Martínez-Chantar ML, Viña J, Viña JR, Mato JM, Avila MA, Franco L, López-Rodas G,
Torres L.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Universidad de València,
València, Spain.

The Id (inhibitor of DNA binding or inhibitor of differentiation)
helix-loop-helix proteins are involved in the regulation of cell growth,
differentiation and cancer. The fact that the molecular mechanisms of liver
regeneration are not completely understood prompted us to study the fate of Id2
in proliferating liver. Id2 increases in liver regeneration after partial
hepatectomy, following the early induction of its gene. Co-immunoprecipitation
shows that Id2 forms a complex with E2F4, p130 and mSin3A in quiescent liver and 
all these components are present at the c-myc promoter as shown using ChIP
(chromatin immunoprecipitation). Activation of c-myc during hepatocyte priming
(G0-G1 transition) correlates with the dissociation of Id2 and HDAC (histone
deacetylase), albeit p130 remains bound at least until 6 h. Moreover, as the
G0-G1 transition progresses, Id2 and HDAC again bind the c-myc promoter
concomitantly with the repression of this gene. The time course of c-myc binding 
to the Id2 promoter, as determined by ChIP assays is compatible with a role of
the oncoprotein as a transcriptional inducer of Id2 in liver regeneration.
Immunohistochemical analysis shows that Id2 also increases in proliferating
hepatocytes after bile duct ligation. In this case, the pattern of Id2 presence
in the c-myc promoter parallels that found in regenerating liver. Our results may
suggest a control role for Id2 in hepatocyte priming, through a p130
dissociation-independent regulation of c-myc.

PMCID: PMC1559451
PMID: 16776654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2006 Mar;35(2):135-8.

[Benzo(a)pyrene induced changes of cyclin D1, CDK4 and E2F-1/4 expression in
human embryo lung fibroblasts].

[Article in Chinese]

Ye M(1), Liu BC, Du HJ, You BR.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Occupation Health and Poison Control, Chinese Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 100050, China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish Benzo (a) pyrene-treated human embryo lung fibroblasts
(HELF), which were provided with some characteristics of transformed cells
(T-HELF), and observe the changes of cyclin D, CDK4 and E2F-1/4 expression in
T-HELF cells.
METHODS: Using 200, 100, 50, 25, 5 and 1 micromol/L B(a)P treated HELF cells for 
24 h. Using MTT detected the cytotoxicity of B(a)P. 100,200 micromol/L B(a)P was 
chosen for the treatment of HELF cells. HELF cells was treated with B(a)P three
times. The identification of T-HELF was investigated. Changes of cell cycle and
the expression of cyclin D1,CDK4 and E2F-1/4 were checked using the flow
cytometer and Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: The survival rate of HELF cells treated with 25-200 micromol/L B(a)P was
78%-80%. 4 w after B(a)P treatment, cells were all dead in 200/mol/L groups. 6 w 
after 100 micromol/L B(a) P treatment, the morphological changes could be
observed. 12 w after treatment, there were colonies of T-HELF cells in soft agar.
In T-HELF cells, cyclin D1 expression was higher than normal HELF, and cell cycle
progressed through G, to S without serum. There were not significant changes of
CDK4 and E2F-1/4 expression in T-HELF cells compared with normal HELF.
CONCLUSION: The T-HELF was established. This model provided a potential tool for 
investigating the molecular mechanism of carcinogenesis of B(a)P. The higher
expression of cyclin D1 may contribute to the cell cycle changes of T-HELF cells.

PMID: 16758952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Methods Enzymol. 2006;407:455-68.

Biochemistry and biology of ARHI (DIRAS3), an imprinted tumor suppressor gene
whose expression is lost in ovarian and breast cancers.

Yu Y(1), Luo R, Lu Z, Wei Feng W, Badgwell D, Issa JP, Rosen DG, Liu J, Bast RC
Jr.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

ARHI is a maternally imprinted tumor suppressor gene that is downregulated in 60%
of ovarian and breast cancers. Loss of ARHI expression is associated with tumor
progression in breast cancer and decreased disease-free survival in ovarian
cancer. ARHI encodes a 26-kDa protein with 55-62% homology to Ras and Rap. In
contrast to Ras, ARHI inhibits growth, motility, and invasion. ARHI contains a
unique 34 amino-acid extension at its N-terminus and differs from Ras in residues
critical for GTPase activity and for its putative effector function. Deletion of 
ARHI's unique N-terminal extension markedly reduces its inhibitory effect on cell
growth. The gene maps to chromosome 1p31 at a site of LOH in 40% of ovarian and
breast cancers. Mutations have not been detected, but the remaining allele is
silenced by methylation in approximately 10-15 % of cases. In the remaining
cancers, ARHI is downregulated by transcriptional mechanisms that involve E2F1
and E2F4, as well as by the loss of RNA binding proteins that decrease the
half-life of ARHI mRNA. Transgenic expression of human ARHI in mice produces
small stature, induces ovarian atrophy, and prevents postpartum milk production. 
Reexpression of ARHI in cancer cells inhibits signaling through Ras/Map and PI3
kinase, upregulates P21(WAF1/CIP1), downregulates cyclin D1, induces JNK, and
inhibits signaling through STAT3. Marked overexpression of ARHI with a dual
adenoviral vector induces caspase-independent, calpain-dependent apoptosis. When 
ARHI is expressed from a doxycycline-inducible promoter at more physiological
levels, autophagy is induced, rather than apoptosis. Growth of ovarian and breast
cancer xenografts is reversibly suppressed by ARHI, but expression of the NTD
mutant produced only a limited inhibitory effect on growth of xenografts.

PMID: 16757345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jun;26(12):4448-61.

Visualizing dynamic E2F-mediated repression in vivo.

Agromayor M(1), Wloga E, Naglieri B, Abrashkin J, Verma K, Yamasaki L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, 1212 Amsterdam Avenue,
1102 Fairchild Building, Mail Code 2428, New York, NY 10027, USA.

Although many E2F target genes have been identified recently, very little is
known about how any single E2F site controls the expression of an E2F target gene
in vivo. To test the requirement for a single E2F site in vivo and to learn how
E2F-mediated repression is regulated during development and tumorigenesis, we
have constructed a novel series of wild-type and mutant Rb promoter-LacZ
transgenic reporter lines that allow us to visualize the activity of a crucial
E2F target in vivo, the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor gene (Rb). Two mutant Rb 
promoter-LacZ constructs were used to evaluate the importance of a single E2F
site or a nearby activator (Sp1/Ets) site that is found mutated in low-penetrance
retinoblastomas. The activity of the wild-type Rb promoter is dynamic, varying
spatially and temporally within the developing nervous system. While loss of the 
activator site silences the Rb promoter, loss of the E2F site stimulates its
activity in the neocortex, retina, and trigeminal ganglion. Surprisingly,
E2F-mediated repression of Rb does not act globally or in a static manner but,
instead, is a highly dynamic process in vivo. Using neocortical extracts, we
detected GA-binding protein alpha (GABPalpha, an Ets family member) bound to the 
activator site and both E2F1 and E2F4 bound to the repressor site of the Rb
promoter in vitro. Additionally, we detected binding of both E2F1 and E2F4 to the
Rb promoter in vivo using chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis on embryonic day
13.5 brain. Unexpectedly, we detect no evidence for Rb promoter autoregulation in
neuroendocrine tumors from Rb+/-; RbP-LacZ mice that undergo loss of
heterozygosity at the Rb locus, in contrast to the situation in human
retinoblastomas where high RB mRNA levels are found. In summary, this study
provides the first demonstration that loss of an E2F site is critical for target 
gene repression in vivo and underscores the complexity of the Rb and E2F family
network in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1489115
PMID: 16738312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jul 14;345(4):1565-72. Epub 2006 May 16.

Gene expression of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors and effect of heparin on
their expression in mice with hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension.

Yu L(1), Quinn DA, Garg HG, Hales CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Unit, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 02114, USA.

The balance between cell proliferation and cell quiescence is regulated
delicately by a variety of mediators, in which cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) and
CDK inhibitors (CDKI) play a very important role. Heparin which inhibits
pulmonary artery smooth muscle cell (PASMC) proliferation increases the levels of
two CDKIs, p21 and p27, although only p27 is important in inhibition of PASMC
growth in vitro and in vivo. In the present study we investigated the expression 
profile of all the cell cycle regulating genes, including all seven CDKIs (p21,
p27, p57, p15, p16, p18, and p19), in the lungs of mice with hypoxia-induced
pulmonary hypertension. A cell cycle pathway specific gene microarray was used to
profile the 96 genes involved in cell cycle regulation. We also observed the
effect of heparin on gene expression. We found that (a) hypoxic exposure for two 
weeks significantly inhibited p27 expression and stimulated p18 activity, showing
a 98% decrease in p27 and 81% increase in p18; (b) other CDKIs, p21, p57, p15,
p16, and p19 were not affected significantly in response to hypoxia; (c) heparin 
treatment restored p27 expression, but did not influence p18; (d) ERK1/2 and p38 
were mediators in heparin upregulation of p27. This study provides an expression 
profile of cell cycle regulating genes under hypoxia in mice with hypoxia-induced
pulmonary hypertension and strengthens the previous finding that p27 is the only 
CDKI involved in heparin regulation of PASMC proliferation and hypoxia-induced
pulmonary hypertension.

PMID: 16729969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Jul;5(7):771-6. Epub 2006 Jul 26.

Heterogeneous cross-talk of E2F family members is crucially involved in growth
modulatory effects of interferon-gamma and EGF.

Reimer D(1), Sadr S, Wiedemair A, Concin N, Hofstetter G, Marth C, Zeimet AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynocology, Innsbruck Medical University,
Austria.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Jul;5(7):777-8.

There is growing evidence that deregulation of E2F transcription factors is
causatively involved in the patho-physiology of various tumors. However, no data 
on the role of E2F family members in tumor biology of ovarian cancer are
available. We here describe an expression study of all known E2F transcription
factors and their coactivators DP-1 and DP-2 in various human ovarian cancer cell
lines and the breast cancer cell line T47D and their involvement in pathways
affected by interferon-gamma and EGF. A significant overexpression of the
proliferation-promoting E2F1 and especially E2F2 points to a pivotal role in
modulating the uncontrolled proliferation in ovarian cancer cells. Of special
note is the fact that interferon-gamma treatment did not only caused a reduction 
of the proliferation-promoting transcription factors E2F1 and E2F2, but also
increased the inhibiting transcription factors E2F4 and E2F5, thus underlining
the importance of an E2F cross-talk in the anti-proliferative function of
interferon-gamma. Moreover, an increase in DP-1 and E2F3 is probably involved in 
the proliferation-enhancing effect of EGF. Our study provides a new insight in
the crucial role of E2F cross-talk, especially the role of the inhibiting
transcription factors E2F4 and E2F5, in the tumor biology of cancer and its
possible usefulness as targets in anti-cancer therapy.

PMID: 16721044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Mar;40(2):79-83.

[Vitamin C reverses benzo (a) pyrene-induced cell cycle changes by E2F pathway].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao A(1), Liu BC, Shen FH, Du HJ, Huang CS, Jia XW, You BR, Ye M.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Occupation Health and Poison Control, Chinese Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 100050, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the role of E2F1/4 pathway in vitamin C reversing benzo (a)
pyrene [B (a) P]-induced changes of cell cycle in human embryo lung fibroblasts
(HELF) and the relationship between E2F1 and cyclin D1/CDK4.
METHODS: The stable transfectants, HELF transfected with antisense cyclin D1 and 
antisense CDK4, were established to detect the relationship of signaling pathway.
Cells were cultured and pretreated with vitamin C before stimulation with B (a) P
for 24 hours. The expression levels of cyclin D1, CDK4, E2F1 and E2F4 were
determined by Western blot and the band intensity was analysed as the relative
value to control by using the Gel-Pro 3.0 software. Flow Cytometric Analysis was 
employed to detect the distributions of cell cycle.
RESULTS: B (a) P significantly elevated the expression levels of cyclin D1, CDK4,
E2F1 and E2F4 in HELF cells. Vitamin C decreased the expression levels of above
proteins in B (a) P-stimulated HELF cells. The expression levels of these
proteins in B (a) P-treated above transfectants were lower than those in B (a)
P-treated HELF cells. The expression levels of above proteins with vitamin C
combined with antisense cyclin D1 were decreased as compared to those with
antisense cyclin D1 alone. B (a) P increased the percentage of S phase as
compared to the controls [(41.1 +/- 0.2)% vs (33.5 +/- 3.2)%, P < 0.05]. Both
vitamin C [(33.2 +/- 0.6)% vs (41.1 +/- 0.2)%, P < 0.05] and antisense cyclin D1 
[(31.2 +/- 1.3)% vs (41.1 +/- 0.2)%, P < 0.05] suppressed the changes of cell
cycle induced by B (a) P. Vitamin C combined with antisense CDK4 markedly
suppressed B (a) P-induced changes of cell cycle as compared to those with
antisense CDK4 alone.
CONCLUSION: Vitamin C might reserve the B (a) P-induced changes of cell cycle via
intracellular signaling pathway of cyclin D1-CDK4/E2F-1/4.

PMID: 16640900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 15;12(8):2404-13.

Transcriptional and posttranscriptional down-regulation of the imprinted tumor
suppressor gene ARHI (DRAS3) in ovarian cancer.

Lu Z(1), Luo RZ, Peng H, Rosen DG, Atkinson EN, Warneke C, Huang M, Nishmoto A,
Liu J, Liao WS, Yu Y, Bast RC Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE: ARHI expression is lost or markedly down-regulated in the majority of
ovarian cancers. The mechanism by which ARHI is down-regulated in ovarian cancers
is still not clear. Our previous reports indicated that ARHI promoter activity
was reduced in ovarian cancer cells, due in part to the effects of negative
regulatory transcription factor(s).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND RESULTS: We now show that E2F1 and E2F4, but not E2F2,
E2F3, or E2F5, bind to the ARHI promoter and repress its activity in ovarian
cancer cells. Consistent with this observation, immunochemical staining of cell
lines and of 364 samples of ovarian cancer tissue show that the expression of
E2F1 and E2F4 proteins is much higher in ovarian cancer cells than in normal
ovarian epithelial cells, and that increased expression of E2Fs was negatively
correlated with ARHI expression (P < 0.05). Mutation of the putative E2F binding 
site in the ARHI promoter reversed this inhibitory effect and significantly
increased ARHI promoter activity. In addition to the effects of transcriptional
regulation, ARHI mRNA also exhibited a significantly reduced half-life in ovarian
cancer cells when compared with that in normal ovarian epithelial cells (P <
0.01), suggesting posttranscriptional regulation of ARHI expression. ARHI mRNA
contains AU-rich elements (ARE) in the 3'-untranslated region. We have found that
these AREs interact with HuR, an ARE-binding protein that stabilizes bound mRNAs,
possibly contributing to the rapid turnover of ARHI mRNA. Finally, reduced HuR
ARE binding activity was observed in ovarian cancer cells when compared with
normal ovarian surface epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data suggest that ARHI expression is regulated
at both the transcriptional and the posttranscriptional levels, contributing to
the dramatic decrease in ARHI expression in ovarian cancers.

PMID: 16638845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2006 Mar 1;44(5):344-8.

[The relationship between frameshift mutations of transforming growth factor-beta
type II receptor, insulin growth factor II receptor, bcl-2 associated X protein, 
E2F4 and microsatellite instability in gastric carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen GT(1), Zhu ZG, Yin HR, Liu BY, Ji J, Zhang J, Lin YZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tongji University Affiliated Oriental Hospital,
Shanghai 200120, China. guotingchen@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To determine the microsatellite instability in gastric carcinomas,
examine the frameshift mutations of transforming growth factor-beta type II
receptor (TGFbetaRII), insulin growth factor II receptor (IGFIIR), bcl-2
associated X protein (BAX) and E2F4, and investigate whether or how alterations
of the TGFbetaRII, IGFIIR, BAX and E2F4 gene are associated with MSI in gastric
cancer.
METHODS: Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded gastrectomy specimens and matching
normal tissues of 65 cases of gastric carcinomas were retrieved from shanghai
Ruijin Hospital and Shanghai East Hospital. DNA was extracted from tissue
sections using phenol chloral isoamyl alcohol. Sections with no more than 50% of 
tumor cell areas were isolated by microdissection. DNA was amplified by PCR-based
single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) for microsatellite analysis and
was sequenced directly. Frameshift mutations in the coding regions, repetitive
mononucleotide tracts of (A)10 for TGFbetaRII, (G)8 for IGFIIR, (G)8 for BAX, and
trinucleotide repeats of (AGC)13 for transcription factors E2F4 were detected
using PCR. Tumors were classified as being microsatellite stable (MSS) or having 
a low frequency of MSI (MSI-L, one of markers different in the tumor) or a high
frequency of MSI (MSI-H, two or more of markers different).
RESULTS: Eleven cases (18.0%) showed MSI-L, 12 (19.7%) showed MSI-H and 38
(62.3%) cases showed MSS. The mutation rates of TGFbetaRII, IGFIIR, BAX and E2F4 
gene were 19.7%, 4.9%, 6.6% and 16.4% respectively. Among the 12 MSI-H gastric
cancers, there were 10 TGFbetaRII mutations, 3 IGFIIR mutations, 4 BAX mutations 
and 10 E2F4 gene mutations. The alterations in the repeats of the related genes
presented polymorphisms. Associations of MSI-H status and mutations of the 4
genes were highly significant (P < 0.01, respectively). No repeat tracts
mutations in TGFbetaRII, IGFIIR, BAX and E2F4 gene were found in MSS tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: The repeat coding regions within TGFbetaRII, IGFIIR, BAX and E2F4
gene are the targets of microsatellite instability. Frameshift mutations of the 4
genes play an important role in the development and progression of gastric
cancers with microsatellite instability.

PMID: 16635398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Mol Cell Biochem. 2006 Aug;288(1-2):79-90. Epub 2006 Apr 22.

Host cell factor-1 and E2F4 interact via multiple determinants in each protein.

Knez J(1), Piluso D, Bilan P, Capone JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University
Medical Center, McMaster University, 1200 Main St. W., Hamilton, Ontario, L8N
3Z5, Canada.

Host Cell Factor (HCF-1) is a conserved, essential protein initially identified
as a co-regulator for the Herpes Simplex Virus transactivator VP16. HCF-1 is
variously involved in regulating transcription, splicing, cell proliferation and 
cytokinesis; however, its mechanisms of action remain unknown. HCF-1 function is 
manifested through an increasing assortment of cellular factors that target
different regions of the protein. Several HCF-1 partners target the
amino-terminal kelch domain of HCF-1 (residues 1-380) via a consensus HCF-binding
motif (HBM) comprising the tetrapeptide (D/E)HXY. Searches of sequence databases 
indicated that this motif is present in E2F1 and E2F4, two members of the E2F
family of cell cycle regulators. We show here that E2F4 specifically and directly
interacts with HCF-1. Mutational analysis showed E2F4 independently targets the
kelch domain and the basic domain (residues 450-902) of HCF-1, both of which are 
required for normal cell-cycle progression via separate determinants. The
HBM-containing domain of E2F4 was necessary for interaction with the kelch domain
of HCF-1 but not for interaction with the basic domain. Mutations in the HCF-1
kelch domain known to block cell growth abrogated E2F4 binding to the kelch
domain in the absence but not in the presence of the juxtaposed basic region.
Functionally, HCF-1 co-activated E2F4/DP-1 in transient transfection assays,
while E2F4 blocked HCF-1-dependent rescue of a cell line that harbors a
temperature sensitive mutant of HCF-1 that causes growth arrest. Our findings
show that HCF-1 and E2F4 interact via multiple determinants and suggest a linkage
between E2F4 and HCF-1 cell growth pathways.

PMID: 16633736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2006 Feb;24(2):67-71.

[cyclin D1/E2F pathways involved in cell cycle changes of human embryo lung
fibroblasts induced by benzo(a)pyrene].

[Article in Chinese]

Ye M(1), Liu BC, Shi XL, You BR, Du HJ, Jia XW, Shen FH.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Occupation Health and Poison Control, Chinese Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 100050, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the roles of cyclin D1/CDK4-E2F-1/4 pathway in cell
cycle changes of human embryo lung fibroblasts (HELF) induced by two different
benzo(a)pyrene [B(a)P] treatment models.
METHODS: Two B(a)P treatment models: HELF were treated by 2 micromol/L B(a)P for 
24 hours; HELF were treated by 100 micromol/L B(a)P three times 24 hours each and
provide with some characteristics of transformed cells (T-HELF). Changes of cell 
cycle and the expression of cyclin D1, CDK4 and E2F-1/4 were checked using the
flow cytometry and Western bolt analysis.
RESULTS: After 24 hours 2 microml/L B(a)P treatment, the HELFs in the G(1) phase 
was decreased. In HELF transfected with antisense cyclin Dl (A-Dl) and antisense 
CDK4 (A-K4), the expression of cyclin Dl and CDK4 blocked the cell cycle changes 
from the G(1) phase to the S phase induced by B(a)P. The overexpression of cyclin
Dl and E2F-1 in HELF was induced by B(a)P. The E2F-1 overexpression in A-D1
induced B(a)P was inhibited. The E2F-4 expression was decreased and the CDK4
expression was increased significantly in A-K4 after B(a)P treatment. Most of
T-HELF transfected with antisense cyclin Dl (T-A-Dl) and antisense CDK4 (T-A-K4) 
were retained in G(1) phase. The cyclin Dl expression in T-HELF was increased
significantly compared with that in HELF. The E2F-4 expression in T-A-Dl and
T-A-K4 was increased significantly compared with that in T-HELF.
CONCLUSION: B(a)P induces the cell cycle changes through cyclin D1/CDK4-E2F-1/4
pathway in HELF treated by 2 micromol/L B(a)P while it induces cell cycle changes
through cyclin D1/CDK4-E2F-4 pathway in T-HELF.

PMID: 16600106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Cell Cycle. 2006 Mar;5(6):567-8. Epub 2006 Mar 15.

The human papillomavirus E7 protein shines a spotlight on the pRB family member, 
p130.

Roman A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the Walther Oncology Center,
Indiana University School of Medicine, and the Walther Cancer Institute,
Indianapolis 46202-5120, USA. aroman@iupui.edu

PMID: 16582614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Jan-Feb;1759(1-2):60-8. Epub 2006 Mar 24.

JPO1/CDCA7, a novel transcription factor E2F1-induced protein, possesses
intrinsic transcriptional regulator activity.

Goto Y(1), Hayashi R, Muramatsu T, Ogawa H, Eguchi I, Oshida Y, Ohtani K, Yoshida
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, School of Agriculture, Meiji University, 1-1-1
Higashimita, Tama-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 214-8571, Japan.

JPO1/CDCA7 was originally identified as a c-Myc-responsive gene that participates
in neoplastic transformation. Here, we report the identification of JPO1/CDCA7 as
a direct transcriptional target of transcription factor E2F1. We demonstrated
that overexpression of E2F1 by adenoviral-mediated gene transfer upregulated
JPO1/CDCA7 mRNA expression in human cells. Analysis of human and mouse JPO1/CDCA7
promoter constructs showed that an E2F-responsive sequence was necessary for
E2F1-induced activation of the JPO1/CDCA7 gene transcription. Among the members
of the E2F family, E2F1 to E2F4, but not E2F5 or E2F6, activated the JPO1/CDCA7
reporter construct. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated that
E2F1, E2F2, and E2F4 specifically bound to an E2F-responsive sequence of the
human JPO1/CDCA7 gene. Like JPO2/R1, which has a homologous transcriptional
regulator domain, the C-terminal cysteine-rich region of JPO1/CDCA7 protein
induced transcriptional activity in a mammalian one-hybrid assay. Taken together,
our results suggest that JPO1/CDCA7 is a unique transcription regulator whose
expression is activated by E2F1 as well as c-Myc.

PMID: 16580749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Biochem J. 2006 Jun 15;396(3):547-56.

ASK-1 (apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1) is a direct E2F target gene.

Kherrouche Z(1), Blais A, Ferreira E, De Launoit Y, Monté D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, 1 rue Calmette, BP 447, 59021
Lille, France.

In the present study, we show that E2Fs (E2 promoter-binding factors) regulate
the expression of ASK-1 (apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1), which encodes a
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase, also known as MAP3K5. Its mRNA
expression is cell-cycle-regulated in human T98G cells released from serum
starvation. Moreover, overexpression and RNA interference experiments support the
requirement of endogenous E2F/DP (E2F dimerization partner) activity for ASK-1
expression. Characterization of the human ASK-1 promoter demonstrates that the
-95/+11 region is critical for E2F-mediated up-regulation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays show that E2F1-E2F4 are bound in vivo to the ASK-1
promoter in cycling cells, probably through a non-consensus E2F-binding site
located 12 bp upstream of the transcription start site. Mutation of this site
completely abolishes the ASK-1 promoter response to E2Fs as well as the E2F1
binding in electrophoretic mobility-shift experiments. Our results indicate that 
E2Fs modulate the expression of ASK-1 and suggest that some of the cellular
functions of ASK-1 may be under the control of E2F transcription factors.
Moreover, the up-regulation of ASK-1 may also favour the p53-independent E2F1
apoptotic activity.

PMCID: PMC1482812
PMID: 16512785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Diabetes. 2006 Mar;55(3):640-50.

Necdin and E2F4 are modulated by rosiglitazone therapy in diabetic human adipose 
and muscle tissue.

Goldfine AB(1), Crunkhorn S, Costello M, Gami H, Landaker EJ, Niinobe M,
Yoshikawa K, Lo D, Warren A, Jimenez-Chillaron J, Patti ME.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, One Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215,
USA. allison.goldfine@joslin.harvard.edu

To identify novel pathways mediating molecular mechanisms of thiazolidinediones
(TZDs) in humans, we assessed gene expression in adipose and muscle tissue from
six subjects with type 2 diabetes before and after 8 weeks of treatment with
rosiglitazone. mRNA was analyzed using Total Gene Expression Analysis (TOGA), an 
automated restriction-based cDNA display method with quantitative analysis of PCR
products. The expression of cell cycle regulatory transcription factors E2F4 and 
the MAGE protein necdin were similarly altered in all subjects after
rosiglitazone treatment. E2F4 expression was decreased by 10-fold in muscle and
2.5-fold in adipose tissue; necdin was identified in adipose tissue only and
increased 1.8-fold after TZD treatment. To determine whether changes were related
to an effect of the drug or adipogenesis, we evaluated the impact of
rosiglitazone and differentiation independently in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. While
treatment of differentiated adipocytes with rosiglitazone did not alter E2F4 or
necdin, expression of both genes was significantly altered during
differentiation. Differentiation was associated with increased cytosolic
localization of E2F4. Moreover, necdin overexpression potently inhibited
adipocyte differentiation and cell cycle progression. These data suggest that
changes in necdin and E2F4 expression after rosiglitazone exposure in humans are 
associated with altered adipocyte differentiation and may contribute to improved 
insulin sensitivity in humans treated with TZDs.

PMID: 16505226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Cell Cycle. 2006 Feb;5(4):437-46. Epub 2006 Feb 15.

Cyclin D1 overexpression increases the susceptibility of human U266 myeloma cells
to CDK inhibitors through a process involving p130-, p107- and E2F-dependent S
phase entry.

Dai Y(1), Hamm TE, Dent P, Grant S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology and Department of Medicine, Virginia
Commonwealth University/Massey Cancer Center, Richmond, Virginia, USA.

Dysregulation of cyclin D1 expression is one of the most common genetic
aberrations found in hematopoietic malignancies, including multiple myeloma. To
address the effects of cyclin D1 overexpression might have on the response of
malignant hematopoietic cells to CDK inhibitors, the impact of ectopic cyclin D1 
overexpression on the response of human multiple myeloma U266 cells to various
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors was examined. Cyclin D1 overexpression
markedly increased the apoptotic response of cells to the CDK inhibitors
flavopiridol, roscovitine, and R-roscovitine. Ectopic expression of cyclin D1
resulted in p21(CIP1) accumulation, an effect that was diminished by CDK
inhibitor exposure. In pRb-null U266 cells, enforced overexpression of cyclin D1 
diminished CDK inhibitor-mediated dephosphorylation of the pocket proteins p130
and p107, reduced binding of E2F1 and E2F4 to p130 and p107, and attenuated
inhibition of E2F activity. Notably, CDK inhibitors failed to reduce the S phase 
fraction in cyclin D1/U266 cells in contrast to effects in their wild-type
counterparts. Finally, cyclin D1/U266 cells exhibited diminished basal NF-kappaB 
activity compared to controls, which was essentially completely abrogated by CDK 
inhibitor exposure. Together, these findings suggest that dysregulation of cyclin
D1 sensitizes human myeloma cells to the actions of CDK inhibitors through
mechanisms involving interference with p21(CIP1) expression, dephosphorylation of
pocket proteins and inactivation of E2Fs culminating in S phase entry, as well as
inactivation of NF-kappaB, leading to apoptosis rather than growth arrest.

PMID: 16479154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Cell Cycle. 2006 Jan;5(2):184-90. Epub 2006 Jan 16.

E2F3a stimulates proliferation, p53-independent apoptosis and carcinogenesis in a
transgenic mouse model.

Paulson QX(1), McArthur MJ, Johnson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Science Park Research Division, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

Mutation or inactivation of the retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor suppressor occurs in
most human tumors and results in the deregulation of several members of the E2F
family of transcription factors. Among the E2F family, E2F3 has been implicated
as a key regulator of cell proliferation and E2F3 gene amplification and
overexpression is detected in some human tumors. To study the role of E2F3 in
tumor development, we established a transgenic mouse model expressing E2F3a in a 
number of epithelial tissues via a keratin 5 (K5) promoter. Transgenic expression
of E2F3a leads to hyperproliferation, hyperplasia and increased levels of
p53-independent apoptosis in transgenic epidermis. Consistent with data from
human cancers, the E2F3a transgene is found to have a weak oncogenic activity on 
its own and to significantly enhance the response to a skin carcinogenesis
protocol. The phenotype of K5 E2F3a transgenic mice is distinct from similar
transgenic mice expressing E2F1 or E2F4. In particular, E2F3a has a unique
apoptotic activity and lacks the tumor suppressive property of E2F1 in this model
system.

PMID: 16340309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Hepatology. 2005 Dec;42(6):1310-9.

Role of HSP90, CDC37, and CRM1 as modulators of P16(INK4A) activity in rat liver 
carcinogenesis and human liver cancer.

Pascale RM(1), Simile MM, Calvisi DF, Frau M, Muroni MR, Seddaiu MA, Daino L,
Muntoni MD, De Miglio MR, Thorgeirsson SS, Feo F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Division of Experimental Pathology and
Oncology, University of Sassari, Italy.

Current evidence indicates that neoplastic nodules induced in liver of Brown
Norway (BN) rats genetically resistant to hepatocarcinogenesis are not prone to
evolve into hepatocellular carcinoma. We show that BN rats subjected to
diethylnitrosamine/2-acetylaminofluorene/partial hepatectomy treatment with a
"resistant hepatocyte" protocol displayed higher number of
glutathione-S-transferase 7-7(+) hepatocytes when compared with susceptible
Fisher 344 (F344) rats, both during and at the end of 2-acetylaminofluorene
treatment. However, DNA synthesis declined in BN but not F344 rats after
completion of reparative growth. Upregulation of p16(INK4A), Hsp90, and Cdc37
genes; an increase in Cdc37-Cdk4 complexes; and a decrease in p16(INK4A)-Cdk4
complexes occurred in preneoplastic liver, nodules, and hepatocellular carcinoma 
of F344 rats. These parameters did not change significantly in BN rats. E2f4 was 
equally expressed in the lesions of both strains, but Crm1 expression and levels 
of E2f4-Crm1 complex were higher in F344 rats. Marked upregulation of P16(INK4A) 
was associated with moderate overexpression of HSP90, CDC37, E2F4, and CRM1 in
human hepatocellular carcinomas with a better prognosis. In contrast, strong
induction of HSP90, CDC37, and E2F4 was paralleled by P16(INK4A) downregulation
and high levels of HSP90-CDK4 and CDC37-CDK4 complexes in hepatocellular
carcinomas with poorer prognosis. CDC37 downregulation by small interfering RNA
inhibited in vitro growth of HepG2 cells. In conclusion, our findings underline
the role of Hsp90/Cdc37 and E2f4/Crm1 systems in the acquisition of a susceptible
or resistant carcinogenic phenotype. The results also suggest that protection by 
CDC37 and CRM1 against growth restraint by P16(INK4A) influences the prognosis of
human hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMID: 16317707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Oncogene. 2006 Mar 23;25(13):1852-61.

DLK1: increased expression in gliomas and associated with oncogenic activities.

Yin D(1), Xie D, Sakajiri S, Miller CW, Zhu H, Popoviciu ML, Said JW, Black KL,
Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. Dong.Yin@cshs.org

DLK1 (delta-like) is a transmembrane and secreted protein in the epidermal growth
factor-like homeotic family. Although expressed widely during embryonic
development, only a few tissues retain the expression in adults. Neuroendocrine
tumors often highly express this protein; therefore, we hypothesized that brain
tumors might also express it. This study found that the expression of DLK1 in
gliomas was higher than that in normal brain (P < 0.05). After stable
transfection of a DLK1 cDNA expression vector into GBM cell lines, their
proliferation was increased. Furthermore, they lost contact inhibition, had
enhanced anchorage-independent growth in soft agar, and had significantly greater
capacity to migrate. Western blot studies showed that expression of cyclin D1,
CDK2, and E2F4 were increased, and Rb levels were decreased in these cells. DLK1 
was found on the cell surface and secreted in the medium from the transfected GBM
cells. DLK1-enriched condition medium stimulated the growth of glioblastoma
multiforme cell lines and explants. DLK1 antibody blocked cell growth stimulated 
by DLK1. In summary, these results suggest that DLK1 may play a role in the
formation or progression of gliomas.

PMID: 16288219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mol Cancer Res. 2005 Oct;3(10):575-83.

A mechanism of COOH-terminal binding protein-mediated repression.

Meloni AR(1), Lai CH, Yao TP, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Box 3054, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

The E2F4 and E2F5 proteins specifically associate with the Rb-related p130
protein in quiescent cells to repress transcription of various genes encoding
proteins important for cell growth. A series of reports has provided evidence
that Rb-mediated repression involves both histone deacetylase (HDAC)-dependent
and HDAC-independent events. Our previous results suggest that one such mechanism
for Rb-mediated repression, independent of recruitment of HDAC, involves the
recruitment of the COOH-terminal binding protein (CtBP) corepressor, a protein
now recognized to play a widespread role in transcriptional repression. We now
find that CtBP can interact with the histone acetyltransferase, cyclic
AMP--responsive element--binding protein (CREB) binding protein, and inhibit its 
ability to acetylate histone. This inhibition is dependent on a NH2-terminal
region of CtBP that is also required for transcription repression. These results 
thus suggest two complementary mechanisms for E2F/p130-mediated repression that
have in common the control of histone acetylation at target promoters.

PMID: 16254191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Apr;1765(2):126-47. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

Hepatocellular carcinoma as a complex polygenic disease. Interpretive analysis of
recent developments on genetic predisposition.

Feo F(1), De Miglio MR, Simile MM, Muroni MR, Calvisi DF, Frau M, Pascale RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Division of Experimental Pathology and
Oncology, University of Sassari, Via P. Manzella 4, 07100 Sasssari, Italy.
feo@uniss.it

The different frequency of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in humans at risk
suggests a polygenic predisposition. However, detection of genetic variants is
difficult in genetically heterogeneous human population. Studies on mouse and rat
models identified 7 hepatocarcinogenesis susceptibility (Hcs) and 2 resistance
(Hcr) loci in mice, and 7 Hcs and 9 Hcr loci in rats, controlling multiplicity
and size of neoplastic liver lesions. Six liver neoplastic nodule remodeling
(Lnnr) loci control number and volume of re-differentiating lesions in rat. A Hcs
locus, with high phenotypic effects, and various epistatic gene-gene interactions
were identified in rats, suggesting a genetic model of predisposition to
hepatocarcinogenesis with different subset of low-penetrance genes, at play in
different subsets of population, and a major locus. This model is in keeping with
human HCC epidemiology. Several putative modifier genes in rodents, deregulated
in HCC, are located in chromosomal segments syntenic to sites of chromosomal
aberrations in humans, suggesting possible location of predisposing loci.
Resistance to HCC is associated with lower genomic instability and downregulation
of cell cycle key genes in preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions. p16(INK4A)
upregulation occurs in susceptible and resistant rat lesions. p16(INK4A)-induced 
growth restraint was circumvented by Hsp90/Cdc37 chaperons and E2f4 nuclear
export by Crm1 in susceptible, but not in resistant rats and human HCCs with
better prognosis. Thus, protective mechanisms seem to be modulated by HCC
modifiers, and differences in their efficiency influence the susceptibility to
hepatocarcinogenesis and probably the prognosis of human HCC.

PMID: 16216419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Oncogene. 2006 Jan 12;25(2):230-9.

E2F-HDAC complexes negatively regulate the tumor suppressor gene ARHI in breast
cancer.

Lu Z(1), Luo RZ, Peng H, Huang M, Nishmoto A, Hunt KK, Helin K, Liao WS, Yu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

ARHI is a maternally imprinted tumor suppressor gene whose expression is markedly
downregulated in breast cancer. Reactivation of ARHI expression in breast cancer 
cells is associated with increased histone H3 acetylation and decreased lysine 9 
methylation of histone H3. An ARHI promoter segment that spanned bases -420 to
+58 (designated the P2 region) exhibits significantly higher promoter activity in
normal cells than in cancer cells. To better understand the molecular mechanisms 
contributing to this differential transcriptional activity, we sought to identify
transcription factors that bind to the P2 region of the ARHI promoter and
regulate its activity. Sequence analysis and oligonucleotide competition in
electrophoretic mobility shift assays identified an A2 fragment containing an
E2F-binding site. Using specific antibodies in supershift assays, we have shown
that anti-E2F1 and 4 antibodies can supershift the A2-protein complexes, whereas 
anti-E2F2 and 6 antibodies cannot, demonstrating that the A2 fragment interacts
with specific members of the E2F family proteins. When compared with normal
breast epithelial cells, breast cancer cells have significantly elevated
expression of E2F1, 4 and increased E2F DNA-binding activity. Moreover, chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that both E2F1 and 4 bind to the ARHI
promoter in breast cancer cells in vivo. This binding was reduced when the cells 
were treated with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor--trichostatin A (TSA).
When SKBr3 cells were cotransfected with an ARHI/luciferase reporter and
E2F-expression vectors, E2F1 and 4 reduced ARHI promoter activity 2-3-fold, and
this reduction could be reversed by TSA treatment. The negative regulation by
E2F-HDAC complexes could also be reduced by small interfering RNA of E2F1 and 4. 
While the retinoblastoma protein, pRB, alone had no effect on ARHI promoter
activity, repression by E2F1, but not E2F4, was enhanced by the coexpression of
pRB. Taken together, our results suggest that E2F1, 4 and their complexes with
HDAC play an important role in downregulating the expression of the tumor
suppressor gene ARHI in breast cancer cells.

PMID: 16158053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Oct 28;336(3):762-9.

Cell cycle-related transformation of the E2F4-p130 repressor complex.

Popov B(1), Chang LS, Serikov V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 4, Tikhoretsky Ave., St.
Petersburg 194064, Russia. popov_478@hotmail.com

During G0 phase the p130, member of the pRb tumor suppressor protein family,
forms a repressor complex with E2F4 which is inactivated in G1/S by
hyperphosphorylation of the p130. The role of p130 after G1/S remains poorly
investigated. We found that in nuclear extracts of T98G cells, the p130-E2F4-DNA 
(pp-E2F4) complex does not dissociate at G1/S transition, but instead reverts to 
the p130-E2F4-cyclin E/A-cdk2 (cyc/cdk-pp-E2F4) complex, which is detected in S
and G2/M phases of the cell cycle. Hyperphosphorylation of the p130 at G1/S
transition is associated with a decrease of its total amount; however, this
protein is still detected during the rest of the cell cycle, and it is
increasingly hyperphosphorylated in the cytosol, but continuously
dephosphorylated in the nucleus. Both nuclear and cytosol cell fractions in T98G 
cells contain a hyperphosphorylated form of p130 in complex with E2F4 at S and
G2/M cell cycle phases. In contrast to T98G cells, transformation of the p130
containing cyc/cdk-pp-E2F4 complex into the p130-pp-E2F4 repressor does not occur
in HeLa cells under growth restriction conditions.

PMID: 16153605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 11;280(45):37319-30. Epub 2005 Sep 6.

Characterization of the condensin component Cnap1 and protein kinase Melk as
novel E2F target genes down-regulated by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3.

Verlinden L(1), Eelen G, Beullens I, Van Camp M, Van Hummelen P, Engelen K, Van
Hellemont R, Marchal K, De Moor B, Foijer F, Te Riele H, Beullens M, Bollen M,
Mathieu C, Bouillon R, Verstuyf A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorium voor Experimentele Geneeskunde en Endocrinologie, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, Belgium.

1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D(3) (1,25(OH)(2)D(3)) has potent antiproliferative effects
characterized by a hampered G(1)/S transition. cDNA microarrays were used to
monitor expression of 21,492 genes in MC3T3-E1 mouse osteoblasts at 1, 6, 12, 24,
and 36 h after treatment with 1,25(OH)(2)D(3). Statistical analysis revealed a
cluster of genes that were strongly down-regulated by 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) and which
not only function in cell cycle regulation and DNA replication but also mediate
checkpoint control, DNA repair, chromosome modifications, and mitosis. Because
many of these genes were shown earlier to be regulated by the transcriptional
repressor E2F4, the intergenic regions of these 1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-down-regulated
genes were searched for the presence of E2F binding sites. This led to the
characterization of two novel E2F target genes, chromosome condensation-related
SMC-associated protein 1 (Cnap1) and maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase
(Melk). Transfection studies and site-directed mutagenesis confirmed Cnap1 and
Melk to be bona fide E2F targets. Repression of Cnap1 and Melk by 1,25(OH)(2)D(3)
was confirmed not only in MC3T3-E1 cells but also in several other bone-unrelated
cell types. This down-regulation as well as the antiproliferative effect of
1,25(OH)(2)D(3) depended on the pocket proteins p107 and p130 because
1,25(OH)(2)D(3) failed to repress these E2F target genes and lost its
antiproliferative action in p107(-/-);p130(-/-) cells but not in pRb(-/-) cells.

PMID: 16144839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;25(18):8166-78.

Pocket protein complexes are recruited to distinct targets in quiescent and
proliferating cells.

Balciunaite E(1), Spektor A, Lents NH, Cam H, Te Riele H, Scime A, Rudnicki MA,
Young R, Dynlacht BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, MSB 504, New York University School of Medicine and
New York University Cancer Institute, 550 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Biochemical and genetic studies have determined that retinoblastoma protein (pRB)
tumor suppressor family members have overlapping functions. However, these
studies have largely failed to distinguish functional differences between the
highly related p107 and p130 proteins. Moreover, most studies pertaining to the
pRB family and its principal target, the E2F transcription factor, have focused
on cells that have reinitiated a cell cycle from quiescence, although recent
studies suggest that cycling cells exhibit layers of regulation distinct from
mitogenically stimulated cells. Using genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation, 
we show that there are distinct classes of genes directly regulated by unique
combinations of E2F4, p107, and p130, including a group of genes specifically
regulated in cycling cells. These groups exhibit both distinct histone
acetylation signatures and patterns of mammalian Sin3B corepressor recruitment.
Our findings suggest that cell cycle-dependent repression results from
recruitment of an unexpected array of diverse complexes and reveals specific
differences between transcriptional regulation in cycling and quiescent cells. In
addition, factor location analyses have, for the first time, allowed the
identification of novel and specific targets of the highly related
transcriptional regulators p107 and p130, suggesting new and distinct regulatory 
networks engaged by each protein in continuously cycling cells.

PMCID: PMC1234327
PMID: 16135806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Mol Carcinog. 2005 Oct;44(2):137-45.

Role of PI3K/Akt signaling in insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) skin tumor
promotion.

Wilker E(1), Lu J, Rho O, Carbajal S, Beltrán L, DiGiovanni J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, Science Park-Research Division, University of
Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.

Overexpression of human IGF-1 with the bovine keratin 5 (BK5) promoter (BK5.IGF-1
transgenic mice) induces persistent epidermal hyperplasia and leads to
spontaneous skin tumor formation. In previous work, PI3K and Akt activities were 
found to be elevated in the epidermis of BK5.IGF-1 transgenic mice compared to
nontransgenic littermates. In the present study, we examined the importance of
the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway in mediating the skin phenotype and the skin tumor
promoting action of IGF-1 in these mice. Western blot analyses with epidermal
lysates showed that signaling components downstream of PI3K/Akt were altered in
epidermis of BK5.IGF-1 mice. Increased phosphorylation of GSK-3 (Ser(9/21)),
TSC2(Thr(1462)), and mTOR(Ser(2448)) was observed. In addition,
hypophosphorylation and increased protein levels of beta-catenin were observed in
the epidermis of BK5.IGF-1 mice. These data suggested that components downstream 
of Akt might be affected, including cell cycle machinery in the epidermis of
BK5.IGF-1 mice. Protein levels of cyclins (D1, E, A), E2F1, and E2F4 were all
elevated in the epidermis of BK5.IGF-1 mice. Also, immunoprecipitation
experiments demonstrated an increase in cdk4/cyclin D1 and cdk2/cyclin E complex 
formation, suggesting increased cdk activity in the epidermis of transgenic mice.
In further studies, the PI3K inhibitor, LY294002, significantly blocked
IGF-1-mediated epidermal proliferation and skin tumor promotion in DMBA-initiated
BK5.IGF-1 mice. In addition, inhibition of PI3K/Akt with LY294002 reversed many
of the cell cycle related changes observed in untreated transgenic animals.
Collectively, the current results supported the hypothesis that elevated PI3K/Akt
activity and subsequent activation of one or more downstream effector pathways
contributed significantly to the tumor promoting action of IGF-1 in the epidermis
of BK5.IGF-1 mice.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16086373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Neurosci Lett. 2005 Jul 15;382(3):259-64. Epub 2005 Apr 14.

E2F4 expression patterns in SIV encephalitis.

Morgan KL(1), Chalovich EM, Strachan GD, Otis LL, Jordan-Sciutto KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pennsylvania, School of Dental
Medicine, 240 S. 40th St., Rm 312 Levy Bldg, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6030, USA.

The E2F1 transcriptional regulator has been shown to exhibit altered expression
and localization in HIVE and SIVE. However, other E2F family members are
expressed in mature neurons and participate in neuronal differentiation. In an in
vitro model of neuronal differentiation, E2F4 protein levels have been shown to
increase. Further reduction in E2F4 leads to loss of neurites in this model.
Neuritic damage and loss are also seen in progression of HIVE and SIVE. To
determine if changes in E2F4 may contribute to altered neuronal morphology and
survival, we assessed E2F4 immunostaining in caudate and mid-frontal cortex from 
SIVE macaques and non-encephalitic controls. We found that E2F4 was expressed in 
neurons and localized to nuclei in both SIVE and non-encephalitic controls.
Quantification of E2F4 fluorescence intensity indicated that there was an overall
decrease in E2F4 in caudate of SIVE macaques as compared to non-encephalitic
controls, which correlated with a decrease in the neuronal phenotypic marker,
MAP2. In contrast, we observed a slight increase in E2F4 in mid-frontal cortex of
SIVE despite a significant decrease in MAP2. When E2F4 is normalized to MAP2, we 
found an increase in E2F4 fluorescence intensity per MAP2 in SIVE mid-frontal
cortex. These findings suggest changes in E2F4 may be contributing to altered
neuronal morphology or survival in SIVE.

PMID: 15925101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Nat Cell Biol. 2005 Jun;7(6):601-11. Epub 2005 May 15.

Prediction of preadipocyte differentiation by gene expression reveals role of
insulin receptor substrates and necdin.

Tseng YH(1), Butte AJ, Kokkotou E, Yechoor VK, Taniguchi CM, Kriauciunas KM,
Cypess AM, Niinobe M, Yoshikawa K, Patti ME, Kahn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Children's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2005 Jun;7(6):543-5.

The insulin/IGF-1 (insulin-like growth factor 1) signalling pathway promotes
adipocyte differentiation via complex signalling networks. Here, using microarray
analysis of brown preadipocytes that are derived from wild-type and insulin
receptor substrate (Irs) knockout animals that exhibit progressively impaired
differentiation, we define 374 genes/expressed-sequence tags whose expression in 
preadipocytes correlates with the ultimate ability of the cells to differentiate.
Many of these genes, including preadipocyte factor-1 (Pref-1) and multiple
members of the Wnt signalling pathway, are related to early adipogenic events.
Necdin is also markedly increased in Irs knockout cells that cannot
differentiate, and knockdown of necdin restores brown adipogenesis with
downregulation of Pref-1 and Wnt10a expression. Insulin receptor substrate
proteins regulate a necdin-E2F4 interaction that represses
peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) transcription via a 
cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB)-dependent pathway. Together
these define a key signalling network that is involved in brown preadipocyte
determination.

PMID: 15895078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 May 1;11(9):3265-73.

Expression of cell cycle-regulated proteins pRB2/p130, p107, E2F4, p27, and pCNA 
in salivary gland tumors: prognostic and diagnostic implications.

Russo G(1), Zamparelli A, Howard CM, Minimo C, Bellan C, Carillo G, Califano L,
Leoncini L, Giordano A, Claudio PP.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, College of
Science and Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122-6099, USA.

The retinoblastoma family consists of the tumor suppressor nuclear phosphoprotein
pRb/p105 and related proteins p107 and pRb2/p130. Recent immunohistochemical
studies of the retinoblastoma family of proteins in lung and endometrial cancer
and choroidal melanomas show a tight inverse correlation between the histologic
grading in the most aggressive tumor types and pRb2/p130 expression. This led us 
to investigate the role of pRb2/p130 in salivary tumors. We studied the
expression of pRb2/p130, p107, E2F4, p27, and PcNA by immunohistochemistry in a
panel of 44 salivary gland tumors. We found a direct correlation between the
cytoplasmic expression of pRb2/p130 and tumor grading and the presence of
metastasis that was highly statistically significant (P < 0.001). Additionally,
increased cytoplasmic pRb2/p130 expression was significantly correlated with a
decreased probability of survival (P < 0.001). Interestingly, p107 nuclear
expression showed a strong direct correlation when compared with the same
variables. pRb2/p130 showed the highest percentage of undetectable nuclear levels
in the specimens examined and the tightest inverse correlation (P < 0.0001) with 
both the histologic grading and pCNA expression in malignant salivary tumors.
Additionally, E2F4 showed an identical localization pattern as to that of
pRb2/p130. These data suggests an important role for pRb2/p130 in the
pathogenesis and progression of certain salivary gland cancers.

PMID: 15867222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Dev Neurosci. 2004;26(5-6):435-45.

Distinct capacities of individual E2Fs to induce cell cycle re-entry in
postmitotic lens fiber cells of transgenic mice.

Chen Q(1), Liang D, Yang T, Leone G, Overbeek PA.

Author information: 
(1)College of Optometry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE: Inactivation of the retinoblastoma gene in human retinoblasts or mouse
lens fiber cells causes inappropriate cell cycle entry, presumably as a
consequence of elevated activity of the E2F transcription factors. Although E2Fs 
are known to be critical regulators of the cell cycle, it is still unclear
whether family members E2F3a, E2F4 or E2F5 are individually capable of inducing
cell cycle entry in vivo. In this study, we designed experiments to test whether 
lens-specific expression of these E2F family members would induce postmitotic
fiber cells to re-enter the cell cycle.
METHODS: Transgenic mice were generated by microinjection of constructs that
contained E2F cDNAs (E2F3a, E2F4 or E2F5) linked to the mouse lens-specific
alphaA-crystallin promoter. The mice were characterized by histology, in situ
hybridization, immunohistochemistry, BrdU incorporation, TUNEL assay and Western 
blots.
RESULTS: E2F3a expression was sufficient to induce cell cycle entry in lens fiber
cells. Cell cycle re-entry was accompanied by apoptotic cell death resulting in
microphthalmia. E2F4 expression stimulated a modest level of cell cycle re-entry,
but the transgenic lenses remained normal in size and did not show significant
apoptosis. Transgenic mice expressing E2F5 did not show lens defects. In both the
E2F3a and E2F4 transgenic lenses, cyclin A2 and cyclin B1 expression were
upregulated. Phosphorylated histone H3, a marker for mitosis, was detected in the
E2F3a fiber cells. Western blots showed that both p53 and p73alpha were
upregulated in the E2F3a lenses. However, expression of p21, a well-known p53
target gene, was not activated, suggesting that p73alpha might be responsible for
inducing apoptosis and blocking unregulated proliferation in lens cells
overexpressing E2F3a.
CONCLUSIONS: E2F3a and E2F4, but not E2F5, function to induce cell cycle entry,
although E2F4 has more modest activity. E2F3a may induce cell death primarily
through activation of p73alpha.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 15855772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 3;280(22):21284-94. Epub 2005 Apr 4.

Dynamic transcriptional regulatory complexes, including E2F4, p107, p130, and
Sp1, control fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 gene expression during
myogenesis.

Parakati R(1), DiMario JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Chicago Medical School, North Chicago,
Illinois 60064, USA.

Developmentally controlled transcriptional regulation of myogenic cell
proliferation and differentiation via expression of the fibroblast growth factor 
receptor 1 (FGFR1) gene is positively regulated by Sp1 and negatively regulated
by E2F4-based transcriptional complexes. We report that p107 and p130 formed
transcriptional complexes with E2F4 on the FGFR1 promoter and repressed FGFR1
gene transcription in myogenic cells. However, in Drosophila melanogaster SL2
cells, only p107 was able to repress Sp1-mediated transactivation of the FGFR1
promoter. Gel shift assays using transfected myoblast nuclear extracts showed
that ectopic p107 reduced Sp1 occupancy of the proximal Sp binding site of the
FGFR1 promoter, and coimmunoprecipitation studies indicated that Sp1 interacts
with p107 but not with p130. Gel shift assays also demonstrated that Sp1
interacted with p107 in E2F4-p107 transcriptional complexes in myoblasts. The
nature of the repressor transcriptional complex was altered in differentiated
muscle fibers by the relative loss of the E2F4-p107-Sp1 transcription complex and
replacement by the repressor E2F4-p130 complex. These findings demonstrate that
activation and repression of FGFR1 gene transcription is governed by interplay
between Sp1, p107, p130, and E2F4 in distinct transcriptional complexes during
skeletal muscle development.

PMID: 15811856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Nat Methods. 2005 Jan;2(1):47-53. Epub 2004 Dec 21.

Mapping DNA-protein interactions in large genomes by sequence tag analysis of
genomic enrichment.

Kim J(1), Bhinge AA, Morgan XC, Iyer VR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology & Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Texas at 
Austin, Austin, Texas 78712-0159, USA.

Identifying the chromosomal targets of transcription factors is important for
reconstructing the transcriptional regulatory networks underlying global gene
expression programs. We have developed an unbiased genomic method called sequence
tag analysis of genomic enrichment (STAGE) to identify the direct binding targets
of transcription factors in vivo. STAGE is based on high-throughput sequencing of
concatemerized tags derived from target DNA enriched by chromatin
immunoprecipitation. We first used STAGE in yeast to confirm that RNA polymerase 
III genes are the most prominent targets of the TATA-box binding protein. We
optimized the STAGE protocol and developed analysis methods to allow the
identification of transcription factor targets in human cells. We used STAGE to
identify several previously unknown binding targets of human transcription factor
E2F4 that we independently validated by promoter-specific PCR and microarray
hybridization. STAGE provides a means of identifying the chromosomal targets of
DNA-associated proteins in any sequenced genome.

PMID: 15782160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Genes Dev. 2005 Mar 15;19(6):719-32.

Regulation of neuron survival and death by p130 and associated chromatin
modifiers.

Liu DX(1), Nath N, Chellappan SP, Greene LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New
York 10032, USA. dl345@columbia.edu

E2F-mediated gene repression plays a key role in regulation of neuron survival
and death. However, the key molecules involved in such regulation and the
mechanisms by which they respond to apoptotic stimuli are largely unknown. Here
we show that p130 is the predominant Rb family member associated with E2F in
neurons, that its major partner for repression of pro-apoptotic genes is E2F4,
and that the p130-E2F4 complex recruits the chromatin modifiers HDAC1 and Suv39H1
to promote gene silencing and neuron survival. Apoptotic stimuli induce neuron
death by sequentially causing p130 hyperphosphorylation, dissociation of
p130-E2F4-Suv39H1-HDAC complexes, altered modification of H3 histone and gene
derepression. Experimental suppression of such events blocks neuron death while
interference with the synthesis of E2F4 or p130, or with the interaction of
E2F4-p130 with chromatin modifiers, induces neuron death. Thus, neuron survival
and death are dependent on the integrity of E2F4-p130-HDAC/Suv39H1 complexes.

PMCID: PMC1065725
PMID: 15769944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Oncogene. 2005 Apr 21;24(18):3028-41.

Inactivation of TGF-beta signaling in hepatocytes results in an increased
proliferative response after partial hepatectomy.

Romero-Gallo J(1), Sozmen EG, Chytil A, Russell WE, Whitehead R, Parks WT,
Holdren MS, Her MF, Gautam S, Magnuson M, Moses HL, Grady WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.

The transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) signaling pathway, which is
activated by the TGF-beta receptor complex consisting of type I and type II
TGF-beta receptors (TGFBR1 and TGFBR2), regulates cell growth and death. TGF-beta
and components of its signaling pathway, particularly TGFBR2, have been
implicated as tumor suppressor genes and important antimitogenic factors in the
gastrointestinal tract and liver. An in vivo approach to study these effects has 
been hindered by the embryonic lethality of Tgfbr2(-/-) mice and poor viability
of the Tgfb1(-/-) mice. Consequently, we have developed a hepatocyte-specific
Tgfbr2 knockout mouse, the Alb-cre Tgfbr2(flx/flx) mouse, to study the
physiologically relevant effects of TGF-beta signaling on epithelial cell
proliferation in vivo. After 70% hepatectomy, we observed increased proliferation
and an increased liver mass : body weight ratio in the Alb-cre Tgfbr2(flx/flx)
mice compared to Tgfbr2(flx/flx) mice. We also observed decreased expression and 
increased phosphorylation of p130 in the livers from the Alb-cre Tgfbr2(flx/flx) 
mice as well as increased expression of cyclin E, which is transcriptionally
regulated, in part, by p130:E2F4. Consistent with these results, in a hepatocyte 
cell line derived from the Tgfbr2(flx/flx) mice, we found that TGF-beta increases
the nuclear localization of E2F4, and presumably the transcriptional repression
of the p130:E2F4 complex. Thus, we have demonstrated that TGF-beta signaling in
vivo regulates the mitogenic response in the regenerating liver, affecting the
liver mass : body weight ratio after partial hepatectomy, and that these
mitogenic responses are accompanied by alterations in p130 expression and
phosphorylation, implicating p130 as one of the proteins regulated in vivo by
TGF-beta during liver regeneration.

PMID: 15735717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 6;280(18):18211-20. Epub 2005 Feb 18.

Cloning and characterization of mouse E2F8, a novel mammalian E2F family member
capable of blocking cellular proliferation.

Maiti B(1), Li J, de Bruin A, Gordon F, Timmers C, Opavsky R, Patil K, Tuttle J, 
Cleghorn W, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology
and Medical Genetics, and Department of Molecular Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The E2F transcription factor family plays a crucial and well established role in 
cell cycle progression. Deregulation of E2F activities in vivo leads to
developmental defects and cancer. Based on current evidence in the field,
mammalian E2Fs can be functionally categorized into either transcriptional
activators (E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3a) or repressors (E2F3b, E2F4, E2F5, E2F6, and
E2F7). We have identified a novel E2F family member, E2F8, which is conserved in 
mice and humans and has its counterpart in Arabidopsis thaliana (E2Ls).
Interestingly, E2F7 and E2F8 share unique structural features that distinguish
them from other mammalian E2F repressor members, including the presence of two
distinct DNA-binding domains and the absence of DP-dimerization,
retinoblastoma-binding, and transcriptional activation domains. Similar to E2F7, 
overexpression of E2F8 significantly slows down the proliferation of primary
mouse embryonic fibroblasts. These observations, together with the fact that E2F7
and E2F8 can homodimerize and are expressed in the same adult tissues, suggest
that they may have overlapping and perhaps synergistic roles in the control of
cellular proliferation.

PMID: 15722552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Circ Res. 2005 Mar 18;96(5):509-17. Epub 2005 Feb 17.

Divergent siblings: E2F2 and E2F4 but not E2F1 and E2F3 induce DNA synthesis in
cardiomyocytes without activation of apoptosis.

Ebelt H(1), Hufnagel N, Neuhaus P, Neuhaus H, Gajawada P, Simm A, Müller-Werdan
U, Werdan K, Braun T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, University of Halle-Wittenberg, Germany.

Proliferation of mammalian cardiomyocytes ceases around birth when a transition
from hyperplastic to hypertrophic myocardial growth occurs. Previous studies
demonstrated that directed expression of the transcription factor E2F1 induces
S-phase entry in cardiomyocytes along with stimulation of programmed cell death. 
Here, we show that directed expression of E2F2 and E2F4 by adenovirus mediated
gene transfer in neonatal cardiomyocytes induced S-phase entry but did not result
in an onset of apoptosis whereas directed expression of E2F1 and E2F3 strongly
evoked programmed cell death concomitant with cell cycle progression. Although
both E2F2 and E2F4 induced S-phase entry only directed expression of E2F2
resulted in mitotic cell division of cardiomyocytes. Expression of E2F5 or a
control LacZ-Adenovirus had no effects on cell cycle progression. Quantitative
real time PCR revealed that E2F1, E2F2, E2F3, and E2F4 alleviate G0 arrest by
induction of cyclinA and E cyclins. Furthermore, directed expression of E2F1,
E2F3, and E2F5 led to a transcriptional activation of several proapoptotic genes,
which were mitigated by E2F2 and E2F4. Our finding that expression of E2F2
induces cell division of cardiomyocytes along with a suppression of proapoptotic 
genes might open a new access to improve the regenerative capacity of
cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 15718499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 May;16(5):2181-90. Epub 2005 Feb 16.

EAPP, a novel E2F binding protein that modulates E2F-dependent transcription.

Novy M(1), Pohn R, Andorfer P, Novy-Weiland T, Galos B, Schwarzmayr L, Rotheneder
H.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Medical Biochemistry, University
Departments at the Vienna Biocenter, Medical University of Vienna, A-1030 Vienna,
Austria.

E2F transcription factors play an essential role in cell proliferation and
apoptosis and their activity is frequently deregulated in human cancers. In a
yeast two-hybrid screen we identified a novel E2F-binding protein. Due to its
strong phosphorylation we named it EAPP (e2F-associated phosphoprotein). EAPP is 
localized in the nucleus and interacts with E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3, but not with
E2F-4. Examination of a number of human cell lines revealed that EAPP levels are 
elevated in most transformed cells. Moreover, EAPP mRNA was detected in all
investigated human tissues in varying amounts. EAPP is present throughout the
cell cycle but disappears during mitosis. In transfection assays with reporters
controlled by either an artificial E2F-dependent promoter or the murine thymidine
kinase promoter, EAPP increased the activation caused by E2F-1 but not by E2F-4. 
Surprisingly, the promoter of the p14(ARF) gene, which was also activated by
E2F-1, became repressed by EAPP. Overexpression of EAPP in U2OS cells resulted in
a significant increase of cells in S-phase, whereas RNAi-mediated knock down of
EAPP reduced the fraction of cells in S-phase. Taken together, these data suggest
that EAPP modulates E2F-regulated transcription, stimulates proliferation, and
may be involved in the malignant transformation of cells.

PMCID: PMC1087227
PMID: 15716352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Int J Obes (Lond). 2005 Mar;29 Suppl 1:S10-2.

Atypical transcriptional regulators and cofactors of PPARgamma.

Miard S(1), Fajas L.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U540, Equipe Avenir, Metabolism and Cancer Laboratory, Montpellier,
France.

Regulation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma)
activity is the result of several events. The first control level is the
regulation of the expression of PPARgamma. Examples of this regulation, during
adipogenesis, is the transactivation of the PPARgamma promoter by transcription
factors of the classical pathway, such as C/EBPs or ADD1/SREBP1, but also newly
identified factors, such as E2Fs. When preadipocytes re-enter the cell cycle,
PPARgamma expression is induced coincident with an increase in DNA synthesis,
suggesting the involvement of the E2F family of cell cycle regulators. E2F1
induces PPARgamma transcription during clonal expansion, whereas E2F4 represses
PPARgamma expression during terminal adipocyte differentiation. Hence, E2Fs
represent the link between proliferative signaling pathways, triggering clonal
expansion, and terminal adipocyte differentiation through regulation of PPARgamma
expression. A second regulatory level of PPARgamma action is interaction with
cofactors. We will focus our attention on the atypical PPARgamma modulators. We
have described an interaction between PPARgamma and the retinoblastoma protein,
RB, which is both dependent upon ligand binding by PPARgamma and upon the
phosphorylation status of RB. The interaction between PPARgamma and RB decreases 
the transcriptional activity of PPARgamma through recruitment of the histone
deacetylase HDAC3. Inhibition of HDAC activity consequently results in a strong
activation of PPARgamma.

PMID: 15711575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;25(4):1325-38.

Dephosphorylated C/EBPalpha accelerates cell proliferation through sequestering
retinoblastoma protein.

Wang GL(1), Timchenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha) has been previously considered 
a strong inhibitor of cell proliferation which uses multiple pathways to cause
growth arrest. In this paper, we describe a new function of C/EBPalpha, which is 
an acceleration of cell proliferation. This new function of C/EBPalpha is created
in proliferating livers by protein phosphatase 2A-mediated dephosphorylation of
C/EBPalpha at Ser193. The Ser193-dephosphorylated C/EBPalpha interacts with
retinoblastoma protein (Rb) independently on E2Fs and sequesters Rb, leading to a
reduction of E2F-Rb repressors and to acceleration of proliferation. This new
function of C/EBPalpha requires Rb, since the dephosphorylated C/EBPalpha does
not promote proliferation in Rb-negative cells. We also show that a balance of Rb
and Ser193-dephosphorylated C/EBPalpha determines if the cells are growth
arrested or have an increased rate of proliferation. Consistently with these
findings, a significant portion of Rb is sequestered into Rb-C/EBPalpha complexes
in proliferating livers, and E2F-Rb complexes are not detectable in these livers.
Our data demonstrate a new pathway by which the phosphorylation-dependent switch 
of biological functions of C/EBPalpha promotes liver proliferation.

PMCID: PMC548025
PMID: 15684384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Virol. 2005 Feb;79(4):2301-8.

The adenovirus E4-6/7 protein directs nuclear localization of E2F-4 via an
arginine-rich motif.

Schaley JE(1), Polonskaia M, Hearing P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Medicine, Stony
Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.

E2F transcription factors are key participants in the regulation of
proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation in mammalian cells. E2Fs are
negatively regulated by members of the retinoblastoma protein (pRb) family.
During adenovirus (Ad) infection, viral proteins that displace pRb family members
from E2Fs and recruit E2F complexes to viral and cellular promoter regions are
expressed. This recruitment of E2F involves the induction of stable E2F binding
to inverted E2F binding sites in the Ad E2a and cellular E2F-1 promoters and
induces both viral and cellular gene expression. E2F-4 has abundant E2F activity 
within cells, and the majority of E2F-4 in asynchronous cells is found in the
cytoplasm. Upon expression of the adenovirus E4-6/7 protein, a significant
portion of E2F-4 is translocated to the nucleus, and its activity constitutes the
majority of Ad-induced nuclear E2F DNA binding activity. This redirection of
E2F-4 from cytoplasm to the nucleus requires an N-terminal arginine-rich nuclear 
localization sequence within E4-6/7. The directed targeting of E4-6/7 to the
nucleus is important for the function of this protein in the context of viral
infection. This function of E4-6/7 has a redundant component as well as
nonredundant components in cooperation with the adenovirus E1A oncoproteins to
deregulate and usurp host cell E2F function.

PMCID: PMC546583
PMID: 15681431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Mol Cell. 2005 Jan 21;17(2):225-36.

Macrophage migration inhibitory factor MIF interferes with the Rb-E2F pathway.

Petrenko O(1), Moll UM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Health Science Center, State University of New York
at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA. apetrenko@notes.cc.sunysb.edu

Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is implicated in the regulation of
inflammation and cell growth. We previously showed that MIF is a potent modulator
of p53- and E2F-dependent pathways that are activated in response to oncogenic
signaling. Here, we characterize the functional link between MIF and E2F
transcription factors. Our results demonstrate that MIF-deficient cells exhibit
E2F-dependent growth alterations and reduced susceptibility to oncogenic
transformation. The basis for this transformation resistance is a perturbed
function of the C-terminal Rb binding region of E2F4. However, inactivation of Rb
or substitution of the E2F4 C-terminal domain by the E2F1 C-terminal region
rescues the transformation defect. Importantly, the involvement of E2F factors in
DNA replication rather than in regulation of transcription determines their
oncogenic properties in the context of MIF deficiency. A proinflammatory molecule
interfering with tumor suppression and DNA replication provides a compelling
molecular link for the association of chronic inflammation and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15664192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Cancer Biol Ther. 2004 Dec;3(12):1208-11. Epub 2004 Dec 21.

Opposing roles of E2Fs in cell proliferation and death.

Crosby ME(1), Almasan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland Clinic 
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

Progression through the cell cycle is dependent upon the temporal and spatial
regulation of the various members of the E2F family of transcription factors. Two
of these members, E2F1 and E2F4 have opposing roles in cell cycle progression,
which were defined over a decade ago. While E2F1 is an activator of cell cycle
progression, E2F4 functions as a transcriptional repressor. Recent data indicate 
that these transcription factors also play a role in the cellular response to DNA
damage. In the case of E2F1, its overexpression leads to apoptosis. In contrast, 
the decreased expression of E2F4, in response to siRNA-mediated knockdown or to
certain therapeutic agents, induces apoptosis. Conversely, increased levels of
E2F4 may confer resistance to apoptosis-inducing therapies used in the clinic.
The balance between the activities of these two proteins in tumor cells is of
great interest. Directed control of E2F1 and E2F4 action may lead to better
diagnosis of disease and improved therapeutic modalities.

PMCID: PMC2519115
PMID: 15662116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Cancer Biol Ther. 2004 Dec;3(12):1262-9. Epub 2004 Dec 14.

E2F4 deficiency promotes drug-induced apoptosis.

Ma Y(1), Freeman SN, Cress WD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, University of South Florida College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida
33612-9497, USA.

E2F1 and E2F4 are known to have opposing roles in cell cycle control. In the
present work, we examine the role of both E2F1 and E2F4 in apoptosis induced by
three cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (roscovitine, BMS-387032, and
flavopiridol) as well as by three established chemotherapeutic drugs (VP16,
cisplatin and paclitaxel). We find that E2F4 levels are diminished following
treatment with cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors (flavopiridol, roscovitine and 
BMS-387032) or with DNA damaging drugs (cisplatin and VP16). In contrast, each of
these drugs induced E2F1. We find that mouse fibroblasts nullizygous for the E2F4
gene are more sensitive to apoptosis induced by roscovitine, flavopiridol,
cisplatin, and VP16, whereas E2F1-deficient fibroblasts are less sensitive.
Likewise, we find that RNAi-mediated reductions in E2F4 in human cancer cells
results in increased drug sensitivity. Taken together, these results support a
model in which E2F1 and E2F4 play opposing roles during drug-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 15611646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Int J Cancer. 2005 May 1;114(5):720-9.

High-resolution analysis of 16q22.1 in breast carcinoma using DNA amplifiable
probes (multiplex amplifiable probe hybridization technique) and
immunohistochemistry.

Rakha EA(1), Armour JA, Pinder SE, Paish CE, Ellis IO.

Author information: 
(1)The Breast Unit, Department of Histopathology, Nottingham City Hospital,
University of Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Loss of the chromosomal material at 16q22.1 is one of the most frequent genetic
aberrations found in both lobular and low-grade nonlobular invasive carcinoma of 
the breast, indicating the presence of a tumour suppressor gene (TSG) at this
region in these tumours. However, the TSG (s) at the 16q22.1 in the more frequent
nonlobular carcinomas is still unknown. Multiplex Amplifiable Probe Hybridisation
(MAPH) is a simple, accurate and a high-resolution technique that provides an
alternative approach to DNA copy-number measurement. The aim of our study was to 
examine the most likely candidate genes at 16q22.1 using MAPH assay combined with
protein expression analysis by immunohistochemistry. We identified deletion at
16q22.1 that involves some or all of these genes. We also noticed that the
smallest region of deletion at 16q22.1 could be delineated to a 3 Mb region
centromeric to the P-cadherin gene. Apart from the correlation between E-cadherin
protein expression and its gene copy number, no correlation was detected between 
the expression of E2F-4, CTCF, TRF2 or P-cadherin with their gene's copy number. 
In the malignant tissues, no significant loss or decrease of protein expression
of any gene other than E-cadherin was seen in association with any specific
tumour type. No expression of VE-cadherin or Ksp-cadherin was detected in the
normal and/or malignant tissues of the breast in these cases. However, there was 
a correlation between increased nuclear expression of E2F-4 and tumours with
higher histological grade (p = 0.04) and positive lymph node disease (p = 0.02), 
suggesting that it may have an oncogenic rather than a tumour suppressor role.
The malignant breast tissues also showed abnormal cytoplasmic cellular
localisation of CTCF, compared to its expression in the normal parenchymal cells.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that MAPH is a potential technique for
assessment of genomic imbalances in malignant tissues. Although our results
support E-cadherin as the TSG in invasive lobular carcinoma, they argue against
the candidacy of E2F-4, CTCF, TRF2, P-cadherin, Ksp-cadherin and VE-cadherin as
TSGs in breast cancer.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15609312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. DNA Repair (Amst). 2005 Feb 3;4(2):183-90.

Proliferation-dependent expression of nuclear uracil-DNA glycosylase is mediated 
in part by E2F-4.

Muller-Weeks S(1), Balzer RJ, Anderson R, Caradonna S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey, School of Osteopathic Medicine, 2 Medical Center Drive, Stratford, NJ
08084, USA. muller@umdnj.edu

There are two isoforms of the prototypical human uracil-DNA glycosylase: one
mitochondrial (UDG1) and one nuclear (UDG1A). Results presented here reveal a
novel genetic organization of UDG1. Specifically, the UDG1 5' UTR is composed of 
two non-coding exons and the promoter region is located much farther upstream
than previously recognized. We also examine the proliferation-dependent
expression of UDG1A and demonstrate that the protein disappears rapidly as cells 
transit from the cell cycle into G0. Ribonuclease protection assays reveal that
UDG1A mRNA levels are greatly reduced during G0 as well. To begin to characterize
the mechanisms contributing to this regulation, we identified two overlapping
candidate E2F binding sites (denoted A and B) in the UDG1A 5' UTR. EMSA analysis 
of this region shows a unique protein complex present only in extracts derived
from G0 cells. In vitro studies using purified E2F-4 and mutant competitors
demonstrate that binding occurs in a proliferation-dependent manner exclusively
to E2F site A. Two approaches were then used to assess the in vivo role of the
candidate E2F sites. First, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis
demonstrates that E2F-4 binds to the UDG1A 5' UTR exclusively in G0 cells.
Secondly, using transient transfection analysis, we show that mutating these
sites abolishes the proliferation-dependent response of UDG1A.

PMID: 15590326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jan;232(1):119-30.

Repression of fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 gene expression by E2F4 in
skeletal muscle cells.

Parakati R(1), Dimario JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Chicago Medical School, North Chicago,
Illinois.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) gene expression is positively and
negatively regulated during muscle differentiation. We recently reported that
FGFR1 gene expression was up-regulated by Sp transcription factors in
proliferating myoblasts. However, the mechanism of down-regulation of this gene
during differentiation is unknown. We have identified the transcription factor
E2F4 as a negative regulator of FGFR1 gene expression. Immunodetection studies
revealed that endogenous E2F1 and E2F2 proteins were cytoplasmic in myoblasts and
myotubes, whereas E2F4 was abundant in the nuclei of both. Upon overexpression,
E2F4 repressed FGFR1 promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner in myoblasts
and Drosophila SL2 cells, and mutation of the E2F4 binding site increased FGFR1
promoter activity and reduced E2F4-mediated repression. Gel shift assays detected
E2F4 binding to a synthetic FGFR1 E2F4 binding site and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays detected E2F4 binding to the endogenous FGFR1 promoter
in proliferating myoblasts and myotubes. The results indicate that FGFR1 promoter
activity in skeletal muscle cells is repressed by E2F4.

PMID: 15580623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Genes Dev. 2004 Dec 1;18(23):2941-51.

A role for E2F6 in distinguishing G1/S- and G2/M-specific transcription.

Giangrande PH(1), Zhu W, Schlisio S, Sun X, Mori S, Gaubatz S, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Department of Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

E2F transcription factors play a critical role in the control of cell cycle
progression, regulating the expression of genes involved in DNA replication, DNA 
repair, mitosis, and cell fate. This involves both positive-acting and
negative-acting E2F proteins, the latter group including the E2F6 protein, which 
has been shown to function as an Rb-independent repressor of E2F-target gene
transcription. In an effort to better delineate the context of E2F6 function,
including the mechanisms of E2F6 functional specificity, we used chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays to assess when and with what genes E2F6 associates
during a cell cycle. We find that E2F6 associates specifically with the E2F
target genes that are activated at G1/S; this interaction occurs during S phase
of the cell cycle. In sharp contrast, E2F6 does not bind to E2F-regulated genes
activated at G2/M. In the absence of E2F6, E2F4 can bind to the G1/S-regulated
promoters and compensate for loss of E2F6 function. Indeed, inhibition of both
E2F4 and E2F6 activity results in specific derepression of these genes during S
phase. We conclude that E2F6 functions as a repressor of E2F-dependent
transcription during S phase and given the specificity for the G1/S-regulated
genes, we propose that E2F6 functions to distinguish G1/S and G2/M transcription 
during the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC534654
PMID: 15574595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Neoplasia. 2004 Sep-Oct;6(5):646-59.

Inositol hexaphosphate inhibits growth and induces G1 arrest and apoptotic death 
of androgen-dependent human prostate carcinoma LNCaP cells.

Agarwal C(1), Dhanalakshmi S, Singh RP, Agarwal R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Colorado Cancer Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO
80262, USA.

Prostate cancer (PCA) is the most common invasive malignancy and the second
leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the US male population. One approach to
control this malignancy is its preventive intervention by dietary agents.
Inositol hexaphosphate (IP6), a dietary constituent, has shown promising efficacy
against various cancers; however, limited studies have been performed with IP6
against PCA. Here, we investigated the growth-inhibitory effect and associated
mechanisms of IP6 in androgen-dependent human prostate carcinoma LNCaP cells. IP6
treatment of cells resulted in a strong growth inhibition and an increase in G1
cell population. In mechanistic studies, IP6 resulted in an increase in
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CDKIs) Cip1/p21 and Kip1/p27 levels, together
with a decrease in cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4 and cyclin D1 protein levels. 
An increase in CDKI levels by IP6 also led to a concomitant increase in their
interactions with CDK2 and CDK4, together with a strong decrease in the kinase
activity of both CDKs. Downstream in CDKI-CDK-cyclin cascade, consistent with its
inhibitory effect on CDK kinase activity, IP6 treatment of cells increased
hypophosphorylated levels of retinoblastoma (Rb) with a decrease in Rb
phosphorylation at serine 780, 807, and 811 sites, and caused a moderate to
strong decrease in the levels of transcription factors E2F1, E2F4, and E2F5. In
other studies, IP6 caused a dose- and a time-dependent apoptotic death of LNCaP
cells, and a decrease in Bcl2 levels, causing a strong increase in Bax versus
Bcl2 ratio, as well as an inhibition of constitutively active AKT
phosphorylation. Taken together, these molecular alterations provide an insight
into IP6-caused growth inhibition, G1 arrest, and apoptotic death of human
prostate carcinoma LNCaP cells. Because early clinical PCA growth is an
androgen-dependent response, the results of the present study employing
androgen-dependent LNCaP cells suggest that IP6 has promise and potential to be
effective against PCA.

PMCID: PMC1531669
PMID: 15548374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Oncogene. 2005 Jan 13;24(3):344-54.

Proteasome inhibitor PS-341 causes cell growth arrest and apoptosis in human
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM).

Yin D(1), Zhou H, Kumagai T, Liu G, Ong JM, Black KL, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. Dong.Yin@cshs.org

The proteasome plays a pivotal role in controlling cell proliferation, apoptosis,
and differentiation in a variety of normal and tumor cells. PS-341, a novel
boronic acid dipeptide that inhibits 26S proteasome activity, has prominent
effects in vitro and in vivo against several solid tumors. We examined its
antiproliferation, proapoptotic effects using three human glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM) cell lines and five primary GBM explants. PS-341 markedly inhibited
proliferation of GBM cell lines and explants in liquid and soft agar culture.
These cells developed a G2/M cell cycle arrest with a concomitant decreased
percentage of cells in S phase ( approximately 2-fold), associated with an
increased expression of p21(WAF1), p27(KIP1), as well as cyclin B1 and decreased 
levels of CDK2, CDK4, and E2F4. About 35-40% of the cells became apoptotic when
exposed to PS-341 (10(-7) M, 24-48 h) as shown by Annexin V analysis; in concert 
with these findings, immunobloting showed a C-terminal 85 kDa apoptotic fragment 
of poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP), and a decreased level of Bcl2 and Bcl-xl.
PS-341 downregulated the expression of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xl in protein levels at an
early time of treatment. These changes occurred irrespective of the p53
mutational status of the cells. PS-341 activated JNK/c-Jun signaling in GBM
cells, and the JNK inhibitor SP600125 blocked the JNK signaling to reverse
partially the PS-341 growth inhibition. PS-341 (10(-7) M, 24 h) decreased nuclear
NF-kappaB levels as shown by Western blot, and reduced transcriptional activity
of NF-kappaB as measured by reporter assays in these transformed cells. Also,
PS-341 enhanced TRAIL (TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand) and TNFalpha (tumor
necrosis factor alpha) induced cell death and apoptosis (two- to five-fold) in
GBM cells. In summary, PS-341 has profound effects on growth and apoptosis of GBM
cells, suggesting that PS-341 may be an effective therapy for patients with
gliomas.

PMID: 15531918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Mol Cell. 2004 Nov 5;16(3):399-411.

A common set of gene regulatory networks links metabolism and growth inhibition.

Cam H(1), Balciunaite E, Blais A, Spektor A, Scarpulla RC, Young R, Kluger Y,
Dynlacht BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, MSB 504, New York University School of Medicine and
New York University Cancer Institute, 550 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Using genome-wide analysis of transcription factor occupancy, we investigated the
mechanisms underlying three mammalian growth arrest pathways that require the pRB
tumor suppressor family. We found that p130 and E2F4 cooperatively repress a
common set of genes under each growth arrest condition and showed that growth
arrest is achieved through repression of a core set of genes involved not only in
cell cycle control but also mitochondrial biogenesis and metabolism.
Motif-finding algorithms predicted the existence of nuclear respiratory factor-1 
(NRF1) binding sites in E2F target promoters, and genome-wide factor binding
analysis confirmed our predictions. We showed that NRF1, a factor known to
regulate expression of genes involved in mitochondrial function, is a coregulator
of a large number of E2F target genes. Our studies provide insights into E2F
regulatory circuitry, suggest how factor occupancy can predict the expression
signature of a given target gene, and reveal pathways deregulated in human
tumors.

PMID: 15525513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. EMBO J. 2004 Nov 24;23(23):4615-26. Epub 2004 Oct 28.

E2Fs link the control of G1/S and G2/M transcription.

Zhu W(1), Giangrande PH, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke Institute for Genome
Sciences and Policy, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Previous work has provided evidence for E2F-dependent transcription control of
both G1/S- and G2/M-regulated genes. Analysis of the G2-regulated cdc2 and cyclin
B1 genes reveals the presence of both positive- and negative-acting E2F promoter 
elements. Additional elements provide both positive (CCAAT and Myb) and negative 
(CHR) control. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays identify multiple
interactions of E2F proteins that include those previously shown to activate and 
repress transcription. We find that E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3 bind to the
positive-acting E2F site in the cdc2 promoter, whereas E2F4 binds to the
negative-acting site. We also find that binding of an activator E2F is dependent 
on an adjacent CCAAT site that is bound by the NF-Y transcription factor and
binding of a repressor E2F is dependent on an adjacent CHR element, suggesting a 
role for cooperative interactions in determining both activation and repression. 
Finally, the kinetics of B-Myb interaction with the G2-regulated promoters
coincides with the activation of the genes, and RNAi-mediated reduction of B-Myb 
inhibits expression of cyclin B1 and cdc2. The ability of B-Myb to interact with 
the cdc2 promoter is dependent on an intact E2F binding site. These results thus 
point to a role for E2Fs, together with B-Myb, which is an E2F-regulated gene
expressed at G1/S, in linking the regulation of genes at G1/S and G2/M.

PMCID: PMC533046
PMID: 15510213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Gene. 2004 Oct 27;341:129-39.

Regulation of transcription of the human MRP7 gene. Characteristics of the basal 
promoter and identification of tumor-derived transcripts encoding additional 5'
end heterogeneity.

Dabrowska M(1), Sirotnak FM.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Pharmacology and Chemistry, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, 1275 York Ave., New York, NY 10021, USA.

Studies focusing on the transcriptional regulation of MRP7 (multidrug resistance 
associated protein 7) gene expression in human tumor cells are described. As
shown by real-time RT-PCR, expression of the MRP7 gene compared to the expression
of the MRP1, 2 and 3 genes was less variable among the different cell types.
MRP1, 2, 3 and 7 gene expression was highest in HepG2 cells compared to
expression in CWR22Rv1 and TSU-PR1 cells. MRP7 gene expression was less than
expression of the MRP1 and 2 genes in HepG2 cells but similar to MRP3 gene
expression in this cell type and similar to or greater than expression of the
MRP1, 2 and 3 genes in CWR22Rv1 and TSU-PR1 cells. Functional deletion analysis, 
in situ mutagenesis and electromobility shift assays (EMSA) showed that basal
MRP7 promoter activity relied upon a proximal segment of the 5' flanking region
169 to 257 nt in length bearing an E2F site acting cooperatively with two closely
positioned Sp1 sites. Two additional Sp1 sites further downstream were of
secondary importance. The sequence of the E2F site was noncanonical and its
interaction with E2F protein was confirmed by a competitive EMSA using a
consensus E2F oligonucleotide probe and by demonstrating a supershift with the
antibody against the E2F4 and E2F5 pocket protein, p107. 5' RACE carried out with
CWR22Rv1 and HepG2 cells detected a single transcription start site (tsp) distal 
to the basal promoter and identified two new MRP7 transcripts with very short 5' 
UTR sequences compared to transcripts found by others in nontumorous human
tissue. This 5' end heterogeneity infers a more complex intron-exon composition
than hitherto shown.

PMID: 15474296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Oct;24(20):8970-80.

Glycogen synthase kinase 3 phosphorylates RBL2/p130 during quiescence.

Litovchick L(1), Chestukhin A, DeCaprio JA.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Mayer 457, 44 Binney St., Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma-related or pocket proteins RB1/pRb,
RBL1/p107, and RBL2/p130 regulates cell cycle progression and exit. While all
pocket proteins are phosphorylated by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) during the 
G1/S-phase transition, p130 is also specifically phosphorylated in G0-arrested
cells. We have previously identified several phosphorylated residues that match
the consensus site for glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) in the G0 form of p130. 
Using small-molecule inhibitors of GSK3, site-specific mutants of p130, and
phospho-specific antibodies, we demonstrate here that GSK3 phosphorylates p130
during G0. Phosphorylation of p130 by GSK3 contributes to the stability of p130
but does not affect its ability to interact with E2F4 or cyclins. Regulation of
p130 by GSK3 provides a novel link between growth factor signaling and regulation
of the cell cycle progression and exit.

PMCID: PMC517894
PMID: 15456871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2004 Nov;41(3):278-82.

Chromosome band 16q22-linked familial AML: exclusion of candidate genes, and
possible disease risk modification by NQO1 polymorphisms.

Escher R(1), Jones A, Hagos F, Carmichael C, Horwitz M, Olopade OI, Scott HS.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Bioinformatics Division, the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Analyses of chromosomal translocation and inversion breakpoints in sporadic acute
myeloid leukemias have identified many transcription factors as playing a role in
leukemogenesis. Studies of families with a Mendelian predisposition to
hematological malignancies have identified the gene coding for the transcription 
factor RUNX1 as a leukemia-predisposing gene involved in the first steps of
leukemogenesis. Using two families, another autosomal dominant familial leukemia 
locus was linked to chromosome band 16q22 where the CBFB gene maps. Although CBFB
forms a core-binding factor transcriptional complex with RUNX1, previous analyses
have excluded the CBFB gene as the leukemia-predisposing gene in these families. 
In the current study, we performed an extended molecular analysis in these
families of the four other transcription factor genes in the 16q22 critical
region as well as of two other genes with a known association with leukemia.
Several previously undescribed but nonpathogenic sequence variants were
identified. We demonstrated that the transcription factors E2F4, CTCF, NFATC3,
and NFAT5, and the genes coding for NAD(P)H:quinone oxido-reductase 1 (NQO1) and 
for E-cadherin are not responsible for the leukemia susceptibility in these
families. The presence of NQO1 polymorphisms may suggest a role for this gene in 
disease risk modification in these families.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15334552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Free Radic Biol Med. 2004 Sep 1;37(5):597-606.

4-hydroxynonenal and regulation of cell cycle: effects on the pRb/E2F pathway.

Barrera G(1), Pizzimenti S, Dianzani MU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Oncology, Section of General
Pathology, University of Turin, 10125 Torino, Italy.

The hypothesis that 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE), a product of lipid peroxidation,
might negatively affect cell proliferation, arose from the observation that lipid
peroxidation is very low in tumors. In leukemic cells HNE inhibited cell growth
and reduced c-myc and c-myb expression. HNE also induced differentiation in
different leukemic cell lines. In HL-60 human leukemic cells, HNE induced the
accumulation of cells in the G(0)/G(1) phase of the cell cycle accompanied by a
decrease of cyclins D1, D2, and A. Moreover, HNE caused an increase in p21
expression. As cyclin D/CDK2 and cyclin A/CDK2 phosphorylate pRB, these findings 
suggested that pRb phosphorylation could be affected by HNE. Hypophosphorylated
pRb binds and inactivates the E2F transcription factors. HNE induced the
dephosphorylation of pRb and the increase in pRb/E2F1 complexes, whereas pRb/E2F4
complexes were reduced, because HNE downregulated E2F4 protein expression. The
analysis of E2F binding to the P2 c-myc promoter revealed that HNE caused a
decrease in "free" E2F, as well as an increase in pRb (and pRB family members)
bound to E2F, with consequent repression of the transcription. In conclusion, HNE
reduces E2F transcriptional activity by modifying a number of genes involved in
regulation of the pRb/E2F pathway.

PMID: 15288118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Cancer Res. 2004 Jul 1;64(13):4390-3.

Genotoxic stress induces expression of E2F4, leading to its association with p130
in prostate carcinoma cells.

DuPree EL(1), Mazumder S, Almasan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

The retinoblastoma (pRb), p107, and p130 pocket proteins bind to the E2F
transcription factors to control gene expression. E2F4 protein levels increased
and accumulated in the nuclei of prostate carcinoma cells subjected to ionizing
radiation (IR). The IR-induced increase of E2F4 levels led to an increase in E2F4
binding to p130 but had no effect on E2F4/p107 or E2F5/p130 complexes. The
increase in E2F4/p130 association after IR was observed in prostate carcinoma
cells regardless of their sensitivity to androgens, but not in breast carcinoma
cells. E2F4/p130 complex formation was dependent on dissociation of p130 from
cyclin-dependent kinase 2 and p130 dephosphorylation. Disruption of E2F4 through 
small interfering RNA prevented p130/E2F4 complex formation and sensitized cells 
to IR-induced apoptosis, leading to caspase-3 activation, cleavage of its
substrate, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, and nuclear condensation. The E2F4/p130
pocket protein complex emerges as a new target of radiation in prostate carcinoma
cells.

PMID: 15231644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Pathol. 2004 Jul;203(3):754-61.

Expression of E2F-4 in invasive breast carcinomas is associated with poor
prognosis.

Rakha EA(1), Pinder SE, Paish EC, Robertson JF, Ellis IO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Nottingham City Hospital, University of
Nottingham, UK.

The E2F family of transcription factors plays a key role in the control of
cellular proliferation and apoptosis. Some family members act as oncogenes and
others act as tumour suppressor genes (TSGs), behaviour which appears to be
tissue-specific. E2F-4 is a member of the E2F family, located at chromosome band 
16q22.1, that shows frequent deletion in breast cancer, suggesting that it may
function as a TSG in breast carcinogenesis. In the present study, the expression 
of E2F-4 was assessed immunohistochemically on paraffin wax sections from 265
breast carcinomas and expression was compared with both clinicopathological
variables and disease outcome in an attempt to identify its possible role as a
TSG and to assess its prognostic value, if any, in breast cancer. E2F-4 protein
expression was detected in the nuclei and in the cytoplasm of normal and
malignant breast epithelial cells. In the malignant tissues, no significant loss 
or decrease of expression was seen in association with any specific tumour type. 
There was a correlation between increased nuclear expression of E2F-4 and
indicators of poor prognosis including larger tumour size (p = 0.000), grade 3
lesions (p = 0.033), lymph node stage (p = 0.037), and poorer Nottingham
prognostic index group (p = 0.003). Increased immunoreactivity was also seen in
association with the development of recurrent disease (p = 0.004), distant
metastasis (p = 0.001), and poorer outcome including poorer overall survival time
(p = 0.002) and shorter disease-free interval (p = 0.001). In multivariate
analysis, E2F-4 was of independent prognostic significance along with grade and
lymph node stage. These results suggest that E2F-4 may play a role in breast
cancer progression and that increased nuclear expression is associated with more 
advanced tumours with poor outcomes. E2F-4 appears to have an oncogenic role
rather than a tumour suppressor role in breast carcinogenesis and, hence, it is
not the gene targeted by 16q22.1 loss in breast carcinoma.

Copyright 2004 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 15221934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Oncogene. 2004 Aug 19;23(37):6250-60.

Expression of MCM10 and TopBP1 is regulated by cell proliferation and UV
irradiation via the E2F transcription factor.

Yoshida K(1), Inoue I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetic Diagnosis, Institute of Medical Science, University of
Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.
yoshidak@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

MCM10 and TopBP1 function in the initiation of DNA replication, by regulating the
chromatin binding of the DNA polymerase alpha loading factor, CDC45. TopBP1 is
also known as a DNA damage response protein. In this study, we showed that the
transcription of human MCM10 and TopBP1 is activated by transcription factors
E2F1-3, but not by factors E2F4-7. Analysis of various MCM10 and TopBP1 promoter 
constructs showed that an E2F-responsive sequence in the vicinity of the
transcription initiation site is necessary for the E2F1-induced activation of
MCM10 and TopBP1 gene transcription, which is further suppressed by pRb. The
promoter activities of human MCM10 and TopBP1 were demonstrated to be growth
dependent via the E2F-responsive sequence. Although E2F1 was stabilized by
ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, the mRNA expression level of TopBP1 was suppressed 
in HCT116 human diploid colon cancer cells. We showed, by performing chromatin
immunoprecipitation that, in response to UV irradiation but not doxorubicin
treatment, E2F4 accumulated on the MCM10 and TopBP1 promoters. Our data suggest a
model in which UV irradiation-induced DNA damage depends, at least in part, on
the accumulation of the E2F4 transcription factor on the MCM10 and TopBP1
promoters, which results in suppression of DNA replication.

PMID: 15195143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 13;279(33):34332-5. Epub 2004 Jun 7.

Glutathione regulates telomerase activity in 3T3 fibroblasts.

Borrás C(1), Esteve JM, Viña JR, Sastre J, Viña J, Pallardó FV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Valencia, Avda.
Blasco Ibáñez 17, 46010 Valencia, Spain.

Changes in telomerase activity have been associated either with cancer, when
activity is increased, or with cell cycle arrest when it is decreased. We report 
that glutathione, a physiological antioxidant present at high intracellular
concentrations, regulates telomerase activity in cells in culture. Telomerase
activity increases in 3T3 fibroblasts before exponential cell growth. The peak of
telomerase activity takes place 24 h after plating and coincides with the maximum
levels of glutathione in the cells. When cells are treated with buthionine
sulfoximine, which decreases glutathione levels in cells, telomerase activity
decreases by 60%, and cell growth is delayed. Glutathione depletion inhibits
expression of E2F4 and Id2, which regulate the cell cycle. When glutathione
levels are restored after incubation with glutathione monoethylester, telomerase 
activity and the cell cycle-related proteins return to control values. To
discover the effect of glutathione redox status on the telomerase multicomplex
structure, we incubated protein extracts from fibroblasts with different
glutathione redox buffers. Telomerase activity is maximal under reduced
conditions i.e. when the reduced/oxidized glutathione ratio is high. Consequently
glutathione concentration parallels telomerase activity. These results underscore
the main role of glutathione in the control of telomerase activity and of the
cell cycle.

PMID: 15184392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 May;24(10):4546-56.

E2F-dependent histone acetylation and recruitment of the Tip60 acetyltransferase 
complex to chromatin in late G1.

Taubert S(1), Gorrini C, Frank SR, Parisi T, Fuchs M, Chan HM, Livingston DM,
Amati B.

Author information: 
(1)DNAX Research Institute, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA.

E2F proteins can either activate or repress transcription. Following mitogenic
stimulation, repressive E2F4-p130-histone deacetylase complexes dissociate from, 
while activating species (E2F1, -2, and -3) associate with, target promoters.
Histones H3 and H4 simultaneously become hyperacetylated, but it remains unclear 
whether this is a prerequisite or a consequence of E2F binding. Here, we show
that activating E2F species are required for hyperacetylation of target chromatin
in human cells. Overexpression of a dominant-negative (DN) E2F1 mutant in
serum-stimulated T98G cells blocked all E2F binding, H4 acetylation, and, albeit 
partially, H3 acetylation. Target gene activation and S-phase entry were also
blocked by DN E2F1. Conversely, ectopic activation of E2F1 rapidly induced H3 and
H4 acetylation, demonstrating a direct role for E2F in these events. E2F1 was
previously shown to bind the histone acetyltransferases (HATs) p300/CBP and
PCAF/GCN5. In our hands, ectopically expressed E2F1 also bound the unrelated HAT 
Tip60 and induced recruitment of five subunits of the Tip60 complex (Tip60,
TRRAP, p400, Tip48, and Tip49) to target promoters in vivo. Moreover,
E2F-dependent recruitment of Tip60 to chromatin occurred in late G(1) following
serum stimulation. We speculate that the activities of multiple HAT complexes
account for E2F-dependent acetylation, transcription, and S-phase entry.

PMCID: PMC400446
PMID: 15121871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Hum Genet. 2004;49(6):312-8. Epub 2004 Apr 29.

Up-regulation of transcriptional factor E2F1 in papillary and anaplastic thyroid 
cancers.

Onda M(1), Nagai H, Yoshida A, Miyamoto S, Asaka S, Akaishi J, Takatsu K,
Nagahama M, Ito K, Shimizu K, Emi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Gerontology, Nippon Medical
School, 1-396 Kosugi-cho, Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki 211-8533, Japan.

Expression of genes in the Rb-E2F signaling pathway is controlled by E2F
transcriptional factors originally defined as molecules that bind to the promoter
of E2 adenovirus. The E2F gene family consists of six members and is designated
E2F1-6. The Rb-E2F signaling pathway is among the main regulators of the cell
cycle, hence its importance in differentiation and oncogenesis. We document here 
up-regulation of E2F1, but not other members of the E2F gene family, in 15 of 18 
primary papillary thyroid cancers examined (83%) in comparison to corresponding
noncancerous thyroid tissues and in all of 11 anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC)
cell lines (100%). The E2F4 gene, however, was down-regulated in 12 of the
papillary thyroid cancers (67%). Immunohistochemical analysis with antibody to
E2F1 revealed prominent intracellular E2F1 protein in most of the primary
papillary cancers (16 of 18; 89%) but was not detectable in normal thyroid
tissues. These data indicated that increased expression of the E2F1 gene might
play a significant role in human thyroid carcinogenesis through derangement of
the Rb-E2F signaling pathway.

PMID: 15118916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 9;279(28):29278-85. Epub 2004 Apr 22.

Hierarchical requirement of SWI/SNF in retinoblastoma tumor suppressor-mediated
repression of Plk1.

Gunawardena RW(1), Siddiqui H, Solomon DA, Mayhew CN, Held J, Angus SP, Knudsen
ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of
Cincinnati, College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0521, USA.

Plk1 (Polo-like kinase 1) is a critical regulator of cell cycle progression that 
harbors oncogenic activity and exhibits aberrant expression in multiple tumors.
However, the mechanism through which Plk1 expression is regulated has not been
extensively studied. Here we demonstrate that Plk1 is a target of the
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor (RB) pathway. Activation of RB and related pocket
proteins p107/p130 mediate attenuation of Plk1. Conversely, RB loss deregulates
the control of Plk1 expression. RB pathway activation resulted in the repression 
of Plk1 promoter activity, and this action was dependent on the SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complex. Although SWI/SNF subunits are lost during tumorigenesis and
cooperate with RB for transcriptional repression, the mechanism through which
SWI/SNF impinges on RB action is unresolved. Therefore, we delineated the
requirement of SWI/SNF for three critical facets of Plk1 promoter regulation:
transcription factor binding, corepressor binding, and histone modification. We
find that E2F4 and pocket protein association with the Plk1 promoter is
independent of SWI/SNF. However, these analyses revealed that SWI/SNF is required
for histone deacetylation of the Plk1 promoter. The importance of
SWI/SNF-dependent histone deacetylation of the Plk1 promoter was evident, because
blockade of this event restored Plk1 expression in the presence of active RB. In 
summary, these data demonstrate that Plk1 is a target of the RB pathway.
Moreover, these findings demonstrate a hierarchical role for SWI/SNF in the
control of promoter activity through histone modification.

PMID: 15105433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Cell Physiol. 2004 May;199(2):262-73.

The nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of E2F4 is involved in the regulation of human
intestinal epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation.

Deschênes C(1), Alvarez L, Lizotte ME, Vézina A, Rivard N.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Group on Functional Development and Physiopathology of the Digestive
Tract, Département d'Anatomie et Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine,
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

The specific mechanisms controlling the transition from proliferation to terminal
differentiation in human intestinal epithelial cells (HIEC) remain largely
undefined. Herein, we analyzed the expression and localization of Rb and E2F
proteins in well-established normal intestinal epithelial cell models which allow
for the re-enactment of the crypt-villus axis in vitro as well as in intact
epithelium and in colon cancer cells. We report that (1) expression of E2F1 is
down-regulated while E2F4 protein is sequestered in the cytoplasm during G(0)
arrest associated with serum deprivation, confluency, and terminal
differentiation of intestinal cells; (2) concurrently, there is an accumulation
of the hypophosphorylated form of the pocket proteins into the nucleus with an
increased association of E2F4 with pRb and p130; (3) cells which expressed high
levels of nuclear E2F4 are all positive for Ki67 staining in human fetal
intestine; (4) activation of HIEC crypt cells by growth factors leads to an
increase in the nuclear localization of E2F4 which may be attributable to a
decrease in the serine/threonine phosphorylation of this transcription factor;
(5) inhibition of p38 MAP kinase with alpha/beta inhibitor SB203580 induces E2F4 
translocation into the nucleus and its transcriptional activity. In conclusion,
our data suggest a key role for E2F4 in proliferation of human intestinal crypt
cells and that its cytoplasmic retention as well as its sequestration by Rb
proteins may represent a critical step in initiating cell-cycle exit.

PMID: 15040009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Apr 9;316(3):930-6.

Cell cycle-dependent regulation of the human aurora B promoter.

Kimura M(1), Uchida C, Takano Y, Kitagawa M, Okano Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathobiochemistry, Gifu University School of Medicine,
Tsukasamachi-40, Gifu 500-8705, Japan. yo@cc.gifu-u.ac.jp

Aurora B is an important regulator of mitosis, and its mRNA and protein levels
are tightly regulated during the cell cycle. In this study, we cloned the 5'
flanking region of the human aurora B gene and characterized its promoter
activity. Two major transcription initiation sites were identified by primer
extension. aurora B promoter activity was upregulated during M phase, and its
cell cycle-dependent element (CDE) and cell cycle-gene homology region (CHR)
upstream of the transcription initiation sites regulated the cell cycle-dependent
promoter activity. Several CDE-binding protein complexes were identified using
the electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Using the biotin-streptavidin pull-down
assay, binding of E2F-1, E2F-4, and DP-2, but not of DP-1, to the CDE was
detected. These results demonstrate that aurora B mRNA level is regulated by
CDE-CHR and that a subset of E2F/DP family proteins binds to the CDE.

PMID: 15033491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Virology. 2004 Mar 15;320(2):218-28.

Simian virus 40 infection disrupts p130-E2F and p107-E2F complexes but does not
perturb pRb-E2F complexes.

Sullivan CS(1), Baker AE, Pipas JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15260, USA.

In its native host species, the Rhesus Macaque, simian virus 40 (SV40) forms a
persistent infection in the kidneys with no apparent harmful side effects. We
show that SV40 infection of growth-arrested monkey kidney epithelial cells
results in the specific disruption of certain Rb-E2F family complexes. Throughout
the course of infection, p130-E2F and p107-E2F complexes are disrupted, but
surprisingly pRb-E2F complexes remain intact. This suggests that the presence of 
some pRb-E2F complexes is not inhibitory to productive infection. Additionally,
while a decrease of p130 steady state levels is observed during the later time
points of infection, early during infection, p130 is readily detectable. This
suggests SV40 infection overrides p130-mediated growth arrest through a
mechanism(s) in addition to the well-documented T antigen-mediated degradation of
p130. Finally, infection induces a dramatic relocalization of E2F4 from the
nucleus to the cytoplasm. The implications of these observations to the life
cycle of the virus are addressed.

PMID: 15016545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Mar;24(6):2546-59.

Transforming growth factor beta-mediated transcriptional repression of c-myc is
dependent on direct binding of Smad3 to a novel repressive Smad binding element.

Frederick JP(1), Liberati NT, Waddell DS, Shi Y, Wang XF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

Smad proteins are the most well-characterized intracellular effectors of the
transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) signal. The ability of the Smads to
act as transcriptional activators via TGF-beta-induced recruitment to Smad
binding elements (SBE) within the promoters of TGF-beta target genes has been
firmly established. However, the elucidation of the molecular mechanisms involved
in TGF-beta-mediated transcriptional repression are only recently being
uncovered. The proto-oncogene c-myc is repressed by TGF-beta, and this repression
is required for the manifestation of the TGF-beta cytostatic program in specific 
cell types. We have shown that Smad3 is required for both TGF-beta-induced
repression of c-myc and subsequent growth arrest in keratinocytes. The
transcriptional repression of c-myc is dependent on direct Smad3 binding to a
novel Smad binding site, termed a repressive Smad binding element (RSBE), within 
the TGF-beta inhibitory element (TIE) of the c-myc promoter. The c-myc TIE is a
composite element, comprised of an overlapping RSBE and a consensus E2F site,
that is capable of binding at least Smad3, Smad4, E2F-4, and p107. The RSBE is
distinct from the previously defined SBE and may partially dictate, in
conjunction with the promoter context of the overlapping E2F site, whether the
Smad3-containing complex actively represses, as opposed to transactivates, the
c-myc promoter.

PMCID: PMC355825
PMID: 14993291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Mar 1;91(4):777-85.

Latent membrane protein 1 of Epstein-Barr virus plays an important role in the
serum starvation resistance of Epstein-Barr virus-immortalized B lymphocytes.

Park CH(1), Kim HR, Kim J, Jang SH, Lee KY, Chung GH, Jang YS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences and the Institute for Molecular Biology and
Genetics, Chonbuk National University, Chonju 561-756, Korea.

We have previously shown that SNU-1103, which is a latency type III Epstein-Barr 
virus (EBV)-transformed lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL) that was developed from a 
Korean cancer patient, resists serum starvation-induced G(1) arrest. In this
study, we examined the role of latent membrane protein-1 (LMP-1) in serum
starvation resistance, since LMP-1 is known to be essential for EBV-mediated
immortalization of human B lymphocytes. The LMP-1 gene from SNU-1103 was
introduced into the EBV-negative BJAB cell line, and shown to be associated with 
resistance to G(1) arrest during serum starvation. Western blot analyses of the
LMP-1-transfected cells revealed several protein alterations as compared to
vector-transfected control cells. The expression of key cell-cycle regulatory
proteins was affected in the G(1) phase: the expression of cyclin D3, CDK2, p27, 
and E2F-4 was up-regulated, and the expression of cyclin D2, CDK6, p21, and p103 
was down-regulated during serum starvation. These results imply that of the
several EBV viral genes expressed in EBV-negative B lymphoma cells, LMP-1
mediates resistance to serum starvation-induced G(1) arrest. However, we cannot
rule out the possibility that other EBV genes are also involved in the cell-cycle
progression of the EBV-transformed LCL during serum starvation, since the altered
protein expression profile of the LMP-1 transfectants was distinct from that of
the SNU-1103 cells that expressed all of the EBV viral proteins.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14991769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Oncogene. 2004 May 6;23(21):3802-12.

Regulation of Geminin and Cdt1 expression by E2F transcription factors.

Yoshida K(1), Inoue I.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Diagnosis, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1
Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. yoshidak@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Geminin and Cdt1 play an essential role in the initiation of DNA replication, by 
regulating the chromatin loading of the MCM complex. In this study, we showed
that the transcription of human Geminin and Cdt1, as well as that of MCM7, is
activated by transcription factors E2F1-4, but not by factors E2F5-7. Analysis of
various Geminin and Cdt1 promoter constructs showed that an E2F-responsive
sequence in the vicinity of the transcription initiation site is necessary for
the transcriptional activation. The promoter activity for human Geminin was
activated by the E7, but not E6, oncogene of human papillomavirus type 16. While 
E2F1-induced activation of human Cdt1 gene transcription was suppressed by pRb,
but not by p107 or p130, its E2F4-induced activation was suppressed by pRb, p107,
and p130. Furthermore, the promoter activities of human Geminin and Cdt1 were
demonstrated to be growth-dependent. Taken together, the results demonstrate that
Geminin and Cdt1 constitute targets for various members of the E2F family of
transcription factors, and that expression of Geminin and Cdt1 is perhaps
mediated by the activation of a pRb/E2F pathway.

PMID: 14990995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Mol Cancer Res. 2004 Feb;2(2):105-14.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 6 inhibits proliferation of human mammary epithelial
cells.

Lucas JJ(1), Domenico J, Gelfand EW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Medical
and Research Center, Denver, CO 80206, USA. lucasj@njc.org

Many defects in cancer cells are in molecules regulating G(1)-phase
cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks), which are responsible for modulating the
activities of Rb family growth-suppressing proteins. Models for understanding how
such defects affect proliferation assume that cdks are responsible for
sequentially phosphorylating, and hence inactivating, the growth-suppressing
functions of Rb family proteins, thus promoting cell cycle progression. However, 
cdks also play a role in formation of growth-suppressing forms of pRb family
molecules, including the "hypophosphorylated" species of pRb itself. Here, it is 
shown that normal human mammary epithelial cells have a high amount of cdk6
protein and activity, but all breast tumor-derived cell lines analyzed had
reduced levels, with several having little or no cdk6. Immunohistochemical
studies showed reduced levels of cdk6 in breast tumor cells as compared with
normal breast tissue in vivo. Cdk6 levels in two breast tumor cell lines were
restored to those characteristic of normal human mammary epithelial cells by DNA 
transfection. The cells had a reduced growth rate compared with parental tumor
cells; cells that lost ectopic expression of cdk6 reverted to the faster growth
rate of parental cells. Cell lines with restored cdk6 levels accumulated higher
amounts of the Rb family protein p130 as well as E2F4, a suppressing member of
the E2F family of transcription factors, in their nuclei. The results suggest
that cdk6 restrains rather than stimulates breast epithelial cell proliferation
and that its loss or down-regulation could play a role in breast tumor
development.

PMID: 14985467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 12;279(11):10796-807. Epub 2003 Dec 19.

S Phase-specific transcription of the mouse ribonucleotide reductase R2 gene
requires both a proximal repressive E2F-binding site and an upstream promoter
activating region.

Chabes AL(1), Björklund S, Thelander L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Umeå University, Sweden.

Ribonucleotide reductase is essential for supplying a balanced pool of the four
deoxyribonucleotides required for DNA synthesis and repair. The active enzyme
consists of two non-identical subunits called proteins R1 and R2. There are
multiple levels of regulation of ribonucleotide reductase activity, which is
highest during the S and G(2) phases of an unperturbed cell cycle in mammalian
cells. Previous reports in the literature have indicated that the S
phase-specific transcription of the mammalian R2 gene is regulated by a
transcriptional block, is dependent on the transcription factor E2F1, or is
simply regulated by proteins that bind to promoter CCAAT boxes plus the TATA box.
Here, we demonstrate that the S phase-specific transcription of the mouse R2 gene
is dependent on an upstream promoter activating region (located at nucleotides
(nt) -672 to -527 from the transcription start site) and one proximal promoter
repressive element (located at nt -112 to -107) that binds E2F4. Binding to the
E2F site is modulated by binding of nuclear factor-Y to an adjacent CCAAT element
(nt -79 to -75). The upstream activating region is crucial for overall R2
promoter activity. Mutation of the E2F-binding site leads to premature promoter
activation in G(1) and increases overall promoter activity but only when the
upstream activating region is present and intact. Therefore, E2F-dependent
repression is essential for cell cycle-specific R2 transcription.

PMID: 14688249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Oncogene. 2003 Oct 23;22(48):7632-41.

Distinct recruitment of E2F family members to specific E2F-binding sites mediates
activation and repression of the E2F1 promoter.

Araki K(1), Nakajima Y, Eto K, Ikeda MA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Craniofacial Embryology, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan.

The activity of E2F transcription factors plays a crucial role in mammalian
cell-cycle progression and is controlled by physical association with the pocket 
proteins (pRb and its related p107 and p130). The E2F1 promoter, which contains
two overlapping E2F-binding sites, is activated at the G1/S transition in an
E2F-dependent manner. Mutational experiments have shown that the distal
E2F-binding site on the E2F1 promoter is required for transcriptional repression 
in the G0 phase, whereas the proximal E2F-binding site contributes to
transcriptional activation at the G1/S boundary. Consistent with these results,
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays have revealed that the E2F4/p130 repressor
complex specifically binds to the distal E2F-binding site, whereas E2F1 and E2F3 
activators preferentially bind to the proximal E2F-binding site. The assays also 
showed that the specific binding of E2F4/p130 complex to the distal site was
dramatically impaired by a mutation introduced into the contiguous repression
site (cell Cycle gene Homology Region; CHR). Taken together, these findings
indicate that the two E2F-binding sites play distinct roles in the regulation of 
E2F1 transcription by interacting with different sets of E2F members and
cooperating with the contiguous repressor element.

PMID: 14576826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 19;278(51):51116-24. Epub 2003 Oct 6.

HCF-1 functions as a coactivator for the zinc finger protein Krox20.

Luciano RL(1), Wilson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and New York University Cancer Institute, New York 
University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

HCF-1 is a transcriptional cofactor required for activation of herpes simplex
virus immediate-early genes by VP16 as well as less clearly defined roles in cell
proliferation, cytokinesis, and spliceosome formation. It is expressed as a large
precursor that undergoes proteolysis to yield two subunits that remain stably
associated. VP16 uses a degenerate 4-amino acid sequence, known as the
HCF-binding motif, to bind to a six-bladed beta-propeller domain at the N
terminus of HCF-1. Functional HCF-binding motifs are also found in LZIP and
Zhangfei, two cellular bZIP transcription factors of unknown function. Here we
show that the HCF-binding motif occurs in a wide spectrum of DNA-binding proteins
and transcriptional cofactors. Three well characterized examples were further
analyzed for their ability to use HCF-1 as a coactivator. Krox20, a zinc finger
transcription factor required for Schwann cell differentiation, and E2F4, a cell 
cycle regulator, showed a strong requirement for functional HCF-1 to activate
transcription. In contrast, activation by estrogen receptor-alpha did not display
HCF dependence. In Krox20, the HCF-binding motif lies within the N-terminal
activation domain and mutation of this sequence diminishes both transactivation
and association with the HCF-1 beta-propeller. The activation domain in the
C-terminal subunit of HCF-1 contributes to activation by Krox20, possibly through
recruitment of p300. These results suggest that HCF-1 is recruited by many
different classes of cellular transcription factors and is therefore likely to be
required for a variety of cellular processes including cell cycle progression and
development.

PMCID: PMC4291123
PMID: 14532282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Oncogene. 2003 Aug 28;22(36):5630-5.

Regulation of FGF receptor-2 expression by transcription factor E2F-1.

Tashiro E(1), Minato Y, Maruki H, Asagiri M, Imoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Informatics, Faculty of Science and Technology, 
Keio University, Yokohama 223-8522, Japan.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGF) and their receptors play an important role in
cell proliferation, angiogenesis and embryonal development. In this study, we
show that expression of the FGF receptor-2 (FGFR-2) protein is induced in the
mid-to-late G1 phase of the cell cycle in serum-starved mouse NIH3T3 cells
released from starvation. Transcription of mouse FGFR-2 was activated by E2F-1.
Analysis of various mouse FGFR-2 promoter mutant constructs showed that a
sequence located +57/+64 downstream of the transcriptional initiation site,
related to the consensus E2F-responsive sequence, is necessary for the
activation. The promoter activity of the mouse FGFR-2 gene is also positively
regulated by E2F-2 and E2F-3, but not by E2F-4 and E2F-5. Moreover, the
E2F-1-induced activation of mouse FGFR-2 gene transcription is suppressed by pRB.
Taken together, the results demonstrate that FGFR-2 is a new class of targets for
E2F, and expression of mouse FGFR-2 in mid-to-late G1 phase would be mediated, at
least in part, by the activation of a pRB/E2F pathway.

PMID: 12944911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Sep 5;308(4):689-97.

Inhibitory effects of novel E2F decoy oligodeoxynucleotides on mesangial cell
proliferation by coexpression of E2F/DP.

Park KK(1), Deok Ahn J, Lee IK, Magae J, Heintz NH, Kwak JY, Lee YC, Cho YS, Kim 
HC, Chae YM, Ho Kim Y, Kim CH, Chang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Kidney Institute, Keimyung University School of Medicine, 194, Dongsan-Dong,
Jung-Gu, Daegu 700-712, South Korea.

Proliferation of glomerular mesangial cells (MCs) is an important feature of
several forms of glomerulonephritis. The transcription factor E2F coordinately
regulates expression of genes required for cell proliferation, thereby mediating 
cell growth control. Here we investigated the role of E2F1 and E2F4 expression,
with or without co-expression of DP1 or DP2, on cell proliferation in transiently
transfected primary rat MCs. In transfected cells, cell proliferation induced by 
over-expression of E2F was significantly enhanced by co-expression of DP
proteins. Previous studies showed that the transfection of decoy
oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) corresponding to E2F binding sites inhibits cell
proliferation. Here we have developed a Ring-E2F (R-E2F) decoy ODN with a
circular dumbbell structure and compared its effects with those of a
phosphorothioated E2F decoy (PS-E2F decoy) ODN. The R-E2F decoy ODN showed
enhanced stability in the presence of nucleases and sera, and inhibited
E2F/DP-dependent promoter activity of cell cycle genes more effectively than the 
PS-E2F decoy ODN. Transfection of R-E2F decoy ODN resulted in strong inhibition
of cell cycle gene expression and MC proliferation. Our data suggest that E2F/DP 
complexes play a critical role in the MC proliferation and that the R-E2F decoy
ODN may be a powerful tool for inhibiting cell proliferation.

PMID: 12927774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Oncogene. 2003 Aug 7;22(32):4943-52.

Inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of apoptosis by novel tetravalent 
peptides inhibiting DNA binding of E2F.

Montigiani S(1), Müller R, Kontermann RE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Philipps-University, 
Emil-Mannkopff-Strasse 2, D-35033 Marburg, Germany.

We have isolated several peptides from random peptide phage display libraries
that specifically recognize the cell cycle regulatory transcription factor E2F
and inhibit DNA binding of E2F/DP heterodimers (E2F-1, E2F-2, E2F-3, E2F-4 or
E2F-5, and DP-1). The inhibitory efficiency could be strongly enhanced by
generating branched tetravalent molecules. To analyse the biological consequences
of peptide-mediated E2F inhibition, we fused two of these branched molecules to a
cell-penetrating peptide derived from the HTV-Tat protein. Incubation of human
tumor cells with these branched Tat-containing peptides led to an inhibition of
cell proliferation and induction of apoptosis. These results provide new insights
into the function of E2F and further validate E2F as a potential therapeutic
target in proliferative diseases.

PMID: 12902977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mol Cell. 2003 Jul;12(1):255-60.

A viral mechanism for remodeling chromatin structure in G0 cells.

Ghosh MK(1), Harter ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland
Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Small DNA viruses force quiescent cells to reenter the cell cycle in order to
replicate their DNA. We report here that the adenovirus E1A protein creates an S 
phase environment in quiescent cells by overcoming the nucleosomal repression of 
E2F-targeted genes. These genes are surrounded by Lys-9-methylated H3 histones,
and their promoters are occupied by the pRb-related protein p130 and the
inhibitory transcription factor E2F4. Kinetic analysis indicates that E1A binds
to E2F promoters where it eliminates p130 and E2F4, resulting in the dramatic
elimination of H3 Lys-9 methylation. Thereafter, H3 Lys-9 acetylation occurs
along with the recruitment of activating E2F family members, and this is followed
by the transcriptional activity of E2F-targeted genes. These results indicate
that E1A has a role in reconfiguring chromatin structure and that this activity
is necessary to overcome the repressive mechanisms that maintain cells in a
quiescent state.

PMID: 12887910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Cell Biol. 2003 Jul 21;162(2):173-83. Epub 2003 Jul 14.

Epstein-Barr virus LMP1 blocks p16INK4a-RB pathway by promoting nuclear export of
E2F4/5.

Ohtani N(1), Brennan P, Gaubatz S, Sanij E, Hertzog P, Wolvetang E, Ghysdael J,
Rowe M, Hara E.

Author information: 
(1)Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Christie Hospital NHS Trust,
Manchester M20 4BX, UK.

The p16INK4a-RB pathway plays a critical role in preventing inappropriate cell
proliferation and is often targeted by viral oncoproteins during immortalization.
Latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is often present in 
EBV-associated proliferative diseases and is critical for the immortalizing and
transforming activity of EBV. Unlike other DNA tumor virus oncoproteins, which
possess immortalizing activity, LMP1 does not bind to retinoblastoma tumor
suppressor protein, but instead blocks the expression of p16INK4a tumor
suppressor gene. However, it has been unclear how LMP1 represses the p16INK4a
gene expression. Here, we report that LMP1 promotes the CRM1-dependent nuclear
export of Ets2, which is an important transcription factor for p16INK4a gene
expression, thereby reducing the level of p16INK4a expression. We further
demonstrate that LMP1 also blocks the function of E2F4 and E2F5 (E2F4/5)
transcription factors through promoting their nuclear export in a CRM1-dependent 
manner. As E2F4/5 are essential downstream mediators for a p16INK4a-induced cell 
cycle arrest, these results indicate that the action of LMP1 on nuclear export
has two effects on the p16INK4a-RB pathway: (1) repression of p16INK4a expression
and (2) blocking the downstream mediator of the p16INK4a-RB pathway. These
results reveal a novel activity of LMP1 and increase an understanding of how
viral oncoproteins perturb the p16INK4a-RB pathway.

PMCID: PMC2172795
PMID: 12860972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Mol Cancer Ther. 2003 Jun;2(6):535-41.

mRNA expression levels of E2F transcription factors correlate with dihydrofolate 
reductase, reduced folate carrier, and thymidylate synthase mRNA expression in
osteosarcoma.

Sowers R(1), Toguchida J, Qin J, Meyers PA, Healey JH, Huvos A, Banerjee D,
Bertino JR, Gorlick R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Orthopaedic Surgery Service, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Previous studies have shown that decreased expression of the reduced folate
carrier (RFC) and increased expression of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) are
associated with intrinsic and acquired methotrexate resistance, respectively, in 
osteosarcoma (OS). It has also been shown in colorectal cancer that E2F-1
expression correlates with thymidylate synthase (TS) and, to a lesser extent,
DHFR expression. To begin to investigate the regulation of DHFR and RFC
expression in OS samples, mRNA expression of E2F-1 and E2F-4 were measured in OS 
tumor samples and related to DHFR, RFC, and TS mRNA expression. Using fluorescent
quantitative real-time PCR, 112 human OS patient samples were investigated for
potential E2F-1/E2F-4:DHFR, E2F-1/E2F-4:RFC, and E2F-1/E2F-4:TS correlations. The
expression ranges for each gene are as follows: DHFR, 0.02-33.13 (median = 0.20);
RFC, 0.02-229.13 (median = 1.91); TS, 0.01-9.99 (median = 0.15); E2F-1,
0.05-69.07 (median = 0.52); and E2F-4, 0.24-52.35 (median = 1.45). Spearman
correlation coefficients (r(s)) for E2F-1:DHFR, E2F-1:RFC, E2F-1:TS, E2F-4:DHFR, 
E2F-4:RFC, and E2F-4:TS were calculated to be 0.53, 0.63, 0.60, 0.41, 0.58, and
0.33, respectively (P < 0.001). On the basis of this data, moderate correlations 
exist between E2F-1/E2F-4 and DHFR, RFC, and TS. These results suggest
E2F-1/E2F-4 may play a role in the regulation of RFC expression, which has not
been reported previously. The E2F transcription factors are also related to DHFR 
and TS expression in OS samples, suggesting a possible involvement in
methotrexate resistance. Although E2F mRNA levels correlate with DHFR, RFC, and
TS mRNA expression, additional experiments are necessary to determine the direct 
effects of these transcription factors and identify other proteins that may
influence this relationship.

PMID: 12813132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Oncogene. 2003 Jun 5;22(23):3518-29.

Triggering of p73-dependent apoptosis in osteosarcoma is under the control of
E2Fs-pRb2/p130 complexes.

La Sala D(1), Macaluso M, Trimarchi C, Giordano A, Cinti C.

Author information: 
(1)ITOI-CNR, Unit of Bologna, c/o IOR, 40136 Bologna, Italy.

Mechanisms underlying multidrug resistance (MDR), one of the major causes of
cancer treatment failure, are still poorly understood. We selected the
osteosarcoma MDR HosDXR150 cell line by culturing Hos cells in the presence of
increasing doxorubicin doses and showed that it is crossresistant to vinblastine.
Similarly to the Hos parental cell line, HosDXR150 cells present mutated p53,
functionally inactivated pRb/p105 and wild-type pRb2/p130. Owing to p53 mutation,
MDR-1 gene, codifying for P-glycoprotein, is upregulated. Evasion of apoptosis in
HosDXR150 cells is only partially explained by drug extrusion because of
P-glycoprotein overexpression. Analysis of gene expression level profiles showed 
that parental cell line undergoes apoptosis through an E2F1/p73-dependent pathway
while its resistant variant evades it. This result can be explained by the
presence of distinct E2Fs-pRb2/p130 complexes on the p73 promoter. Namely, in Hos
p73 transcription is activated by E2F1-Rb2/p130-p300 complexes, while in
HosDXR150 it is kept repressed by E2F4-Rb2/p130-HDAC1 complexes.

PMID: 12789260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Oncogene. 2003 Jun 5;22(23):3511-7.

pRb2/p130-E2F4/5-HDAC1-SUV39H1-p300 and pRb2/p130-E2F4/5-HDAC1-SUV39H1-DNMT1
multimolecular complexes mediate the transcription of estrogen receptor-alpha in 
breast cancer.

Macaluso M(1), Cinti C, Russo G, Russo A, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, College of
Science and Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

The estrogen receptor-alpha (ER) plays a crucial role in normal breast
development and is also linked to development and progression of mammary
carcinoma. The transcriptional repression of ER-alpha gene in breast cancer is an
area of active investigation with potential clinical significance. However, the
molecular mechanisms that regulate the ER-alpha gene expression are not fully
understood. Here we show a new molecular mechanism of ER-alpha gene inactivation 
mediated by pRb2/p130 in ER-negative breast cancer cells. We investigated in vivo
occupancy of ER-alpha promoter by pRb2/p130-E2F4/5-HDAC1-SUV39 H1-p300 and
pRb2/p130-E2F4/5-HDAC1-SUV39H1-DNMT1 complexes, and provided a link between
pRb2/p130 and chromatin-modifying enzymes in the regulation of ER-alpha
transcription in a physiological setting. These findings suggest that
pRb2/p130-multimolecular complexes can be key elements in the regulation of
ER-alpha gene expression and may be viewed as promising targets for the
development of novel therapeutic strategies in the treatment of breast cancer,
especially for those tumors that are ER negative.

PMID: 12789259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 15;278(33):30435-40. Epub 2003 May 27.

Dynamic recruitment of NF-Y and histone acetyltransferases on cell-cycle
promoters.

Caretti G(1), Salsi V, Vecchi C, Imbriano C, Mantovani R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Animale, Università di Modena e Reggio, Via Campi
213/d, 41100 Modena, Italy.

Regulation of transcription during the cell-cycle is under the control of E2
factors (E2Fs), often in cooperation with nuclear factor Y (NF-Y), a histone-like
CCAAT-binding trimer. NF-Y is paradigmatic of a constitutive, ubiquitous factor
that pre-sets the promoter architecture for other regulatory proteins to access
it. We analyzed the recruitment of NF-Y, E2F1/4/6, histone acetyltransferases,
and histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1/3/4 to several cell-cycle promoters by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays in serum-starved and restimulated NIH3T3 cells. NF-Y
binding is not constitutive but timely regulated in all promoters tested, being
displaced when promoters are repressed. p300 association correlates with
activation, and it is never found in the absence of NF-Y, whereas PCAF/hGCN5 is
often found before NF-Y association. E2F4 and E2F6, together with HDACs, are
bound to repressed promoters, including the G2/M Cyclin B2. As expected, an
inverse relationship between HDACs association and histones H3/H4 acetylation is 
observed. Blocking cells in G1 with the cyclin-dependent kinase 2 inhibitor
R-roscovitine confirms that NF-Y is bound to G1/S but not to G2/M promoters in
G1. These data indicate that following the release of E2Fs/HDACs, a hierarchy of 
PCAF-NF-Y-p300 interactions and H3-H4 acetylations are required for activation of
cell-cycle promoters.

PMID: 12771133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Cell. 2003 May 16;113(4):495-506.

Aging reduces proliferative capacities of liver by switching pathways of
C/EBPalpha growth arrest.

Iakova P(1), Awad SS, Timchenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging, Department of Pathology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The liver is capable of completely regenerating itself in response to injury and 
after partial hepatectomy. In liver of old animals, the proliferative response is
dramatically reduced, the mechanism for which is unknown. The liver specific
protein, C/EBPalpha, normally arrests proliferation of hepatocytes through
inhibiting cyclin dependent kinases (cdks). We present evidence that aging
switches the liver-specific pathway of C/EBPalpha growth arrest to repression of 
E2F transcription. We identified an age-specific C/EBPalpha-Rb-E2F4 complex that 
binds to E2F-dependent promoters and represses these genes. The
C/EBPalpha-Rb-E2F4 complex occupies the c-myc promoter and blocks induction of
c-myc in livers of old animals after partial hepatectomy. Our results show that
the age-dependent switch from cdk inhibition to repression of E2F transcription
causes a loss of proliferative response in the liver because of an inability to
induce E2F target genes after partial hepatectomy providing a possible mechanism 
for the age-dependent loss of liver regenerative capacity.

PMID: 12757710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Biochem Pharmacol. 2003 May 15;65(10):1593-601.

N-Acetylcysteine enhances UV-mediated caspase-3 activation, fragmentation of
E2F-4, and apoptosis in human C8161 melanoma: inhibition by ectopic Bcl-2
expression.

Rieber M(1), Rieber MS.

Author information: 
(1)IVIC, Tumor Cell Biology Laboratory, CMBC, Apartado 21827, Caracas 1020 A,
Venezuela. mrieber@ivic.ve

Redox imbalance due to oxidative stress or excessive antioxidant levels can alter
apoptotic responses. Recently, antioxidants like N-acetylcysteine (NAC) were
reported to inhibit H(2)O(2)-mediated necrotic cell death, although they were
inactive against apoptosis induced by other agents like etoposide. NAC was also
found to kill preferentially tumor cells compared to normal fibroblasts at
20-50mM, but these concentrations are lethal to normal splenocytes. We now
demonstrate that 10mM NAC, a non-toxic concentration, can enhance the UV
radiation-mediated apoptosis of human C8161 melanoma cells. Compared to treatment
with UV radiation alone, combination treatment with NAC doubled the ratio of
activated caspase-3 to pro-caspase-3 and produced greater fragmentation of the
retinoblastoma protein and the E2F-4 transcription factor without affecting the
E2F-1 protein. These effects of joint NAC-UV radiation treatment were
counteracted by the overexpression of the bcl-2 gene. To our knowledge, this
report is the first to: (i) demonstrate a synergy between DNA-damaging agents,
like UV radiation, and antioxidants, like NAC, and (ii) show that a
Bcl-2-inhibitable E2F-4 fragmentation occurs concurrently with caspase-3
activation and apoptosis.

PMID: 12754095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Cancer Cell. 2003 Apr;3(4):333-46.

Inactivation of E2F3 results in centrosome amplification.

Saavedra HI(1), Maiti B, Timmers C, Altura R, Tokuyama Y, Fukasawa K, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology
and Medical Genetics, Children's Research Institute, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors is critical for the control of cell cycle
progression. We now show that the specific inactivation of E2F3 in mouse embryo
fibroblasts (MEFs) results in a disruption of the centrosome duplication cycle.
Loss of E2F3, but not E2F1, E2F2, E2F4, or E2F5 results in unregulated cyclin
E-dependent kinase activity, defects in nucleophosmin B association with
centrosomes, and premature centriole separation and duplication. Consequently,
this defect leads to centrosome amplification, mitotic spindle defects, and
aneuploidy. Our findings implicate the E2F3 transcription factor as an important 
link that orchestrates DNA and centrosome duplication cycles, ensuring the
faithful transmission of genetic material to daughter cells.

PMCID: PMC3033013
PMID: 12726860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 May;23(10):3656-68.

Constitutive E2F1 overexpression delays endochondral bone formation by inhibiting
chondrocyte differentiation.

Scheijen B(1), Bronk M, van der Meer T, Bernards R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis and Center for Biomedical Genetics, The
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Longitudinal bone growth results from endochondral ossification, a process that
requires proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes. It has been shown
that proper endochondral bone formation is critically dependent on the
retinoblastoma family members p107 and p130. However, the precise functional
roles played by individual E2F proteins remain poorly understood. Using both
constitutive and conditional E2F1 transgenic mice, we show that ubiquitous
transgene-driven expression of E2F1 during embryonic development results in a
dwarf phenotype and significantly reduced postnatal viability. Overexpression of 
E2F1 disturbs chondrocyte maturation, resulting in delayed endochondral
ossification, which is characterized by reduced hypertrophic zones and
disorganized growth plates. Employing the chondrogenic cell line ATDC5, we
investigated the effects of enforced E2F expression on the different phases of
chondrocyte maturation that are normally required for endochondral ossification. 
Ectopic E2F1 expression strongly inhibits early- and late-phase differentiation
of ATDC5 cells, accompanied by diminished cartilage nodule formation as well as
decreased type II collagen, type X collagen, and aggrecan gene expression. In
contrast, overexpression of E2F2 or E2F3a results in only a marginal delay of
chondrocyte maturation, and increased E2F4 levels have no effect. These data are 
consistent with the notion that E2F1 is a regulator of chondrocyte
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC164752
PMID: 12724423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 May;23(9):3287-304.

Regulation of E2F1 by BRCT domain-containing protein TopBP1.

Liu K(1), Lin FT, Ruppert JM, Lin WC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294-3300, USA.

The E2F transcription factor integrates cellular signals and coordinates cell
cycle progression. Our prior studies demonstrated selective induction and
stabilization of E2F1 through ATM-dependent phosphorylation in response to DNA
damage. Here we report that DNA topoisomerase IIbeta binding protein 1 (TopBP1)
regulates E2F1 during DNA damage. TopBP1 contains eight BRCT (BRCA1
carboxyl-terminal) motifs and upon DNA damage is recruited to stalled replication
forks, where it participates in a DNA damage checkpoint. Here we demonstrated an 
interaction between TopBP1 and E2F1. The interaction depended on the amino
terminus of E2F1 and the sixth BRCT domain of TopBP1. It was specific to E2F1 and
was not observed in E2F2, E2F3, or E2F4. This interaction was induced by DNA
damage and phosphorylation of E2F1 by ATM. Through this interaction, TopBP1
repressed multiple activities of E2F1, including transcriptional activity,
induction of S-phase entry, and apoptosis. Furthermore, TopBP1 relocalized E2F1
from diffuse nuclear distribution to discrete punctate nuclear foci, where E2F1
colocalized with TopBP1 and BRCA1. Thus, the specific interaction between TopBP1 
and E2F1 during DNA damage inhibits the known E2F1 activities but recruits E2F1
to a BRCA1-containing repair complex, suggesting a direct role of E2F1 in DNA
damage checkpoint/repair at stalled replication forks.

PMCID: PMC153207
PMID: 12697828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 20;278(25):23008-19. Epub 2003 Apr 3.

The interferon-inducible p202a protein modulates NF-kappaB activity by inhibiting
the binding to DNA of p50/p65 heterodimers and p65 homodimers while enhancing the
binding of p50 homodimers.

Ma XY(1), Wang H, Ding B, Zhong H, Ghosh S, Lengyel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

p202a is a member of the interferon-inducible murine p200 family of proteins.
These proteins share 1 or 2 partially conserved 200 amino acid segments of the a 
or the b type. The known biological activities of p202a include among others the 
regulation of muscle differentiation, cell proliferation, and apoptosis. These
biological activities of p202a can be correlated with the inhibition of the
activity of several transcription factors. Thus, the binding of p202a results in 
the inhibition of the sequence-specific binding to DNA of the c-Fos, c-Jun, E2F1,
E2F4, MyoD, myogenin, and c-Myc transcription factors. This study concerns the
mechanisms by which p202a inhibits the activity of NF-kappaB, a transcription
factor involved among others in host defense, inflammation, immunity, and the
apoptotic response. NF-kappaB consists of p50 and p65 subunits. We demonstrate
that p202a can inhibit in vitro and in vivo the binding to DNA of p65 homodimers 
and p50/65 heterodimers, whereas it increases the binding of p50 homodimers. Thus
p202a can impair NF-kappaB activity both by inhibiting the binding to DNA of the 
transcriptionally active p65 homodimers and p50/p65 heterodimers and by boosting 
the binding of the repressive p50 homodimers. p202a can bind p50 and p65 in vitro
and in vivo, and p202a can be part of the p50 homodimer complex bound to DNA. p50
binds in p202a to the a type segment, whereas p65 binds to the b type segment.
Transfected ectopic p202a increases the apoptotic effect of tumor necrosis factor
(at least in part) by inhibiting NF-kappaB and its antiapoptotic activity.

PMID: 12676938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Carcinogenesis. 2003 Mar;24(3):555-63.

Inositol hexaphosphate inhibits growth, and induces G1 arrest and apoptotic death
of prostate carcinoma DU145 cells: modulation of CDKI-CDK-cyclin and pRb-related 
protein-E2F complexes.

Singh RP(1), Agarwal C, Agarwal R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and University of
Colorado Cancer Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO
80262, USA.

Cancer chemopreventive effects of inositol hexaphosphate (IP6), a dietary
constituent, have been demonstrated against a variety of experimental tumors,
however, limited studies have been done against prostate cancer (PCA), and
molecular mechanisms are not well defined. In the present study, we investigated 
the growth inhibitory effect and associated mechanisms of IP6 in advanced human
PCA cells. Advanced human prostate carcinoma DU145 cells were used to study the
anticancer effect of IP6. Flow cytometric analysis was performed for cell cycle
progression and apoptosis studies. Western immunoblotting, immunoprecipitation
and kinase assay were performed to investigate the involvement of G1 cell cycle
regulators and their interplay, and end point markers of apoptosis. A significant
dose- as well as time-dependent growth inhibition was observed in IP6-treated
cells, which was associated with an increase in G1 arrest. IP6 strongly increased
the expression of CDKIs (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors), Cip1/p21 and
Kip1/p27, without any noticeable changes in G1 CDKs and cyclins, except a slight 
increase in cyclin D2. IP6 inhibited kinase activities associated with CDK2, 4
and 6, and cyclin E and D1. Further studies showed the increased binding of
Kip1/p27 and Cip1/p21 with cyclin D1 and E. In down-stream of CDKI-CDK/cyclin
cascade, IP6 increased hypophosphorylated levels of Rb-related proteins, pRb/p107
and pRb2/p130, and moderately decreased E2F4 but increased its binding to both
pRb/p107 and pRb2/p130. At higher doses and longer treatment times, IP6 caused a 
marked increase in apoptosis, which was accompanied by increased levels of
cleaved PARP and active caspase 3. IP6 modulates CDKI-CDK-cyclin complex, and
decreases CDK-cyclin kinase activity, possibly leading to hypophosphorylation of 
Rb-related proteins and an increased sequestration of E2F4. Higher doses of IP6
could induce apoptosis and that might involve caspases activation. These
molecular alterations provide an insight into IP6-caused growth inhibition, G1
arrest and apoptotic death of human prostate carcinoma DU145 cells.

PMID: 12663518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Gen Virol. 2003 Apr;84(Pt 4):929-38.

Stimulation of bovine herpesvirus-1 productive infection by the adenovirus E1A
gene and a cell cycle regulatory gene, E2F-4.

Geiser V(1), Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, School of Biological
Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 68583, USA.

Identifying cellular genes that promote bovine herpesvirus-1 (BHV-1) productive
infection is important, as BHV-1 is a significant bovine pathogen. Previous
studies demonstrated that BHV-1 DNA is not very infectious unless cotransfected
with a plasmid expressing bICP0, a viral protein that stimulates expression of
all classes of viral promoters. Based on these and other studies, we hypothesize 
that the ability of bICP0 to interact with and modify the function of cellular
proteins stimulates virus transcription. If this prediction is correct, cellular 
proteins that activate virus transcription could, in part, substitute for bICP0
functions. The adenovirus E1A gene and bICP0 encode proteins that are potent
activators of viral gene expression, they do not specifically bind DNA and both
proteins interact with chromatin-remodelling enzymes. Because of these functional
similarities, E1A was tested initially to see if it could stimulate BHV-1
productive infection. E1A consistently stimulates BHV-1 productive infection, but
not as efficiently as bICP0. The ability of E1A to bind Rb family members plays a
role in stimulating productive infection, suggesting that E2F family members
activate productive infection. E2F-4, but not E2F-1, E2F-2 or E2F-5, activates
productive infection with similar efficiency as E1A. Next, E2F family members
were examined for their ability to activate the BHV-1 immediate-early (IE)
transcription unit 1 (IEtu1) promoter, as it regulates IE expression of bICP0 and
bICP4. E2F-1 and E2F-2 strongly activate the IEtu1 promoter, but not a BHV-1
IEtu2 promoter or a herpes simplex virus type 1 ICP0 promoter construct. These
studies suggest that E2F family members can stimulate BHV-1 productive infection.

PMID: 12655094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Ann Surg Oncol. 2003 Mar;10(2):136-43.

Fine mapping of Wilms' tumors with 16q loss of heterozygosity localizes the
putative tumor suppressor gene to a region of 6.7 megabases.

Safford SD(1), Goyeau D, Freemerman AJ, Bentley R, Everett ML, Grundy PE, Skinner
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Pediatric Surgery, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to more precisely map the region of 16q
loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in Wilms' tumors and to examine the expression of
putative tumor suppressor.
METHODS: We performed polymerase chain reaction-based LOH analysis on the 185
sample pairs from 21 to 80 megabases (Mb) on chromosome 16q. Expression of two
candidate tumor suppressor genes located within the identified consensus region
of 16q LOH was examined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: We identified 16q LOH in 7 (4%) of 185 Wilms' tumors not previously
thought to demonstrate such genetic loss. The smallest common region of genetic
loss was located between 67.3 and 74.0 Mb on chromosome 16. Within this 6.7-Mb
region, there reside only three recognized tumor suppressor genes: E-cadherin,
P-cadherin, and E2F4. E-cadherin demonstrates statistically significantly reduced
expression in Wilms' tumors with 16q LOH.
CONCLUSIONS: We have localized the consensus region of 16q LOH in Wilms' tumor to
a 6.7-Mb locus and have identified three candidate Wilms' tumor suppressor genes 
within this narrowed region. Our data support E-cadherin as a candidate tumor
suppressor gene in Wilms' tumor; however, further studies are needed to
definitively prove its role as the tumor suppressor gene associated with 16q LOH.

PMID: 12620908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 9;278(19):16770-6. Epub 2003 Feb 28.

Regulation of the cyclin D3 promoter by E2F1.

Ma Y(1), Yuan J, Huang M, Jove R, Cress WD.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that ectopic expression of E2F1 is sufficient to 
drive quiescent cells into S phase and that E2F1 expression can contribute to
oncogenic transformation. Key target genes in this process include master
regulators of the cell cycle, such as cyclin E, which regulates G(1) progression,
and cyclin A, which is required for the initiation of DNA synthesis. In the
present work, we present novel evidence that a second G(1) cyclin, cyclin D3, is 
also potently activated by E2F1. First, an estrogen receptor-E2F1 fusion protein 
(ER-E2F1) potently activates the endogenous cyclin D3 mRNA upon treatment with
4-hydroxytamoxifen, which induces nuclear accumulation of the otherwise cytosolic
fusion protein. Furthermore, trans-activation of cyclin D3 by ER-E2F1 occurs even
in the presence of the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide and thus appears
direct. Second, all of the growth-stimulatory members of the E2F family (E2F1,
-2, and -3A) potently activate a cyclin D3 promoter reporter, whereas
growth-restraining members of the family (E2F4, -5, and -6) have little effect.
Third, recombinant E2F1 binds with high affinity to the cyclin D3 promoter in
vitro. Fourth, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrate that endogenous
E2F1 is associated with the cyclin D3 promoter in vivo. Finally, mapping
experiments localize the essential E2F regulatory element of the cyclin D3
promoter to a noncanonical E2F site in the promoter between nucleotides -143 and 
-135 relative to the initiating methionine codon. We conclude that in addition to
cyclins E and A, E2F family members can also activate one member of the D-type
cyclins, further contributing to the ability of the stimulatory E2F family
members to drive cellular proliferation.

PMID: 12611887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Mar 4;100(5):2456-61. Epub 2003 Feb 25.

The role of E2F4 in adipogenesis is independent of its cell cycle regulatory
activity.

Landsberg RL(1), Sero JE, Danielian PS, Yuan TL, Lee EY, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
MA 02139, USA.

The E2F and pocket protein families are known to play an important role in the
regulation of both cellular proliferation and terminal differentiation. In this
study, we have used compound E2F and pocket protein mutant mouse embryonic
fibroblasts to dissect the role of these proteins in adipogenesis. This analysis 
shows that loss of E2F4 allows cells to undergo spontaneous differentiation. The 
ability of E2F4 to prevent adipogenesis seems to be quite distinct from the known
properties of E2F. First, it can be separated from any change in either
E2F-responsive gene expression or cell cycle regulation. Second, it is a specific
property of E2F4, and not other E2Fs, and it occurs independently of E2F4's
ability to interact with pocket proteins. In addition, E2F4 loss does not
override the differentiation defect resulting from pRB loss even though it
completely suppresses the proliferation defect of Rb(-/-) mouse embryonic
fibroblasts. This finding definitively separates the known, positive role of pRB 
in adipogenesis from its cell cycle function and shows that this pocket protein
is required to act downstream of E2F4 in the differentiation process.

PMCID: PMC151362
PMID: 12604789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Cancer Cell. 2002 Dec;2(6):463-72.

E2F4 loss suppresses tumorigenesis in Rb mutant mice.

Lee EY(1), Cam H, Ziebold U, Rayman JB, Lees JA, Dynlacht BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA.

The E2F transcription factors mediate the activation or repression of key cell
cycle regulatory genes under the control of the retinoblastoma protein (pRB)
tumor suppressor and its relatives, p107 and p130. Here we investigate how E2F4, 
the major "repressive" E2F, contributes to pRB's tumor-suppressive properties.
Remarkably, E2F4 loss suppresses the development of both pituitary and thyroid
tumors in Rb(+/-) mice. Importantly, E2F4 loss also suppresses the inappropriate 
gene expression and proliferation of pRB-deficient cells. Biochemical analyses
suggest that this tumor suppression occurs via a novel mechanism: E2F4 loss
allows p107 and p130 to regulate the pRB-specific, activator E2Fs. We also detect
these novel E2F complexes in pRB-deficient cells, suggesting that they play a
significant role in the regulation of tumorigenesis in vivo.

PMID: 12498715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 17;278(3):1443-9. Epub 2002 Nov 21.

E2F mediates sustained G2 arrest and down-regulation of Stathmin and AIM-1
expression in response to genotoxic stress.

Polager S(1), Ginsberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, The Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel.

Exposure of cells to genotoxic agents results in activation of checkpoint
pathways leading to cell cycle arrest. These arrest pathways allow repair of
damaged DNA before its replication and segregation, thus preventing accumulation 
of mutations. The tumor suppressor retinoblastoma (RB) is required for the G(1)/S
checkpoint function. In addition, regulation of the G(2) checkpoint by the tumor 
suppressor p53 is RB-dependent. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the
involvement of RB and its related proteins p107 and p130 in the G(2) checkpoint
is not fully understood. We show here that sustained G(2)/M arrest induced by the
genotoxic agent doxorubicin is E2F-dependent and involves a decrease in
expression of two mitotic regulators, Stathmin and AIM-1. Abrogation of E2F
function by dominant negative E2F abolishes the doxorubicin-induced
down-regulation of Stathmin and AIM-1 and leads to premature exit from G(2).
Expression of the E7 papilloma virus protein, which dissociates complexes
containing E2F and RB family members, also prevents the down-regulation of these 
mitotic genes and leads to premature exit from G(2) after genotoxic stress.
Furthermore, genotoxic stress increases the levels of nuclear E2F-4 and p130 as
well as their in vivo binding to the Stathmin promoter. Thus, functional
complexes containing E2F and RB family members appear to be essential for
repressing expression of critical mitotic regulators and maintaining the G(2)/M
checkpoint.

PMID: 12446714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Cell Cycle. 2002 Mar-Apr;1(2):137-42.

The cancer preventive flavonoid silibinin causes hypophosphorylation of Rb/p107
and Rb2/p130 via modulation of cell cycle regulators in human prostate carcinoma 
DU145 cells.

Tyagi A(1), Agarwal C, Agarwal R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences; School of Pharmacy; University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center; Denver Colorado 80262, USA.

Phosphorylation status of retinoblastoma (Rb) and related proteins is important
to drive cell cycle progression. In hyperphosphorylated state, they are growth
stimulatory, but their hypophosphorylation is growth inhibitory. Here we assessed
whether silibinin causes hypophosphorylation of Rb-related proteins as its growth
inhibitory response in human prostate cancer (PCA) DU145 cells. Silibinin
treatment of cells resulted in a strong increase (up to 2.3-and 5.4-fold) in the 
levels of hypophosphorylated Rb/p107 and Rb2/p130, respectively, but a strong
decrease (91, 78 and 45%) in protein levels of transcription factors E2F3, E2F4
and E2F5, respectively. In the studies analyzing whether this effect of silibinin
is via modulation of cell cycle regulators, silibinin-treated cells showed a
strong increase (up to 13- and 6-fold) in Cip1/p21 and Kip1/p27 levels,
respectively. Silibinin treatment also resulted in 90 and 70% decrease in CDK4
and CDK2 levels, respectively, but did not alter the protein levels of cyclin D1 
and cyclin E. Consistent with its effect on G1 cell cycle regulators, silibinin
treated cells exhibited a strong G1 arrest, almost complete growth inhibition,
and morphological changes suggestive of differentiation. Together, these results 
suggest that silibinin caused hypophosphorylation of Rb-related proteins may in
part be responsible for its cancer preventive and anti-carcinogenic efficacy in
different cancer models including PCA.

PMID: 12429923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Dec;22(23):8184-98.

Rapamycin potentiates transforming growth factor beta-induced growth arrest in
nontransformed, oncogene-transformed, and human cancer cells.

Law BK(1), Chytil A, Dumont N, Hamilton EG, Waltner-Law ME, Aakre ME, Covington
C, Moses HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology. Department of Molecular Physiology and
Biophysics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232,
USA. brian.k.law@vanderbilt.edu

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) induces cell cycle arrest of most
nontransformed epithelial cell lines. In contrast, many human carcinomas are
refractory to the growth-inhibitory effect of TGF-beta. TGF-beta overexpression
inhibits tumorigenesis, and abolition of TGF-beta signaling accelerates
tumorigenesis, suggesting that TGF-beta acts as a tumor suppressor in mouse
models of cancer. A screen to identify agents that potentiate TGF-beta-induced
growth arrest demonstrated that the potential anticancer agent rapamycin
cooperated with TGF-beta to induce growth arrest in multiple cell lines.
Rapamycin also augmented the ability of TGF-beta to inhibit the proliferation of 
E2F1-, c-Myc-, and (V12)H-Ras-transformed cells, even though these cells were
insensitive to TGF-beta-mediated growth arrest in the absence of rapamycin.
Rapamycin potentiation of TGF-beta-induced growth arrest could not be explained
by increases in TGF-beta receptor levels or rapamycin-induced dissociation of
FKBP12 from the TGF-beta type I receptor. Significantly, TGF-beta and rapamycin
cooperated to induce growth inhibition of human carcinoma cells that are
resistant to TGF-beta-induced growth arrest, and arrest correlated with a
suppression of Cdk2 kinase activity. Inhibition of Cdk2 activity was associated
with increased binding of p21 and p27 to Cdk2 and decreased phosphorylation of
Cdk2 on Thr(160). Increased p21 and p27 binding to Cdk2 was accompanied by
decreased p130, p107, and E2F4 binding to Cdk2. Together, these results indicate 
that rapamycin and TGF-beta cooperate to inhibit the proliferation of
nontransformed cells and cancer cells by acting in concert to inhibit Cdk2
activity.

PMCID: PMC134072
PMID: 12417722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 27;277(52):50263-74. Epub 2002 Oct 24.

G1 cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase-coordinated phosphorylation of endogenous
pocket proteins differentially regulates their interactions with E2F4 and E2F1
and gene expression.

Calbó J(1), Parreño M, Sotillo E, Yong T, Mazo A, Garriga J, Grana X.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology and Department of
Biochemistry, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19140, USA.

Mitogenic stimulation leads to activation of G(1) cyclin-dependent kinases
(CDKs), which phosphorylate pocket proteins and trigger progression through the
G(0)/G(1) and G(1)/S transitions of the cell cycle. However, the individual role 
of G(1) cyclin-CDK complexes in the coordinated regulation of pocket proteins and
their interaction with E2F family members is not fully understood. Here we report
that individually or in concert cyclin D1-CDK and cyclin E-CDK complexes induce
distinct and coordinated phosphorylation of endogenous pocket proteins, which
also has distinct consequences in the regulation of pocket protein interactions
with E2F4 and the expression of p107 and E2F1, both E2F-regulated genes. The
up-regulation of these two proteins and the release of p130 and pRB from E2F4
complexes allows formation of E2F1 complexes not only with pRB but also with p130
and p107 as well as the formation of p107-E2F4 complexes. The formation of these 
complexes occurs in the presence of active cyclin D1-CDK and cyclin E-CDK
complexes, indicating that whereas phosphorylation plays a role in the abrogation
of certain pocket protein/E2F interactions, these same activities induce the
formation of other complexes in the context of a cell expressing endogenous
levels of pocket and E2F proteins. Of note, phosphorylated p130 "form 3," which
does not interact with E2F4, readily interacts with E2F1. Our data also
demonstrate that ectopic overexpression of either cyclin is sufficient to induce 
mitogen-independent growth in human T98G and Rat-1 cells, although the effects of
cyclin D1 require downstream activation of cyclin E-CDK2 activity. Interestingly,
in T98G cells, cyclin D1 induces cell cycle progression more potently than cyclin
E. This suggests that cyclin D1 activates pathways independently of cyclin E that
ensure timely progression through the cell cycle.

PMID: 12401786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Oncogene. 2002 Oct 24;21(49):7569-79.

P130 and its truncated form mediate p53-induced cell cycle arrest in Rb(-/-)
Saos2 cells.

Gao CF(1), Ren S, Wang J, Zhang SL, Jin F, Nakajima T, Ikeda M, Tsuchida N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cellular Oncology, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and 
Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8549, Japan.

In the present study, we investigate the mechanism of how p53 induces growth
arrest in Rb-defective Saos2 cells that express temperature-sensitive mutant p53 
(ts p53). The activation of p53 at a permissive temperature (32.5 degrees C)
induces the cell cycle arrest at both the G1 and G2 stages. The induction of
several p53-responsive genes as well as a small form of p130 (S-p130) was
detected upon p53 activation. S-p130 retained the functions as a pocket protein
and was dominant over p130 at the protein level after 36 h at 32.5 degrees C. A
canonical p53 binding site was identified in intron 4 of p130. Furthermore, a
novel p53-inducible transcript containing a partial intron 4 sequence downstream 
of the p53 binding site and exon 5 of p130 was detected by RT-PCR, suggesting
S-p130 is induced by p53 at transcriptional level. The results from gel shift
assay and immunoprecipitation showed that S-p130 as well as p130 formed complexes
with both E2F1 and E2F4 at a permissive temperature. Moreover, the transient
expression of E1A (12S) and E2F1 effectively abrogated p53-induced cell cycle
arrest. These results strongly suggested that p130 and its truncated form might
substitute Rb in mediating p53-induced cell cycle arrest in Rb(-/-) Saos2 cells.

PMID: 12386819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2002 Sep;10(3):225-30.

Expression of E2F-4 gene in colorectal adenocarcinoma and corresponding covering 
mucosa: an immunohistochemistry, image analysis, and immunoblot study.

Mady HH(1), Hasso S, Melhem MF.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and dagger Biological Sciences, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15240, USA.

E2F-4 is a transcription factor involved in the transition of the cell from the
resting state (G0/G1) to the proliferative stage (S). It has been associated with
the p107 and p130 members of the Rb-family and it is responsible for many
important growth suppressive functions. E2F-1, one member of the E2F family, has 
a similar structure to E2F-4; however, both have different mechanisms of action
in regulating cell-cycle progression. Although E2F-4 acts mainly as a repressor
in the early part of the cell cycle, E2F-1 has the ability to function as both an
oncogene and a tumor suppressor gene. In an attempt to identify the role of E2F-4
as a potential mediator of cell proliferation, differentiation, tumorigenesis,
and apoptosis in colorectal mucosa comparing with that of E2F-1, the authors
examine 20 patients with human colon cancer and their corresponding
histologically healthy mucosa by using immunohistochemical methods, computerized 
quantitative image analysis, and immunoblot analysis. Immunohistochemical studies
were performed with formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections stained with a
monoclonal antibody against the E2F-4 protein. Apoptosis levels were determined
by in situ assay. Positivity was scored by a Computerized Image Analyzer to
detect the relative amount of the protein. Immunoblot analysis was performed on
protein extracts from snap-frozen tissues of the same specimens. The results show
that the expression of E2F-4 was greater in the tumor cells than in their
corresponding benign epithelium as determined by immunohistochemical staining and
image analysis. This was confirmed by semiquantitative IB analysis of the E2F-4
protein. The labeling index (LI) of E2F-4 in the tumors was inversely
proportional to the LI of apoptotic cells. Within these cases, 12 cases showed a 
very high E2F-4 LI corresponding to low apoptosis LI. Three cases with relatively
lower levels of E2F-4 LI were characterized with high apoptotic rates. These data
suggest that E2F-4 gene overexpression plays a role in the development of
colorectal tumors and appears to play a role in suppressing apoptosis.

PMID: 12373148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. FASEB J. 2002 Dec;16(14):1943-5. Epub 2002 Oct 4.

Opposing regulatory roles of E2F in human telomerase reverse transcriptase
(hTERT) gene expression in human tumor and normal somatic cells.

Won J(1), Yim J, Kim TK.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Initiative Center for Genetic Reprogramming,
Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Korea.

Telomerase activity is closely correlated with cellular proliferative activity in
human tissues. Human cells with high proliferative potential, such as tumor cells
or stem cells, exhibit telomerase activity, whereas most normal human somatic
cells do not. Telomerase activity is tightly regulated by the expression of its
catalytic subunit human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT). Through an
expression cloning approach, we identified E2F-1 as a repressor of the hTERT gene
in human tumor cells. Ectopic expression of E2F-1 repressed hTERT promoter
activity by inhibiting Sp1 activation of the hTERT promoter. In contrast to the
repressor function of E2F-1 in human tumor cells, we demonstrated that E2F-1 is
an activator of the hTERT gene in normal human somatic cells. Ectopically
expressed E2F-1 activated the hTERT promoter through a noncanonical DNA binding
site. E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3 (but not E2F-4 and E2F-5) repressed hTERT promoter 
activity in human tumor cells, whereas they activated it in normal somatic cells.
These contrasting effects of E2F transcription factors on the hTERT promoter
could underlie the paradoxical biological activities of E2F, which can both
promote and inhibit cellular proliferation and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12368233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 1;277(44):42128-35. Epub 2002 Aug 26.

Ectopic expression of necdin induces differentiation of mouse neuroblastoma
cells.

Kobayashi M(1), Taniura H, Yoshikawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Regulation of Macromolecular Functions, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Yamadaoka 3-2, Suita, Japan.

Necdin is expressed predominantly in postmitotic neurons, and ectopic expression 
of this protein strongly suppresses cell growth. Necdin has been implicated in
the pathogenesis of Prader-Willi syndrome, a human neurodevelopmental disorder
associated with genomic imprinting. Here we demonstrate that ectopic expression
of necdin induces a neuronal phenotype in neuroblastoma cells. Necdin was
undetectable in mouse neuroblastoma N1E-115 cells under undifferentiated and
differentiated conditions. N1E-115 cells transfected with necdin cDNA showed
morphological differentiation such as neurite outgrowth and expression of the
synaptic marker proteins synaptotagmin and synaptophysin. In addition, Western
blot analysis of the retinoblastoma protein (Rb) family members Rb, p130, and
p107 revealed that necdin cDNA transfectants contained an increased level of p130
and a reduced level of p107, a pattern seen in differentiated G(0) cells. The
transcription factors E2F1 and E2F4 physically interacted with necdin via their
carboxyl-terminal transactivation domains, but only E2F1 abrogated necdin-induced
growth arrest and neurite outgrowth of neuroblastoma cells. Overexpression of
E2F1 in differentiated N1E-115 cells induced apoptosis, which was antagonized by 
co-expression of necdin. These results suggest that necdin promotes the
differentiation and survival of neurons through its antagonistic interactions
with E2F1.

PMID: 12198120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Cell. 2002 Jul 12;110(1):19-32.

E2F4/5 and p107 as Smad cofactors linking the TGFbeta receptor to c-myc
repression.

Chen CR(1), Kang Y, Siegel PM, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Smad3 is a direct mediator of transcriptional activation by the TGFbeta receptor.
Its target genes in epithelial cells include cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
that generate a cytostatic reponse. We defined how, in the same context, Smad3
can also mediate transcriptional repression of the growth-promoting gene c-myc. A
complex containing Smad3, the transcription factors E2F4/5 and DP1, and the
corepressor p107 preexists in the cytoplasm. In response to TGFbeta, this complex
moves into the nucleus and associates with Smad4, recognizing a composite
Smad-E2F site on c-myc for repression. Previously known as the ultimate
recipients of cdk regulatory signals, E2F4/5 and p107 act here as transducers of 
TGFbeta receptor signals upstream of cdk. Smad proteins therefore mediate
transcriptional activation or repression depending on their associated partners.

PMID: 12150994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jul 12;295(2):267-75.

4-Hydroxynonenal affects pRb/E2F pathway in HL-60 human leukemic cells.

Barrera G(1), Pizzimenti S, Laurora S, Moroni E, Giglioni B, Dianzani MU.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina e Oncologia Sperimentale, Sezione di Patologia
Generale, Corso Raffaello 30, 10125 Turin, Italy.

4-Hydroxynonenal (HNE), a highly reactive product of lipid peroxidation, has an
antiproliferative effect in several tumor cell lines and provokes alteration of
cell cycle progression in HL-60 cells. HNE down-regulates c-myc expression in
K562, HL-60, and MEL cells. This prompted us to study the cascade of phenomena
that, starting from the CKIs expression and the phosphorylation of pRb, arrives
at the E2F binding to consensus sequence in the P2 promoter of the c-myc gene.
Treatment of HL-60 cells with HNE (1 microM) causes a p53-independent increase of
p21(WAF1/CIP1) expression, pRb dephosphorylation, a decrease of low molecular
weight E2F complexes and an increase of high molecular weight E2F complexes bound
to P2 c-myc promoter. E2F4 expression is reduced by HNE treatment as well as the 
amount of pRb/E2F4 complexes, whereas the amount of pRb/E2F1 complexes is
increased. In conclusion, HNE can affect the pRb/E2F pathway by modifying the
expression of several genes involved in the control of cell proliferation.

PMID: 12150942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Mol Cell. 2002 Jul;10(1):7-8.

Smad about E2F. TGFbeta repressionof c-Myc via a Smad3/E2F/p107 complex.

Kowalik TF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester 01655, USA.

Signaling by TGFbeta regulates the expression of hundreds of genes. The rapid
repression of c-Myc stands out because of its roles in growth control and cancer.
Recent work shows that c-Myc repression by TGFbeta is mediated by the nuclear
translocation of a novel, preformed complex composed of Smad3, E2F4 or E2F5, and 
the Rb-related factor p107.

PMID: 12150900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2002 Jun;21(2):185-9.

E2F-4 mutation in hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer.

Moriyama H(1), Sasamoto H, Kambara T, Matsubara N, Ikeda M, Baba S, Meltzer SJ,
Lynch HT, Shimizu K, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Gastroenterological Surgery and Surgical Oncology, Okayama University
Graduate School of Medicine, Japan.

Defects in the DNA mismatch repair function are known to cause microsatellite
instability (MSI) in hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) as well
as in a subset of sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC). We previously reported that
the E2F-4 gene, which encodes an important transcription factor in cell cycle
control, had frequent tumor-specific mutations at a coding region of
trinucleotide microsatellite (CAG)n in a subset of human sporadic CRC with
high-frequency MSI (MSI-H). In this study, we assessed mutations of E2F-4 in
HNPCC as well as other target genes of defective DNA mismatch repair function.
Eighteen colorectal cancer (CRC) patients from 13 kindreds meeting the Amsterdam 
criteria for HNPCC were analyzed and compared to sporadic CRC patients with
MSI-H. We detected mutations of E2F-4 at the same repeat sequence in HNPCC. The
frequency of the E2F-4 mutation in HNPCC was comparable with that in sporadic CRC
with MSI-H. E2F-4 was considered to be one of the important target genes
responsible for the carcinogenesis of HNPCC.

PMID: 12148576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Biochem J. 2002 Nov 15;368(Pt 1):283-91.

An E2F-binding site mediates the activation of the proliferative isoform of
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase by phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase.

Fernández de Mattos S(1), Lam EW, Tauler A.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Bioqui;mica i Biologia Molecular-Divisió IV, Facultat de
Farmàcia, Universitat de Barcelona, Av. Diagonal 643, E-08028 Barcelona,
Catalunya, Spain.

In the present study, we demonstrate that E2F is implicated in the regulation of 
the glycolytic enzyme 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase
(6PF2K/Fru-2,6-BPase) during cell division. The expression of this enzyme is
induced during the G(1)/S transition of the cell cycle. We identified and
monitored the E2F-pocket protein complexes that bind to the E2F site of the
F-type promoter during cell-cycle entry, and we analysed their contribution to
the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase)-mediated regulation of the
promoter. We found that the predominant E2F complex bound to the F-type promoter 
in unstimulated/quiescent cells contains E2F4, DP1 and p130 proteins. In
serum-stimulated (S-phase) cells, the composition of the complex switched to
E2F1/4, DP1 and p107, together with cyclin A and cyclin-dependent kinase 2.
Treatment with the PI 3-kinase specific inhibitor LY 294002 prevented the
formation of the S-phase complex, suggesting that activation of the PI 3-kinase
pathway is essential for the formation of this complex. Further supporting this
idea, we obtained results showing that treatment of cycling NIH 3T3 cells with
either wortmannin or LY 294002 induces the accumulation of the transcriptionally 
repressive p130-E2F4-DP1 complex. Using the Rat-1 ER-E2F1 cell line where E2F1
activity can be conditionally induced, we demonstrated that E2F activity is
involved in the in vivo transcriptional regulation of the F-type 6PF2K/Fru-2,
6-BPase gene. Taken together, our results show that the F-type 6PF2K/Fru-2,
6-BPase is a genuine E2F-regulated gene, and that its regulation by the PI
3-kinase pathway is at least partially mediated through the E2F transcription
factor.

PMCID: PMC1222960
PMID: 12139485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Dev Cell. 2002 Jul;3(1):39-49.

E2Fs regulate adipocyte differentiation.

Fajas L(1), Landsberg RL, Huss-Garcia Y, Sardet C, Lees JA, Auwerx J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, B.P. 163, F-67404 Illkirch cedex, C.U. de, Strasbourg, France.

When preadipocytes reenter the cell cycle, PPAR gamma expression is induced,
coincident with an increase in DNA synthesis, suggesting the involvement of the
E2F family of cell cycle regulators. We show here that E2F1 induces PPAR gamma
transcription during clonal expansion, whereas E2F4 represses PPARg amma
expression during terminal adipocyte differentiation. Using a combination of in
vivo experiments with knockout and chimeric animals and in vitro experiments, we 
demonstrate that the absence of E2F1 impairs, whereas depletion of E2F4
stimulates, adipogenesis. E2Fs hence represent the link between proliferative
signaling pathways, triggering clonal expansion, and terminal adipocyte
differentiation through regulation of PPAR gamma expression. This underscores the
complex role of the E2F protein family in the control of both cell proliferation 
and differentiation.

PMID: 12110166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Oncogene. 2002 Jul 11;21(30):4626-34.

Ectopic expression of cyclin E in estrogen responsive cells abrogates
antiestrogen mediated growth arrest.

Dhillon NK(1), Mudryj M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of California, Davis, Davis, California, CA 95616, USA.

Estrogens stimulate proliferation of estrogen receptor positive MCF7 breast
cancer cells while antiestrogens signal a G0/G1 growth arrest. In MCF7 cells,
arrest is mediated through the CDK inhibitors p21 and p27 and through a decrease 
in cyclin E/CDK2 kinase activity. We found that in MCF7 cells, overexpression of 
cyclin E partially abrogates a tamoxifen mediated growth arrest. Overexpression
of cyclin E is accompanied by a decrease in the levels of RB and CDK inhibitor
p21 but an increase in CDK inhibitor p27. Cyclin E overexpression also alters the
composition of E2F transcription factor complexes. The E2F4/p107/cyclin E/CDK2
complex, a minor component in proliferating control cells that is absent in
growth-arrested cells, is more abundant in both proliferating and tamoxifen
treated cyclin E overexpressing cells. Conversely, levels of the quiescence
associated E2F/p130 complex is not detected in these cells. Expression from the
E2F dependant promoter is elevated in proliferating and tamoxifen treated cyclin 
E overexpressing cells. This study suggests that a modest overexpression of
cyclin E abrogates the tamoxifen mediated growth arrest through modification of
the RB/E2F pathway. Moreover, these results provide one explanation of why some
cells that express the estrogen receptor may be unresponsive to antiestrogens.

PMID: 12096339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 13;277(37):34471-9. Epub 2002 Jun 27.

Active nuclear import and export pathways regulate E2F-5 subcellular
localization.

Apostolova MD(1), Ivanova IA, Dagnino C, D'Souza SJ, Dagnino L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Child Health Research Institute and Lawson Health
Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C1,
Canada.

Epidermal keratinocyte differentiation is accompanied by differential regulation 
of E2F genes, including up-regulation of E2F-5 and its concomitant association
with the retinoblastoma family protein p130. This complex appears to play a role 
in irreversible withdrawal from the cell cycle in differentiating keratinocytes. 
We now report that keratinocyte differentiation is also accompanied by changes in
E2F-5 subcellular localization, from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. To define the 
molecular determinants of E2F-5 nuclear import, we tested its ability to enter
the nucleus in import assays in vitro using digitonin-permeabilized cells. We
found that E2F-5 enters the nucleus through mediated transport processes that
involve formation of nuclear pore complexes. It has been proposed that E2F-4 and 
E2F-5, which lack defined nuclear localization signal (NLS) consensus sequences, 
enter the nucleus in association with NLS-containing DP-2 or pRB family proteins.
However, we show that nuclear import of E2F-5 only requires the first N-terminal 
56 amino acid residues and is not dependent on interaction with DP or pRB family 
proteins. Because E2F-5 is predominantly cytoplasmic in undifferentiated
keratinocytes and in other intact cells, we also examined whether this protein is
subjected to active nuclear export. Indeed, E2F-5 is exported from the nucleus
through leptomycin B-sensitive, CRM1-mediated transport, through a region
corresponding to amino acid residues 130-154. This region excludes the DNA- and
the p130-binding domains. Thus, the subcellular distribution of E2F-5 is tightly 
regulated in intact cells, through multiple functional domains that direct
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of this protein.

PMID: 12089160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 30;277(35):31679-93. Epub 2002 Jun 20.

Regulation of the human cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p18INK4c by the
transcription factors E2F1 and Sp1.

Blais A(1), Monté D, Pouliot F, Labrie C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology and Oncology Research Center, Centre Hospitalier de
l'Université Laval Research Center, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Quebec,
Sainte-Foy, G1V 4G2 Quebec, Canada.

The p18(INK4c) cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor is an important regulator of
cell cycle progression and cellular differentiation. We and others found that
overexpressed E2F proteins up-regulate p18 expression. To better understand this 
phenomenon, we performed a functional analysis of the human p18 promoter.
Deletion studies revealed that the E2F-responsive elements of the promoter are
located within 131 bp upstream of the transcription start site. This region
contains putative Sp1- and E2F-binding sites. Mutational inactivation of these
elements revealed that the Sp1 sites were important for the basal activity of the
promoter but could also mediate the effects of E2F1 on the p18 promoter.
Moreover, we found that E2F1 and Sp1 can synergistically enhance the activity of 
the proximal p18 promoter. Gel shift analyses using p18 promoter-derived probes
led to the identification of several multiprotein complexes that were found to
contain different combinations of E2F proteins and/or Sp1. Recombinant E2F1 was
also capable of binding to the E2F-binding sites. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments demonstrated that E2F1 and E2F4 associate with the p18 promoter in
unperturbed cells. Based on these findings, we conclude that E2F proteins and Sp1
play an important role in the control of p18 expression.

PMID: 12077144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Mod Pathol. 2002 Jun;15(6):632-40.

Distinct clinical features and outcomes of gastric cancers with microsatellite
instability.

Lee HS(1), Choi SI, Lee HK, Kim HS, Yang HK, Kang GH, Kim YI, Lee BL, Kim WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Korea.

Microsatellite instability (MSI) is a hallmark of the DNA mismatch repair
deficiency that is one of the pathways of gastric carcinogenesis.
Clinicopathologic characteristics of MSI+ gastric cancers remain unclear. To
determine the correlation between MSI status and clinical features, we analyzed
327 consecutive gastric cancers for the occurrence of MSI in the BAT-26 marker.
Because it has been proven that MSI at BAT-26 reflects the MSI+ phenotype,
cancers with alteration at BAT-26 were categorized as having the MSI+ phenotype. 
The expressions of hMLH1, hMSH2, p53, MUC1, MUC2, and CEA were evaluated
immunohistochemically using the tissue array method. The MSI+ phenotype was found
in 9.5% (31/327) of gastric cancers examined. MSI+ gastric cancers were
significantly associated with older age, antral location, Borrmann's gross Type
II, intestinal subtype, lower prevalence of lymph node metastasis, and lower pTNM
stage (P <.05). By multivariate logistic regression, MSI+ gastric cancers had a
lower prevalence of lymph node metastasis independent of tumor invasion (P
<.001). MSI+ gastric cancers displayed frequent frameshift mutations of
transforming growth factor-beta type II receptor (90.3%), BAX (61.3%), hMSH3
(38.7%), and E2F4 (61.3%) genes and diminished hMLH1 (24/31) or hMSH2 (4/31)
expressions. The MSI+ phenotype correlated with patient survival in advanced
gastric carcinoma (P =.046). In conclusion, MSI+ phenotype in gastric cancers was
found to have distinct clinicopathologic characteristics and to be predictive of 
a favorable outcome in advanced carcinoma.

PMID: 12065777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2002 Jul;283(1):H204-12.

Differences in E2F subunit expression in quiescent and proliferating vascular
smooth muscle cells.

Fujita N(1), Furukawa Y, Itabashi N, Okada K, Saito T, Ishibashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Jichi
Medical School, Tochigi, Japan.

E2F is a family of transcriptional factors that control G(1)/S transition. We
investigated how the E2F family participates in the biological responses of
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) to vasoconstrictive hormones compared with
fetal bovine serum (FBS). FBS induced upregulation of E2F-1 and E2F-5 at both
mRNA and protein levels and slightly reduced E2F-3 protein. Angiotensin II (ANG
II) and arginine vasopressin increased E2F-3 protein, but not E2F-1 and E2F-5,
without upregulating its mRNA level. FBS transactivated the E2F-1 gene through
the induction of free E2F-1 binding onto its promoter, whereas ANG II-induced
binding of E2F-3 did not result in activation of the E2F-1 promoter. These
changes are responsible for hypertrophic or hyperplastic response of VSMC to
different growth factors or stimulants. In contrast, both FBS and
vasoconstrictive hormones drove transcription of the cdc6 gene by downregulating 
p130 and recruiting free E2F-3 in the latter, which underlies the progression of 
VSMC into S phase.

PMID: 12063292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Magy Onkol. 2001;45(2):161-167.

[Genetic marker analysis in head and neck cancer]

[Article in Hungarian]

Csuka O(1), Olasz J, Juhász A, Hargitai A, Remenár E, Kásler M.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Oncology, Budapest, H-1122, Hungary. jtimar@oncol.hu

Prognostication of head and neck cancer (HNCC) involves molecular identification 
of residual tumor cells, prediction of recurrence, distant metastases or
secondary tumors and prediction of the sensitvity to therapy. Biomarkers of HNCC 
are mutations of p53, p16 and amplification of Cyclin D and E2F4. One hundred and
fifty-two HNCC cases have been evaluated for p53, hMLH1, Cyclin D and p16 gene
alterations using PCR-SSCP and Western blot analysis. P53 mutations of HNCC have 
been found in 37.5% of cases. However, 11% of the cases showed p53 mutations in
the normal peritumoral mucosa suggesting "field cancerization" process.
Mismatch-repair gene mutations (MMR: hMHL1 and hMSH2) occurred with 17 and 8.6%
frequency, respectively, while E2F4 mutations were even more frequent (21.4%) in 
HNCC. Our data suggest that E2F4 overexpression can be caused by the inactivation
of the p16 gene in HNCC, while its mutations are most probably associated to the 
mutations of the MMR genes. These molecular informations can help to predict the 
biological potential of HNCC as well as the probability of the development of
secondary HNCCs.

PMID: 12050711  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


349. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 26;277(30):26741-52. Epub 2002 May 2.

Distinct phosphorylation events regulate p130- and p107-mediated repression of
E2F-4.

Farkas T(1), Hansen K, Holm K, Lukas J, Bartek J.

Author information: 
(1)Danish Cancer Society, Institute of Cancer Biology, Strandboulevarden 49,
Copenhagen DK-2100, Denmark.

The "pocket proteins" pRb (retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein), p107, and
p130 regulate cell proliferation via phosphorylation-sensitive interactions with 
E2F transcription factors and other proteins. We previously identified 22 in vivo
phosphorylation sites in human p130, including three sites selectively targeted
by cyclin D-Cdk4(6) kinases. Here we assessed the effects of alanine substitution
at the individual or combined Cdk4(6)-specific sites in p130, compared with
homologous sites in p107 (Thr(369)/Ser(650)/Ser(964)). In U-2-OS cells, the
triple p107(DeltaCdk4)* mutant strongly inhibited E2F-4 activity and imposed a
G(1) arrest resistant to cyclin D1 coexpression. In contrast, the p130(DeltaCdk4)
mutant still responded to cyclin D1, suggesting the existence of additional
phosphorylation sites critical for E2F-4 regulation. Extensive mutagenesis,
sensitive E2F reporter assays, and cell cycle analyses allowed the identification
of six such residues (serines 413, 639, 662, 1044, 1080, and 1112) that, in
addition to the Cdk4-specific sites, are necessary and sufficient for the
regulation of E2F-4 and the cell cycle by p130. Surprisingly, 12 of the in vivo
phosphorylation sites seem dispensable for E2F regulation and probably modulate
other functions of p130. These results further elucidate the complex regulation
of p130 and provide a molecular mechanism to explain the differential control of 
p107 and p130 by cyclin-dependent kinases.

PMID: 12006580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2002 Apr 1;134(1):46-54.

Cytogenetic aberrations and heterogeneity of mutations in repeat-containing genes
in a colon carcinoma from a patient with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
cancer.

Planck M(1), Halvarsson B, Pålsson E, Hallén M, Ekelund M, Pålsson B, Baldetorp
B, Nilbert M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University Hospital, 221 85 Lund, Sweden.
maria.planck@onk.lu.se

The majority of tumors from patients affected by hereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer (HNPCC) exhibit a mutator phenotype characterized by widespread
microsatellite instability (MSI) and somatic mutations in repeated sequences in
several cancer-associated genes. An inverse relationship between MSI and
chromosomal instability (CIN) has been demonstrated and HNPCC-associated tumors
are generally characterized by diploid or near-diploid cells with few or no
chromosomal rearrangements. We have studied MSI, somatic mutations in
repeat-containing genes, DNA-ploidy, and cytogenetic aberrations in a colon
carcinoma from a patient with a germline MLH1 mutation. Mutations in coding
repeats were assessed in 10 macroscopically separate areas of the primary tumor
and in two lymph nodes. Some of the genes studied (E2F4, MSH3, MSH6, TCF4, and
TGFBRII) showed a consistent lack of mutations, whereas others (BAX, Caspase-5
and IGFIIR) displayed alterations in some tumor regions but not in others. The
tumor had DNA-index 1.1-1.2 and a stable, aberrant karyotype with extra copies of
chromosomes 7 and 12 and the structural aberrations i(1q), der(20)t(8;20), and
der(22)t(1;22). The finding of CIN, MSI, and somatic mutations in coding repeats 
in this tumor suggests that these phenomena may act together in HNPCC
tumorigenesis. Furthermore, the observed intratumoral heterogeneity of mutations 
in coding repeats implies these changes occur late in tumorigenesis and, thus,
probably play a role in tumor progression rather than initiation.

PMID: 11996796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2002 Jun;34(2):243-8.

Defective DNA-mismatch repair: a potential mediator of leukemogenic
susceptibility in therapy-related myelodysplasia and leukemia.

Olipitz W(1), Hopfinger G, Aguiar RC, Gunsilius E, Girschikofsky M, Bodner C,
Hiden K, Linkesch W, Hoefler G, Sill H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Karl-Franzens University,
Graz, Austria.

We investigated the potential role of defective DNA-mismatch repair (MMR) as a
mediator of leukemogenic susceptibility in patients with therapy-related
myelodysplasia (t-MDS) and leukemia (t-leuk). Thirty-seven individuals with
t-MDS/t-leuk were analyzed for microsatellite instability (MSI), the hallmark of 
defective DNA-MMR. Using standardized international criteria, 5/37 (14%) patients
displayed high MSI, whereas 3 other patients had low MSI (8%). To determine the
stage at which MSI had developed, we analyzed the primary tumors of 12 patients. 
Three of 4 patients with high MSI t-MDS/t-leuk also had microsatellite unstable
primary tumors. Conversely, MSI was not detected in any primary malignancy of
patients with low MSI or microsatellite stable t-MDS/t-leuk (P = 0.0182). In the 
high MSI group, we further investigated genes targeted by defective DNA-MMR (BAX,
TGFBRII, IGFIIR, Caspase-5, APC, PTEN, E2F4, MBD4, MSH6, and MSH3) in both
primary tumor and t-MDS/t-leuk. However, no mutation was found in any gene. The
significant association of MSI in t-MDS/t-leuk and corresponding primary tumors
suggests that defective DNA-MMR confers leukemogenic susceptibility to this
cohort of patients.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11979558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Genes Dev. 2002 Apr 15;16(8):933-47.

E2F mediates cell cycle-dependent transcriptional repression in vivo by
recruitment of an HDAC1/mSin3B corepressor complex.

Rayman JB(1), Takahashi Y, Indjeian VB, Dannenberg JH, Catchpole S, Watson RJ, te
Riele H, Dynlacht BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Despite biochemical and genetic data suggesting that E2F and pRB (pocket protein)
families regulate transcription via chromatin-modifying factors, the precise
mechanisms underlying gene regulation by these protein families have not yet been
defined in a physiological setting. In this study, we have investigated promoter 
occupancy in wild-type and pocket protein-deficient primary cells. We show that
corepressor complexes consisting of histone deacetylase (HDAC1) and mSin3B were
specifically recruited to endogenous E2F-regulated promoters in quiescent cells. 
These complexes dissociated from promoters once cells reached late G1, coincident
with gene activation. Interestingly, recruitment of HDAC1 complexes to promoters 
depended absolutely on p107 and p130, and required an intact E2F-binding site. In
contrast, mSin3B recruitment to certain promoters did not require p107 or p130,
suggesting that recruitment of this corepressor can occur via E2F-dependent and
-independent mechanisms. Remarkably, loss of pRB had no effect on HDAC1 or mSin3B
recruitment. p107/p130 deficiency triggered a dramatic loss of E2F4 nuclear
localization as well as transcriptional derepression, which is suggested by
nucleosome mapping studies to be the result of localized hyperacetylation of
nucleosomes proximal to E2F-binding sites. Taken together, these findings show
that p130 escorts E2F4 into the nucleus and, together with corepressor complexes 
that contain mSin3B and/or HDAC1, directly represses transcription from target
genes as cells withdraw from the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC152357
PMID: 11959842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Oncogene. 2002 Feb 28;21(10):1563-70.

Differences in DNA binding properties between E2F1 and E2F4 specify repression of
the Mcl-1 promoter.

Croxton R(1), Ma Y, Cress WD.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Oncology, H Lee Moffitt Comprehensive Cancer Center and
Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, FL 33612, USA.

E2F1 is a potent inducer of apoptosis whereas its relative, E2F4, generally does 
not promote cell death. Other work from our laboratory has demonstrated that E2F1
can directly bind and represss the Mcl-1 promoter - contributing to E2F1-mediated
apoptosis. Here we show that while E2F1 can repress the Mcl-1 promoter, other
members of the E2F family (such as E2F4) cannot. Characterization of the Mcl-1
promoter demonstrates that the -143/+10 region is critical for E2F1-mediated
downregulation. We demonstrate that the ability of E2F1 to repress the Mcl-1
promoter correlates with its ability to bind within the required -143/+10 region 
of this promoter. In contrast, E2F4 is unable to bind to the -143/+10 region of
the Mcl-1 promoter. We propose that E2F4 is unable to repress the Mcl-1 promoter 
primarily as a result of insufficient binding to the essential regulatory region.
This is the first evidence of DNA binding specificity among E2F family members
that results in differential regulation of a naturally occurring promoter.

PMID: 11896585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Cytokine. 2002 Jan 21;17(2):91-7.

Role of pRB-family/E2F complex in the inhibition of IL-3-dependent lymphoid cell 
proliferation.

Yamada M(1), Kondo T, Ashizawa S, Takebayashi T, Higashi H, Hatakeyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Kita-15, Nishi-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0815, Japan.

Interleukin 3 (IL-3)-dependent proliferation of haematopoietic cells is
specifically inhibited by p130, a member of the pRB-family proteins. p130
interacts with the cell-cycle regulatory E2F transcription factors, notably E2F-4
and E2F-5, and affects promoters containing E2F-binding sites through two
distinct mechanisms. First, upon complex formation with E2F, it blocks
transcriptional activation by E2F. Second, the formed p130-E2F complex binds to
E2F sites and actively represses transcription by inhibiting the activity of
surrounding enhancer elements on the promoter. To pursue the relative
contributions of each mechanism in the p130-mediated inhibition of IL-3-dependent
cell proliferation, we employed a dominant-negative DP-1, which suppresses both
E2F-dependent transactivation and the formation of active transcriptional
repressors. Ectopic expression of the dominant negative DP-1 in the
IL-3-dependent BaF3 lymphoid cells gave rise to an inhibition of cell
proliferation, which was concomitantly associated with a decrease in levels of
cyclin E, an indispensable molecule for G1 to S-phase cell-cycle progression. Our
results indicate that blocking E2F-dependent transactivation, but not the
formation of p130-E2F transcriptional repressor complexes, is responsible for the
inhibition of IL-3-dependent cell growth by p130.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 11886176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Ginekol Pol. 2001 Dec;72(12A):1560-6.

[Differences in human and rat FSH receptors promote activity as a result of the
transcriptional factors: E2F1, E2F4 and E2F5 overexpression].

[Article in Polish]

Putowski L(1), Gasior W, Gogacz M, Gagala J, Jakowicki JA.

Author information: 
(1)II Katedry i Kliniki Ginekologii Operacyjnej Akademii Medycznej w Lublinie.

FSH-R expression in granulosa cells varies during the course of ovarian
ontogenesis, as well as, during each menstrual cycle. Expression of
follicle-stimulating hormone receptors (FSH-R) on Sertoli cells of the testis and
ovarian granulosa cells depend on many paracrine and autocrine factors. The
modulation of FSH-R synthesis is accomplished via a number of mechanisms
including regulation of the promoter activity. Little is known about factors
involved in control of FSH-R transcription in different species. The aim of the
present study was to investigate differences in the regulation of human and rat
FSH-R promoter activity by E2F transcriptional factors.MATERIAL AND METHODS: The 
5'-flanking regions of human and rat FSH receptor gene subcloned in the pGL3
plasmid were transiently transfected into cultured CHO cells and rat granulosa
cells. Rat granulosa cells were obtained by puncturing ovaries from DES primed
immature Sprague-Dawley rats. Promoter activity was determined by measuring
firefly luciferase luminescence of the cell lysate. Transfection efficiency was
normalized by the renilla luciferase activity generated by co-transfected pRL-CMV
vector. In order to determine the influence of E2F1, E2F4 and E2F5, on FSH-R
promoter activity, cells were transfected either with promoter construct alone or
with its mixture with selected expression vector.
RESULTS: Rat FSH-R promoter construct (-1033/+6 bp) and human FSH-R promoter
construct (-1485/-1 bp) were both active in transfected cells. Overexpression of 
E2F1 protein decreased both, human and rat wild type FSH-R promoter activity.
Overexpression of E2F4 did not affect neither rat nor human FSH-R gene
transcription. Expression vector for E2F5 increased both, human and rat, FSH-R
promoter activity. Folds of increase were markedly higher in case of rat FSH-R
construct transfection, comparing to human FSH-R promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest, that the E2F1 and E2F5 factors might play an
opposite role in the regulation of FSH-R promoter activity. More pronounced
stimulatory effect of E2F5 on the rat FSH-R can be explained by the presence of
E2F site in the promoter. Since there is no E2F sensitive element in the human
FSH-R promoter sequence, E2F1 and E2F5 can also indirectly influence FSH-R
promoter activity.

PMID: 11883315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Cell Sci. 2002 Mar 1;115(Pt 5):1073-82.

Forskolin-mediated G1 arrest in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia cells:
phosphorylated pRB sequesters E2Fs.

Gützkow KB(1), Naderi S, Blomhoff HK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, University of Oslo, PO Box 1112, Blindern, 
N-0317, Oslo, Norway.

Increased intracellular levels of cAMP, induced by forskolin, lead to permanent
G1 arrest of Reh cells. As expected, we observed a rapid dephosphorylation of the
retinoblastoma protein (pRB) within 2 hours of forskolin treatment concomitant
with reduced activity of the pRB-specific kinases. Interestingly, however, the
dephosphorylation of pRB, as well as the inhibition of the kinase activities, was
only transient, despite the permanent arrest of cells in G1. Importantly,
although the pRB-specific kinases were fully active after 48 hours, pRB became
only partially rephosphorylated. The transient dephosphorylation of pRB could be 
explained by the transient decrease in the activities of the pRB-specific
kinases, but to understand why pRB became only partially rephosphorylated,
despite fully activated kinases, we postulated that cAMP could activate a
pRB-directed phosphatase. It was therefore interesting to find that the
phosphatase inhibitor, tautomycin, was able to abolish the forskolin-mediated
dephosphorylation of pRB, without increasing the activities of the pRB-specific
kinases. To understand how Reh cells expressing hyperphosphorylated forms of pRB 
can remain arrested in G1, we used three different methods to test for the
ability of pRB to form functional complexes with the family of E2F transcription 
factors. As expected, we observed an increased complex formation between E2F-1,
E2F-4 and pRB after 2 hours when pRB was in its most dephosphorylated state.
Surprisingly, however, prolonged treatment with forskolin, which induced partial 
rephosphorylation of pRB, in fact further increased the complex formation between
the E2Fs and pRB, and this also resulted in reduced E2F-promoter activity in
vivo. These data imply that in Reh cells, partially phosphorylated forms of pRB
retain the ability to inhibit E2F-promoter activity, and thereby prevent cells
from entering into S-phase.

PMID: 11870225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Feb 19;99(4):2002-7.

Mutagenesis of a functional chimeric gene in yeast identifies mutations in the
simian virus 40 large T antigen J domain.

Fewell SW(1), Pipas JM, Brodsky JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15260, USA.

Simian virus 40 large T antigen contains an amino terminal J domain that
catalyzes T antigen-mediated viral DNA replication and cellular transformation.
To dissect the role of the J domain in these processes, we exploited the genetic 
tools available only in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae to isolate 14
loss-of-function point mutations in the T antigen J domain. This screen also
identified mutations that, when engineered into simian virus 40, resulted in T
antigen mutants that were defective for the ability to support viral growth, to
transform mammalian cells in culture, to dissociate the p130-E2F4 transcription
factor complex, and to stimulate ATP hydrolysis by hsc70, a hallmark of J
domain-containing molecular chaperones. These data correlate the chaperone
activity of the T antigen J domain with its roles in viral infection and cellular
transformation and support a model by which the viral J domain recruits the
cytoplasmic hsc70 molecular chaperone in the host to rearrange multiprotein
complexes implicated in replication and transformation. More generally, this
study presents the use of a yeast screen to identify loss-of-function mutations
in a mammalian virus and can serve as a widely applicable method to uncover
domain functions of mammalian proteins for which there are yeast homologues with 
selectable mutant phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC122309
PMID: 11854498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Genes Dev. 2002 Jan 15;16(2):245-56.

E2F integrates cell cycle progression with DNA repair, replication, and G(2)/M
checkpoints.

Ren B(1), Cam H, Takahashi Y, Volkert T, Terragni J, Young RA, Dynlacht BD.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142,
USA.

The E2F transcription factor family is known to play a key role in the timely
expression of genes required for cell cycle progression and proliferation, but
only a few E2F target genes have been identified. We explored the possibility
that E2F regulators play a broader role by identifying additional genes bound by 
E2F in living human cells. A protocol was developed to identify genomic binding
sites for DNA-binding factors in mammalian cells that combines
immunoprecipitation of cross-linked protein-DNA complexes with DNA microarray
analysis. Among approximately 1200 genes expressed during cell cycle entry, we
found that the promoters of 127 were bound by the E2F4 transcription factor in
primary fibroblasts. A subset of these targets was also bound by E2F1. Most
previously identified target genes known to have roles in DNA replication and
cell cycle control and represented on the microarray were confirmed by this
analysis. We also identified a remarkable cadre of genes with no previous
connection to E2F regulation, including genes that encode components of the DNA
damage checkpoint and repair pathways, as well as factors involved in chromatin
assembly/condensation, chromosome segregation, and the mitotic spindle
checkpoint. Our data indicate that E2F directly links cell cycle progression with
the coordinate regulation of genes essential for both the synthesis of DNA as
well as its surveillance.

PMCID: PMC155321
PMID: 11799067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Genes Dev. 2002 Jan 15;16(2):235-44.

Isolating human transcription factor targets by coupling chromatin
immunoprecipitation and CpG island microarray analysis.

Weinmann AS(1), Yan PS, Oberley MJ, Huang TH, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Previously, identification of promoters regulated by mammalian transcription
factors has relied upon overexpression studies. Here we present the
identification of a large set of promoters that are bound by E2F in physiological
conditions. Probing a human CpG microarray with chromatin immunoprecipitated
using an antibody to E2F4, we have identified 68 unique target loci; 15% are
bidirectional promoters and 25% recruit E2F via a mechanism distinct from the
defined consensus site. Interestingly, although E2F has been shown previously to 
regulate genes involved in cell cycle progression, many of the new E2F target
genes encode proteins involved in DNA repair or recombination. We suggest that
human CpG microarrays, in combination with chromatin immunoprecipitation, will
allow rapid identification of target promoters for many mammalian transcription
factors.

PMCID: PMC155318
PMID: 11799066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2001 Sep;69(2):115-22.

Expression of E2F-1 and E2F-4 is reduced in primary and metastatic breast
carcinomas.

Ho GH(1), Calvano JE, Bisogna M, Van Zee KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.

The E2F family of transcription factors can induce both cell proliferation and
apoptosis. Whether they function as oncogenes or tumor suppressors appears to be 
tissue specific. Their role in breast carcinogenesis remains unclear. We found a 
decreased expression of E2F-1 and E2F-4 in 70% (7/10) of primary breast
carcinomas and in all (10/10) metastatic nodal tissues when compared with the
corresponding normal breast tissue. No tumor-specific mutation was detected, but 
polymorphisms were identified in E2F-1 exon 5 and in the polyserine tract of
E2F-4. The presence of polymorphisms did not correlate with E2F expression. Among
the 12 human breast cancer cell lines, one contained a missense mutation in E2F-1
exon 2. Five (42%) cell lines overexpressed E2F-1, while three (25%) expressed
low levels of the protein. Our results suggest that not only are the E2Fs likely 
to function as tumor suppressors in breast cancer, but also that their
down-regulation may be important in the development of metastases.

PMID: 11759817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Oncogene. 2001 Nov 29;20(55):7935-44.

Cell cycle genes as targets of retinoid induced ovarian tumor cell growth
suppression.

Zhang D(1), Vuocolo S, Masciullo V, Sava T, Giordano A, Soprano DR, Soprano KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Temple University School of Medicine,
3400 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, PA 19140, USA.

We have examined the effect of all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) on cell cycle gene
expression in RA sensitive CA-OV3 and RA resistant SK-OV3 ovarian carcinoma cell 
lines. Gene expression was analysed by multiprobe RNAse protection, Western
blotting and in vitro kinase assays. No differences were observed between RA
sensitive and RA resistant ovarian carcinoma cells in the levels of expression of
many cell cycle genes including cyclin A, B and E, cdk 2,4 and 6, E2F-1, E2F-2,
E2F-3, E2F-4, E2F-5, DP-1 and DP-2. However, RA sensitive CA-OV3 cells expressed 
higher levels of p53, p27, p21, and p16 compared to RA resistant SK-OV3 cells. In
addition, RA treatment of CA-OV3 cells resulted in a significant decrease in
hyperphosphorylated RB and RB-2/p130 and corresponding significant increases in
the levels of hypophosphorylated and/or partially phosphorylated RB-2/p130
protein and hypophosphorylated RB. Also, RA treatment increased expression of the
cdk inhibitor p27 and decreased activity of cdk 2, cdk 4 and cdk 6. Finally,
amounts of p27-cyclin E and RB-2/p130-E2F4 complexes were found to increase in
CA-OV3 cells growth arrested by RA. These results suggest that the pocket protein
pathways are critical targets for retinoid suppression of ovarian carcinoma cell 
growth.

PMID: 11753676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Cancer Res. 2001 Dec 15;61(24):8811-9.

Regulation of cyclin D1 and p16(INK4A) is critical for growth arrest during
mammary involution.

Gadd M(1), Pisc C, Branda J, Ionescu-Tiba V, Nikolic Z, Yang C, Wang T,
Shackleford GM, Cardiff RD, Schmidt EV.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown, Massachusetts
02129, USA.

A coordinated growth arrest during mammary involution completes the dramatic
changes in mammary cell proliferation seen during pregnancy and lactation.
Signals regulating this arrest are poorly understood, despite their potential
relevance to oncogenesis. Here we report that the arrest involves a unique pulse 
of p16(INK4A) expression in vivo, which accompanies decreased cyclin D1
expression and a shift to an active repressor E2F4 complex. We used INK4A/ARF-/- 
mice as well as cyclin D1 and p16(INK4A) transgenic strains to examine the
physiological significance of these patterns. p16(INK4A) directly regulated the
in vivo transition from E2F3 to E2F4 as the major E2F DNA binding activity, and
its contribution to growth arrest was independent of cyclin D1. Transgenic cyclin
D1 expression prevented normal terminal differentiation by ablating the
p16(INK4A) pulse, abolishing the shift from E2F3 to E2F4, derepressing E2F target
genes, and expanding a stem cell population. The effects of cyclin D1 were
reversed by restoring p16(INK4A) but were not seen in INK4A/ARF-/- mice. Our
results indicate that cyclin D1 may contribute to tumorigenesis by altering cell 
differentiation and demonstrate a significant function for p16(INK4A) in
development in vivo. These regulatory mechanisms used during mammary involution
offer a potential explanation for the protective effect of pregnancy against
breast cancer.

PMID: 11751403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Virus Genes. 2001;23(2):123-35.

HTLV-1 proviruses encoding non-functional TAX in adult T-cell leukemia.

Okazaki S(1), Moriuchi R, Yosizuka N, Sugahara K, Maeda T, Jinnai I, Tomonaga M, 
Kamihira S, Katamine S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

Adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) is associated with prior infection with human T-cell 
leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1). TAX, the major transactivator of HTLV-1, has been
implicated in the immortalization of infected T-cells, but molecular mechanisms
of in vivo malignant cell transformation induced by HTLV-1 remain unclear. To
investigate the role of TAX in the monoclonal proliferation of ATL cells, we
determined the nucleotide sequence of tax DNA clones obtained from 6 ATL patients
and analysed the biological function of their products. We found that ATL cells
from 2 of these patients possessed tax with a nonsense or frame-shift mutation
resulting in the premature termination of its protein product, which was no
longer functional. This strongly argued against an indispensable role of TAX for 
the maintenance of ATL cells in vivo. On the other hand, the frequency of
nucleotide substitutions found in non-functional tax DNA clones from these
patients was significantly lower than those in functional tax DNA clones from the
others, suggesting a role for TAX in the genome instability of infected cells.
Although mismatch repair defects in the microsatellite markers, including those
in hMSH3, hMSH6, BAX, TGF-beta RII, and E2F4 genes, were infrequent, we found an 
increase in the number of CAG repeats of the E2F4 microsatellite marker in 1
patient. These findings indicate that while TAX may be a necessary prerequisite
for malignant transformation of infected cells, it is not essential for the
maintenance of ATL cells in vivo.

PMID: 11724264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Gene. 2001 Oct 31;278(1-2):245-52.

Identification of twenty-two candidate markers for human osteogenic sarcoma.

Fuchs B(1), Zhang K, Schabel A, Bolander ME, Sarkar G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, MN 55905,
USA.

Since osteogenic sarcoma (OGS) predominantly affects children, its etiology and
progression may be determined more by genetic than environmental factors. A few
genes have been associated with OGS, however, their value in the diagnosis and/or
prognosis of the disease remains poor. Evidently, more markers need to be
identified for improving management of patients with OGS. To identify potential
genetic markers for OGS, we have extended preferential amplification of coding
sequences (PACS) to screen multiple samples simultaneously. The extended method
is termed multi-PACS. Multi-PACS was applied between a normal osteoblast and four
OGS-derived cell lines to identify differentially expressed coding sequence tags 
(dCST) that identified 145 dCSTs. Subsequently, differential mRNA expression was 
validated for a chosen subset of 22 dCSTs. These chosen dCSTs include among
others cyclins D and E, two cyclin dependent kinases, two other kinases,
transcription factors E2F4, E2F5, and p130, a DNA repair gene, a gene for the
signalosome subunit, and potential guanine nucleotide binding factors. We infer
that these genes could be so easily identified because PACS preferentially
identifies coding instead of non-coding sequences. We also infer that these genes
identify signaling pathways pertinent to OGS. mRNA expression profile of these 22
genes/dCSTs generated distinct expression signature of the OGS-derived cell lines
suggesting that further work on clinical samples with these dCSTs will yield
valuable information for OGS. We conclude that these 22 genes/dCSTs are candidate
markers for OGS.

PMID: 11707342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Lab Invest. 2001 Nov;81(11):1565-73.

Effect of naturally occurring E2F-4 alterations on transcriptional activation and
proliferation in transfected cells.

Takashima H(1), Matsumoto Y, Matsubara N, Shirakawa Y, Kawashima R, Tanino M, Ito
S, Isozaki H, Ouchida M, Meltzer SJ, Shimizu K, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery and Surgical Oncology, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Okayama, Japan.

E2F is a family of transcription factors implicated in the regulation of gene
expression required for progression through the G(1)-S transition. We have
previously detected tumor-specific mutations at a trinucleotide repeat coding
sequence of E2F-4 gene in a subset of human sporadic colorectal cancers. The
purpose of this study was to investigate the potential functional consequences of
these E2F-4 mutations. We transfected NIH3T3 fibroblasts with expression
constructs containing wild-type as well as mutant E2F-4 cDNA, and the effect of
the E2F-4 mutations on proliferation was examined. Alteration in transactivation 
of the E2F consensus promoter sequence was also examined by transient
cotransfection of a E2F-4 with a DP-2 construct into cultured human cells.
Transfected cell clones overexpressing mutant E2F-4 grew more rapidly and showed 
higher proliferative activity by increased immunohistochemical staining for
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). All three mutant forms of E2F-4 showed
elevated transactivation of the E2F consensus promoter sequence. Thus, expression
of mutant E2F-4s confers a growth advantage in vivo, and this effect may be
related to the acquisition of a neoplastic phenotype.

PMID: 11706064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 4;277(1):854-61. Epub 2001 Oct 31.

c-myc is a downstream target of the Smad pathway.

Yagi K(1), Furuhashi M, Aoki H, Goto D, Kuwano H, Sugamura K, Miyazono K, Kato M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Cancer Institute of the Japanese Foundation
for Cancer Research and Research for the Future Program, Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science, 1-37-1 Kami-ikebukuro, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 170-8455, Japan.

c-Myc is one of the most potent regulators of cell cycle progression in higher
eukaryotes. Down-regulation of c-Myc is a critical event for growth inhibition
induced by transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) and is frequently impaired 
in cancer cells. We determined a Smad-responsive element in the c-myc promoter.
This element is a complex of the TGF-beta1 inhibitory element (TIE) originally
identified in the transin/stromelysin promoter and an E2F site responsible for
transcriptional activation of the c-myc promoter. Smad3 and E2F-4 directly bound 
to the element (TIE/E2F), and substitution of two nucleotides in TIE/E2F impaired
binding of both Smad3 and E2F-4 as well as serum-induced activation and
TGF-beta-induced suppression of the c-myc promoter activity. Smads bound TIE/E2F 
within 1 h after stimulation with TGF-beta, before the suppression of c-myc
transcription, whereas binding of p130 to TIE/E2F became augmented later than 12 
h. TGF-beta signaling did not compete with E2F-4 for binding to TIE/E2F, but
reduced p300 co-immunoprecipitating with E2F-4. Therefore, TGF-beta signaling may
suppress c-myc promoter activity by dissociating p300 from E2F-4.

PMID: 11689553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Exp Gerontol. 2001 Aug;36(8):1265-75.

The human melanocyte: a model system to study the complexity of cellular aging
and transformation in non-fibroblastic cells.

Bandyopadhyay D(1), Timchenko N, Suwa T, Hornsby PJ, Campisi J, Medrano EE.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging and Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza M320, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The melanocyte is a neural crest-derived cell that localizes in humans to several
organs including the epidermis, eye, inner ear and leptomeninges. In the skin,
melanocytes synthesize and transfer melanin pigments to surrounding
keratinocytes, leading to skin pigmentation and protection against solar
exposure. We have investigated the process of replicative senescence and
accompanying irreversible cell cycle arrest, in melanocytes in culture. As was
found in other cell types, progressive telomere shortening appears to trigger
replicative senescence in normal melanocytes. In addition, senescence is
associated with increased binding of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
(CDK-I) p16(INK4a) to CDK4, down-regulation of cyclin E protein levels (and
consequent loss of cyclin E/CDK2 activity), underphosphorylation of the
retinoblastoma protein RB and subsequent increased levels of E2F4-RB repressive
complexes. In contrast to fibroblasts, however, the CDK-Is p21(Waf-1) and
p27(Kip-1) are also down-regulated. These changes appear to be important for
replicative senescence because they do not occur in melanocytes that overexpress 
the catalytic subunit of the enzyme telomerase (hTERT), or in melanomas, which
are tumors that originate from melanocytes or melanoblasts. In contrast to
unmodified melanocytes, hTERT overexpressing (telomerized) melanocytes displayed 
telomerase activity, stable telomere lengths and an extended replicative life
span. However, telomerized melanocytes show changes in cell cycle regulatory
proteins, including increased levels of cyclin E, p21(Waf-1) and p27(Kip-1).
Cyclin E, p21(Waf-1) and p27(Kip-1) are also elevated in many primary melanomas, 
whereas p16(INK4a) is mutated or deleted in many invasive and metastatic
melanomas. Thus, the molecular mechanisms leading to melanocyte senescence and
transformation differ significantly from fibroblasts. This suggests that
different cell types may use different strategies to halt the cell cycle in
response to telomere attrition and thus prevent replicative immortality.

PMID: 11602203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Cell Physiol. 2001 Oct;189(1):34-44.

pRb2/p130 and p107 control cell growth by multiple strategies and in association 
with different compartments within the nucleus.

Zini N(1), Trimarchi C, Claudio PP, Stiegler P, Marinelli F, Maltarello MC, La
Sala D, De Falco G, Russo G, Ammirati G, Maraldi NM, Giordano A, Cinti C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Normal and Pathologic Cytomorphology, CNR, Bologna, Italy.

It has been recently reported that retinoblastoma family proteins suppress cell
growth by regulating not only E2F-dependent mRNA transcription but also rRNA and 
tRNA transcription and, through HDAC1 recruitment, chromatin packaging. In the
present study we report data showing that these various control strategies are
correlated, at least in part, with nuclear compartmentalization of retinoblastoma
proteins. In a first series of experiments, we showed that pRb2/p130 and p107 are
not evenly distributed within the nucleus and that cell cycle-dependent binding
with E2F4 changes also as a function of their subnuclear localization. Namely, in
the nucleoplasm pRb2/p130-E2F4 complexes are more numerous during G0/G1 while in 
the nucleolus they increase in S phase. Partially different functions for p107
are suggested since p107-E2F4 complexes in the nucleoplasm are more numerous is S
phase with respect to G0/G1 and no cell cycle change is observed in the
nucleolus. In a second series of experiments we showed that pRb2/p130, p107,
E2F4, and pRb2/p130-HDAC1 complexes are all inner nuclear matrix-associated
proteins and localize to sites different from pRb/p105 ones. We provide further
evidence of multiple and partially distinct retinoblastoma protein family
functional roles during cell cycle. Moreover, our data support emerging evidence 
for functional interrelationships between nuclear structure and gene expression.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11573202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Oncogene. 2001 Sep 6;20(39):5475-83.

Cloning and characterization of a novel transcription factor involved in cellular
proliferation arrest: PATF.

Crisanti P(1), Raguenez G, Blancher C, Neron B, Mamoune A, Omri B.

Author information: 
(1)Développement, Vieillissement et Pathologie de la Rétine, INSERM U450,
Affiliée CNRS, Association Claude Bernard, 29 rue Wilhem, 75016 Paris, France.
plassiaz@infobiogen.fr

Cell cycle withdrawal involves several transcription factors such as E2Fs members
that play a key role in cell growth control. Here we describe a novel putative
bZIP transcription factor isolated from the retina and involved in neuronal
proliferation arrest at the terminal differentiation: PATF (Proliferation Arrest 
Transcription Factor). We show that PATF associates with E2F4 protein and
interacts with the E2F consensus site. PATF expression increases with
establishment of quiescent state. Furthermore, the nuclear PATF localization like
E2F4, depends on cell growth arrest. The decrease of PATF amount, using a
retroviral antisense strategy, results in pursued neuroretina cell mitosis. Our
results indicate that PATF could be a new molecular signal implicated in the
final neuronal cell cycle withdrawal.

PMID: 11571645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 23;276(47):44331-7. Epub 2001 Sep 14.

Role of specific CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein isoforms in intestinal epithelial
cells.

Gheorghiu I(1), Deschênes C, Blais M, Boudreau F, Rivard N, Asselin C.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de recherche en biologie du développement, Département d'anatomie et de
biologie cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke,
Québec J1H 5N4, Canada.

Intestinal epithelial cells participate in the acute phase response in response
to inflammation. We have shown that acute phase protein genes are induced during 
intestinal acute phase response, and that the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
family of transcription factors are involved. To address the role of specific
C/EBP isoforms, we generated IEC-6 rat intestinal epithelial cell lines
expressing different C/EBP isoforms, by retroviral infection. Overexpression of
C/EBPalpha p30 and C/EBPdelta led to increases in C/EBPbeta LAP and C/EBPbeta LIP
endogenous protein levels, as determined by electrophoretic mobility shift assays
and Western blot. Inhibition of C/EBP activity with dominant negative C/EBPs
(C/EBPbeta LIP, 3hF, 4hF) decreased glucocorticoid-, cAMP- and IL-1
responsiveness of the endogenous haptoglobin gene, while overexpression of each
C/EBP isoform increased the responsiveness to these regulators. In contrast,
dominant negative C/EBPs or C/EBP isoforms did not alter the expression of
alpha-acid glycoprotein in response to dexamethasone and of C/EBPbeta and
C/EBPdelta in response to various regulators as assessed by Northern blot. These 
data show that the three C/EBP isoforms are involved in the regulation of
haptoglobin and that C/EBPbeta, C/EBPdelta, and alpha-acid glycoprotein
expression are not induced by C/EBP isoforms in contrast to other cell types.
C/EBPbeta LAP-expressing cells showed an inhibition of cell growth characterized 
by a delay in p27(Kip1) decrease in response to serum and a decrease in cyclin D 
isoforms and cyclin E protein levels. Finally, C/EBP isoforms interact with the
E2F4 transcription factor. Thus, specific C/EBP isoforms are involved in the
differential expression of acute phase protein genes in response to hormones and 
cytokines. Furthermore, C/EBP isoforms may play a role in the control of cell
cycle progression.

PMID: 11559710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Cancer Res. 2001 Sep 15;61(18):6693-7.

Transfer of E2F-1 to human glioma cells results in transcriptional up-regulation 
of Bcl-2.

Gomez-Manzano C(1), Mitlianga P, Fueyo J, Lee HY, Hu M, Spurgers KB, Glass TL,
Koul D, Liu TJ, McDonnell TJ, Yung WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuro-Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Strong evidence exists to support the tenet that activation of E2F transcription 
factors, via alterations in the p16-cyclin D-Rb pathway, is a key event in the
malignant progression of most human malignant gliomas. The oncogenic ability of
E2F has been related to the E2F-mediated up-regulation of several proteins that
positively regulate cell proliferation. However, E2F may indirectly enhance
proliferation by activating antiapoptotic molecules. In this work, we sought to
ascertain whether E2F-1-mediated events involve the up-regulation of the
antiapoptotic molecule Bcl-2. Western blot analyses showed up-regulation of Bcl-2
but not of Bcl-x(L) by 24 h after the transfer of E2F-1. Northern blot studies
showed that transfer of E2F-1 also up-regulated Bcl-2 RNA. In support of these
findings and the concept that E2F-1 has a direct effect in the induction of
Bcl-2, we found a putative E2F binding site within the Bcl-2 sequence. Subsequent
gel-mobility shift and supershift experiments involving the CTCCGCGC site in the 
bcl-2 promoter showed that E2F-1 bound Bcl-2. Transactivation experiments
consistently showed that ectopic E2F-1 activated responsive elements located in
the -1448/-1441 region in the P1 promoter region of the bcl-2 gene. As expected, 
other members of the E2F family of transcription factors such as E2F-2 and E2F-4 
also transactivated the bcl-2 promoter. Our results demonstrate that E2F-1
modulates the expression of the antiapoptotic molecule Bcl-2 and suggest that
up-regulation of Bcl-2 may favor the oncogenic role of E2F-1 and other members of
the E2F family of transcription factors.

PMID: 11559537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Oncogene. 2001 Aug 23;20(37):5215-8.

Alterations of repeated sequences in 5' upstream and coding regions in colorectal
tumors from patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer and Turcot
syndrome.

Miyaki M(1), Iijima T, Shiba K, Aki T, Kita Y, Yasuno M, Mori T, Kuroki T, Iwama 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Hereditary Tumor Research Project, Tokyo Metropolitan Komagome Hospital, Tokyo
113-8677, Japan. mmiyaki@opal.famille.ne.jp

One of the characteristics of tumors from patients with germline mutations of DNA
mismatch repair genes is instability at microsatellite regions (MSI). We analysed
alterations at repeated sequences of coding regions, as well as those of 5'
upstream regions, in 29 MSI-High colorectal tumors from patients with hereditary 
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) and Turcot syndrome. We found that
repeated sequences in 5' upstream regions were altered in these tumors, at
considerable frequencies. The (A)10 repeat in the promoter region (position -178 
to approximately -169) of the GAPDH gene was altered in 17% of the tumors. The
(A)10(TA)9 in the 5' upstream region (position -318 to approximately -291) of the
mitochondrial isoleucyl tRNA synthetase gene (IleRS-A), coded in nuclear DNA, was
altered in 59% of the tumors, whereas (A)9 in the 5' upstream region (position
-859 to approximately -851) of cytoplasmic isoleucyl tRNA synthetase gene
(IleRS-B) was not altered. Alteration at repeated sequences in the coding regions
were 72% at TGFbetaRII(A)10, 24% at IGFIIR(G)8, 45% at BAX(G)8, 55% at
E2F4(CAG)13, 66% at caspase-5 (A)10, 31% at MBD4(A)10, 55% at hMSH3(A)8 and 34%
at hMSH6(C)8. The number of altered genes increased with the advancement of
carcinoma according to Dukes categories: mean numbers of altered genes within
these 10 genes were 2.6 for Dukes A, 4.7 for Dukes B and 7.8 for Dukes C. The
mean number for adenomas was 2.0. These results suggest that the MSI phenotype
also causes alteration of 5' upstream regions which may affect apoptosis and some
mitochondrial functions in HNPCC and Turcot tumors, and that accumulation of
altered genes with repeated sequences is associated with the progression of HNPCC
and Turcot colorectal tumors.

PMID: 11526511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Oncogene. 2001 Aug 23;20(37):5124-31.

E2F2 converts reversibly differentiated PC12 cells to an irreversible,
neurotrophin-dependent state.

Persengiev SP(1), Li J, Poulin ML, Kilpatrick DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, 55 Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

E2Fs play a central role in cell proliferation and growth arrest through their
ability to regulate genes involved in cell cycle progression, arrest and
apoptosis. Recent studies further indicate that this family of transcriptional
regulators participate in cell fate/differentiation events. They are thus likely 
to have a prominent role in controlling the terminal differentiation process and 
its irreversibility. Here we have specifically examined the role of E2F2 in
neuronal differentiation using a gain-of-function approach. Endogenous E2F2
increased in PC12 cells in response to nerve growth factor (NGF) and was also
expressed in cerebellar granule neurons undergoing terminal differentiation.
While PC12 cells normally undergo reversible dedifferentiation and cell cycle
re-entry upon NGF removal, forced expression of E2F2 inhibited these events and
induced apoptosis. Thus, E2F2 converted PC12-derived neurons from a reversible to
a 'terminally' differentiated, NGF-dependent state, analogous to postmitotic
sympathetic neurons. This contrasts with the effects of E2F4, which enhances the 
differentiation state of PC12 cells without affecting cell cycle parameters or
survival. These results indicate that E2F2 may have a unique role in maintaining 
the postmitotic state of terminally differentiated neurons, and may participate
in apoptosis in neurons attempting to re-enter the cell cycle. It may also be
potentially useful in promoting the terminally arrested/differentiated state of
tumor cells.

PMID: 11526501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Mol Cell. 2001 Jul;8(1):105-13.

Myc requires distinct E2F activities to induce S phase and apoptosis.

Leone G(1), Sears R, Huang E, Rempel R, Nuckolls F, Park CH, Giangrande P, Wu L, 
Saavedra HI, Field SJ, Thompson MA, Yang H, Fujiwara Y, Greenberg ME, Orkin S,
Smith C, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Cancer Genetics, Department of Molecular Virology, Ohio
State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Previous work has shown that the Myc transcription factor induces transcription
of the E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3 genes. Using primary mouse embryo fibroblasts deleted
for individual E2F genes, we now show that Myc-induced S phase and apoptosis
requires distinct E2F activities. The ability of Myc to induce S phase is
impaired in the absence of either E2F2 or E2F3 but not E2F1 or E2F4. In contrast,
the ability of Myc to induce apoptosis is markedly reduced in cells deleted for
E2F1 but not E2F2 or E2F3. From this data, we propose that the induction of
specific E2F activities is an essential component in the Myc pathways that
control cell proliferation and cell fate decisions.

PMID: 11511364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Cancer Lett. 2001 Sep 28;171(1):57-65.

Tributyrin, an oral butyrate analogue, induces apoptosis through the activation
of caspase-3.

Clarke KO(1), Feinman R, Harrison LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, UMDNJ--New Jersey Medical School, 185 South Orange
Avenue, MSB G588, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the anti-proliferative and
pro-apoptotic effects of the butyrate analogues, tributyrin (TB) and
phenylbutyrate (PB), in a colon cancer model. We demonstrate that HT-29 colon
cancer cells exposed to PB and TB result in growth inhibition associated with an 
induction of apoptosis mediated through the activation of caspase-3 activity. A
block in the G1/S cell cycle traverse associated with a decrease in CDK2 (cyclin 
dependent kinase) protein levels and retinoblastoma protein hypophosphorylation
was also noted after PB and TB exposure. Importantly, TB proved to be the most
potent agent in its ability to induce these phenotypic changes, and potentially
may represent a novel therapy for patients with advanced colorectal cancer.

PMID: 11485828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Melanoma Res. 2001 Jun;11(3):283-9.

Instability at sequence repeats in melanocytic tumours.

Richetta A(1), Ottini L, Falchetti M, Innocenzi D, Bottoni U, Faiola R,
Mariani-Costantini R, Calvieri S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Dermatology, Policlinico Umberto I, University La Sapienza, Rome,
Italy.

To obtain information on the prevalence of microsatellite mutations in melanomas,
we analysed the status of 14 repetitive loci characterized by structurally
different non-coding and coding sequence repeats in a panel of 34 primary
melanocytic tumours and in lymph node metastases matched to 13 cases. Instability
at one or more of the non-coding dinucleotide repeats D2S123, D3S1611, D5S107 and
D18S34 was detected in ten out of the 34 primary tumours (29%) and in ten of the 
13 metastases (77%). There was no instability at the non-coding mononucleotide
repeats BAT25, BAT26 and APDelta3 or at the coding mononucleotide runs within the
TGFbetaRII, IGFIIR, BAX, hMSH3 and hMSH6 genes. A five-repeats expansion of the
coding E2F4(CAG)n run was found in the only malignant melanoma of soft parts
examined, which also showed instability at two dinucleotide loci, and in a
superficial spreading melanoma, which was stable at the mononucleotide and
dinucleotide repeats but was the only tumour that manifested instability at the
SCA1(CAG)n repeat. The absence of mutations at mononucleotide tracts indicates
that, in the malignant melanomas tested, microsatellite instability was not
associated with the microsatellite mutator phenotype characteristic of mismatch
repair-deficient tumours. On the other hand, our results confirm that
microsatellite instability at dinucleotide repeats increases with melanoma
progression, and indicate that expansions of triplet repeats may occur in
melanocytic tumours.

PMID: 11468517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Pathol. 2001 Jul;194(3):334-40.

Microsatellite alterations and target gene mutations in the early stages of
multiple gastric cancer.

Ogata S(1), Tamura G, Endoh Y, Sakata K, Ohmura K, Motoyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Yamagata,
Japan.

Multiple gastric cancers may develop through the same genetic background: the
mutator pathway due to defects in DNA mismatch repair genes, or the suppressor
pathway due to defects in tumour suppressor genes. To clarify the critical
genetic events in the early stages of multiple gastric cancer development, 29
early and four advanced gastric cancers were examined from 12 patients.
Microsatellite alterations were studied involving microsatellite instability
(MSI) and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at tumour suppressor loci, representative 
of the mutator pathway and the suppressor pathway, respectively, as well as
mutations of target genes (TGF-beta RII, BAX, hMSH3, and E2F-4). MSI was
determined in ten cancers (10/33; 30.3%) from seven patients (7/12; 58.3%). LOH
was detected in six cancers (6/33; 18.2%) from five patients (5/12; 41.7%), most 
frequently at TP53, in four cancers (4/33; 12.1%) from four patients (4/12;
33.3%). In cases with multiple gastric cancers in the same stomach, the MSI
status was generally the same, but in two patients (2/12; 16.8%) a tumour with
MSI-H and another with LOH were found to co-exist in the same stomach. As for
mutations of the target genes, it was found that E2F-4 was mutated in six cancers
(6/33; 18.2%) from four patients (4/12; 33.3%). Furthermore, identical E2F-4
mutations were detected in four of the six intestinal metaplastic mucosae
adjacent to each cancer carrying an E2F-4 mutation. No mutations were detected in
the other target genes. In conclusion, the present results indicate that the
majority of multiple gastric cancers develop from the same genetic background,
with the mutator pathway playing a more important role than the suppressor
pathway. Mutations of E2F-4 are early events in multiple gastric cancer
development, occurring even in the intestinal metaplastic mucosa, with mutations 
of other target genes to follow during cancer progression.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 11439366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mol Carcinog. 2001 Jun;31(2):90-100.

Deregulated expression of DP1 induces epidermal proliferation and enhances skin
carcinogenesis.

Wang D(1), Russell J, Xu H, Johnson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park-Research Division, Smithville, Texas, USA.

E2F transcription factors have been implicated in several cellular processes,
including proliferation, apoptosis, and oncogenic transformation. A functional
E2F factor consists of a heterodimer containing an E2F polypeptide (E2F1-E2F6)
and a DRTF1-polypeptide (DRTF1-polypeptide-1 (DP1) or DRTF1-polypeptide-2). It is
the E2F subunit that supplies the transcriptional activation domain and the motif
involved in binding to members of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor family. The
role of the DP subunit in regulating E2F-dependent activities is not completely
understood. To examine the properties of DP1 in vivo, we generated transgenic
mouse lines expressing DP1 under the control of a keratin 5 (K5) promoter.
Overexpression of DP1 in basal layer keratinocytes caused mild hyperplasia and
hyperproliferation of the epidermis but did not result in increased apoptosis or 
spontaneous tumor development. Coexpression of DP1 with E2F1 or E2F4 in the
epidermis of bigenic mice modestly enhanced proliferation and apoptosis over the 
levels induced by E2F1 or E2F4 expression alone. In a two-stage chemical
carcinogenesis assay, more and larger skin tumors developed in K5 DP1 transgenic 
mice than in nontransgenic mice. These findings show that in this in vivo model, 
deregulated expression of DP1 on its own induced proliferation and enhanced
carcinogenesis.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11429786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 31;276(35):32627-34. Epub 2001 Jun 19.

E2F transcriptional activation requires TRRAP and GCN5 cofactors.

Lang SE(1), McMahon SB, Cole MD, Hearing P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Medicine, State
University of New York, Stony Brook, New York 11794-5222, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors regulates the temporal transcription of
genes involved in cell cycle progression and DNA synthesis. E2F transactivation
is antagonized by retinoblastoma protein (pRb), which recruits
chromatin-remodeling proteins such as histone deacetylases and SWI.SNF complexes 
to the promoter to repress transcription. We hypothesized that E2F proteins must 
reverse the pRb-imposed chromatin structure to stimulate transcription. If this
is true, E2F proteins should recruit proteins capable of histone acetylation.
Here we map the E2F-4 transactivation domain and show that E2F-1 and E2F-4
transactivation domains bind the acetyltransferase GCN5 and cofactor TRRAP in
vivo. TRRAP and GCN5 co-expression stimulated E2F-mediated transactivation, and
c-Myc repressed E2F transactivation dependent on an intact TRRAP/GCN5 binding
motif. The transactivation domain of E2F-4 recruited proteins with significant
histone acetyltransferase activity in vivo, and this activity required
catalytically active GCN5. E2F-4 proteins with subtle mutations in the
transactivation domain exhibited a positive correlation among transcriptional
activation and GCN5 and TRRAP binding capacity and associated acetyltransferase
activity. We conclude that E2F stimulates transcription by recruiting
acetyltransferase activity and the essential cofactors GCN5 and TRRAP. These
results provide a mechanism for E2F transcription factors to overcome
pRb-mediated dominant repression of transcription.

PMID: 11418595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jul;21(14):4773-84.

Differential regulation of retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein by G(1)
cyclin-dependent kinase complexes in vivo.

Ezhevsky SA(1), Ho A, Becker-Hapak M, Davis PK, Dowdy SF.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (pRB) negatively regulates early-G(1)
cell cycle progression, in part, by sequestering E2F transcription factors and
repressing E2F-responsive genes. Although pRB is phosphorylated on up to 16
cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) sites by multiple G(1) cyclin-Cdk complexes, the
active form(s) of pRB in vivo remains unknown. pRB is present as an
unphosphorylated protein in G(0) quiescent cells and becomes hypophosphorylated
(approximately 2 mol of PO(4) to 1 mol of pRB) in early G(1) and
hyperphosphorylated (approximately 10 mol of PO(4) to 1 mol of pRB) in late G(1) 
phase. Here, we report that hypophosphorylated pRB, present in early G(1),
represents the biologically active form of pRB in vivo that is assembled with
E2Fs and E1A but that both unphosphorylated pRB in G(0) and hyperphosphorylated
pRB in late G(1) fail to become assembled with E2Fs and E1A. Furthermore, using
transducible dominant-negative TAT fusion proteins that differentially target
cyclin D-Cdk4 or cyclin D-Cdk6 (cyclin D-Cdk4/6) and cyclin E-Cdk2 complexes,
namely, TAT-p16 and TAT-dominant-negative Cdk2, respectively, we found that, in
vivo, cyclin D-Cdk4/6 complexes hypophosphorylate pRB in early G(1) and that
cyclin E-Cdk2 complexes inactivate pRB by hyperphosphorylation in late G(1).
Moreover, we found that cycling human tumor cells expressing deregulated cyclin
D-Cdk4/6 complexes, due to deletion of the p16(INK4a) gene, contained
hypophosphorylated pRB that was bound to E2Fs in early G(1) and that
E2F-responsive genes, including those for dihydrofolate reductase and cyclin E,
were transcriptionally repressed. Thus, we conclude that, physiologically, pRB is
differentially regulated by G(1) cyclin-Cdk complexes.

PMCID: PMC87164
PMID: 11416152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Adv Enzyme Regul. 2001;41:31-55.

Genetic alterations at the nuclear localization signal of the RB2/p130 gene occur
in lymphoid tumor but not in osteosarcoma cell lines.

Maraldi NM(1), Giordano A, Manzoli L, Falconi M, Pol AD, Cinti C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Citomorfologia Normale e Patologica, C.N.R., and Laboratory of
Cell Biology, Istituti Ortopedici Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy.

PMID: 11384736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2001 Apr 15;388(2):243-52.

Rb dephosphorylation and suppression of E2F activity in human breast tumor cells 
exposed to a pharmacological concentration of estradiol.

Gewirtz DA(1), Di YM, Randolph JK, Jain PT, Valerie K, Bullock S, Nath N,
Chellappan SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Medicine, Medical College of
Virginia, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, USA. gewirtz@hsc.vcu.edu

This report characterizes the influence of a pharmacological concentration of
estradiol on growth arrest and cell death in MCF-7 breast tumor cells, with a
focus on elements of the Rb-E2F cell-cycle regulatory pathway. Continuous
exposure of MCF-7 breast tumor cells to 100 microM estradiol produces a marked
reduction in the G1 and S phase populations and a corresponding increase in the
G2/M population within 24 h; after 48 h, accumulation of cells in G1 becomes
evident while after 72 h the cells appear to be equally distributed between the
G1 and G2/M phases. The accumulation of cells in G1 is temporally associated with
dephosphorylation of the Rb protein and suppression of E2F activity. Estradiol
also produces an initial burst of cell death with loss of approximately 40% of
the tumor cell population within 24 h; however, there is no tangible evidence for
the occurrence of apoptosis based on terminal transferase end-labeling of DNA,
DNA fragmentation analysis by alkaline unwinding, cell-cycle analysis or cell
morphology. In addition to the lack of caspase-3 in MCF-7 cells, the absence of
apoptosis could be related, at least in part, to the fact that estradiol promotes
a rapid reduction in levels of the E2F-1 and Myc proteins. Overall, these studies
are consistent with the concept that alterations in the levels and/or activity of
the E2F family of proteins as well as proteins interacting with the E2F family
may influence the nature of the antiproliferative and cytotoxic responses of the 
breast tumor cell.

PMID: 11368161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Cancer Res. 2001 May 15;61(10):4283-6.

Identification of differentially expressed genes by serial analysis of gene
expression in human prostate cancer.

Waghray A(1), Schober M, Feroze F, Yao F, Virgin J, Chen YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wayne State University, 540 East Canfield, Detroit,
MI 48201, USA.

Prostate cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in American males. To better
understand the genetic bases of this disease, we have generated a comprehensive
molecular profile of human prostate. The gene expression pattern in normal and
prostate cancer tissues was analyzed by serial analysis of gene expression
(SAGE). A total of 133,217 transcripts were analyzed, and 35,185 distinct SAGE
tags were identified representing 19,287 genes. Comparison of the transcripts in 
normal and tumor tissue revealed 156 differentially expressed genes (P < 0.05),
of which 88 genes were up-regulated and 68 genes were down-regulated in the tumor
tissue. Based on SAGE data, we estimate that the transcriptome for human prostate
is approximately 37,000. Several differentially expressed genes identified by
SAGE were selected for confirmation using immunohistochemistry. Some genes (e.g.,
E2F4) were overexpressed in tumor epithelial cells and some (e.g., Daxx) were
increased in tumor stroma. Further characterization of the role of E2F4 and Daxx 
as well as other differentially expressed genes may provide useful insights into 
the mechanism of prostate cancer development.

PMID: 11358857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Genomics. 2001 May 1;73(3):284-90.

Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel mouse epidermal differentiation
gene and its promoter.

Wang A(1), Johnson DG, MacLeod MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

The transcription factor E2F1 is an important regulator of cell proliferation,
apoptosis, and differentiation. A novel mouse gene (Eig3) was originally
identified as up-regulated in E2F1-overexpressing keratinocytes by the rapid
analysis of gene expression technique. An apparently full-length cDNA and a
2.8-kb genomic fragment containing the entire gene have been cloned. Sequence
comparisons suggest that Eig3 is homologous to a human epidermal differentiation 
gene, XP5, and belongs to a family of at least 10 murine genes that are related
to the small proline-rich genes involved in skin differentiation. Eig3 was
expressed in adult mouse stomach and epidermis and overexpressed in keratinocytes
transgenic for E2F1 or E2F4, but not in c-myc transgenics. Interestingly, Eig3
expression was highly increased in mouse skin papillomas but not in squamous
carcinomas. Since there is no E2F consensus binding sequence in the promoter or
first intron of Eig3, E2F regulation may be indirect.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11350120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 1;20(5):543-50.

Regulation of the Cdc25A gene by the human papillomavirus Type 16 E7 oncogene.

Katich SC(1), Zerfass-Thome K, Hoffmann I.

Author information: 
(1)Angewandte Tumorvirologie (F0400), Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 242, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Cdc25A is a tyrosine phosphatase that is involved in the regulation of the G1/S
phase transition by activating cyclin E/Cdk2 and cyclin A/Cdk2 complexes through 
removal of inhibitory phosphorylations. The E6 and E7 oncoproteins of the
high-risk human papillomaviruses (HPV) interact with and functionally abrogate
the p53 and pRB proteins, respectively. In the present study we have investigated
the regulation of the Cdc25A promoter during G1 and S-phases of the cell cycle
and by the HPV-16 E7 oncoprotein. Serum induction leads to a derepression of the 
Cdc25A promoter and can be mediated through two E2F binding sites, E2F-A and
E2F-C. While E2F-A is by both E2F1 and E2F4, E2F-C is regulated only by E2F1. The
Cdc25A promoter is transactivated by the E7 oncogene of HPV-16. Furthermore,
Cdc25A levels are highly increased in E7-expressing cell lines. Inducible
expression of E7 leads to an immediate increase in Cdc25A protein levels. These
data suggest that Cdc25A may be a critical target of HPV-16 E7 in the disruption 
of the G1/S phase transition.

PMID: 11313986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Oncogene. 2001 Apr 5;20(15):1882-91.

The p107 tumor suppressor induces stable E2F DNA binding to repress target
promoters.

O'Connor RJ(1), Schaley JE, Feeney G, Hearing P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Medicine, State
University of New York, Stony Brook, New York, NY 11794, USA.

E2F transcription factors are key players in the regulation of proliferation,
apoptosis, and differentiation in mammalian cells. E2Fs are negatively regulated 
by members of the retinoblastoma protein family, Rb, p107 and p130. During
adenovirus infection, viral proteins are expressed that displace Rb family
members from E2Fs and recruit E2F complexes to viral and cellular promoter
regions. This recruitment of E2F involves the induction of stable E2F binding to 
inverted E2F binding sites in the Ad E2a and cellular E2F-1 promoters and induces
both viral and cellular gene expression. The cellular p107 tumor suppressor also 
displays such regulation of E2F DNA binding activity. p107 induces stable
E2F-4/DP binding to inverted E2F binding sites in the Ad E2a and cellular E2F-1
promoters. The induction of E2F DNA binding by p107 minimally requires the
sequences in p107 that mediate E2F interaction. The related tumor suppressor,
p130, also effects this function. p107 levels increase substantially as cells
progress through S phase. p107 induction of E2F DNA binding was observed
primarily in S phase cells coincident with the increase in p107 protein levels.
The results of promoter activity assays directly correlate the induction of E2F
DNA binding by p107 with effective transcriptional repression. These results
support a model in which p107 and p130 induce the stable binding of E2F complexes
to promoters that drive expression of critical regulatory proteins such as E2F-1.
Since p107 and p130 bind histone deacetylase complexes (HDACs) which repress
promoter activity, p107-E2F and p130-E2F would stably recruit repressor complexes
to effect efficient promoter repression.

PMID: 11313936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;21(8):2918-32.

RBP1 recruits the mSIN3-histone deacetylase complex to the pocket of
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor family proteins found in limited discrete regions
of the nucleus at growth arrest.

Lai A(1), Kennedy BK, Barbie DA, Bertos NR, Yang XJ, Theberge MC, Tsai SC, Seto
E, Zhang Y, Kuzmichev A, Lane WS, Reinberg D, Harlow E, Branton PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G
1Y6.

Retinoblastoma (RB) tumor suppressor family pocket proteins induce cell cycle
arrest by repressing transcription of E2F-regulated genes through both histone
deacetylase (HDAC)-dependent and -independent mechanisms. In this study we have
identified a stable complex that accounts for the recruitment of both repression 
activities to the pocket. One component of this complex is RBP1, a known
pocket-binding protein that exhibits both HDAC-dependent and -independent
repression functions. RB family proteins were shown to associate via the pocket
with previously identified mSIN3-SAP30-HDAC complexes containing exclusively
class I HDACs. Such enzymes do not interact directly with RB family proteins but 
rather utilize RBP1 to target the pocket. This mechanism was shown to account for
the majority of RB-associated HDAC activity. We also show that in quiescent
normal human cells this entire RBP1-mSIN3-SAP30-HDAC complex colocalizes with
both RB family members and E2F4 in a limited number of discrete regions of the
nucleus that in other studies have been shown to represent the initial origins of
DNA replication following growth stimulation. These results suggest that RB
family members, at least in part, drive exit from the cell cycle by recruitment
of this HDAC complex via RBP1 to repress transcription from E2F-dependent
promoters and possibly to alter chromatin structure at DNA origins.

PMCID: PMC86920
PMID: 11283269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Breast Cancer Res. 2001;3(2):122-33. Epub 2000 Dec 22.

Mechanisms of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid inhibition of mammary cell growth.

Said TK(1), Moraes RC, Sinha R, Medina D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. tsaid@bcm.tmc.edu

The mechanism of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid in cell growth inhibition
involved induction of pRb-2/p130 interaction and nuclear translocation with
E2F-4, followed by significant repression in E2F-1 and PCNA nuclear levels, which
led to inhibition in DNA synthesis in mammary epithelial cell lines.

PMCID: PMC13923
PMID: 11250759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Oral Oncol. 2000 Sep;36(5):497.

Immunohistochemical investigation of new suppressor oncogene p130 in oral
squamous cell carcinoma, vol.35 (1999), 321-325.

Claudio PP.

Comment on
    Oral Oncol. 1999 May;35(3):321-5.

PMID: 11203255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Feb 15;29(4):E23.

A novel tetracycline-dependent transactivator with E2F4 transcriptional
activation domain.

Akagi K(1), Kanai M, Saya H, Kozu T, Berns A.

Author information: 
(1)Saitama Cancer Center Research Institute, 818 Komuro Ina Kita-adachigun
Saitama 362-0806, Japan. akagi@cancer-c.pref.saitama.jp

A tetracycline-controlled gene expression system provides a powerful tool to
dissect the functions of gene products. However, it often appears difficult to
establish cell lines or transgenic animals stably expressing
tetracycline-dependent transactivators, possibly as a result of toxicity of the
transactivator domains used. In order to overcome this problem, we developed a
novel tetracycline-dependent transactivator that works efficiently in mammalian
cells. This transactivator is a fusion of the tet reverse repressor mutant and
the transcriptional activating domain of human E2F4, which is ubiquitously
expressed in vivo. We demonstrate here that this tetracycline-regulated gene
expression system provides a two log transcriptional activation in mammalian
cells as assessed by northern blot and luciferase analyses. Combining this system
with green fluorescent protein reporter systems or microarray gene expression
profiling will facilitate the study of gene function.

PMCID: PMC29630
PMID: 11160943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Feb;21(4):1384-92.

E2F4 is exported from the nucleus in a CRM1-dependent manner.

Gaubatz S(1), Lees JA, Lindeman GJ, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

E2F is a family of transcription factors required for normal cell cycle control
and for cell cycle arrest in G1. E2F4 is the most abundant E2F protein in many
cell types. In quiescent cells, it is localized to the nucleus, where it is bound
to the retinoblastoma-related protein p130. During entry into the cell cycle, the
protein disappears from the nucleus and appears in the cytoplasm. The mechanism
by which this change occurs has, in the past, been unclear. We have found that
E2F4 is actively exported from the nucleus and that leptomycin B, a specific
inhibitor of nuclear export, inhibits this process. E2F4 export is mediated by
two hydrophobic export sequences, mutations in either of which result in export
failure. Individual export mutants of E2F4, but not a mutant with inactivation of
both export signals, can be efficiently excluded from the nucleus by forced
coexpression of the nuclear export receptor CRM1. Similarly, CRM1 overexpression 
can prevent cell cycle arrest induced by the cyclin kinase inhibitor p16(INK4a), 
an E2F4-dependent process. Taken together, these data suggest that nuclear export
contributes to the regulation of E2F4 function, including its ability to regulate
exit from G1 in association with a suitable pocket protein.

PMCID: PMC99590
PMID: 11158323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Virol. 2000 May;74(9):4192-206.

Dysregulation of cyclin E gene expression in human cytomegalovirus-infected cells
requires viral early gene expression and is associated with changes in the
Rb-related protein p130.

McElroy AK(1), Dwarakanath RS, Spector DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Molecular Genetics, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0366, USA.

We have previously shown that many cell cycle regulatory gene products are
markedly affected by infection of primary fibroblasts with human cytomegalovirus 
(HCMV) (F. M. Jault, J. M. Jault, F. Ruchti, E. A. Fortunato, C. Clark, J.
Corbeil, D. D. Richman, and D. H. Spector, J. Virol. 69:6697-6704, 1995). One of 
these proteins, cyclin E, is a key determinant of cell cycle progression during
G(1), and its mRNA levels are significantly increased in HCMV-infected
fibroblasts (B. S. Salvant, E. A. Fortunato, and D. H. Spector, J. Virol.
72:3729-3741, 1998). To determine the molecular basis of this effect, we have
examined the events that occur at the endogenous cyclin E promoter during the
course of infection. In vivo dimethyl sulfate footprinting of the cyclin E
promoter revealed several regions of protection and hypersensitivity that were
unique to infected cells. In accord with this observation, we find that the
virus-induced cyclin E transcripts initiate downstream of the start site
identified in mock-infected cells, in regions where these newly appearing
protected and hypersensitive sites occur. Viral gene expression is required for
this induction. However, the viral immediate-early proteins IE1-72 and IE2-86,
either alone or in combination, cannot induce expression of the endogenous cyclin
E. The virus must progress past the immediate-early phase and express an early
gene product(s) for activation of cyclin E expression. Moreover, IE1-72 does not 
appear to be required, as infection of cells with an HCMV mutant containing a
deletion in the IE1-72 gene leads to full upregulation of cyclin E expression.
Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays with infected cell extracts and a
region of the cyclin E promoter that includes two previously defined E2F sites as
the probe, we detected the appearance of an infection-specific banding pattern.
One of the infection-specific bands contained the proteins E2F-4, DP-1, and p130,
which were maintained in the infected cells as uniquely phosphorylated species.
These results suggest that an altered E2F-4-DP-1-p130 complex along with viral
early gene expression may play a role in the transcriptional regulation of cyclin
E mRNA during HCMV infection.

PMCID: PMC111934
PMID: 10756032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2000 Apr;41(5):1054-62.

Expression patterns of retinoblastoma and E2F family proteins during corneal
development.

Francesconi CM(1), Hutcheon AE, Chung EH, Dalbone AC, Joyce NC, Zieske JD.

Author information: 
(1)Schepens Eye Research Institute and Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine the expression patterns of the retinoblastoma protein and
the E2F transcription factor families in limbal and corneal epithelia and in
corneal keratocytes in situ during corneal development and differentiation.
METHODS: Retinoblastoma protein (pRb) and its family members p107 and p130;
E2F-1, -2, and -4, members of the E2F family of transcription factors; and Ki67, 
a marker of actively cycling cells, were localized by indirect immunofluorescence
microscopy, in corneas of neonatal, juvenile, and adult rats. Presence of mRNA
for pRb, p107, p130, and E2F types 1 to 5 in adult corneal epithelium was
determined by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: mRNA for all members of pRb and E2F families was present in adult
corneal epithelium. The greatest number of Ki67-positive corneal and limbal
epithelial cells were present at days 13 to 19, and Ki67-positive stromal
keratocytes at day 2. pRb and E2F-2 were localized to all cells in neonatal,
juvenile, and adult corneas. With age, p130 localization became more intense and 
nuclear in stromal keratocytes and suprabasal cells of corneal and limbal
epithelia; p107, initially nuclear in limbal and corneal epithelia, became
increasingly cytoplasmic in corneal epithelium. E2F-1 was initially nuclear in
keratocytes and diminished after day 10. E2F-1 was localized in the basal cell
layer of limbal and corneal epithelia after day 10. E2F4 was always nuclear in
limbal epithelium and cytoplasmic in corneal epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression patterns of pRb and E2F family proteins vary with corneal
cell differentiation, but are most apparent with p130 and p107. Nuclear
localization of p130 appears to correlate with terminal differentiation in
epithelium and entrance into a quiescent state by keratocytes. In contrast, p107 
is nuclear in the undifferentiated limbal basal cells and is cytoplasmic in the
remainder of the corneal epithelial cells.

PMID: 10752941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Oncogene. 2000 Oct 19;19(44):5116-22.

Phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma-related protein p130 in growth-arrested
cells.

Canhoto AJ(1), Chestukhin A, Litovchick L, DeCaprio JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, MA 02115, USA.

The retinoblastoma family of proteins including pRB, p107 and p130 undergoes cell
cycle dependent phosphorylation during the mid-G1 to S phase transition. This
phosphorylation is dependent upon the activity of cyclin D/cdk4. In contrast to
pRB and p107, p130 is phosphorylated during G0 and the early G1 phase of the cell
cycle. We observed that p130 is specifically phosphorylated on serine and
threonine residues in T98G cells arrested in G0 by serum deprivation or density
arrest. Identification of the phospho-serine and phospho-threonine residues
revealed that most were clustered within a short co-linear region unique to p130,
defined as the Loop. Deletion of the Loop region resulted in a change in the
phosphorylation status of p130 under growth arrest conditions. Notably, deletion 
of the Loop did not affect the ability of p130 to bind to E2F-4 or SV40 Large T
antigen, to induce growth arrest in Saos-2 cells, and to become
hyperphosphorylated during the proliferative phase of the cell cycle. p130
undergoes specific G0 phosphorylation in a manner that distinguishes it from pRB 
and p107.

PMID: 11042701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Nature. 2000 Oct 5;407(6804):642-5.

A common E2F-1 and p73 pathway mediates cell death induced by TCR activation.

Lissy NA(1), Davis PK, Irwin M, Kaelin WG, Dowdy SF.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Pathology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis Missouri 63110, USA.

Strong stimulation of the T-cell receptor (TCR) on cycling peripheral T cells
causes their apoptosis by a process called TCR-activation-induced cell death
(TCR-AICD). TCR-AICD occurs from a late G1 phase cell-cycle check point
independently of the 'tumour suppressor' protein p53. Disruption of the gene for 
the E2F-1 transcription factor, an inducer of apoptosis, causes significant
increases in T-cell number and splenomegaly. Here we show that T cells undergoing
TCR-AICD induce the p53-related gene p73, another mediator of apoptosis, which is
hypermethylated in lymphomas. Introducing a dominant-negative E2F-1 protein or a 
dominant-negative p73 protein into T cells protects them from TCR-mediated
apoptosis, whereas dominant-negative E2F-2, E2F-4 or p53 does not. Furthermore,
E2F-1-null or p73-null primary T cells do not undergo TCR-mediated apoptosis
either. We conclude that TCR-AICD occurs from a late G1 cell-cycle checkpoint
that is dependent on both E2F-1 and p73 activities. These observations indicate
that, unlike p53, p73 serves to integrate receptor-mediated apoptotic stimuli.

PMID: 11034214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 19;276(3):1998-2006. Epub 2000 Oct 13.

p130/E2F4 binds to and represses the cdc2 promoter in response to p53.

Taylor WR(1), Schonthal AH, Galante J, Stark GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland
Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

p53 represses the transcription of cdc2 and cyclin B1, causing loss of Cdc2
activity and G(2) arrest. Here we show that the region -22 to -2 of the cdc2
promoter called the R box is required for repression by p53 but not for basal
promoter activity. The R box confers p53-dependent repression on heterologous
promoters and binds to p130/E2F4 in response to overexpression of p53. R
box-dependent repression requires p21/waf1, and overexpression of p21/waf1 also
represses the cdc2 promoter. These observations suggest that p53 represses the
cdc2 promoter by inducing p21/waf1, which inhibits cyclin-dependent kinase
activity, enhancing the binding of p130 and E2F4, which together bind to and
repress the cdc2 promoter.

PMID: 11032828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Oncogene. 2000 Sep 28;19(41):4713-20.

Caspase-dependent apoptosis by ectopic expression of E2F-4.

Chang YC(1), Nakajima H, Illenye S, Lee YS, Honjo N, Makiyama T, Fujiwara I,
Mizuta N, Sawai K, Saida K, Mitsui Y, Heintz NH, Magae J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont College of Medicine, Burlington
05403, USA.

E2F is a family of transcription factors which regulates cell cycle and apoptosis
of mammalian cells. E2F-1-3 localize in the nucleus, and preferentially bind pRb,
while E2F-4 and 5 have no nuclear localization signal and preferentially bind
p107/p130. E2F-6 suppresses the transcriptional activity of other E2F proteins.
DP-1 and 2 are heterodimeric partners of each E2F protein. Using
tetracycline-responsive promoters, here we compared the effects of ectopic
expression of E2F-1, DP-1 and E2F-4 on cell cycle progression and apoptosis in
Chinese hamster cell lines. We found that E2F-4, as well as DP-1 and E2F-1,
induced growth arrest and caspase-dependent apoptosis. E2F-4 did not have a
marked effect on cell cycle progression, while E2F-1 induced DNA synthesis of
resting cells and DP-1 arrested cells in G1. Ectopic expression of E2F-4 did not 
activate E2F-dependent transcription. Our results suggest that expression of
E2F-4 at elevated levels induces growth arrest and apoptosis of mammalian cells
through a mechanism distinct from E2F-1 and DP-1.

PMID: 11032021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Mol Cell. 2000 Sep;6(3):729-35.

E2F4 and E2F5 play an essential role in pocket protein-mediated G1 control.

Gaubatz S(1), Lindeman GJ, Ishida S, Jakoi L, Nevins JR, Livingston DM, Rempel
RE.

Author information: 
(1)The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

E2F transcription factors are major regulators of cell proliferation. The
diversity of the E2F family suggests that individual members perform distinct
functions in cell cycle control. E2F4 and E2F5 constitute a defined subset of the
family. Until now, there has been little understanding of their individual
biochemical and biological functions. Here, we report that simultaneous
inactivation of E2F4 and E2F5 in mice results in neonatal lethality, suggesting
that they perform overlapping functions during mouse development. Embryonic
fibroblasts isolated from these mice proliferated normally and reentered from Go 
with normal kinetics compared to wild-type cells. However, they failed to arrest 
in G1 in response to p16INK4a. Thus, E2F4 and E2F5 are dispensable for cell cycle
progression but necessary for pocket protein-mediated G1 arrest of cycling cells.

PMID: 11030352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Oct 5;276(3):930-9.

Transforming growth factor beta inhibits the phosphorylation of pRB at multiple
serine/threonine sites and differentially regulates the formation of pRB
family-E2F complexes in human myeloid leukemia cells.

Hu X(1), Cress WD, Zhong Q, Zuckerman KS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology and Hematology, University of South Florida,
Tampa, Florida, 33612, USA.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta)1 induced dephosphorylation of pRb at
multiple serine and threonine residues including Ser249/Thr252, Thr373, Ser780,
and Ser807/811 in MV4-11 cells. Likewise, TGFbeta1 caused the dephosphorylation
of p130, while inhibiting accumulation of p107 protein. Phosphorylated pRb was
detected to bind E2F-1 and E2F-3, which appears to be a major form of pRb
complexes in actively cycling cells. TGFbeta1 significantly downregulated
pRb-E2F-1 and pRb-E2F-3 complexes as a result of inhibition of E2F-1 and E2F-3.
In contrast, complexes of E2F-4 with pRb and with p130 were increased markedly
upon TGFbeta1 treatment, whereas p107 associated E2F-4 was dramatically
decreased. In agreement with these results, p130-E2F-4 DNA binding activity was
dominant in TGFbeta1 treated cells, whereas p107-E2F-4 DNA binding activity was
only found in proliferating cells. Our data strongly suggest that inhibition of
E2Fs and differential regulation of pRb family-E2F-4 complexes are linked to
TGFbeta1-induced growth inhibition. E2F-4 is switched from p107 to p130 and pRb
when cells are arrested in G1 phase by TGFbeta1.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11027571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Digestion. 2000;62(2-3):213-6.

Multiple tumors and a novel E2F-4 mutation. A case report.

Matsubara N(1), Yoshitaka T, Matsuno T, Ikeda M, Isozaki H, Tanaka N, Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Okayama University Medical School, Okayama,
Japan. nagamb@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp

Defects in the DNA mismatch-repair are known to cause microsatellite instability 
(MSI) in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) as well as sporadic
colorectal cancer (CRC). We previously reported that the E2F-4 gene, which
encodes an important transcription factor in cell cycle control, had frequent
tumor-specific mutations at the trinucleotide coding region microsatellite (CAG)n
in a subset of human sporadic CRC with MSI. We report a 65-year-old man with
triple tumors in the abdomen, including colon cancer, stomach cancer, and lipoma 
of the retroperitoneum, with the analysis of E2F-4 mutation. We report the first 
case of colon cancer with a homozygous E2F-4 mutation along with a detailed
analysis of other cancer related genes as well as a prognosis.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 11025371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Pathol Int. 2000 Sep;50(9):690-5.

Microsatellite instability and alteration of E2F-4 gene in adenosquamous and
squamous cell carcinomas of the stomach.

Woo DK(1), Lee WA, Kim YI, Kim WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Microsatellite instability (MSI) due to defective DNA mismatch repair (MMR) is a 
form of genomic instability underlying the tumorigenesis of various human
neoplasms. To evaluate the roles of MSI in the pathogenesis of gastric carcinomas
with squamous differentiation, 17 primary stomach cancer patients (15
adenosquamous and two squamous cell carcinomas) were examined for MSI frequency
using five microsatellite markers and the criteria for MSI recommended by the
National Cancer Institute Workshop. The molecular causes and consequences of MSI 
in these neoplasms were further researched through the immunohistochemistry of
MMR proteins and the mutational analysis of cancer-associated genes targeted by
MSI, respectively. Two of the 17 (12%) cases demonstrated MSI at the most
examined loci and were classified as having high level MSI (MSI-H). These tumors 
also exhibited frame-shift mutations at mononucleotide repeats in the target
genes, including TGFbetaRII, IGFIIR, BAX, and hMSH6. It is interesting to note
that the mutations of the serine (AGC)13 repeats within the E2F-4 gene were found
only in the squamous cell carcinoma portions of them, whereas such alterations
were not detected in any of the adenocarcinomatous portions. This suggests that
E2F-4 might be implicated in the transformation of adenocarcinoma into squamous
cell carcinoma and further studies are needed to understand its role in squamous 
differentiation.

PMID: 11012981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Int J Cancer. 2000 Sep 20;89(5):444-52.

Microsatellite instability, prognosis and metastasis in gastric cancers from a
low-risk population.

Schneider BG(1), Bravo JC, Roa JC, Roa I, Kim MC, Lee KM, Plaisance KT Jr,
McBride CM, Mera R.

Author information: 
(1)Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center and Stanley Scott Cancer
Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. bschne1@LSUMC.edu

We examined 169 cases of gastric adenocarcinoma for microsatellite instability
(MSI), using a panel of 8 microsatellite markers. Of these cases, 142 were from
the United States, a country of relatively low risk for gastric cancer. Comparing
microdissected tumors to normal cells from the same patient, we classified tumors
as being microsatellite-stable (MSS) or having a low frequency of MSI (MSI-L, up 
to 30% of markers different in the tumor) or a high frequency of MSI (MSI-H, 30% 
or more of markers different). Among our American cases, we identified 26 (18.2%)
showing MSI-H and 15 (10.6%) showing MSI-L. Twenty cases were from Korean
patients, and they showed no significant differences in proportions of MSI-H and 
MSI-L from the American cases. MSI-H tumors in the American patients were
characterized by elevated frequencies of band shifts in repeat sequences of the
BAX (50%), transforming growth factor-beta receptor type II (TGFbetaRII, 68.9%), 
beta(2)-microglobulin (21.4%) and E2F4 (51.7%) genes. Alterations in E2F4 in
MSI-H tumors were always integral multiples of 3 nucleotides lost or gained,
which would not cause a frameshift mutation, and within the range of normal
polymorphisms for this sequence. North American patients (n = 127) with MSI-H and
MSI-L tumors had a longer median survival of 541 days and 587 days, respectively,
compared to 265 days for patients with MSS tumors (p = 0.027). This survival
difference may result from a significantly greater tendency for metastases in the
MSS group (p = 0.031).

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11008207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 29;275(52):41219-26.

Opposite functions for E2F1 and E2F4 in human epidermal keratinocyte
differentiation.

Paramio JM(1), Segrelles C, Casanova ML, Jorcano JL.

Author information: 
(1)Program on Cell and Molecular Biology, Centro de Investigaciones Energeticas, 
Medioambigentales y Tecnologicas (Edificio 7), Av. Complutense 22, Madrid
E-28040, Spain. jesusm.paramio@ciemat.es

Proteins of the retinoblastoma family (pRb, p107, and p130) modulate cell
proliferation, a function related to their capacity to control the activity of
the E2F transcription factor family. The Rb proteins also control cell
differentiation in different tissues. We have recently described their
involvement in human epidermal keratinocyte differentiation (Paramio, J. M.,
Lain, S., Segrelles, C., Lane, E. B. , and Jorcano, J. L. (1998) Oncogene 17,
949-957). Here we show that E2F proteins are also involved in this process. We
found that E2F1 and E2F4 are expressed differentially during the in vitro
differentiation of human epidermal keratinocytes, with the former uniformly
present throughout the process, whereas the second is predominantly expressed at 
the onset of differentiation. This pattern is also observed in human skin by
confocal microscopy. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and
immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that the complexes formed by E2F1
and E2F4 and Rb family proteins vary throughout in vitro keratinocyte
differentiation. In agreement with this observation, several E2F-responsive genes
are differentially regulated during this process. To test the functional
implications of these observations, we transfected HaCaT keratinocytes with
plasmids coding for E2F1 and E2F4. Transfected cells display opposite in vitro
differentiation properties. Although E2F1-transfected cells are unable to
differentiate, E2F4-transfected cells show an increased differentiation rate
compared with Neo-transfected control cells. Our data demonstrate that the
differential and coordinated expression and interaction of E2F and Rb proteins
modulate the process of epidermal differentiation and provide clear evidence that
members of the E2F family of transcription factors play specific and opposite
roles during cell differentiation.

PMID: 11005809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 8;275(49):38221-9.

A pure estrogen antagonist inhibits cyclin E-Cdk2 activity in MCF-7 breast cancer
cells and induces accumulation of p130-E2F4 complexes characteristic of
quiescence.

Carroll JS(1), Prall OW, Musgrove EA, Sutherland RL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, St. Vincent's
Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales 2010, Australia.

Estrogen antagonists inhibit cell cycle progression in estrogen-responsive cells,
but the molecular mechanisms are not fully defined. Antiestrogen-mediated
G(0)/G(1) arrest is associated with decreased cyclin D1 gene expression,
inactivation of cyclin D1-cyclin dependent kinase (Cdk) 4 complexes, and
decreased phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein (pRb). We now show that
treatment of MCF-7 breast cancer cells with the pure estrogen antagonist ICI
182780 results in inhibition of cyclin E-Cdk2 activity prior to a decrease in the
G(1) to S phase transition. This decrease was dependent on p21(WAF1/Cip1) since
treatment with antisense oligonucleotides to p21 attenuated the effect.
Recruitment of p21 to cyclin E-Cdk2 complexes was in turn dependent on decreased 
cyclin D1 expression since it was apparent following treatment with antisense
cyclin D1 oligonucleotides. To define where within the G(0) to S phase continuum 
antiestrogen-treated cells arrested, we assessed the relative abundance and
phosphorylation state of pocket protein-E2F complexes. While both pRb and p107
levels were significantly decreased, p130 was increased 4-fold and was
accompanied by the formation of p130.E2F4 complexes and the accumulation of
hyperphophorylated E2F4, putative markers of cellular quiescence. Thus, ICI
182780 inhibits both cyclin D1-Cdk4 and cyclin E-Cdk2 activity, resulting in the 
arrest of MCF-7 cells in a state with characteristics of quiescence (G(0)), as
opposed to G(1) arrest.

PMID: 10991938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mol Cell. 2000 Aug;6(2):293-306.

Loss of E2F4 activity leads to abnormal development of multiple cellular
lineages.

Rempel RE(1), Saenz-Robles MT, Storms R, Morham S, Ishida S, Engel A, Jakoi L,
Melhem MF, Pipas JM, Smith C, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

We have generated mice deficient in E2F4 activity, the major form of E2F in many 
cell types. Analysis of newborn pups deficient in E2F4 revealed abnormalities in 
hematopoietic lineage development as well as defects in the development of the
gut epithelium. Specifically, we observed a deficiency of various mature
hematopoietic cell types together with an increased number of immature cells in
several lineages. This was associated with an increased frequency of apoptotic
cells. We also found a substantial reduction in the thickness of the gut
epithelium that normally gives rise to crypts as well as a reduction in the
density of villi. These observations suggest a critical role for E2F4 activity in
controlling the maturation of cells in a number of tissues.

PMID: 10983977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Mol Cell. 2000 Aug;6(2):281-91.

E2F4 is essential for normal erythrocyte maturation and neonatal viability.

Humbert PO(1), Rogers C, Ganiatsas S, Landsberg RL, Trimarchi JM, Dandapani S,
Brugnara C, Erdman S, Schrenzel M, Bronson RT, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139,
USA.

The retinoblastoma protein (pRB) plays a key role in the control of normal
development and proliferation through the regulation of the E2F transcription
factors. We generated a mutant mouse model to assess the in vivo role of the
predominant E2F family member, E2F4. Remarkably, loss of E2F4 had no detectable
effect on either cell cycle arrest or proliferation. However, E2F4 was essential 
for normal development. E2f4-/- mice died of an increased susceptibility to
opportunistic infections that appeared to result from craniofacial defects. They 
also displayed a variety of erythroid abnormalities that arose from a cell
autonomous defect in late stage maturation. This suggests that E2F4 makes a major
contribution to the control of erythrocyte development by the pRB tumor
suppressor.

PMID: 10983976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Oct;20(19):7059-67.

E2F-Rb complexes assemble and inhibit cdc25A transcription in cervical carcinoma 
cells following repression of human papillomavirus oncogene expression.

Wu L(1), Goodwin EC, Naeger LK, Vigo E, Galaktionov K, Helin K, DiMaio D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06510, USA.

Expression of the bovine papillomavirus E2 protein in cervical carcinoma cells
represses expression of integrated human papillomavirus (HPV) E6/E7 oncogenes,
followed by repression of the cdc25A gene and other cellular genes required for
cell cycle progression, resulting in dramatic growth arrest. To explore the
mechanism of repression of cell cycle genes in cervical carcinoma cells following
E6/E7 repression, we analyzed regulation of the cdc25A promoter, which contains
two consensus E2F binding sites and a consensus E2 binding site. The wild-type E2
protein inhibited expression of a luciferase gene linked to the cdc25A promoter
in HT-3 cervical carcinoma cells. Mutation of the distal E2F binding site in the 
cdc25A promoter abolished E2-induced repression, whereas mutation of the proximal
E2F site or the E2 site had no effect. None of these mutations affected the
activity of the promoter in the absence of E2 expression. Expression of the E2
protein also led to posttranscriptional increase in the level of E2F4, p105(Rb), 
and p130 and induced the formation of nuclear E2F4-p130 and E2F4-p105(Rb)
complexes. This resulted in marked rearrangement of the protein complexes that
formed at the distal E2F site in the cdc25A promoter, including the replacement
of free E2F complexes with E2F4-p105(Rb) complexes. These experiments indicated
that repression of E2F-responsive promoters following HPV E6/E7 repression was
mediated by activation of the Rb tumor suppressor pathway and the assembly of
repressing E2F4-Rb DNA binding complexes. Importantly, these experiments revealed
that HPV-induced alterations in E2F transcription complexes that occur during
cervical carcinogenesis are reversed by repression of HPV E6/E7 expression.

PMCID: PMC86242
PMID: 10982822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Virol. 2000 Sep;74(17):7842-50.

E2F proteins are posttranslationally modified concomitantly with a reduction in
nuclear binding activity in cells infected with herpes simplex virus 1.

Advani SJ(1), Weichselbaum RR, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The transition from G(1) to S phase in the cell cycle requires sequential
activation of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (cdk4) and cdk2, which phosphorylate the 
retinoblastoma protein, causing the release of E2F. Free E2F upregulates the
transcription of genes involved in S phase and cell cycle progression. Recent
studies from this and other laboratories have shown that herpes simplex virus 1
stabilizes cyclin D3 early in infection and that early events in viral
replication are sensitive to inhibitors of some cdks. On the other hand cdk2 is
not activated. Here we report studies on the status of members of E2F family in
cycling HEp-2 and HeLa cells and quiescent serum-starved, contact-inhibited human
lung fibroblasts. The results show that (i) at 8 h postinfection or thereafter,
E2F-1 and E2F-5 were posttranslationally modified and/or translocated from
nucleus to the cytoplasm, (ii) E2F-4 was hyperphophorylated, and (iii) overall,
E2F binding to cognate DNA sites was decreased at late times after infection.
These results concurrent with those cited above indicate that late in infection
activation of S-phase genes is blocked both by posttranslational modification and
translocation of members of E2F family to inactive compartments and by the
absence of active cdk2. The observation that E2F were also posttranslationally
modified in quiescent human lung fibroblasts that were not in S phase at the time
of infection suggests that specific viral gene products are responsible for
modification of the members of E2F family and raises the possibility that in
infected cells, activation of the S phase gene is an early event in viral
infection and is then shut off at late times. This is consistent with the timing 
of stabilization of cyclin D3 and the events blocked by inhibitors of cdks.

PMCID: PMC112314
PMID: 10933691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 29;275(39):30317-25.

Cdk2-dependent phosphorylation and functional inactivation of the pRB-related
p130 protein in pRB(-), p16INK4A(+) tumor cells.

Cheng L(1), Rossi F, Fang W, Mori T, Cobrinik D.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Pathology, and the Institute of Cancer Genetics,
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032,
USA.

The retinoblastoma family proteins pRB, p107, and p130 are phosphorylated and
released from E2Fs in the late G(1) phase of the cell cycle. This phosphorylation
is thought to contribute to the derepression of E2F-responsive genes and to be
mediated, in part, by Cdk4 and Cdk6. Evidence that Cdk4/6 activity is inhibited
by p16(INK4A) in most pRB(-) cells suggests that p107 and p130 may be
underphosphorylated and remain associated with E2Fs during G(1)-S progression in 
cells that lack pRB. To examine this, we evaluated the cell cycle-dependent
phosphorylation and E2F binding abilities of p107 and p130 in pRB(-), p16(+)
Saos-2 osteosarcoma cells. p130, but not p107, was phosphorylated and released
from E2F-4 in late G(1) and S phase cells, although p130 phosphorylation differed
qualitatively in these and other pRB(-), p16(+) cells as compared with pRB(+),
p16(-) cell types. p130 phosphorylation occurred in the absence of cyclin
D-Cdk4/6 complexes, coincided with cyclin E- and Cdk2-associated kinase activity,
and was prevented by expression of dominant negative Cdk2. Moreover, dominant
negative Cdk2 prevented the dissociation of endogenous p130-E2F-4 complexes and
inhibited E2F-4-dependent transcription. These findings show that p130 can be
phosphorylated and functionally inactivated in a Cdk2-dependent process, and they
highlight the involvement of distinct Cdks in the regulation of different pRB
family proteins.

PMID: 10906146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 30;275(26):19992-20001.

Glucocorticoids inhibit developmental stage-specific osteoblast cell cycle.
Dissociation of cyclin A-cyclin-dependent kinase 2 from E2F4-p130 complexes.

Smith E(1), Redman RA, Logg CR, Coetzee GA, Kasahara N, Frenkel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Institute for Genetic Medicine, University 
of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90033,
USA.

Unique cell cycle control is instituted in confluent osteoblast cultures, driving
growth to high density. The postconfluent dividing cells share features with
cells that normally exit the cell cycle; p27(kip1) is increased, p21(waf1/cip1)
is decreased, free E2F DNA binding activity is reduced, and E2F4 is primarily
nuclear. E2F4-p130 becomes the predominant E2F-pocket complex formed on E2F
sites, but, unlike the complex that typifies resting cells, cyclin A and CDK2 are
also present. Administration of dexamethasone at this, but not earlier stages,
results in reduction of cyclin A and CDK2 levels with a parallel decrease in the 
associated kinase activity, dissociation of cyclin A-CDK2 from the E2F4-p130
complexes, and inhibition of G(1)/S transition. The glucocorticoid-mediated cell 
cycle attenuation is also accompanied by, but not attributable to, increased
p27(kip1) and decreased p21(waf1/cip1) levels. The attenuation of osteoblast
growth to high density by dexamethasone is associated with severe impairment of
mineralized extracellular matrix formation, unless treatment commences in
cultures that have already grown to high density. Both the antimitotic and the
antiphenotypic effects are reversible, and both are antagonized by RU486. Thus,
glucocorticoids induce premature attenuation of the osteoblast cell cycle,
possibly contributing to the osteoporosis induced by these drugs in vivo.

PMID: 10867026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Int J Dev Biol. 2000 Apr;44(3):267-77.

Expression of the E2F family of transcription factors during murine development.

Kusek JC(1), Greene RM, Nugent P, Pisano MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Craniofacial Biology, ULSD, University
of Louisville Birth Defects Center, KY 40292, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors plays a crucial role in the control of
cell cycle progression and regulation of cellular proliferation, both processes
fundamental to mammalian development. In the present study, we have examined the 
levels of expression of the six currently identified E2F proteins in murine
embryos/fetuses as a function of gestational age, compared the expression of
these six proteins in selected developing and adult tissues, and examined E2F
expression in the embryonic murine palate, a tissue in which perturbation of
proliferation is associated with induction of cleft palate. Our results indicate 
that: 1) multiple forms of individual E2F family members are present in
embryonic, fetal and adult cells/tissues; 2) each of the six E2Fs is expressed in
a tissue specific manner in both adult and embryonic/fetal organs; 3) certain
forms of individual E2F family members are preferentially detected in adult
tissues, whereas others are preferentially expressed in embryonic/fetal tissues; 
4) expression of the various E2Fs and their isoforms follows distinct temporal
patterns during murine gestation; and 5) individual E2F family members also
exhibit differential patterns of temporal expression during murine palatogenesis.

PMID: 10853823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Mol Biol Cell. 2000 Jun;11(6):2117-30.

Density-dependent growth inhibition of fibroblasts ectopically expressing
p27(kip1).

Zhang X(1), Wharton W, Donovan M, Coppola D, Croxton R, Cress WD, Pledger WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, University of South Florida College of Medicine,
Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

The cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) inhibitor p27(kip1) is thought to be
responsible for the onset and maintenance of the quiescent state. It is possible,
however, that cells respond differently to p27(kip1) in different conditions, and
using a BALB/c-3T3 cell line (termed p27-47) that inducibly expresses high levels
of this protein, we show that the effect of p27(kip1) on cell cycle traverse is
determined by cell density. We found that ectopic expression of p27(kip1) blocked
the proliferation of p27-47 cells at high density but had little effect on the
growth of cells at low density whether exponentially cycling or stimulated from
quiescence. Regardless of cell density, the activities of cdk4 and cdk2 were
markedly repressed by p27(kip1) expression, as was the cdk4-dependent
dissociation of E2F4/p130 complexes. Infection of cells with SV40, a DNA tumor
virus known to abrogate formation of p130- and Rb-containing complexes, allowed
dense cultures to proliferate in the presence of supraphysiological amounts of
p27(kip1) but did not stimulate cell cycle traverse when cultures were cotreated 
with the potent cdk2 inhibitor roscovitine. Our data suggest that residual levels
of cyclin/cdk activity persist in p27(kip1)-expressing p27-47 cells and are
sufficient for the growth of low-density cells and of high-density cells infected
with SV40, and that effective disruption of p130 and/or Rb complexes is
obligatory for the proliferation of high-density cultures.

PMCID: PMC14907
PMID: 10848633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(13):4745-53.

Bcl-2 retards cell cycle entry through p27(Kip1), pRB relative p130, and altered 
E2F regulation.

Vairo G(1), Soos TJ, Upton TM, Zalvide J, DeCaprio JA, Ewen ME, Koff A, Adams JM.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne
Hospital, Victoria, Australia.

Independent of its antiapoptotic function, Bcl-2 can, through an undetermined
mechanism, retard entry into the cell cycle. Cell cycle progression requires the 
phosphorylation by cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) of retinoblastoma protein
(pRB) family members to free E2F transcription factors. We have explored whether 
retarded cycle entry is mediated by the Cdk inhibitor p27 or the pRB family. In
quiescent fibroblasts, enforced Bcl-2 expression elevated levels of both p27 and 
the pRB relative p130. Bcl-2 still slowed G(1) progression in cells deficient in 
pRB but not in those lacking p27 or p130. Hence, pRB is not required, but both
p27 and p130 are essential mediators. The ability of p130 to form repressive
complexes with E2F4 is implicated, because the retardation by Bcl-2 was
accentuated by coexpressed E2F4. A plausible relevant target of p130/E2F4 is the 
E2F1 gene, because Bcl-2 expression delayed E2F1 accumulation during G(1)
progression and overexpression of E2F1 overrode the Bcl-2 inhibition. Hence,
Bcl-2 appears to retard cell cycle entry by increasing p27 and p130 levels and
maintaining repressive complexes of p130 with E2F4, perhaps to delay E2F1
expression.

PMCID: PMC85901
PMID: 10848600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 1;275(35):27377-85.

The interferon- and differentiation-inducible p202a protein inhibits the
transcriptional activity of c-Myc by blocking its association with Max.

Wang H(1), Liu C, Lu Y, Chatterjee G, Ma XY, Eisenman RN, Lengyel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

p202a is a murine protein that is induced during the fusion of myoblasts to
myotubes and can also be induced by interferon. Even 2-3-fold overexpression of
p202a in cells retards proliferation. p202a was shown to modulate transcription
by binding, and inhibiting the activity of several transcription factors
including c-Fos, c-Jun, AP-2, E2F1, E2F4, NF-kappaB, MyoD, and myogenin. Here we 
report that p202a also bound the c-Myc protein in vitro and in vivo; the
C-terminal p202a b segment bound the C-terminal basic region
helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (bHLHLZ) region of c-Myc. The transfection of a
p202a expression plasmid inhibited the c-Myc-dependent expression of reporter
plasmids in transient assays; moreover, overexpression of p202a in stable cell
lines decreased the endogenous levels of mRNAs whose expression is driven by
c-Myc. These effects of p202a are consistent with our finding that the binding of
p202a to c-Myc inhibited the binding of c-Myc to Max in vitro and in vivo. p202a 
also inhibited the c-Myc-induced anchorage-independent growth and apoptosis of
Rat-1 cells. The inhibition of c-Myc-dependent transcription, proliferation, and 
apoptosis by p202a is in line with the involvement of p202a in differentiation.

PMID: 10835425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Jun 6;97(12):6481-6.

CpG methylation as a mechanism for the regulation of E2F activity.

Campanero MR(1), Armstrong MI, Flemington EK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Harvard Medical School and
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney Street, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.

Regulation of gene expression in mammals through methylation of cytosine residues
at CpG dinucleotides is involved in the development and progression of tumors.
Because many genes that are involved in the control of cell proliferation are
regulated by members of the E2F family of transcription factors and because some 
E2F DNA-binding sites are methylated in vivo, we have investigated whether CpG
methylation can regulate E2F functions. We show here that methylation of E2F
elements derived from the dihydrofolate reductase, E2F1, and cdc2 promoters
prevents the binding of all E2F family members tested (E2F1 through E2F5). In
contrast, methylation of the E2F elements derived from the c-myc and c-myb
promoters minimally affects the binding of E2F2, E2F3, E2F4, and E2F5 but
significantly inhibits the binding of E2F1. Consistent with these studies, E2F3, 
but not E2F1, activates transcription through methylated E2F sites derived from
the c-myb and c-myc genes whereas both E2F1 and E2F3 fail to transactivate a
reporter gene that is under the control of a methylated dihydrofolate reductase
E2F site. Together, these data illustrate a means through which E2F activity can 
be controlled.

PMCID: PMC18629
PMID: 10823896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Int J Cancer. 2000 Jun 1;86(5):672-7.

Genomic structure and mutation screening of the E2F4 gene in human tumors.

Schwemmle S(1), Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope National
Medical Center, Duarte, California 91010, USA. sschwemmle@coh.org

E2F4, a member of the E2F family of transcription factors, is abundant in
non-proliferating and differentiated cells where it plays an important role in
the suppression of proliferation-associated genes. The E2F4 gene spans 6 kb and
has 10 exons. It contains a serine (CAG) repeat tract in exon 7, which is
unstable in gastrointestinal tumors. To further investigate a possible role of
this gene in tumorigenesis we performed mutational analysis and expression
studies in different tumors. Primary human tumor tissue of the stomach, colon,
breast and lung (28), metastatic tumors of the colon (3) and small cell lung
tumor cell lines (18) were screened for somatic mutations in the coding region of
E2F4. No mutation was found. Microsatellite instability of the CAG repeat,
however, was documented in primary stomach and colon tumors. Northern blot
analysis revealed upregulated E2F4 transcript levels in tumor cell lines. Our
data suggest that a direct involvement of E2F4 in tumorigenesis is unlikely,
although increased E2F4 expression may be associated with human cancer.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10797289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(10):3633-9.

Complex transcriptional regulatory mechanisms control expression of the E2F3
locus.

Adams MR(1), Sears R, Nuckolls F, Leone G, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

E2F transcription activity has been shown to play a critical role in cell growth 
control, regulating the expression of a variety of genes that encode proteins
important for the initiation of DNA replication and cell cycle regulation. We
have shown that the E2F3 locus encodes two protein products: the E2F3a product,
which is tightly regulated by cell growth, and the E2F3b product, which is
constitutively expressed throughout the cell cycle. To further explore the
mechanism controlling the expression of the two E2F3 gene products, we analyzed
the genomic sequences flanking the 5' region of E2F3a and E2F3b. We find that a
series of E2F binding sites confer negative control on the E2F3a promoter in
quiescent cells, similar to the control of the E2F1 and E2F2 promoters. In
addition, a group of E-box elements, which are Myc binding sites, confer
responsiveness to Myc and are necessary for full activation of the E2F3a promoter
in response to growth stimulation. Based on these results and past experiments,
it appears that the E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3a genes are similarly regulated by growth
stimulation, involving a combination of E2F-dependent negative control and
Myc-mediated positive control. In contrast, the constitutive expression of the
E2F3b gene more closely reflects the control of expression of the E2F4 and E2F5
genes.

PMCID: PMC85656
PMID: 10779353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(10):3626-32.

Identification of a novel E2F3 product suggests a mechanism for determining
specificity of repression by Rb proteins.

Leone G(1), Nuckolls F, Ishida S, Adams M, Sears R, Jakoi L, Miron A, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

The tumor suppressor function of Rb is intimately related to its ability to
interact with E2F and repress the transcription of E2F target genes. Here we
describe a novel E2F product that specifically interacts with Rb in quiescent
cells. This novel E2F, which we term E2F3b, is encoded by a unique mRNA
transcribed from an intronic promoter within the E2F3 locus. The E2F3b RNA
differs from the previously characterized E2F3 RNA, which we now term E2F3a, by
the utilization of a unique coding exon. In contrast to the E2F3a product that is
tightly regulated by cell growth, the E2F3b product is expressed equivalently in 
quiescent and proliferating cells. But, unlike the E2F4 and E2F5 proteins, which 
are also expressed in quiescent cells and form complexes with the p130 protein,
the E2F3b protein associates with Rb and represents the predominant E2F-Rb
complex in quiescent cells. Thus, the previously described specificity of Rb
function as a transcriptional repressor in quiescent cells coincides with the
association of Rb with this novel E2F product.

PMCID: PMC85655
PMID: 10779352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(10):3417-24.

E2F4 and E2F1 have similar proliferative properties but different apoptotic and
oncogenic properties in vivo.

Wang D(1), Russell JL, Johnson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, Science Park-Research Division, University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

Loss of retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor suppressor function, as occurs in many cancers,
leads to uncontrolled proliferation, an increased propensity to undergo
apoptosis, and tumorigenesis. Rb negatively regulates multiple E2F transcription 
factors, but the role of the different E2F family members in manifesting the
cellular response to Rb inactivation is unclear. To study the effect of
deregulated E2F4 activity on cell growth control and tumorigenesis, transgenic
mouse lines expressing the E2F4 gene under the control of a keratin 5 (K5)
promoter were developed, and their phenotypes were compared to those of
previously generated K5 E2F1 transgenic mice. In contrast to what has been
observed in vitro, ectopically expressed E2F4 was found to localize to the
nucleus and induce proliferation to an extent similar to that induced by E2F1 in 
transgenic tissue. Unlike E2F1, E2F4 does not induce apoptosis, and this
correlates with the differential abilities of these two E2F species to stimulate 
p19(ARF) expression in vivo. To examine the role of E2F4 in tumor development,
the mouse skin two-stage carcinogenesis model was utilized. Unlike E2F1
transgenic mice, E2F4 transgenic mice developed skin tumors with a decreased
latency and increased incidence compared to those characteristics in wild-type
controls. These findings demonstrate that while the effects of E2F1 and E2F4 on
cell proliferation in vivo are similar, their apoptotic and oncogenic properties 
are quite different.

PMCID: PMC85634
PMID: 10779331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Genes Dev. 2000 Apr 1;14(7):804-16.

Analysis of promoter binding by the E2F and pRB families in vivo: distinct E2F
proteins mediate activation and repression.

Takahashi Y(1), Rayman JB, Dynlacht BD.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard University, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

The E2F transcription factor plays a pivotal role in the timely activation of
gene expression during mammalian cell cycle progression, whereas pRB and related 
proteins control cell growth in part through the ability to block the action of
E2F. To identify physiologically important E2F-responsive promoters and to study 
their occupancy and histone acetylation state in vivo, we have taken advantage of
a cross-linking approach in synchronized, living cells. We find that the pattern 
of E2F and pRB-related polypeptides recruited to these promoters changes in a
strikingly dynamic fashion as cells progress from quiescence into G(1) and S
phase: Repression of each promoter in quiescent cells is associated with
recruitment of E2F-4 and p130 and low levels of histone acetylation, but by late 
G(1), these proteins are replaced largely by E2F-1 and E2F-3, in concert with
acetylation of histones H3 and H4 and gene activation. These findings suggest
that repression and activation of E2F-responsive genes may occur through distinct
E2F heterodimers that direct the sequential recruitment of enzymes able to
deacetylate and then acetylate core histones.

PMCID: PMC316494
PMID: 10766737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Kidney Int. 2000 Apr;57(4):1581-9.

Three-dimensional matrix suppresses E2F-controlled gene expression in glomerular 
mesangial cells.

Tsuboi N(1), Yoshida H, Kawamura T, Furukawa Y, Hosoya T, Yamada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Institute of DNA Medicine, Jikei
University School of Medicine, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Extracellular matrix (ECM) regulates mitogenesis of glomerular
mesangial cells. Currently, however, the molecular mechanisms that mediate the
control of cell growth by ECM are not fully elucidated.
METHODS: The effects of structurally distinct forms of type I collagen matrix on 
mesangial cell proliferation and cell cycle distribution were examined.
Expressions of the cell cycle-regulatory transcription factor E2F and
retinoblastoma susceptibility gene family proteins were also investigated.
RESULTS: Mesangial cells cultured on monomeric collagen matrix showed a
substantial growth response to serum. In contrast, mesangial cells cultured on
polymerized collagen matrix exhibited arrest of the cell cycle in the G0/G1
phase. The induction of the quiescent phenotype was correlated with
down-regulation of E2F-1, the prototypal transcription factor that controls cell 
cycle progression. The suppression of E2F-1 was associated with (1)
dephosphorylation of retinoblastoma susceptibility gene proteins, pRB and p130,
and (2) accumulation of E2F-pRB and E2F-p130 DNA binding complexes that bind to
the E2F consensus sequence located in the E2F-1 promoter. Other E2F regulatory
genes, including c-myc, cyclin A, and cdc 2, were also down-regulated in
mesangial cells cultured on polymerized collagen matrix.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that a three-dimensional collagen induces cell 
cycle arrest via suppression of E2F-controlled gene expression in mesangial
cells. Dephosphorylation of pRB and p130 and subsequent generation of
transrepressor complexes, E2F-pRB and E2F-p130, may be involved in this process.

PMID: 10760093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Exp Med. 2000 Mar 20;191(6):1005-16.

Deregulated E2F transcriptional activity in autonomously growing melanoma cells.

Halaban R(1), Cheng E, Smicun Y, Germino J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8059, USA. ruth.halaban@yale.edu

Inactivation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (pRb) has been
implicated in melanoma cells, but the molecular basis for this phenotype has not 
yet been elucidated, and the status of additional family members (p107 and p130, 
together termed pocket proteins) or the consequences on downstream targets such
as E2F transcription factors are not known. Because cell cycle progression is
dependent on the transcriptional activity of E2F family members (E2F1-E2F6), most
of them regulated by suppressive association with pocket proteins, we
characterized E2F-pocket protein DNA binding activity in normal versus malignant 
human melanocytes. By gel shift analysis, we show that in mitogen-dependent
normal melanocytes, external growth factors tightly controlled the levels of
growth-promoting free E2F DNA binding activity, composed largely of E2F2 and
E2F4, and the growth-suppressive E2F4-p130 complexes. In contrast, in melanoma
cells, free E2F DNA binding activity (E2F2 and E2F4, to a lesser extent E2F1,
E2F3, and occasionally E2F5), was constitutively maintained at high levels
independently of external melanocyte mitogens. E2F1 was the only family member
more abundant in the melanoma cells compared with normal melanocytes, and the
approximately fivefold increase in DNA binding activity could be accounted for
mostly by a similar increase in the levels of the dimerization partner DP1. The
continuous high expression of cyclin D1, A2, and E, the persistent
cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) and CDK2 activities, and the presence of
hyperphosphorylated forms of pRb, p107, and p130, suggest that melanoma cells
acquired the capacity for autonomous growth through inactivation of all three
pocket proteins and release of E2F activity, otherwise tightly regulated in
normal melanocytes by external growth factors.

PMCID: PMC2193116
PMID: 10727462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Cell Biol. 2000 Mar 20;148(6):1187-201.

Subcellular compartmentalization of E2F family members is required for
maintenance of the postmitotic state in terminally differentiated muscle.

Gill RM(1), Hamel PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M5S 1A8.

Maintenance of cells in a quiescent state after terminal differentiation occurs
through a number of mechanisms that regulate the activity of the E2F family of
transcription factors. We report here that changes in the subcellular
compartmentalization of the E2F family proteins are required to prevent nuclei in
terminally differentiated skeletal muscle from reentering S phase. In terminally 
differentiated L6 myotubes, E2F-1, E2F-3, and E2F-5 were primarily cytoplasmic,
E2F-2 was nuclear, whereas E2F-4 became partitioned between both compartments. In
these same cells, pRB family members, pRB, p107, and p130 were also nuclear. This
compartmentalization of the E2F-1 and E2F-4 in differentiated muscle cells grown 
in vitro reflected their observed subcellular location in situ. We determined
further that exogenous E2F-1 or E2F-4 expressed in myotubes at levels fourfold
greater than endogenous proteins compartmentalized identically to their
endogenous counterparts. Only when overexpressed at higher levels was
inappropriate subcellular location for these proteins observed. At these levels, 
induction of the E2F-regulated genes, cyclins A and E, and suppression of factors
associated with myogenesis, myogenin, and p21(Cip1) was observed. Only at these
levels of E2F expression did nuclei in these terminally differentiated cells
enter S phase. These data demonstrate that regulation of the subcellular
compartmentalization of E2F-family members is required to maintain nuclei in a
quiescent state in terminally differentiated cells.

PMCID: PMC2174298
PMID: 10725332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2000 Apr;27(4):403-11.

Distinct clinicopathologic and genetic profiles in sporadic gastric cancer with
different mutator phenotypes.

Wu MS(1), Lee CW, Shun CT, Wang HP, Lee WJ, Chang MC, Sheu JC, Lin JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

A subset of sporadic gastric cancers (GC) exhibits microsatellite instability
(MSI). To define the precise role of MSI in GC, a total of 100 patients with
sporadic GC were classified into three groups, i.e., high-frequency MSI (MSI-H), 
low-frequency MSI (MSI-L), and microsatellite stable (MSS), based on 10
microsatellite markers. Mutational analyses of TGFbetaRII, IGFIIR, BAX, MSH3,
MSH6, E2F4, MSH2, MLH1, and TP53 genes, and methylation and protein expression of
MLH1 and MSH2 were performed and correlated. Twenty-seven percent of GC showed
MSI at least in one locus and could be further graded as MSI-H (14%) and MSI-L
(13%). No clinicopathologic difference was noted between GC with MSI-L and MSS.
Compared with GC with MSI-L or MSS, GC with MSI-H had a significantly higher
frequency of antral location, intestinal subtype, H. pylori seropositivity, but a
lower incidence of lymph node metastasis, and displayed a higher frequency of
frameshift mutations of TGFbetaRII, IGFIIR, BAX, MSH3, and E2F4 genes but a lower
incidence of TP53 mutations. Furthermore, hypermethylation of the MLH1 promoter
was responsible for the loss of protein function in 13 of 14 MSI-H tumors. It was
concluded that a specific phenotype and a distinct profile of genetic alterations
exist in MSI-H GC. We speculate that epigenetic inactivation of MLH1 by
methylation plays a crucial role in initiating such a pathway of carcinogenesis. 
In contrast, GCs with MSS and MSI-L exhibit clinicopathologic features that are
distinct from MSI-H tumors and have a higher frequency of TP53 mutations,
suggesting that they may evolve through an entirely different pathway.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10719371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Int J Oncol. 2000 Apr;16(4):731-7.

Analysis of the candidate target genes for mutation in microsatellite
instability-positive cancers of the colorectum, stomach, and endometrium.

Semba S(1), Ouyang H, Han SY, Kato Y, Horii A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Tohoku University School of Medicine,
Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Microsatellite instability (MSI) in human carcinoma DNA is a characteristic
phenotype observed in hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer and also in some
human sporadic cancers including multiple primary carcinomas. In this study, we
analyzed mutations in the hCHK1, E2F4, hMSH3, and hMSH6 genes in MSI+ human
cancers arising in colorectum, stomach and endometrium. The E2F4 and hMSH3 genes 
were mutated in all tumor types. Interestingly, the hMSH6 gene was mutated in
colorectal and gastric cancers but not in endometrial cancer; this is similar to 
the TGFbetaRII gene. It is notable that the mutation status of the secondary
mutators, hMSH3 and hMSH6, did not influence slippage-related frameshift
mutations in genes harboring simple tandem-repeats, which suggests that the MSI
phenotype may be affected mainly by abnormalities in the primary mutator genes,
not by the secondary mutator genes. No mutations were observed in the cell cycle 
checkpoint gene hCHK1; mutations of this gene are thought to have a limited role,
if any, in at least the tumor types analyzed in this study.

PMID: 10717241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Hum Mutat. 2000 Mar;15(3):296-7.

Various AGC repeat numbers in the coding region of the human transcription factor
gene E2F-4.

Zhong X, Hemmi H, Koike J, Tsujita K, Shimatake H.

The E2F family of transcription factors regulates the expression of genes
required for DNA synthesis and cell cycle control. The AGC triplet repeat in the 
coding region of the E2F-4 gene, a member of the family, has been reported to be 
mutated in colorectal cancers with a microsatellite instability (MSI) phenotype. 
We found a wider range variation of the repeat number in DNAs from tumors, the
corresponding normal mucosa, and healthy individuals. A total of 5 repeat
variants, ranging from 8 to 17 AGC repeats, was detected in 6 (9.7%) of the 62
healthy individuals and 8 (8.9%) of the 90 normal DNAs of the patients. The
wild-type 13 repeat was present in all of these individuals. The variation of the
AGC repeat number may be a polymorphism. Further, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at
the E2F-4 locus in the tumor tissues of 2 (25%) of the 8 informative cases was
detected. The variation may be a useful marker for detection of LOH in primary
tumors.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10679953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Blood. 2000 Feb 15;95(4):1509-10.

Mutations of the E2F4 gene in hematological malignancies having microsatellite
instability.

Komatsu N(1), Takeuchi S, Ikezoe T, Tasaka T, Hatta Y, Machida H, Williamson IK, 
Bartram CR, Koeffler HP, Taguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Nankoku, Japan.

Mutations of coding repeats within the E2F4, TGF-betaRII, BAX, IGFIIR, and hMSH3 
are critical targets of microsatellite instability (MSI) in many kinds of
cancers. We analyzed 9 childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) samples, 5
acute myelocytic leukemia (AML) samples, and 10 adult T-cell leukemia (ATL)
samples having MSI to determine whether they had mutations of the E2F4,
TGF-betaRII, BAX, IGFIIR, and hMSH3 genes. Frameshift mutations were found at
trinucleotide repeats within a coding exon of the E2F4 gene in 2 of 10 (20%) ATL 
samples and 1 of 9 (11%) childhood ALL samples. No mutations were found in the
TGF-betaRII, BAX, IGFIIR, and hMSH3 genes. E2F4 is a transcription factor that
influences the cell-cycle progression. These results suggest that mutations of
the E2F4 gene, presumably caused by an abnormality of one of the DNA repair
genes, may play an important role in development of ATL and childhood ALL.
(Blood. 2000;95:1509-1510)

PMID: 10666234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2000 Jan;278(1):C110-7.

Characterization and regulation of E2F activity during Caco-2 cell
differentiation.

Ding Q(1), Wang Q, Dong Z, Evers BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston,
Texas 77555, USA.

The specific mechanisms controlling intestinal cell differentiation remain
largely undefined. The retinoblastoma (Rb) proteins (pRb, p130, and p107) appear 
crucial to the terminal differentiation process of certain cells through their
association and repression of E2F transcription factors. We have examined the
expression of pRb-related proteins p130 and p107 as well as the regulation of E2F
during spontaneous differentiation of the Caco-2 intestinal cell line. Nuclear
protein levels of p130 and p107 were increased with Caco-2 differentiation.
Induction of a slower-migrating E2F complex was noted in postconfluent (i.e.,
differentiated) Caco-2 cells; p130 protein was the predominant component of this 
E2F complex with a minor contribution from cyclin-dependent kinase-2. A small
component of p107 binding was identified by deoxycholate release gel shift
assays. In contrast, no pRb binding to E2F was noted in Caco-2 cells. In addition
to increased association with p130, E2F-4 phosphorylation was markedly decreased 
in differentiated Caco-2 cells, whereas E2F protein levels remained unchanged.
Taken together, our findings suggest that the regulation of E2F function may be
an important contributing factor in the cell cycle block and spontaneous
differentiation of Caco-2 cells. This regulation of E2F occurs most likely
through its increased association with p130 as well as decreased phosphorylation.

PMID: 10644518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. DNA Cell Biol. 1999 Dec;18(12):911-22.

Differential regulation of E2F transcription factors by p53 tumor suppressor
protein.

Vaishnav YN(1), Pant V.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi,
India. yvaishnav@hotmail.com

The cell cycle is under the control of various positive and negative regulators. 
Two such regulators are the E2F family of transcription factors and the p53 tumor
suppressor protein. While E2F proteins are implicated in promoting the S phase of
the cell cycle, p53 has the potential to arrest cells in G1 phase and thereby
prevent entry into S phase. Because they perform seemingly opposite functions in 
the control of cell growth, a possibility of functional interactions between E2F 
and p53 was investigated. It was found that p53 specifically inhibited activated 
transcription by E2F-5 but not by E2F-1. Investigation into the mechanism of
action established that heterodimer formation and the DNA-binding steps were not 
significantly inhibited by p53. However, the transcriptional activation step of
E2F-5 activity, as examined by using a Gal4 DNA-binding domain chimera, was
specifically inhibited by p53. Interestingly, p53 could also inhibit
transcriptional activation by E2F-4 but not by E2F-2 or E2F-3. The results
indicate that p53 differentially regulates the activities of two subclasses
(E2F-1/-2/-3 vs. E2F-4/-5) of E2F transcription factors. Detailed analysis using 
a two-hybrid approach in mammalian cells indicated lack of physical interaction
between p53 and E2F-5, DP-1, or E2F-1. Reciprocal analysis revealed that whereas 
E2F-1 dramatically inhibited p53-activated transcription, E2F-5 or DP-1 did not. 
Thus, nonreciprocal functional interactions exist between various members of the 
E2F family of transcription factors and p53 tumor suppressor protein. The complex
interplay between various positive and negative regulators of cell growth, such
as E2F and p53 proteins, may be crucial in determining the ultimate outcome in
terms of cell cycle arrest, cell growth, or apoptosis.

PMID: 10619603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Int J Oncol. 2000 Jan;16(1):133-9.

The effect of mismatch repair deficiency on tumourigenesis; microsatellite
instability affecting genes containing short repeated sequences.

Johannsdottir JT(1), Jonasson JG, Bergthorsson JT, Amundadottir LT, Magnusson J, 
Egilsson V, Ingvarsson S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland.

We have investigated microsatellite instability (MSI) in colorectal, gastric,
endometrial and ovarian cancer as a result of mismatch repair (MMR) deficiency.
We detected frameshift mutations in several genes that carry short repeated
sequences and are important in cell fidelity and growth control; hMSH3, hMSH6,
BAX, IGFIIR, TGFbetaIIR, E2F4 and BRCA2. Accumulation of mutations was
heterogeneous and mainly restricted to tumours showing MSI at several loci
(MSI-H). Both insertions and deletions were evident and occasional intratumour
heterogeneity was evident with more than one different additional allele in the
tumour. Most MSI-H tumours had acquired mutations in more than one gene and
longer repeated sequences were more frequently targets for mutations. The
TGFbetaIIR gene was mutated in 62%, the hMSH3 gene in 43%, the E2F4 gene in 35%, 
the hMSH6 in 32%, the BAX gene in 32%, the IGFIIR gene in 26%, and the BRCA2 gene
in 2% of the MSI-H tumours. Homozygous mutations or mutation of both alleles were
evident in all genes except BRCA2, in total 23/105 mutated cases, varying from 7%
for BAX to 50% for E2F4. E2F4 mutations were exclusively found in colon tumours
and E2F4 polymorphisms was found in 8% of cases. No difference in mutation
prevalence was noted between cancer types apart from TGFbetaIIR mutations, which 
were frequently found in colon and gastric tumours but not in endometrial
tumours, suggesting that endometrial tumours progress by a different route where 
TGFbetaIIR mutations are less favourable.

PMID: 10601558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Dec 15;253(2):561-72.

Activation of a cAMP pathway and induction of melanogenesis correlate with
association of p16(INK4) and p27(KIP1) to CDKs, loss of E2F-binding activity, and
premature senescence of human melanocytes.

Haddad MM(1), Xu W, Schwahn DJ, Liao F, Medrano EE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology and Dermatology, Baylor College of Medicine and
VAMC, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

There is strong evidence that the senescent phenotype, whether induced by
telomere shortening, oxidative damage, or oncogenic stimuli, is an important
tumor suppressive mechanism. The melanocyte is a cell of neural crest origin that
produces the pigment melanin and can develop into malignant melanomas. To
understand how malignant cells escape senescence, it is first crucial to define
what genes control senescence in the normal cell. Prolonged exposure to high
levels of cAMP results in accumulation of melanin and terminal differentiation of
human melanocytes. Here we present evidence that activation of a cAMP pathway
correlates with multiple cellular changes in these cells: (1) increased
expression of the transcription factor microphthalmia; (2) increased
melanogenesis; (3) increased association of the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitors (CDK-Is) p27(KIP1) and p16(INK4) with CDK2 and CDK4, respectively; (4)
failure to phosphorylate the retinoblastoma protein (pRB); (5) decreased
expression of E2F1, E2F2, and E2F4 proteins; (6) loss of E2F DNA-binding
activity; and (7) phenotypic changes characteristic of senescent cells. Senescent
melanocytes have potent E2F inhibitory activity, because extracts from these
cells completely abolished E2F DNA-binding activity that was present in extracts 
from the early proliferative phase. We propose that increased activity of the
CDK-Is p27 and p16 and loss of E2F activity in human melanocytes characterize a
senescence program activated by the cAMP pathway. Disruption of cAMP-mediated and
melanogenesis-induced senescence may cause immortalization of human melanocytes, 
an early step in the development of melanomas.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10585280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Eur J Immunol. 1999 Oct;29(10):3380-9.

Modulation of E2F activity in primary mouse B cells following stimulation via
surface IgM and CD40 receptors.

Lam EW(1), Glassford J, van der Sman J, Banerji L, Pizzey AR, Shaun N, Thomas B, 
Klaus GG.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research and Section of Virology and Cell Biology 
Imperial College School of Medicine at St Mary's, London, GB. eric.lam@ic.ac.uk

Since signals via CD40 and the B cell receptor are known to synergize to induce B
cell activation, we have analyzed the pocket protein/E2F complexes in mouse B
lymphocytes following stimulation by anti-IgM, anti-CD40, alone or together. We
find that E2F4 and DP1 form the predominant E2F heterodimers in the G0 and G1
phases of the cell cycle, complexed with hypophosphorylated p130. During late G1 
and S phase this complex is replaced by at least three different E2F complexes,
one of which is an E2F complex containing p107 or pRB as well as two "free" E2F
complexes consisting of E2F4/DP1 and E2F1-3/DP1. These effects were mirrored by
the levels and phosphorylation status of the three pocket proteins. We also
observed an increase in electrophoretic mobility of DP1 and E2F4 as B cells
progressed from G0 into early G1, resulting from their dephosphorylation. This is
known to correlate with a decrease in DNA binding capacity of these proteins and 
could also be important for derepression of genes negatively regulated through
E2F sites in their promoters. These results therefore indicate that the pRB/E2F
pathway integrates proliferative signals emanating from the sIgM and CD40
receptors.

PMID: 10540350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Kidney Int. 1999 Oct;56(4):1238-41.

Regulation of the G1/S transition phase in mesangial cells by E2F1.

Inoshita S(1), Terada Y, Nakashima O, Kuwahara M, Sasaki S, Marumo F.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Japan.

It has been established that E2F transcription factors are essential for the
regulation of the cell cycle. The E2Fs play an important role in G1/S transition 
phase, as they regulate the activation of several genes whose products are
required for DNA synthesis. E2Fs bind to the retinoblastoma protein family and
their transcriptional activities are suppressed in the G0 and early G1 phases.
The E2F family consists of a group of five closely related proteins (E2F1 through
E2F5). Proliferation of the mesangial cell is a common feature of many glomerular
diseases, but the regulation of mesangial cell cycle has not been clarified, nor 
has the participation of the E2F family in mesangial cells. To elucidate the
mechanisms of G1/S transition phase in mesangial cells, we investigated the roles
of the E2F family in the mesangial cell cycle. In primary cultured mesangial
cells, the protein expression of E2F1 through E2F3 was induced by fetal calf
serum (FCS) stimulation. E2F1 especially was strongly induced by mitogenic
stimulation. The E2F4 protein was abundantly expressed in the quiescent state and
was slightly increased by FCS stimulation. We considered E2F1 to be
representative of the E2F family, and used adenovirus-mediated gene transfer to
investigate the function of E2F1 to show that overexpression of E2F1 promoted
cell cycle progression as measured by a flow cytometer. Furthermore, we
investigated the effect of E2F1 overexpression to cyclin D1 and cyclin E
expression. Because we previously reported that the regulation of G1 cyclins is a
key factor in the G1/S transition phase in mesangial cells, we showed that
overexpression of E2F1 induced protein expression of cyclin D1 and cyclin E and
increased promoter activity. Thus, we conclude that E2F1 plays an important role 
in the G1/S transition phase and acts on the mesangial cell cycle through two
distinct pathways: (1) E2F1 directly transcribes an S-phase gene, and (2) E2F1
promotes cell cycle progression via the induction of cyclin D1 and cyclin E.

PMID: 10504464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Lab Invest. 1999 Sep;79(9):1113-20.

Accumulated frameshift mutations at coding nucleotide repeats during the
progression of gastric carcinoma with microsatellite instability.

Kim JJ(1), Baek MJ, Kim L, Kim NG, Lee YC, Song SY, Noh SH, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Microsatellite instability (MSI) and frameshift mutations in genes containing
nucleotide repeats have been reported in a subset of gastric carcinomas, but the 
mutational profiles in precancerous lesions have not been characterized. To
characterize the genetic events during gastric carcinogenesis, we analyzed DNA
from 56 gastric adenomas and 167 gastric carcinomas for MSI using five
microsatellite markers and for frameshift mutations at coding nucleotide repeats 
of the type II transforming growth factor beta receptor, BAX, hMSH3, hMSH6, IGF
II receptor, and E2F-4 genes. On the basis of the number of markers displaying
instability per tumor, the tumors were divided into three groups: those with two 
or more of the five markers showing instability (high MSI [MSI-H]), those with
one of the five markers showing instability (low MSI [MSI-L]), and those with no 
instability. MSI-H was found in 8 adenomas (14%) and 19 carcinomas (11%), and
MSI-L was found in 8 adenomas (14%) and 9 carcinomas (5%). These groups were
tested for correlations with several clinicopathologic parameters. MSI-H gastric 
adenomas were related to the high histologic grade of composing dysplastic glands
(p = 0.004), and MSI-H gastric carcinomas were associated with exophytic tumor
growth (p = 0.005). We found 48 frameshift mutations at coding nucleotide repeats
of the six genes, and all mutations except one were found in MSI-H gastric
tumors. Only one of the 17 MSI-L tumors showed frameshift mutations at coding
nucleotide repeats of the transforming growth factor beta receptor II gene.
Compared with MSI-H gastric carcinomas, MSI-H adenomas had no mutations in the
hMSH6 and the IGF II receptor genes, less frequent mutations in the transforming 
growth factor beta receptor II (38% versus 63%), BAX (13% versus 37%), and hMSH3 
(13% versus 37%) genes, and more frequent mutations in the E2F-4 (50% versus 37%)
gene. Our findings suggest that MSI and E2F-4 mutations are early genetic events 
and that mutations of the other five genes are accumulated during the progression
of gastric carcinomas with MSI.

PMID: 10496529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 9;18(36):5054-62.

E2F activates late-G1 events but cannot replace E1A in inducing S phase in
terminally differentiated skeletal muscle cells.

Pajalunga D(1), Tognozzi D, Tiainen M, D'Angelo M, Ferrantelli F, Helin K, Sacchi
A, Crescenzi M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncogenesis Laboratory, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.

We have previously shown that the adenovirus E1A oncogene can reactivate the cell
cycle in terminally differentiated cells. Current models imply that much or all
of this E1A activity is mediated by the release of the E2F transcription factors 
from pocket-protein control. In contrast, we show here that overexpression of
E2F-1, E2F-2 and E2F-4, or a chimeric E2F-4 tethered to a nuclear localization
signal cannot reactivate postmitotic skeletal muscle cells (myotubes). This is
not due to lack of transcriptional activity, as demonstrated on both a reporter
construct and a number of endogenous target genes. Although cyclin E was strongly
overexpressed in E2F-transduced myotubes, it lacked associated kinase activity,
possibly explaining the inability of the myotubes to enter S phase and accumulate
cyclin A. Although E2F is not sufficient to trigger DNA synthesis in myotubes,
its activity is necessary even in the presence of E1A, as dominant-negative DP-1 
mutants inhibit E1A-mediated cell cycle reentry. Our data show that, to
reactivate myotubes, E1A must exert other functions, in addition to releasing
E2F. They also establish mouse myotubes as an experimental system uniquely suited
to study the most direct E2F functions in the absence of downstream cell cycle
effects.

PMID: 10490842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Sep;19(9):6048-56.

E2F4 actively promotes the initiation and maintenance of nerve growth
factor-induced cell differentiation.

Persengiev SP(1), Kondova II, Kilpatrick DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

E2F transcription factors play a critical role in cell cycle progression through 
the regulation of genes required for G(1)/S transition. They are also thought to 
be important for growth arrest; however, their potential role in the cell
differentiation process has not been previously examined. Here, we demonstrate
that E2F4 is highly upregulated following the neuronal differentiation of PC12
cells with nerve growth factor (NGF), while E2F1, E2F3, and E2F5 are
downregulated. Immunoprecipitation and subcellular fractionation studies
demonstrated that both the nuclear localization of E2F4 and its association with 
the Rb family member p130 increased following neuronal differentiation. The
forced expression of E2F4 markedly enhanced the rate of PC12 cell differentiation
induced by NGF and also greatly lowered the rate at which cells lost their
neuronal phenotype following NGF removal. Importantly, this effect occurred in
the absence of any significant change in the growth regulation of PC12 cells by
NGF. Further, the downregulation of E2F4 expression with antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides inhibited NGF-induced neurite outgrowth, indicating an
important role for this factor during PC12 cell differentiation. Finally, E2F4
expression was found to increase dramatically in the developing rat cerebral
cortex and cerebellum, as neuroblasts became postmitotic and initiated terminal
differentiation. These findings demonstrate that, in addition to its effects on
cell proliferation, E2F4 actively promotes the neuronal differentiation of PC12
cells as well as the retention of this state. Further, this effect is independent
of alterations in cell growth and may involve interactions between E2F4 and the
neuronal differentiation program itself. E2F4 may be an important participant in 
the terminal differentiation of neuroblasts.

PMCID: PMC84505
PMID: 10454552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Mol Carcinog. 1999 Aug;25(4):295-303.

No effect of loss of E2F1 on liver regeneration or hepatocarcinogenesis in
C57BL/6J or C3H/HeJ mice.

Lukas ER(1), Bartley SM, Graveel CR, Diaz ZM, Dyson N, Harlow E, Yamasaki L,
Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison
53706, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors regulates the expression of genes needed 
for DNA synthesis and cell-cycle control. However, the individual contributions
of the different E2F family members in regulating proliferation in various
tissues have not been well characterized. Mouse liver is an excellent system for 
investigating proliferation because its growth state can be experimentally
manipulated. As observed in cell culture systems, E2F1 protein is present at low 
levels in the quiescent liver, with an increase in expression during
proliferation. Therefore, we expected that E2F1 may play an important role in
cell-growth control during periods of robust proliferation. Using
E2F1-nullizygous mice, we performed partial hepatectomies to investigate the role
of E2F1 in the synchronous proliferation of adult hepatocytes. We found that E2F1
deficiency resulted in only minor changes in gene expression and that the timing 
of liver regeneration was not altered in E2F1 nullizygous mice. E2F1 has
displayed properties of both a tumor suppressor and an oncogene in different
model systems. Therefore, we investigated the role of E2F1 in rapidly growing
liver tumor cells in strains of mice that have high (C3H/HeJ) and low (C57BL/6J) 
rates of hepatocarcinogenesis. We observed no significant differences in the
number of liver tumors that developed after diethylnitrosamine treatment of wild 
type versus E2F1-nullizygous mice. We suggest that abundant levels of E2F4 in the
mouse liver compensate for loss of E2F1.

PMID: 10449036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Sep 1;27(17):3621-30.

E2F/p107 and E2F/p130 complexes are regulated by C/EBPalpha in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Timchenko NA(1), Wilde M, Iakova P, Albrecht JH, Darlington GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging, Department of Pathology, Baylor College of
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA. nikolait@bcm.tmc.edu

We have previously found that loss of C/EBPalpha in hepatocytes of newborn livers
leads to increased proliferation, to a reduction in p21 protein levels and to an 
induction of S phase-specific E2F/p107 complexes. In this paper, we investigated 
C/EBPalpha-dependent regulation of E2F complexes in a well-characterized cell
line, 3T3-L1, and in stable transformants that conditionally express C/EBPalpha. 
C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta proteins are induced in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes during
differentiation with different kinetics and potentially may regulate E2F/Rb
family complexes. In pre-differentiated cells, three E2F complexes are observed: 
cdk2/E2F/p107, E2F/p130 and E2F4. cdk2/E2F/p107 complexes are induced in nuclear 
extracts of 3T3-L1 cells during mitotic expansion, but are not detectable in
nuclear extracts at later stages of 3T3-L1 differentiation. The reduction in
E2F/p107 complexes is associated with elevation of C/EBPalpha, but is independent
of C/EBPbeta expression. Bacterially expressed, purified His-C/EBPalpha is able
to disrupt E2F/p107 complexes that are observed at earlier stages of 3T3-L1
differentiation. C/EBPbeta, however, does not disrupt E2F/p107 complexes. A short
C/EBPalpha peptide with homology to E2F is sufficient to bring about the
disruption of E2F/p107 complexes from 3T3-L1 cells in vitro. Induction of
C/EBPalpha in stable 3T3-L1 clones revealed that C/EBPalpha causes disruption of 
p107/E2F complexes in these cells. In contrast, E2F/p130 complexes are induced in
cells expressing C/EBPalpha. Our data suggest that induction of p130/E2F
complexes by C/EBPalpha occurs via up-regulation of p21, which, in turn, leads to
association with and inhibition of, cdk2 kinase activity. The reduction in cdk2
kinase activity correlates with alterations of p130 phosphorylation and with
induction of p130/E2F complexes in 3T3-L1 stable clones. Our data suggest two
pathways of C/EBPalpha-dependent regulation of E2F/Rb family complexes:
disruption of S phase-specific E2F/p107 complexes and induction of E2F/p130
complexes.

PMCID: PMC148609
PMID: 10446255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Sep 1;27(17):3527-33.

The cloning of plant E2F, a retinoblastoma-binding protein, reveals unique and
conserved features with animal G(1)/S regulators.

Ramírez-Parra E(1), Xie Q, Boniotti MB, Gutierrez C.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular 'Severo Ochoa', Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, 28049
Madrid, Spain.

Association of the retinoblastoma (Rb) protein with E2F transcription factors is 
central to cell cycle-specific gene expression and growth in animal cells.
Whether Rb-E2F complexes are also involved in plant cell growth and
differentiation is still unknown since E2F proteins have not yet been identified 
in plants. Here we report the isolation and characterisation of a wheat E2F
(TmE2F) cDNA clone. Interestingly, the overall domain organisation of plant E2F
is related to the human E2F-1/2/3 subset but its primary sequence is slightly
more related to the E2F-4/5 subset. TmE2F-Rb binding depends on residues, located
at the C-terminus, which are different from those of animal E2Fs. However, the
acidic or hydrophobic nature of certain residues is maintained, strongly
suggesting that they may have a crucial role in E2F activities. Plant E2F is
expressed in proliferating cultured cells and in differentiated tissues and is
up-regulated early in S phase. Our studies reinforce the idea that G(1)/S
regulators in plants are unrelated to those of yeast cells but similar to those
of animal cells and provide new tools to analyse the links between cell cycle
regulators, plant growth and developmental signals.

PMCID: PMC148597
PMID: 10446243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Int J Oncol. 1999 Aug;15(2):387-90.

Upregulation of E2F transcription factors in chemically induced mouse skin
tumors.

Balasubramanian S(1), Ahmad N, Mukhtar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
44106, USA.

E2F family of transcription factors plays an important role in cell cycle
regulation, oncogenesis and differentiation. E2Fs are a family of heterodimeric
transcription factors composed of E2F-like and DP-like subunits. They regulate
expression of specific genes controlling cellular proliferation by binding to
specific sequences within the promoter regions of these target genes and
affecting their transcription in a cell cycle dependent manner. Recent studies
have suggested an essential role of Rb/E2F pathway in the passage of cells
through the G1 phase of the cell cycle. To better understand the role of these
transcription factors in epithelial tumorigenesis, we compared the expression of 
various proteins involved in the Rb/E2F pathway in epidermis and
7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA)-initiated and
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) promoted papillomas on SENCAR mouse
skin. Western blot analysis data showed 3.0- to 7.6-fold upregulation of E2F-1,
E2F-2, E2F-3, E2F-4 and E2F-5 in tumors compared to normal epidermis. In tumors, 
the protein expression of DP-1 did not show significant change whereas that of
DP-2 showed a 2.2-fold increase. Compared to normal epidermis, a significant
upregulation of pRb (6.3-fold) and p107 (13-fold) was also observed in tumors.
The protein expression of p130 was not detectable either in normal epidermis or
in tumors. These data suggest that the overexpression of E2F proteins may be
involved in the G1-S phase dysregulation that occurs during mouse skin
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 10402252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Virol. 1999 Aug;73(8):6540-50.

The Epstein-Barr virus protein BRLF1 activates S phase entry through E2F1
induction.

Swenson JJ(1), Mauser AE, Kaufmann WK, Kenney SC.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

The Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) immediate-early protein BRLF1 is one of two
transactivators which mediate the switch from latent to lytic replication in
EBV-infected cells. DNA viruses often modulate the function of critical cell
cycle proteins to maximize the efficiency of virus replication. Here we have
examined the effect of BRLF1 on cell cycle progression. A replication-deficient
adenovirus expressing BRLF1 (AdBRLF1) was used to infect normal human fibroblasts
and various epithelial cell lines. BRLF1 expression induced S phase entry in
contact-inhibited fibroblasts and in the human osteosarcoma cell line U-2 OS.
AdBRLF1 infection produced a dramatic increase in the level of E2F1 but not E2F4.
In contrast, the levels of Rb, p107, and p130 were decreased in AdBRLF1-infected 
cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays confirmed an increased level of free
E2F1 in the AdBRLF1-infected human fibroblasts. Consistent with the previously
described effect of E2F1, AdBRLF1-infected fibroblasts had increased levels of
p53 and p21 and died by apoptosis. BRLF1-induced activation of E2F1 may be
required for efficient EBV lytic replication, since at least one critical viral
replication gene (the viral DNA polymerase) is activated by E2F (C. Liu, N. D.
Sista, and J. S. Pagano, J. Virol. 70:2545-2555, 1996).

PMCID: PMC112737
PMID: 10400750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jul;19(7):4729-38.

p70(s6k) integrates phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and rapamycin-regulated signals
for E2F regulation in T lymphocytes.

Brennan P(1), Babbage JW, Thomas G, Cantrell D.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Activation Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London WC2A
3PX, United Kingdom.

In T lymphocytes, the hematopoietic cytokine interleukin-2 (IL-2) uses
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase)-induced signaling pathways to
regulate E2F transcriptional activity, a critical cell cycle checkpoint. PI
3-kinase also regulates the activity of p70(s6k), the 40S ribosomal protein S6
kinase, a response that is abrogated by the macrolide rapamycin. This
immunosuppressive drug is known to prevent T-cell proliferation, but the precise 
point at which rapamycin regulates T-cell cycle progression has yet to be
elucidated. Moreover, the effects of rapamycin on, and the role of p70(s6k) in,
IL-2 and PI 3-kinase activation of E2Fs have not been characterized. Our present 
results show that IL-2- and PI 3-kinase-induced pathways for the regulation of
E2F transcriptional activity include both rapamycin-resistant and
rapamycin-sensitive components. Expression of a rapamycin-resistant mutant of
p70(s6k) in T cells could restore rapamycin-suppressed E2F responses. Thus, the
rapamycin-controlled processes involved in E2F regulation appear to be mediated
by p70(s6k). However, the rapamycin-resistant p70(s6k) could not rescue rapamycin
inhibition of T-cell cycle entry, consistent with the involvement of additional, 
rapamycin-sensitive pathways in the control of T-cell cycle progression. The
present results thus show that p70(s6k) is able to regulate E2F transcriptional
activity and provide direct evidence for the first time for a link between IL-2
receptors, PI 3-kinase, and p70(s6k) that regulates a crucial G1 checkpoint in T 
lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC84271
PMID: 10373522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Virology. 1999 Jun 5;258(2):257-70.

Herpes simplex virus induces intracellular redistribution of E2F4 and
accumulation of E2F pocket protein complexes.

Olgiate J(1), Ehmann GL, Vidyarthi S, Hilton MJ, Bachenheimer SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina School
of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 27599-7290, USA.

Accumulation of E2F-p107 and E2F-pRB DNA binding complexes occurred after herpes 
simplex virus infection of U2-OS cells. Accumulation of E2F-p107 also occurred by
4 h p.i. in C33 cells. This corresponded to a time when host DNA synthesis was
reduced by 50%, and lagged by >/=1 h, the onset of viral DNA synthesis. To
determine the basis for increased nuclear E2F complexes, we investigated the
effects of virus infection on the intracellular distribution of the E2F-dependent
DNA binding complexes and their protein constituents. Western blot analyses of
whole cell extracts revealed that amounts of E2F4, E2F1, DP1, and p107 remained
unchanged after infection of C33 cells. Analysis of cytoplasmic and nuclear
fractions, however, revealed that cytoplasmic E2F4 decreased and nuclear E2F4
increased. This correlated with a loss of cytoplasmic E2F DNA-binding activity
and a corresponding increase in nuclear DNA-binding activity. Concomitant with
its redistribution, the apparent molecular weight of total and p107-associated
E2F4 increased, at least partially as a result of protein phosphorylation.
Increased nuclear E2F-pRB in U2-OS cells was accompanied by the conversion of pRB
from a hyper- to a hypophosphorylated state. Infection of U2-OS cells with viral 
mutants indicated that viral protein IE ICP4 was necessary for the decrease in
cytoplasmic E2F-p107, and that viral protein DE ICP8 was required for nuclear
accumulation of p107-E2F. In contrast, ICP8 was not required for accumulation of 
E2F-pRB. These results indicate that the increase in E2F-p107 may be explained by
the redistribution and modification of E2F4 and the increase in E2F-pRB by
modification of pRB.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10366563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 May 19;258(3):596-604.

DP1 phosphorylation in multimeric complexes: weaker interaction with cyclin A
through the E2F1 cyclin A binding domain leads to more efficient phosphorylation 
than stronger interaction through the p107 cyclin A binding domain.

Guida P(1), Zhu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, 10461, USA.

Stable enzyme-substrate interaction has been recognized as a major mechanism
underlying the substrate preferences of cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks). To learn
the relationship between stability of physical association and efficiency of
phosphorylation, we studied DP1 phosphorylation by cyclin A-Cdk2 in multiprotein 
complexes. When DP1 was connected to cyclin A-Cdk2 through E2F4 and p107, its
phosphorylation was very inefficient, although its association with cyclin A-Cdk2
was stable. In contrast, DP1 was efficiently phosphorylated when weakly connected
to cyclin A-Cdk2 via E2F1 or E2F4 with a fused cyclin A binding domain of E2F1.
The transactivation activity of E2F4-DP1 heterodimers was reduced when DP1 was
phosphorylated, while a phosphorylation deficient mutant of DP1 resisted this
down-regulation. Phosphorylation and functional regulation of DP1 were not due to
nuclear localization. Thus, stronger physical association between the kinase and 
the substrate does not necessarily lead to more efficient phosphorylation than
weaker interaction does.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10329431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Virol. 1999 Jun;73(6):4678-88.

Control of cell cycle entry and apoptosis in B lymphocytes infected by
Epstein-Barr virus.

Spender LC(1), Cannell EJ, Hollyoake M, Wensing B, Gawn JM, Brimmell M, Packham
G, Farrell PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Imperial College School of Medicine, St.
Mary's Campus, London W2 1PG, United Kingdom.

Infection of human B cells with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) results in activation of
the cell cycle and cell growth. To interpret the mechanisms by which EBV
activates the cell, we have assayed many proteins involved in control of the G0
and G1 phases of the cell cycle and regulation of apoptosis. In EBV infection
most of the changes, including the early induction of cyclin D2, are dependent on
expression of EBV genes, but an alteration in the E2F-4 profile was partly
independent of viral gene expression, presumably occurring in response to signal 
transduction activated when the virus binds to its receptor, CD21. By comparing
the expression of genes controlling apoptosis, including those encoding several
members of the BCL-2 family of proteins, the known relative resistance of
EBV-immortalized B-cell lines to apoptosis induced by low serum was found to
correlate with expression of both BCL-2 and A20. A20 can be regulated by the
NF-kappaB transcription factor, which is known to be activated by the EBV LMP-1
protein. Quantitative assays demonstrated a direct temporal relationship between 
LMP-1 protein levels and active NF-kappaB during the time course of infection.

PMCID: PMC112509
PMID: 10233927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Clin Cancer Res. 1999 Apr;5(4):839-44.

Microsatellite instability is uncommon in breast cancer.

Anbazhagan R(1), Fujii H, Gabrielson E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

In some tumors, defects in mismatch repair enzymes lead to errors in the
replication of simple nucleotide repeat segments. This condition is commonly
known as microsatellite instability (MSI) because of the frequent mutations of
microsatellite sequences. Although the MSI phenotype is well recognized in some
colon, gastric, pancreatic, and endometrial cancers, reports of MSI in breast
cancer are inconsistent. We report here our experience with >10,000
amplifications of simple nucleotide repeats in noncoding genomic regions using
DNA from 267 cases of breast cancer, including cases that represent all major
histological types of breast cancer. We rarely (10 reactions) found unexpected
bands in amplifications of tumor DNA that were not present in amplifications of
normal DNA. Moreover, repeats of these reactions did not confirm microsatellite
instability in a single case. We also evaluated the simple nucleotide repeats in 
the transforming growth factor type II receptor, insulin-like growth factor type 
II receptor, BAX, and E2F-4 genes, which are frequently mutated in tumors with
microsatellite instability. No mutations of these genes were found in any of the 
30 breast cancer cell lines and 61 primary breast cancer samples examined. These 
results indicate that mismatch repair errors characteristic of the MSI phenotype 
are uncommon in human breast cancer.

PMID: 10213220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Oncogene. 1999 Mar 18;18(11):2003-14.

Transcriptional repression of the E2F-1 gene by interferon-alpha is mediated
through induction of E2F-4/pRB and E2F-4/p130 complexes.

Furukawa Y(1), Iwase S, Kikuchi J, Nakamura M, Yamada H, Matsuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Department of Hematology, Jichi Medical School,
Tochigi, Japan.

E2F is a heterodimeric transcription factor composed of one of five E2F subunits 
(E2F-1 to E2F-5) and a DP subunit. E2F regulates the expression of several
growth-promoting genes, and thus, can be a target of antiproliferative action of 
interferons (IFNs). In this study, we investigated the mechanisms whereby
IFN-alpha suppresses transcription of the E2F-1 gene. Transfection studies
revealed that E2F-1 promoter was functionally divided into two parts: upstream
activation sequences (UAS) and a downstream negative-regulatory element
(E2F-binding sites). When cells were proliferating, transcription of the E2F-1
gene was primarily driven by the UAS, while E2F sites were not involved in
activation. IFN-alpha markedly reduced E2F-1 promoter activity, but introduction 
of non-binding mutation at the E2F sites completely abrogated the inhibition.
Free E2F4 was found to be the predominant species bound to the E2F sites in
proliferating cells. IFN-alpha induced upregulation of E2F-4 along with
dephosphorylation of pRB and p130, which resulted in the formation of E2F-4/pRB
and E2F-4/p130 complexes on the E2F-1 promoter. These complexes function as
transcriptional repressors to inhibit E2F-1 mRNA expression. Our findings
indicate that E2F-4 is a critical regulator of E2F-1, which offer an excellent
paradigm for understanding functional diversity within the E2F family.

PMID: 10208422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 23;274(17):12009-16.

Modulation of E2F complexes during G0 to S phase transition in human primary
B-lymphocytes.

van der Sman J(1), Thomas NS, Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research and Section of Virology and Cell Biology,
Imperial College School of Medicine at St Mary's, London W2 1PG, United Kingdom.

The pocket protein-E2F complexes are convergence points for cell cycle signaling.
In the present report, we identified and monitored the pocket protein-E2F
complexes in human primary B-lymphocytes after activation by phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate. Consistent with previous data from human and mouse fibroblasts and
T-lymphocytes, E2F4 and DP1 form the predominant E2F heterodimers both in G0 and 
G1 phases of the human B-lymphocyte cell cycle, whereas E2F1 and -3 are first
detected in late G1, and their expression levels increase towards S phase.
Intriguingly, the major E2F complex that we detected in quiescent human
B-lymphocytes is consisted of pRB, E2F4, and DP1. Though the levels of DP1 and -2
increase when cells progress from G0 to S, the proportion of DP1 to DP2 remains
relatively constant during the cell cycle. We also observed an increase in
electrophoretic mobility of the predominant E2F components, DP1 and E2F4, as
B-lymphocytes progressed from G0 into early G1. This increase in mobility was
attributable to dephosphorylation, as lambda phosphatase treatment could convert 
the slower migrating forms into the corresponding faster mobility forms. We
further demonstrated that this change in phosphorylation status correlates with a
decrease in DNA binding activity. This modulation of DNA binding activity
mediated through the dephosphorylation of DP1 and E2F4 could help to explain the 
lack of in vivo DNA footprinting in late G1 and S phases of gene promoters
negatively regulated through E2F sites and suggests a novel mechanism for
controlling E2F transcriptional activity during the transition from quiescence to
proliferation.

PMID: 10207023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. EMBO J. 1999 Apr 1;18(7):1878-90.

Timing of cyclin E gene expression depends on the regulated association of a
bipartite repressor element with a novel E2F complex.

Le Cam L(1), Polanowska J, Fabbrizio E, Olivier M, Philips A, Ng Eaton E, Classon
M, Geng Y, Sardet C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire, UMR 5535, CNRS, 1919 route de Mende, 34293,
Montpellier cedex 5, France.

Transient induction of the cyclin E gene in late G1 gates progression into S. We 
show that this event is controlled via a cyclin E repressor module (CERM), a
novel bipartite repressor element located near the cyclin E transcription start
site. CERM consists of a variant E2F-binding site and a contiguous upstream
AT-rich sequence which cooperate during G0/G1 to delay cyclin E expression until 
late G1. CERM binds the protein complex CERC, which disappears upon progression
through G0-G1 and reappears upon entry into the following G1. CERC disappearance 
correlates kinetically with the liberation of the CERM module in vivo and cyclin 
E transcriptional induction. CERC contains E2F4/DP1 and a pocket protein, and
sediments faster than classical E2F complexes in a glycerol gradient, suggesting 
the presence of additional components in a novel high molecular weight complex.
Affinity purified CERC binds to CERM but not to canonical E2F sites, thus
displaying behavior different from known E2F complexes. In cells nullizygous for 
members of the Rb family, CERC is still detectable and CERM-dependent repression 
is functional. Thus p130, p107 and pRb function interchangeably in CERC. Notably,
the CERC-CERM complex dissociates prematurely in pRb-/- cells in correspondence
with the premature expression of cyclin E. Thus, we identify a new regulatory
module that controls repression of G1-specific genes in G0/G1.

PMCID: PMC1171273
PMID: 10202151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Gen Virol. 1999 Mar;80 ( Pt 3):549-55.

Activation of cyclin A gene expression by the cyclin encoded by human
herpesvirus-8.

Duro D(1), Schulze A, Vogt B, Bartek J, Mittnacht S, Jansen-Dürr P.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte
Tumorvirologie, Heidelberg, Germany.

Human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8), also known as Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus, encodes a protein, referred to as HHV8-Vcyc, with sequence
similarity to human G1 cyclins, in particular of the D type. HHV8-Vcyc is
expressed in Kaposi's sarcoma and functional analysis suggests that it can
activate cyclin-dependent kinases (cdk) and thereby trigger inactivation of the
retinoblastoma protein (pRb), indicating that HHV8-Vcyc may contribute to the
oncogenic potential of HHV-8. We show here that HHV8-Vcyc can activate
transcription of the human cyclin A gene in quiescent cells, a property shared
with known transforming oncogenes. Transcriptional activation by HHV8-Vcyc
depends on an E2F-binding site in the cyclin A promoter, and cdk6 kinase activity
is required. The ability of HHV8-Vcyc to activate cyclin A gene expression is
shared by D-type cyclins and cyclin E. Unlike D-type cyclins, HHV8-Vcyc is unable
to trigger phosphorylation of the pRb-related protein p107 and fails to induce
dissociation of p107 from E2F. Unlike cyclin E, HHV8-Vcyc fails to interact
physically with E2F complexes on the cyclin A promoter. These results provide
additional evidence for the notion that the HHV-8-encoded cyclin differs in
several properties from cellular G1 cyclins.

PMID: 10091992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Genes Dev. 1999 Mar 15;13(6):666-74.

Structural basis of DNA recognition by the heterodimeric cell cycle transcription
factor E2F-DP.

Zheng N(1), Fraenkel E, Pabo CO, Pavletich NP.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cellular Biochemistry and Biophysics Program,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021 USA.

The E2F and DP protein families form heterodimeric transcription factors that
play a central role in the expression of cell cycle-regulated genes. The crystal 
structure of an E2F4-DP2-DNA complex shows that the DNA-binding domains of the
E2F and DP proteins both have a fold related to the winged-helix DNA-binding
motif. Recognition of the central c/gGCGCg/c sequence of the consensus
DNA-binding site is symmetric, and amino acids that contact these bases are
conserved among all known E2F and DP proteins. The asymmetry in the extended
binding site TTTc/gGCGCc/g is associated with an amino-terminal extension of
E2F4, in which an arginine binds in the minor groove near the TTT stretch. This
arginine is invariant among E2Fs but not present in DPs. E2F4 and DP2 interact
through an extensive protein-protein interface, and structural features of this
interface suggest it contributes to the preference for heterodimers over
homodimers in DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC316551
PMID: 10090723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Int J Cancer. 1999 Mar 15;80(6):944-5.

Absence of intragenic mismatch mutations in small cell lung cancers with
microsatellite instability.

Anbazhagan R, Merlo A, Sidransky D, Gabrielson E.

PMID: 10074930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Oncogene. 1999 Jan 21;18(3):593-605.

Association with E2F-1 governs intracellular trafficking and polyubiquitination
of DP-1.

Magae J(1), Illenye S, Chang YC, Mitsui Y, Heintz NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont College of Medicine, Burlington
05405, USA.

The cell cycle-regulated transcription factor E2F is a family of heterodimers
composed of E2F and DP protein subunits. While DP proteins stabilize DNA binding 
of E2F proteins, and influence the entry of E2F-4 and E2F-5 into the nucleus, the
role of DP proteins in E2F-dependent gene expression is not well understood.
Using immunolocalization, immunoprecipitation, and cell fractionation
experiments, here we show association with E2F subunits governs intracellular
trafficking and ubiquitination of DP-1. In transient transfection experiments,
DP-1 polypeptides that stably bound E2F-1 entered the nucleus. DP-1 proteins that
failed to associate with E2F subunits accumulated in the cell cytoplasm as
polyubiquitinated DP-1. A Chinese hamster cell line that conditionally expresses 
HA-DP-1 was used to examine the effect of DP-1 on cell cycle progression. In
serum response experiments, moderate increases in HA-DP-1 led to a threefold
increase in E2F DNA binding activity in vitro, a corresponding increase in dhfr
gene expression during transition of G1, and higher rates of S phase entry.
However, flow cytometry showed cells expressing very high levels of HA-DP-1
failed to enter the S phase. Inhibition of cell cycle progression by high levels 
of HA-DP-1 was associated with the accumulation of other ubiquitinated cellular
proteins, including c-jun and the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21,
indicating that degradation of ubiquitinated proteins is required for progression
from G0 to S phase even in the presence of activated E2F. Under similar
conditions, expression of E2F-1 reduced the levels of ubiquitinated cellular
proteins and accelerated cell cycle progression. Our studies indicate association
with E2F subunits prevents ubiquitin-dependent degradation of DP-1 in the
cytoplasm by promoting nuclear entry of E2F/DP heterodimers.

PMID: 9989809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Cancer Res. 1999 Jan 15;59(2):462-6.

Causes and consequences of microsatellite instability in endometrial carcinoma.

Gurin CC(1), Federici MG, Kang L, Boyd J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Genetic instability of microsatellite repeat sequences [microsatellite
instability (MI)] is commonly seen in tumors associated with the hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer syndrome and is a result of inactivating mutations
in any of several genes involved in a particular pathway of DNA mismatch repair. 
Sporadic (i.e., nonhereditary) manifestations of several tumor types, including
colorectal, gastric, and endometrial carcinomas, also exhibit MI in a significant
fraction of cases. Many MI+ sporadic colorectal carcinomas are associated with
somatic mutations of mismatch repair genes, and several genes with coding region 
microsatellites are frequently mutated as a result in these cancers. The
molecular causes and consequences of MI in sporadic endometrial carcinomas remain
obscure, however. The aims of this study were: (a) to identify a series of
sporadic endometrial carcinomas with clear evidence of MI; (b) to determine the
extent to which somatic alterations in mismatch repair genes are associated with 
this MI; and (c) to establish whether the genes containing coding region
microsatellite repeats that are known to be disrupted in MI+ gastrointestinal
cancers are also disrupted in MI+ endometrial carcinomas. Matched pairs of normal
and tumor DNA from 57 consecutive cases of endometrial carcinoma were examined
for evidence of MI using a consensus panel of microsatellite markers. Fourteen
cases (25%) displayed unequivocal evidence of MI, consistent with previously
published estimates of the incidence of MI+ sporadic endometrial carcinoma. These
cases were subjected to a mutation screen of the coding regions and exon-intron
boundaries of the mismatch repair genes MSH2 and MLH1. Although several
polymorphisms were detected, no clearly deleterious mutations were found in
either of these genes. Notably, however, hypermethylation of the MLH1 promoter
region was identified in 10 of 14 (71%) MI+ cases. Somatic mutations in coding
region microsatellite repeats in the TGFbetaIIR, IGFIIR, BAX, E2F4, MSH3, MSH6,
BRCA1, and BRCA2 genes were generally rare. Four MI+ tumors (29%) contained
somatic mutations in the PTEN gene, only one of which was likely the result of
MI. These data indicate that somatic mutational inactivation of known mismatch
repair genes does not account for the great majority of sporadic endometrial
carcinomas with MI and that a significant fraction of these cases may instead be 
causally associated with hypermethylation of the MLH1 promoter. Furthermore,
genes with coding region microsatellites that are frequently mutated in MI+
gastrointestinal cancers are rarely mutated in MI+ endometrial cancers, implying 
the existence of alternative molecular targets for the tumorigenic effects of MI 
in this tumor type.

PMID: 9927063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):916-22.

E2F and histone deacetylase mediate transforming growth factor beta repression of
cdc25A during keratinocyte cell cycle arrest.

Iavarone A(1), Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.

cdc25A is a tyrosine phosphatase that activates G1 cyclin-dependent kinases
(Cdk's). In human keratinocytes, cdc25A expression is down-regulated after the
initial drop in Cdk activity caused by cell exposure to the antimitogenic
cytokine transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) or removal of serum factors. 
Here we show that the TGF-beta-inhibitory-response element in the cdc25A promoter
maps to an E2F site at nucleotides -62 to -55 from the transcription start site. 
This site is not required for basal transcription in keratinocytes. We provide
evidence that the cell cycle arrest program activated by TGF-beta in human
keratinocytes includes the generation of E2F4-p130 complexes that in association 
with histone deacetylase HDAC1 inhibit the activity of the cdc25A promoter from
this repressor E2F site. This mechanism is part of a program that places
keratinocytes in the quiescent state following the initial drop in Cdk activity
caused by cell exposure to TGF-beta.

PMCID: PMC83949
PMID: 9858615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1998 Dec;23(4):317-22.

Infrequent frameshift mutations of polynucleotide repeats in multiple primary
cancers affecting the esophagus and other organs.

Iwaya T(1), Maesawa C, Nishizuka S, Suzuki Y, Sakata K, Sato N, Ikeda K, Koeda K,
Ogasawara S, Otsuka K, Kimura Y, Aoki K, Ishida K, Saito K, Tamura G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Iwate Medical University School of Medicine, Morioka,
Japan.

Frequent frameshift mutations of simple nucleotide repeats in the
protein-encoding regions, as well as replication errors (RERs) at microsatellite 
loci, have recently been demonstrated in gastrointestinal tumors. These genetic
instabilities have been considered indicative of an increased risk of
accumulating mutations in cancer-associated genes and of developing multiple
cancers. We studied frameshift (or insertion/deletion) mutations of simple
nucleotide repeats in five genes (TGFbeta type II receptor [TGFbetaRII], E2F4,
MSH2, MSH3, and MSH6) in 23 tumors from 12 patients who had synchronous cancers
of the esophagus and other organs. Genetic instability at four microsatellite
loci, as well as mutations in the TP53, APC, and KRAS2 genes, were also studied. 
No frameshift mutations were observed in the TGFbetaRII, MSH3, and MSH6 genes.
RER and a deletion mutation of BAT26 in MSH2 were present in one (1/23; 4%)
gastric cancer. This tumor also carried a deletion mutation in the serine (AGC)
repeat of the E2F4 gene. Mutation screening of the TP53, APC, and KRAS2 genes
revealed that the synchronous cancers did not carry the same mutations. Our
results suggested that genetic instability, such as insertion/deletion mutations 
in simple nucleotide repeats, is not significantly associated with the
development of multiple primary cancers of the esophagus and other organs, and
that these synchronous cancers developed independently according to their
different environmental factors.

PMID: 9824204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Oncogene. 1998 Aug 20;17(7):867-76.

The E2F-family proteins induce distinct cell cycle regulatory factors in
p16-arrested, U343 astrocytoma cells.

Dirks PB(1), Rutka JT, Hubbard SL, Mondal S, Hamel PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

We previously demonstrated that P16Ink4a (p16) expression in p16-deficient U343
astrocytoma cells causes a G1 cell cycle arrest, profound changes in cytoskeletal
proteins and alterations in expression and activity of the pRB and E2F family
proteins. We examine here the effects of expressing wild type or mutant versions 
of the downstream targets of p16 in U343 astrocytomas. We first attempted to
block proliferation of U343 cells using the dominant mutant of pRB, deltap34.
Expression of this mutant in the human osteosarcoma, SAOS-2, potently blocked
proliferation but did not affect the cell cycle of U343 cells. We next showed
that expression of E2F-1, E2F-2, E2F-3 and E2F-4 are each able to overcome this
p16-dependent cell cycle arrest but exhibit distinct biological activities.
Adenoviral-mediated expression of E2F-1, E2F-2, E2F-3, or E2F-4 overcame the
p16-dependent cell cycle block and induced alterations in cell morphology. E2F-5,
only in conjunction with DP1, promoted cell cycle progression. For both E2F-1 and
E2F-2, but not E2F-3 or E2F-5/DP1, cell cycle re-entry was associated with almost
quantitative cell death. Only small numbers of dying cells were observed in
E2F-4-expressing cultures. Expression of the different E2F's altered the
expression of distinct sets of cell cycle regulatory proteins. E2F-1 induced
endogenous E2F-4 expression and also caused an increase in pRB, p107 and cyclin E
levels. Expression of E2F-4 caused a weak increase in E2F-1 levels but also
strongly induced pRB, p107, p130 and cyclin E. However, E2F-1 and E2F-4 clearly
regulate expression of distinct genes, demonstrated when E2F-4 caused a threefold
increase in the levels of cdk2 whereas E2F-1 failed to increase in this cyclin
dependent kinase. Similarly, expression of E2F-1 or E2F-2 were shown to have
distinct effects on the expression of cdk2, cyclin E and pRB despite both of
these closely related E2F-family members potently inducing cell death. Thus,
E2F-1, E2F-2, E2F-3 and E2F-4 are able to overcome the p16-dependent
proliferative block in U343 astrocytoma cells. While overcoming this cell cycle
block, each of the E2F's uniquely affect the expression of a number of cell cycle
regulatory proteins and have distinct abilities to promote cell death.

PMID: 9780003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Am J Pathol. 1998 Oct;153(4):1063-78.

Accumulated clonal genetic alterations in familial and sporadic colorectal
carcinomas with widespread instability in microsatellite sequences.

Fujiwara T(1), Stolker JM, Watanabe T, Rashid A, Longo P, Eshleman JR, Booker S, 
Lynch HT, Jass JR, Green JS, Kim H, Jen J, Vogelstein B, Hamilton SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

A subset of hereditary and sporadic colorectal carcinomas is defined by
microsatellite instability (MSI), but the spectra of gene mutations have not been
characterized extensively. Thirty-nine hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer 
syndrome carcinomas (HNPCCa) and 57 sporadic right-sided colonic carcinomas
(SRSCCa) were evaluated. Of HNPCCa, 95% (37/39) were MSI-positive as contrasted
with 31% (18/57) of SRSCCa (P < 0.000001), but instability tended to be more
widespread in SRSCCa (P = 0.08). Absence of nuclear hMSH2 mismatch repair gene
product by immunohistochemistry was associated with germline hMSH2 mutation (P = 
0.0007). The prevalence of K-ras proto-oncogene mutations was similar in HNPCCa
and SRSCCa (30% (11/37) and 30% (16/54)), but no HNPCCa from patients with
germline hMSH2 mutation had codon 13 mutation (P = 0.02), and two other HNPCCa
had multiple K-ras mutations attributable to subclones. 18q allelic deletion and 
p53 gene product overexpression were inversely related to MSI (P = 0.0004 and P =
0.0001, respectively). Frameshift mutation of the transforming growth factor beta
type II receptor gene was frequent in all MSI-positive cancers (85%, 46/54), but 
mutation of the E2F-4 transcription factor gene was more common in HNPCCa of
patients with germline hMSH2 mutation than in those with germline bMLH1 mutation 
(100% (8/8) versus 40% (2/5), P = 0.04), and mutation of the Bax proapoptotic
gene was more frequent in HNPCCa than in MSI-positive SRSCCa (55% (17/31) versus 
13% (2/15), P = 0.01). The most common combination of mutations occurred in only 
23% (8/35) of evaluable MSI-positive cancers. Our findings suggest that the
accumulation of specific genetic alterations in MSI-positive colorectal cancers
is markedly heterogeneous, because the occurrence of some mutations (eg, ras,
E2F-4, and Bax genes), but not others (eg, transforming growth factor beta type
II receptor gene), depends on the underlying basis of the mismatch repair
deficiency. This genetic heterogeneity may contribute to the heterogeneous
clinical and pathological features of MSI-positive cancers.

PMCID: PMC1853059
PMID: 9777938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 11;273(37):23659-67.

p130, p107, and pRb are differentially regulated in proliferating cells and
during cell cycle arrest by alpha-interferon.

Thomas NS(1), Pizzey AR, Tiwari S, Williams CD, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University College London Medical School, 98
Chenies Mews, London WC1E 6HX, United Kingdom. nicholas.thomas@ucl.ac.uk

We have determined how the phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma family (pRb,
p107, and p130) is governed in individual cell cycle phases of Daudi B-cells
during cell cycle exit triggered by alpha-interferon (alpha-IFN). alpha-IFN
causes dephosphorylation of pRb and loss of p130 phosphorylated Form 3. However, 
the change in p130 phosphorylation in response to alpha-IFN occurs before
dephosphorylation of pRb is complete because loss of p130 Form 3 occurs
throughout the cell cycle prior to complete arrest in G1, whereas pRb is
dephosphorylated only in G1. In contrast, p107 is dephosphorylated and is then
depleted from cells as they exit the cell cycle. p130, predominantly in Form 1,
and hypophosphorylated pRb bind an E2F DNA binding site; p130 complexes E2F-4,
whereas pRb binds both E2F-4 and E2F-1. The phosphorylated forms of E2F-4 that
bind to the E2F DNA site are different from hyperphosphorylated E2F-4, which
predominates in primary hemopoietic cells in G0. We conclude that although cell
cycle arrest induced by alpha-IFN may be mediated in part by formation of a
complex containing p130 and E2F-4, alpha-IFN does not induce hyperphosphorylation
of E2F-4, which characterizes primary hemopoietic cells in G0.

PMID: 9726970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Sep 1;95(18):10493-8.

The three members of the pocket proteins family share the ability to repress E2F 
activity through recruitment of a histone deacetylase.

Ferreira R(1), Magnaghi-Jaulin L, Robin P, Harel-Bellan A, Trouche D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire "Oncogénèse, Différenciation et Transduction du Signal," Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Propre de Recherche 9079, IFC-01,
94801 Villejuif, France.

The transcription factor E2F plays a major role in cell cycle control in
mammalian cells. E2F binding sites, which are present in the promoters of a
variety of genes required for S phase, shift from a negative to a positive role
in transcription at the commitment point, a crucial point in G1 that precedes the
G1/S transition. Before the commitment point, E2F activity is repressed by
members of the pocket proteins family. This repression is believed to be crucial 
for the proper control of cell growth. We have previously shown that Rb, the
founding member of the pocket proteins family, represses E2F1 activity by
recruiting the histone deacetylase HDAC1. Here, we show that the two other
members of the pocket proteins family, p107 and p130, also are able to interact
physically with HDAC1 in live cells. HDAC1 interacts with p107 and Rb through an 
"LXCXE"-like motif, similar to that used by viral transforming proteins to bind
and inactivate pocket proteins. Indeed, we find that the viral transforming
protein E1A competes with HDAC1 for p107 interaction. We also demonstrate that
p107 is able to interact simultaneously with HDAC1 and E2F4, suggesting a model
in which p107 recruits HDAC1 to repress E2F sites. Indeed, we demonstrate that
histone deacetylase activity is involved in the p107- or p130-induced repression 
of E2F4. Taken together, our data suggest that all members of the E2F family are 
regulated in early G1 by similar complexes, containing a pocket protein and the
histone deacetylase HDAC1.

PMCID: PMC27922
PMID: 9724731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Immunol. 1998 Aug 15;161(4):1630-6.

Transcription factor E2F controls the reversible gamma delta T cell growth arrest
mediated through WC1.

Kirkham PA(1), Lam EW, Takamatsu HH, Parkhouse RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute for Animal Health, Pirbright, Surrey,
United Kingdom. paul.kirkham@pharma.novartis.com

IL-2-stimulated expansion of T cells requires continued and sequential passage of
the dividing cells through a major cell cycle check point in the G1 phase. We
have previously shown that a gamma delta T cell-specific surface receptor, WC1,
induces G0/G1 growth arrest, reversible with Con A, in proliferating
IL-2-dependent gamma delta T cells. We now show that this reversible WC1-induced 
cell cycle arrest is correlated with induction of the cyclin kinase inhibitor
p27kip1 and an associated down-regulation in cyclins A, D2, and D3 expression,
along with dephosphorylation of pocket proteins p107, p130, and pRb. Together
with diminished pocket protein phosphorylation, p107 expression levels are
significantly down-regulated in response to WC1 stimulation. This coordinated
sequence of signaling events is focused on E2F regulation so that, downstream of 
the pocket proteins, WC1 stimulation results in a diminished DNA binding activity
for free E2F as a consequence of reduced E2F1 expression, whereas E2F4 expression
is unaffected. Consistent with this interpretation, overexpression of E2F1
overcomes the growth-arresting effects induced by WC1 stimulation. Finally, in
accordance with our previous observations at both the cellular and molecular
level, subsequent mitogen stimulation can reverse all the above changes induced
by WC1. These results, focused on E2F regulation, therefore provide a first
insight into the effects of both positive (mitogen) and negative (anti-WC1)
stimuli on cell cycle control in IL-2-dependent gamma delta T cells.

PMID: 9712024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Kokubyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1998 Jun;65(2):172-88.

[Interaction of E2F/Rb family members with factor binding to co-repressor element
on B-myb and E2F1 promoters].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakajima Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Faculty of Dentistry,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University.

The E2F transcription factor plays an important role in controlling the
expression of genes required for cell cycle progression. The transcription of a
number of these genes, including E2F1 and B-myb, is repressed in G0/early G1 at
E2F DNA binding sites mediated by interaction of E2F with the Rb family member
proteins. It was shown that a corepressor element CHR, which was originally
identified in the B-myb promoter, is also responsible for the repression of the
E2F1 promoter. The mutation of the CHR element adjacent to E2F sites leads to a
derepression of the E2F1 promoter in quiescent cells. The CHR-mutated promoter is
activated by the E2F family of proteins (E2F1, E2F2, E2F3, and E2F4) but unable
to be repressed by any of the Rb family members (Rb, p107, and p130) to the level
of the wild-type promoter activity in G0, indicating that the repression by the
Rb family members is required for the corepressor element. Moreover, it was shown
that a factor specifically bound to the CHR element is co-purified with E2F by
DNA affinity purification and co-immunoprecipitated with E2F4 and the Rb family
members. These results seggested that E2F and the Rb family member proteins
regulate the transcription of the E2F1 and B-myb genes by associating with an
additional corepressor protein.

PMID: 9711036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Mol Carcinog. 1998 Jul;22(3):190-8.

Differential activities of E2F family members: unique functions in regulating
transcription.

Pierce AM(1), Schneider-Broussard R, Philhower JL, Johnson DG.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Science Park-Research
Division, Smithville 78957, USA.

Several regulators of E2F transcriptional activity, including the retinoblastoma 
tumor suppressor (Rb) protein, p16Ink4a, cyclin D1, and cyclin-dependent kinase
4, have been shown to be targets for genetic alterations that underlie the
development of human cancers. Deregulation of E2F transcription factors as a
result of these genetic alterations is believed to contribute to tumor
development. This hypothesis is supported by the finding that at least some
members of the E2F gene family can contribute to oncogenic transformation when
overexpressed. Each E2F family member can dimerize with DP proteins, bind
consensus E2F sites, and activate transcription. Several pieces of evidence
suggest, however, that the various E2F species have unique functions in
regulating transcription. We compared the abilities of E2F1, E2F4, and E2F5 to
activate transcription from a variety of gene promoters and found that in all
cases E2F1 was the most potent activator, followed by E2F4 and then by E2F5.
Construction of chimeric proteins between E2F1 and E2F4 demonstrated that either 
the carboxy terminus or the amino terminus of E2F1 could make E2F4 a more potent 
activator. In contrast, neither the carboxy terminus nor the amino terminus of
E2F1 could significantly increase the activity of E2F5. We found that, consistent
with a role for E2F5 in transcriptional repression, E2F5's binding partner p130, 
like Rb, could also actively repress transcription when directly bound to a
target promoter.

PMID: 9688145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jul 21;95(15):8574-9.

Control of retinoblastoma protein-independent hematopoietic cell cycle by the
pRB-related p130.

Hoshikawa Y(1), Mori A, Amimoto K, Iwabe K, Hatakeyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 170-8455, Japan.

The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (pRB) is a potent inhibitor of
mammalian cell growth and the functional inactivation of pRB is widely presumed
to be essential for progression of the cell cycle from G1 phase. In this work,
the generality of pRB-based cell cycle control in mammalian cells was addressed
by conditionally expressing pRB in cytokine-dependent hematopoietic cells. We
show herein that these cells are able to progress through the cell cycle in
response to cytokine despite the continued presence of supraphysiological amounts
of wild-type pRB or phosphorylation-resistant pRB mutants. However, their growth 
was strongly blocked by ectopic expression of the pRB-related pocket protein,
p130. This growth inhibition required the E2F-binding pocket domain but not the
cyclin-binding domain of p130. Furthermore, increased amounts of the
p130-controlled E2F, termed E2F-4, potentiated the mitogenic response of the
cells to cytokine and the constitutive overexpression of E2F-4 rendered the cells
cytokine-independent. Our results indicate the existence of a non-pRB-based cell 
cycle whose operation depends primarily on the interplay between p130 and E2F-4
in certain hematopoietic cells.

PMCID: PMC21117
PMID: 9671719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Aug;18(8):4565-76.

Regulation of cellular genes in a chromosomal context by the retinoblastoma tumor
suppressor protein.

Buchmann AM(1), Swaminathan S, Thimmapaya B.

Author information: 
(1)Robert H. Lurie Cancer Center and Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611-3088, USA.

The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor gene product (pRb) is involved in controlling
cell cycle progression from G1 into S. pRb functions, in part, by regulating the 
activities of several transcription factors, making pRb involved in the
transcriptional control of cellular genes. Transient-transfection assays have
implicated pRb in the transcription of several genes, including c-fos, the
interleukin-6 gene, c-myc, cdc-2, c-neu, and the transforming growth factor beta2
gene. However, these assays place the promoter in an artificial context and
exclude the effects of far 5' upstream regions and chromosomal architecture on
gene transcription. In these experiments, we have studied the role of pRb in the 
control of cell cycle-related genes within a chromosomal context and within the
context of the G1 phase of the cell cycle. We have used adenovirus vectors to
overexpress pRb in human osteosarcoma cells and breast cells synchronized in
early G1. By RNase protection assays, we have assayed the effects of this
virus-produced pRb on gene expression in these cells. These results indicate that
pRb is involved in the transcriptional downregulation of the E2F-1, E2F-2,
dihydrofolate reductase, thymidine kinase, c-myc, proliferating-cell nuclear
antigen, p107, and p21/Cip1 genes. However, it has no effect on the transcription
of the E2F-3, E2F-4, E2F-5, DP-1, DP-2, or p16/Ink4 genes. The results are
consistent with the notion that pRb controls the transcription of genes involved 
in S-phase promotion. They also suggest that pRb negatively regulates the
transcription of two of the transcription factors whose activity it also
represses, E2F-1 and E2F-2, and that it plays a role in downregulating the
immediate-early gene response to serum stimulation.

PMCID: PMC109042
PMID: 9671466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Oncogene. 1998 Jun 11;16(23):2957-63.

A new model of cell cycle-regulated transcription: repression of the cyclin A
promoter by CDF-1 and anti-repression by E2F.

Liu N(1), Lucibello FC, Engeland K, Müller R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Germany.

Cell cycle regulation of the cyclin A gene is determined by a bipartite repressor
binding site in the region of the basal promoter, termed CDE-CHR, which also
controls the expression of cell cycle genes upregulated in S or G2 (such as
cdc25C). The CDE-CHR in the cyclin A promoter is recognized by both E2F complexes
and CDF-1, but the contribution of each of these factors in cell cycle regulation
is unknown. In the present study, we have introduced mutations into the cyclin A 
promoter which lead to either a loss or enhancement of E2F binding, while having 
only marginal effects on the interaction with CDF-1. Unlike mutants deficient for
CDF-1 binding, promoter variants lacking E2F binding showed an unchanged
repression in G0, thus identifying CDF-1 as the principal repressor of the cyclin
A gene. The same mutants did show, however, a delayed derepression while a
mutation leading to increased E2F binding resulted in premature up-regulation.
These findings clearly suggest that E2F contributes to the correct timing of
cyclin A transcription, presumably by acting as an anti-repressor. In agreement
with this conclusion, we find that the cyclin A promoter only poorly interacts
with E2F-4, which is the major E2F family member in G0 cells, while a clear
binding is seen with E2F-1 and -3, which are up-regulated in late G1.

PMID: 9662327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jun;18(6):3212-22.

Inhibition of cyclin D1 kinase activity is associated with E2F-mediated
inhibition of cyclin D1 promoter activity through E2F and Sp1.

Watanabe G(1), Albanese C, Lee RJ, Reutens A, Vairo G, Henglein B, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Coordinated interactions between cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), their target
"pocket proteins" (the retinoblastoma protein [pRB], p107, and p130), the pocket 
protein binding E2F-DP complexes, and the Cdk inhibitors regulate orderly cell
cycle progression. The cyclin D1 gene encodes a regulatory subunit of the Cdk
holoenzymes, which phosphorylate the tumor suppressor pRB, leading to the release
of free E2F-1. Overexpression of E2F-1 can induce apoptosis and may either
promote or inhibit cellular proliferation, depending upon the cell type. In these
studies overexpression of E2F-1 inhibited cyclin D1-dependent kinase activity,
cyclin D1 protein levels, and promoter activity. The DNA binding domain, the pRB 
pocket binding region, and the amino-terminal Sp1 binding domain of E2F-1 were
required for full repression of cyclin D1. Overexpression of pRB activated the
cyclin D1 promoter, and a dominant interfering pRB mutant was defective in cyclin
D1 promoter activation. Two regions of the cyclin D1 promoter were required for
full E2F-1-dependent repression. The region proximal to the transcription
initiation site at -127 bound Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4, and the distal region at -143
bound E2F-4-DP-1-p107. In contrast with E2F-1, E2F-4 induced cyclin D1 promoter
activity. Differential regulation of the cyclin D1 promoter by E2F-1 and E2F-4
suggests that E2Fs may serve distinguishable functions during cell cycle
progression. Inhibition of cyclin D1 abundance by E2F-1 may contribute to an
autoregulatory feedback loop to reduce pRB phosphorylation and E2F-1 levels in
the cell.

PMCID: PMC108903
PMID: 9584162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Oncogene. 1998 Mar 26;16(12):1513-23.

Regulation of the cdk inhibitor p21 gene during cell cycle progression is under
the control of the transcription factor E2F.

Hiyama H(1), Iavarone A, Reeves SA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuro-Oncology, Neuroscience Center, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston 02129, USA.

The control of cell cycle progression is orchestrated by an extraordinary diverse
and dynamic in function group of proteins. Critical in the progression are the
actions of the E2F family of transcription factors which regulate the expression 
of genes necessary for the G1/S transition and the WAF/CIP/KIP family of cdk
inhibitors which can inhibit cell cycle progression. In this report, we have
identified E2F binding sites in both the human and mouse p21 promoters that bind 
E2F protein complexes from nuclear extracts in a cell cycle-dependent manner. In 
ectopic expression experiments we determined that E2F1, but not E2F4, can
strongly transactivate the human p21 gene through these E2F binding sites which
are located in the -215/+1 region of the p21 gene. The transactivation of the p21
gene through regulatory elements within the -215/+1 region of the promoter was
correlated with increased levels of endogenous E2F1 and p21 proteins at the G1/S 
boundary. The significance of transactivation of the p21 gene by E2F is that p21 
function is important in cell cycle progression as well as for cell cycle arrest.
Indeed, E2F-induced levels of p21 protein during the G1/ S transition is
consistent with the recent findings demonstrating that p21 acts as an assembly
factor for kinase active cyclin/cdk/p21 complexes.

PMID: 9569018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 13;273(11):6190-5.

The role of cyclin D3-dependent kinase in the phosphorylation of p130 in mouse
BALB/c 3T3 fibroblasts.

Dong F(1), Cress WD Jr, Agrawal D, Pledger WJ.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, University of South
Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

We have observed that cyclin D3-dependent kinase activity is increased in the
late G1 phase in BALB/c 3T3 fibroblasts. The profile of cyclin D3-associated
activity closely parallels that of cyclin D1, which is also induced after
mitogenic stimulation of quiescent cells. These activities correlate with the
appearance of hyperphosphorylated p130, an Rb family member important in
regulating E2F-4 and E2F-5 activity in fibroblastic cells. We demonstrated,
however, that only the cyclin D3 activity efficiently phosphorylated p130 in an
in vitro kinase assay. This apparent specificity was further demonstrated by
experiments which demonstrated that cyclin D3 was physically associated with p130
at the times when D3-dependent kinase activity and p130 hyperphosphorylation were
observed. Examination of E2F by electrophoretic mobility shift assay revealed
that E2F-4 DNA binding activity existed in a p130.E2F complex at times before
D3-dependent kinase activity was apparent and in a free E2F-4 complex after D3
activity developed. Thus, our data suggest that cyclin D3 preferentially
phosphorylates p130 and is thereby specifically targeted to overcoming
growth-suppressive control mediated through p130 pathways.

PMID: 9497341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Cancer Res. 1998 Apr 1;58(7):1325-31.

Regulation of E2F4 mitogenic activity during terminal differentiation by its
heterodimerization partners for nuclear translocation.

Puri PL(1), Cimino L, Fulco M, Zimmerman C, La Thangue NB, Giordano A, Graessmann
A, Levrero M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Expression, Fondazione Andrea Cesalpino, Policlinico
Umberto I, University of Rome La Sapienza, Italy.

E2F/DP heterodimers play a pivotal role in the regulation of cell growth and
differentiation. A decrease in E2F/DP activity occurs during cell cycle arrest
and differentiation. However, very little is known about the specific role of the
various E2F/DP members along the transition from proliferation to terminal
differentiation. We have previously shown that E2F4 accounts for the vast
majority of the endogenous E2F in differentiating muscle cells. Here, we show
that E2F4, which lacks a nuclear localization signal (nls), is distributed in
both the nucleus and the cytoplasm, in either asynchronously growing myoblasts or
differentiated myotubes. E2F4 nuclear accumulation is induced by the binding in
the cytoplasm with specific partners p107, pRb2/p130, and DP3delta, an
nls-containing spliced form of DP3, which provide the nls. Although
overexpression of E2F4/DP3delta reactivates the cell cycle in quiescent cells,
the E2F4 nuclear accumulation induced by pRb2/p130 and p107 correlates with cell 
growth arrest Moreover, E2F4/DP3delta-induced cell cycle reactivation is
efficiently counteracted by either p107 or pRb2/p130 overexpression. Reinduction 
in quiescent cells of DNA synthesis by E2F1/DP1 overexpression is abrogated by
coexpression of pRb and is hampered by MyoD overexpression. Both pRb2/p130 and
pRb, as well as MyoD, are up-regulated in myotubes. Accordingly, multinucleated
myotubes, which are induced to reenter the S-phase by oncoviral proteins, are
refractory to cell cycle reactivation by forced expression of E2F4/DP3delta or
E2F1/DP1. Thus, E2F/DP repression represents only one of multiple redundant
circuits that control the postmitotic state in terminally differentiated cells
and that are targeted by adenovirus E1A and SV40 large T antigen.

PMID: 9537223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Clin Invest. 1998 Mar 1;101(5):1012-9.

All-trans retinoic acid converts E2F into a transcriptional suppressor and
inhibits the growth of normal human bronchial epithelial cells through a retinoic
acid receptor- dependent signaling pathway.

Lee HY(1), Dohi DF, Kim YH, Walsh GL, Consoli U, Andreeff M, Dawson MI, Hong WK, 
Kurie JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Retinoids, including retinol and retinoic acid derivatives, maintain the normal
growth and differentiation of human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells and are
under investigation as agents for lung cancer prevention. In this study, we
examined the biologic effects of retinoids on normal HBE cells and the molecular 
mechanisms of retinoid actions. At a dose of 10(-6) M, all-trans retinoic acid
(t-RA) suppressed the proliferation of normal HBE cells, which accumulated in the
G0 phase. No evidence of programmed cell death was observed. The class of
retinoid nuclear receptor that mediated the growth arrest was explored. Normal
HBE cell growth was suppressed by a retinoid that selectively activates retinoic 
acid receptors but not by one that activates retinoid X receptors. The E2F
transcription factor has demonstrated a role in G0 entry through transcriptional 
suppression of genes that induce cell cycle progression. To investigate the role 
of E2F in retinoid signaling, transient transfection assays were performed using 
reporter plasmids containing E2F-binding sites. Findings from these experiments
suggested that t-RA treatment converted E2F into a transcriptional suppressor.
Supporting this possibility, t-RA inhibited the expression of the E2F target
genes B-myb, cyclin A, and cyclin E. Further, t-RA increased the levels of
nuclear E2F-4, p107, and p130 and enhanced the binding of E2F-4 to p107, which
have been associated with the conversion of E2F into a transcriptional suppressor
in other cells. These findings point to retinoic acid receptor- and E2F-dependent
pathways as potential mediators of retinoid-induced growth arrest in normal HBE
cells and have implications for the use of retinoids in clinical trials on the
prevention of lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC508652
PMID: 9486971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Virol. 1998 Mar;72(3):2323-34.

Anchorage-independent transcription of the cyclin A gene induced by the E7
oncoprotein of human papillomavirus type 16.

Schulze A(1), Mannhardt B, Zerfass-Thome K, Zwerschke W, Jansen-Dürr P.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany.

To develop an experimental model for E7-mediated anchorage-independent growth, we
studied the ability of E7-expressing NIH 3T3 subclones to enter S phase when they
were cultured in suspension. We found that expression of E7 prevents the
inhibition of cyclin E-associated kinase and also triggers activation of cyclin A
gene expression in suspension cells. A point mutation in the amino terminus of E7
prevented E7-driven rescue of cyclin E-associated kinase activity in suspension
cells; however, cells with this mutation retained some ability to activate cyclin
A gene expression and promote S-phase entry. Activation of cyclin A gene
expression by E7 was correlated with an increased binding of free E2F to a
regulatory element in the cyclin A promoter which mediates both repression of
cyclin A upon loss of adhesion and its reactivation by E7. Surprisingly,
expression of E7 led to a nuclear accumulation of one species of free E2F,
namely, an E2F-4-DP-1 heterodimer, that is exclusively cytoplasmic in the absence
of E7. Taken together, the data reported here indicate that several different
E7-dependent changes of cellular-growth-regulating pathways can cooperate to
allow adhesion-independent entry into S phase.

PMCID: PMC109532
PMID: 9499093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Cancer Res. 1998 Feb 15;58(4):594-8.

Close correlation between mutations of E2F4 and hMSH3 genes in colorectal cancers
with microsatellite instability.

Ikeda M(1), Orimo H, Moriyama H, Nakajima E, Matsubara N, Mibu R, Tanaka N,
Shimada T, Kimura A, Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Okayama University Medical School, Japan.

Defects in mismatch repair function can lead to the microsatellite instability
(MI+; replication error) phenotype in certain human cancers. We previously
reported that MI+ tumor-specific repeat number alteration at 13 consecutive
trinucleotide (CAG) repeats within a coding exon of the E2F4 gene is a possible
target of the defective repair pathway. Additional investigations revealed that
E2F4 mutations are common (11 of 17 cases, 65%, mostly deletions) in a subset of 
human colorectal cancers with extensive MI+ phenotype, with respect to the
proportion of loci affected and that most of these E2F4-mutated tumors (9 of 11, 
82%) were accompanied by frameshift mutations in a polyadenine stretch within the
seventh exon of the hMSH3 gene, a known mismatch repair gene that is responsible 
for repair of mismatch loops of two to four nucleotides. However, neither of
these mutations was detected in 15 tumors with a lower incidence of MI+ loci.
Similar repeat number alterations were less frequent in CAG repeats from other
genes in all of the MI+ tumors we examined. These results indicate the presence
of a novel cascade of mutational events that may be involved in acquisition of
the malignant phenotype of human colorectal cancers with genetic instability.

PMID: 9485005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. DNA Cell Biol. 1998 Jan;17(1):9-18.

Site-directed mutant p21 proteins defective in both inhibition of E2F-regulated
transcription and disruption of E2F-p130-cyclin-cdk2 complexes.

Robles SJ(1), Shiyanov P, Aristodemo GT, Raychaudhuri P, Adami GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of Dentistry,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 60612, USA.

P21 is a regulatory protein that can contribute to cell cycle arrest by
inhibiting the cyclin-dependent-kinases (cdks). However, the mechanism that links
the inhibition of the cdk activities and the cell cycle arrest is not well
established. To investigate this, we studied a purified endogenous cellular
complex which contained E2F (in the form of E2F-4), p130, cyclin, and cdk2. This 
complex of E2F-p130-cyclin-cdk2 is found mainly in cycling cells and is
postulated to be an intermediate that leads to the activation of E2F. We
previously showed that p21 could disrupt this complex leading to the accumulation
of an E2F-p130 complex and the inhibition of E2F-regulated transcription. We
analyzed a group of p21 mutants including those that harbored changes in cyclin- 
and cdk2-binding motifs. We show that both the cyclin and cdk2 binding motifs of 
p21 are crucial for the disruption of this endogenous complex of
E2F-p130-cyclin-cdk2. This suggests a model where the ability of p21 to inhibit
the function of this complex is dependent on interactions with both cyclin and
cdk2 molecules. This was substantiated by studies with intact cells. P21 mutants 
that are impaired in their ability to disrupt the cellular E2F-p130-cyclin-cdk2
complex are also shown to be maximally impaired in the ability to repress
E2F-regulated transcription.

PMID: 9468218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jan 26;242(3):586-92.

The molecular and functional characterization of E2F-5 transcription factor.

Vaishnav YN(1), Vaishnav MY, Pant V.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi, India. yash@iegebnd.ernet.in

The E2F activity plays a critical role in the control of cell cycle and action of
tumor suppressor proteins and is also a target of the transforming proteins of
small DNA tumor viruses. We describe here molecular cloning and functional
characterization of a fifth member of the E2F family of transcription factors.
E2F-5 protein is more homologous to E2F-4 (72% amino acid identity) than to
E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3 (35% amino acid identity). Based on structural and
functional criteria, the E2F family appears to comprise two distinct
sub-families, one composed of E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3 and the other composed of
E2F-4 and E2F-5, E2F-5 mRNA is expressed in a wide variety of human tissues. The 
protein is expressed as multiple species ranging in size from 46 to 54 kDa as a
result of differential phosphorylation. The expression of a reporter gene
containing E2F binding sites in the promoter is transcriptionally activated by
E2F-5 in a cooperative manner with the DP-1 protein. The interaction between
E2F-5 and DP-1 is demonstrated using a two-hybrid system in mammalian cells. We
have also demonstrated the presence of a strong transactivation domain at the
carboxy terminus (273-346 amino acid residues) of E2F-5 protein.

PMID: 9464260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Cell Growth Differ. 1998 Jan;9(1):59-69.

E2F-1 and E2F-3 are functionally distinct in their ability to promote myeloid
cell cycle progression and block granulocyte differentiation.

Strom DK(1), Cleveland JL, Chellappan S, Nip J, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and the Vanderbilt Cancer Center, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Interleukin 3 (IL-3)-dependent 32D.3 myeloid cells are an attractive model system
for the analysis of hematopoietic cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis. In
these cells, E2F-3, E2F-4, and DP-1 are regulated by both IL-3 and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), whereas E2F-1 was expressed at low levels and 
was not regulated by either cytokine. E2F-2 and E2F-5 were not detectable. To
examine phenotypes associated with the loss of normal cell cycle regulation by
pRb, we established E2F-1- and E2F-3-overexpressing cell lines. In contrast to
E2F-1, E2F-3 overexpression did not accelerate apoptosis or promote S-phase entry
in the absence of IL-3, demonstrating that they are not functionally redundant.
In addition, when cells were cultured in G-CSF to stimulate granulocytic
differentiation, E2F-1 overexpression overrode survival functions provided by
G-CSF and serum and induced apoptosis. In contrast, cells overexpressing E2F-3
exhibited normal granulocytic differentiation. Bcl-2 coexpression blocked
E2F-1-induced apoptosis in the presence of G-CSF. However, these cells were
blocked in the granulocytic differentiation program at the metamyelocyte stage
and remained dependent on G-CSF for continuous culture. Cells overexpressing both
E2F-1 and Bcl-2 exhibited slowed but continuous cell cycling in the absence of
IL-3 until they eventually succumbed to apoptosis. Therefore, E2F-1, but not
E2F-3, can temporally replace the requirement for growth factors to promote cell 
cycle progression, and in terminally differentiating cells, this leads to a block
in differentiation and induction of apoptosis.

PMID: 9438389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Cell Sci. 1997 Nov;110 ( Pt 22):2819-31.

Distinct mechanisms of nuclear accumulation regulate the functional consequence
of E2F transcription factors.

Allen KE(1), de la Luna S, Kerkhoven RM, Bernards R, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Glasgow, UK.

Transcription factor E2F plays an important role in coordinating and integrating 
early cell cycle progression with the transcription apparatus. It is known that
physiological E2F arises when a member of two families of proteins, E2F and DP,
interact as E2F/DP heterodimers and that transcriptional activity is regulated
through the physical association of pocket proteins such as pRb. However, little 
information is available regarding the mechanisms which control the levels of
functional E2F. In this study, we have characterised one such mechanism which
regulates the nuclear accumulation and activity of E2F. Specifically, we show
that E2F proteins fall into two distinct categories according to their ability to
accumulate in nuclei, one being exemplified by E2F-1 and the other by E2F-4 and
-5. Thus, E2F-1 possesses an intrinsic nuclear localization signal whereas E2F-4 
and -5 are devoid of such a signal. Furthermore, we find for E2F-4 and -5 that
two distinct processes govern their nuclear accumulation whereby the nuclear
localization signal is supplied in trans from either a DP heterodimer partner or 
a physically associated pocket protein. It is consistent with the role of pocket 
proteins in regulating nuclear accumulation that we find E2F-5 to be nuclear
during early cell cycle progression with an increased cytoplasmic concentration
in cycling cells. Our data show that the mechanism of nuclear accumulation
determines the functional consequence of E2F on cell cycle progression: pocket
protein-mediated accumulation impedes cell cycle progression, whereas
DP-regulated nuclear accumulation promotes cell cycle progression. Moreover, the 
inactivation of pocket proteins by the adenovirus Ela protein, and subsequent
release of E2F, failed to displace nuclear E2F. Our study identifies a new level 
of regulation in the control of E2F activity exerted at the level of nuclear
accumulation where subunit composition and interaction with pocket proteins
dictates the functional consequence on cell cycle progression.

PMID: 9427290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Front Biosci. 1998 Jan 1;3:d11-24.

The p130 pocket protein: keeping order at cell cycle exit/re-entrance
transitions.

Mayol X(1), Grana X.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology and Department of
Biochemistry and Temple University School of Medicine, 3307 North Broad St.,
Philadelphia, PA19140, USA.

Pocket proteins, including the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene product (pRB)
and the related proteins p107 and p130, function at cell cycle regulatory steps
that link cyclin/CDK-integrated positive and negative growth signals with E2F
transcription factor activity on genes required for cell cycle progression.
Protein complex formation between pocket proteins and members of the E2F family
of transcription factors determines whether E2F complexes act as transcriptional 
activators or repressors. Experimental work over the last few years indicates
that individual pocket proteins interact with specific E2F members to regulate
the transcription of certain genes under diverse cell growth conditions. Among
these protein associations, p130-containing E2F complexes seem to be of
particular importance in controlling gene transcription in quiescent and
differentiating cells by repressing the transcription of a set of E2F-responsive 
genes. Once the cells are progressing through the G1 phase of the cell cycle,
pocket protein-mediated regulation of E2F activity is assumed by pRB and p107.
p130-mediated transcriptional regulation thus seems to prevent a gene expression 
program characteristic of dividing cells at the cell cycle exit and re-entrance
transitions and in quiescent cells.

PMID: 9405335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;17(12):7268-82.

E2F activity is regulated by cell cycle-dependent changes in subcellular
localization.

Verona R(1), Moberg K, Estes S, Starz M, Vernon JP, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
02139, USA.

E2F directs the cell cycle-dependent expression of genes that induce or regulate 
the cell division process. In mammalian cells, this transcriptional activity
arises from the combined properties of multiple E2F-DP heterodimers. In this
study, we show that the transcriptional potential of individual E2F species is
dependent upon their nuclear localization. This is a constitutive property of
E2F-1, -2, and -3, whereas the nuclear localization of E2F-4 is dependent upon
its association with other nuclear factors. We previously showed that E2F-4
accounts for the majority of endogenous E2F species. We now show that the
subcellular localization of E2F-4 is regulated in a cell cycle-dependent manner
that results in the differential compartmentalization of the various E2F
complexes. Consequently, in cycling cells, the majority of the p107-E2F,
p130-E2F, and free E2F complexes remain in the cytoplasm. In contrast, almost all
of the nuclear E2F activity is generated by pRB-E2F. This complex is present at
high levels during G1 but disappears once the cells have passed the restriction
point. Surprisingly, dissociation of this complex causes little increase in the
levels of nuclear free E2F activity. This observation suggests that the
repressive properties of the pRB-E2F complex play a critical role in establishing
the temporal regulation of E2F-responsive genes. How the differential subcellular
localization of pRB, p107, and p130 contributes to their different biological
properties is also discussed.

PMCID: PMC232584
PMID: 9372959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;17(12):6994-7007.

Subunit composition determines E2F DNA-binding site specificity.

Tao Y(1), Kassatly RF, Cress WD, Horowitz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

The product of the retinoblastoma (Rb) susceptibility gene, Rb-1, regulates the
activity of a wide variety of transcription factors, such as E2F, in a cell
cycle-dependent fashion. E2F is a heterodimeric transcription factor composed of 
two subunits each encoded by one of two related gene families, denoted E2F and
DP. Five E2F genes, E2F-1 through E2F-5, and two DP genes, DP-1 and DP-2, have
been isolated from mammals, and heterodimeric complexes of these proteins are
expressed in most, if not all, vertebrate cells. It is not yet clear whether
E2F/DP complexes regulate overlapping and/or specific cellular genes. Moreover,
little is known about whether Rb regulates all or a subset of E2F-dependent
genes. Using recombinant E2F, DP, and Rb proteins prepared in
baculovirus-infected cells and a repetitive immunoprecipitation-PCR procedure
(CASTing), we have identified consensus DNA-binding sites for E2F-1/DP-1,
E2F-1/DP-2, E2F-4/DP-1, and E2F-4/DP-2 complexes as well as an Rb/E2F-1/DP-1
trimeric complex. Our data indicate that (i) E2F, DP, and Rb proteins each
influence the selection of E2F-binding sites; (ii) E2F sites differ with respect 
to their intrinsic DNA-bending properties; (iii) E2F/DP complexes induce distinct
degrees of DNA bending; and (iv) complex-specific E2F sites selected in vitro
function distinctly as regulators of cell cycle-dependent transcription in vivo. 
These data indicate that the specific sequence of an E2F site may determine its
role in transcriptional regulation and suggest that Rb/E2F complexes may regulate
subsets of E2F-dependent cellular genes.

PMCID: PMC232556
PMID: 9372931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Mol Carcinog. 1997 Oct;20(2):216-23.

High-affinity binding of the cell cycle-regulated transcription factors E2F1 and 
E2F4 to benzo[a]pyrene diol epoxide-DNA adducts.

Johnson DG(1), Coleman A, Powell KL, MacLeod MC.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Science Park-Research
Division, Smithville 78957, USA.

Previous studies indicated that DNA adducts formed by a carcinogenic diol
epoxide, 7r,8t-dihydroxy-9t, 10t-epoxy-7,8,9,10-tetrahydrobenzo[a]pyrene (BPDE), 
can increase the affinity of the transcription factor Sp1 for DNA sequences that 
are not normally specific binding sites. It was suggested that adduct-induced
bends in the DNA were responsible for this behavior. The cell cycle-regulated
transcription factor E2F is also known to bend DNA upon binding. When partially
purified E2F was tested in a gel mobility-shift assay, binding to a target DNA
containing two consensus E2F-binding sites was enhanced by prior modification of 
the DNA with BPDE. Recombinant human E2F1, E2F4, and DP1 fusion proteins were
affinity purified from bacteria expressing these genes. A combination of either
E2F1 or E2F4 with their dimerization partner, DP1, gave preparations that
exhibited binding to the E2F site-containing DNA fragment. In both cases, the
proteins exhibited much higher apparent affinity for BPDE-modified DNA than for
unmodified DNA. In addition, BPDE-modified DNA was a better competitor for the
binding than unmodified DNA. Heterologous DNA that contained no consensus E2F
binding motifs also competed well for E2F binding when modified with BPDE. In
contrast, transcription factor that does not bend DNA appreciably (GAL4) did not 
show enhanced affinity for BPDE-modified DNA. These findings suggest that
numerous transcription factors that bend DNA may bind with anomalously high
affinity to sequences that contain carcinogen-DNA adducts.

PMID: 9364211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Cell Biochem. 1997 Dec 1;67(3):297-303.

Retinoblastoma-related protein pRb2/p130 and its binding to the B-myb promoter
increase during human neuroblastoma differentiation.

Raschellà G(1), Tanno B, Bonetto F, Amendola R, Battista T, De Luca A, Giordano
A, Paggi MG.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Toxicology and Biomedical Sciences, Ente Nuove Tecnologie Energia e
Ambiente (ENEA), Rome, Italy.

Neuroblastoma cells can undergo neural differentiation upon treatment with a
variety of chemical inducers and growth factors. During this process, many cell
cycle-related genes are downregulated while differentiation-specific genes are
triggered. The retinoblastoma family proteins, pRb, p107, and pRb2/p130, are
involved in transcriptional repression of proliferation genes, mainly through
their interaction with the E2F transcription factors. We report that pRb2/p130
expression levels increased during differentiation of neuroblastoma cell line
LAN-5. On the other hand, both pRb and p107 decreased and underwent progressive
dephosphorylation at late differentiation times. The expression of B-myb and
c-myb, two targets of the retinoblastoma family proteins, were downregulated in
association with the increase of pRb2/p130, which was detected as the major
component of the complex with E2F on the E2F site of the B-myb promoter in
differentiated cells. Interestingly, E2F4, a preferential partner of p107 and
pRb2/p130, was upregulated and underwent changes in cellular localization during 
differentiation. In conclusion, our data suggest a major role of pRb2/p130 in the
regulation of B-myb promoter during neural differentiation despite the importance
of cofactors in modulating the function of the retinoblastoma family proteins.

PMID: 9361185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Nov;17(11):6459-64.

Identification of a viral kinase that phosphorylates specific E2Fs and pocket
proteins.

Pajovic S(1), Wong EL, Black AR, Azizkhan JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

The transcription factor E2F and its regulation by pRB and related pocket
proteins are central to cell cycle control in higher eukaryotes. Much of our
knowledge of this regulation has come from studies using immediate-early proteins
of DNA tumor viruses. Previously, we reported that the 72-kDa immediate-early
region 1 gene product of the human cytomegalovirus, IE72, transactivates the
dihydrofolate reductase promoter through the E2F site and that it physically
interacts with E2F1 (M. J. Margolis, S. Pajovic, E. L. Wong, M. Wade, R. Jupp, J.
A. Nelson, and J. C. Azizkhan, J. Virol. 69:7759-7767, 1995). In this study, we
further characterized the mechanism by which IE72 modulates E2F-dependent
transcription. In vitro phosphorylation reactions using gel-purified bacterially 
expressed proteins revealed that IE72 is a kinase that autophosphorylates and
phosphorylates E2F1, -2, and -3 (but not E2F4 or -5) and the RB-related pocket
proteins p130 and p107 (but not pRB). The region of IE72 spanning amino acids 173
to 197 shows a high level of homology to the ATP binding sites in over 500
kinases. The kinase-negative protein IE72deltaATP, from which this region has
been deleted, cannot activate E2F-dependent transcription. The kinase activity of
IE72 is also required for its ability to reduce the association of E2F4 with p107
and p130. Taken together, these data suggest that the kinase activity of IE72 is 
required for E2F-dependent transcriptional activation and that this is likely to 
result from phosphorylation of specific members of the E2F and pocket protein
families by IE72.

PMCID: PMC232498
PMID: 9343408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):5508-20.

Induction of S-phase entry by E2F transcription factors depends on their nuclear 
localization.

Müller H(1), Moroni MC, Vigo E, Petersen BO, Bartek J, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan,
Italy.

The E2F transcription factors are essential for regulating the correct timing of 
activation of several genes whose products are implicated in cell proliferation
and DNA replication. The E2Fs are targets for negative regulation by the
retinoblastoma protein family, which includes pRB, p107, and p130, and they are
in a pathway that is frequently found altered in human cancers. There are five
members of the E2F family, and they can be divided into two functional subgroups.
Whereas, upon overexpression, E2F-1, -2, and -3 induce S phase in quiescent
fibroblasts and override G1 arrests mediated by the p16INK4A tumor suppressor
protein or neutralizing antibodies to cyclin D1, E2F-4 and -5 do not. Using E2F-1
and E2F-4 as representatives of the two subgroups, we showed here, by
constructing a set of chimeric proteins, that the amino terminus of E2F-1 is
sufficient to confer S-phase-inducing potential as well as the ability to
efficiently transactivate an E2F-responsive promoter to E2F-4. We found that the 
E2F-1 amino terminus directs chimeric proteins to the nucleus. Surprisingly, a
short nuclear localization signal derived from simian virus 40 large T antigen
could perfectly substitute for the presence of the E2F-1 amino terminus in these 
assays. Thus, nuclearly localized E2F-4, when overexpressed, displayed biological
activities similar to those of E2F-1. Furthermore, we showed that nuclear
localization of endogenous E2F-4 is cell cycle regulated, with E2F-4 being
nuclear in the G0 and early G1 phases and mainly cytoplasmic after the pRB family
members have become phosphorylated. We propose a novel mechanism for the
regulation of E2F-dependent transcription in which E2F-4 regulates transcription 
only from G0 until mid- to late G1 phase whereas E2F-1 is active in late G1 and S
phases, until it is inactivated by cyclin A-dependent kinase in late S phase.

PMCID: PMC232399
PMID: 9271426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 1997 Aug;27(4):288.

Phosphorylation of proteins that regulate the cell cycle and cancer: an
international perspective.

Heintz NH.

PMID: 9379522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Mech Dev. 1997 Aug;66(1-2):13-25.

Expression patterns of the E2F family of transcription factors during mouse
nervous system development.

Dagnino L(1), Fry CJ, Bartley SM, Farnham P, Gallie BL, Phillips RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Cancer Research, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. ldagnino@ogh.on.ca

The E2F family of transcription factors consists of two subgroups termed E2F and 
DP. E2F is required for cell proliferation, and is necessary for fruit fly
development. E2F activity is a target for regulation by the retinoblastoma gene
family, which includes pRB, p107 and p130. Mutant RB-/-, RB-/-:p107-/- and
p107-/-:p130-/- mice develop abnormally, probably as a result of dysregulation in
the activity of E2F, indicating the importance of E2F in mammalian development.
To investigate the role of E2F in murine development, we have examined the
patterns of expression of E2F-1 through E2F-5, and DP-1 in the developing nervous
system by in situ hybridization. E2F-1, E2F-2 and E2F-5 are first detected in the
9.5 days post-coitus (dpc) forebrain. Expression of these E2F forms extends
caudally thereafter and includes the developing brain and the upper half of the
10.5 dpc spinal cord. By 11.5 dpc, these E2F factors are expressed throughout the
central nervous system. In 12.5 dpc embryos, E2F-1, E2F-2 and E2F-5 are highly
expressed in proliferating, undifferentiated neuronal precursors. As neurons
differentiate and migrate to the outer marginal zones in the nervous system,
expression of these E2F members is extinguished. In the developing retina,
another neuronal tissue, E2F-1 expression is also confined to the proliferating, 
undifferentiated retinoblastic layer. In contrast, E2F-3 expression is
up-regulated as retinoblasts differentiate into the ganglion cell layer. In
non-neuronal tissues, high E2F-4 transcript levels are present in regions
corresponding to proliferative chondrocytes, whereas E2F-2 and E2F-4 transcripts 
are very abundant in the thymic cortex, which contains immature thymocytes. We
conclude that individual E2F forms are differentially regulated during the
development of distinct tissues, and especially during neuronal development.

PMID: 9376316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Invest Dermatol. 1997 Aug;109(2):187-93.

E2F as a regulator of keratinocyte proliferation: implications for skin tumor
development.

Jones SJ(1), Dicker AJ, Dahler AL, Saunders NA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology and Cancer Research, University of Queensland Department
of Medicine, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Woolloonggabba, Australia.

E2F and DP family members are established regulators of the cell cycle. In this
study, we examined their activity/expression during keratinocyte growth arrest.
Treating human epidermal keratinocytes with the growth inhibitors TPA or
IFN-gamma or allowing the cells to reach confluence resulted in 90% inhibition of
DNA synthesis, whereas a keratinocyte-derived squamous carcinoma cell line
(SCC25) was resistant to growth inhibitors. Gel shift analysis of keratinocytes
using an E2F response element indicated that growth arrest was associated with a 
decrease in all E2F binding complexes. This indicates that growth inhibition is
not due to negative regulation by pocket proteins. Conversely, gel shift analysis
of growth inhibitor-resistant SCC25 cells showed no decrease in E2F binding. If
deregulated E2F expression/activity is involved in tumor development, then the
deliberate deregulation of E2F activity may make keratinocytes resistant to
growth inhibitors in much the same way as the SCC cells. The HPV16 E7 protein is 
known to activate E2F. Retroviral infection of keratinocytes with E7-expressing
constructs resulted in growth inhibitor resistance, whereas infection with E6
constructs did not. E2F is a heterodimeric complex consisting of E2F family
members (1-5) and DP proteins (1-3). Examination of the expression levels for E2F
genes and other genes associated with the cell cycle indicated that E2F1 was
profoundly decreased in growth-arrested keratinocytes (90%), whereas E2F3, E2F5, 
and DP1 were not. E2F2 and E2F4 were increased in IFN-gamma-treated keratinocytes
but not in TPA-treated or confluent keratinocytes. In contrast, SCC25 cells did
not undergo growth arrest and did not downregulate E2F1 mRNA expression in
response to growth inhibitors. Our results indicate that E2F DNA binding and in
particular E2F1 mRNA expression are associated with keratinocyte proliferation.
Our results with the SCC25 cells and the E7-infected cells are consistent with
the proposition that deregulated E2F expression/activity (in particular E2F1) may
be involved in the unregulated proliferation of skin tumor cells.

PMID: 9242506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Oncogene. 1997 Jul 17;15(3):291-301.

Inhibition of E2F-4/DP-1-stimulated transcription by p202.

Choubey D(1), Gutterman JU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

The interferon (IFN)-inducible proteins mediate activities of the interferons
including the cell growth-regulatory activity. We have shown that p202, an
IFN-inducible 52kDa primarily nuclear phosphoprotein whose expression in
transfected cells inhibits cell proliferation, interacts with the retinoblastoma 
tumor suppressor protein (pRb) and the transcription factor E2F (E2F-1/ DP-1) in 
vitro and in vivo. p202 was shown to inhibit E2F-1/DP-1-stimulated transcription 
of a reporter gene and of endogenous genes. Here we report that expression of
p202 inhibited E2F-4/DP-1-stimulated transcription of a reporter gene in
transfected cells. Furthermore, this inhibition was associated with the
inhibition of the sequence-specific DNA-binding of E2F-4 both in complex with the
pocket proteins p107 or p130 and in its 'free' form in vitro. p202 bound to p107 
and p130 in vitro and in vivo and also associated with E2F-4, supporting the
notion that complexes containing p107/E2F-4 or p130/ E2F-4 and p202 exist in
vivo. Moreover, cotransfection of E2F-4-encoding plasmid in AKR-2B cells overcame
p202-mediated inhibition of cell growth, raising the possibility that p202
contributes to cell growth inhibition by the interferons, at least in part, by
modulating E2F-4-mediated transcription.

PMID: 9233764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Oncogene. 1997 Jul 10;15(2):143-57.

BRCA1 proteins are transported to the nucleus in the absence of serum and splice 
variants BRCA1a, BRCA1b are tyrosine phosphoproteins that associate with E2F,
cyclins and cyclin dependent kinases.

Wang H(1), Shao N, Ding QM, Cui J, Reddy ES, Rao VN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Allegheny University of the Health Sciences,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

BRCA1, a familial breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene encodes nuclear
phosphoproteins that function as tumor suppressors in human breast cancer cells. 
Previously, we have shown that overexpression of a BRCA1 splice variant BRCA1a
accelerates apoptosis in human breast cancer cells. In an attempt to determine
whether the subcellular localization of BRCA1 is cell cycle regulated, we have
studied the subcellular distribution of BRCA1 in asynchronous and growth arrested
normal, breast and ovarian cancer cells using different BRCA1 antibodies by
immunofluorescence and immunohistochemical staining. Upon serum starvation of
NIH3T3, some breast and ovarian cancer cells, most of the BRCA1 protein
redistributed to the nucleus revealing a new type of regulation that may modulate
the activity of BRCA1 gene. We have also characterized two new variant BRCA1
proteins (BRCA1a/p110 and BRCA1b/ p100) which are phosphoproteins containing
phosphotyrosine. Immunofluorescence and Western blotting analysis indicate
cytoplasmic and nuclear localization of BRCA1a and BRCA1b proteins. To elucidate 
the biological function of BRCA1, we created a bacterial fusion protein of
glutathione-transferase (GST) and BRCA1 zinc finger domain and detected two
cellular proteins with molecular weights of approximately 32 and 65 kD, one of
which contains phosphotyrosine designated p32 and p65 BRCA1 interacting proteins 
(BIP) that specifically interact with BRCA1. Western blot analysis of BIP with
cyclins/CDKs and E2F antisera indicated association with cdc2, cdk2, cdk4, cyclin
B, cyclin D, cyclin A and E2F-4 but not with cdk3, cdk5, cdk6, E2F-1, E2F-2,
E2F-3, E2F-5 and cyclin E. Furthermore, we have also demonstrated a direct
interaction of in vitro translated BRCA1a and BRCA1b proteins with recombinant
cyclin A, cyclin B1, cyclin D1, cdc2, cdk2 and E2F fusion proteins in vitro.
Taken together these results seem to suggest that BRCA1 could be an important
negative regulator of cell cycle that functions through interaction with E2F
transcriptional factors and phosphorylation by cyclins/cdk complexes with the
zinc ring finger functioning as a major protein-protein interaction domain. If
the interactions we observe in vitro is also seen in vivo then it may be possible
that lack or impaired binding of the disrupted BRCA1 proteins to E2F,
cyclins/CDKs in patients with mutations in the zinc finger domain could deprive
the cell of an important mechanism for braking cell proliferation leading to the 
development of breast and ovarian cancers.

PMID: 9244350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 1997 Jul;13(7):448-52.

Sequence of a human E2F-4 pseudogene with shortened AGC trinucleotide repeats.

Cheng CM(1), Chang YF, Yuo CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Kaohsiung Medical College, Taiwan, Republic of China.

We have isolated a human genomic DNA fragment of 0.7 kb by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) using human E2F-4 gene primers. Sequence analysis indicates that
this DNA comes from a processed E2F-4 pseudogene. Its sequence is 75% identical
to the human E2F-4 cDNA, and bears several deletions and insertions. A 30 bp
deletion shortens the 13 AGC repeats in the E2F-4 gene by 10 repeats. The
sequence data also suggest that another 65 bp deletion and some small insertions 
may be generated by replication errors on template pairing.

PMID: 9260465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Blood. 1997 Jul 1;90(1):194-203.

Characterization of cell cycle status and E2F complexes in mobilized CD34+ cells 
before and after cytokine stimulation.

Williams CD(1), Linch DC, Watts MJ, Thomas NS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University College London Medical School, UK.

Mobilized peripheral blood progenitors (CD34+ cells) have been shown to be either
in the G0 or G1 phase of the cell cycle. In this study, it is shown that they are
small cells with low protein content suggestive of G0. Support for this is
provided by showing that the principal E2F complex consists of hypophosphorylated
p130, E2F-4, and DP-1. The E2F-4 is more highly phosphorylated than in quiescent 
T cells. In response to cytokines in vitro, the CD34+ cells start to enter G1
within 8 hours and enter S-phase at about 48 hours. As cells enter G1, E2F-4 is
dephosphorylated to several hypophosphorylated forms and three new DNA-binding
complexes appear, including one containing E2F-4, DP-1, and p107. We suggest that
mobilized CD34+ cells may be maintained in G0 by p130, E2F-4, and DP-1 and the
coordinate dephosphorylation of E2F-4 and hyperphosphorylation of p130 may be
central to the initiation of proliferation.

PMID: 9207453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jul;17(7):3566-79.

p130 and p107 use a conserved domain to inhibit cellular cyclin-dependent kinase 
activity.

Woo MS, Sánchez I, Dynlacht BD.

The pRB-related proteins p107 and p130 are thought to suppress growth in part
through their associations with two important cell cycle kinases, cyclin A-cdk2
and cyclin E-cdk2, and transcription factor E2F. Although each protein plays a
critical role in cell proliferation, the functional consequences of the
association among growth suppressor, cyclin-dependent kinase, and transcription
factor have remained elusive. In an attempt to understand the biochemical
properties of such complexes, we reconstituted each of the p130-cyclin-cdk2 and
p107-cyclin-cdk2 complexes found in vivo with purified, recombinant proteins.
Strikingly, stoichiometric association of p107 or p130 with either cyclin E-cdk2 
or cyclin A-cdk2 negated the activities of these kinases. The results of our
experiments suggest that inhibition does not result from substrate competition or
loss of cdk2 activation. Kinase inhibitory activity was dependent upon an
amino-terminal region of p107 that is highly conserved with p130. Further, a role
for this amino-terminal region in growth suppression was uncovered by using p107 
mutants unable to bind E2F. To determine whether cellular complexes might display
similar regulatory properties, we purified p130-cyclin A-cdk2 complexes from
human cells and found that such complexes exist in two forms, one that contains
E2F-4-DP-1 and one that lacks the heterodimer. These endogenous complexes behaved
like the in vitro-reconstituted complexes, exhibiting low levels of associated
kinase activity that could be significantly augmented by dissociation of p130.
The results of these experiments suggest a mechanism whereby p130 and p107
suppress growth by inhibiting important cell cycle kinases.

PMCID: PMC232210
PMID: 9199292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Cancer Res. 1997 Jun 15;57(12):2350-3.

Frequent mutation of the E2F-4 cell cycle gene in primary human gastrointestinal 
tumors.

Souza RF(1), Yin J, Smolinski KN, Zou TT, Wang S, Shi YQ, Rhyu MG, Cottrell J,
Abraham JM, Biden K, Simms L, Leggett B, Bova GS, Frank T, Powell SM, Sugimura H,
Young J, Harpaz N, Shimizu K, Matsubara N, Meltzer SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine and
Baltimore Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 21201-1595, USA.

The E2F group of transcription factors transactivates genes that promote
progression through the G1-S transition of the cell cycle. Members of the
retinoblastoma (Rb) family of proteins bind to E2Fs and inhibit this function.
E2F-4, one example of the E2F group, functions as an oncogene when transfected
into nontransformed cells in vitro. On the other hand, mice that are homozygously
lacking a normal E2F-1 gene develop cancers, consistent with a tumor-suppressive 
role for this gene. The exact function of E2Fs has thus been unclear; moreover,
direct involvement of this gene in primary human tumorigenesis has not been
shown. We, therefore, investigated mutation within the E2F-4 coding region in 16 
primary gastric adenocarcinomas, 12 ulcerative colitis-associated neoplasms, 46
sporadic colorectal carcinomas, 9 endometrial cancers, and 3 prostatic
carcinomas. We limited our investigation to the serine repeat within E2F-4,
reasoning that this tract might be altered in genetically unstable tumors
(replication error-positive, or RER+). All tumors were RER+, with the exception
of a control group of 15 RER- sporadic colorectal carcinomas. PCR with
incorporation of [32P]dCTP was performed using primers flanking the serine
trinucleotide (AGC) repeat. Twenty-two of 59 gastrointestinal tumors (37%)
contained E2F-4 mutations; these comprised 5 of 16 gastric tumors (31%), 4 of 12 
ulcerative colitis-associated neoplasms (33%, including 1 dysplastic lesion), and
13 of 31 sporadic colorectal cancers (42%). No mutation was present in any of the
endometrial, prostate, or RER- colorectal tumors. Of note, homozygous mutations
occurred in three cases, and two of seven informative patients showed loss of one
E2F-4 allele in their tumors. Furthermore, the RER+ sporadic colorectal tumors
were evaluated at trinucleotide repeats within the genes for N-cadherin and
B-catenin; no tumors demonstrated mutation of these genes. These data suggest
that E2F-4 is a target of defective DNA repair in these tumors.

PMID: 9192806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 Jun;8(6):699-710.

Down-regulation of cyclin A gene expression upon genotoxic stress correlates with
reduced binding of free E2F to the promoter.

Spitkovsky D(1), Schulze A, Boye B, Jansen-Dürr P.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte
Tumorvirologie, Heidelberg, Germany.

Treatment of mammalian cells by DNA-damaging agents leads to various cellular
responses. At sufficiently high dosage, cisplatin blocks cell proliferation and
finally kills cells; this effect is the basis for its widespread use as an
anticancer drug. Cisplatin-treated cells arrest in the G1 phase of the cell
cycle, most likely due to a signal generated by the stabilization of p53 and the 
subsequent induction of p21WAF-1/Cip1. We show here that cisplatin-treated
mammalian cells accumulate normal levels of cyclin D1 and cyclin E but fail to
produce cyclin A. The block to cyclin A gene expression occurs at the level of
transcription and is mediated by an E2F binding site in the cyclin A promoter. It
is shown here that, upon cisplatin treatment, transcriptionally active free E2F
becomes limiting, coincident with the accumulation of hypophosphorylated species 
of the retinoblastoma protein family. Immunoprecipitation experiments suggest
that the loss of free E2F results, at least in part, from the sequestration of
E2F-4/DP-1 heterodimers by p107. A role for the kinase inhibitor p21WAF-1/Cip1 in
repression of the cyclin A promoter is supported by our finding that ectopic
expression of p21WAF-1/Cip1 is sufficient to inhibit transcription from the
cyclin A gene, dependent on the E2F site. The data establish the E2F site in the 
human cyclin A promoter as a key target for the signaling pathway leading to G1
arrest in response to DNA damage by cisplatin and potentially other genotoxic
agents.

PMID: 9186003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 May 13;94(10):5095-100.

The subcellular localization of E2F-4 is cell-cycle dependent.

Lindeman GJ(1), Gaubatz S, Livingston DM, Ginsberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors plays a crucial role in cell cycle
progression. E2F activity is tightly regulated by a number of mechanisms, which
include the timely synthesis and degradation of E2F, interaction with
retinoblastoma protein family members ("pocket proteins"), association with DP
heterodimeric partner proteins, and phosphorylation of the E2F/DP complex. Here
we report that another mechanism, subcellular localization, is important for the 
regulation of E2F activity. Unlike E2F-1, -2, or -3, which are constitutively
nuclear, ectopic E2F-4 and -5 were predominantly cytoplasmic. Cotransfection of
expression vectors encoding p107, p130, or DP-2, but not DP-1, resulted in the
nuclear localization of E2F-4 and -5. Moreover, the transcriptional activity of
E2F-4 was markedly enhanced when it was invariably nuclear. Conversely, it was
reduced when the protein was excluded from the nucleus, implying that E2F-4
transcription function depends upon its cytological location. In keeping with
this, the nuclear/cytoplasmic ratios of endogenous E2F-4 changed as cells exited 
G0, with high ratios in G0 and early G1 and a progressive increase in cytoplasmic
E2F-4 as cells approached S phase. Thus, the subcellular location of E2F-4 is
regulated in a cell cycle-dependent manner, providing another potential mechanism
for its functional regulation.

PMCID: PMC24637
PMID: 9144196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 May 13;94(10):4948-53.

E2F4-RB and E2F4-p107 complexes suppress gene expression by transforming growth
factor beta through E2F binding sites.

Li JM(1), Hu PP, Shen X, Yu Y, Wang XF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27708, 
USA.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) causes growth arrest in most cell
types. TGF-beta induces hypophosphorylation of retinoblastoma susceptibility gene
1 product (RB), which sequesters E2F factors needed for progression into S phase 
of the cell cycle, thereby leading to cell cycle arrest at G1. It is possible,
however, that the E2F-RB complex induced by TGF-beta may bind to E2F sites and
suppress expression of specific genes whose promoters contain E2F binding sites. 
We show here that TGF-beta treatment of HaCaT cells induced the formation of
E2F4-RB and E2F4-p107 complexes, which are capable of binding to E2F sites.
Disruption of their binding to DNA with mutation in the E2F sites did not change 
the expression from promoters of E2F1, B-myb, or HsORC1 genes in cycling HaCaT
cells. However, the same mutation stimulated 5- to 6-fold higher expression from 
all three promoters in cells treated with TGF-beta. These results suggest that
E2F binding sites play an essential role in the transcription repression of these
genes under TGF-beta treatment. Consistent with their repression of
TGF-beta-induced gene expression, introduction of E2F sites into the promoter of 
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p15(INK4B) gene effectively inhibited its
induction by TGF-beta. Experiments utilizing Gal4-RB and Gal4-p107 chimeric
constructs demonstrated that either RB or p107 could directly repress TGF-beta
induction of p15(INK4B) gene when tethered to p15(INK4B) promoter through Gal4
DNA binding sites. Therefore, E2F functions to bring RB and p107 to E2F sites and
represses gene expression by TGF-beta. These results define a specific function
for E2F4-RB and E2F4-p107 complexes in gene repression under TGF-beta treatment, 
which may constitute an integral part of the TGF-beta-induced growth arrest
program.

PMCID: PMC24611
PMID: 9144170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 9;272(19):12406-14.

Modulation of E2F activity is linked to interferon-induced growth suppression of 
hematopoietic cells.

Iwase S(1), Furukawa Y, Kikuchi J, Nagai M, Terui Y, Nakamura M, Yamada H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hemopoiesis, Institute of Hematology, and the Department of
Hematology, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi 329-04, Japan.

E2F is a heterodimeric transcription factor that controls transcription of
several growth-regulatory genes including cdc2. To investigate the mechanism of
interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha)-mediated growth suppression of hematopoietic cells, 
we examined the effect of IFN-alpha on the expression and function of E2F using
IFN-sensitive Daudi cells. Down-regulation of E2F-1, a subunit of E2F, was
observed after 8 h of culture with IFN-alpha; expression of E2F-4, another
subunit of E2F, and DP-1, a heterodimeric partner of E2F, was unaffected. Gel
shift assays revealed that the DNA binding activity of free E2F, which is
composed of E2F-1 and E2F-4, was inhibited by IFN-alpha. In contrast, IFN-alpha
did not affect the DNA binding ability of E2F-1 and E2F-4 in a complex with
retinoblastoma (RB) susceptibility gene family proteins including pRB, p107, and 
p130. IFN-alpha could induce dephosphorylation of pRB, thereby turning active
E2F-pRB complexes into transcriptional repressors. Transient chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase assays revealed that the activity of the E2F-dependent cdc2
promoter was suppressed by IFN-alpha. These results suggest that the
antiproliferative action of IFN-alpha is mediated through the modulation of E2F
activity in two different ways: down-regulation of transcriptionally active free 
E2F and conversion of E2F-pRB complexes into transcriptional repressors.

PMID: 9139687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 May;8(5):553-63.

Expression patterns of the E2F family of transcription factors during murine
epithelial development.

Dagnino L(1), Fry CJ, Bartley SM, Farnham P, Gallie BL, Phillips RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Cancer Research, Hospital for Sick Children,
University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. ldagnino@ogh.on.ca

The E2F family of transcription factors includes five E2F and three DP forms. E2F
is involved in the regulation of cell proliferation, but little is known about
E2F function during vertebrate development. We have explored the regulation of
E2F expression during mouse organogenesis by in situ hybridization. We find
selective up-regulation of E2F-2, E2F-4, and E2F-5 transcripts in epidermis and
intestinal epithelium at important developmental stages. E2F-4 transcript levels 
are high in early, undifferentiated single-cell-layer ectoderm, and later in
13.5-14.5-day-postcoitus (dpc) embryo epithelium, which contains several layers
of proliferating cells. E2F-2 is up-regulated following the onset of E2F-4
expression and is first apparent in undifferentiated epithelium at 13.5-14.5 days
of gestation. In contrast, E2F-5 transcripts are detected later in gestation,
once the epidermis shows evidence of stratification. Stratification of the
epidermis into basal, proliferating cells and suprabasal, terminally
differentiating cells at 15.5-19.5 days of gestation coincides with expression of
E2F-2 and E2F-4 in basal cells and of E2F-5 in suprabasal cells. Similarly, in
intestinal epithelium, E2F-4 up-regulation in pseudostratified epithelium at 13.5
days of gestation precedes appearance of E2F-2 transcripts, in 14.5-dpc embryos, 
in the proliferating, intervillus epithelium. In 16.5-19.5-dpc embryos, no E2F-2 
transcripts were detected at the tip of the developing villi, which contain
terminally differentiating cells. In contrast, E2F-5 transcripts were limited to 
the upper half of the villi and were absent in the intervillus epithelium. This
suggests that E2F-2 and E2F-4 may participate in maintaining epithelial cells in 
a proliferative, undifferentiated phenotype, whereas E2F-5 may be important to
maintain the differentiated state. Thus, selective regulation of E2F forms occurs
during murine epithelial development, irrespective of the ectodermal or
endodermal origin of such epithelia.

PMID: 9149906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Apr;17(4):1966-76.

Position-dependent transcriptional regulation of the murine dihydrofolate
reductase promoter by the E2F transactivation domain.

Fry CJ(1), Slansky JE, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison 53706, USA.

Activity of the dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr) promoter increases at the
G1-S-phase boundary of the cell cycle. Mutations that abolish protein binding to 
an E2F element in the dhfr promoter also abolish the G1-S-phase increase in dhfr 
transcription, indicating that transcriptional regulation is mediated by the E2F 
family of proteins. To investigate the mechanism by which E2F regulates dhfr
transcription, we moved the E2F element upstream and downstream of its natural
position in the promoter. We found that the E2F element confers growth regulation
to the dhfr promoter only when it is proximal to the transcription start site.
Using a heterologous E2F element, we showed that position-dependent regulation is
a property that is promoter specific, not E2F element specific. We demonstrated
that E2F-mediated growth regulation of dhfr transcription requires activation of 
the dhfr promoter in S phase and that the C-terminal activation domains of E2F1, 
E2F4, and E2F5, when fused to the Gal4 DNA binding domain, are sufficient to
specify position-dependent activation. To further investigate the role of
activation in dhfr regulation, we tested other transactivation domains for their 
ability to activate the dhfr promoter. We found that the N-terminal
transactivation domain of VP16 cannot activate the dhfr promoter. We propose
that, unlike other E2F-regulated promoters, robust transcription from the dhfr
promoter requires an E2F transactivation domain close to the transcription start 
site.

PMCID: PMC232043
PMID: 9121444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Oncogene. 1997 Mar 13;14(10):1171-84.

MyoD prevents cyclinA/cdk2 containing E2F complexes formation in terminally
differentiated myocytes.

Puri PL(1), Balsano C, Burgio VL, Chirillo P, Natoli G, Ricci L, Mattei E,
Graessmann A, Levrero M.

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione A Cesalpino and I Clinica Medica, University of Rome La Sapienza,
Roma, Italy.

Withdrawal from the cell cycle of differentiating myocytes is regulated by the
myogenic basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein MyoD and the pocket proteins pRb, 
p107 and pRb2/p130. Downstream effectors of 'pocket' proteins are the components 
of the E2F family of transcription factors, which regulate the G1/S-phase
transition. We analysed by EMSA the composition of E2F complexes in cycling,
quiescent undifferentiated and differentiated C2C12 skeletal muscle cells. An E2F
complex containing mainly E2F4 and pRb2/p130 (E2F-G0/G1 complex) appears when DNA
synthesis arrests, replacing the cyclinA/cdk2 containing E2F complex of
proliferating myoblasts (E2F-G1/S complex). Serum stimulation reinduces DNA
synthesis and the re-appearance of E2F-G1/S complexes in quiescent myoblasts but 
not in differentiated C2C12 myotubes. In differentiating C2C12 cells, E2F
complexes switch and DNA synthesis in response to serum are prevented when MyoD
DNA binding activity and the cdks inhibitor MyoD downstream effector p21 are
induced. Thus, during myogenic differentiation, formation of E2F4 and pRb2/p130
containing complexes is an early event, but not enough on its own to prevent the 
reactivation of DNA synthesis. Using a subclone of C3H10T1/2 mouse fibroblasts
stably expressing Estrogen Receptor-MyoD (ER-MyoD) chimerae, we found that
estrogen directed MyoD activation prevents the reassociation of cyclinA/cdk2 to
the E2F4 containing complex following serum stimulation and this correlates with 
suppression of E2F activity and the inability of cells to re-enter the cell
cycle. Our data indicate that, in differentiating myocytes, one mechanism through
which MyoD induces permanent cell cycle arrest involves p21 upregulation and
suppression of the proliferation-associated cdks-containing E2F complexes
formation.

PMID: 9121766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Br J Haematol. 1997 Mar;96(4):688-96.

The predominant E2F complex in human primary haemopoietic cells and in AML blasts
contains E2F-4, DP-1 and p130.

Williams CD(1), Linch DC, Sørensen TS, La Thangue NB, Thomas NS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University College London Medical School.

The E2F family of transcription factors are thought to play an important role in 
the control of cell cycle progression. There is now also increasing evidence that
some family members may act as oncogenes or tumour suppressor genes. The
characterization of these proteins in human primary haemopoietic cells and acute 
myeloid leukaemia (AML) blasts may thus give an insight to the molecular
mechanisms governing proliferation and leukaemogenesis in these cells. Therefore 
we analysed the expression of E2F-DNA binding activity and the constituent
proteins found in the complexes in human primary haemopoietic cells of various
lineages. We also studied blasts from 18 patients with acute myeloid leukaemia
(AML). On electromobility shift assays (EMSA) a single E2F-DNA binding complex
was detected in T cells, B cells and monocytes which was shown to contain E2F-4, 
DP-1 and p130, indicating that all quiescent haemopoietic cells have the same
complex. Examination of 18 AML samples by EMSA revealed the presence of E2F
binding and no gross abnormalities were detected. An E2F-4/p130 complex was
detected in representative samples of all FAB types analysed. Thus abnormalities 
of E2F function are unlikely to play a primary pathogenic role in AML.

PMID: 9074408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Genes Dev. 1996 Dec 1;10(23):2960-70.

Degradation of E2F by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway: regulation by
retinoblastoma family proteins and adenovirus transforming proteins.

Hateboer G(1), Kerkhoven RM, Shvarts A, Bernards R, Beijersbergen RL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam.

E2F transcription factors are key regulators of transcription during the cell
cycle. E2F activity is regulated at the level of transcription and DNA binding
and by complex formation with the retinoblastoma pocket protein family. We show
here that free E2F-1 and E2F-4 transcription factors are unstable and that their 
degradation is mediated by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Both E2F-1 and E2F-4
are rendered unstable by an epitope in the carboxyl terminus of the proteins, in 
close proximity to their pocket protein interaction surface. We show that binding
of E2F-1 to pRb or E2F-4 to p107 or p130 protects E2Fs from degradation, causing 
the complexes to be stable. The increased stability of E2F-4 pocket protein
complexes may contribute to the maintenance of active transcriptional repression 
in quiescent cells. Surprisingly, adenovirus transforming proteins, which release
pocket protein-E2F complexes, also inhibit breakdown of free E2F. These data
reveal an additional level of regulation of E2F transcription factors by targeted
proteolysis, which is inhibited by pocket protein binding and adenovirus early
region 1 transforming proteins.

PMID: 8956997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Oct 14;227(2):553-7.

Mutations of E2F-4 trinucleotide repeats in colorectal cancer with microsatellite
instability.

Yoshitaka T(1), Matsubara N, Ikeda M, Tanino M, Hanafusa H, Tanaka N, Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Okayama, University Medical School, Japan.

Genetic instability at microsatellites in some colorectal cancer (CRC) have been 
linked to the defects of human mismatch repair genes, but the targets of these
defective genes have been largely unknown. We screened CRC specimens for
alteration of E2F-4 gene by analyzing both cDNA and genomic sequences along with 
replication error (RER+) phenotype. Two out of 20 sporadic CRC patients showed
RER+ phenotype. We found tumor-specific copy number alteration in 13 consecutive 
trinucleotide (CAG) repeats within the coding exon of E2F-4 exclusively in these 
2 specimens. Thus, E2F-4 may be a clue of the target gene of defective repair
genes in CRC with genetic instability in addition to the TGF-beta type II
receptor gene.

PMID: 8878551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Oncogene. 1996 Sep 5;13(5):1073-82.

E2F binding is required but not sufficient for repression of B-myb transcription 
in quiescent fibroblasts.

Bennett JD(1), Farlie PG, Watson RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Imperial College School of Medicine at
St Mary's, London, UK.

We have previously shown in mouse NIH3T3 fibroblasts that transcription of the
B-myb gene, which encodes a transcription factor required for S phase entry, is
repressed through a promoter E2F site in G0/early G1. Transcription repression at
this stage of the cell cycle was correlated with binding of a specific p107/E2F
complex to this site. We report here, however, that transfection of cells with
the known components of this complex, p107, E2F-4 and DP-1, did not repress the
B-myb promoter in cycling NIH3T3 cells, although p107 inhibited transcription
transactivation by E2F-4/DP-1. To establish definitively the contribution of E2F 
to repression, the effects of further mutations within and surrounding the E2F
site were examined. It was evident that E2F binding and repression were closely
correlated, lending greater weight to the contention that E2F itself is
implicated in this activity. These studies also identified a closely linked site,
designated the downstream repression site (DRS), which was not required for E2F
binding or transactivation but which was necessary for repression. These findings
indicated that E2F-dependent repression and activation are independently
regulated phenomena and suggest that repression involves additional interactions 
determined by the promoter context.

PMID: 8806697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Cell Physiol. 1996 Sep;168(3):580-8.

Regulation of dihydrofolate reductase gene expression and E2F components in human
diploid fibroblasts during growth and senescence.

Good L(1), Dimri GP, Campisi J, Chen KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Rutgers, State University of New Jersey, Piscataway
08855-0939, USA.

The induction of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), a key enzyme in DNA biosynthesis
that is induced just before the onset of S phase, is markedly attenuated in
senescent human fibroblasts (Pang and Chen, 1994, J. Cell. Physiol.,
160:531-538). Footprinting analysis of the 365 bp promoter region of the human
DHFR gene (-381 to -17) indicated that nuclear proteins bind to a cluster of
cis-elements, including two overlapping E2F binding sequences, two Sp1 sites, and
one Yi sequence. Gel mobility shift assays were performed to assess the role of
each cis-element in the regulation of DHFR gene expression. We found that 1) Sp1 
binding activity was constitutively expressed throughout the cell cycle in early 
passage and senescent cells; 2) Yi binding activity was undetectable in both
early passage and senescent cells; and 3) E2F binding activity was
serum-inducible, senescence-dependent, and prominent in presenescent cells but
strikingly diminished in senescent cells. Northern blot analysis of the
expression of E2F and DP family members showed that the E2F-1, E2F-4, and E2F-5
mRNA was growth- and senescence-dependent, whereas E2F-3, DP-1, and DP-2
expression was constitutive and senescence-independent. In contrast, E2F-2 mRNA
was not detectable in IMR-90 or WI-38 human fibroblasts. Western blot analysis
showed that among the E2F-associated proteins, the expression of E2F-1, cyclin A,
and cyclin B but not p107 was cell cycle- and senescence-dependent. A nuclear
extract mixing experiment suggested that an inhibitory factor may further reduce 
E2F binding activity in senescent cells.

PMID: 8816912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Aug 1;24(15):2905-10.

Cell cycle-regulated repression of B-myb transcription: cooperation of an E2F
site with a contiguous corepressor element.

Liu N(1), Lucibello FC, Zwicker J, Engeland K, Müller R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung (IMT), Philipps-Universität 
Marburg, Germany.

B-myb belongs to a group of cell cycle genes whose transcription is repressed in 
G0/early G1 through a binding site for the transcription factor E2F. Here, we
show that the B-myb repressor element is specifically recognised by heterodimers 
consisting of DP-1 and E2F-1, E2F-3 or E2F-4. Surprisingly, E2F-mediated
repression is dependent on a contiguous corepressor element that resembles the
CHR previously established as a corepressor of the CDE in cell cycle genes
derepressed in S/G2, such as cyclin A, cdc2 and cdc25C. A factor binding to the
B-myb CHR was identified in fractionated HeLa nuclear extract and found to
interact with the minor groove, as previously shown by in vivo footprinting for
the cyclin A CHR. The B-myb and cdc25C CHRs are related with respect to protein
binding but are functionally clearly distinct. Our results support a model where 
both E2F- and CDE-mediated repression, acting at different stages in the cell
cycle, are dependent on promoter-specific CHR elements.

PMCID: PMC146036
PMID: 8760872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Oncogene. 1996 Jul 18;13(2):237-46.

G1 cyclin/CDK-independent phosphorylation and accumulation of p130 during the
transition from G1 to G0 lead to its association with E2F-4.

Mayol X(1), Garriga J, Graña X.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

During the transition from G1 to G0, p130 undergoes a specific phosphorylation
event-leading to p130-form 2- that is mediated by a kinase/s other than the known
G1, S and G2/M cyclin/CDKs. Changes in the phosphorylation status of p130 during 
this transition are responsible, at least in part, for the concomitant formation 
of p130/E2F-4 complexes, which are characteristic of G0. These complexes remain
abundant during early G1 upon restimulation, but not after mitosis, and are
dissociated in mid G1 when p130 is abruptly hyperphosphorylated to form 3.
Subsequently, p130 forms 1 and 2 are no longer detected during the remainder of
the cell cycle. Consistently, phosphorylation to form 3 and dissociation from
E2F-4 complexes is reproduced by a cyclin/CDK holoenzyme in vitro.
TGF-beta-induced G1 arrest abrogates cyclin/CDK phosphorylation of p130 but not
phosphorylation to form 2. The cell cycle-dependent phosphorylation pattern of
p130 is thus shown to comprise two distinct steps that are catalyzed by different
kinases. The differential regulation of p130 and pRB phosphorylation during the
transition from G1 to G0 may explain the fact that p130 and E2F-4 are the major
components of E2F complexes in quiescent cells. Moreover, the newly described
phosphorylation of p130 at the transition from G1 to G0 defines a novel mechanism
of cell cycle exit regulation.

PMID: 8710362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Cell Sci. 1996 Jul;109 ( Pt 7):1717-26.

Nuclear localization of DP and E2F transcription factors by heterodimeric
partners and retinoblastoma protein family members.

Magae J(1), Wu CL, Illenye S, Harlow E, Heintz NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont, Burlington 05405, USA.

E2F is a family of transcription factors implicated in the regulation of genes
required for progression through G1 and entry into the S phase. The
transcriptionally active forms of E2F are heterodimers composed of one
polypeptide encoded by the E2F gene family and one polypeptide encoded by the DP 
gene family. The transcriptional activity of E2F/DP heterodimers is influenced by
association with the members of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein
family (pRb, p107, and p130). Here the intracellular distribution of E2F and DP
proteins was investigated in transiently transfected Chinese hamster and human
cells. In transfected cells, DP-1 did not accumulate in the nucleus unless it was
coexpressed with the heterodimeric partners E2F-1, E2F-2, or E2F-3. Domain
mapping experiments showed that regions of E2F-1 and DP-1 that are required for
stable association of the two proteins were also required for nuclear
localization of DP-1. Unlike E2F-1, -2, and -3, E2F-4 did not accumulate in the
nucleus unless it was coexpressed with DP-2, p107 and p130, but not pRb,
stimulated nuclear localization of E2F-4, either alone or in combination with
DP-2. These results indicate that DP proteins preferentially associate with
specific E2F partners, and suggest that the ability of specific E2F/DP
heterodimers to localize in the nucleus contributes to the regulation of E2F
activity.

PMID: 8832394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jun;16(6):2987-97.

Inhibition of E2F activity by the cyclin-dependent protein kinase inhibitor p21
in cells expressing or lacking a functional retinoblastoma protein.

Dimri GP(1), Nakanishi M, Desprez PY, Smith JR, Campisi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Life Sciences Division, Berkeley National
Laboratory, University of California 94720, USA.

p21Sdi1/WAF1/Cip1 inhibits cyclin-dependent protein kinases and cell
proliferation. p21 is presumed to inhibit growth by preventing the
phosphorylation of growth-regulatory proteins, including the retinoblastoma tumor
suppressor protein (pRb). The ultimate effector(s) of p21 growth inhibition,
however, is largely a matter of conjecture. We show that p21 inhibits the
activity of E2F, an essential growth-stimulatory transcription factor that is
negatively regulated by unphosphorylated pRb. p21 suppressed the activity of
E2F-responsive promoters (dihydrofolate reductase and cdc2), but E2F-unresponsive
promoters (c-fos and simian virus 40 early) were unaffected. Moreover, the simian
virus 40 early promoter was rendered p21 suppressible by introducing wild-type,
but not mutant, E2F binding sites; p21 deletion mutants showed good agreement in 
their abilities to inhibit E2F transactivation and DNA synthesis; and E2F-1
(which binds pRb), but not E2F-4 (which does not), reversed both inhibitory
effects of p21. Despite the central role for pRb in regulating E2F, p21
suppressed growth and E2F activity in cells lacking a functional pRb. Moreover,
p21 protein (wild type but not mutant) specifically disrupted an
E2F-cyclin-dependent protein kinase 2-p107 DNA binding complex in nuclear
extracts of proliferating cells, whether or not they expressed normal pRb. Thus, 
E2F is a critical target and ultimate effector of p21 action, and pRb is not
essential for the inhibition of growth or E2F-dependent transcription.

PMCID: PMC231293
PMID: 8649410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 May 14;93(10):4633-7.

Regulation of the retinoblastoma protein-related protein p107 by G1
cyclin-associated kinases.

Xiao ZX(1), Ginsberg D, Ewen M, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

p107 is a retinoblastoma protein-related phosphoprotein that, when overproduced, 
displays a growth inhibitory function. It interacts with and modulates the
activity of the transcription factor, E2F-4. In addition, p107 physically
associates with cyclin E-CDK2 and cyclin A-CDK2 complexes in late G1 and at G1/S,
respectively, an indication that cyclin-dependent kinase complexes may regulate, 
contribute to, and/or benefit from p107 function during the cell cycle. Our
results show that p107 phosphorylation begins in mid G1 and proceeds through late
G1 and S and that cyclin D-associated kinase(s) contributes to this process. In
addition, E2F-4 binds selectively to hypophosphorylated p107, and G1
cyclin-dependent p107 phosphorylation leads to the dissociation of p107-E2F-4
complexes as well as inactivation of p107 G1 blocking function.

PMCID: PMC39330
PMID: 8643455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Apr 16;93(8):3215-20.

A unique role for the Rb protein in controlling E2F accumulation during cell
growth and differentiation.

Ikeda MA(1), Jakoi L, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Examination of the interactions involving transcription factor E2F activity
during cell growth and terminal differentiation suggests distinct roles for Rb
family members in the regulation of E2F accumulation. The major species of E2F in
quiescent cells is a complex containing the E2F4 product in association with the 
Rb-related p130 protein. As cells enter the cell cycle, this complex disappears, 
and there is a concomitant accumulation of free E2F activity of which E2F4 is a
major component. E2F4 then associates with the Rb-related p107 protein as cells
enter S phase. Rb can be found in interactions with each E2F species, including
E2F4, during G1, but there appears to be a limited amount of Rb with respect to
E2F, likely due to the maintenance of most Rb protein in an inactive state by
phosphorylation. A contrasting circumstance can be found during the induction of 
HL60 cell differentiation. As these cells exit the cell cycle, active Rb protein 
appears to exceed E2F, as there is a marked accumulation of E2F-Rb interactions, 
involving all E2F species, including E2F4, which is paralleled by the conversion 
of Rb from a hyperphosphorylated state to a hypophosphorylated state. These
results suggest that the specific ability of Rb protein to interact with each E2F
species, dependent on concentration of active Rb relative to accumulation of E2F,
may be critical in cell-growth decisions.

PMCID: PMC39585
PMID: 8622916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Curr Biol. 1996 Apr 1;6(4):474-83.

E2F-1 but not E2F-4 can overcome p16-induced G1 cell-cycle arrest.

Mann DJ(1), Jones NC.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: The transition from G1 to S phase is the key regulatory step in the
mammalian cell cycle. This transition is regulated positively by G1-specific
cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks) and negatively by the product of the
retinoblastoma tumour suppressor gene, pRb. Hypophosphorylated pRb binds to and
inactivates the E2F transcription factor, which controls the expression of genes 
required for S-phase progression. Hyperphosphorylation of pRb in late G1 phase
results in the accumulation of active E2F, a critical event in the progression to
S phase. The E2F factor is not a single entity, but rather represents a family of
highly related molecules, all of which bind to pRb or the pRb-related proteins
p107 and p130.
RESULTS: In this study, we have used specific inhibitors of cdks to explore the
requirements for cell-cycle progression from G1 to S phase. Expression of
p16Ink4, which specifically inhibits cyclin D-directed cdks, blocks cells in G1
phase; this block can be overcome by expression of the viral proteins that
inactivate pRb or by E2F-1. Importantly however, the G1 arrest is not overcome by
overexpression of E2F-4. By using chimeric E2F proteins, containing amino-acid
sequences from E2F-1 and E2F-4, we have shown that their differential abilities
to overcome a p16-imposed arrest is determined by their respective amino-terminal
regions. We also demonstrate that E2F-1 can promote entry into S phase without
concomitant phosphorylation of pRb. In contrast to the p16-mediated G1 block, G1 
arrest mediated by the cdk inhibitors p21Cip1 or p27Kip1 cannot be bypassed
either by inactivation of pRb or overexpression of E2F family members.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that the role of the cyclin D-directed cdks
in promoting the progression of cells from G1 into S phase is wholly to activate 
an E2F-1-like activity through phosphorylation, thus preventing the formation of 
the E2F-pRb complex. The cyclin E-cdk2 complex is also required for the G1/S
transition but has a different and as yet undefined role. We also provide
evidence for a functional difference between E2F-1 and E2F-4, dependant upon the 
region that contains the DNA-binding and dimerization domains. These results
indicate that these two E2F family members are likely to regulate the expression 
of different subsets of E2F-responsive promoters.

PMID: 8723352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1659-67.

Interaction of Sp1 with the growth- and cell cycle-regulated transcription factor
E2F.

Karlseder J(1), Rotheneder H, Wintersberger E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Für Molekularbiologie, Universität Wien, Austria, USA.

Within the region around 150 bp upstream of the initiation codon, which was
previously shown to suffice for growth-regulated expression, the murine thymidine
kinase gene carries a single binding site for transcription factor Sp1; about 10 
bp downstream of this site, there is a binding motif for transcription factor
E2F. The latter protein appears to be responsible for growth regulation of the
promoter. Mutational inactivation of either the Sp1 or the E2F site almost
completely abolishes promoter activity, suggesting that the two transcription
factors interact directly in delivering an activation signal to the basic
transcription machinery. This was verified by demonstrating with the use of
glutathione S-transferase fusion proteins that E2F and Sp1 bind to each other in 
vitro. For this interaction, the C-terminal part of Sp1 and the N terminus of
E2F1, a domain also present in E2F2 and E2F3 but absent in E2F4 and E2F5, were
essential. Accordingly, E2F1 to E2F3 but not E2F4 and E2F5 were found to bind sp1
in vitro. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that complexes exist in vivo, 
and it was estabilished that the distance between the binding sites for the two
transcription factors was critical for optimal promoter activity. Finally, in
vivo footprinting experiments indicated that both the sp1 and E2F binding sites
are occupied throughout the cell cycle. Mutation of either binding motif
abolished binding of both transcription factors in vivo, which may indicate
cooperative binding of the two proteins to chromatin-organized DNA. Our data are 
in line with the hypothesis that E2F functions as a growth- and cell cycle
regulated tethering factor between Sp1 and the basic transcription machinery.

PMCID: PMC231152
PMID: 8657141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1436-49.

E2F-4 switches from p130 to p107 and pRB in response to cell cycle reentry.

Moberg K(1), Starz MA, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
02139, USA.

The E2F transcription factor couples the coordinate expression of cell cycle
proteins to their appropriate transition points. Its activity is controlled by
the cell cycle regulators pRB, p107, and p130. These bind to E2F at defined but
distinct stages of the cell cycle. Using specific antisera, we have identified
the DP and E2F components of each of these species. Although present at very
different levels, DP-1 and DP-2 are evenly distributed among each of these
complexes. In contrast, the individual E2Fs have distinctly different binding
profiles. Consistent with previous studies, E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3 bind
specifically to the retinoblastoma protein. In each case, their expression and
DNA binding activity are restricted to post-G1/S fractions. Surprisingly, E2F-1
and E2F-3 make unequal contributions to the pRB-associated and free E2F activity,
suggesting that these proteins perform different cell cycle functions. Most
significantly, this study showed E2F-4 accounts for the vast majority of the
endogenous E2F activity. In arrested cells, E2F-4 is sequestered by the p130
protein. However, as the cells pass the G1-to-S transition, the levels of pRB and
p107 increase and E2F-4 now associates with both of these regulators. Despite
this, a considerable amount of E2F-4 exists as free E2F. In G1 cells, this
accounts for almost all of the free activity. Once the cells enter S phase, free 
E2F is composed of an equal mixture of E2F-4 and E2F-1.

PMCID: PMC231128
PMID: 8657117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Jan;7(1):31-42.

Changes in E2F DNA-binding activity during induced erythroid differentiation.

Richon VM(1), Venta-Perez G.

Author information: 
(1)DeWitt Wallace Research Laboratory, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, New York 10021, USA. v-richon@ski.mskcc.org

The cytodifferentiation agent hexamethylene bisacetamide (HMBA) is an inducer of 
differentiation of a variety of transformed cells, including the murine
erythroleukemia (MEL) cell line. Induction of differentiation of MEL cells is a
multistep process resulting in cessation of cell division and phenotypic
maturation (including hemoglobin production). To investigate HMBA-induced MEL
cell differentiation, we have analyzed the regulation of the E2F transcription
factor. E2F regulates the transcription of several genes whose products are
involved in both cell cycle regulation and differentiation. In nuclear extracts
from uninduced MEL cells, three complexes were detected using gel mobility assays
with the E2F/E2 oligonucleotide. The complex with the fastest mobility is the
free form of E2F binding to DNA, and the more slowly migrating complexes contain 
E2F, p107, and cdk2. By 8 h of HMBA induction and for the remainder of the
differentiation process, the free E2F complex is not detected, and only complexes
of slower mobility, which contain p107 and cdk2, are found. The level of p107
protein increases during induction of differentiation; there is no change in the 
level of cdk2 protein and E2F-4 and DP-1 proteins during the first 4 days. The
level of E2F-1 mRNA does not change, but a new form of E2F is detected during
induction of differentiation. Thus, HMBA causes a selective loss in the free E2F 
DNA-binding complex, an increase in p107 protein, and an increase in a form of
E2F protein during MEL cell differentiation.

PMID: 8788031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 1996;208:79-93.

The cellular effects of E2F overexpression.

Adams PD(1), Kaelin WG Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The product of the retinoblastoma tumor-suppressor gene (RB) is a ubiquitously
expressed, 105-kDa nuclear phosphoprotein (pRB). The pRB protein negatively
regulates the cellular G1/S phase transition, and it is at this point in the cell
cycle that it is thought to play its role as a tumor suppressor. The
growth-inhibitory effects of pRB are exerted, at least in part, through the E2F
family of transcription factors. This chapter reviews the insights into the
mechanism of action of the E2F family members that have been obtained through
overexpression studies. Studies in RB-/- SAOS-2 cells have provided evidence in
support of the hypothesis that the E2F family members are negatively regulated by
pRB and the related protein p130. In particular, the results obtained are
consistent with the earlier biochemical data which suggested that E2F1 is
regulated primarily by pRB, and E2F4 by p130. Results relating to p107 are also
discussed. Consistent with the proposed role of pRB and E2F1 as coregulators of
entry into S phase, experiments have demonstrated that overexpression of E2F1 is 
sufficient to override the cell cycle arrests caused by serum deprivation of
fibroblasts or transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) treatment of mink lung 
epithelial cells. However, at least in the case of the serum deprivation induced 
arrest, the ultimate result of E2F1 overexpression is death by p53-dependent
apoptosis. In light of this and other data, a model is discussed as to how
functional inactivation of pRB and p53 might cooperate to promote tumorigenesis. 
A number of studies have demonstrated the oncogenic potential of E2F family
members, at least under certain conditions. This is, again, in keeping with the
notion that these proteins play a critical role in controlling proliferation.

PMID: 8575214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Dec;15(12):6901-13.

In vivo structure of the human cdc2 promoter: release of a p130-E2F-4 complex
from sequences immediately upstream of the transcription initiation site
coincides with induction of cdc2 expression.

Tommasi S(1), Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope National
Medical Center, Duarte, California 91010, USA.

In quiescent cells, cdc2 mRNA is almost undetectable. Stimulation of cells to
reenter the cell cycle results in induction of cdc2 expression, beginning at the 
G1-to-S transition and reaching maximum levels during late S and G2 phases. To
investigate cdc2 transcriptional regulation throughout cell cycle progression, we
monitored protein-DNA interactions by in vivo footprinting along 800 bp of the
human cdc2 promoter in quiescent fibroblasts and at different time points
following serum stimulation. We found 11 in vivo protein-binding sites, but no
protein binding was observed at a high-affinity E2F site that had previously been
implicated in cdc2 regulation. Nine of the identified in vivo binding sites
(among them were two inverted CCAAT boxes, two Sp1 sites, and one ets-2 site)
bind transcription factors constitutively throughout the cell cycle. However, at 
two elements located at positions -60 and -20 relative to the transcription start
site, the binding pattern changes significantly as the cells are entering S
phase. A G0- and G1-specific protein complex disappears at the -20 element at the
beginning of S phase. This sequence deviates at one base position from known E2F 
consensus binding sites. We found that the major E2F activity in human
fibroblasts contains E2F-4 and p130. The -20 element of the cdc2 gene
specifically interacts with a subset of E2F-4-p130 complexes present in G0 cells 
but does not interact with S-phase-specific E2F complexes. Transient-transfection
experiments with wild-type and mutant cdc2 promoter constructs indicate that the 
-20 element is involved in suppressing cdc2 activity in quiescent cells. We
suggest that the presence of the p130-E2F-4 complex in G0/G1 blocks access of
components of the basal transcription machinery or prevents transaction by the
constitutively bound upstream activator proteins.

PMCID: PMC230945
PMID: 8524257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Gen Virol. 1995 Sep;76 ( Pt 9):2141-9.

Epstein-Barr virus EBNA-LP and transcription regulation properties of pRB, p107
and p53 in transfection assays.

Inman GJ(1), Farrell PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, St Mary's Hospital Medical School,
London, UK.

The EBNA-LP protein (also known as EBNA-5) of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) has been
reported previously to colocalize in the nuclei of cells with the pRb protein and
to bind in vitro to pRb and to the p53 protein, suggesting a role for EBNA-LP in 
modulation of the function of these proteins. Here we test in transfection assays
whether EBNA-LP expression has any functional consequence for repression of E2F-1
activity by pRb or p107 or for activation of transcription by the p53 protein. No
significant effect could be found, although the assay systems were sensitive to
the established effects of simian virus 40 large T antigen and human
papillo-mavirus type 16 E6 protein. There was very effective repression of
GAL4/E2F-1 transactivation by p107, consistent with earlier reports and
indicating that p107 can interact with the E2F-1 transactivation domain, even
though p107 has been reported to bind specifically to E2F complexes containing
E2F-4. The results indicate that, if the associations of EBNA-LP with pRB and p53
are physiologically relevant, they most likely affect other functions of these
proteins or modulate their gene regulatory functions in ways that cannot be
detected by transfection into cycling transformed cells.

PMID: 7561751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Genes Dev. 1995 Jun 1;9(11):1340-53.

Regulation of the retinoblastoma protein-related p107 by G1 cyclin complexes.

Beijersbergen RL(1), Carlée L, Kerkhoven RM, Bernards R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam.

The orderly progression through the cell cycle is mediated by the sequential
activation of several cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) complexes. These
kinases phosphorylate a number of cellular substrates, among which is the product
of the retinoblastoma gene, pRb. Phosphorylation of pRb in late G1 causes the
release of the transcription factor E2F from pRb, resulting in the
transcriptional activation of E2F-responsive genes. We show here that
phosphorylation of the pRb-related p107 is also cell cycle regulated. p107 is
first phosphorylated at 8 hr following serum stimulation of quiescent
fibroblasts, which coincides with an increase in cyclin D1 protein levels.
Consistent with this, we show that a cyclin D1/cdk4 complex, but not a cyclin
E/cdk2 complex, can phosphorylate p107 in vivo. Furthermore, phosphorylation of
p107 can be abolished by the overexpression of a dominant-negative form of cdk4. 
Phosphorylation of p107 results in the loss of the ability to associate with
E2F-4, a transcription factor with growth-promoting and oncogenic activity. A
p107-induced cell cycle block can be released by cyclin D1/cdk4 but not by cyclin
E/cdk2. These data indicate that the activity of p107 is regulated by
phosphorylation through D-type cyclins.

PMID: 7797074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Genes Dev. 1995 Apr 1;9(7):869-81.

Functional interaction between E2F-4 and p130: evidence for distinct mechanisms
underlying growth suppression by different retinoblastoma protein family members.

Vairo G(1), Livingston DM, Ginsberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Little is known of the mechanisms controlling the G0/G1 transition of the cell
cycle. The induction of immediate early gene expression, thought to be important 
for this process, suggests that the key factors controlling this transition
preexist in quiescent cells. The E2F family of transcription factors likely play 
an important role in this process, because E2F DNA-binding activity exists in
quiescent cells, and the induction of at least some immediate early genes
requires intact E2F regulatory promoter sites. Here, we show that the major G0
E2F activity of primary human T cells, E2F-4, is stably bound to the p130 pocket 
protein in association with a DP heterodimerization partner. p130-E2F-4 binding
has functional implications because p130 effectively suppressed E2F-4-mediated
trans-activation, and coexpression of E2F4 overcame p130-mediated G1 arrest more 
efficiently than RB-induced G1 blockade. Conversely, E2F-1 overrode an RB-induced
G1 block more efficiently than E2F-4. Thus, p130 and RB appear to induce cell
cycle arrest via biochemically distinct mechanisms that involve different E2F
family members.

PMID: 7705662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Mar 14;92(6):2403-7.

E2F-4 and E2F-5, two members of the E2F family, are expressed in the early phases
of the cell cycle.

Sardet C(1), Vidal M, Cobrinik D, Geng Y, Onufryk C, Chen A, Weinberg RA.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142.

The E2F transcription factors play a role in regulating the expression of genes
required for cell proliferation. Their activity appears to be regulated by
association with the retinoblastoma protein (pRb) and the pRb-related proteins
p107 and p130. In vivo, pRb is found in complex with a subset of E2F
components--namely, E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3. Here we describe the
characterization of cDNAs encoding two unusual E2Fs, E2F-4 and E2F-5, each
identified by the ability of their gene product to interact with p130 in a yeast 
two-hybrid system. E2F-4 and -5 share common sequences with E2F-1, E2F-2, and
E2F-3 and, like these other E2Fs, the ability to heterodimerize with DP-1,
thereby acquiring the ability to bind an E2F DNA recognition sequence with high
affinity. However, in contrast to E2F-1, E2F-4 and E2F-5 fail to bind pRb in a
two-hybrid assay. Moreover, they show a unique pattern of expression in
synchronized human keratinocytes: E2F-4 and E2F-5 mRNA expression is maximal in
mid-G1 phase before E2F-1 expression is detectable. These findings suggest that
E2F-4 and E2F-5 may contribute to the regulation of early G1 events including the
G0/G1 transition.

PMCID: PMC42492
PMID: 7892279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cell Mol Biol Res. 1995;41(3):147-54.

Structural characterization and specificity of expression of E2F-5: a new member 
of the E2F family of transcription factors.

Itoh A(1), Levinson SF, Morita T, Kourembanas S, Brody JS, Mitsialis SA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biomolecular Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, MA
02118, USA.

Members of the E2F gene family are transcription factors that have been
implicated in the control of genes essential for cell cycle progression.
Regulation of E2F function is finely tuned by the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor
gene product and a small family of related "pocket proteins," with the
participation of a number of cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases. Perturbations 
of this regulatory network can lead to oncogenic transformation and, in certain
systems, to the loss of the ability to maintain terminal differentiation. We
describe here the cloning, structural characterization, and tissue expression
pattern of a new member of the E2F family, E2F-5. We show that this protein is
highly conserved between human and rat but exhibits considerable divergence from 
E2F-1, E2F-2, or E2F3. Together with the recently reported E2F-4, E2F-5 defines a
new branch of the E2F family. The distribution of E2F-5 mRNA among adult rat
tissues and the temporal pattern of its expression during the cell cycle of
vascular smooth muscle cells are distinctly different from that of E2F-1. The
structural divergence between the two branches of the E2F family may thus reflect
participation in different regulatory networks.

PMID: 8589754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Genes Dev. 1994 Nov 15;8(22):2665-79.

E2F-4, a new member of the E2F transcription factor family, interacts with p107.

Ginsberg D(1), Vairo G, Chittenden T, Xiao ZX, Xu G, Wydner KL, DeCaprio JA,
Lawrence JB, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

The E2F family of transcription factors has been implicated in the regulation of 
cell proliferation, and E2F-binding sites are present in the promoters of several
growth-regulating genes. E2F family members are functionally regulated, in part, 
by complex formation with one or more members of the nuclear pocket protein
family, RB, p107, and p130. Pocket protein regulation of E2F likely contributes
to normal cellular growth control. While the three cloned species of E2F, E2F-1, 
E2F-2, and E2F-3, are known to be targets of RB interaction, no E2F species has
yet been shown to be a specific p107 or p130 target. Here, we describe the
cloning of a new member of the E2F family, E2F-4, which forms heterodimers with a
member(s) of the DP family and, unlike some family members, is present throughout
the cell cycle and appears to be a differentially phosphorylated p107-binding
partner. p107 binding not only can be linked to the regulation of E2F-4
transcriptional activity, but also to suppression of the ability of E2F-4 to
transform an immortalized rodent cell line.

PMID: 7958924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


