
1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015 Jul;84:179-90. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2015.04.026. Epub
2015 May 2.

Interplay between the E2F pathway and ß-adrenergic signaling in the pathological 
hypertrophic response of myocardium.

Major JL(1), Salih M(1), Tuana BS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Road, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada. (2)Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada; 
University of Ottawa Heart Institute, 40 Ruskin Street, Ottawa, Ontario K1Y 4W7, 
Canada. Electronic address: btuana@uottawa.ca.

The E2F/Pocket protein (Rb) pathway regulates cell growth, differentiation, and
death by modulating gene expression. We previously examined this pathway in the
myocardium via manipulation of the unique E2F repressor, E2F6, which is believed 
to repress gene activity independently of Rb. Mice with targeted expression of
E2F6 in postnatal myocardium developed dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) without
hypertrophic growth. We assessed the mechanisms of the apparent failure of
compensatory hypertrophic growth as well as their response to the ß-adrenergic
agonist isoproterenol. As early as 2 weeks, E2F6 transgenic (Tg) mice present
with dilated thinner left ventricles and significantly reduced ejection fraction 
and fractional shortening which persists at 6 weeks of age, but with no apparent 
increase in left ventricle weight: body weight (LVW:BW). E2F6-Tg mice treated
with isoproterenol (6.1 mg/kg/day) show double the increase in LVW:BW than their 
Wt counterparts (32% vs 16%, p-value: 0.007). Western blot analysis revealed the 
activation of the adrenergic pathway in Tg heart tissue under basal conditions
with ~2-fold increase in the level of ß2-adrenergic receptors (p-value: 8.9E-05),
protein kinase A catalytic subunit (PKA-C) (p-value: 0.0176), activated c-Src
tyrosine-protein kinase (p-value: 0.0002), extracellular receptor kinase 2 (ERK2)
(p-value: 0.0005), and induction of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl2 (p-value 0.
0.00001). In contrast, a ~60% decrease in the cardiac growth regulator: AKT1
(p-value 0.0001) and a ~four fold increase in cyclic AMP dependent
phosphodiesterase 4D (PDE4D), the negative regulator of PKA activity, were
evident in the myocardium of E2F6-Tg mice. The expression of E2F3 was
down-regulated by E2F6, but was restored by isoproterenol. Further, Rb expression
was down-regulated in Tg mice in response to isoproterenol implying a net
activation of the E2F pathway. Thus the unique regulation of E2F activity by E2F6
renders the myocardium hypersensitive to adrenergic stimulus resulting in robust 
hypertrophic growth. These data reveal a novel interplay between the E2F pathway,
ß2-adrenergic/PKA/PDE4D, and ERK/c-Src axis in fine tuning the pathological
hypertrophic growth response. E2F6 deregulates E2F3 such that pro-hypertrophic
growth and survival are enhanced via ß2-adrenergic signaling however this
response is outweighed by the induction of anti-hypertrophic signals so that left
ventricle dilation proceeds without any increase in muscle mass.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25944088  [PubMed - in process]


2. APMIS. 2015 Apr;123(4):350-8. doi: 10.1111/apm.12352.

Primary synovial epithelioid sarcoma of the knee: distinctly unusual location
leading to its confusion with pigmented villonodular synovitis.

Chow LT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, Prince of Wales Hospital,
Hong Kong, China.

Epithelioid sarcoma (ES) is a rare malignant soft tissue tumor occurring in the
distal extremities of young adults and is characterized histologically by nodules
of epithelioid cells showing central necrosis. Intra-articular ES is extremely
rare; only four cases have been reported, but their radiologic and histologic
documentation of intra-articular origin have been imprecise. We report the first 
radiologically and histologically well-documented case of primary synovial ES. A 
59-year-old woman presented with pain followed by swelling of her right knee for 
6 months. MRI revealed an entirely intra-articular nodular synovial mass in the
lateral part of the right knee joint in a background of diffusely thickened
synovium. Synovectomy was performed under the clinical impression of pigmented
villonodular synovitis (PVNS), a diagnosis erroneously confirmed by the reporting
pathologist. The tumor rapidly recurred 3 months afterward and the diagnosis of
primary synovial ES was made. Despite above-knee amputation, the tumor continued 
to spread proximally to the retroperitoneum. She developed multiple lung
metastases and died 20 months after initial presentation. The nodular aggregates 
of tumor cells with central necrosis resulted in diffuse polypoid synovial
thickening mimicking tuberculous synovitis and PVNS. The tumor cells showed
positive staining for EMA, CK19, CD34, and complete loss of INI1 staining,
establishing the diagnosis of primary synovial ES. The ES spread from the
synovium to and along the joint capsule, and then extra-articularly into the soft
tissue surrounding the knee joint, with lymphovascular permeation. Such pattern
of spread calls for radical surgical excision as the treatment of choice.

© 2015 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25801084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Apr 10;459(3):374-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.105. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

Oct3/4 directly regulates expression of E2F3a in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Kanai D(1), Ueda A(1), Akagi T(1), Yokota T(1), Koide H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kanazawa
University, Japan. (2)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kanazawa University, Japan. Electronic address:
hkoide@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells, derived from the inner cell mass of blastocysts, have 
a characteristic cell cycle with truncated G1 and G2 phases. Recent findings that
suppression of Oct3/4 expression results in a reduced proliferation rate of ES
cells suggest the involvement of Oct3/4 in the regulation of ES cell growth,
although the underlying molecular mechanism remains unclear. In the present
study, we identified E2F3a as a direct target gene of Oct3/4 in ES cells. Oct3/4 
directly bound to the promoter region of the E2F3a gene and positively regulated 
expression of E2F3a in mouse ES cells. Suppression of E2F3a activity by E2F6
overexpression led to the reduced proliferation in ES cells, which was relieved
by co-expression of E2F3a. Furthermore, cell growth retardation caused by loss of
Oct3/4 was rescued by E2F3a expression. These results suggest that Oct3/4
upregulates E2F3a expression to promote ES cell growth.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25727014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 29;9(12):e116050. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116050.
eCollection 2014.

A mathematical model of bimodal epigenetic control of miR-193a in ovarian cancer 
stem cells.

Cheng FH(1), Aguda BD(2), Tsai JC(3), Kochanczyk M(4), Lin JM(1), Chen GC(1), Lai
HC(5), Nephew KP(6), Hwang TW(3), Chan MW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, National Chung Cheng University, Min-Hsiung,
Chia-Yi, Taiwan, Republic of China; Institute of Molecular Biology, National
Chung Cheng University, Min-Hsiung, Chia-Yi, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(2)DiseasePathways LLC, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Department of Mathematics, National Chung Cheng University, Min-Hsiung,
Chia-Yi, Taiwan, Republic of China. (4)Institute of Fundamental Technological
Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland. (5)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China; Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan,
Republic of China; Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Xiangya Hospital, Central
South University, Changsha, People's Republic of China; Institute of Clinical
Pharmacology, Central South University, Changsha, People's Republic of China;
Hunan Key Laboratory of Pharmacogenetics, Changsha, People's Republic of China.
(6)Medical Sciences, Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Bloomington, Indiana, United States of America.

Accumulating data indicate that cancer stem cells contribute to tumor
chemoresistance and their persistence alters clinical outcome. Our previous study
has shown that ovarian cancer may be initiated by ovarian cancer initiating cells
(OCIC) characterized by surface antigen CD44 and c-KIT (CD117). It has been
experimentally demonstrated that a microRNA, namely miR-193a, targets c-KIT mRNA 
for degradation and could play a crucial role in ovarian cancer development. How 
miR-193a is regulated is poorly understood and the emerging picture is complex.
To unravel this complexity, we propose a mathematical model to explore how
estrogen-mediated up-regulation of another target of miR-193a, namely E2F6, can
attenuate the function of miR-193a in two ways, one through a competition of E2F6
and c-KIT transcripts for miR-193a, and second by binding of E2F6 protein, in
association with a polycomb complex, to the promoter of miR-193a to down-regulate
its transcription. Our model predicts that this bimodal control increases the
expression of c-KIT and that the second mode of epigenetic regulation is required
to generate a switching behavior in c-KIT and E2F6 expressions. Additional
analysis of the TCGA ovarian cancer dataset demonstrates that ovarian cancer
patients with low expression of EZH2, a polycomb-group family protein, show
positive correlation between E2F6 and c-KIT. We conjecture that a simultaneous
EZH2 inhibition and anti-estrogen therapy can constitute an effective combined
therapeutic strategy against ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC4278842
PMID: 25545504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. BMC Genomics. 2014 Dec 3;15:1053. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-1053.

Cross-species transcriptomic analysis elucidates constitutive aryl hydrocarbon
receptor activity.

Sun RX, Chong LC, Simmons TT, Houlahan KE, Prokopec SD, Watson JD, Moffat ID,
Lensu S, Lindén J, P'ng C, Okey AB, Pohjanvirta R, Boutros PC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Informatics and Bio-computing Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, 
Toronto, Canada. Paul.Boutros@oicr.on.ca.

BACKGROUND: Research on the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) has largely focused
on variations in toxic outcomes resulting from its activation by halogenated
aromatic hydrocarbons. But the AHR also plays key roles in regulating pathways
critical for development, and after decades of research the mechanisms underlying
physiological regulation by the AHR remain poorly characterized. Previous studies
identified several core genes that respond to xenobiotic AHR ligands across a
broad range of species and tissues. However, only limited inferences have been
made regarding its role in regulating constitutive gene activity, i.e. in the
absence of exogenous ligands. To address this, we profiled transcriptomic
variations between AHR-active and AHR-less-active animals in the absence of an
exogenous agonist across five tissues, three of which came from rats
(hypothalamus, white adipose and liver) and two of which came from mice (kidney
and liver). Because AHR status alone has been shown sufficient to alter
transcriptomic responses, we reason that by contrasting profiles amongst
AHR-variant animals, we may elucidate effects of the AHR on constitutive mRNA
abundances.
RESULTS: We found significantly more overlap in constitutive mRNA abundances
amongst tissues within the same species than from tissues between species and
identified 13 genes (Agt, Car3, Creg1, Ctsc, E2f6, Enpp1, Gatm, Gstm4, Kcnj8,
Me1, Pdk1, Slc35a3, and Sqrdl) that are affected by AHR-status in four of five
tissues. One gene, Creg1, was significantly up-regulated in all AHR-less-active
animals. We also find greater overlap between tissues at the pathway level than
at the gene level, suggesting coherency to the AHR signalling response within
these processes. Analysis of regulatory motifs suggests that the AHR mostly
mediates transcriptional regulation via direct binding to response elements.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings, though preliminary, present a platform for further
evaluating the role of the AHR in regulation of constitutive mRNA levels and
physiologic function.

PMCID: PMC4301818
PMID: 25467400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Oct 23;5:e1486. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.454.

Polycomb protein EZH2 suppresses apoptosis by silencing the proapoptotic miR-31.

Zhang Q(1), Padi SK(1), Tindall DJ(2), Guo B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, North Dakota State
University, Fargo, ND 58108, USA. (2)Department of Urology, Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is the catalytic subunit of the polycomb
repressive complex 2 and suppresses gene expression by catalyzing histone H3
methylation on lysine 27. EZH2 is overexpressed in metastatic prostate cancer and
has been shown to promote cell proliferation and metastasis. Here we show that
EZH2 also suppresses prostate cancer apoptosis by coordinating the epigenetic
silencing of two proapoptotic microRNAs (miRNA), miR-205 and miR-31. We
previously reported that miR-205 promotes apoptosis by targeting antiapoptotic
protein Bcl-w and miR-205 is silenced in prostate cancer through promoter
methylation. In this study, we found that EZH2 suppresses miR-31 expression by
trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone 3 on the miR-31 promoter. SiRNA knockdown 
of EZH2 increased miR-31 expression and decreased the antiapoptotic protein E2F6 
(E2F transcription factor 6) (a target of miR-31), resulting in the sensitization
of prostate cancer cells to docetaxel-induced apoptosis. Conversely,
overexpression of EZH2 blocked docetaxel-induced apoptosis. We further
demonstrated that miR-205 silencing is linked to miR-31 silencing through EZH2.
Suppression of miR-205 with an miRNA inhibitor caused an increase of EZH2
protein, which in turn inhibited miR-31 expression. Conversely, overexpression of
miR-205 decreased EZH2 protein and increased miR-31 expression. In paired human
prostate cancer specimens and adjacent normal tissues, we observed that the
decrease of miR-205 expression correlated with EZH2 overexpression and miR-31
silencing. Thus, EZH2 integrates the epigenetic silencing of miR-205 and miR-31
to confer resistance to chemotherapy-induced apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC4237267
PMID: 25341040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Dec;13(12):3185-97. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0243.
Epub 2014 Oct 15.

miR-185 suppresses tumor proliferation by directly targeting E2F6 and DNMT1 and
indirectly upregulating BRCA1 in triple-negative breast cancer.

Tang H(1), Liu P(1), Yang L(1), Xie X(1), Ye F(1), Wu M(2), Liu X(1), Chen B(1), 
Zhang L(1), Xie X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer
Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (2)Department of Cancer Prevention Center,
Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (3)Department 
of Breast Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong,
China. Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in 
South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, China. xiexm@sysucc.org.cn.

Breast cancer is a major public health problem all over the world, and the
current treatment strategies are not potent enough for some patients, especially 
those with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Recent studies have demonstrated
that microRNAs (miRNA) play vital roles in the development of TNBC. In this
study, we found that miR-185 was strongly downregulated in TNBC tissues and cell 
lines and that its expression levels were associated with lymph node metastasis, 
clinical stage, overall survival, and relapse-free survival in TNBC. We also
found that ectopic expression of miR-185 inhibited TNBC cell proliferation in
vitro and in vivo. We further identified that miR-185 directly targeted DNMT1 and
E2F6, which resulted in a marked increase in the expression of BRCA1 at the mRNA 
and protein levels in TNBC. Our data suggest that miR-185 functions as a tumor
suppressor in TNBC development. It is a promising prognostic biomarker and
potential therapeutic target for TNBC.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25319390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2014 Sep;21(9):825-32. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2862. Epub 2014 Aug
3.

Regulation of microRNA-mediated gene silencing by microRNA precursors.

Roy-Chaudhuri B(1), Valdmanis PN(1), Zhang Y(1), Wang Q(1), Luo QJ(1), Kay MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.
[2] Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.

Processing of microRNAs (miRNAs) from their precursors to their biologically
active mature forms is regulated during development and cancer. We show that
mouse pri- or pre-miR-151 can bind to and compete with mature miR-151-5p and
miR-151-3p for binding sites contained within the complementary regions of the
E2f6 mRNA 3' untranslated region (UTR). E2f6 mRNA levels were directly regulated 
by pri- or pre-miR-151. Conversely, miR-151-mediated repression of ARHGDIA mRNA
was dependent on the level of mature miR-151 because only the mature miRNA binds 
the 3' UTR. Thus, processing of miR-151 can have different effects on separate
mRNA targets within a cell. A bioinformatics pipeline revealed additional
candidate regions where precursor miRNAs can compete with their mature miRNA
counterparts. We validated this experimentally for miR-124 and the SNAI2 3' UTR. 
Hence, miRNA precursors can serve as post-transcriptional regulators of miRNA
activity and are not mere biogenesis intermediates.

PMCID: PMC4244528
PMID: 25086740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 24;15:519. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-519.

Transcriptional regulation and spatial interactions of head-to-head genes.

Chen Y, Li Y, Wei J(1), Li YY.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Center for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai, P R China.
Jenny.Wei@astrazeneca.com.

BACKGROUND: In eukaryotic genomes, about 10% of genes are arranged in a
head-to-head (H2H) orientation, and the distance between the transcription start 
sites of each gene pair is closer than 1 kb. Two genes in an H2H pair are prone
to co-express and co-function. There have been many studies on bidirectional
promoters. However, the mechanism by which H2H genes are regulated at the
transcriptional level still needs further clarification, especially with regard
to the co-regulation of H2H pairs. In this study, we first used the Hi-C data of 
chromatin linkages to identify spatially interacting H2H pairs, and then
integrated ChIP-seq data to compare H2H gene pairs with and without evidence of
spatial interactions in terms of their binding transcription factors (TFs). Using
ChIP-seq and DNase-seq data, histones and DNase associated with H2H pairs were
identified. Furthermore, we looked into the connections between H2H genes in a
human co-expression network.
RESULTS: We found that i) Similar to the behaviour of two genes within an H2H
pair (intra-H2H pair), a gene pair involving two distinct H2H pairs (inter-H2H
pair) which interact with each other spatially, share common transcription
factors (TFs); ii) TFs of intra- and inter-H2H pairs are distributed differently.
Factors such as HEY1, GABP, Sin3Ak-20, POL2, E2F6, and c-MYC are essential for
the bidirectional transcription of intra-H2H pairs; while factors like CTCF,
BDP1, GATA2, RAD21, and POL3 play important roles in coherently regulating
inter-H2H pairs; iii) H2H gene blocks are enriched with hypersensitive DNase and 
modified histones, which participate in active transcriptions; and iv) H2H genes 
tend to be highly connected compared with non-H2H genes in the human
co-expression network.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings shed new light on the mechanism of the transcriptional 
regulation of H2H genes through their linear and spatial interactions. For
intra-H2H gene pairs, transcription factors regulate their transcriptions through
bidirectional promoters, whereas for inter-H2H gene pairs, transcription factors 
are likely to regulate their activities depending on the spatial interaction of
H2H gene pairs. In this way, two distinctive groups of transcription factors
mediate intra- and inter-H2H gene transcriptions respectively, resulting in a
highly compact gene regulatory network.

PMCID: PMC4089025
PMID: 24962804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Jan 21;20(3):795-803. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i3.795.

Bortezomib effect on E2F and cyclin family members in human hepatocellular
carcinoma cell lines.

Baiz D(1), Dapas B(1), Farra R(1), Scaggiante B(1), Pozzato G(1), Zanconati F(1),
Fiotti N(1), Consoloni L(1), Chiaretti S(1), Grassi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Daniele Baiz, Barbara Dapas, Bruna Scaggiante, Sara Chiaretti, Gabriele
Grassi, Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, 34100 Trieste, Italy.

AIM: To evaluate the effects of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BZB) on E2Fs
and related genes in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells.
METHODS: The mRNA levels of the E2F family members (pro-proliferative: E2F1-3 and
anti-proliferative: E2F4-8) and of their related genes cyclins and
cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks) were evaluated in two HCC cell lines following a 
single BZB administration. mRNA levels of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) genes were also measured in both cell lines after BZB treatment. The BZB
concentration (40 nmol/L) used was chosen to stay well below the maximal
amount/cm² recommended for in vivo application, and 2 d incubation was chosen as 
this time point has been found optimal to detect BZB effects in our previous
studies. The HCC cell lines, HepG2 and JHH6, were chosen as they display
different phenotypes, hepatocyte-like for HepG2 and undifferentiated for JHH6,
thus representing an in vitro model of low and high aggressive forms of HCC,
respectively. The mRNA levels of the target genes were measured by two-color
microarray-based gene expression analysis, performed according to Agilent
Technologies protocol and using an Agilent Scan B. For the E2F family members,
mRNA levels were quantified by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR). Using small interfering RNA's, the effects of E2F8 depletion
on cell number was also evaluated.
RESULTS: After BZB treatment, microarray analysis of the undifferentiated JHH6
revealed a significant decrease in the expression of the pro-proliferative E2F
member E2F2. Quantitative RT-PCR data were in keeping with the microarray
analysis, and showed a significant increase and decrease in E2F8 and E2F2 mRNA
levels, respectively. In contrast, BZB treatment of the hepatocyte-like HCC cell 
line HepG2 had a significant impact on mRNA levels of 5 of the 8 E2F members. In 
particular, mRNA levels of the pro-proliferative E2F members E2F1, E2F2, and of
the anti-proliferative member E2F8, decreased over 80%. Notably, a reduction in
E2F8 expression in HepG2 and JHH6 cells following siRNA treatment had no impact
on cell proliferation. As observed with JHH6, BZB treatment of HepG2 cells
induced a significant increase in mRNA levels of an anti-proliferative E2F
member, E2F6 in this case. As was observed with E2F's, more dramatic changes in
mRNA levels of the E2F related genes cyclins and Cdks and EMT genes were observed
after BZB treatment of HepG2 compared to JHH6.
CONCLUSION: The differential expression of E2Fs and related genes induced by BZB 
in diverse HCC cell phenotypes contribute to bortezomib's mechanism of action in 
hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3921488
PMID: 24574752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. BMC Genomics. 2013;14 Suppl 6:S5. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-S6-S5. Epub 2013 Oct 
25.

A novel in silico reverse-transcriptomics-based identification and blood-based
validation of a panel of sub-type specific biomarkers in lung cancer.

Barh D, Jain N, Tiwari S, Field JK, Padin-Iruegas E, Ruibal A, López R, Herranz
M, Bhattacharya A, Juneja L, Viero C, Silva A, Miyoshi A, Kumar A, Blum K,
Azevedo V, Ghosh P, Liloglou T.

Lung cancer accounts for the highest number of cancer-related deaths worldwide.
Early diagnosis significantly increases the disease-free survival rate and a
large amount of effort has been expended in screening trials and the development 
of early molecular diagnostics. However, a gold standard diagnostic strategy is
not yet available. Here, based on miRNA expression profile in lung cancer and
using a novel in silico reverse-transcriptomics approach, followed by analysis of
the interactome; we have identified potential transcription factor (TF) markers
that would facilitate diagnosis of subtype specific lung cancer. A subset of
seven TF markers has been used in a microarray screen and was then validated by
blood-based qPCR using stage-II and IV non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC).
Our results suggest that overexpression of HMGA1, E2F6, IRF1, and TFDP1 and
downregulation or no expression of SUV39H1, RBL1, and HNRPD in blood is suitable 
for diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma sub-types of
NSCLC. Here, E2F6 was, for the first time, found to be upregulated in NSCLC blood
samples. The miRNA-TF-miRNA interaction based molecular mechanisms of these seven
markers in NSCLC revealed that HMGA1 and TFDP1 play vital roles in lung cancer
tumorigenesis. The strategy developed in this work is applicable to any other
cancer or disease and can assist in the identification of potential biomarkers.

PMCID: PMC3908344
PMID: 24564251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cell Signal. 2014 May;26(5):1075-81. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.01.008. Epub
2014 Jan 16.

Promising roles of mammalian E2Fs in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhan L(1), Huang C(1), Meng XM(1), Song Y(1), Wu XQ(1), Miu CG(1), Zhan XS(1), Li
J(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Meishan Road, Hefei 230032,
China; Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui Medical University (AMU), China.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Meishan Road, Hefei 230032,
China; Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui Medical University (AMU), China.
Electronic address: lj@ahmu.edu.cn.

In mammalian cells, E2F family of transcription factors (E2Fs) traditionally
modulates assorted cellular functions related to cell cycle progression,
proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation. Eight members, E2F1 E2F8 have been 
recognized of this family so far, and the members of this family are generally
divided into activator E2F (E2F1--E2F3a), repressor E2F (E2F3b--E2F5) and
inhibitor E2F (E2F6--E2F8) subclasses based on their structur-e and function.
Studies have showed that the mammalian E2F family members represent a recent
evolutionary adaptation to malignancies besides hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
and a growing body of evidence has validated that the individual members of the
family develop a close relationship with HCC. E2F1 was identified to play
overlapping roles in HCC, while E2F2--E2F8 (except E2F6 and E2F7) showed to be
tumor-promoter in HCC. However, the mechanism underlying the mammalian E2Fs
associated with HCC is still unknown and needs further research. The aim of this 
review is to sum up the collective knowledge of E2F family and the roles of each 
member of this family in HCC. Moreover, we will discuss some novel therapeutic
target for HCC based on the complicated functions of mammalian E2Fs.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24440307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Mar;42(5):3044-58. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1317. Epub 2013
Dec 24.

SUMOylation of the polycomb group protein L3MBTL2 facilitates repression of its
target genes.

Stielow C(1), Stielow B, Finkernagel F, Scharfe M, Jarek M, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research, Philipps-University,
Emil-Mannkopff-Str. 2, D-35032 Marburg and Helmholtz Centre for Infection
Research (HZI), Inhoffenstraße 7, D-38124 Braunschweig, Germany.

Lethal(3) malignant brain tumour like 2 (L3MBTL2) is an integral component of the
polycomb repressive complex 1.6 (PRC1.6) and has been implicated in
transcriptional repression and chromatin compaction. Here, we show that L3MBTL2
is modified by SUMO2/3 at lysine residues 675 and 700 close to the C-terminus.
SUMOylation of L3MBTL2 neither affected its repressive activity in reporter gene 
assays nor it's binding to histone tails in vitro. In order to analyse whether
SUMOylation affects binding of L3MBTL2 to chromatin, we performed ChIP-Seq
analysis with chromatin of wild-type HEK293 cells and with chromatin of HEK293
cells stably expressing either FLAG-tagged SUMOylation-competent or
SUMOylation-defective L3MBTL2. Wild-type FLAG-L3MBTL2 and the
SUMOylation-defective FLAG-L3MBTL2 K675/700R mutant essentially occupied the same
sites as endogenous L3MBTL2 suggesting that SUMOylation of L3MBTL2 does not
affect chromatin binding. However, a subset of L3MBTL2-target genes, particularly
those with low L3MBTL2 occupancy including pro-inflammatory genes, was
de-repressed in cells expressing the FLAG-L3MBTL2 K675/700R mutant. Finally, we
provide evidence that SUMOylation of L3MBTL2 facilitates repression of these
PRC1.6-target genes by balancing the local H2Aub1 levels established by the
ubiquitinating enzyme RING2 and the de-ubiquitinating PR-DUB complex.

PMCID: PMC3950706
PMID: 24369422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. BMC Genomics. 2013 Nov 25;14:830. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-830.

HOXC9 directly regulates distinct sets of genes to coordinate diverse cellular
processes during neuronal differentiation.

Wang X(1), Choi JH, Ding J, Yang L, Ngoka LC, Lee EJ, Zha Y, Mao L, Jin B, Ren M,
Cowell J, Huang S, Shi H, Cui H, Ding HF.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.
hcui@swu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Cellular differentiation is characterized by the acquisition of
specialized structures and functions, cell cycle exit, and global attenuation of 
the DNA damage response. It is largely unknown how these diverse cellular events 
are coordinated at the molecular level during differentiation. We addressed this 
question in a model system of neuroblastoma cell differentiation induced by
HOXC9.
RESULTS: We conducted a genome-wide analysis of the HOXC9-induced neuronal
differentiation program. Microarray gene expression profiling revealed that
HOXC9-induced differentiation was associated with transcriptional regulation of
2,370 genes, characterized by global upregulation of neuronal genes and
downregulation of cell cycle and DNA repair genes. Remarkably, genome-wide
mapping by ChIP-seq demonstrated that HOXC9 bound to 40% of these genes,
including a large number of genes involved in neuronal differentiation, cell
cycle progression and the DNA damage response. Moreover, we showed that HOXC9
interacted with the transcriptional repressor E2F6 and recruited it to the
promoters of cell cycle genes for repressing their expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that HOXC9 coordinates diverse cellular
processes associated with differentiation by directly activating and repressing
the transcription of distinct sets of genes.

PMCID: PMC3906982
PMID: 24274069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Gene Regul Syst Bio. 2013 Nov 4;7:139-52. doi: 10.4137/GRSB.S13204. eCollection
2013.

Pathway Analysis of ChIP-Seq-Based NRF1 Target Genes Suggests a Logical
Hypothesis of their Involvement in the Pathogenesis of Neurodegenerative
Diseases.

Satoh J(1), Kawana N, Yamamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and Molecular Neuropathology, Meiji
Pharmaceutical University, Kiyose, Tokyo, Japan.

Nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) serves as a transcription factor that
activates the expression of a wide range of nuclear genes essential for
mitochondrial biogenesis and function, including mitochondrial respiratory
complex subunits, heme biosynthetic enzymes, and regulatory factors involved in
the replication and transcription of mitochondrial DNA. Increasing evidence
indicates that mitochondrial function is severely compromised in the brains of
aging-related neurodegenerative diseases. To identify the comprehensive set of
human NRF1 target genes potentially relevant to the pathogenesis of
neurodegenerative diseases, we analyzed the NRF1 chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by deep sequencing (ChIP-Seq) dataset retrieved from the Encyclopedia of
DNA Elements (ENCODE) project. Overall, we identified 2,470 highly stringent
ChIP-Seq peaks on protein-coding genes in SK-N-SH human neuroblastoma cells. They
were accumulated in the proximal promoter regions with an existence of the
NRF1-binding consensus sequence. The set of ChIP-Seq-based NRF1 target genes
included known NRF1 targets such as EIF2S1, EIF2S2, CYCS, FMR1, FXR2, E2F6, CD47,
and TOMM34. By pathway analysis, the molecules located in the core pathways
related to mitochondrial respiratory function were determined to be highly
enriched in NRF1 target genes. Furthermore, we found that NRF1 target genes play 
a pivotal role in regulation of extra-mitochondrial biological processes,
including RNA metabolism, splicing, cell cycle, DNA damage repair, protein
translation initiation, and ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation. We identified
a panel of neurodegenerative disease-related genes, such as PARK2 (Parkin), PARK6
(Pink1), PARK7 (DJ-1), and PAELR (GPR37) for Parkinson's disease, as well as
PSENEN (Pen2) and MAPT (tau) for Alzheimer's disease, as previously unrecognized 
NRF1 targets. These results suggest a logical hypothesis that aberrant regulation
of NRF1 and its targets might contribute to the pathogenesis of human
neurodegenerative diseases via perturbation of diverse mitochondrial and
extra-mitochondrial functions.

PMCID: PMC3825669
PMID: 24250222  [PubMed]


16. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Dec;24(23):3634-50. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-05-0264. Epub 2013
Oct 9.

Identification of cell cycle-regulated genes periodically expressed in U2OS cells
and their regulation by FOXM1 and E2F transcription factors.

Grant GD(1), Brooks L 3rd, Zhang X, Mahoney JM, Martyanov V, Wood TA, Sherlock G,
Cheng C, Whitfield ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH
03755 Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA 94305.

We identify the cell cycle-regulated mRNA transcripts genome-wide in the
osteosarcoma-derived U2OS cell line. This results in 2140 transcripts mapping to 
1871 unique cell cycle-regulated genes that show periodic oscillations across
multiple synchronous cell cycles. We identify genomic loci bound by the G2/M
transcription factor FOXM1 by chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) and associate these with cell
cycle-regulated genes. FOXM1 is bound to cell cycle-regulated genes with peak
expression in both S phase and G2/M phases. We show that ChIP-seq genomic loci
are responsive to FOXM1 using a real-time luciferase assay in live cells, showing
that FOXM1 strongly activates promoters of G2/M phase genes and weakly activates 
those induced in S phase. Analysis of ChIP-seq data from a panel of cell cycle
transcription factors (E2F1, E2F4, E2F6, and GABPA) from the Encyclopedia of DNA 
Elements and ChIP-seq data for the DREAM complex finds that a set of core cell
cycle genes regulated in both U2OS and HeLa cells are bound by multiple cell
cycle transcription factors. These data identify the cell cycle-regulated genes
in a second cancer-derived cell line and provide a comprehensive picture of the
transcriptional regulatory systems controlling periodic gene expression in the
human cell division cycle.

PMCID: PMC3842991
PMID: 24109597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Curr Biol. 2013 Sep 9;23(17):1629-37. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.06.063. Epub 2013
Aug 15.

Chk1 inhibits E2F6 repressor function in response to replication stress to
maintain cell-cycle transcription.

Bertoli C(1), Klier S, McGowan C, Wittenberg C, de Bruin RA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, London
WC1E 6BT, UK.

BACKGROUND: In eukaryotic cells, detection of replication stress results in the
activation of the DNA replication checkpoint, a signaling cascade whose central
players are the kinases ATR and Chk1. The checkpoint response prevents the
accumulation of DNA damage and ensures cell viability by delaying progression
into mitosis. However, the role and mechanism of the replication checkpoint
transcriptional response in human cells, which is p53 independent, is largely
unknown.
RESULTS: We show that, in response to DNA replication stress, the regular
E2F-dependent cell-cycle transcriptional program is maintained at high levels,
and we establish the mechanisms governing such transcriptional upregulation.
E2F6, a repressor of E2F-dependent G1/S transcription, replaces the activating
E2Fs at promoters to repress transcription in cells progressing into S phase in
unperturbed conditions. After replication stress, the checkpoint kinase Chk1
phosphorylates E2F6, leading to its dissociation from promoters. This promotes
E2F-dependent transcription, which mediates cell survival by preventing DNA
damage and cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: This work reveals, for the first time, that the regular cell-cycle
transcriptional program is part of the DNA replication checkpoint response in
human cells and establishes the molecular mechanism involved. We show that
maintaining high levels of G1/S cell-cycle transcription in response to
replication stress contributes to two key functions of the DNA replication
checkpoint response, namely, preventing genomic instability and cell death. Given
the critical role of replication stress in oncogene transformation, a detailed
understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in the checkpoint response
will contribute to a better insight into cancer development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3977652
PMID: 23954429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Epigenetics. 2013 Aug;8(8):873-84. doi: 10.4161/epi.25522. Epub 2013 Jul 2.

E2f6-mediated repression of the meiotic Stag3 and Smc1ß genes during early
embryonic development requires Ezh2 and not the de novo methyltransferase Dnmt3b.

Leseva M(1), Santostefano KE, Rosenbluth AL, Hamazaki T, Terada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology; University of Florida College of Medicine;
Gainesville, FL USA.

The E2f6 transcriptional repressor is an E2F-family member essential for the
silencing of a group of meiosis-specific genes in somatic tissues. Although E2f6 
has been shown to associate with both polycomb repressive complexes (PRC) and the
methyltransferase Dnmt3b, the cross-talk between these repressive machineries
during E2f6-mediated gene silencing has not been clearly demonstrated yet. In
particular, it remains largely undetermined when and how E2f6 establishes
repression of meiotic genes during embryonic development. We demonstrate here
that the inactivation of a group of E2f6 targeted genes, including Stag3 and
Smc1ß, first occurs at the transition from mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) to
epiblast stem cells (EpiSCs), which represent pre- and post-implantation stages, 
respectively. This process was accompanied by de novo methylation of their
promoters. Of interest, despite a clear difference in DNA methylation status,
E2f6 was similarly bound to the proximal promoter regions both in ESCs and
EpiSCs. Neither E2f6 nor Dnmt3b overexpression in ESCs decreased meiotic gene
expression or increased DNA methylation, indicating that additional factors are
required for E2f6-mediated repression during the transition. When the SET domain 
of Ezh2, a core subunit of the PRC2 complex, was deleted, however, repression of 
Stag3 and Smc1ß during embryoid body differentiation was largely impaired,
indicating that the event required the enzymatic activity of Ezh2. In addition,
repression of Stag3 and Smc1ß occurred in the absence of Dnmt3b. The data
presented here suggest a primary role of PRC2 in E2f6-mediated gene silencing of 
the meiotic genes.

PMCID: PMC3883790
PMID: 23880518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 4;8(4):e61196. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061196. Print 2013.

p15(PAF) is an Rb/E2F-regulated S-phase protein essential for DNA synthesis and
cell cycle progression.

Chang CN(1), Feng MJ, Chen YL, Yuan RH, Jeng YM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Pathology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

The p15(PAF)/KIAA0101 protein is a proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA)-associated protein overexpressed in multiple types of cancer. Attenuation 
of p15(PAF) expression leads to modifications in the DNA repair process,
rendering cells more sensitive to ultraviolet-induced cell death. In this study, 
we identified that p15(PAF) expression peaks during the S phase of the cell
cycle. We observed that p15(PAF) knockdown markedly inhibited cell proliferation,
S-phase progression, and DNA synthesis. Depletion of p15(PAF) resulted in p21
upregulation, especially chromatin-bound p21. We further identified that the
p15(PAF) promoter contains 3 E2F-binding motifs. Loss of Rb-mediated
transcriptional repression resulted in upregulated p15(PAF) expression. Binding
of E2F4 and E2F6 to the p15(PAF) promoter caused transcriptional repression.
Overall, these results indicate that p15(PAF) is tightly regulated by the Rb/E2F 
complex. Loss of Rb/E2F-mediated repression during the G1/S transition phase
leads to p15(PAF) upregulation, which facilitates DNA synthesis and S-phase
progression.

PMCID: PMC3617190
PMID: 23593430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Radiat Oncol. 2012 Dec 5;7:205. doi: 10.1186/1748-717X-7-205.

Exposure to ionizing radiation induced persistent gene expression changes in
mouse mammary gland.

Datta K(1), Hyduke DR, Suman S, Moon BH, Johnson MD, Fornace AJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown
University, 3970 Reservoir Rd, Washington, DC, NW 20057-1468, USA.
datta_k2003@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Breast tissue is among the most sensitive tissues to the carcinogenic
actions of ionizing radiation and epidemiological studies have linked radiation
exposure to breast cancer. Currently, molecular understanding of radiation
carcinogenesis in mammary gland is hindered due to the scarcity of in vivo
long-term follow up data. We undertook this study to delineate radiation-induced 
persistent alterations in gene expression in mouse mammary glands 2-month after
radiation exposure.
METHODS: Six to eight week old female C57BL/6J mice were exposed to 2 Gy of whole
body <U+03B3> radiation and mammary glands were surgically removed 2-month after
radiation. RNA was isolated and microarray hybridization performed for gene
expression analysis. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was used for biological
interpretation of microarray data. Real time quantitative PCR was performed on
selected genes to confirm the microarray data.
RESULTS: Compared to untreated controls, the mRNA levels of a total of 737 genes 
were significantly (p<0.05) perturbed above 2-fold of control. More genes (493
genes; 67%) were upregulated than the number of downregulated genes (244 genes;
33%). Functional analysis of the upregulated genes mapped to cell proliferation
and cancer related canonical pathways such as 'ERK/MAPK signaling', 'CDK5
signaling', and '14-3-3-mediated signaling'. We also observed upregulation of
breast cancer related canonical pathways such as 'breast cancer regulation by
Stathmin1', and 'HER-2 signaling in breast cancer' in IPA. Interestingly, the
downregulated genes mapped to fewer canonical pathways involved in cell
proliferation. We also observed that a number of genes with tumor suppressor
function (GPRC5A, ELF1, NAB2, Sema4D, ACPP, MAP2, RUNX1) persistently remained
downregulated in response to radiation exposure. Results from qRT-PCR on five
selected differentially expressed genes confirmed microarray data. The PCR data
on PPP4c, ELF1, MAPK12, PLCG1, and E2F6 showed similar trend in up and
downregulation as has been observed with the microarray.
CONCLUSIONS: Exposure to a clinically relevant radiation dose led to long-term
activation of mammary gland genes involved in proliferative and metabolic
pathways, which are known to have roles in carcinogenesis. When considered along 
with downregulation of a number of tumor suppressor genes, our study has
implications for breast cancer initiation and progression after therapeutic
radiation exposure.

PMCID: PMC3551737
PMID: 23216862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47967. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047967. Epub 2012 Oct 17.

E2F6 associates with BRG1 in transcriptional regulation.

Leung JY(1), Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina, USA.

The E2F6 protein functions as an Rb-independent repressor of gene transcription. 
We have previously provided evidence suggesting a role for E2F6 in repression of 
E2F-responsive genes at S phase. Here, we have identified BRG1, the ATPase
subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex, as an E2F6 interacting
protein. Immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate that BRG1 binds specifically
to E2F6 and E2F4 but not the activator E2Fs. E2F6 was also able to interact with 
BAF155, a BRG1-associated factor, in the SWI/SNF complex. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays demonstrate the binding of BRG1 coincident with E2F6
on G1/S gene promoters during S phase. Collectively, our studies suggest that
E2F6 may recruit BRG1 in transcriptional regulation of genes important for G1/S
phase transition of the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC3474740
PMID: 23082233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cytokine. 2012 Dec;60(3):736-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2012.08.009. Epub 2012 Sep
13.

Combining gene expression microarray- and cluster analysis with sequence-based
predictions to identify regulators of IL-13 in allergy.

Bruhn S(1), Katzenellenbogen M, Gustafsson M, Krönke A, Sönnichsen B, Zhang H,
Benson M.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Individualized Medication, Linköping University, Linköping,
Sweden.

The Th2 cytokine IL-13 plays a key role in allergy, by regulating IgE, airway
hyper secretion, eosinophils and mast cells. In this study, we aimed to identify 
novel transcription factors (TFs) that potentially regulated IL-13. We analyzed
Th2 polarized naïve T cells from four different blood donors with gene expression
microarrays to find clusters of genes that were correlated or anti-correlated
with IL13. These clusters were further filtered, by selecting genes that were
functionally related. In these clusters, we identified three transcription
factors (TFs) that were predicted to regulate the expression of IL13, namely
CEBPB, E2F6 and AHR. siRNA mediated knockdowns of these TFs in naïve polarized T 
cells showed significant increases of IL13, following knockdown of CEBPB and
E2F6, but not AHR. This suggested an inhibitory role of CEBPB and E2F6 in the
regulation of IL13 and allergy. This was supported by analysis of E2F6, but not
CEBPB, in allergen-challenged CD4+ T cells from six allergic patients and six
healthy controls, which showed decreased expression of E2F6 in patients. In
summary, our findings indicate an inhibitory role of E2F6 in the regulation of
IL-13 and allergy. The analytical approach may be generally applicable to
elucidate the complex regulatory patterns in Th2 cell polarization and allergy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22981205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Genes Dev. 2012 Jul 15;26(14):1533-45. doi: 10.1101/gad.184911.111.

E2F7, a novel target, is up-regulated by p53 and mediates DNA damage-dependent
transcriptional repression.

Carvajal LA(1), Hamard PJ, Tonnessen C, Manfredi JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, 
New York 10029, USA.

The p53 tumor suppressor protein is a transcription factor that exerts its
effects on the cell cycle via regulation of gene expression. Although the
mechanism of p53-dependent transcriptional activation has been well-studied, the 
molecular basis for p53-mediated repression has been elusive. The E2F family of
transcription factors has been implicated in regulation of cell cycle-related
genes, with E2F6, E2F7, and E2F8 playing key roles in repression. In response to 
cellular DNA damage, E2F7, but not E2F6 or E2F8, is up-regulated in a
p53-dependent manner, with p53 being sufficient to increase expression of E2F7.
Indeed, p53 occupies the promoter of the E2F7 gene after genotoxic stress,
consistent with E2F7 being a novel p53 target. Ablation of E2F7 expression
abrogates p53-dependent repression of a subset of its targets, including E2F1 and
DHFR, in response to DNA damage. Furthermore, E2F7 occupancy of the E2F1 and DHFR
promoters is detected, and expression of E2F7 is sufficient to inhibit cell
proliferation. Taken together, these results show that p53-dependent
transcriptional up-regulation of its target, E2F7, leads to repression of
relevant gene expression. In turn, this E2F7-dependent mechanism contributes to
p53-dependent cell cycle arrest in response to DNA damage.

PMCID: PMC3404382
PMID: 22802528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Sep 7;11(3):319-32. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.06.002. Epub
2012 Jul 5.

The polycomb group protein L3mbtl2 assembles an atypical PRC1-family complex that
is essential in pluripotent stem cells and early development.

Qin J(1), Whyte WA, Anderssen E, Apostolou E, Chen HH, Akbarian S, Bronson RT,
Hochedlinger K, Ramaswamy S, Young RA, Hock H.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

L3mbtl2 has been implicated in transcriptional repression and chromatin
compaction but its biological function has not been defined. Here we show that
disruption of L3mbtl2 results in embryonic lethality with failure of
gastrulation. This correlates with compromised proliferation and abnormal
differentiation of L3mbtl2(-/-) embryonic stem (ES) cells. L3mbtl2 regulates
genes by recruiting a Polycomb Repressive Complex1 (PRC1)-related complex,
resembling the previously described E2F6-complex, and including G9A, Hdac1, and
Ring1b. The presence of L3mbtl2 at target genes is associated with H3K9
dimethylation, low histone acetylation, and H2AK119 ubiquitination, but the
latter is neither dependent on L3mbtl2 nor sufficient for repression. Genome-wide
studies revealed that the L3mbtl2-dependent complex predominantly regulates genes
not bound by canonical PRC1 and PRC2. However, some developmental regulators are 
repressed by the combined activity of all three complexes. Together, we have
uncovered a highly selective, essential role for an atypical PRC1-family complex 
in ES cells and early development.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3647456
PMID: 22770845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Oncol Rep. 2012 Aug;28(2):677-81. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1845. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

4-hexylresorcinol stimulates the differentiation of SCC-9 cells through the
suppression of E2F2, E2F3 and Sp3 expression and the promotion of Sp1 expression.

Kim SG(1), Kim AS, Jeong JH, Choi JY, Kweon H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, College of Dentistry,
Gangneung-Wonju National University, Gangneung 210-702, Republic of Korea.
epker@chollian.net

The dormancy-inducing factors of bacteria inhibit tumor cell growth. In the
present study, we evaluated the antitumor effects of the dormancy-inducing factor
4-hexylresorcinol (4-HR) using real-time cell electronic sensing (RT-CES) in
SCC-9 cells (tongue squamous cell carcinoma cells). Treatment with 4-HR
suppressed the growth of SCC-9 cells in a dose-dependent manner. We used a DNA
microarray to identify genes that showed a significant change in expression upon 
4-HR administration in SCC-9 cells. Among the differentially expressed genes, the
protein expression of several cell proliferation related factors, including E2F1,
E2F2, E2F3, E2F4, E2F5, E2F6, Sp1 and Sp3, were determined by western blot
analyses. Treatment with 4-HR strongly suppressed E2F2 and slightly suppressed
E2F3 but did not change the expression of E2F1, E2F4, E2F5 and E2F6 relative to
no treatment. Furthermore, 4-HR increased Sp1 expression in a dose-dependent
manner and decreased Sp3 expression. Therefore, the ratio of Sp1 to Sp3, an
important driving force of epithelial cell differentiation, was drastically
increased. Consistent with this observation, 4-HR increased the expression of the
epithelial cell differentiation markers involucrin and keratin 10. Together, our 
results indicate that 4-HR induces the differentiation of SCC-9 via the
modulation of the E2F-mediated signaling pathway.

PMID: 22664654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. FASEB J. 2012 Jun;26(6):2569-79. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-203174. Epub 2012 Mar 7.

The E2F6 repressor activates gene expression in myocardium resulting in dilated
cardiomyopathy.

Westendorp B(1), Major JL, Nader M, Salih M, Leenen FH, Tuana BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Rd., Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada.

The E2F/Rb pathway regulates cardiac growth and development and holds great
potential as a therapeutic target. The E2F6 repressor is a unique E2F member that
acts independently of pocket proteins. Forced expression of E2F6 in mouse
myocardium induced heart failure and mortality, with severity of symptoms
correlating to E2F6 levels. Echocardiography demonstrated a 37% increase (P<0.05)
in left ventricular end-diastolic diameter and reduced ejection fraction (<40%,
P<0.05) in young transgenic (Tg) mice. Microarray and qPCR analysis revealed a
paradoxical increase in E2F-responsive genes, which regulate the cell cycle,
without changes in cardiomyocyte cell number or size in Tg mice. Young adult Tg
mice displayed a 75% (P<0.01) decrease in gap junction protein connexin-43,
resulting in abnormal electrocardiogram including a 24% (P<0.05) increase in PR
interval. Further, mir-206, which targets connexin-43, was up-regulated 10-fold
(P<0.05) in Tg myocardium. The mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, which
regulates the levels of miR-206 and connexin-43, was activated in Tg hearts.
Thus, deregulated E2F6 levels evoked abnormal gene expression at transcriptional 
and post-transcriptional levels, leading to cardiac remodeling and dilated
cardiomyopathy. The data highlight an unprecedented role for the strict
regulation of the E2F pathway in normal postnatal cardiac function.

PMID: 22403008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Epigenetics. 2011 Nov;6(11):1373-7. doi: 10.4161/epi.6.11.17978. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Maintenance of DNA methylation: Dnmt3b joins the dance.

Walton EL(1), Francastel C, Velasco G.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics and Cell Fate, Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France.

DNA methylation mostly occurs within the context of CpG dinucleotides and is
essential for embryonic development and gene repression. It is generally accepted
that DNA methyltransferases carry out specific and non-overlapping functions,
Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b being responsible for the establishment of methylation around
the time of implantation and Dnmt1 ensuring that methylation is faithfully copied
to daughter cells via what has come to be known as "maintenance methylation."
This longstanding view has been challenged over the years with the observation
that Dnmt1 alone is incapable of perfect maintenance methylation. A new model is 
emerging that takes into account a contribution of the de novo enzymes Dnmt3a and
Dnmt3b in the maintenance of the DNA methylation. We recently showed that certain
germ line genes are specific targets of Dnmt3b, and that Dnmt3b remains bound to 
their promoter regions in somatic cells via interaction with the transcriptional 
repressor E2F6. It is tempting to consider an ongoing role for Dnmt3b in the
methylation of germ line genes in somatic cells. We propose here observations in 
support of the hypothesis that the maintenance of methylation and subsequent
silencing of a handful of germ line genes requires Dnmt3b but not Dnmt1. In
addition to suggesting a new role for Dnmt3b in the protection of somatic cells
against the promiscuous expression of the germ line program, these observations
are of particular interest in the field of carcinogenesis, given that the
expression of catalytically inactive Dnmt3b isoforms and aberrant expression of
germ line genes are commonly observed in cancer cells.

PMID: 22048250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. FASEB J. 2011 Nov;25(11):3815-27. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-187484. Epub 2011 Jul 25.

Nuclear localization of <U+03B3>-tubulin affects E2F transcriptional activity and
S-phase progression.

Höög G(1), Zarrizi R, von Stedingk K, Jonsson K, Alvarado-Kristensson M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund
University, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.

We show that the centrosome- and microtubule-regulating protein <U+03B3>-tubulin
interacts with E2 promoter binding factors (E2Fs) to modulate E2F transcriptional
activity and thereby control cell cycle progression. <U+03B3>-Tubulin contains a
C-terminal signal that results in its translocation to the nucleus during late
G(1) to early S phase. <U+03B3>-Tubulin mutants showed that the C terminus interacts
with the transcription factor E2F1 and that the E2F1-<U+03B3>-tubulin complex is formed 
during the G(1)/S transition, when E2F1 is transcriptionally active. Furthermore,
E2F transcriptional activity is altered by reduced expression of <U+03B3>-tubulin or by 
complex formation between <U+03B3>-tubulin and E2F1, E2F2, or E2F3, but not E2F6. In
addition, the <U+03B3>-tubulin C terminus encodes a DNA-binding domain that interacts
with E2F-regulated promoters, resulting in <U+03B3>-tubulin-mediated transient
activation of E2Fs. Thus, we report a novel mechanism regulating the activity of 
E2Fs, which can help explain how these proteins affect cell cycle progression in 
mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC3205837
PMID: 21788450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell. 2011 May 20;42(4):438-50. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.04.004.

L3MBTL2 protein acts in concert with PcG protein-mediated monoubiquitination of
H2A to establish a repressive chromatin structure.

Trojer P(1), Cao AR, Gao Z, Li Y, Zhang J, Xu X, Li G, Losson R,
Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Farnham PJ, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, NYU Medical School, 522 First Avenue, New
York, NY 10016, USA.

We have identified human MBT domain-containing protein L3MBTL2 as an integral
component of a protein complex that we termed Polycomb repressive complex 1
(PRC1)-like 4 (PRC1L4), given the copresence of PcG proteins RING1, RING2, and
PCGF6/MBLR. PRC1L4 also contained E2F6 and CBX3/HP1<U+03B3>, known to function in
transcriptional repression. PRC1L4-mediated repression necessitated L3MBTL2 that 
compacted chromatin in a histone modification-independent manner. Genome-wide
location analyses identified several hundred genes simultaneously bound by
L3MBTL2 and E2F6, preferentially around transcriptional start sites that
exhibited little overlap with those targeted by other E2Fs or by L3MBTL1, another
MBT domain-containing protein that interacts with RB1. L3MBTL2-specific RNAi
resulted in increased expression of target genes that exhibited a significant
reduction in H2A lysine 119 monoubiquitination. Our findings highlight a PcG/MBT 
collaboration that attains repressive chromatin without entailing histone lysine 
methylation marks.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3142354
PMID: 21596310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Invest Dermatol. 2011 May;131(5):1077-84. doi: 10.1038/jid.2010.430. Epub 2011 
Jan 20.

Loss of E2F7 expression is an early event in squamous differentiation and causes 
derepression of the key differentiation activator Sp1.

Hazar-Rethinam M(1), Cameron SR, Dahler AL, Endo-Munoz LB, Smith L, Rickwood D,
Saunders NA.

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Pathobiology Group, Diamantina Institute, Princess Alexandra
Hospital, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Squamous differentiation is controlled by key transcription factors such as Sp1
and E2F. We have previously shown that E2F1 can suppress transcription of the
differentiation-specific gene, transglutaminase type 1 (TG1), by an indirect
mechanism mediated by Sp1. Transient transfection of E2F1-E2F6 indicated that
E2F-mediated reduction of Sp1 transcription was not responsible for E2F-mediated 
suppression of squamous differentiation. However, we found that E2F4 and E2F7,
but not E2Fs 1, 2, 3, 5, or 6, could suppress the activation of the Sp1 promoter 
in differentiated keratinocytes (KCs). E2F4-mediated suppression could not be
antagonized by E2Fs 1, 2, 3, 5, or 6 and was localized to a region of the human
Sp1 promoter spanning -139 to + 35 bp. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis, as
well as transient overexpression and short hairpin RNA knockdown experiments
indicate that E2F7 binds to a unique binding site located between -139 and -119
bp of the Sp1 promoter, and knockdown of E2F7 in proliferating KCs leads to a
derepression of Sp1 expression and the induction of TG1. In contrast, E2F4
knockdown in proliferating KCs did not alter Sp1 expression. These data indicate 
that loss of E2F7 during the initiation of differentiation leads to the
derepression of Sp1 and subsequent transcription of differentiation-specific
genes such as TG1.

PMID: 21248772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Feb 1;108(5):2130-5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1009933108.
Epub 2011 Jan 18.

Human papillomavirus E7 oncoprotein induces KDM6A and KDM6B histone demethylase
expression and causes epigenetic reprogramming.

McLaughlin-Drubin ME(1), Crum CP, Münger K.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Division, Department of Medicine, The Channing Laboratory,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. mdrubin@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Despite the availability of vaccines, human papillomavirus (HPV) infections
remain a cause of significant cancer morbidity and mortality. We have previously 
shown that HPV16 E7 associates with and diminishes E2F6-containing polycomb
repressive complexes. Here, we show that repressive trimethyl marks on lysine 27 
of histone 3, which are necessary for binding of polycomb repressive complexes,
are decreased in HPV16 E7-expressing cells and HPV16-positive cervical lesions.
This is caused by transcriptional induction of the KDM6A and KDM6B histone 3
lysine 27-specific demethylases. HPV16 E7-mediated KDM6B induction accounts for
expression of the cervical cancer biomarker, p16(INK4A). Moreover, KDM6A- and
KDM6B-responsive Homeobox genes are expressed at significantly higher levels,
suggesting that HPV16 E7 results in reprogramming of host epithelial cells. These
effects are independent of the ability of E7 to inhibit the retinoblastoma tumor 
suppressor protein. Most importantly, these effects are reversed when E7
expression is silenced, indicating that this pathway may have prognostic and/or
therapeutic significance.

PMCID: PMC3033314
PMID: 21245294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mod Pathol. 2011 May;24(5):698-707. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.237. Epub 2011
Jan 14.

Improved demonstration of immunohistochemical prognostic markers for survival in 
follicular lymphoma cells.

Camacho FI(1), Bellas C, Corbacho C, Caleo A, Arranz-Sáez R, Cannata J, Menárguez
J, Sánchez-Verde L, González-Camacho L, Pérez-Martín ME, Martínez-González MA,
Alvaro T, Mollejo M, Ruíz-Marcellán C, Montalbán C, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario de Getafe, Carretera de
Toledo, Getafe, Madrid, Spain. ficamacho.hugf@salud.madrid.org

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is one of the most common forms of the low-grade
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in adults, with a characteristic translocation,
t(14;18)(q32;q21) that deregulates the expression of the BCL2 gene. The clinical 
course of FL patients is variable, whereby a subset of patients survive for long 
periods even without relapses, whereas the majority have frequent relapses with
shorter survival. We have analyzed a series of 186 FLs, studying the correlation 
between clinical outcome and the tumor cell expression of a set of
immunohistochemical markers, using an automated procedure for tissue microarrays 
to reduce the subjectivity of scoring. The results identified several markers
associated with differences in overall survival (OS) in univariate analyses, such
as Cyclin E, Mdm2, CD10, p21, IgD, Bcl-xL, CD30, and E2F6. Cases with a higher
level of expression of Cyclin E, Mdm2, p21, IgD, Bcl-xL, CD30, and E2F6 were
associated with a significantly shorter OS. On the other hand, strong CD10
expression was linked to a significantly better outcome. A Cox model was then
constructed, integrating the Follicular Lymphoma International Prognostic Index
(FLIPI) score and a restricted selection of three immunohistochemical markers:
Cyclin E, Mdm2, and CD10 expression. A potentially useful finding is that the
integrated FLIPI plus immunohistochemical model can be used to identify a subset 
of 26 patients (almost 20% of the total series), with a survival probability of
100% at 5 years. This not only confirms that a group of FL cases may have a very 
good clinical course, but also indicates that this group can be identified using 
this integrated clinical and immunohistochemical approach.

PMID: 21240256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Clin Invest. 2010 Oct;120(10):3530-44. doi: 10.1172/JCI41805. Epub 2010 Sep 20.

Human parvovirus B19 causes cell cycle arrest of human erythroid progenitors via 
deregulation of the E2F family of transcription factors.

Wan Z(1), Zhi N, Wong S, Keyvanfar K, Liu D, Raghavachari N, Munson PJ, Su S,
Malide D, Kajigaya S, Young NS.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-1652, USA.

Human parvovirus B19 (B19V) is the only human pathogenic parvovirus. It causes a 
wide spectrum of human diseases, including fifth disease (erythema infectiosum)
in children and pure red cell aplasia in immunocompromised patients. B19V is
highly erythrotropic and preferentially replicates in erythroid progenitor cells 
(EPCs). Current understanding of how B19V interacts with cellular factors to
regulate disease progression is limited, due to a lack of permissive cell lines
and animal models. Here, we employed a recently developed primary human CD36(+)
EPC culture system that is highly permissive for B19V infection to identify
cellular factors that lead to cell cycle arrest after B19V infection. We found
that B19V exploited the E2F family of transcription factors by downregulating
activating E2Fs (E2F1 to E2F3a) and upregulating repressive E2Fs (E2F4 to E2F8)
in the primary CD36(+) EPCs. B19V nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) was a key viral
factor responsible for altering E2F1-E2F5 expression, but not E2F6-E2F8
expression. Interaction between NS1 and E2F4 or E2F5 enhanced the nuclear import 
of these repressive E2Fs and induced stable G2 arrest. NS1-induced G2 arrest was 
independent of p53 activation and increased viral replication. Downstream
E2F4/E2F5 targets, which are potentially involved in the progression from G2 into
M phase and erythroid differentiation, were identified by microarray analysis.
These findings provide new insight into the molecular pathogenesis of B19V in
highly permissive erythroid progenitors.

PMCID: PMC2947219
PMID: 20890043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Oncol Rep. 2010 Nov;24(5):1371-81.

A subset of microRNAs potentially acts as a convergent hub for upstream
transcription factors in cancer cells.

Ohdaira H(1), Sasaki T, Yoshida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture, Meiji University,
Kawasaki, Kanagawa 214-8571, Japan.

microRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding short nucleotides that exhibit a unique
function as translational suppressors towards a wide realm of mRNAs. To date, a
specific set of miRNAs has been characterized as oncogenes and tumor suppressors 
based on their expression levels and/or target mRNA functions; however, a
comprehensive view of the changes in miRNA expression regulated by pivotal
cellular signaling mechanisms remains elusive. Here, we aimed to characterize
common and unique miRNAs regulated by transcriptional regulators such as
oncogenic HRAS, c-Jun and E2F family members (E2F1E2F6) in the human cancer cell
lines A549 and HeLa. For this purpose, we employed a miRNA microarray and
identified several miRNAs that were commonly regulated by transcriptional
regulators. Next we tested whether these miRNAs could affect any of the signal
pathways by employing luciferase reporters bearing response elements for various 
cellular signaling pathways. Among those tested, luciferase reporter bearing
interferon <U+03B3> activation site responsive element was solely activated by miR-494, 
indicating that the overexpression of miR-494 has a limited effect on a specific 
signal pathway in A549 cells. Taken together, these results suggest that a unique
subset of miRNAs could have an integrating effect on upstream pivotal
transcriptional regulators influencing decisions regarding proper cellular
responses.

PMID: 20878133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 22;285(43):33134-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.143461. Epub
2010 Aug 16.

RB·E2F1 complex mediates DNA damage responses through transcriptional regulation 
of ZBRK1.

Liao CC(1), Tsai CY, Chang WC, Lee WH, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.

RB plays an essential role in DNA damage-induced growth arrest and regulates the 
expression of several factors essential for DNA repair machinery. However, how RB
coordinates DNA damage response through transcriptional regulation of genes
involved in growth arrest remains largely unexplored. We examined whether RB can 
mediate the response to DNA damage through modulation of ZBRK1, a zinc
finger-containing transcriptional repressor that can modulate the expression of
GADD45A, a DNA damage response gene, to induce cell cycle arrest in response to
DNA damage. We found that the ZBRK1 promoter contains an authentic
E2F-recognition sequence that specifically binds E2F1, but not E2F4 or E2F6,
together with chromatin remodeling proteins CtIP and CtBP to form a repression
complex that suppresses ZBRK1 transcription. Furthermore, loss of RB-mediated
transcriptional repression led to an increase in ZBRK1 transcript levels,
correlating with increased sensitivity to ultraviolet (UV) and methyl
methanesulfonate-induced DNA damage. Taken together, these results suggest that
the RB·CtIP (CtBP interacting protein)/CtBP (C terminus-binding protein) /E2F1
complex plays a critical role in ZBRK1 transcriptional repression, and loss of
this repression may contribute to cellular sensitivity of DNA damage, ultimately 
leading to carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2963368
PMID: 20713352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Blood. 2010 Jul 22;116(3):437-45. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-165985. Epub 2010
May 5.

miR-28 is a thrombopoietin receptor targeting microRNA detected in a fraction of 
myeloproliferative neoplasm patient platelets.

Girardot M(1), Pecquet C, Boukour S, Knoops L, Ferrant A, Vainchenker W,
Giraudier S, Constantinescu SN.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Ltd, Brussels, Belgium.

BCR-ABL negative myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs; polycythemia vera, essential
thrombocythemia, primary myelofibrosis) are malignant diseases arising from a
multipotent hematopoietic progenitor, frequently altered by JAK2 V617F or other
JAK/STAT activating mutations. The thrombopoietin receptor (TpoR, MPL) is one of 
the major dimeric cytokine receptors that use JAK2 in the myeloid lineage, and
was found to be down-modulated in certain MPN patients. We searched for negative 
regulators of MPL expression. Here we report that miR-28 targets the 3'
untranslated (3'UTR) region of MPL, inhibiting its translation, as well as other 
proteins potentially involved in megakaryocyte differentiation, such as E2F6.
Expression of miR-28 in CD34-derived megakaryocytes inhibited terminal
differentiation. miR-28 was found to be overexpressed in platelets of a fraction 
of MPN patients, while it was expressed at constant low levels in platelets from 
healthy subjects. Constitutive activation of STAT5 leading to autonomous growth
of hematopoietic cell lines was associated with increased miR-28 expression. We
discuss how down-modulating MPL and other targets of miR-28, and of related
miR-708 and miR-151, could contribute to MPN pathogenicity.

PMID: 20445018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 18;107(20):9281-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1000473107. Epub 2010 May 3.

Dnmt3b recruitment through E2F6 transcriptional repressor mediates germ-line gene
silencing in murine somatic tissues.

Velasco G(1), Hubé F, Rollin J, Neuillet D, Philippe C, Bouzinba-Segard H,
Galvani A, Viegas-Péquignot E, Francastel C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, University Paris Diderot, 75013 
Paris, France.

Methylation of cytosine residues within the CpG dinucleotide in mammalian cells
is an important mediator of gene expression, genome stability, X-chromosome
inactivation, genomic imprinting, chromatin structure, and embryonic development.
The majority of CpG sites in mammalian cells is methylated in a nonrandom
fashion, raising the question of how DNA methylation is distributed along the
genome. Here, we focused on the functions of DNA methyltransferase-3b (Dnmt3b),
of which deregulated activity is linked to several human pathologies. We
generated Dnmt3b hypomorphic mutant mice with reduced catalytic activity, which
first revealed a deregulation of Hox genes expression, consistent with the
observed homeotic transformations of the posterior axis. In addition, analysis of
deregulated expression programs in Dnmt3b mutant embryos, using DNA microarrays, 
highlighted illegitimate activation of several germ-line genes in somatic tissues
that appeared to be linked directly to their hypomethylation in mutant embryos.
We provide evidence that these genes are direct targets of Dnmt3b. Moreover, the 
recruitment of Dnmt3b to their proximal promoter is dependant on the binding of
the E2F6 transcriptional repressor, which emerges as a common hallmark in the
promoters of genes found to be up-regulated as a consequence of impaired Dnmt3b
activity. Therefore, our results unraveled a coordinated regulation of genes
involved in meiosis, through E2F6-dependant methylation and transcriptional
silencing in somatic tissues.

PMCID: PMC2889045
PMID: 20439742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Genomics. 2010 Apr;95(4):203-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2010.02.003. Epub 2010 Feb
11.

Identification of human specific gene duplications relative to other primates by 
array CGH and quantitative PCR.

Armengol G(1), Knuutila S, Lozano JJ, Madrigal I, Caballín MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, Plant Biology and Ecology, Faculty of
Biosciences, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain.
gemma.armengol@uab.cat

In order to identify human lineage specific (HLS) copy number differences (CNDs) 
compared to other primates, we performed pair wise comparisons (human vs.
chimpanzee, gorilla and orangutan) by using cDNA array comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH). A set of 23 genes with HLS duplications were identified, as 
well as other lineage differences in gene copy number specific of chimpanzee,
gorilla and orangutan. Each species has gained more copies of specific genes
rather than losing gene copies. Eleven of the 23 genes have only been observed to
have undergone HLS duplication in Fortna et al. (2004) and in the present study. 
Then, seven of these 11 genes were analyzed by quantitative PCR in chimpanzee,
gorilla and orangutan, as well as in other six primate species (Hylobates lar,
Cercopithecus aethiops, Papio hamadryas, Macaca mulatta, Lagothrix lagothricha,
and Saimiri sciureus). Six genes confirmed array CGH data, and four of them
appeared to have bona fide HLS duplications (ABCB10, E2F6, CDH12, and TDG genes).
We propose that these gene duplications have a potential to contribute to
specific human phenotypes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20153417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cell Death Dis. 2010 Dec 9;1:e105. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2010.85.

Downregulation of miR-205 and miR-31 confers resistance to chemotherapy-induced
apoptosis in prostate cancer cells.

Bhatnagar N(1), Li X, Padi SK, Zhang Q, Tang MS, Guo B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, North Dakota State
University, Fargo, 58108, USA.

Advanced prostate cancers are known to acquire not only invasive capabilities but
also significant resistance to chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. To understand how 
microRNAs (miRNAs) may contribute to prostate cancer resistance to apoptosis, we 
compared microRNA expression profiles of a benign prostate cancer cell line
WPE1-NA22 and a highly malignant WPE1-NB26 cell line (derived from a common
lineage). We found that miR-205 and miR-31 are significantly downregulated in
WPE1-NB26 cells, as well as in other cell lines representing advanced-stage
prostate cancers. Antiapoptotic genes BCL2L2 (encoding Bcl-w) and E2F6 are
identified as the targets of miR-205 and miR-31, respectively. By downregulating 
Bcl-w and E2F6, miR-205 and miR-31 promote chemotherapeutic agents-induced
apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. The promoter region of the miR-205 gene was
cloned and was found to be hypermethylated in cell lines derived from advanced
prostate cancers, contributing to the downregulation of the gene. Treatment with 
DNA methylation inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine induced miR-205 expression,
downregulated Bcl-w, and sensitized prostate cancer cells to chemotherapy-induced
apoptosis. Thus, downregulation of miR-205 and miR-31 has an important role in
apoptosis resistance in advanced prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3004480
PMID: 21368878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Dev Biol. 2010 Mar 1;339(1):89-100. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.12.018. Epub 2009
Dec 28.

Deficiency of smarcal1 causes cell cycle arrest and developmental abnormalities
in zebrafish.

Huang C(1), Gu S, Yu P, Yu F, Feng C, Gao N, Du J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Nutritional Sciences and Key Laboratory of Nutrition and
Metabolism, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. chuang@sibs.ac.cn

Mutations in SMARCAL1 cause Schimke Immuno-Osseous Dysplasia (SIOD), an autosomal
recessive multisystem developmental disease characterized by growth retardation, 
T-cell deficiency, bone marrow failure, anemia and renal failure. SMARCAL1
encodes an ATP-driven annealing helicase. However, the biological function of
SMARCAL1 and the molecular basis of SIOD remain largely unclear. In this work, we
cloned the zebrafish homologue of the human SMARCAL1 gene and found that smarcal1
regulated cell cycle progression. Morpholino knockdown of smarcal1 in zebrafish
recapitulated developmental abnormalities in SIOD patients, including growth
retardation, craniofacial abnormality, and haematopoietic and vascular defects.
Lack of smarcal1 caused G0/G1 cell cycle arrest and induced cell apoptosis.
Furthermore, using Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay and reporter assay, we
found that SMARCAL1 was transcriptionally inhibited by E2F6, an important cell
cycle regulator. Over-expression of E2F6 in zebrafish embryos reduced the
expression of smarcal1 mRNA and induced developmental defects similar to those in
smarcal1 morphants. These results suggest that SIOD may be caused by defects in
cell cycle regulation. Our study provides a model of SIOD and reveals its
cellular and molecular bases.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20036229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Sep 25;387(3):611-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.07.093. Epub 2009 Jul 24.

An essential role for DNA methyltransferase 3a in melanoma tumorigenesis.

Deng T(1), Kuang Y, Wang L, Li J, Wang Z, Fei J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institute for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai, China.

Abnormal DNA methylation and associated silencing of tumor suppressor genes are
common to many types of cancers. Among the three coordinate DNA
methyltransferases (Dnmts), Dnmt1 and Dnmt3b were both shown to be important for 
cancer cell survival and tumorigenesis. However, the relationship between Dnmt3a 
and tumorigenesis is still largely unknown. Here, we show that inhibition of
Dnmt3a expression, by stable transfection of a Dnmt3a-RNA interference (RNAi)
construct dramatically inhibited melanoma growth and metastasis in mouse melanoma
models. Microarray analysis revealed that genes critical for the tumor immune
response, were implicated in the inhibition of melanoma growth. Expression of a
cluster of class I and class II MHC genes, class II transactivator (Ciita), as
well as a subset of 5 chemokines (Cxcl9, Cxcl16, Ccl12, Ccl4, and Ccl2) were
up-regulated. Furthermore, we determined that the promoter IV of Ciita was
significantly demethylated in Dnmt3a-depleted tumors. In addition, several known 
tumor-related genes, which are critical for developmental processes and cell
cycle, were confirmed to be misregulated, including TgfB1, Socs1, Socs2, E2F6,
Ccne1, and Cyr61. The results presented in this report strongly suggest that
Dnmt3a plays an essential role in melanoma tumorigenesis, and that the underlying
mechanisms include the modulation of the tumor immune response, as well as other 
processes.

PMID: 19632198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Apr;120(3):593-601. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0422-1.
Epub 2009 May 23.

CpG island methylation affects accessibility of the proximal BRCA1 promoter to
transcription factors.

Xu J(1), Huo D, Chen Y, Nwachukwu C, Collins C, Rowell J, Slamon DJ, Olopade OI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Center for Clinical Cancer Genetics, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637-1463, USA.

To understand the mechanism of transcriptional down-regulation of BRCA1 by
promoter methylation, we screened 51 breast cancer cell lines and identified
HCC38 as another BRCA1 promoter-methylated cell line in addition to UACC3199.
There was low expression of BRCA1 mRNA and BRCA1 protein in both cell lines as
measured by quantitative RT-PCR and western blot analysis. After transient
treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR) and trichostatin A (TSA),
re-expression of BRCA1 mRNA and BRCA1 protein was detected in UACC3199 cells, but
not in HCC38 cells. Another demethylating agent, zebularine, did not induce BRCA1
re-expression in either cell line. To test the hypothesis that methylation of CpG
sites may affect accessibility of the BRCA1 promoter to transcription factors and
consequently cause down-regulation of BRCA1, we analyzed the binding of four
transcription factors (CTCF, Sp1, E2F1 and E2F6) to the BRCA1 promoter using
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP) and quantitative PCR. CTCF and E2F1
were enriched at the unmethylated BRCA1 promoter in MCF-7 cells. In contrast,
these two transcription factors were not enriched at the methylated BRCA1
promoter in UACC3199 and HCC38 cells. Following demethylating drug treatment,
E2F1 was enriched at the BRCA1 promoter in the demethylated UACC3199 cells. This 
indicates that reduced accessibility of transcription factors to the methylated
promoter is one of the mechanisms for down-regulation of BRCA1 in heavily
methylated cancer cells.

PMID: 19466541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2009 May;41(5):414-28.

Identification of aberrant cell cycle regulation in Epstein-Barr virus-associated
nasopharyngeal carcinoma by cDNA microarray and gene set enrichment analysis.

Zhang W(1), Zeng Z, Zhou Y, Xiong W, Fan S, Xiao L, Huang D, Li Z, Li D, Wu M, Li
X, Shen S, Wang R, Cao L, Tang K, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha, China.

Previous studies have revealed that Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) was closely
associated with nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). This study aimed to characterize 
the global pathways affected in the EBV-associated NPC. Combined with
microdissection, gene expression profiles in 22 NPCs and 10 non-tumor
nasopharyngeal epithelial (NPE) tissue samples were analyzed. All NPC specimens
served in the microarray analysis were positive for EBV, as judged by
identification of the expression of EBV nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1). Through gene
set enrichment analysis (GSEA), we found that cell cycle pathway was the most
disregulated pathway in NPC (P=0.000, false discovery rate q-value=0.007), which 
included some aberrant expressed components. We first found that overexpression
of CDK4, cyclin D1, and Rb proteins, and loss of expression of proteins p16, p27,
and p19 were statistically significant in NPC tissues compared with non-cancerous
NPE (P<0.05) by real-time RT-PCR and tissue microarray. EBV-encoded small RNA-1
(EBER-1) hybridization signals in the NPC showed significant associations with
the overexpression of Rb (P=0.000), cyclin D1 (P=0.000), CDK4 (P=0.000), and the 
loss of expression of p16 proteins (P=0.039). In the final logistic regression
analysis model, EBER-1 and abnormal expression of p16, Rb, cyclin D1, and E2F6
were independent contributions to nasopharyngeal carcinogenesis. Through survival
analysis, only cyclin D1 could predict the prognosis of NPC patients. These
results suggested that cell cycle pathway was the most disregulated pathway in
the EBV-associated NPC, and EBER-1 was closely associated with p16, CDK4, cyclin 
D1, and Rb.cyclin D1 could be the prognosis biomarker for NPC.

PMID: 19430707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Chin Med J (Engl). 2009 Feb 20;122(4):437-43.

Alteration of gene expression during nasopharyngeal carcinogenesis revealed by
oligonucleotide microarray after microdissection of tumor tissue and normal
epithelia from nasopharynx.

Liu ZQ(1), Tian YQ, Hu YF, Li XL, Ma FR, Li GY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery Peking University Third
Hospital, Beijing 100191, China.

BACKGROUND: Microarray and microdissection techniques were being used for many
applications to study the carcinogenesis of some human tumors. But seldom studies
had hitherto combined these two techniques to study carcinogenesis mechanism of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). To identify a set of genes involved in the
carcinogenesis and development of NPC, we used the microdissected homogeneous NPC
tissue cells and the pure normal epithelium pillar cells to construct the whole
human genome expression profiles.
METHODS: We preserved the tissue samples from nasopharynx of 18 patients
(including 13 samples of NPC and 5 samples of normal or inflammatory mucous
tissue samples from nasopharynx) in RNAlater Stabilization Reagent. The tissue
samples were microdissected to harvest the homogeneous tissue cells, then total
RNA was isolated from them. The sufficient antisense RNA (aRNA) was amplified
from these total RNA. HG-U133.Plus.2.0 GeneChip was used to construct the human
whole genome expression profiling of each sample. Differential patterns of
expression of genes correlated with the carcinogenesis, classification and
progression of NPC were identified with comparing the expression profiling data
respectively in leave one out cross-validation analysis. Correlation between aRNA
expression measured by the microarrays and semi-quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (sqRT-PCR) were also ascertained, and
found that hybridization results were validated in all of the 18 patients.
RESULTS: Differential patterns of expression of 127 genes correlated with the
carcinogenesis (A P value less than 0.001 with the 2-fold differentiated
expression between case group and control group) of the NPC were filtered. The
top most up-regulated and down-regulated 8 genes by the way of permutation test
were also selected and listed in the paper. Expression of genes E2F6 and TSPAN-1 
was identified using aRNA by sqRT-PCR and showed that there was significant
difference between the average value of case groups and that of control group
respectively (t = 2.170, df = 16, P = 0.045 and t = -2.946, df = 16, P = 0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: We had identified some genes which could be the molecular marker
during the carcinogenesis and the development of the NPC. The genes which
selected from the different subgroups seemed to be implicated for the
diagnosis,classification, and progression of NPC, and provided important insights
into their underlying biology.

PMID: 19302751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. BMC Mol Biol. 2008 Dec 27;9:111. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-9-111.

Transcriptional regulation of BRD7 expression by Sp1 and c-Myc.

Liu H(1), Zhou M, Luo X, Zhang L, Niu Z, Peng C, Ma J, Peng S, Zhou H, Xiang B,
Li X, Li S, He J, Li X, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Xiang-Ya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410078, People's Republic of China.
huayingcsu@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Bromodomain is an evolutionally conserved domain that is found in
proteins strongly implicated in signal-dependent transcriptional regulation.
Genetic alterations of bromodomain genes contributed to the development of many
human cancers and other disorders. BRD7 is a recently identified bromodomain
gene. It plays a critical role in cellular growth, cell cycle progression, and
signal-dependent gene expression. Previous studies showed that BRD7 gene
exhibited much higher-level of mRNA expression in normal nasopharyngeal epithelia
than in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) biopsies and cell lines. However, little
is known about its transcriptional regulation. In this study, we explored the
transcriptional regulation of BRD7 gene.
METHOD: Potential binding sites of transcription factors within the promoter
region of BRD7 gene were predicted with MatInspector Professional
http://genomatix.de/cgi-bin/matinspector_prof/mat_fam.pl. Mutation construct
methods and luciferase assays were performed to define the minimal promoter of
BRD7 gene. RT-PCR and western blot assays were used to detect the endogenous
expression of transcription factor Sp1, c-Myc and E2F6 in all cell lines used in 
this study. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) and Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) were used to detect the direct transcription factors
that are responsible for the promoter activity of BRD7 gene. DNA vector-based
siRNA technology and cell transfection methods were employed to establish clone
pools that stably expresses SiRNA against c-Myc expression in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma 5-8F cells. Real-time PCR was used to detect mRNA expression of BRD7
gene in 5-8F/Si-c-Myc cells.
RESULTS: We defined the minimal promoter of BRD7 gene in a 55-bp region (from
-266 to -212bp), and identified that its promoter activity is inversely related
to c-Myc expression. Sp1 binds to the Sp1/Myc-Max overlapping site of BRD7
minimal promoter, and slightly positively regulate its promoter activity. c-Myc
binds to this Sp1/Myc-Max overlapping site as well, and negatively regulates the 
promoter activity and endogenous mRNA expression of BRD7 gene. Knock-down of
c-Myc increases the promoter activity and mRNA level of BRD7 gene. The luciferase
activity of the mutated promoter constructs showed that Sp1/Myc-Max overlapping
site is a positive regulation element of BRD7 promoter.
CONCLUSION: These studies provide for the first time the evidence that c-Myc is
indeed a negative regulator of BRD7 gene. These findings will help to further
understand and uncover the bio-functions of BRD7 gene involved in the
pathogenesis of NPC.

PMCID: PMC2632634
PMID: 19111069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Biol Reprod. 2008 Nov;79(5):921-30. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.067645. Epub 2008
Jul 30.

A conserved E2F6-binding element in murine meiosis-specific gene promoters.

Kehoe SM(1), Oka M, Hankowski KE, Reichert N, Garcia S, McCarrey JR, Gaubatz S,
Terada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

During gametogenesis, germ cells must undergo meiosis in order to become viable
haploid gametes. Successful completion of this process is dependent upon the
expression of genes whose protein products function specifically in meiosis.
Failure to express these genes in meiotic cells often results in infertility,
whereas aberrant expression in somatic cells may lead to mitotic catastrophe. The
mechanisms responsible for regulating the timely expression of meiosis-specific
genes have not been fully elucidated. Here we demonstrate that E2F6, a member of 
the E2F family of transcription factors, is essential for the repression of the
newly identified meiosis-specific gene, Slc25a31 (also known as Ant4, Aac4), in
somatic cells. This discovery, along with previous studies, prompted us to
investigate the role of E2F6 in the regulation of meiosis-specific genes in
general. Interestingly, the core E2F6-binding element (TCCCGC) was highly
conserved in the proximal promoter regions of 19 out of 24 (79.2%)
meiosis-specific genes. This was significantly higher than the frequency found in
the promoters of all mouse genes (15.4%). In the absence of E2F6, only a portion 
of these meiosis-specific genes was derepressed in somatic cells. However,
endogenous E2F6 bound to the promoters of these meiosis-specific genes regardless
of whether they required E2F6 for their repression in somatic cells. Further,
E2F6 overexpression was capable of reducing their transcription. These findings
indicate that E2F6 possesses a broad ability to bind to and regulate the
meiosis-specific gene population.

PMCID: PMC2715002
PMID: 18667754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Virol. 2008 Sep;82(17):8695-705. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00579-08. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Human papillomavirus type 16 E7 oncoprotein associates with E2F6.

McLaughlin-Drubin ME(1), Huh KW, Münger K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Infectious Diseases Division, The Channing Laboratory,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

The papillomavirus life cycle is intimately coupled to the differentiation state 
of the infected epithelium. Since papillomaviruses lack most of the rate-limiting
enzymes required for genome synthesis, they need to uncouple keratinocyte
differentiation from cell cycle arrest and maintain or reestablish a
replication-competent state within terminally differentiated keratinocytes. The
human papillomavirus (HPV) E7 protein appears to be a major determinant for this 
activity and induces aberrant S-phase entry through the inactivation of the
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor and related pocket proteins. In addition, E7 can 
abrogate p21 and p27. Together, this leads to the activation of E2F1 to E2F5,
enhanced expression of E2F-responsive genes, and increased cdk2 activity. E2F6 is
a pRB-independent, noncanonical member of the E2F transcription factor family
that acts as a transcriptional repressor. E2F6 expression is activated in S phase
through an E2F-dependent mechanism and thus may provide a negative-feedback
mechanism that slows down S-phase progression and/or exit in response to the
activation of the other E2F transcription factors. Here, we show that low- and
high-risk HPV E7 proteins, as well as simian virus 40 T antigen and adenovirus
E1A, can associate with and inactivate the transcriptional repression activity of
E2F6, thereby subverting a critical cellular defense mechanism. This may result
in the extended S-phase competence of HPV-infected cells. E2F6 is a component of 
polycomb group complexes, which bind to silenced chromatin and are critical for
the maintenance of cell fate. We show that E7-expressing cells show decreased
staining for E2F6/polycomb complexes and that this is at least in part dependent 
on the association with E2F6.

PMCID: PMC2519642
PMID: 18579589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Sep;19(9):3691-700. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-02-0171. Epub 2008
Jun 18.

E2F6 inhibits cobalt chloride-mimetic hypoxia-induced apoptosis through E2F1.

Yang WW(1), Shu B, Zhu Y, Yang HT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.

E2F6, a potent transcriptional repressor, plays important roles in cell cycle
regulation. However, roles of E2F6 in hypoxia-induced apoptosis are unknown.
Here, we demonstrated biological functions of E2F6 in hypoxia-induced apoptosis
and regulatory pathways. During hypoxia (CoCl(2), 800 microM)-induced human
embryonic kidney 293 cell apoptosis, E2F6 expression was down-regulated with
concurrent increases in E2F1 expression and transactivation. E2F6 overexpression 
abrogated hypoxia-induced apoptosis and alteration of E2F1. Conversely, specific 
knockdown of E2F6 by small interfering RNA had opposite effects. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay confirmed that E2F6 regulated E2F1 expression through
the transrepression of E2F1 promoter. Interestingly, E2F1 transactivation and
apoptosis induced by hypoxia in cells stably expressing E2F1 were inhibited by
E2F6 overexpression, suggesting that the inhibitory effects of E2F6 are not only 
mediated by the repression of E2F1 promoter. This was confirmed by E2F6-inhibited
transactivation of E2F1 and apoptosis via competing with E2F1 for DNA binding
sites evidenced by the different behaviors of E2F6DeltaC (C-terminal deletion)
and E2F6.E68 (mutant DNA binding site) and by the lack of association of E2f6
with E2F1 protein. Moreover, hypoxia up-regulated expression of E2F1-responsive
proapoptotic gene apoptosis protease-activating factor 1 was repressed by E2F6
overexpression. Together, these findings demonstrate a novel role of E2F6 in
control of hypoxia-induced apoptosis through regulation of E2F1.

PMCID: PMC2526686
PMID: 18562691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 1;68(7):2094-105. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5194.

Exploration of tumor-suppressive microRNAs silenced by DNA hypermethylation in
oral cancer.

Kozaki K(1), Imoto I, Mogi S, Omura K, Inazawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo,
Japan.

In the last few years, microRNAs (miRNA) have started a revolution in molecular
biology and emerged as key players in the carcinogenesis. They have been
identified in various tumor types, showing that different sets of miRNAs are
usually deregulated in different cancers. To identify the miRNA signature that
was specific for oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), we first examined
expression profiles of 148 miRNAs in a panel of 18 OSCC cell lines and the
immortalized oral keratinocyte line RT7 as a control. Compared with RT7, the
expression of 54 miRNAs (36.5%) was frequently down-regulated in OSCC lines
(<0.5-fold expression, >or=66.7% of 18 lines). Among these 54 miRNAs, we further 
analyzed four of these miRNAs (i.e., miR-34b, miR-137, miR-193a, and miR-203),
located around CpG islands, to identify tumor-suppressive miRNAs silenced through
aberrant DNA methylation. The expression of those four genes was restored by
treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine in OSCC cells lacking their expression. In 
addition, expression levels of the four miRNAs were inversely correlated with
their DNA methylation status in the OSCC lines. In primary tumors of OSCC with
paired normal oral mucosa, down-regulation of miRNA expression through
tumor-specific hypermethylation was more frequently observed for miR-137 and
miR-193a than for miR-34b and miR-203. Moreover, the ectopic transfection of
miR-137 or miR-193a into OSCC lines lacking their expressions significantly
reduced cell growth, with down-regulation of the translation of cyclin-dependent 
kinase 6 or E2F transcription factor 6, respectively. Taken together, our results
clearly show that miR-137 and miR-193a are tumor suppressor miRNAs epigenetically
silenced during oral carcinogenesis.

PMID: 18381414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Dev Dyn. 2008 May;237(5):1232-42. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21516.

E2f6 and Bmi1 cooperate in axial skeletal development.

Courel M(1), Friesenhahn L, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Bmi1 is a Polycomb Group protein that functions as a component of Polycomb
Repressive Complex 1 (PRC1) to control axial skeleton development through Hox
gene repression. Bmi1 also represses transcription of the Ink4a-Arf locus and is 
consequently required to maintain the proliferative and self-renewal properties
of hematopoietic and neural stem cells. Previously, one E2F family member, E2F6, 
has been shown to interact with Bmi1 and other known PRC1 components. However,
the biological relevance of this interaction is unknown. In this study, we use
mouse models to investigate the interplay between E2F6 and Bmi1. This analysis
shows that E2f6 and Bmi1 cooperate in the regulation of Hox genes, and
consequently axial skeleton development, but not in the repression of the
Ink4a-Arf locus. These findings underscore the significance of the E2F6-Bmi1
interaction in vivo and suggest that the Hox and Ink4a-Arf loci are regulated by 
somewhat different mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2697036
PMID: 18366140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2008 Feb 25;60(1):1-10.

Expression pattern of E2F6 in physical and chemical hypoxia-induced apoptosis.

Shu B(1), Yang WW, Yang HT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology of Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (SJTUSM) and Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences (SIBS), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Shanghai 200025,
China.

Apoptosis can be caused by hypoxia, a major factor during ischemic injury, in
cardiomyocytes. However, the regulatory mechanisms underlying hypoxia-induced
cardiomyocyte apoptosis have not yet been fully understood. E2F6, an identified
E2F family member, has been demonstrated to repress DNA damage-induced apoptosis 
in our recent study. However, it is unclear whether E2F6 is involved in
hypoxia-induced apoptosis. In this study, we determined the expression property
of E2F6 during hypoxia-induced apoptosis in H9c2 cells, a rat ventricular
myoblast cell line. The results showed that physical hypoxia and chemical
hypoxia-mimetic agents desferrioxamine (DFO) and cobalt chloride (CoCl(2))
induced apoptosis in H9c2 cells. Physical hypoxia- and CoCl(2)-induced apoptosis 
was accompanied with a downregulation of endogenous E2F6 mRNA expression, but not
protein expression. DFO treatment resulted in a significant downregulation of
both mRNA and protein expressions of endogenous E2F6. These results suggest that 
E2F6 may be involved in DFO-induced apoptosis, while it is less sensitive in
physical hypoxia- and CoCl(2)-induced apoptosis in H9c2 cells. In addition, the
apoptosis induced by DFO may share different pathways from that induced by
physical hypoxia and CoCl(2).

PMID: 18288351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. PLoS One. 2008 Jan 23;3(1):e1484. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001484.

Transcriptional regulation of an evolutionary conserved intergenic region of
CDT2-INTS7.

Nakagawa H(1), Tategu M, Yamauchi R, Sasaki K, Sekimachi S, Yoshida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Meiji University School of Agriculture, Kawasaki,
Kanagawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In the mammalian genome, a substantial number of gene pairs
(approximately 10%) are arranged head-to-head on opposite strands within 1,000
base pairs, and separated by a bidirectional promoter(s) that generally drives
the co-expression of both genes and results in functional coupling. The
significance of unique genomic configuration remains elusive.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we report on the identification of an
intergenic region of non-homologous genes, CDT2, a regulator of DNA replication, 
and an integrator complex subunit 7 (INTS7), an interactor of the largest subunit
of RNA polymerase II. The CDT2-INTS7 intergenic region is 246 and 245 base pairs 
long in human and mouse respectively and is evolutionary well-conserved among
several mammalian species. By measuring the luciferase activity in A549 cells,
the intergenic human sequence was shown to be able to drive the reporter gene
expression in either direction and notably, among transcription factors E2F, E2F1
approximately E2F4, but not E2F5 and E2F6, this sequence clearly up-regulated the
reporter gene expression exclusively in the direction of the CDT2 gene. In
contrast, B-Myb, c-Myb, and p53 down-regulated the reporter gene expression in
the transcriptional direction of the INTS7 gene. Overexpression of E2F1 by
adenoviral-mediated gene transfer resulted in an increased CDT2, but not INTS7,
mRNA level. Real-time polymerase transcription (RT-PCR) analyses of the
expression pattern for CDT2 and INTS7 mRNA in human adult and fetal tissues and
cell lines revealed that transcription of these two genes are asymmetrically
regulated. Moreover, the abundance of mRNA between mouse and rat tissues was
similar, but these patterns were quite different from the results obtained from
human tissues.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These findings add a unique example and help to
understand the mechanistic insights into the regulation of gene expression
through an evolutionary conserved intergenic region of the mammalian genome.

PMCID: PMC2194621
PMID: 18213392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 15;283(7):4352-63. Epub 2007 Dec 11.

Structure-function analysis of the THAP zinc finger of THAP1, a large C2CH
DNA-binding module linked to Rb/E2F pathways.

Bessière D(1), Lacroix C, Campagne S, Ecochard V, Guillet V, Mourey L, Lopez F,
Czaplicki J, Demange P, Milon A, Girard JP, Gervais V.

Author information: 
(1)University of Toulouse, Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology,
France.

THAP1, the founding member of a previously uncharacterized large family of
cellular proteins (THAP proteins), is a sequence-specific DNA-binding factor that
has recently been shown to regulate cell proliferation through modulation of
pRb/E2F cell cycle target genes. THAP1 shares its DNA-binding THAP zinc finger
domain with Drosophila P element transposase, zebrafish E2F6, and several
nematode proteins interacting genetically with the retinoblastoma protein pRb. In
this study, we report the three-dimensional structure and structure-function
relationships of the THAP zinc finger of human THAP1. Deletion mutagenesis and
multidimensional NMR spectroscopy revealed that the THAP domain of THAP1 is an
atypical zinc finger of approximately 80 residues, distinguished by the presence 
between the C2CH zinc coordinating residues of a short antiparallel beta-sheet
interspersed by a long loop-helix-loop insertion. Alanine scanning mutagenesis of
this loop-helix-loop motif resulted in the identification of a number of critical
residues for DNA recognition. NMR chemical shift perturbation analysis was used
to further characterize the residues involved in DNA binding. The combination of 
the mutagenesis and NMR data allowed the mapping of the DNA binding interface of 
the THAP zinc finger to a highly positively charged area harboring multiple
lysine and arginine residues. Together, these data represent the first
structure-function analysis of a functional THAP domain, with demonstrated
sequence-specific DNA binding activity. They also provide a structural framework 
for understanding DNA recognition by this atypical zinc finger, which defines a
novel family of cellular factors linked to cell proliferation and pRb/E2F cell
cycle pathways in humans, fish, and nematodes.

PMID: 18073205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Genome Res. 2007 Nov;17(11):1550-61. Epub 2007 Oct 1.

A comprehensive ChIP-chip analysis of E2F1, E2F4, and E2F6 in normal and tumor
cells reveals interchangeable roles of E2F family members.

Xu X(1), Bieda M, Jin VX, Rabinovich A, Oberley MJ, Green R, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California-Davis, Davis, California 
95616, USA.

Using ChIP-chip assays (employing ENCODE arrays and core promoter arrays), we
examined the binding patterns of three members of the E2F family in five cell
types. We determined that most E2F1, E2F4, and E2F6 binding sites are located
within 2 kb of a transcription start site, in both normal and tumor cells. In
fact, the majority of promoters that are active (as defined by TAF1 or POLR2A
binding) in GM06990 B lymphocytes and Ntera2 carcinoma cells were also bound by
an E2F. This very close relationship between E2F binding sites and binding sites 
for general transcription factors in both normal and tumor cells suggests that a 
chromatin-bound E2F may be a signpost for active transcription initiation
complexes. In general, we found that several E2Fs bind to a given promoter and
that there is only modest cell type specificity of the E2F family. Thus, it is
difficult to assess the role of any particular E2F in transcriptional regulation,
due to extreme redundancy of target promoters. However, Ntera2 carcinoma cells
were exceptional in that a large set of promoters were bound by E2F6, but not by 
E2F1 or E2F4. It has been proposed that E2F6 contributes to gene silencing by
recruiting enzymes involved in methylating histone H3. To test this hypothesis,
we created Ntera2 cell lines harboring shRNAs to E2F6. We found that reduction of
E2F6 only induced minimal alteration of the transcriptome of Ntera2
transcriptome. Our results support the concept of functional redundancy in the
E2F family and suggest that E2F6 is not critical for histone methylation.

PMCID: PMC2045138
PMID: 17908821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. PLoS One. 2007 Sep 19;2(9):e912.

Comparative analysis of E2F family member oncogenic activity.

Chen C(1), Wells AD.

Author information: 
(1)Joseph Stokes, Jr. Research Institute, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

The E2F family of transcription factors consists of nine members with both
distinct and overlapping functions. These factors are situated downstream of
growth factor signaling cascades, where they play a central role in cell growth
and proliferation through their ability to regulate genes involved in cell cycle 
progression. For this reason, it is likely that the members of the E2F family
play a critical role during oncogenesis. Consistent with this idea is the
observation that some tumors exhibit deregulated expression of E2F proteins. In
order to systematically compare the oncogenic capacity of these family members,
we stably over-expressed E2F1 through 6 in non-transformed 3T3 fibroblasts and
assessed the ability of these transgenic cell lines to grow under conditions of
low serum, as well as to form colonies in soft agar. Our results show that these 
six E2F family members can be divided into three groups that exhibit differential
oncogenic capacity. The first group consists of E2F2 and E2F3a, both of which
have strong oncogenic capacity. The second group consists of E2F1 and E2F6, which
were neutral in our assays when compared to control cells transduced with vector 
alone. The third group consists of E2F4 and E2F5, which generally act to repress 
E2F-responsive genes, and in our assays demonstrated a strong capacity to inhibit
transformation. Our results imply that the pattern of expression of these six E2F
family members in a cell could exert a strong influence over its susceptibility
to oncogenic transformation.

PMCID: PMC1975672
PMID: 17878947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Breast Cancer Res. 2007;9(4):R49.

Characterization of a negative transcriptional element in the BRCA1 promoter.

MacDonald G(1), Stramwasser M, Mueller CR.

Author information: 
(1)Queen's Cancer Research Institute, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario,
Canada, K7L 3N6.

INTRODUCTION: Decreased transcription of the BRCA1 gene has previously been
observed to occur in sporadic breast tumours, making elucidation of the
mechanisms regulating the expression of this gene important for our understanding
of the etiology of the disease.
METHODS: Transcriptional elements involved in the regulation of the BRCA1
promoter were analysed by co-transfection experiments into the human MCF-7 and
T-47D breast cancer cell lines.
RESULTS: We have identified a repressor element, referred to as the UP site,
within the proximal BRCA1 promoter whose inactivation results in increased
promoter activity. An E2F recognition element, previously suggested to mediate
repression via E2F-6, is adjacent to the UP site and its inactivation also leads 
to increased BRCA1 expression. These two elements appear to form a composite
repressor element whose combined effect is additive. The UP element is composed
of two sequences, one of which binds the ubiquitously expressed ets family
transcription factor GABP alpha/beta. This site is distinct from a previously
identified GABP alpha/beta site, the RIBS element, though the RIBS site appears
to be necessary for derepression of the promoter via mutations in the UP site.
Knockdown of GABP alpha using an shRNA vector confirms that this protein is
important for the function of both the RIBS and UP sites.
CONCLUSION: The identification of a repressor element in the BRCA1 promoter
brings a new level of complexity to the regulation of BRCA1 expression. The
elements characterized here may play a normal role in the integration of a
variety of signals, including two different growth related pathways, and it is
possible that loss of the ability to derepress the BRCA1 promoter during critical
periods may contribute to breast transformation.

PMCID: PMC2206725
PMID: 17663789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Stem Cells. 2007 Oct;25(10):2439-47. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

E2F-6 suppresses growth-associated apoptosis of human hematopoietic progenitor
cells by counteracting proapoptotic activity of E2F-1.

Kikuchi J(1), Shimizu R, Wada T, Ando H, Nakamura M, Ozawa K, Furukawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stem Cell Regulation, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical
School, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke-City, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

E2F-6 is a dominant-negative transcriptional repressor against other members of
the E2F family. In this study, we investigated the expression and function of
E2F-6 in human hematopoietic progenitor cells to clarify its role in
hematopoiesis. We found that among E2F subunits, E2F-1, E2F-2, E2F-4, and E2F-6
were expressed in CD34(+) human hematopoietic progenitor cells. The expression of
E2F-6 increased along with proliferation and decreased during differentiation of 
hematopoietic progenitors, whereas the other three species were upregulated in
CD34(-) bone marrow mononuclear cells. Overexpression of E2F-6 did not affect the
growth of immature hematopoietic cell line K562 but suppressed E2F-1-induced
apoptosis, whereas it failed to inhibit apoptosis induced by differentiation
inducers and anticancer drugs. Among E2F-1-dependent apoptosis-related molecules,
E2F-6 specifically inhibited upregulation of Apaf-1 by competing with E2F-1 for
promoter binding. E2F-6 similarly suppressed apoptosis and Apaf-1 upregulation in
primary hematopoietic progenitor cells during cytokine-induced proliferation but 
had no effect when they were differentiated. As a result, E2F-6 enhanced the
clonogenic growth of colony-forming unit-granulocyte, erythroid, macrophage, and 
megakaryocyte. These results suggest that E2F-6 provides a failsafe mechanism
against loss of hematopoietic progenitor cells during proliferation. Disclosure
of potential conflicts of interest is found at the end of this article.

PMID: 17600109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Cell Cycle. 2007 May 2;6(9):1096-101. Epub 2007 May 13.

Plasticity of mammalian myotubes upon stimulation with a thrombin-activated serum
factor.

Lööf S(1), Straube WL, Drechsel D, Tanaka EM, Simon A.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institute, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Salamanders display unique regeneration abilities among adult vertebrates. An
intriguing feature of salamander regeneration is the dedifferentiation of cells, 
such as myofibers and myotubes at the injury site, a process that involves cell
cycle reentry from the differentiated state. A thrombin-activated serum factor
that is distinct from conventional growth factors is known to cause S-phase
reentry in salamander myotubes. While mammalian myotubes do not reenter S-phase
upon serum stimulation, an upregulation of some immediate early genes such as jun
and fos has been observed. Until now, it was unknown whether this transcriptional
response was stimulated by conventional growth factors or by the
thrombin-activated serum factor. By measuring transcriptional activity in
individually purified C2C12 mouse myotubes using quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reactions, we show that a set of immediate early
genes are activated in response to the thrombin-activated serum factor in a
distinct manner from the growth factors PDGF, FGF and EGF. A partially purified
fraction of the thrombin activated serum factor elicited stronger upregulation of
a broader set of genes compared to individual growth factors and additionally
caused downregulation of E2F6. Despite this robust transcriptional response in
mammalian myotubes, we did not detect a large-scale change in histone H3K9
di-methylation or S-phase, a feature that characterizes salamander
serum-stimulated myotubes. Our results indicate that mammalian myotubes have
retained responsiveness to the thrombin-activated serum factor, but full reentry 
into S-phase is prevented by factors downstream of the immediate early genes.

PMID: 17457055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. DNA Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;26(2):91-9.

Transcriptional regulation of human chromatin assembly factor ASF1.

Hayashi R(1), Goto Y, Tanaka R, Oonogi K, Hisasue M, Yoshida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, School of Agriculture, Meiji University,
Kanagawa, Japan.

Antisilencing function 1 (ASF1) is a conserved histone chaperone implicated in
nucleosome assembly, transcriptional silencing, and the cellular response to DNA 
damage. Here, we report the identification of human ASF1B, but not ASF1A, as a
direct transcriptional target of transcription factor E2F1. We demonstrated that 
overexpression of E2F1 by adenoviral-mediated gene transfer upregulated ASF1B
mRNA expression in HeLa cells. Analysis of human ASF1B promoter constructs showed
that an E2F-responsive sequence was necessary for E2F1-induced activation of the 
ASF1B gene transcription. Oligonucleotides including an E2F consensus sequence
were specifically bound by E2F1 protein in vitro. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis demonstrated that E2F1 bound to an E2F-responsive sequence of the human 
ASF1B gene. Among the members of the E2F family, E2F1 to E2F5, but not E2F6,
activated the ASF1B reporter construct. Sp1 and NFYA failed to induce the
activity of the ASF1A and ASF1B promoter. ASF1A and ASF1B mRNA were upregulated
by serum stimulation. Taken together, our results suggest that the expression of 
human ASF1A and ASF1B are upregulated followed by cell proliferation signal, but 
that of ASF1B is uniquely regulated by transcription factors E2F during cell
cycle progression.

PMID: 17328667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2007 May;6(5):820-34. Epub 2007 Feb 11.

Proteomics analysis of Ring1B/Rnf2 interactors identifies a novel complex with
the Fbxl10/Jhdm1B histone demethylase and the Bcl6 interacting corepressor.

Sánchez C(1), Sánchez I, Demmers JA, Rodriguez P, Strouboulis J, Vidal M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, Centro de Investigaciones
Biológicas (CSIC), Ramiro de Maeztu 9, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

Ring1B/Rnf2 is a RING finger protein member of the Polycomb group (PcG) of
proteins, which form chromatin-modifying complexes essential for embryonic
development and stem cell renewal and which are commonly deregulated in cancer.
Ring1B/Rnf2 is a ubiquitin E3 ligase that catalyzes the monoubiquitylation of the
histone H2A, one of the histone modifications needed for the transcriptional
repression activity of the PcG of proteins. Ring1B/Rnf2 was shown to be part of
two complexes, the PRC1 PcG complex and the E2F6.com-1 complex, which also
contains non-PcG members, thus raising the prospect for additional Ring1B/Rnf2
partners and functions extending beyond the PcG. Here we used a high throughput
proteomics approach based on the single step purification, using streptavidin
beads, of in vivo biotinylated Ring1B/Rnf2 and associated proteins from a nuclear
extract from erythroid cells and their identification by mass spectrometry. About
50 proteins were confidently identified of which 20 had not been identified
previously as subunits of Ring1B/Rnf2 complexes. We found that histone
demethylases LSD1/Aof2 and Fbxl10/Jhdm1B, casein kinase subunits, and the BcoR
corepressor were among the new interactors identified. We also isolated an
Fbxl10/Jhdm1B complex by biotinylation tagging to identify shared interacting
partners with Ring1B/Rnf2. In this way we identified a novel Ring1B-Fbxl10
complex that also includes Bcl6 corepressor (BcoR), CK2alpha, Skp1, and
Nspc1/Pcgf1. The putative enzymatic activities and protein interaction and
chromatin binding motifs present in this novel Ring1B-Fbxl10 complex potentially 
provide additional mechanisms for chromatin modification/recruitment to chromatin
and more evidence for Ring1B/Rnf2 activities beyond those typically associated
with PcG function. Lastly this work demonstrates the utility of biotinylation
tagging for the rapid characterization of complex mixtures of multiprotein
complexes achieved through the iterative use of this simple yet high throughput
proteomics approach.

PMID: 17296600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Feb;210(2):517-26.

Establishment of histone gene regulation and cell cycle checkpoint control in
human embryonic stem cells.

Becker KA(1), Stein JL, Lian JB, van Wijnen AJ, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Rapid self-renewal of human embryonic stem (ES) cells (NIH designation WA01 and
WA09) is accommodated by an abbreviated cell cycle due to a reduction in the G1
phase. Thus, molecular mechanisms operative in ES cells may expedite the cellular
commitment to progress into S phase to initiate replication of DNA and
biosynthesis of histone proteins to form new chromatin. Here we show that the
selective cell cycle regulated expression of individual histone H4 gene copies,
which is typical for somatic cell types, is already firmly established in human
ES cells. This early establishment of H4 gene regulation, which is E2F
independent, is consistent with co-expression of the cognate transcriptional
regulators HiNF-P and p220(NPAT). Human ES cells differ from somatic cells in the
expression of members of the E2F family and RB-related pocket proteins
(p105(RB1), p107(RBL1), and p130(RBL2/RB2)) that control expression of genes
encoding enzymes for nucleotide metabolism and DNA synthesis. Human ES cells
rapidly and robustly (>200-fold) induce the cyclin dependent kinase (CDK)
inhibitor p21(WAF1/CIP1) upon gamma-irradiation. This DNA damage response
promptly reduces histone gene expression as well as mRNA levels for HiNF-P and
p220(NPAT) and causes accumulation of unprocessed histone H4 precursor RNAs.
Furthermore, while E2F4, E2F5 and p130(RBL2/RB2) are the major E2F and pocket
protein mRNAs in actively proliferating ES cells, expression levels of E2F5,
E2F6, and p105(RB1) are most strongly elevated during cell cycle arrest in cells 
responding to DNA damage. Our data suggest that the brief G1 phase of ES cells is
supported by a potent p21(WAF1/CIP1) related DNA damage response that functions
through several mechanisms to rapidly inhibit cell cycle progression. This
response may alter the E2F/pocket protein combinations that control E2F dependent
genes and block H4 gene expression by inhibiting histone-specific transcription
factors and processing of histone gene transcripts, as well as by destabilizing
histone mRNAs.

PMID: 17096384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cell Death Differ. 2007 Apr;14(4):807-17. Epub 2006 Nov 10.

E2F6 negatively regulates ultraviolet-induced apoptosis via modulation of BRCA1.

Yang WW(1), Wang ZH, Zhu Y, Yang HT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology of Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) and
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

E2F6 is believed to repress E2F-responsive genes and therefore plays an important
role in cell-cycle regulation. However, the role of E2F6 in the control of
apoptosis remains unknown. We show here that the expression of E2F6 was
downregulated with a concurrent increase in BRCA1 mRNA and cleaved protein during
ultraviolet (UV)-induced apoptosis in human embryonic kidney 293 cells. Moreover,
E2F6 overexpression distinctly inhibited UV-induced apoptosis as well as
UV-induced increases in BRCA1 expression and cleavage, accompanied with increases
of the full-length BRCA1 and BRCA1 nuclear foci. In contrast, knockdown of E2F6
by small interfering RNA had opposite effects. Furthermore, these effects of E2F6
on BRCA1 depended upon the association of E2F6 with BRCA1 via its C-terminus in a
UV-triggered manner and upon the transcriptional repression by E2F6 on the BRCA1 
promoter. These findings provide the first demonstration of the important role
for E2F6 in the control of apoptosis via targeting of BRCA1.

PMID: 17096023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Blood. 2007 Jan 15;109(2):584-94. Epub 2006 Sep 26.

The THAP-zinc finger protein THAP1 regulates endothelial cell proliferation
through modulation of pRB/E2F cell-cycle target genes.

Cayrol C(1), Lacroix C, Mathe C, Ecochard V, Ceribelli M, Loreau E, Lazar V,
Dessen P, Mantovani R, Aguilar L, Girard JP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Vasculaire, Equipe labellisée La Ligue 2006, Institut 
de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique Unité mixte de recherche, Toulouse, France.

We recently cloned a novel human nuclear factor (designated THAP1) from
postcapillary venule endothelial cells (ECs) that contains a DNA-binding THAP
domain, shared with zebrafish E2F6 and several Caenorhabditis elegans proteins
interacting genetically with retinoblastoma gene product (pRB). Here, we show
that THAP1 is a physiologic regulator of EC proliferation and cell-cycle
progression, 2 essential processes for angiogenesis. Retroviral-mediated gene
transfer of THAP1 into primary human ECs inhibited proliferation, and large-scale
expression profiling with microarrays revealed that THAP1-mediated growth
inhibition is due to coordinated repression of pRB/E2F cell-cycle target genes.
Silencing of endogenous THAP1 through RNA interference similarly inhibited EC
proliferation and G1/S cell-cycle progression, and resulted in down-regulation of
several pRB/E2F cell-cycle target genes, including RRM1, a gene required for
S-phase DNA synthesis. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in proliferating ECs 
showed that endogenous THAP1 associates in vivo with a consensus THAP1-binding
site found in the RRM1 promoter, indicating that RRM1 is a direct transcriptional
target of THAP1. The similar phenotypes observed after THAP1 overexpression and
silencing suggest that an optimal range of THAP1 expression is essential for EC
proliferation. Together, these data provide the first links in mammals among THAP
proteins, cell proliferation, and pRB/E2F cell-cycle pathways.

PMID: 17003378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Oncogene. 2007 Mar 15;26(12):1714-22. Epub 2006 Sep 25.

PHC3, a component of the hPRC-H complex, associates with E2F6 during G0 and is
lost in osteosarcoma tumors.

Deshpande AM(1), Akunowicz JD, Reveles XT, Patel BB, Saria EA, Gorlick RG, Naylor
SL, Leach RJ, Hansen MF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

Polyhomeotic-like 3 (PHC3) is a ubiquitously expressed member of the polycomb
gene family and part of the human polycomb complex hPRC-H. We found that in
normal cells PHC3 associated with both hPRC-H complex components and with the
transcription factor E2F6. In differentiating and confluent cells, PHC3 and E2F6 
showed nuclear colocalization in a punctate pattern that resembled the binding of
polycomb bodies to heterochromatin. This punctate pattern was not seen in
proliferating cells suggesting that PHC3 may be part of an E2F6-polycomb complex 
that has been shown to occupy and silence target promoters in G(0). Previous loss
of heterozygosity (LoH) analyses had shown that the region containing PHC3
underwent frequent LoH in primary human osteosarcoma tumors. When we examined
normal bone and human osteosarcoma tumors, we found loss of PHC3 expression in 36
of 56 osteosarcoma tumors. Sequence analysis revealed that PHC3 was mutated in
nine of 15 primary osteosarcoma tumors. These findings suggest that loss of PHC3 
may favor tumorigenesis by potentially disrupting the ability of cells to remain 
in G(0).

PMCID: PMC2691996
PMID: 17001316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Dec;209(3):923-34.

Acute loss of transcription factor E2F1 induces mitochondrial biogenesis in HeLa 
cells.

Goto Y(1), Hayashi R, Kang D, Yoshida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Meiji University Graduate School of Agriculture, 
Tama-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 214-8571, Japan.

Here, we sought to clarify the comprehensive cellular response to transcription
factor E2F1 expression using short interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated gene
silencing to examine the roles of E2F1. For this purpose, we analyzed global gene
expression changes in E2F1 knockdown HeLa cells, where no changes in cell growth 
or apoptosis were observed. Among the identified genes, the mRNA levels of
mitochondria-encoded genes were highly elevated in E2F1 siRNA-treated cells, but 
not in E2F6 siRNA-treated cells, relative to control siRNA-treated cells. These
changes were accompanied by a significant increase in the transcription and
replication of mitochondria DNA as well as the induction of nuclear-encoded
mitochondrial topoisomerase I (TOP1MT) mRNA in E2F1 knockdown cells, but not in
E2F6 knockdown cells, whereas the levels of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) mRNA and protein were unchanged, relative to the
levels in control siRNA-treated cells. Time-course experiments demonstrated that 
the induction of TOP1MT coincided with the timing of E2F1 loss. In addition, E2F1
knockdown cells, but not E2F6 knockdown cells, displayed increased ATP levels
along with an accumulation of cytochrome b protein. Finally, RNA interference
(RNAi)-mediated reduction in E2F1 knockdown HeLa cells, but not in E2F6 knockdown
HeLa cells, resulted in increased anticancer drug sensitivity. Taken together,
these data demonstrate a novel physiological aspect of E2F1 in human cancer
cells, where activated mitochondrial biogenesis occurs as a consequence of the
acute loss of E2F1.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16972274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. DNA Cell Biol. 2006 Jun;25(6):346-58.

Cloning and characterization of the BRD7 gene promoter.

Liu H(1), Peng C, Zhou M, Zhou J, Shen S, Zhou H, Xiong W, Luo X, Peng S, Niu Z, 
Ouyang J, Li X, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Xiang-Ya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Hunan, People's Republic of China.

BRD7, a novel bromodomain gene, encodes a protein that inhibits cell growth and
cell cycle progression by transcriptional regulation of some cell cycle-related
genes. Its transcriptional down-expression has been shown to be critical to the
pathogenesis of Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Little is known about the
transcriptional mechanisms controlling BRD7 gene expression. In this paper, we
have characterized the 5' regulatory region of the BRD7 gene in order to
understand the molecular mechanisms regulating its expression. Transient
transfection results suggested that the analyzed upstream sequences of the BRD7
gene might contain some important but not sufficient sequence information to
confer the cell-type specificity of BRD7 gene expression. Further analysis with a
series of deletions demonstrated that a 125-bp region was required for the basal 
promoter activity of the BRD7 gene. Results from ChIP and EMSA indicated that the
promoter was responsive to Sp1, E2F, and E2F6. All of these suggest a possible
mechanism that transcriptional factor Sp1, E2F, and E2F-6 are associated in the
BRD7 promoter region and regulate BRD7 promoter activity. Taken together, these
results will help to better understand the role of the BRD7 gene in
signal-dependent transcriptional regulation, and to develop new reagents for
therapeutic upregulation of the BRD7 gene in NPC.

PMID: 16792505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Jan-Feb;1759(1-2):60-8. Epub 2006 Mar 24.

JPO1/CDCA7, a novel transcription factor E2F1-induced protein, possesses
intrinsic transcriptional regulator activity.

Goto Y(1), Hayashi R, Muramatsu T, Ogawa H, Eguchi I, Oshida Y, Ohtani K, Yoshida
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, School of Agriculture, Meiji University, 1-1-1
Higashimita, Tama-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 214-8571, Japan.

JPO1/CDCA7 was originally identified as a c-Myc-responsive gene that participates
in neoplastic transformation. Here, we report the identification of JPO1/CDCA7 as
a direct transcriptional target of transcription factor E2F1. We demonstrated
that overexpression of E2F1 by adenoviral-mediated gene transfer upregulated
JPO1/CDCA7 mRNA expression in human cells. Analysis of human and mouse JPO1/CDCA7
promoter constructs showed that an E2F-responsive sequence was necessary for
E2F1-induced activation of the JPO1/CDCA7 gene transcription. Among the members
of the E2F family, E2F1 to E2F4, but not E2F5 or E2F6, activated the JPO1/CDCA7
reporter construct. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated that
E2F1, E2F2, and E2F4 specifically bound to an E2F-responsive sequence of the
human JPO1/CDCA7 gene. Like JPO2/R1, which has a homologous transcriptional
regulator domain, the C-terminal cysteine-rich region of JPO1/CDCA7 protein
induced transcriptional activity in a mammalian one-hybrid assay. Taken together,
our results suggest that JPO1/CDCA7 is a unique transcription regulator whose
expression is activated by E2F1 as well as c-Myc.

PMID: 16580749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 16;281(24):16546-50. Epub 2006 Mar 24.

New insights into BS69 functions.

Velasco G(1), Grkovic S, Ansieau S.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U59O and U412, Centre Léon Berard, Université Claude Bernard Lyon I, 28
rue Laennec, F-69008 Lyon, France.

The BS69 protein has been commonly described as a co-repressor associated with
various transcription factors. However, this hypothesis relied predominantly on
overexpression of tagged proteins due to the lack of a reliable BS69 antibody. We
present for the first time a complete sequence of BS69 and valuable tools to
characterize the endogenous protein. We show that the full-length BS69 protein,
as well as minor alternatively spliced isoforms, is ubiquitously expressed,
nuclear, and associates with chromatin and mitotic chromosomes. Accordingly, BS69
interacts with a set of chromatin remodeling factors, including ATP-dependent
helicases, histone deacetylases, and histone methyltransferases, as well as the
E2F6 transcription factor. These data strengthen a role for BS69 in gene
repression and link BS69 to chromatin remodeling.

PMID: 16565076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2006 Jan;58(1):73-82.

Characterisation and regulation of E2F-6 and E2F-6b in the rat heart: a potential
target for myocardial regeneration?

Movassagh M(1), Bicknell KA, Brooks G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Hutchison/MRC Research Centre, University of
Cambridge, Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridgeshire, CB2 2XZ, UK.

The E2F transcription factors are instrumental in regulating cell cycle
progression and growth, including that in cardiomyocytes, which exit the cell
cycle shortly after birth. E2F-6 has been demonstrated to act as a
transcriptional repressor; however, its potential role in normal cardiomyocyte
proliferation and hypertrophy has not previously been investigated. Here we
report the isolation and characterisation of E2F-6 and E2F-6b in rat
cardiomyocytes and consider its potential as a target for myocardial regeneration
following injury. At the mRNA level, both rat E2F-6 and the alternatively spliced
variant, E2F-6b, were expressed in E18 myocytes and levels were maintained
throughout development into adulthood. Interestingly, E2F-6 protein expression
was down-regulated during myocyte development suggesting that it is regulated
post-transcriptionally in these cells. During myocyte hypertrophy, the mRNA
expressions of E2F-6 and E2F-6b were not regulated whereas E2F-6 protein was
up-regulated significantly. Indeed, E2F-6 protein expression levels closely
parallel the developmental withdrawal of myocytes from the cell cycle and the
subsequent reactivation of their cell cycle machinery during hypertrophic growth.
Furthermore, depletion of E2F-6, using anti-sense technology, results in death of
cultured neonatal myocytes. Taken together, abrogation of E2F-6 expression in
neonatal cardiomyocytes leads to a significant decrease in their viability,
consistent with the notion that E2F-6 might be required for maintaining normal
myocyte growth.

PMID: 16393466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 16;280(50):41380-6. Epub 2005 Oct 19.

Silencing of the meiotic genes SMC1beta and STAG3 in somatic cells by E2F6.

Storre J(1), Schäfer A, Reichert N, Barbero JL, Hauser S, Eilers M, Gaubatz S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Philipps-University 
Marburg, 35037 Marburg, Germany.

E2F6, a member of the E2F-family of transcription factors, is a retinoblastoma
protein-independent transcriptional repressor. E2F6 associates with polycomb
group (Pc-G) multiprotein complexes that contain histone H3 methyltransferases,
suggesting that E2F6 represses genes by covalent histone modification. However,
genes that are repressed by E2F6 via a mechanism that involves histone H3
methylation have not been identified. Using cDNA microarray experiments comparing
wild-type and E2f6-/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts, we now found that E2F6 is
required to silence the meiosis-specific genes SMC1beta and STAG3 in somatic
cells. Re-expression of E2F6 in E2f6-/- cells was sufficient to restore their
repression. E2F6 binds in vivo to the promoters of these genes through a
conserved binding site. Transcriptional repression of SMC1beta and STAG3 by E2F6 
involves multiple mechanisms, including methylation of histone H3 on lysine 9 and
lysine 27. Our findings suggest a molecular mechanism for the stable
transcriptional silencing of meiotic genes in somatic cells by E2F6.

PMID: 16236716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Oncogene. 2006 Jan 12;25(2):230-9.

E2F-HDAC complexes negatively regulate the tumor suppressor gene ARHI in breast
cancer.

Lu Z(1), Luo RZ, Peng H, Huang M, Nishmoto A, Hunt KK, Helin K, Liao WS, Yu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

ARHI is a maternally imprinted tumor suppressor gene whose expression is markedly
downregulated in breast cancer. Reactivation of ARHI expression in breast cancer 
cells is associated with increased histone H3 acetylation and decreased lysine 9 
methylation of histone H3. An ARHI promoter segment that spanned bases -420 to
+58 (designated the P2 region) exhibits significantly higher promoter activity in
normal cells than in cancer cells. To better understand the molecular mechanisms 
contributing to this differential transcriptional activity, we sought to identify
transcription factors that bind to the P2 region of the ARHI promoter and
regulate its activity. Sequence analysis and oligonucleotide competition in
electrophoretic mobility shift assays identified an A2 fragment containing an
E2F-binding site. Using specific antibodies in supershift assays, we have shown
that anti-E2F1 and 4 antibodies can supershift the A2-protein complexes, whereas 
anti-E2F2 and 6 antibodies cannot, demonstrating that the A2 fragment interacts
with specific members of the E2F family proteins. When compared with normal
breast epithelial cells, breast cancer cells have significantly elevated
expression of E2F1, 4 and increased E2F DNA-binding activity. Moreover, chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that both E2F1 and 4 bind to the ARHI
promoter in breast cancer cells in vivo. This binding was reduced when the cells 
were treated with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor--trichostatin A (TSA).
When SKBr3 cells were cotransfected with an ARHI/luciferase reporter and
E2F-expression vectors, E2F1 and 4 reduced ARHI promoter activity 2-3-fold, and
this reduction could be reversed by TSA treatment. The negative regulation by
E2F-HDAC complexes could also be reduced by small interfering RNA of E2F1 and 4. 
While the retinoblastoma protein, pRB, alone had no effect on ARHI promoter
activity, repression by E2F1, but not E2F4, was enhanced by the coexpression of
pRB. Taken together, our results suggest that E2F1, 4 and their complexes with
HDAC play an important role in downregulating the expression of the tumor
suppressor gene ARHI in breast cancer cells.

PMID: 16158053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2006 Jan;290(1):C189-99. Epub 2005 Aug 17.

Activating E2Fs mediate transcriptional regulation of human E2F6 repressor.

Lyons TE(1), Salih M, Tuana BS.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Univ. of
Ottawa, 451 Smyth Rd., Ottawa, ON, Canada K1H 8M5.

E2F6 is believed to repress E2F-responsive genes and therefore serve a role in
cell cycle regulation. Analysis of the human E2F6 promoter region revealed the
presence of two putative E2F binding sites, both of which were found to be
functionally critical because deletion or mutations of these sites abolished
promoter activity. Ectopic expression of E2F1 protein was found to increase E2F6 
mRNA levels and significantly upregulate E2F6 promoter activity. Deletion or
mutation of the putative E2F binding sites nullified the effects of E2F1 on the
E2F6 promoter activity. Studies on the temporal induction of E2F family members
demonstrated that the activating E2Fs, and most notably E2F1, were upregulated
before E2F6 during cell cycle progression at the G1/S phase, and this coincided
with the time course of induction experienced by the E2F6 promoter during the
course of the cell cycle. EMSAs indicated the specific binding of nuclear
complexes to the E2F6 promoter that contained E2F1-related species whose binding 
was specifically competed by the consensus E2F binding site. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays with anti-E2Fs demonstrated the association of E2F
family members with the E2F6 promoter in vivo. These data indicate that the
expression of the E2F6 repressor is influenced at the transcriptional level by
E2F family members and suggest that interplay among these transcriptional
regulators, especially E2F1, may be critical for cell cycle regulation.

PMID: 16107498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 19;280(33):29625-36. Epub 2005 Jun 28.

H19 mRNA-like noncoding RNA promotes breast cancer cell proliferation through
positive control by E2F1.

Berteaux N(1), Lottin S, Monté D, Pinte S, Quatannens B, Coll J, Hondermarck H,
Curgy JJ, Dugimont T, Adriaenssens E.

Author information: 
(1)ERI-8 INSERM Signalisation des Facteurs de Croissance dans le Cancer du Sein, 
Protéomique Fonctionnelle, UPRES-EA 1033, IFR 118, Université des Sciences et
Technologies de Lille (USTL), Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.

The imprinted H19 gene has riboregulatory functions. We show here that H19
transcription is up-regulated during the S-phase of growth-stimulated cells and
that the H19 promoter is activated by E2F1 in breast cancer cells. H19 repression
by pRb and E2F6 confirms the E2F1-dependent control of the H19 promoter.
Consistently, we demonstrate by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays that
endogenous E2F1 is recruited to the H19 promoter in vivo. The functionality of
E2F promoter sites was further confirmed by gel shift and mutagenesis
experiments, revealing that these sites are required for binding and promoter
response to E2F1 exogenous expression and serum stimulation. Furthermore, we show
that H19 overexpression confers a growth advantage on breast cancer cells
released from growth arrest as well as in asynchronously growing cells. The H19
knockdown by small interfering RNA duplexes impedes S-phase entry in both
wild-type and stably H19-transfected cells. Based on these findings, we conclude 
that the H19 RNA is actively linked to E2F1 to promote cell cycle progression of 
breast cancer cells. This clearly supports the H19 oncogenic function in breast
tumor genesis.

PMID: 15985428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Curr Biol. 2005 Jun 7;15(11):1051-7.

A role for E2F6 in the restriction of male-germ-cell-specific gene expression.

Pohlers M(1), Truss M, Frede U, Scholz A, Strehle M, Kuban RJ, Hoffmann B, Morkel
M, Birchmeier C, Hagemeier C.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Laboratory for Molecular Biology, Charité-CCM, Humboldt
University, Ziegelstrasse 5-9, D-10098 Berlin, Germany.

E2F transcription factors play a pivotal role in the regulation of cellular
proliferation and can be subdivided into activating and repressing family members
[1]. Like other E2Fs, E2F6 binds to E2F consensus sites, but in contrast to
E2F1-5, it lacks an Rb binding domain and functions as an Rb-independent
transcriptional repressor [2, 3, 4 and 5]. Instead, E2F6 has been shown to
complex with Polycomb (PcG) group proteins [6 and 7], which have a
well-established role in gene silencing. Here, we show that E2F6 plays an
unexpected and essential role in the tissue specificity of gene expression.
E2F6-deficient mice ubiquitously express the alpha-tubulin 3 and 7 genes, which
are expressed strictly testis-specifically in control mice. Like an additional
E2F6 target gene, Tex12, that we identified, tubulin 3 and 7 are normally
expressed in male germ cells only. The promoters of the alpha-tubulin and Tex12
genes share a perfectly conserved E2F site, which E2F6 binds to. Mechanistically,
E2F6-mediated repression involves CpG hypermethylation locking target promoters
in an inactive state. Thus, E2F6 is essential for the long-term somatic silencing
of certain male-germ-cell-specific genes, but it is dispensable for cell-cycle
regulation.

PMID: 15936277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 May 10;102(19):6907-12. Epub 2005 Apr 29.

The THAP domain of THAP1 is a large C2CH module with zinc-dependent
sequence-specific DNA-binding activity.

Clouaire T(1), Roussigne M, Ecochard V, Mathe C, Amalric F, Girard JP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Vasculaire, Equipe Labellisée La Ligue 2003, Institut 
de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 5089, 205 Route de Narbonne, 31077
Toulouse, France.

We have recently described an evolutionarily conserved protein motif, designated 
the THAP domain, which defines a previously uncharacterized family of cellular
factors (THAP proteins). The THAP domain exhibits similarities to the
site-specific DNA-binding domain of Drosophila P element transposase, including a
putative metal-coordinating C2CH signature (CX(2-4)CX(35-53)CX(2)H). In this
article, we report a comprehensive list of approximately 100 distinct THAP
proteins in model animal organisms, including human nuclear proapoptotic factors 
THAP1 and DAP4/THAP0, transcriptional repressor THAP7, zebrafish orthologue of
cell cycle regulator E2F6, and Caenorhabditis elegans chromatin-associated
protein HIM-17 and cell-cycle regulators LIN-36 and LIN-15B. In addition, we
demonstrate the biochemical function of the THAP domain as a zinc-dependent
sequence-specific DNA-binding domain belonging to the zinc-finger superfamily. In
vitro binding-site selection allowed us to identify an 11-nucleotide consensus
DNA-binding sequence specifically recognized by the THAP domain of human THAP1.
Mutations of single nucleotide positions in this sequence abrogated THAP-domain
binding. Experiments with the zinc chelator 1,10-o-phenanthroline revealed that
the THAP domain is a zinc-dependent DNA-binding domain. Site-directed mutagenesis
of single cysteine or histidine residues supported a role for the C2CH motif in
zinc coordination and DNA-binding activity. The four other conserved residues (P,
W, F, and P), which define the THAP consensus sequence, were also found to be
required for DNA binding. Together with previous genetic data obtained in C.
elegans, our results suggest that cellular THAP proteins may function as
zinc-dependent sequence-specific DNA-binding factors with roles in proliferation,
apoptosis, cell cycle, chromosome segregation, chromatin modification, and
transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC1100732
PMID: 15863623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2005 Mar;90(1):5-14.

Phenotypic characterization of BRCA1 and BRCA2 tumors based in a tissue
microarray study with 37 immunohistochemical markers.

Palacios J(1), Honrado E, Osorio A, Cazorla A, Sarrió D, Barroso A, Rodríguez S, 
Cigudosa JC, Diez O, Alonso C, Lerma E, Dopazo J, Rivas C, Benítez J.

Author information: 
(1)Breast and Gynaecological Cancer Laboratory, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Oncológicas (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

Familial breast cancers that are associated with BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline
mutations differ in both their morphological and immunohistochemical
characteristics. To further characterize the molecular difference between
genotypes, the authors evaluated the expression of 37 immunohistochemical markers
in a tissue microarray (TMA) containing cores from 20 BRCA1, 14 BRCA2, and 59
sporadic age-matched breast carcinomas. Markers analyzed included, amog others,
common markers in breast cancer, such as hormone receptors, p53 and HER2, along
with 15 molecules involved in cell cycle regulation, such as cyclins, cyclin
dependent kinases (CDK) and CDK inhibitors (CDKI), apoptosis markers, such as
BCL2 and active caspase 3, and two basal/myoepithelial markers (CK 5/6 and
P-cadherin). In addition, we analyzed the amplification of CCND1, CCNE, HER2 and 
MYC by FISH. Unsupervised cluster data analysis of both hereditary and sporadic
cases using the complete set of immunohistochemical markers demonstrated that
most BRCA1-associated carcinomas grouped in a branch of ER-, HER2-negative tumors
that expressed basal cell markers and/or p53 and had higher expression of
activated caspase 3. The cell cycle proteins associated with these tumors were
E2F6, cyclins A, B1 and E, SKP2 and Topo IIalpha. In contrast, most
BRCA2-associated carcinomas grouped in a branch composed by ER/PR/BCL2-positive
tumors with a higher expression of the cell cycle proteins cyclin D1, cyclin D3, 
p27, p16, p21, CDK4, CDK2 and CDK1. In conclusion, our study in hereditary breast
cancer tumors analyzing 37 immunohistochemical markers, define the molecular
differences between BRCA1 and BRCA2 tumors with respect to hormonal receptors,
cell cycle, apoptosis and basal cell markers.

PMID: 15770521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 6;280(18):18211-20. Epub 2005 Feb 18.

Cloning and characterization of mouse E2F8, a novel mammalian E2F family member
capable of blocking cellular proliferation.

Maiti B(1), Li J, de Bruin A, Gordon F, Timmers C, Opavsky R, Patil K, Tuttle J, 
Cleghorn W, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology
and Medical Genetics, and Department of Molecular Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The E2F transcription factor family plays a crucial and well established role in 
cell cycle progression. Deregulation of E2F activities in vivo leads to
developmental defects and cancer. Based on current evidence in the field,
mammalian E2Fs can be functionally categorized into either transcriptional
activators (E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3a) or repressors (E2F3b, E2F4, E2F5, E2F6, and
E2F7). We have identified a novel E2F family member, E2F8, which is conserved in 
mice and humans and has its counterpart in Arabidopsis thaliana (E2Ls).
Interestingly, E2F7 and E2F8 share unique structural features that distinguish
them from other mammalian E2F repressor members, including the presence of two
distinct DNA-binding domains and the absence of DP-dimerization,
retinoblastoma-binding, and transcriptional activation domains. Similar to E2F7, 
overexpression of E2F8 significantly slows down the proliferation of primary
mouse embryonic fibroblasts. These observations, together with the fact that E2F7
and E2F8 can homodimerize and are expressed in the same adult tissues, suggest
that they may have overlapping and perhaps synergistic roles in the control of
cellular proliferation.

PMID: 15722552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Genes Dev. 2004 Dec 1;18(23):2941-51.

A role for E2F6 in distinguishing G1/S- and G2/M-specific transcription.

Giangrande PH(1), Zhu W, Schlisio S, Sun X, Mori S, Gaubatz S, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Department of Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

E2F transcription factors play a critical role in the control of cell cycle
progression, regulating the expression of genes involved in DNA replication, DNA 
repair, mitosis, and cell fate. This involves both positive-acting and
negative-acting E2F proteins, the latter group including the E2F6 protein, which 
has been shown to function as an Rb-independent repressor of E2F-target gene
transcription. In an effort to better delineate the context of E2F6 function,
including the mechanisms of E2F6 functional specificity, we used chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays to assess when and with what genes E2F6 associates
during a cell cycle. We find that E2F6 associates specifically with the E2F
target genes that are activated at G1/S; this interaction occurs during S phase
of the cell cycle. In sharp contrast, E2F6 does not bind to E2F-regulated genes
activated at G2/M. In the absence of E2F6, E2F4 can bind to the G1/S-regulated
promoters and compensate for loss of E2F6 function. Indeed, inhibition of both
E2F4 and E2F6 activity results in specific derepression of these genes during S
phase. We conclude that E2F6 functions as a repressor of E2F-dependent
transcription during S phase and given the specificity for the G1/S-regulated
genes, we propose that E2F6 functions to distinguish G1/S and G2/M transcription 
during the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC534654
PMID: 15574595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):1199-208. Epub 2004 Nov 8.

A novel repressive E2F6 complex containing the polycomb group protein, EPC1, that
interacts with EZH2 in a proliferation-specific manner.

Attwooll C(1), Oddi S, Cartwright P, Prosperini E, Agger K, Steensgaard P,
Wagener C, Sardet C, Moroni MC, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Department of Experimental Oncology, Via
Ripamonti 435, Milan, 20141, Italy.

The transcriptional repressor E2F6 has been identified as a component of two
distinct polycomb group protein (PcG)-containing complexes, suggesting a
mechanism for the recruitment of repressive complexes to target sequences in DNA.
Whereas one complex is involved in the repression of classic E2F target genes in 
G0, a role for E2F6 within the cell cycle has yet to be defined. We searched for 
novel E2F6-binding proteins using a yeast two-hybrid screen and identified the
PcG protein, EPC1. We showed that, both in vitro and in vivo, E2F6, DP1, and EPC1
form a stable core complex with repressive activity. Furthermore, we identified
the proliferation-specific PcG, EZH2, as an EPC1-interacting protein. Using
affinity purification, we showed that E2F6, DP1, EPC1, EZH2, and Sin3B co-elute, 
suggesting the identification of a novel E2F6 complex that exists in vivo in both
normal and transformed human cell lines. EZH2 is required for cellular
proliferation and consistent with this, EZH2 elutes with the E2F6-EPC1 complex
only in proliferating cells. Thus we have identified a novel E2F6-PcG complex
(E2F6-EPC1) that interacts with EZH2 and may regulate genes required for cell
cycle progression.

PMID: 15536069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Nov 12;324(2):497-503.

E2F6: a member of the E2F family that does not modulate squamous differentiation.

Wong CF(1), Barnes LM, Smith L, Popa C, Serewko-Auret MM, Saunders NA.

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Pathobiology Group, Cancer Biology Programme, Centre for Immunology
and Cancer Research, University of Queensland, Princess Alexandra Hospital,
Woolloongabba, Queensland 4102, Australia.

The inhibition of E2F has been demonstrated to be important in the initiation of 
squamous differentiation by two independent manners: promotion of growth arrest
and the relief of the differentiation-suppressive properties of E2Fs. E2F6 is
reported to behave as a transcriptional repressor of the E2F family. In this
study, we examined the ability of E2F6 to act as the molecular switch required
for E2F inhibition in order for keratinocytes to enter a terminal differentiation
programme. Results demonstrated that whilst E2F6 was able to suppress E2F
activity in proliferating keratinocytes, it did not modulate squamous
differentiation in a differentiated keratinocyte. Furthermore, inhibition of E2F,
by overexpressing E2F6, was not sufficient to sensitise either proliferating
keratinocytes or the squamous cell carcinoma cell line, KJD-1/SV40, to
differentiation-inducing agents. Significantly, although E2F6 could suppress E2F 
activity in proliferating cells, it could not inhibit proliferation of KJD-1/SV40
cells. These results demonstrate that E2F6 does not contain the domains required 
for modulation of squamous differentiation and imply isoform-specific functions
for individual E2F family members.

PMID: 15474455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Pathol. 2004 Dec;204(5):528-37.

Abnormal PcG protein expression in Hodgkin's lymphoma. Relation with E2F6 and
NFkappaB transcription factors.

Sánchez-Beato M(1), Sánchez E, García JF, Pérez-Rosado A, Montoya MC, Fraga M,
Artiga MJ, Navarrete M, Abraira V, Morente M, Esteller M, Koseki H, Vidal M,
Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Programme, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas 
(CNIO), C/Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, E-28029 Madrid, Spain. msbeato@cnio.es

The Polycomb group (PcG) of proteins comprises a family of repressors of homeobox
genes that play key roles in body formation, haematopoiesis and cell cycle
control. In this study, a large-scale analysis of PcG protein expression (BMI1,
MEL18, PH1, RNF2, RING1, and RYBP) was performed in 321 Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL)
biopsies and in reactive lymphoid tissues using tissue microarrays. The relevance
of PcG proteins in HL was also investigated by the simultaneous analysis of PcG
and other proteins involved in the control of cell cycle, transcription machinery
and lymphoid differentiation. The analysis revealed increased expression of a set
of PcG proteins (particularly RYBP and BMI1) in tumour cells in comparison with
reactive lymphoid tissue. One of the most striking findings was anomalous RYBP
expression in 55% of classical HL cases associated with an unfavourable response 
to treatment and shorter survival. The data obtained in this study also show an
association of PcG proteins with E2F6 and NFkappaB transcription factors. The
statistical relationship between PcG and NFkappaB activation was further explored
in HL-derived cell lines treated with curcumin, an NFkappaB inhibitor, and
TNFalpha. Up- or downregulation of MEL18 was paralleled by loss or gain of
activated NFkappaB, which suggests that NFkappaB may regulate expression of this 
protein. Investigation of the relationship between E2F6 and RING1 by
immunofluorescence and confocal analysis, in HL cell lines and paraffin sections,
revealed co-expression of both proteins in the same tumour cells. These results
allow us to propose that the formation of transcription complexes with E2F6 may
modify the functional status of PcG proteins in HSR cells.

Copyright (c) 2004 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published
by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 15470680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Br J Neurosurg. 2004 Jun;18(3):300-3.

Problematic differential diagnosis between cerebellar liponeurocytoma and
anaplastic oligodendroglioma.

Valéry CA(1), Sakka LJ, Poirier J.

Author information: 
(1)Services de Neurochirurgie, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
charles.valery@psl.ap-hop-paris.fr

A cerebellar tumour, first diagnosed as an anaplastic oligodendroglioma, received
radiation therapy (45 Gy) following gross total resection. The second
histological study revealed a liponeurocytoma, a benign tumour not requiring
adjuvant therapy. This case emphasizes the importance of considering this
diagnosis to prevent unnecessary irradiation of such rumours.

PMID: 15327238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Biochem J. 2004 Nov 1;383(Pt. 3):529-36.

The NRF-1/alpha-PAL transcription factor regulates human E2F6 promoter activity.

Kherrouche Z(1), De Launoit Y, Monte D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8117, Institut de Biologie de Lille, 1 rue Calmette, BP 447, 59021
Lille, France.

E2F6 is widely expressed in human tissues and cell lines. Recent studies have
demonstrated its involvement in developmental patterning and in the regulation of
various genes implicated in chromatin remodelling. Despite a growing number of
studies, nothing is really known concerning the E2F6 expression regulation. To
understand how cells control E2F6 expression, we analysed the activity of the
previously cloned promoter region of the human E2F6 gene. DNase I footprinting,
gel electrophoreticmobility shift, transient transfection and site-directed
mutagenesis experiments allowed the identification of two functional
NRF-1/alpha-PAL (nuclear respiratory factor-1/alpha-palindrome-binding
protein)-binding sites within the human E2F6 core promoter region, which are
conserved in the mouse and rat E2F6 promoter region. Moreover, ChIP (chromatin
immunoprecipitation) analysis demonstrated that overexpressed NRF-1/alpha-PAL is 
associated in vivo with the E2F6 promoter. Furthermore, overexpression of
full-length NRF-1/alpha-PAL enhanced E2F6 promoter activity, whereas expression
of its dominant-negative form reduced the promoter activity. Our results indicate
that NRF-1/alpha-PAL is implicated in the regulation of basal E2F6 gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC1133746
PMID: 15257658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 May 7;317(3):749-60.

Human E2F6 is alternatively spliced to generate multiple protein isoforms.

Kherrouche Z(1), De Launoit Y, Monté D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8117, Institut de Biologie de Lille, 1 rue Calmette, BP 447, 59021
Lille, France.

E2F6 protein belongs to the family of the E2F transcription factors. Here, we
showed that the human E2F6 gene contains nine exons distributed along 20.4kbp of 
genomic DNA on chromosome 2 leading to the transcription of six alternatively
spliced E2F6 mRNAs that encode four different E2F6 proteins. Moreover, we
identified an E2F6 pseudogene localized on chromosome 22 completely spliced and
devoid of exons 2, 3, and 4, and part of exons 1 and 5. Definition of the
transcriptional initiation site and sequence analysis show that the gene contains
a TATA less, CAAT less, GC-rich promoter with multiple transcription start sites.
Regulatory elements necessary for basal transcription reside within a 134bp
fragment as determined by transient transfection experiments.

PMID: 15081404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Proteomics. 2004 Apr;4(4):995-1006.

Transforming growth factor-beta1-regulated proteins in human endothelial cells
identified by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry.

Lomnytska M(1), Lukiyanchuk V, Hellman U, Souchelnytskyi S.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Uppsala, Sweden.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta) is a potent regulator of angiogenesis
affecting proliferation, differentiation and migration of endothelial cells. The 
effect of TGFbeta on endothelial cells depends on the origin of the cells and on 
the experimental conditions. Global analysis of TGFbeta signalling is expected to
unveil mechanisms of this variability and identify novel targets of the growth
factor. Here, we report proteome profiling of human microvascular endothelial
cells obtained from dermis, which were treated with TGFbeta1 and compared to
nontreated cells. We identified 54 proteins affected by TGFbeta1 using
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and peptide mass fingerprinting. Thirteen of 
the identified proteins are involved in various signalling processes. Seven
proteins are involved in cytoskeleton rearrangements and six are involved in
regulation of metabolism. Ten proteins were identical to predicted hypothetical
proteins with no assigned functions. In agreement with the effect of TGFbeta1 on 
components of the cytoskeleton, TGFbeta1 induces actin cytoskeleton
rearrangements. TGFbeta1 also affected expression of E2F6, p57Kip2, G(q)alpha,
hnRNP A1 and myosin light chain proteins as shown by immunoblotting.
Down-regulation of the transcriptional repressor E2F6 by TGFbeta1 correlated with
a weak growth-inhibitory activity of TGFbeta1 on HMVEC-d cells. Twenty-five of
the identified proteins have not previously been described as being regulated by 
TGFbeta1, providing new insights into TGFbeta1 signalling in endothelial cells.

PMID: 15048981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Brain Pathol. 2003 Oct;13(4):643-5.

June 2003: 33-year-old male with a frontal lobe mass.

Iezza G(1), Loh C, Lanman TH, Yong WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (Neuropathology), Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center and UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, Calif, USA.

The June 2003 COM. A 33-year-old male with a history of seizures was found to
have an intra- and extra-axial frontal lobe mass. The histology of the resected
tumor showed a meningioma with underlying meningioangiomatosis.
Meningioangiomatosis (MA) is a benign intracortical plaque-like proliferation of 
meningothelial cells, microvasculature and fibroblast-like cells probably of
hamartomatous origin. Very rarely, MA is associated with an overlying meningioma 
as in this case. When MA is accompanied by a meningioma, it is generally not
associated with clinical evidence of neurofibromatosis. It is important to
distinguish MA from an invasive meningioma, because of its favorable prognosis
after resection.

PMID: 14655769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Cutan Pathol. 2003 Oct;30(9):577-81.

Cutaneous sclerosing perineurioma of the digits: an uncommon soft-tissue
neoplasm. Report of two cases with immunohistochemical analysis.

Canales-Ibarra C(1), Magariños G, Olsoff-Pagovich P, Ortiz-Hidalgo C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The American British Cowdray Hospital, Mexico City,
Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Cutaneous sclerosing perineurioma is a recently characterized,
uncommon tumor composed of perineurial cells, which exhibits immunoreactivity for
epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). These lesions occur preferentially in children
and young adults and usually develop as dermal or subcutaneous nodules in the
hands or palms.
METHODS: We report two cases of cutaneous sclerosing perineurioma in young
patients without stigmata of neurofibromatosis. Histologically, these lesions
were well-circumscribed masses and were characterized by a variable number of
epithelioid and spindle cells with wavy nuclei end elongated cytoplasmic
processes embedded in a dense collagen stroma.
RESULTS: These cells showed focal whorling formation, demonstrated robust
immunoreactivity for EMA and CD99, and were uniformly negative for S-100 protein,
actin (HHF-35), CD34, cytokeratin AE1-3, and CD57.
CONCLUSION: We comment on the differential diagnosis of fibrous cutaneous lesions
based on immunohistochemistry.

PMID: 14507408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 24;278(43):42466-76. Epub 2003 Aug 8.

E2F6 negatively regulates BRCA1 in human cancer cells without methylation of
histone H3 on lysine 9.

Oberley MJ(1), Inman DR, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, 1400 University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

E2F6 contains a DNA binding domain that is very similar to that of the other
members of the E2F family of transcriptional regulators. However, E2F6 cannot
bind to all promoters that contain consensus E2F-binding sites. Therefore, we
used a combination of chromatin immunoprecipitation and genomic microarrays to
identify promoters bound by E2F6 in human cells. Although most of the identified 
promoters were bound by multiple E2F family members, one promoter was bound only 
by E2F6. To determine which of the newly identified promoters were regulated by
E2F6, we reduced the level of E2F6 by using RNA interference technology. We found
that mRNA transcribed from promoters bound by E2F6 was increased after reduction 
of the amount of E2F6 protein in the cell. Interestingly, many of the
E2F6-regulated genes encoded functions involved in tumor suppression and the
maintenance of chromatin structure. Specifically, our results suggest that E2F6
represses transcription of the brca1, ctip, art27, hp1alpha, and the rbap48
genes. E2F6 has been postulated to mediate transcriptional repression by
recruiting a histone H3 methyltransferase to the DNA. However, we found that the 
E2F6-regulated promoters did not contain histone H3 methylated at lysine 9. To
determine the mechanism by which E2F6 regulates transcription, we performed
chromatin immunoprecipitation before and after the introduction of small
inhibitory ribonucleic acids specific to E2F6. We found that depletion of E2F6
resulted in the recruitment of E2F1 to the target promoters. In summary, we have 
identified 48 endogenous target genes of E2F6 and have shown that E2F6 can
repress target promoters in a manner that does not require histone H3 methylation
at lysine 9.

PMID: 12909625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 15;278(33):30435-40. Epub 2003 May 27.

Dynamic recruitment of NF-Y and histone acetyltransferases on cell-cycle
promoters.

Caretti G(1), Salsi V, Vecchi C, Imbriano C, Mantovani R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Animale, Università di Modena e Reggio, Via Campi
213/d, 41100 Modena, Italy.

Regulation of transcription during the cell-cycle is under the control of E2
factors (E2Fs), often in cooperation with nuclear factor Y (NF-Y), a histone-like
CCAAT-binding trimer. NF-Y is paradigmatic of a constitutive, ubiquitous factor
that pre-sets the promoter architecture for other regulatory proteins to access
it. We analyzed the recruitment of NF-Y, E2F1/4/6, histone acetyltransferases,
and histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1/3/4 to several cell-cycle promoters by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays in serum-starved and restimulated NIH3T3 cells. NF-Y
binding is not constitutive but timely regulated in all promoters tested, being
displaced when promoters are repressed. p300 association correlates with
activation, and it is never found in the absence of NF-Y, whereas PCAF/hGCN5 is
often found before NF-Y association. E2F4 and E2F6, together with HDACs, are
bound to repressed promoters, including the G2/M Cyclin B2. As expected, an
inverse relationship between HDACs association and histones H3/H4 acetylation is 
observed. Blocking cells in G1 with the cyclin-dependent kinase 2 inhibitor
R-roscovitine confirms that NF-Y is bound to G1/S but not to G2/M promoters in
G1. These data indicate that following the release of E2Fs/HDACs, a hierarchy of 
PCAF-NF-Y-p300 interactions and H3-H4 acetylations are required for activation of
cell-cycle promoters.

PMID: 12771133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mod Pathol. 2003 Apr;16(4):293-8.

Immunohistochemical demonstration of EMA/Glut1-positive perineurial cells and
CD34-positive fibroblastic cells in peripheral nerve sheath tumors.

Hirose T(1), Tani T, Shimada T, Ishizawa K, Shimada S, Sano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Saitama Medical School, Saitama, Japan.
thirose@saitma

To clarify the cellular composition of various peripheral nerve tumorous lesions 
(traumatic neuroma, 5 cases; schwannoma, 10 cases; neurofibroma, 14 cases;
perineurioma, 3 cases; conventional malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
(MPNST), 7 cases; perineurial MPNST, 4 cases), expression of several markers
specific to nerve sheath cells, including glucose transporter protein 1 (Glut1)
and CD34, were immunohistochemically investigated with highly sensitive detection
methods. In normal nerves and neuromas, perineuriums were positive for Glut1 as
well as for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), and there were some CD34-positive 
fibroblast-like cells in the endoneurium. Schwannomas consisted principally of
S-100 protein-positive Schwann cells, whereas a few CD34-positive fibroblastic
cells were present in Antoni B areas. Neurofibromas and conventional MPNST
exhibited a mixed proliferation of S-100 protein-, EMA/Glut1-, and CD34-positive 
cells, indicating a heterogeneous composition of the constituents. The catalyzed 
signal amplification (CSA) system demonstrated more numerous EMA-positive
perineurial cells in neurofibromas than did the ENVISION+ method. Perineurial
cell tumors (benign and malignant) were composed of EMA/Glut1-positive and S-100 
protein-negative tumor cells. The present study confirmed the characteristic
cellular composition to each nerve sheath tumor immunohistochemically and showed 
the usefulness of the nerve sheath cell markers. Glut1 as well as EMA are
specific to perineurial cells, and CD34 seems to be immunoreactive to endoneurial
fibroblasts.

PMID: 12692193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2003 Mar-Apr;6(2):137-41. Epub 2003 Jan 28.

Soft tissue perineuriomas in children: report of three cases and review of the
literature [corrected].

Balarezo FS(1), Muller RC, Weiss RG, Brown T, Knibbs D, Joshi VV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hartford Hospital, 80 Seymour Street, Hartford, CT
06102, USA. fbalare@harthosp.org

Erratum in
    Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2003 Jul-Aug;6(4):following 364.

Perineuriomas (PN) are uncommon, slowly growing, usually benign tumors composed
of well-differentiated perineural cells. Two variants are recognized: intraneural
perineuriomas and soft tissue perineurioma, which includes a sclerosing subset of
tumors. They are usually reported in the adult population. We present three cases
of soft tissue perineuriomas in children. One was located in the deep soft tissue
of the retroperitoneum in a 14-year-old girl, the second one in the left thumb of
a 14-year-old boy, and the third one in the index finger of a 16-year-old boy.
This report, which describes the clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and
ultrastructural features of these tumors, should alert pathologists to the
occurrence of perineuriomas in children. A review of the English language
literature on perineuriomas in children is also included.

PMID: 12545405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Oct;269(20):5030-6.

Two different E2F6 proteins generated by alternative splicing and internal
translation initiation.

Dahme T(1), Wood J, Livingston DM, Gaubatz S.

Author information: 
(1)Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

E2F transcription factors play an important role in the regulation of cell cycle 
progression. E2F6, the most recently identified member of the E2F family, is a
retinoblastoma-protein-independent transcriptional repressor that is required for
developmental patterning of the axial skeleton. It has recently been shown that
the E2f6 locus produces two different mRNAs, E2F6 and E2F6b. The E2F6b mRNA
contains an additional exon that is inserted by alternative splicing. This exon
contains an in-frame stop-codon and an in-frame translation initiation codon.
However, whether a protein is translated from the E2F6b mRNA has not yet been
addressed. We now show that internal translation initiation gives rise to E2F6b, 
an amino-terminal truncated E2F6 protein. We also show that E2F6 and E2F6b mRNAs 
are ubiquitously expressed in primary mouse tissues. During the cell cycle, the
highest expression of both forms is found at the G1 to S transition. The 5'
untranslated regions of E2F6 and E2F6b are unusually long, and they contain
several upstream AUG codons followed by short reading frames. Our results suggest
that translation of E2F6b is initiated by internal ribosome entry. We propose
that regulated translation initiation can produce distinct E2F6 isoforms under
different physiological conditions.

PMID: 12383262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Histopathology. 2002 Sep;41(3):273.

Capsular vascular proliferation associated with thyroid paraganglioma.

Vodovnik A.

Comment on
    Histopathology. 2001 Nov;39(5):463-8.

PMID: 12207792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. APMIS. 2002 Jun;110(6):447-50.

Lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma of the breast.

Pestereli HE(1), Erdogan O, Kaya R, Karaveli FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Akdeniz University, School of Medicine, Antalya,
Turkey. epestereli@superonline.com

Lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma (LELC) of the breast is a rare, newly recognized
subtype of breast carcinoma. Distinction from medullary carcinoma is important
because of the difference in biologic behavior of these two neoplasms and LELC of
the breast is regarded as an unusual form of lobular carcinoma. We present the
case of a 56-year-old female with a breast mass measuring 2 cm in diameter, which
was diagnosed as invasive lobular carcinoma with LELC pattern. This is the ninth 
case reported in the English literature and to the best of our knowledge the
first one with lymph node metastasis.

PMID: 12193205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. EMBO Rep. 2002 Jul;3(7):695-700.

Homeotic transformations of the axial skeleton that accompany a targeted deletion
of E2f6.

Storre J(1), Elsässer HP, Fuchs M, Ullmann D, Livingston DM, Gaubatz S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut for Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Philipps-University
Marburg, Germany.

E2F transcription factors play an important role in regulating mammalian cell
proliferation. E2F6, the most recently identified E2F family member, is a
transcriptional repressor. In an effort to ascertain the in vivo biological
function of E2F6, we have generated an E2f6 mutant mouse strain. Mice lacking
E2F6 are viable and healthy. Surprisingly, E2f6-/- embryonic fibroblasts
proliferate normally. However, E2f6-/- animals display overt homeotic
transformations of the axial skeleton that are strikingly similar to the skeletal
transformations observed in polycomb mutant mice. This observation is compatible 
with the recent finding that endogenous E2F6 and one or more mammalian polycomb
proteins are components of the same multiprotein complex. The accumulated
evidence suggests that, during development, E2F6 participates in the recruitment 
of polycomb proteins to specific target promoters.

PMCID: PMC1084195
PMID: 12101104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Science. 2002 May 10;296(5570):1132-6.

A complex with chromatin modifiers that occupies E2F- and Myc-responsive genes in
G0 cells.

Ogawa H(1), Ishiguro K, Gaubatz S, Livingston DM, Nakatani Y.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2002 May 10;296(5570):1034-5.

E2F-6 contributes to gene silencing in a manner independent of retinoblastoma
protein family members. To better elucidate the molecular mechanism of repression
by E2F-6, we have purified the factor from cultured cells. E2F-6 is found in a
multimeric protein complex that contains Mga and Max, and thus the complex can
bind not only to the E2F-binding site but also to Myc- and Brachyury-binding
sites. Moreover, the complex contains chromatin modifiers such as a novel histone
methyltransferase that modifies lysine 9 of histone H3, HP1gamma, and Polycomb
group (PcG) proteins. The E2F-6 complex preferentially occupies target promoters 
in G0 cells rather than in G1 cells. These data suggest that these chromatin
modifiers contribute to silencing of E2F- and Myc-responsive genes in quiescent
cells.

PMID: 12004135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Science. 2002 May 10;296(5570):1034-5.

Transcription. Chromatin control--a place for E2F and Myc to meet.

La Thangue NB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical and
Life Sciences, Davidson Building, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.
n.lathangue@bio.gla.ac.uk

Comment on
    Science. 2002 May 10;296(5570):1132-6.

PMID: 12004105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jan;3(1):11-20.

Sibling rivalry in the E2F family.

Trimarchi JM(1), Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77
Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

The E2F transcription factor family determines whether or not a cell will divide 
by controlling the expression of key cell-cycle regulators. The individual E2Fs
can be divided into distinct subgroups that act in direct opposition to one
another to promote either cellular proliferation or cell-cycle exit and terminal 
differentiation. What is the underlying molecular basis of this
'push-me-pull-you' regulation, and what are its biological consequences?

PMID: 11823794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2000 Sep;22(5):403-5.

[Clinicopathologic criteria for the diagnosis of extranodal anaplastic large-cell
lymphoma: a preliminary study].

[Article in Chinese]

Ji T(1), Yao L, Deng B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fuzhou General Hospital of PLA, Fuzhou 350025, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study and observe the clinicopathologic features of extranodal Ki-1
(CD30) positive anaplastic large-cell lymphoma (ALCL) in order to assess its
diagnostic criteria.
METHODS: Lymph nodes of 12 patients with Ki-1 positive ALCL were examined
histopathologically and immunohistochemically.
RESULTS: There were distinctive histopathological features of ALCL cells.
Immunohistochemical staining revealed that all of the ALCL were Ki-1 positive
(CD30 or Ber-H2). Of them, 5 cases were leucocyte common antigen (LCA) and
epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) positive, 2 cases were LCA negative and EMA
positive, 1 case was LCA positive and EMA negative, and the other 4 cases were
both negative. Seven cases (58.3%) showed B cell markers, 2 cases (16.7%) showed 
T cell markers and remaining 3 cases had neither T nor B markers.
CONCLUSION: Extranodal Ki-1 (CD30) positive ALCL has distinctive histopathologic 
and immunohistochemical features which help its differential diagnosis.

PMID: 11778279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Digestion. 2001;64(2):87-91.

Screening for autoantibodies to tissue transglutaminase reveals a low prevalence 
of celiac disease in blood donors with cryptogenic hypertransaminasemia.

Soresi M(1), Amplo M, Agliastro R, Sesti R, Di Giovanni G, Magliarisi C,
Belvedere M, Carroccio A, Montalto G.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Medicina Interna, Università di Palermo, Palermo, Italia.

Patients with chronic cryptogenic hypertransaminasemia are at high risk of
developing celiac disease (CD). In fact, among the various serological disorders,
CD patients at onset frequently present hypertransaminasemia. In this study, we
evaluated usefulness and reliability of the new test for antitissue
transglutaminase (tTG) in screening for CD as well as in estimating the
prevalence of CD in a population of blood donors presenting unexplained
hypertransaminasemia at donation. Controls were 180 consecutive healthy donors
without hypertransaminasemia and 20 CD patients with known antiendomysial
antibody (EmA) positivity. Out of 22,204 blood donors over a period of 2 years,
we found 258 subjects (1.2%) with cryptogenic hypertransaminasemia. Four of these
subjects (1.5%) were positive for anti-tTG, but only 3 of them were positive for 
EmA. EmA were negative in all the remaining hypertransaminasemia subjects. In the
control groups, anti-tTG antibodies were negative in all the 180 healthy donors
without hypertransaminasemia, but positive in all the CD patients known to be EmA
positive. 3 of the 4 subjects positive for anti-tTG, including 2 who were also
EmA positive, underwent biopsy of the distal duodenal mucosa which showed a
picture compatible with CD only in the 2 patients with concomitant EmA
positivity. After 3 months of gluten-free diet, the serum transaminase values
normalized in these 2 patients. In conclusion, the prevalence of CD in our blood 
bank population was lower than that reported in other similar studies, but the
new test for anti-tTG showed a good sensitivity and reliability, and, therefore, 
it can be proposed as a first-level test in screening for CD in selected
populations such as subjects with hypertransaminasemia.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11684821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Plant Mol Biol. 2001 Nov;47(4):555-68.

Arabidopsis E2F1 binds a sequence present in the promoter of S-phase-regulated
gene AtCDC6 and is a member of a multigene family with differential activities.

de Jager SM(1), Menges M, Bauer UM, Murra JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Cambridge, UK.

Mammalian E2F transcription factors are composed of E2F and DP subunits, and with
their negative regulators, Rb-related proteins, govern expression of
cell-division-related genes. Six E2Fs and two DPs are present in mammals, but
only single E2F genes are known from wheat, tobacco and carrot. Here we show that
E2Fs are a multigene family in Arabidopsis, and report isolation of three
E2F-like clones AtE2F1-3, with 45-62% identity to wheat, tobacco and carrot E2Fs.
Sequence analysis reveals that AtE2F1 and AtE2F3 are closely related to
previously identified plant E2Fs, whereas AtE2F2 is related to human E2F6 and
Drosophila dE2F2 which are unusual in lacking transcriptional activation
potential. Consistent with this, we show that AtE2FI and AtE2F3 activate
transcription in yeast cells and bind a plant Rb protein, but AtE2F2 cannot
activate transcription or bind Rb. Consensus E2F-binding sites were identified in
promoters of several cell cycle related genes, including the D-type cyclin CycD3 
and the Arabidopsis homologue of the replication origin protein CDC6.
Accumulation of AtE2F1-3 was observed in partially synchronised Arabidopsis cells
re-entering the cell cycle, before induction of CycD3 and CDC6 expression in late
G1. AtE2F1 complexes bound to consensus E2F sequences and to the AtCDC6 promoter 
in vitro. We conclude that Arabidopsis contains a family of functionally distinct
E2F genes, most probably involved in the G1-to-S phase progression.

PMID: 11669580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Oct 19;288(1):22-33.

Molecular cloning and characterization of the mouse E2F6 gene.

Kherrouche Z(1), Begue A, Stehelin D, Monté D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie de Lille, UMR 8526 CNRS/Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 rue 
Calmette, 59021 Lille Cedex, France.

E2F6 is the most recently identified member of the E2F family. In this study, the
murine E2F6 gene was cloned and found to consist of eight exons. Analysis of its 
5' flanking region revealed two transcription start sites. The proximal promoter 
region contained no TATA or CAAT box. We also identified a novel E2F6 mRNA
containing the alternative exon 2. The E2F6 mRNAs are highly expressed during
mouse embryogenesis and are present in all adult tissues examined. Moreover, E2F6
shows a unique expression pattern in synchronized mouse embryonic fibroblasts.
E2F6 expression rapidly increases during the G0-G1 transition, reaching its
higher level in mid-G1, and remains relatively constant thereafter. These
findings suggest that E2F6 may contribute to the regulation of events throughout 
the cell cycle. Isolation of the murine E2F6 gene is a step toward generation of 
genetically modified mouse models that will help to understand the functions of
E2F6.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11594747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2001 Jul-Aug;4(4):397-401.

Neutrophil-rich anaplastic large cell lymphoma of the skull presenting after head
trauma.

Parker JR(1), López-Terrada D, Gresik MV, Vogel H, Baumgartner JE, Finegold MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The presentation of anaplastic large cell lymphoma in bone is uncommon. We report
a case of anaplastic large cell lymphoma of the skull that was diagnosed after
head trauma. Biopsy revealed significant destruction of the outer table of the
frontal bone. Histopathologically, the initial evaluation suggested osteomyelitis
because of a mixed inflammatory infiltrate with large numbers of neutrophils.
However, several clusters and individual mononuclear cells were atypical. The
tumor cells had large, pleomorphic nuclei; these cells stained positively with
antibodies to Ki-1 (CD 30), ALK-1, and EMA. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) showed rearrangement of the ALK gene, which usually results from the
t(2;5) translocation, present in most anaplastic large cell lymphomas. There was 
no evidence of systemic disease. The patient has tolerated chemotherapy and is
free of disease 12 months later.

PMID: 11441342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2001 Jun;13(6):667-71.

Adult endomysial antibody-negative coeliac disease and cigarette smoking.

Prasad S(1), Thomas P, Nicholas DS, Sharer NM, Snook JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Poole Hospital NHS Trust, Dorset, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the relative incidence and characteristics of endomysial 
antibody (EMA)-negative coeliac disease in adults.
DESIGN: Retrospective analysis of prospectively collected data on adults with
newly diagnosed coeliac disease, with determination of EMA status before gluten
withdrawal.
SETTING: District general hospital (secondary care institution).
PARTICIPANTS: Sixty consecutive incident cases.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: (i) Proportion of cases who were EMA-negative; (ii)
comparison of clinical and laboratory variables at diagnosis for EMA-positive and
EMA-negative subjects.
RESULTS: Fifteen subjects (25%, 95% CI 15-38%) were EMA negative, of whom only
two were IgA deficient. There was clinical evidence in all 15 patients and
histological evidence in 13 patients of a response to gluten withdrawal. No
significant differences were found between EMA-positive and EMA-negative subjects
with respect to histological features, age, gender, clinical manifestations,
concurrent autoimmune disorders, family history of coeliac disease, or
haemoglobin and albumin concentrations at diagnosis. However, EMA-negative status
at diagnosis was associated strongly with current or recent cigarette smoking (OR
7.0, 95% CI 1.7-31.5, P= 0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: A substantial minority of patients with otherwise typical coeliac
disease are EMA negative, and most of these are IgA replete. The value of EMA as 
a screening tool is therefore limited. EMA status in untreated coeliac disease
correlates strongly with cigarette smoking history: this may be of pathogenic
significance, given the previously demonstrated association between smoking and
the risk of coeliac disease.

PMID: 11434592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Carcinog. 2001 Jun;31(2):90-100.

Deregulated expression of DP1 induces epidermal proliferation and enhances skin
carcinogenesis.

Wang D(1), Russell J, Xu H, Johnson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park-Research Division, Smithville, Texas, USA.

E2F transcription factors have been implicated in several cellular processes,
including proliferation, apoptosis, and oncogenic transformation. A functional
E2F factor consists of a heterodimer containing an E2F polypeptide (E2F1-E2F6)
and a DRTF1-polypeptide (DRTF1-polypeptide-1 (DP1) or DRTF1-polypeptide-2). It is
the E2F subunit that supplies the transcriptional activation domain and the motif
involved in binding to members of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor family. The
role of the DP subunit in regulating E2F-dependent activities is not completely
understood. To examine the properties of DP1 in vivo, we generated transgenic
mouse lines expressing DP1 under the control of a keratin 5 (K5) promoter.
Overexpression of DP1 in basal layer keratinocytes caused mild hyperplasia and
hyperproliferation of the epidermis but did not result in increased apoptosis or 
spontaneous tumor development. Coexpression of DP1 with E2F1 or E2F4 in the
epidermis of bigenic mice modestly enhanced proliferation and apoptosis over the 
levels induced by E2F1 or E2F4 expression alone. In a two-stage chemical
carcinogenesis assay, more and larger skin tumors developed in K5 DP1 transgenic 
mice than in nontransgenic mice. These findings show that in this in vivo model, 
deregulated expression of DP1 on its own induced proliferation and enhanced
carcinogenesis.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11429786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Apr 10;98(8):4455-60. Epub 2001 Mar 27.

p19ARF targets certain E2F species for degradation.

Martelli F(1), Hamilton T, Silver DP, Sharpless NE, Bardeesy N, Rokas M, DePinho 
RA, Livingston DM, Grossman SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

p19ARF suppresses the growth of cells lacking p53 through an unknown mechanism.
p19ARF was found to complex with transcription factors E2F1, -2, and -3. Levels
of endogenous or ectopically expressed E2F1, -2, and -3, but not E2F6, were
reduced after synthesis of p19ARF, through a mechanism involving increased
turnover. p19ARF-induced degradation of E2F1 depended on a functional proteasome,
and E2F1 was relocalized to nucleoli when coexpressed with p19ARF. Consistent
with reduced levels of E2F1 and E2F3, the proliferation of cells defective for
p53 function was suppressed by p19ARF, and the effect was partially reversed by
ectopic overexpression of E2F1. These results suggest a broader role for p19ARF
as a tumor suppressor, in which targeting of certain E2F species may cooperate
with stimulation of the p53 pathway to counteract oncogenic growth signals.

PMCID: PMC31856
PMID: 11274364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Virchows Arch. 2001 Feb;438(2):198-200.

Meningeal nodules in teratoma of the testis.

Michal M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sikl's Department of Pathology, Medical Faculty Hospital, Pilsen, Czech
Republic. michal@fnplzen.cz

A case of a 52-year-old man with a mature adult teratoma is reported. Beside
histologically mature tissues, this teratoma contained large areas of a
meningiomatous proliferation in close proximity of a peripheral nerve and glial
tissue. These meningiomatous proliferations were mostly seen in the peripheral
parts of the teratoma surrounding the rest of teratomatous elements and were
immunohistochemically EMA-positive and S-100 protein- and cytokeratin-negative.
Identical meningothelial proliferations are well known in the skin and adjacent
soft tissues of the scalp, where they have variously been called sequestrated
meningoceles, meningeal hamartoma, cutaneous meningiomas, rudimentary
meningocele, hamartoma of the scalp with ectopic meningothelial elements, or
cutaneous heterotopic meningeal nodules.

PMID: 11253123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Pathol Res Pract. 2000;196(11):791-4.

Renal tubular dysgenesis-like lesions and hypocalvaria. Report of two cases
involving indomethacin.

Robin YM(1), Reynaud P, Orliaguet T, Lemery D, Vanlieferingen P, Dechelotte P.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie Pathologique, H tel Dieu BP69, Clermont Ferrand, France.

We describe a case of twins with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (TTS) who were
found to have renal tubular dysgenesis (TRD)-like lesions and hypocalvaria
attributed to indomethacin treatment of the mother for acute polyhydramnios.
History of pregnancy, postnatal clinical course, pathological findings of the
kidneys, and the skulls are presented and discussed. These findings include
incompletely differentiated proximal tubules in the kidneys and hypoplastic
calvaria in both twins. The renal tubular lesions were more marked in the donor
than in the transfused twin, probably due to the greater degree of ischemia in
that twin. This seems to be in favor of a vascular etiology of the renal defects.
However, the fact that similar renal lesions and hypocalvaria were also present
in the transfused twin seems to indicate that indomethacin played a role in their
onset. This so-called kidney-skull connection has never been reported in
conjunction with indomethacin therapy.

PMID: 11186177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 13;98(4):1519-24. Epub 2001 Jan 30.

The E2F6 transcription factor is a component of the mammalian Bmi1-containing
polycomb complex.

Trimarchi JM(1), Fairchild B, Wen J, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77
Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The E2F transcription factors play a key role in the regulation of cellular
proliferation and terminal differentiation. E2F6 is the most recently identified 
and the least well understood member of the E2F family. It is only distantly
related to the other E2Fs and lacks the sequences responsible for both
transactivation and binding to the retinoblastoma protein. Consistent with this
finding, E2F6 can behave as a dominant negative inhibitor of the other E2F family
members. In this study, we continue to investigate the possible role(s) of E2F6
in vivo. We report the isolation of RYBP, a recently identified member of the
mammalian polycomb complex, as an E2F6-interacting protein. Mapping studies
indicate that RYBP binds within the known "repression domain" of E2F6. Moreover, 
we demonstrate that endogenous E2F6 and polycomb group proteins, including RYBP, 
Ring1, MEL-18, mph1, and the oncoprotein Bmi1, associate with one another. These 
findings suggest that the biological properties of E2F6 are mediated through its 
ability to recruit the polycomb transcriptional repressor complex.

PMCID: PMC29289
PMID: 11171983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2000 Sep;15(9):1032-6.

Adult coeliac disease: prevalence and clinical significance.

Cook HB(1), Burt MJ, Collett JA, Whitehead MR, Frampton CM, Chapman BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Christchurch Hospital and Christchurch School 
of Medicine, New Zealand. bramwelc@chhlth.govt.nz

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Although coeliac disease is a common condition, the role of 
population screening is not clear. The aim of this study was to determine the
prevalence and clinical significance of coeliac disease in the adult population
of Christchurch, New Zealand.
METHODS: A total of 1064 adults randomly selected from the 1996 Christchurch
electoral rolls were enlisted. The subjects were screened for coeliac disease
using the anti-endomysial antibody test (EMA), and all those with positive tests 
were reviewed and underwent a small bowel biopsy.
RESULTS: Twelve of the 1064 persons tested (1.1%) were EMA positive and all had
small bowel biopsy histology consistent with coeliac disease. Two of the 12
subjects were previously known to be EMA positive although neither had a small
bowel biopsy. One additional subject with known and treated coeliac disease was
also enrolled but was EMA negative. Thus, the overall prevalence of coeliac
disease was 13 of 1064 subjects (1.2%, or 1:82), 10 of whom were newly diagnosed 
(0.9%, or 1:106) and three were previously known or suspected to have coeliac
disease (0.3%, or 1:355). The prevalence in both sexes was similar. Nine of the
12 EMA-positive coeliac disease subjects identified by the use of screening
reported symptoms, of which tiredness and lethargy were the most common. The
subjects were of normal stature, although females tended to be lean. None of the 
subjects were anaemic, but four were iron deficient and four folate deficient.
Five of the 12 had sustained bone fractures. Bone mineral density was reduced in 
males but not in females.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of coeliac disease in the adult population of
Christchurch, New Zealand, is 1.2%. Unrecognized coeliac disease which was
detected by population screening was three-fold more common than proven or
suspected coeliac disease. Population screening may identify subjects who could
benefit from treatment.

PMID: 11059933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Oncogene. 2000 Sep 28;19(41):4713-20.

Caspase-dependent apoptosis by ectopic expression of E2F-4.

Chang YC(1), Nakajima H, Illenye S, Lee YS, Honjo N, Makiyama T, Fujiwara I,
Mizuta N, Sawai K, Saida K, Mitsui Y, Heintz NH, Magae J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont College of Medicine, Burlington
05403, USA.

E2F is a family of transcription factors which regulates cell cycle and apoptosis
of mammalian cells. E2F-1-3 localize in the nucleus, and preferentially bind pRb,
while E2F-4 and 5 have no nuclear localization signal and preferentially bind
p107/p130. E2F-6 suppresses the transcriptional activity of other E2F proteins.
DP-1 and 2 are heterodimeric partners of each E2F protein. Using
tetracycline-responsive promoters, here we compared the effects of ectopic
expression of E2F-1, DP-1 and E2F-4 on cell cycle progression and apoptosis in
Chinese hamster cell lines. We found that E2F-4, as well as DP-1 and E2F-1,
induced growth arrest and caspase-dependent apoptosis. E2F-4 did not have a
marked effect on cell cycle progression, while E2F-1 induced DNA synthesis of
resting cells and DP-1 arrested cells in G1. Ectopic expression of E2F-4 did not 
activate E2F-dependent transcription. Our results suggest that expression of
E2F-4 at elevated levels induces growth arrest and apoptosis of mammalian cells
through a mechanism distinct from E2F-1 and DP-1.

PMID: 11032021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mech Dev. 2000 Oct;97(1-2):211-5.

E2F transcription factors are differentially expressed in murine gametes and
early embryos.

Palena A(1), Mangiacasale R, Magnano AR, Barberi L, Giordano R, Spadafora C,
Lavia P.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Genetica Evoluzionistica CNR, c/o Dipartimento di Genetica e
Biologia Molecolare, Università "La Sapienza", Via degli Apuli 4, 00185, Roma,
Italy.

We have examined the murine genes encoding transcription factors E2F1, -3, -5 and
-6 in gametes and early embryos. All genes are expressed as maternal transcripts 
and all are efficiently transcribed after the blastocyst stage. Between those two
stages, each E2F mRNA is transcribed with a distinctive and unique pattern. E2F
proteins are also differentially expressed and compartmentalized in
pre-implantation embryos.

PMID: 11025228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochem J. 2000 Oct 1;351(Pt 1):251-6.

Activity of the human cytochrome c1 promoter is modulated by E2F.

Luciakova K(1), Barath P, Li R, Zaid A, Nelson BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Arrhenius Laboratories, Stockholm University,
S-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden.

The human cytochrome c(1) promoter is strongly activated in transfected
Drosophila SL2 cells expressing exogenous human E2F1. Transfection-deletion
experiments, DNase I protection by E2F1 and gel mobility-shift experiments locate
E2F1 activation sites to two regions on either side of the transcription start
site. Deletion of either region prevents E2F1 activation in transfected SL2
cells, suggesting a co-operative interaction between them. E2F6, a member of the 
E2F family that lacks transactivation domains but contains specific suppressor
domains, inhibits cytochrome c(1) promoter activity when co-transfected into HeLa
cells, indicating that the E2F proteins modulate the cytochrome c(1) promoter in 
mammalian cells. However, E2F is not a general regulator of oxidative
phosphorylation genes since three additional nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes 
were unaffected by E2F1 or E2F6.

PMCID: PMC1221356
PMID: 10998368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Int J Dev Biol. 2000 Apr;44(3):267-77.

Expression of the E2F family of transcription factors during murine development.

Kusek JC(1), Greene RM, Nugent P, Pisano MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Craniofacial Biology, ULSD, University
of Louisville Birth Defects Center, KY 40292, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors plays a crucial role in the control of
cell cycle progression and regulation of cellular proliferation, both processes
fundamental to mammalian development. In the present study, we have examined the 
levels of expression of the six currently identified E2F proteins in murine
embryos/fetuses as a function of gestational age, compared the expression of
these six proteins in selected developing and adult tissues, and examined E2F
expression in the embryonic murine palate, a tissue in which perturbation of
proliferation is associated with induction of cleft palate. Our results indicate 
that: 1) multiple forms of individual E2F family members are present in
embryonic, fetal and adult cells/tissues; 2) each of the six E2Fs is expressed in
a tissue specific manner in both adult and embryonic/fetal organs; 3) certain
forms of individual E2F family members are preferentially detected in adult
tissues, whereas others are preferentially expressed in embryonic/fetal tissues; 
4) expression of the various E2Fs and their isoforms follows distinct temporal
patterns during murine gestation; and 5) individual E2F family members also
exhibit differential patterns of temporal expression during murine palatogenesis.

PMID: 10853823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Pol J Pathol. 2000;51(1):55-7.

Ductal sebaceoma (sebomatricoma).

Biernat W(1), Biernat S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumour Pathology, Medical University, MSW Hospital, Lódz.
biernat@psk2.am.lodz.pl

We present a case of an unusual tumour arising in the forehead of a 52-year-old
female. The tumour, diagnosed as sebaceoma (or sebomatricoma), showed
predominantly differentiation towards ductal protion of the sebaceous gland. It
was marked in tissue sections as areas of "poroid" cells and the tumour required 
differentiation from poroma. Focal areas of necrosis en masse in the present
tumour contributed further difficulties in to the differential diagnosis. As
single multivacuolar sebocytes were found and no cuticular cells could be
identified, the tumour was diagnosed as ductal sebaceoma (sebomatricoma). The
aspects of morphological distinction between sebomatricomas and poromas are
presented with its clinical implications.

PMID: 10833905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Exp Med. 2000 Mar 20;191(6):1005-16.

Deregulated E2F transcriptional activity in autonomously growing melanoma cells.

Halaban R(1), Cheng E, Smicun Y, Germino J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8059, USA. ruth.halaban@yale.edu

Inactivation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (pRb) has been
implicated in melanoma cells, but the molecular basis for this phenotype has not 
yet been elucidated, and the status of additional family members (p107 and p130, 
together termed pocket proteins) or the consequences on downstream targets such
as E2F transcription factors are not known. Because cell cycle progression is
dependent on the transcriptional activity of E2F family members (E2F1-E2F6), most
of them regulated by suppressive association with pocket proteins, we
characterized E2F-pocket protein DNA binding activity in normal versus malignant 
human melanocytes. By gel shift analysis, we show that in mitogen-dependent
normal melanocytes, external growth factors tightly controlled the levels of
growth-promoting free E2F DNA binding activity, composed largely of E2F2 and
E2F4, and the growth-suppressive E2F4-p130 complexes. In contrast, in melanoma
cells, free E2F DNA binding activity (E2F2 and E2F4, to a lesser extent E2F1,
E2F3, and occasionally E2F5), was constitutively maintained at high levels
independently of external melanocyte mitogens. E2F1 was the only family member
more abundant in the melanoma cells compared with normal melanocytes, and the
approximately fivefold increase in DNA binding activity could be accounted for
mostly by a similar increase in the levels of the dimerization partner DP1. The
continuous high expression of cyclin D1, A2, and E, the persistent
cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) and CDK2 activities, and the presence of
hyperphosphorylated forms of pRb, p107, and p130, suggest that melanoma cells
acquired the capacity for autonomous growth through inactivation of all three
pocket proteins and release of E2F activity, otherwise tightly regulated in
normal melanocytes by external growth factors.

PMCID: PMC2193116
PMID: 10727462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Ann Pathol. 2000 Jan;20(1):93-4.

[Localized hypertrophic neuropathy: differential diagnosis of intraneural
perineurioma].

[Article in French]

Cazals-Hatem D(1), Kania R, Deroin P, Lisovoski F, Sterkers O, Degott C, Hénin D.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie-Pathologique.

PMID: 10648999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Ann Pathol. 2000 Jan;20(1):62-5.

[Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor with rhabdomyoblastic differentiation
and glandular component].

[Article in French]

Karpuz V(1), Letovanec N, Von Hochstetter A, Joris F.

Author information: 
(1)Division de Pathologie, Institut Central des Hôpitaux Valaisans, avenue du
Grand-Champsée 86, 1951 Sion, Suisse.

An exceptional case of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor with striated
muscle differentiation and glandular component is reported, in a 52-year old man.
This tumor measured 8 cm in diameter, and was localized in the chest wall,
infiltrating the skeletal muscle. The mesenchymal portion of the tumor was
composed mostly of spindle cells arranged in interlacing fascicles. Between these
fascicles, there were large cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and clear 
elongated nucleus. Immunohistochemical study demonstrated cytokeratin, EMA and
CEA expression in the glandular component and S100 protein expression in the
major portion of the mesenchymal component. The large cells identified as
rhabdomyoblasts, expressed desmin, myoglobin, alpha-SR actin and alpha-SM actin. 
The tumor recurred 5 years after its resection. Histological and
immunohistochemical features were identical. We think that positivity of
neoplastic striated muscle cells with alpha-SM actin reflects an early
differentiation phase of these cells.

PMID: 10648990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Oncogene. 1998 Aug 6;17(5):611-23.

E2F-6: a novel member of the E2F family is an inhibitor of E2F-dependent
transcription.

Cartwright P(1), Müller H, Wagener C, Holm K, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Department of Experimental Oncology, Milan,
Italy.

The E2F family of transcription factors are essential for the regulation of genes
required for appropriate progression through the cell cycle. Five members of the 
E2F family have been previously reported, namely E2F1-5. All five are key
elements in transcriptional regulation of essential genes, and they can be
divided into two functional groups, those that induce S-phase progression when
overexpressed in quiescent cells (E2Fs 1-3), and those that do not (E2Fs 4-5).
Here, we describe the identification of a novel member of this family, which we
refer to as E2F-6. E2F-6 shares significant homology with E2Fs 1-5, especially
within the DNA binding, heterodimerization and marked box domains. Unlike E2Fs
1-5, E2F-6 lacks a transactivation and a pocket protein binding domain, hence,
forms a unique third group within the E2F family. E2F-6 is a nuclear protein that
can form heterodimers with the DP proteins (both DP-I and DP-2) in vitro and in
vivo. Our results show that the complex formed between E2F-6 and the DP proteins,
possesses high DNA binding activity, displaying a preference for a TTTCCCGC E2F
recognition site, which is slightly different to the E2F consensus site derived
from the E2 promoter (TTTCGCGC). In contrast to the other members of the E2F
family, ectopic expression of E2F-6 inhibits transcription from promoters
possessing E2F recognition sites rather than activating transcription. In
addition, overexpression of E2F-6 suppresses the transactivational effects of
coexpression of E2F-1 and DP-1. The inhibitory effect of E2F-6 is dependent on
its DNA binding activity and its ability to form heterodimers with the DPs.
Interestingly, ectopic expression of E2F-6 leads to accumulation of cells in
S-phase. Our data suggest that E2F-6 expression delays the exit from S-phase
rather than inducing S-phase, which further emphasizes the functional difference 
between E2F-6 and the previously known E2F family members.

PMID: 9704927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Aug 4;95(16):9190-5.

Unusual proliferation arrest and transcriptional control properties of a newly
discovered E2F family member, E2F-6.

Gaubatz S(1), Wood JG, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

E2F transcription factors play an important role in the regulation of cell cycle 
progression. We report here the cloning and characterization of an additional
member of this family, E2F-6. E2F-6 lacks pocket protein binding and
transactivation domains, and it is a potent transcriptional repressor that
contains a modular repression domain at its carboxyl terminus. Overproduction of 
E2F-6 had no specific effect on cell cycle progression in asynchronously growing 
Saos2 and NIH 3T3 cells, but it inhibited entry into S phase of NIH 3T3 cells
stimulated to exit G0. Taken together, these data suggest that E2F-6 can regulate
a subset of E2F-dependent genes whose products are required for entry into the
cell cycle but not for normal cell cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC21314
PMID: 9689056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. No Shinkei Geka. 1998 Mar;26(3):265-70.

[A case of clear cell meningioma originating from the cerebellar tentorium].

[Article in Japanese]

Ito T(1), Nakamura H, Oka K, Nakagawara J, Nagashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nakamura Memorial Hospital.

We report herein on a case of clear cell meningioma originating from the
cerebellar tentorium, surgically treated by occipital transtentorial approach
(OTT). A 67-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital in September, 1996,
complaining of gait disturbance. MRI revealed an isointense mass on T1 and T2 WI,
clearly enhanced with gadolinium in the right upper cerebellum originating from
the tentorium. A left vertebral angiogram showed tumor stain from the right
superior cerebellar artery. The tumor was subtotally removed by OTT on September 
24, 1996. Gamma knife radiosurgery was performed for regrowing tumor 6 months
after surgery. Histological examination revealed that the tumors were composed of
sheets of clear, glycogen-rich cells and lobulated by thin connective tissues.
There were no malignant findings, but some tumor cells had infiltrated into the
cerebellar cortex. Immunohistochemistry showed that tumor cells were positive for
EMA and vimentin, but negative for keratin. MIB-1 staining index was 7.02%. From 
these findings, this case was diagnosed as a typical clear cell meningioma
originating from the cerebellar tentorium. From a review of the literature
including our case, clear cell meningioma may be clinicopathologically malignant,
so careful follow-up will be necessary.

PMID: 9558660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 17;95(6):2850-5.

E2F-6, a member of the E2F family that can behave as a transcriptional repressor.

Trimarchi JM(1), Fairchild B, Verona R, Moberg K, Andon N, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Building
E17-517B, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The E2F family of proteins is required to establish the correct
cell-cycle-dependent transcription of genes that direct the process of cell
division. All previously identified E2F proteins can act in a similar manner;
depending on whether or not they are associated with the cell cycle inhibitors
the retinoblastoma protein (pRB), p107, or p130, they can either repress or
activate the transcription of E2F-responsive genes. We now report the cloning and
characterization of another E2F family member, E2F-6, whose structure is
reminiscent of the dominant inhibitors of other transcription factor families.
The dimerization and DNA binding properties of E2F-6 are similar to those of the 
other E2F family members. However, it is not regulated by pRB, p107, or p130, and
it is unable to activate transcription. Instead, it can act to repress the
transcription of E2F responsive genes by countering the activity of the other E2F
complexes via a pRB-, p107-, or p130-independent mechanism.

PMCID: PMC19658
PMID: 9501179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Nature. 1997 Dec 11;390(6660):567-8.

An E2F-like repressor of transcription.

Morkel M, Wenkel J, Bannister AJ, Kouzarides T, Hagemeier C.

PMID: 9403682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


