
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Mar 9. pii: gkw146. [Epub ahead of print]

E2F7 regulates transcription and maturation of multiple microRNAs to restrain
cell proliferation.

Mitxelena J(1), Apraiz A(2), Vallejo-Rodríguez J(1), Malumbres M(3), Zubiaga
AM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology,
University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, 48080 Bilbao, Spain. (2)Department of
Cell Biology and Histology, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, 48080
Bilbao, Spain. (3)Cell Division and Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), 28029 Madrid, Spain. (4)Department of Genetics, Physical 
Anthropology and Animal Physiology, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU,
48080 Bilbao, Spain ana.zubiaga@ehu.es.

E2F transcription factors (E2F1-8) are known to coordinately regulate the
expression of a plethora of target genes, including those coding for microRNAs
(miRNAs), to control cell cycle progression. Recent work has described the
atypical E2F factor E2F7 as a transcriptional repressor of cell cycle-related
protein-coding genes. However, the contribution of E2F7 to miRNA gene expression 
during the cell cycle has not been defined. We have performed a genome-wide RNA
sequencing analysis to identify E2F7-regulated miRNAs and show that E2F7 plays as
a major role in the negative regulation of a set of miRNAs that promote cellular 
proliferation. We provide mechanistic evidence for an interplay between E2F7 and 
the canonical E2F factors E2F1-3 in the regulation of multiple miRNAs. We show
that miR-25, -26a, -27b, -92a and -7 expression is controlled at the
transcriptional level by the antagonistic activity of E2F7 and E2F1-3. By
contrast, let-7 miRNA expression is controlled indirectly through a novel
E2F/c-MYC/LIN28B axis, whereby E2F7 and E2F1-3 modulate c-MYC and LIN28B levels
to impact let-7 miRNA processing and maturation. Taken together, our data uncover
a new regulatory network involving transcriptional and post-transcriptional
mechanisms controlled by E2F7 to restrain cell cycle progression through
repression of proliferation-promoting miRNAs.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26961310  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. EMBO Rep. 2016 Mar;17(3):414-27. doi: 10.15252/embr.201540984. Epub 2016 Feb 5.

Feedback regulation between atypical E2Fs and APC/CCdh1 coordinates cell cycle
progression.

Boekhout M(1), Yuan R(2), Wondergem AP(2), Segeren HA(2), van Liere EA(2), Awol
N(2), Jansen I(2), Wolthuis RM(1), de Bruin A(3), Westendorp B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology I (B5), The Netherlands Cancer Institute (NKI-AvL),
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (3)Department of
Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The
Netherlands Department of Pediatrics, Division of Molecular Genetics, University 
Medical Center Groningen University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
a.debruin@uu.nl b.westendorp@uu.nl. (4)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands a.debruin@uu.nl
b.westendorp@uu.nl.

E2F transcription factors control the oscillating expression pattern of multiple 
target genes during the cell cycle. Activator E2Fs, E2F1-3, induce an upswing of 
E2F targets, which is essential for the G1-to-S phase transition, whereas
atypical E2Fs, E2F7 and E2F8, mediate a downswing of the same targets during late
S, G2, and M phases. Expression of atypical E2Fs is induced by E2F1-3, but it is 
unknown how atypical E2Fs are inactivated in a timely manner. Here, we
demonstrate that E2F7 and E2F8 are substrates of the anaphase-promoting
complex/cyclosome (APC/C). Removal of CDH1, or mutating the CDH1-interacting KEN 
boxes, stabilized E2F7/8 from anaphase onwards and during G1. Expressing KEN
mutant E2F7 during G1 impairs S phase entry and eventually results in cell death.
Furthermore, we show that E2F8, but not E2F7, interacts also with APC/C(C)
(dc20). Importantly, atypical E2Fs can activate APC/C(C) (dh1) by repressing its 
inhibitors cyclin A, cyclin E, and Emi1. In conclusion, we discovered a feedback 
loop between atypical E2Fs and APC/C(C) (dh1), which ensures balanced expression 
of cell cycle genes and normal cell cycle progression.

© 2016 The Authors.

PMID: 26882548  [PubMed - in process]


3. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 25. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7003. [Epub ahead of print]

MiR-129 triggers autophagic flux by regulating a novel Notch-1/ E2F7/Beclin-1
axis to impair the viability of human malignant glioma cells.

Chen X(1), Zhang Y(1), Shi Y(1), Lian H(2), Tu H(1), Han S(1), Yin J(1), Peng
B(1,)(3), Zhou B(4), He X(1,)(3), Liu W(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Wuhan University Renmin Hospital, Wuhan 430060,
China. (3)Hubei Provincial Key Laboratory of Developmentally Originated Disease, 
Wuhan 430071, China. (4)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology,
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A & M University,
Texas 77843, USA. (5)Hubei Province Key Laboratory of Allergy and Immunology,
Wuhan 430071, China.

Abnormalities of autophagy have been implicated in an increasing number of human 
cancers, including glioma. To date, there is a wealth of evidence indicating that
microRNAs (miRNAs) contribute significantly to autophagy in a variety of cancers.
Previous studies have suggested that miR-129 functioned as an important inhibitor
of the cell cycle and could promote the apoptosis of many cancer cell lines in
vitro. Here, we reported that miR-129 acted as a potent inducer of autophagy.
Forced expression of miR-129 could induce autophagic flux by targetedly
suppressing Notch-1 in glioma cells. The autophagy induced by miR-129 could
restrain the activity of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and upregulate
Beclin-1. Moreover, we demonstrated that E2F transcription factor 7 (E2F7) could 
also trigger autophagic flux by upregulating Beclin-1 and mediating
miR-129-induced autophagy. Additionally, knockdown of Notch-1 could upregulate
the expression of E2F7, whereas downregulation of E2F7 alleviated
shNotch-1-induced autophagic flux. In particular, knockdown of endogenous
Beclin-1 could effectively reduce autophagic flux stimulated by miR-129 and E2F7.
Interestingly, upon attenuation of miR-129- or E2F7-triggered autophagic flux
rescued cell viability suppressed by them. More importantly, intratumoral
injection of pHAGE-miR-129 lentivirus in a nude mouse xenograft model
significantly restrained tumor growth and triggered autophagy. In conclusion,
these findings identify a new function for miR-129 as a potent inducer of
autophagy through a novel Notch-1/E2F7/Beclin-1 axis in glioma.

PMID: 26824182  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2016 Feb 1;292:65-74. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2015.12.010.
Epub 2015 Dec 19.

The ovarian DNA damage repair response is induced prior to phosphoramide
mustard-induced follicle depletion, and ataxia telangiectasia mutated inhibition 
prevents PM-induced follicle depletion.

Ganesan S(1), Keating AF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.
Electronic address: shanthig@iastate.edu. (2)Department of Animal Science, Iowa
State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA. Electronic address: akeating@iastate.edu.

Phosphoramide mustard (PM) is an ovotoxic metabolite of cyclophosphamide and
destroys primordial and primary follicles potentially by DNA damage induction.
The temporal pattern by which PM induces DNA damage and initiation of the ovarian
response to DNA damage has not yet been well characterized. This study
investigated DNA damage initiation, the DNA repair response, as well as induction
of follicular demise using a neonatal rat ovarian culture system. Additionally,
to delineate specific mechanisms involved in the ovarian response to PM exposure,
utility was made of PKC delta (PKCd) deficient mice as well as an ATM inhibitor
(KU 55933; AI). Fisher 344 PND4 rat ovaries were cultured for 12, 24, 48 or 96h
in medium containing DMSO ±60µM PM or KU 55933 (48h; 10nM). PM-induced activation
of DNA damage repair genes was observed as early as 12h post-exposure. ATM,
PARP1, E2F7, P73 and CASP3 abundance were increased but RAD51 and BCL2 protein
decreased after 96h of PM exposure. PKCd deficiency reduced numbers of all
follicular stages, but did not have an additive impact on PM-induced ovotoxicity.
ATM inhibition protected all follicle stages from PM-induced depletion. In
conclusion, the ovarian DNA damage repair response is active post-PM exposure,
supporting that DNA damage contributes to PM-induced ovotoxicity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26708502  [PubMed - in process]


5. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Dec 17. pii: gkv1471. [Epub ahead of print]

Genome-wide analysis reveals NRP1 as a direct HIF1a-E2F7 target in the regulation
of motorneuron guidance in vivo.

de Bruin A(1), Cornelissen PW(2), Kirchmaier BC(3), Mokry M(4), Iich E(2),
Nirmala E(2), Liang KH(2), Végh AM(2), Scholman KT(2), Groot Koerkamp MJ(5),
Holstege FC(5), Cuppen E(6), Schulte-Merker S(7), Bakker WJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, 3584 CL Utrecht, The Netherlands Department of Pediatrics, Division
of Molecular Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen 9713 AV, The Netherlands a.debruin@uu.nl. (2)Department of
Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, 3584 CL
Utrecht, The Netherlands. (3)Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of
Arts and Sciences and University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CT Utrecht, The
Netherlands Goethe Universität Frankfurt, Buchmann Institute of Molecular Life
Sciences (BMLS), Neural and Vascular Guidance group, D-60438 Frankfurt am Main,
Germany. (4)Division of Pediatrics, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University
Medical Center Utrecht, 3508 AB Utrecht, The Netherlands. (5)Molecular Cancer
Research, University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, Utrecht, 3584 
CG, The Netherlands. (6)Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and
Sciences and University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(7)Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences and
University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands Institute for
Cardiovascular Organogenesis and Regeneration, Cells-in-Motion Cluster of
Excellence, University of Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany.

In this study, we explored the existence of a transcriptional network
co-regulated by E2F7 and HIF1a, as we show that expression of E2F7, like HIF1a,
is induced in hypoxia, and because of the previously reported ability of E2F7 to 
interact with HIF1a. Our genome-wide analysis uncovers a transcriptional network 
that is directly controlled by HIF1a and E2F7, and demonstrates both stimulatory 
and repressive functions of the HIF1a -E2F7 complex. Among this network we reveal
Neuropilin 1 (NRP1) as a HIF1a-E2F7 repressed gene. By performing in vitro and in
vivo reporter assays we demonstrate that the HIF1a-E2F7 mediated NRP1 repression 
depends on a 41 base pairs 'E2F-binding site hub', providing a molecular
mechanism for a previously unanticipated role for HIF1a in transcriptional
repression. To explore the biological significance of this regulation we
performed in situ hybridizations and observed enhanced nrp1a expression in spinal
motorneurons (MN) of zebrafish embryos, upon morpholino-inhibition of e2f7/8 or
hif1a. Consistent with the chemo-repellent role of nrp1a, morpholino-inhibition
of e2f7/8 or hif1a caused MN truncations, which was rescued in TALEN-induced
nrp1a(hu10012) mutants, and phenocopied in e2f7/8 mutant zebrafish. Therefore, we
conclude that repression of NRP1 by the HIF1a-E2F7 complex regulates MN axon
guidance in vivo.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26681691  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Nat Commun. 2015 Dec 3;6:10050. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10050.

Structural insights into the DNA-binding specificity of E2F family transcription 
factors.

Morgunova E(1), Yin Y(1), Jolma A(1), Dave K(1), Schmierer B(1), Popov A(2),
Eremina N(3), Nilsson L(1), Taipale J(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, SE 141 83
Stockholm, Sweden. (2)European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Division of
Experiments, 38 000 Grenoble, France. (3)Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Stockholm University, SE 106 91, Sweden. (4)Genome-Scale Biology
Research Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, PO Box 63,
FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland.

The mammalian cell cycle is controlled by the E2F family of transcription
factors. Typical E2Fs bind to DNA as heterodimers with the related dimerization
partner (DP) proteins, whereas the atypical E2Fs, E2F7 and E2F8 contain two
DNA-binding domains (DBDs) and act as repressors. To understand the mechanism of 
repression, we have resolved the structure of E2F8 in complex with DNA at atomic 
resolution. We find that the first and second DBDs of E2F8 resemble the DBDs of
typical E2F and DP proteins, respectively. Using molecular dynamics simulations, 
biochemical affinity measurements and chromatin immunoprecipitation, we further
show that both atypical and typical E2Fs bind to similar DNA sequences in vitro
and in vivo. Our results represent the first crystal structure of an E2F protein 
with two DBDs, and reveal the mechanism by which atypical E2Fs can repress
canonical E2F target genes and exert their negative influence on cell cycle
progression.

PMCID: PMC4686757
PMID: 26632596  [PubMed - in process]


7. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 13;6(31):31944-57. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5128.

E2F7 overexpression leads to tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer cells by
competing with E2F1 at miR-15a/16 promoter.

Chu J(1,)(2,)(3), Zhu Y(1,)(2), Liu Y(1,)(2), Sun L(1,)(2,)(3), Lv X(1,)(2), Wu
Y(1,)(2), Hu P(1,)(2,)(3), Su F(1,)(2), Gong C(1,)(2), Song E(1,)(2,)(3), Liu
B(1,)(2,)(3), Liu Q(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Tumor Center, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou 510120, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Gene Regulation and
Target Therapy of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Sun Yat-sen Memorial
Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510120, China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Gene Engineering of Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol,
School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China.

About 50-70% of breast cancers are estrogen receptor a (ERa) positive and most of
them are sensitive to endocrine therapy including tamoxifen. However, one third
of these patients will eventually develop resistance and relapse. We found that
the expression of miR-15a and miR-16 were significantly decreased in tamoxifen
resistant ER positive breast cancer cell lines. Exogenous expression of
miR-15a/16 mimics re-sensitized resistant cells to tamoxifen by inhibiting Cyclin
E1 and B cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2) to induce cell growth arrest and apoptosis
respectively. Further, we identified that a repressive member of E2F family,
E2F7, was responsible for the suppression of miR-15a/16 cluster by competing with
E2F1 for E2F binding site at the promoter of their host gene DLEU2. Moreover,
high expression of E2F7 is correlated with high risk of relapse and poor
prognosis in breast cancer patients receiving tamoxifen treatment. Together, our 
results suggest that overexpression of E2F7 represses miR-15a/16 and then
increases Cyclin E1 and Bcl-2 that result in tamoxifen resistance. E2F7 may be a 
valuable prognostic marker and a therapeutic target of tamoxifen resistance in
breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4741652
PMID: 26397135  [PubMed - in process]


8. J Clin Invest. 2015 Jul 1;125(7):2825-40. doi: 10.1172/JCI78753. Epub 2015 Jun
22.

Mature T cell responses are controlled by microRNA-142.

Sun Y, Oravecz-Wilson K, Mathewson N, Wang Y, McEachin R, Liu C, Toubai T, Wu J, 
Rossi C, Braun T, Saunders T, Reddy P.

T cell proliferation is critical for immune responses; however, the molecular
mechanisms that mediate the proliferative response are poorly understood.
MicroRNAs (miRs) regulate various molecular processes, including development and 
function of the immune system. Here, utilizing multiple complementary genetic and
molecular approaches, we investigated the contribution of a
hematopoietic-specific miR, miR-142, in regulating T cell responses. T cell
development was not affected in animals with a targeted deletion of Mir142;
however, T cell proliferation was markedly reduced following stimulation both in 
vitro and in multiple murine models of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD).
miR-142-deficient T cells demonstrated substantial cell-cycling defects, and
microarray and bioinformatics analyses revealed upregulation of genes involved in
cell cycling. Moreover, 2 predicted miR-142 target genes, the atypical E2F
transcription factors E2f7 and E2f8, were most highly upregulated in
miR-142-deficient cells. Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat
interference-mediated (CRISPRi-mediated) silencing of E2F7 and E2F8 in
miR-142-deficient T cells ameliorated cell-cycling defects and reduced GVHD, and 
overexpression of these factors in WT T cells inhibited the proliferative
response. Together, these results identify a link between hematopoietic-specific 
miR-142 and atypical E2F transcription factors in the regulation of mature T cell
cycling and suggest that targeting this interaction may be relevant for
mitigating GVHD.

PMCID: PMC4563679
PMID: 26098216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015 Jun 18;107(9). pii: djv151. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv151.
Print 2015 Sep.

E2F8 as a Novel Therapeutic Target for Lung Cancer.

Park SA(1), Platt J(1), Lee JW(1), López-Giráldez F(1), Herbst RS(1), Koo JS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine (SAP, JWL, RSH,
JSK) and Translational Research Program (RSH, JSK), Yale Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Departments of Pathology and Medical Oncology (JP), Yale School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT; Yale Center for Genome Analysis, Yale University,
Orange, CT (FLG). (2)Section of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine
(SAP, JWL, RSH, JSK) and Translational Research Program (RSH, JSK), Yale
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Departments of Pathology and Medical Oncology (JP), 
Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT; Yale Center for Genome Analysis, Yale
University, Orange, CT (FLG). jpeter.koo@yale.edu.

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015 Sep;107(9). pii: djv180. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv180.

BACKGROUND: The E2F members have been divided into transcription activators
(E2F1-E2F3) and repressors (E2F4-E2F8). E2F8 with E2F7 has been known to play an 
important physiologic role in embryonic development and cell cycle regulation by 
repressing E2F1. However, the function of E2F8 in cancer cells is unknown.
METHODS: E2F8 expression was assessed by immunoblotting or immunofluorescence
staining in human lung cancer (LC) cells and tissues from LC patients (n = 45).
Cell proliferation, colony formation, and invasion analysis were performed to
evaluate the role of E2F8 in LC. Microarray analysis was used to determine the
target genes of E2F8. The regulation of E2F8 on the expression of ubiquitin-like 
PHD and RING domain-containing 1 (UHRF1), one of E2F8 target genes, was
determined using chromatin immunoprecipitation and promoter activity assays.
Human LC xenograft models were used to determine the effects of inhibiting E2F8
by siRNAs (n = 7 per group) or antisense morpholino (n = 8 per group) on tumor
growth. Survival was analyzed using the Kaplan-Meier method and group differences
by the Student's t test. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: LC tumors overexpressed E2F8 compared with normal lung tissues.
Depletion of E2F8 inhibited cell proliferation and tumor growth. E2F8 knockdown
statistically significantly reduced the expression of UHRF1 (~60%-70%, P < .001),
and the direct binding of E2F8 on the promoter of UHRF1 was identified.
Kaplan-Meier analysis with a public database showed prognostic significance of
aberrant E2F8 expression in LC (HR = 1.91 95% CI = 1.21 to 3.01 in chemo-naïve
patients, P = .0047).
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that E2F8 is overexpressed in LC and is required for
the growth of LC cells. These findings implicate E2F8 as a novel therapeutic
target for LC treatment.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4651101 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26089541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. BMC Genomics. 2015 Jun 17;16:464. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1643-9.

Whole-genome cartography of p53 response elements ranked on transactivation
potential.

Tebaldi T(1), Zaccara S(2), Alessandrini F(3), Bisio A(4), Ciribilli Y(5), Inga
A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of Trento, via delle Regole
101, 38123, Mattarello, TN, Italy. t.tebaldi@unitn.it. (2)Centre for Integrative 
Biology (CIBIO), University of Trento, via delle Regole 101, 38123, Mattarello,
TN, Italy. sara.zaccara@unitn.it. (3)Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO),
University of Trento, via delle Regole 101, 38123, Mattarello, TN, Italy.
f.alessandrini@unitn.it. (4)Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of
Trento, via delle Regole 101, 38123, Mattarello, TN, Italy.
alessandra.bisio@unitn.it. (5)Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University 
of Trento, via delle Regole 101, 38123, Mattarello, TN, Italy.
yari.ciribilli@unitn.it. (6)Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of
Trento, via delle Regole 101, 38123, Mattarello, TN, Italy.
alberto.inga@unitn.it.

BACKGROUND: Many recent studies using ChIP-seq approaches cross-referenced to
trascriptome data and also to potentially unbiased in vitro DNA binding selection
experiments are detailing with increasing precision the p53-directed gene
regulatory network that, nevertheless, is still expanding. However, most
experiments have been conducted in established cell lines subjected to specific
p53-inducing stimuli, both factors potentially biasing the results.
RESULTS: We developed p53retriever, a pattern search algorithm that maps p53
response elements (REs) and ranks them according to predicted transactivation
potentials in five classes. Besides canonical, full site REs, we developed
specific pattern searches for non-canonical half sites and 3/4 sites and show
that they can mediate p53-dependent responsiveness of associated coding
sequences. Using ENCODE data, we also mapped p53 REs in about 44,000 distant
enhancers and identified a 16-fold enrichment for high activity REs within those 
sites in the comparison with genomic regions near transcriptional start sites
(TSS). Predictions from our pattern search were cross-referenced to ChIP-seq,
ChIP-exo, expression, and various literature data sources. Based on the mapping
of predicted functional REs near TSS, we examined expression changes of thirteen 
genes as a function of different p53-inducing conditions, providing further
evidence for PDE2A, GAS6, E2F7, APOBEC3H, KCTD1, TRIM32, DICER, HRAS, KITLG and
TGFA p53-dependent regulation, while MAP2K3, DNAJA1 and potentially YAP1 were
identified as new direct p53 target genes.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide a comprehensive annotation of canonical and non-canonical
p53 REs in the human genome, ranked on predicted transactivation potential. We
also establish or corroborate direct p53 transcriptional control of thirteen
genes. The entire list of identified and functionally classified p53 REs near all
UCSC-annotated genes and within ENCODE mapped enhancer elements is provided. Our 
approach is distinct from, and complementary to, existing methods designed to
identify p53 response elements. p53retriever is available as an R package at:
http://tomateba.github.io/p53retriever .

PMCID: PMC4470028
PMID: 26081755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Aug;14(8):1939-50. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0076. Epub
2015 May 27.

RacGAP1 Is a Novel Downstream Effector of E2F7-Dependent Resistance to
Doxorubicin and Is Prognostic for Overall Survival in Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Hazar-Rethinam M(1), de Long LM(1), Gannon OM(1), Boros S(2), Vargas AC(2),
Dzienis M(3), Mukhopadhyay P(1), Saenz-Ponce N(1), Dantzic DD(1), Simpson F(1),
Saunders NA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Pathobiology Group, University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, 
Princess Alexandra Hospital, Translational Research Institute, Woolloongabba,
Queensland, Australia. (2)Department of Pathology, Princess Alexandra Hospital,
Woolloongabba, Queensland, Australia. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Princess
Alexandra Hospital, Woolloongabba, Queensland, Australia. (4)Epithelial
Pathobiology Group, University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Princess
Alexandra Hospital, Translational Research Institute, Woolloongabba, Queensland, 
Australia. nsaunders@uq.edu.au.

We have previously shown that E2F7 contributes to drug resistance in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells. Considering that dysregulation of
responses to chemotherapy-induced cytotoxicity is one of the major reasons for
treatment failure in HNSCC, identifying the downstream effectors that regulate
E2F7-dependent sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents may have direct clinical
impact. We used transcriptomic profiling to identify candidate pathways that
contribute to E2F7-dependent resistance to doxorubicin. We then manipulated the
expression of the candidate pathway using overexpression and knockdown in in
vitro and in vivo models of SCC to demonstrate causality. In addition, we
examined the expression of E2F7 and RacGAP1 in a custom tissue microarray (TMA)
generated from HNSCC patient samples. Transcriptomic profiling identified RacGAP1
as a potential mediator of E2F7-dependent drug resistance. We validated
E2F7-dependent upregulation of RacGAP1 in doxorubicin-insensitive SCC25 cells.
Extending this, we found that selective upregulation of RacGAP1 induced
doxorubicin resistance in previously sensitive KJDSV40. Similarly, stable
knockdown of RacGAP1 in insensitive SCC25 cells induced sensitivity to
doxorubicin in vitro and in vivo. RacGAP1 expression was validated in a TMA, and 
we showed that HNSCCs that overexpress RacGAP1 are associated with a poorer
patient overall survival. Furthermore, E2F7-induced doxorubicin resistance was
mediated via RacGAP1-dependent activation of AKT. Finally, we show that SCC cells
deficient in RacGAP1 grow slower and are sensitized to the cytotoxic actions of
doxorubicin in vivo. These findings identify RacGAP1 overexpression as a novel
prognostic marker of survival and a potential target to sensitize SCC to
doxorubicin.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26018753  [PubMed - in process]


12. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 22;10(4):e0123167. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123167.
eCollection 2015.

Identification of Cellular Targets of MicroRNA-181a in HepG2 Cells: A New
Approach for Functional Analysis of MicroRNAs.

Tan JY(1), Habib NA(2), Chuah YW(3), Yau YH(3), Geifman-Shochat S(3), Chen WN(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore, Singapore. (2)Imperial College London,
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Surgery and Cancer, London, England.
(3)Division of Structural Biology and Biochemistry, School of Biological
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are known to play a part in regulating important cellular
processes. They generally perform their regulatory function through their binding
with mRNAs, ultimately leading to a repression of target protein expression
levels. However, their roles in cellular processes are poorly understood due to
the limited understanding of their specific cellular targets. Aberrant levels of 
miRNAs have been found in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) including miR-181a.
Using bioinformatics analysis, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B (CDKN1ß) and 
transcriptional factor E2F7 were identified as potential targets of miR-181a.
Validation analysis using surface plasmon resonance (SPR) showed a positive
binding between miR-181a and the 3'UTRs of these two potential mRNA targets. In
vivo luciferase assay further confirmed the positive miR-181a:mRNA bindings,
where a significant decrease in luciferase activity was detected when HepG2 cells
were co-transfected with the 3'UTR-containing reporter plasmids and miR-181a. The
potential impact of miR-181a binding to its specific targets on the general
cellular behavior was further investigated. Results showed that miR-181a
significantly activated the MAPK/JNK pathway which regulates cell proliferation, 
supporting our recently reported findings. Inhibition of miR-181a, on the other
hand, abolished the observed activation. Our findings open up a new approach in
designing targeted functional analysis of miRNAs in cellular processes, through
the identification of their cellular targets.

PMCID: PMC4406611
PMID: 25901570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Chem Biol. 2015 Apr 23;22(4):453-9. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2015.03.008. Epub
2015 Apr 9.

Unbiased proteomic profiling strategy for discovery of bacterial effector
proteins reveals that Salmonella protein PheA is a host cell cycle regulator.

Na HN(1), Yoo YH(2), Yoon CN(2), Lee JS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Recognition Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and
Technology, 39-1 Hawolgok-dong, Seoul 136-791, South Korea; Department of
Biological Chemistry, University of Science & Technology, 113 Gwahank-ro,
Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-333, South Korea. (2)Molecular Recognition Research
Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, 39-1 Hawolgok-dong, Seoul
136-791, South Korea. (3)Molecular Recognition Research Center, Korea Institute
of Science and Technology, 39-1 Hawolgok-dong, Seoul 136-791, South Korea;
Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Science & Technology, 113
Gwahank-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-333, South Korea. Electronic address:
junseoklee@kist.re.kr.

Comment in
    Chem Biol. 2015 Apr 23;22(4):434-5.

Salmonella utilizes a type III secretion system to inject bacterial effector
proteins into the host cell cytosol. Once in the cytosol, these effectors hijack 
various biochemical pathways to regulate virulence. Despite the importance of
effector proteins, especially for understanding host-pathogen interactions, a
potentially large number of effectors are yet to be identified. Here, we
demonstrate that unbiased chemical proteomic profiling using off-the-shelf
fluorescent probes leads to the discovery of a host cell cycle regulator encoded 
in the Salmonella genome. Our profiling combined with bioinformatic analysis
implicates 29 Salmonella as potential effectors. We follow up on the top
candidate, chorismate mutase-P/prehenate dehydratase, PheA, and present evidence 
that PheA is an effector that mimics E2F7 transcription factor of the host cell
and promotes G1/S cell cycle arrest. This validates our strategy and opens
opportunities for effector identification in the future.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25865312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Oncol Rep. 2015 May;33(5):2354-60. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3812. Epub 2015 Feb 20.

MicroRNA-424 may function as a tumor suppressor in endometrial carcinoma cells by
targeting E2F7.

Li Q(1), Qiu XM(1), Li QH(1), Wang XY(1), Li L(1), Xu M(1), Dong M(1), Xiao
YB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynaecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical
College, Zunyi, Guizou 563000, P.R. China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are frequently dysregulated in human cancers and can act as
potent oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes. Aberrant expression of miR-424 has
been identified in some types of cancer, however, its expression and potential
biologic role in endometrial cancer are remains to be determined. In the present 
study, we demonstrated that miR-424 was downregulated in human endometrial cancer
and suppressed growth of the human Ishikawa and HEC-1B endometrial cancer cell
lines. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that E2F7 was a putative target of
miR-424. In a luciferase reporter system, we confirmed that E2F7 was a direct
target gene of miR-424. Furthermore, knockdown of E2F7 inhibited Ishikawa and
HEC-1B cell growth. These findings indicate that miR-424 targets the E2F7
transcript and suppresses endometrial cancer cell growth, suggesting that miR-424
has a tumor suppressive role in human endometrial cancer pathogenesis.

PMID: 25708247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Cell Sci. 2015 Mar 15;128(6):1166-79. doi: 10.1242/jcs.164103. Epub 2015 Jan
22.

Downregulation of E2F1 during ER stress is required to induce apoptosis.

Pagliarini V(1), Giglio P(1), Bernardoni P(1), De Zio D(2), Fimia GM(3),
Piacentini M(4), Corazzari M(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Infectious Disease 'L. Spallanzani' IRCCS, 00149 Rome, 
Italy. (2)Department of Biology, Unit of the Dulbecco Telethon Institute,
University of Rome 'Tor Vergata', 00133 Rome, Italy Cell Stress and Survival
Unit, Danish Cancer Society Research Center, Strandboulevarden 49, Copenhagen
DK-2100, Denmark. (3)National Institute for Infectious Disease 'L. Spallanzani'
IRCCS, 00149 Rome, Italy Department of Biological and Environmental Science and
Technology (Di.S.Te.B.A.), University of Salento, 73100 Lecce, Italy. (4)National
Institute for Infectious Disease 'L. Spallanzani' IRCCS, 00149 Rome, Italy
Cellular and Developmental Lab, Department of Biology, University of Rome 'Tor
Vergata', 00133 Rome, Italy. (5)National Institute for Infectious Disease 'L.
Spallanzani' IRCCS, 00149 Rome, Italy Cellular and Developmental Lab, Department 
of Biology, University of Rome 'Tor Vergata', 00133 Rome, Italy
marco.corazzari@uniroma2.it marco.corazzari@inmi.it.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) has recently emerged as an alternative target to
induce cell death in tumours, because prolonged ER stress results in the
induction of apoptosis even in chemoresistant transformed cells. Here, we show
that the DNA-damage-responsive pro-apoptotic factor E2F1 is unexpectedly
downregulated during the ER stress-mediated apoptotic programme. E2F1 decline is 
a late event during the ER response and is mediated by the two unfolded protein
response (UPR) sensors ATF6 and IRE1 (also known as ERN1). Whereas ATF6 directly 
interacts with the E2F1 promoter, IRE1 requires the involvement of the known E2F1
modulator E2F7, through the activation of its main target Xbp-1. Importantly,
inhibition of the E2F1 decrease prevents ER-stress-induced apoptosis, whereas
E2F1 knockdown efficiently sensitises cells to ER stress-dependent apoptosis,
leading to the upregulation of two main factors in the UPR pro-apoptotic
execution phase, Puma and Noxa (also known as BBC3 and PMAIP1, respectively). Our
results point to a novel key role of E2F1 in the cell survival/death decision
under ER stress, and unveil E2F1 inactivation as a valuable novel potential
therapeutic strategy to increase the response of tumour cells to ER stress-based 
anticancer treatments.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25616897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 13;290(7):4075-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.602532. Epub 2014 
Dec 29.

Cyclin E-CDK2 protein phosphorylates plant homeodomain finger protein 8 (PHF8)
and regulates its function in the cell cycle.

Sun L(1), Huang Y(1), Wei Q(1), Tong X(2), Cai R(1), Nalepa G(3), Ye X(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology
and Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100101, China, the University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101,
China, and. (2)From the Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Pathogenic 
Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (3)the Department of Pediatrics and Division of 
Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, and
Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202. (4)From the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China, yex@im.ac.cn.

Cyclin E-CDK2 is a key regulator in G1/S transition. Previously, we identified a 
number of CDK2-interacting proteins, including PHF8 (plant homeodomain finger
protein 8). In this report, we confirmed that PHF8 is a novel cyclin E-CDK2
substrate. By taking the approach of mass spectrometry, we identified that PHF8
Ser-844 is phosphorylated by cyclin E-CDK2. Immunoblotting analysis indicated
that WT PHF8 demethylates histone H3K9me2 more efficiently than the cyclin E-CDK2
phosphorylation-deficient PHF8-S844A mutant. Furthermore, flow cytometry analysis
showed that WT PHF8 promotes S phase progression more robustly than PHF8-S844A.
Real-time PCR results demonstrated that PHF8 increases transcription of cyclin E,
E2F3, and E2F7 to significantly higher levels compared with PHF8-S844A. Further
analysis by ChIP assay indicated that PHF8 binds to the cyclin E promoter
stronger than PHF8-S844A and reduces the H3K9me2 level at the cyclin E promoter
more efficiently than PHF8-S844A. In addition, we found that cyclin
E-CDK2-mediated phosphorylation of PHF8 Ser-844 promotes PHF8-dependent rRNA
transcription in luciferase reporter assays and real-time PCR. Taken together,
these results indicate that cyclin E-CDK2 phosphorylates PHF8 to stimulate its
demethylase activity to promote rRNA transcription and cell cycle progression.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4326817
PMID: 25548279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Jan 15;21(2):417-27. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1962.
Epub 2014 Nov 19.

A novel E2F/sphingosine kinase 1 axis regulates anthracycline response in
squamous cell carcinoma.

Hazar-Rethinam M(1), de Long LM(1), Gannon OM(1), Topkas E(1), Boros S(2), Vargas
AC(2), Dzienis M(3), Mukhopadhyay P(1), Simpson F(1), Endo-Munoz L(1), Saunders
NA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Pathobiology Group, University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, 
Princess Alexandra Hospital, Translational Research Institute, Woolloongabba,
Queensland, Australia. (2)Department of Pathology, Princess Alexandra Hospital,
Woolloongabba, Queensland, Australia. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Princess
Alexandra Hospital, Woolloongabba, Queensland, Australia. (4)Epithelial
Pathobiology Group, University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Princess
Alexandra Hospital, Translational Research Institute, Woolloongabba, Queensland, 
Australia. nsaunders@uq.edu.au.

PURPOSE: Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) are frequently drug
resistant and have a mortality rate of 45%. We have previously shown that E2F7
may contribute to drug resistance in SCC cells. However, the mechanism and
pathways involved remain unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used transcriptomic profiling to identify candidate
pathways that may contribute to E2F7-dependent resistance to anthracyclines. We
then manipulated the activity/expression of the candidate pathway using
overexpression, knockdown, and pharmacological inhibitors in in vitro and in vivo
models of SCC to demonstrate causality. In addition, we examined the expression
of E2F7 and a downstream effector in a tissue microarray (TMA) generated from
HNSCC patient samples.
RESULTS: E2F7-deficient keratinocytes were selectively sensitive to doxorubicin
and this was reversed by overexpressing E2F7. Transcriptomic profiling identified
Sphingosine kinase 1 (Sphk1) as a potential mediator of E2F7-dependent drug
resistance. Knockdown and overexpression studies revealed that Sphk1 was a
downstream target of E2F7. TMA studies showed that E2F7 overexpression correlated
with Sphk1 overexpression in human HNSCC. Moreover, inhibition of Sphk1 by shRNA 
or the Sphk1-specific inhibitor, SK1-I (BML-EI411), enhanced the sensitivity of
SCC cells to doxorubicin in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, E2F7-induced
doxorubicin resistance was mediated via Sphk1-dependent activation of AKT in
vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSION: We identify a novel drugable pathway in which E2F7 directly increases
the transcription and activity of the Sphk1/S1P axis resulting in activation of
AKT and subsequent drug resistance. Collectively, this novel combinatorial
therapy can potentially be trialed in humans using existing agents.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25411162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mol Reprod Dev. 2014 Dec;81(12):1103-14. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22429. Epub 2014 Nov
12.

The miR-302 cluster transcriptionally regulated by POUV, SOX and STAT5B controls 
the undifferentiated state through the post-transcriptional repression of PBX3
and E2F7 in early chick development.

Lee SI(1), Jeon MH, Kim JS, Park JK, Park EW, Jeon IS, Byun SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biotechnology Division, National Institute of Animal Science, Rural
Development Administration, Suwon, 441-706, Republic of Korea.

Early chick development is a systematic process governed by the concerted action 
of multiple mechanisms that regulate transcription and post-transcriptional
processes. Post-transcriptional microRNA-mediated regulation, with regard to
lineage specification and differentiation in early chick development, requires
further investigation. Here, we characterize the transcriptional and
post-transcriptional regulation mechanisms in undifferentiated chick blastodermal
cells. Expression of the miR-302 cluster, POUV, SOX2, and STAT5B decreased in a
time-dependent manner in early chick development. We found that POUV, SOX2, and
STAT5B regulate the transcription of the miR-302 cluster, as its 5'-flanking
region contains binding elements for each transcription factor. Additionally,
POUV, SOX2, and STAT5B maintain pluripotency by regulating genes containing the
miR-302 cluster target sequence. For example, microRNAs from the miR-302 cluster 
can bind to PBX3 and E2F7 transcripts, thus acting as a post-transcriptional
regulator that maintains the undifferentiated state of blastodermal cells by
balancing the expression of genes related to pluripotency and differentiation.
Based on these results, we suggest that both transcriptional and
post-transcriptional regulation of the miR302 cluster is critical for
intrinsically controlling the undifferentiated state of chick embryonic
blastodermal cells. These findings may help our understanding of the cellular and
molecular mechanisms that underlie developmental decisions during early chick
development.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25394196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Genes Cancer. 2014 Apr;5(1-2):31-40.

CtBP2 proteome: Role of CtBP in E2F7-mediated repression and cell proliferation.

Zhao LJ(1), Subramanian T(1), Vijayalingam S(1), Chinnadurai G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology Saint Louis University Health Sciences Center
Doisy Research Center 1100 South Grand Blvd St. Louis, Missouri 63104.

C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) family transcriptional corepressors include
CtBP1 and CtBP2. While CtBP1 and CtBP2 share significant amino acid sequence
homology, CtBP2 possesses a unique N-terminal domain that is modified by
acetylation and contributes to exclusive nuclear localization. Although CtBP1 and
CtBP2 are functionally redundant for certain activities during vertebrate
development, they also perform unique functions. Previous studies have identified
several CtBP1-interacting proteins that included other transcriptional
corepressors, DNA-binding repressors and histone modifying enzymatic components
such as the histone deacetylases and the histone demethylase LSD-1. Here, we
carried out an unbiased proteomic analysis of CtBP2-associated proteins and
discovered the association of several components of the CtBP1 proteome as well as
novel interactions. The CtBP2 proteome contained components of the NuRD complex
and the E2F family member E2F7. E2F7 interacted with the hydrophobic cleft region
of CtBP1 and CtBP2 through a prototypical CtBP binding motif, PIDLS. E2F7
repressed E2F1 transcription, inhibited cell proliferation in a CtBP-dependent
fashion. Our study identified CtBP as a corepressor of E2F7 and as a regulator of
DNA damage response.

PMCID: PMC4063256
PMID: 24955216  [PubMed]


20. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Oct;115(10):1816-28. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24852.

High-resolution molecular validation of self-renewal and spontaneous
differentiation in clinical-grade adipose-tissue derived human mesenchymal stem
cells.

Dudakovic A(1), Camilleri E, Riester SM, Lewallen EA, Kvasha S, Chen X, Radel DJ,
Anderson JM, Nair AA, Evans JM, Krych AJ, Smith J, Deyle DR, Stein JL, Stein GS, 
Im HJ, Cool SM, Westendorf JJ, Kakar S, Dietz AB, van Wijnen AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

Improving the effectiveness of adipose-tissue derived human mesenchymal
stromal/stem cells (AMSCs) for skeletal therapies requires a detailed
characterization of mechanisms supporting cell proliferation and multi-potency.
We investigated the molecular phenotype of AMSCs that were either actively
proliferating in platelet lysate or in a basal non-proliferative state. Flow
cytometry combined with high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNASeq) and RT-qPCR
analyses validate that AMSCs express classic mesenchymal cell surface markers
(e.g., CD44, CD73/NT5E, CD90/THY1, and CD105/ENG). Expression of CD90 is
selectively elevated at confluence. Self-renewing AMSCs express a standard cell
cycle program that successively mediates DNA replication, chromatin packaging,
cyto-architectural enlargement, and mitotic division. Confluent AMSCs
preferentially express genes involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) formation and
cellular communication. For example, cell cycle-related biomarkers (e.g., cyclins
E2 and B2, transcription factor E2F1) and histone-related genes (e.g., H4, HINFP,
NPAT) are elevated in proliferating AMSCs, while ECM genes are strongly
upregulated (>10-fold) in quiescent AMSCs. AMSCs also express pluripotency genes 
(e.g., POU5F1, NANOG, KLF4) and early mesenchymal markers (e.g., NES, ACTA2)
consistent with their multipotent phenotype. Strikingly, AMSCs modulate
expression of WNT signaling components and switch production of WNT ligands (from
WNT5A/WNT5B/WNT7B to WNT2/WNT2B), while upregulating WNT-related genes (WISP2,
SFRP2, and SFRP4). Furthermore, post-proliferative AMSCs spontaneously express
fibroblastic, osteogenic, chondrogenic, and adipogenic biomarkers when maintained
in confluent cultures. Our findings validate the biological properties of
self-renewing and multi-potent AMSCs by providing high-resolution quality control
data that support their clinical versatility.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4225070
PMID: 24905804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cell Signal. 2014 May;26(5):1075-81. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.01.008. Epub
2014 Jan 16.

Promising roles of mammalian E2Fs in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhan L(1), Huang C(1), Meng XM(1), Song Y(1), Wu XQ(1), Miu CG(1), Zhan XS(1), Li
J(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Meishan Road, Hefei 230032,
China; Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui Medical University (AMU), China.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Meishan Road, Hefei 230032,
China; Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui Medical University (AMU), China.
Electronic address: lj@ahmu.edu.cn.

In mammalian cells, E2F family of transcription factors (E2Fs) traditionally
modulates assorted cellular functions related to cell cycle progression,
proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation. Eight members, E2F1 E2F8 have been 
recognized of this family so far, and the members of this family are generally
divided into activator E2F (E2F1--E2F3a), repressor E2F (E2F3b--E2F5) and
inhibitor E2F (E2F6--E2F8) subclasses based on their structur-e and function.
Studies have showed that the mammalian E2F family members represent a recent
evolutionary adaptation to malignancies besides hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
and a growing body of evidence has validated that the individual members of the
family develop a close relationship with HCC. E2F1 was identified to play
overlapping roles in HCC, while E2F2--E2F8 (except E2F6 and E2F7) showed to be
tumor-promoter in HCC. However, the mechanism underlying the mammalian E2Fs
associated with HCC is still unknown and needs further research. The aim of this 
review is to sum up the collective knowledge of E2F family and the roles of each 
member of this family in HCC. Moreover, we will discuss some novel therapeutic
target for HCC based on the complicated functions of mammalian E2Fs.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24440307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 12;8(9):e73693. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073693. eCollection
2013.

Atypical E2fs control lymphangiogenesis through transcriptional regulation of
Ccbe1 and Flt4.

Weijts BG(1), van Impel A, Schulte-Merker S, de Bruin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(9). doi:10.1371/annotation/25c7c486-9e68-4df9-af01-2fe1c5d1a2d4.

Lymphatic vessels are derived from venous endothelial cells and their formation
is governed by the Vascular endothelial growth factor C (VegfC)/Vegf receptor 3
(Vegfr3; Flt4) signaling pathway. Recent studies show that Collagen and Calcium
Binding EGF domains 1 protein (Ccbe1) enhances VegfC-dependent lymphangiogenesis.
Both Ccbe1 and Flt4 have been shown to be indispensable for lymphangiogenesis.
However, how these essential players are transcriptionally regulated remains
poorly understood. In the case of angiogenesis, atypical E2fs (E2f7 and E2f8)
however have been recently shown to function as transcriptional activators for
VegfA. Using a genome-wide approach we here identified both CCBE1 and FLT4 as
direct targets of atypical E2Fs. E2F7/8 directly bind and stimulate the CCBE1
promoter, while recruitment of E2F7/8 inhibits the FLT4 promoter. Importantly,
inactivation of e2f7/8 in zebrafish impaired venous sprouting and
lymphangiogenesis with reduced ccbe1 expression and increased flt4 expression.
Remarkably, over-expression of e2f7/8 rescued Ccbe1- and Flt4-dependent
lymphangiogenesis phenotypes. Together these results identified E2f7/8 as novel
in vivo transcriptional regulators of Ccbe1 and Flt4, both essential genes for
venous sprouting and lymphangiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3771987
PMID: 24069224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cell Cycle. 2013 Sep 15;12(18):2992-3000. doi: 10.4161/cc.26030. Epub 2013 Aug
13.

Unbiased transcriptome signature of in vivo cell proliferation reveals pro- and
antiproliferative gene networks.

Cohen M(1), Vecsler M, Liberzon A, Noach M, Zlotorynski E, Tzur A.

Author information: 
(1)The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences; Bar-Ilan University;
Ramat-Gan, Israel; Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology Institute; Bar-Ilan
University; Ramat-Gan, Israel.

Different types of mature B-cell lymphocytes are overall highly similar.
Nevertheless, some B cells proliferate intensively, while others rarely do. Here,
we demonstrate that a simple binary classification of gene expression in
proliferating vs. resting B cells can identify, with remarkable selectivity,
global in vivo regulators of the mammalian cell cycle, many of which are also
post-translationally regulated by the APC/C E3 ligase. Consequently, we discover 
a novel regulatory network between the APC/C and the E2F transcription factors
and discuss its potential impact on the G1-S transition of the cell cycle. In
addition, by focusing on genes whose expression inversely correlates with
proliferation, we demonstrate the inherent ability of our approach to also
identify in vivo regulators of cell differentiation, cell survival, and other
antiproliferative processes. Relying on data sets of wt, non-transgenic animals, 
our approach can be applied to other cell lineages and human data sets.

PMCID: PMC3875674
PMID: 23974109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cell Cycle. 2013 Sep 15;12(18):3037-51. doi: 10.4161/cc.26078. Epub 2013 Aug 20.

E2F-7 couples DNA damage-dependent transcription with the DNA repair process.

Zalmas LP(1), Coutts AS, Helleday T, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology; Department of Oncology; University of Oxford;
Oxford, UK.

The cellular response to DNA damage, mediated by the DNA repair process, is
essential in maintaining the integrity and stability of the genome. E2F-7 is an
atypical member of the E2F family with a role in negatively regulating
transcription and cell cycle progression under DNA damage. Surprisingly, we found
that E2F-7 makes a transcription-independent contribution to the DNA repair
process, which involves E2F-7 locating to and binding damaged DNA. Further, E2F-7
recruits CtBP and HDAC to the damaged DNA, altering the local chromatin
environment of the DNA lesion. Importantly, the E2F-7 gene is a target for
somatic mutation in human cancer and tumor-derived mutant alleles encode proteins
with compromised transcription and DNA repair properties. Our results establish
that E2F-7 participates in 2 closely linked processes, allowing it to directly
couple the expression of genes involved in the DNA damage response with the DNA
repair machinery, which has relevance in human malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3875678
PMID: 23974101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(8):e1003726. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003726. Epub 2013 Aug 
15.

Characterization of the p53 cistrome--DNA binding cooperativity dissects p53's
tumor suppressor functions.

Schlereth K(1), Heyl C, Krampitz AM, Mernberger M, Finkernagel F, Scharfe M,
Jarek M, Leich E, Rosenwald A, Stiewe T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology, Philipps-University, Marburg, Germany.

p53 protects us from cancer by transcriptionally regulating tumor suppressive
programs designed to either prevent the development or clonal expansion of
malignant cells. How p53 selects target genes in the genome in a context- and
tissue-specific manner remains largely obscure. There is growing evidence that
the ability of p53 to bind DNA in a cooperative manner prominently influences
target gene selection with activation of the apoptosis program being completely
dependent on DNA binding cooperativity. Here, we used ChIP-seq to comprehensively
profile the cistrome of p53 mutants with reduced or increased cooperativity. The 
analysis highlighted a particular relevance of cooperativity for extending the
p53 cistrome to non-canonical binding sequences characterized by deletions,
spacer insertions and base mismatches. Furthermore, it revealed a striking
functional separation of the cistrome on the basis of cooperativity; with low
cooperativity genes being significantly enriched for cell cycle and high
cooperativity genes for apoptotic functions. Importantly, expression of high but 
not low cooperativity genes was correlated with superior survival in breast
cancer patients. Interestingly, in contrast to most p53-activated genes,
p53-repressed genes did not commonly contain p53 binding elements. Nevertheless, 
both the degree of gene activation and repression were cooperativity-dependent,
suggesting that p53-mediated gene repression is largely indirect and mediated by 
cooperativity-dependently transactivated gene products such as CDKN1A, E2F7 and
non-coding RNAs. Since both activation of apoptosis genes with non-canonical
response elements and repression of pro-survival genes are crucial for p53's
apoptotic activity, the cistrome analysis comprehensively explains why
p53-induced apoptosis, but not cell cycle arrest, strongly depends on the
intermolecular cooperation of p53 molecules as a possible safeguard mechanism
protecting from accidental cell killing.

PMCID: PMC3744428
PMID: 23966881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 23;288(34):24581-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.467506. Epub 2013
Jul 13.

Interaction of E2F7 transcription factor with E2F1 and C-terminal-binding protein
(CtBP) provides a mechanism for E2F7-dependent transcription repression.

Liu B(1), Shats I, Angus SP, Gatza ML, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Department of Molecular
Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
27708, USA.

Previous work has identified distinct functions for E2F proteins during a
cellular proliferative response including a role for E2F1-3 in the activation of 
transcription at G1/S and a role for E2F4-8 in repressing the same group of
E2F1-3 target genes as cells progress through S phase. We now find that E2F7 and 
E2F8, which are induced by E2F1-3 at G1/S, can form a heterodimer with E2F1
through interactions involving the DNA-binding domains of the two proteins. In
vitro DNA interaction assays demonstrate the formation of an E2F1-E2F7 complex,
as well as an E2F7-E2F7 complex on adjacent E2F-binding sites. We also show that 
E2F7 recruits the co-repressor C-terminal-binding protein (CtBP) and that CtBP2
is essential for E2F7 to repress E2F1 transcription. Taken together, these
findings suggest a mechanism for the repression of transcription by E2F7.

PMCID: PMC3750156
PMID: 23853115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 18;8(6):e65644. Print 2013.

PPARß Regulates Liver Regeneration by Modulating Akt and E2f Signaling.

Liu HX(1), Fang Y, Hu Y, Gonzalez FJ, Fang J, Wan YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
California, Sacramento, California, United States of America.

The current study tests the hypothesis that peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor ß (PPARß) has a role in liver regeneration due to its effect in
regulating energy homeostasis and cell proliferation. The role of PPARß in liver 
regeneration was studied using two-third partial hepatectomy (PH) in Wild-type
(WT) and PPARß-null (KO) mice. In KO mice, liver regeneration was delayed and the
number of Ki-67 positive cells reached the peak at 60 hr rather than at 36-48 hr 
after PH shown in WT mice. RNA-sequencing uncovered 1344 transcriptomes that were
differentially expressed in regenerating WT and KO livers. About 70% of those
differentially expressed genes involved in glycolysis and fatty acid synthesis
pathways failed to induce during liver regeneration due to PPARß deficiency. The 
delayed liver regeneration in KO mice was accompanied by lack of activation of
phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1)/Akt. In addition, cell
proliferation-associated increase of genes encoding E2f transcription factor
(E2f) 1-2 and E2f7-8 as well as their downstream target genes were not noted in
KO livers 36-48 hr after PH. E2fs have dual roles in regulating metabolism and
proliferation. Moreover, transient steatosis was only found in WT, but not in KO 
mice 36 hr after PH. These data suggested that PPARß-regulated PDK1/Akt and E2f
signaling that controls metabolism and proliferation is involved in the normal
progression of liver regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3688817
PMID: 23823620  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


28. Cell Rep. 2013 Apr 25;3(4):1252-65. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.03.004. Epub 2013 
Apr 4.

Suppression of nucleotide metabolism underlies the establishment and maintenance 
of oncogene-induced senescence.

Aird KM(1), Zhang G, Li H, Tu Z, Bitler BG, Garipov A, Wu H, Wei Z, Wagner SN,
Herlyn M, Zhang R.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression and Regulation Program, The Wistar Institute Cancer Center,
The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Oncogene-induced senescence is characterized by a stable cell growth arrest, thus
providing a tumor suppression mechanism. However, the underlying mechanisms for
this phenomenon remain unknown. Here, we show that a decrease in
deoxyribonucleotide triphosphate (dNTP) levels underlies oncogene-induced stable 
senescence-associated cell growth arrest. The decrease in dNTP levels is caused
by oncogene-induced repression of ribonucleotide reductase subunit M2 (RRM2), a
rate-limiting protein in dNTP synthesis. This precedes the senescence-associated 
cell-cycle exit and coincides with the DNA damage response. Consistently, RRM2
downregulation is both necessary and sufficient for senescence. Strikingly,
suppression of nucleotide metabolism by RRM2 repression is also necessary for
maintenance of the stable senescence-associated cell growth arrest. Furthermore, 
RRM2 repression correlates with senescence status in benign nevi and melanoma,
and its knockdown drives senescence of melanoma cells. These data reveal the
molecular basis whereby the stable growth arrest of oncogene-induced senescence
is established and maintained through suppression of nucleotide metabolism.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3840499
PMID: 23562156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Oncogene. 2014 Mar 13;33(11):1407-17. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.86. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Downregulation of serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 3 induces G1 cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis in colon cancer cells.

Kurokawa K(1), Akaike Y(1), Masuda K(1), Kuwano Y(1), Nishida K(1), Yamagishi
N(1), Kajita K(1), Tanahashi T(1), Rokutan K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stress Science, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University 
of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.

Serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 3 (SRSF3) likely has wide-ranging roles in
gene expression and facilitation of tumor cell growth. SRSF3 knockdown induced G1
arrest and apoptosis in colon cancer cells (HCT116) in association with altered
expression of 833 genes. Pathway analysis revealed 'G1/S Checkpoint Regulation'
as the most highly enriched category in the affected genes. SRSF3 knockdown did
not induce p53 or stimulate phosphorylation of p53 or histone H2A.X in wild-type 
HCT116 cells. Furthermore, the knockdown induced G1 arrest in p53-null HCT116
cells, suggesting that p53-dependent DNA damage responses did not mediate the G1 
arrest. Real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and western
blotting confirmed that SRSF3 knockdown reduced mRNA and protein levels of
cyclins (D1, D3 and E1), E2F1 and E2F7. The decreased expression of cyclin D and 
E2F1 likely impaired the G1-to-S-phase progression. Consequently, retinoblastoma 
protein remained hypophosphorylated in SRSF3 knockdown cells. The knockdown also 
induced apoptosis in association with reduction of BCL2 protein levels. We also
found that SRSF3 knockdown facilitated skipping of 81 5'-nucleotides (27 amino
acids) from exon 8 of homeodomain-interacting protein kinase-2 (HIPK2) and
produced a HIPK2 <U+0394>e8 isoform. Full-length HIPK2 (HIPK2 FL) is constantly degraded
through association with an E3 ubiquitin ligase (Siah-1), whereas HIPK2 <U+0394>e8,
lacking the 27 amino acids, lost Siah-1-binding ability and became resistant to
proteasome digestion. Interestingly, selective knockdown of HIPK2 FL induced
apoptosis in various colon cancer cells expressing wild-type or mutated p53.
Thus, these findings disclose an important role of SRSF3 in the regulation of the
G1-to-S-phase progression and alternative splicing of HIPK2 in tumor growth.

PMID: 23503458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Transcription. 2013 Mar-Apr;4(2):62-6. doi: 10.4161/trns.23680. Epub 2013 Feb 14.

HIF proteins connect the RB-E2F factors to angiogenesis.

Bakker WJ(1), Weijts BG, Westendorp B, de Bruin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Recently, we showed that E2F7 and E2F8 (E2F7/8) are critical regulators of
angiogenesis through transcriptional control of VEGFA in cooperation with HIF.
(1) Here we investigate the existence of other novel putative angiogenic
E2F7/8-HIF targets, and discuss the role of the RB-E2F pathway in regulating
angiogenesis during embryonic and tumor development.

PMCID: PMC3646055
PMID: 23412359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cell Death Dis. 2012 Oct 25;3:e413. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2012.151.

The microRNA-26a target E2F7 sustains cell proliferation and inhibits monocytic
differentiation of acute myeloid leukemia cells.

Salvatori B(1), Iosue I, Mangiavacchi A, Loddo G, Padula F, Chiaretti S, Peragine
N, Bozzoni I, Fazi F, Fatica A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology 'Charles Darwin' and Institute Pasteur
Cenci-Bolognetti, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Blocks in genetic programs required for terminal myeloid differentiation and
aberrant proliferation characterize acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells.
1,25-Dihydroxy-vitamin D3 (VitD3) arrests proliferation of AML cells and induces 
their differentiation into mature monocytes. In a previous study, we showed that 
miR-26a was induced upon VitD3-mediated monocytic differentiation. Here, we
identify E2F7 as a novel target of miR-26a. We show that E2F7 significantly
promotes cell cycle progression and inhibits monocytic differentiation of AML
cells. We also demonstrate that E2F7 binds the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 
p21(CIP1/WAF1) (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A) promoter repressing its
expression. Moreover, interfering with E2F7 expression results in inhibition of
c-Myc (v-myc myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homolog) transcriptional activity.
This leads to the downregulation of c-Myc transcriptional target miR-17-92
cluster, whose expression has a well-defined role in contributing to block
monocytic differentiation and sustain AML cell proliferation. Finally, we show
that the expression of E2F7 is upregulated in primary blasts from AML patients.
Thus, these findings indicate that the newly identified miR-26a target E2F7 might
have an important role in monocytic differentiation and leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3481138
PMID: 23096114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nat Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;14(11):1192-202. doi: 10.1038/ncb2595. Epub 2012 Oct 14.

Canonical and atypical E2Fs regulate the mammalian endocycle.

Chen HZ(1), Ouseph MM, Li J, Pécot T, Chokshi V, Kent L, Bae S, Byrne M, Duran C,
Comstock G, Trikha P, Mair M, Senapati S, Martin CK, Gandhi S, Wilson N, Liu B,
Huang YW, Thompson JC, Raman S, Singh S, Leone M, Machiraju R, Huang K, Mo X,
Fernandez S, Kalaszczynska I, Wolgemuth DJ, Sicinski P, Huang T, Jin V, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Solid Tumor Biology Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and 
Medical Genetics, Department of Molecular Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The endocycle is a variant cell cycle consisting of successive DNA synthesis and 
gap phases that yield highly polyploid cells. Although essential for metazoan
development, relatively little is known about its control or physiologic role in 
mammals. Using lineage-specific cre mice we identified two opposing arms of the
E2F program, one driven by canonical transcription activation (E2F1, E2F2 and
E2F3) and the other by atypical repression (E2F7 and E2F8), that converge on the 
regulation of endocycles in vivo. Ablation of canonical activators in the two
endocycling tissues of mammals, trophoblast giant cells in the placenta and
hepatocytes in the liver, augmented genome ploidy, whereas ablation of atypical
repressors diminished ploidy. These two antagonistic arms coordinate the
expression of a unique G2/M transcriptional program that is critical for mitosis,
karyokinesis and cytokinesis. These results provide in vivo evidence for a direct
role of E2F family members in regulating non-traditional cell cycles in mammals.

PMCID: PMC3616487
PMID: 23064266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Nat Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;14(11):1181-91. doi: 10.1038/ncb2585. Epub 2012 Oct 14.

E2F8 is essential for polyploidization in mammalian cells.

Pandit SK(1), Westendorp B, Nantasanti S, van Liere E, Tooten PC, Cornelissen PW,
Toussaint MJ, Lamers WH, de Bruin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, 3584CL Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Polyploidization is observed in all mammalian species and is a characteristic
feature of hepatocytes, but its molecular mechanism and biological significance
are unknown. Hepatocyte polyploidization in rodents occurs through incomplete
cytokinesis, starts after weaning and increases with age. Here, we show in mice
that atypical E2F8 is induced after weaning and required for hepatocyte
binucleation and polyploidization. A deficiency in E2f8 led to an increase in the
expression level of E2F target genes promoting cytokinesis and thereby preventing
polyploidization. In contrast, loss of E2f1 enhanced polyploidization and
suppressed the polyploidization defect of hepatocytes deficient for atypical
E2Fs. In addition, E2F8 and E2F1 were found on the same subset of target
promoters. Contrary to the long-standing hypothesis that polyploidization
indicates terminal differentiation and senescence, we show that prevention of
polyploidization through inactivation of atypical E2Fs has, surprisingly, no
impact on liver differentiation, zonation, metabolism and regeneration. Together,
these results identify E2F8 as a repressor and E2F1 as an activator of a
transcriptional network controlling polyploidization in mammalian cells.

PMID: 23064264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Invest New Drugs. 2013 Apr;31(2):458-60. doi: 10.1007/s10637-012-9882-y. Epub
2012 Oct 2.

The non-genotoxic activator of the p53 pathway Nutlin-3 shifts the balance
between E2F7 and E2F1 transcription factors in leukemic cells.

di Iasio MG(1), Zauli G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology and Embryology, University of Ferrara, Ferrara,
Italy.

The effect of Nutlin-3, a small molecule inhibitor of the MDM2/p53 interaction,
was investigated on the steady-state mRNA levels of the transcription factors
E2F1 and E2F7 in a cohort of primary B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL)
patient samples (n = 15) and normal peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). A 
24-h treatment with Nutlin-3 significantly down-regulated E2F1 and promoted the
concomitant up-regulation of E2F7 in both leukemic and normal cells. Our data
suggest that the ability of Nutlin-3 to up-regulate E2F7 likely represents an
important molecular determinant in the anti-proliferative activity of Nutlin-3.

PMID: 23054209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. EMBO J. 2012 Oct 3;31(19):3871-84. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.231. Epub 2012 Aug 17.

E2F7 and E2F8 promote angiogenesis through transcriptional activation of VEGFA in
cooperation with HIF1.

Weijts BG(1), Bakker WJ, Cornelissen PW, Liang KH, Schaftenaar FH, Westendorp B, 
de Wolf CA, Paciejewska M, Scheele CL, Kent L, Leone G, Schulte-Merker S, de
Bruin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The E2F family of transcription factors plays an important role in controlling
cell-cycle progression. While this is their best-known function, we report here
novel functions for the newest members of the E2F family, E2F7 and E2F8 (E2F7/8).
We show that simultaneous deletion of E2F7/8 in zebrafish and mice leads to
severe vascular defects during embryonic development. Using a panel of transgenic
zebrafish with fluorescent-labelled blood vessels, we demonstrate that E2F7/8 are
essential for proper formation of blood vessels. Despite their classification as 
transcriptional repressors, we provide evidence for a molecular mechanism through
which E2F7/8 activate the transcription of the vascular endothelial growth factor
A (VEGFA), a key factor in guiding angiogenesis. We show that E2F7/8 directly
bind and stimulate the VEGFA promoter independent of canonical E2F binding
elements. Instead, E2F7/8 form a transcriptional complex with the hypoxia
inducible factor 1 (HIF1) to stimulate VEGFA promoter activity. These results
uncover an unexpected link between E2F7/8 and the HIF1-VEGFA pathway providing a 
molecular mechanism by which E2F7/8 control angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3463843
PMID: 22903062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Genes Dev. 2012 Jul 15;26(14):1546-57. doi: 10.1101/gad.196238.112.

The atypical E2F family member E2F7 couples the p53 and RB pathways during
cellular senescence.

Aksoy O(1), Chicas A, Zeng T, Zhao Z, McCurrach M, Wang X, Lowe SW.

Author information: 
(1)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA.

Oncogene-induced senescence is an anti-proliferative stress response program that
acts as a fail-safe mechanism to limit oncogenic transformation and is regulated 
by the retinoblastoma protein (RB) and p53 tumor suppressor pathways. We identify
the atypical E2F family member E2F7 as the only E2F transcription factor potently
up-regulated during oncogene-induced senescence, a setting where it acts in
response to p53 as a direct transcriptional target. Once induced, E2F7 binds and 
represses a series of E2F target genes and cooperates with RB to efficiently
promote cell cycle arrest and limit oncogenic transformation. Disruption of RB
triggers a further increase in E2F7, which induces a second cell cycle checkpoint
that prevents unconstrained cell division despite aberrant DNA replication.
Mechanistically, E2F7 compensates for the loss of RB in repressing mitotic E2F
target genes. Together, our results identify a causal role for E2F7 in cellular
senescence and uncover a novel link between the RB and p53 pathways.

PMCID: PMC3404383
PMID: 22802529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Genes Dev. 2012 Jul 15;26(14):1533-45. doi: 10.1101/gad.184911.111.

E2F7, a novel target, is up-regulated by p53 and mediates DNA damage-dependent
transcriptional repression.

Carvajal LA(1), Hamard PJ, Tonnessen C, Manfredi JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, 
New York 10029, USA.

The p53 tumor suppressor protein is a transcription factor that exerts its
effects on the cell cycle via regulation of gene expression. Although the
mechanism of p53-dependent transcriptional activation has been well-studied, the 
molecular basis for p53-mediated repression has been elusive. The E2F family of
transcription factors has been implicated in regulation of cell cycle-related
genes, with E2F6, E2F7, and E2F8 playing key roles in repression. In response to 
cellular DNA damage, E2F7, but not E2F6 or E2F8, is up-regulated in a
p53-dependent manner, with p53 being sufficient to increase expression of E2F7.
Indeed, p53 occupies the promoter of the E2F7 gene after genotoxic stress,
consistent with E2F7 being a novel p53 target. Ablation of E2F7 expression
abrogates p53-dependent repression of a subset of its targets, including E2F1 and
DHFR, in response to DNA damage. Furthermore, E2F7 occupancy of the E2F1 and DHFR
promoters is detected, and expression of E2F7 is sufficient to inhibit cell
proliferation. Taken together, these results show that p53-dependent
transcriptional up-regulation of its target, E2F7, leads to repression of
relevant gene expression. In turn, this E2F7-dependent mechanism contributes to
p53-dependent cell cycle arrest in response to DNA damage.

PMCID: PMC3404382
PMID: 22802528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Dev Cell. 2012 Apr 17;22(4):849-62. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.01.013.

Atypical E2F repressors and activators coordinate placental development.

Ouseph MM(1), Li J, Chen HZ, Pécot T, Wenzel P, Thompson JC, Comstock G, Chokshi 
V, Byrne M, Forde B, Chong JL, Huang K, Machiraju R, de Bruin A, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Solid Tumor Biology Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and 
Medical Genetics, Human Cancer Genetics Program, Comprehensive Cancer Center,
College of Medicine and Public Health, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA.

The evolutionarily ancient arm of the E2f family of transcription factors
consisting of the two atypical members E2f7 and E2f8 is essential for murine
embryonic development. However, the critical tissues, cellular processes, and
molecular pathways regulated by these two factors remain unknown. Using a series 
of fetal and placental lineage-specific cre mice, we show that E2F7/E2F8
functions in extraembryonic trophoblast lineages are both necessary and
sufficient to carry fetuses to term. Expression profiling and biochemical
approaches exposed the canonical E2F3a activator as a key family member that
antagonizes E2F7/E2F8 functions. Remarkably, the concomitant loss of E2f3a
normalized placental gene expression programs, corrected placental defects, and
fostered the survival of E2f7/E2f8-deficient embryos to birth. In summary, we
identified a placental transcriptional network tightly coordinated by activation 
and repression through two distinct arms of the E2F family that is essential for 
extraembryonic cell proliferation, placental development, and fetal viability.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3483796
PMID: 22516201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Blood. 2012 May 10;119(19):4532-42. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-388231. Epub 2012 
Mar 14.

Concomitant inactivation of Rb and E2f8 in hematopoietic stem cells synergizes to
induce severe anemia.

Hu T(1), Ghazaryan S, Sy C, Wiedmeyer C, Chang V, Wu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, New Jersey Medical
School-University Hospital Cancer Center, University of Medicine and Dentistry of
New Jersey, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

The retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor suppressor plays important roles in regulating
hematopoiesis, particularly erythropoiesis. In an effort to understand whether Rb
function can be mediated by E2F transcription factors in a BM-derived
hematopoietic system in mice, we uncovered a functional synergy between Rb and
E2F8 to promote erythropoiesis and to prevent anemia. Specifically, whereas
Mx1-Cre-mediated inactivation of Rb or E2f8 in hematopoietic stem cells only led 
to mild erythropoietic defects, concomitant inactivation of both genes resulted
in marked ineffective erythropoiesis and mild hemolysis, leading to severe anemia
despite the presence of enhanced extramedullary erythropoiesis. Interestingly,
although ineffective erythropoiesis was already present in the Rb<U+0394>/<U+0394> mice and
exacerbated in the Rb<U+0394>/<U+0394>;E2f8<U+0394>/<U+0394> mice, hemolysis was exclusively manifested in
the double-knockout mice. Using an adoptive transfer system and an
erythroid-specific knockout system, we have shown that the synergy of Rb and E2f8
deficiency in triggering severe anemia is intrinsic to the erythroid lineage.
Surprisingly, concomitant inactivation of Rb and E2f7, a close family member of
E2f8, did not substantially worsen the erythropoietic defect resulted from Rb
deficiency. The results of the present study reveal the specificity of E2F8 in
mediating Rb function in erythropoiesis and suggest critical and overlapping
roles of Rb and E2f8 in maintaining normal erythropoiesis and in preventing
hemolysis.

PMCID: PMC3362366
PMID: 22422820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Lab Invest. 2012 Apr;92(4):571-83. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2012.10. Epub 2012 Feb 
13.

Downregulation of microRNAs miR-1, -206 and -29 stabilizes PAX3 and CCND2
expression in rhabdomyosarcoma.

Li L(1), Sarver AL, Alamgir S, Subramanian S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Elevated levels of PAX3 and cell proliferation genes are characteristic features 
of rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). We hypothesize that the increased levels of these
genes are stabilized due to downregulation of specific miRNAs. In this study, we 
show that downregulation of miR-1, -206 and -29 stabilizes the expression of PAX3
and CCND2 in both embryonal (ERMS) and alveolar (ARMS) RMS types. Ectopic
expression of miR-1 and 206 in JR1, an ERMS cell line, show significant
downregulation of PAX3 protein expression, whereas overexpression of these miRNAs
in Rh30, an ARMS cell line, did not show any effect in PAX3 protein levels. In
ARMS, PAX3 forms a fusion transcript with FOXO1 and the resultant loss of PAX3
3'UTR in the fusion transcript indicate an oncogenic mechanism to evade
miRNA-mediated regulation of PAX3. Further, we show that miR-1, -206 and -29 can 
regulate the expression of CCND2, a cell cycle gene. In addition to CCND2, miR-29
also targets E2F7, another cell cycle regulator. Cell function analysis shows
that overexpression of miR-29 downregulates the expression of these cell cycle
genes, induces partial G1 arrest leading to decreased cell proliferation. Taken
together our data suggest that the RMS state is stabilized by the deregulation of
multiple miRNAs and their target genes, supporting a tumor suppressor role for
these miRNA.

PMID: 22330340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Int J Mol Sci. 2011;12(12):8947-60. doi: 10.3390/ijms12128947. Epub 2011 Dec 6.

The role of the E2F transcription factor family in UV-induced apoptosis.

Hazar-Rethinam M(1), Endo-Munoz L, Gannon O, Saunders N.

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Pathobiology Group, University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, 
Princess Alexandra Hospital, Queensland 4102, Australia. m.rethinam@uq.edu.au

The E2F transcription factor family is traditionally associated with cell cycle
control. However, recent data has shown that activating E2Fs (E2F1-3a) are potent
activators of apoptosis. In contrast, the recently cloned inhibitory E2Fs (E2F7
and 8) appear to antagonize E2F-induced cell death. In this review we will
discuss (i) the potential role of E2Fs in UV-induced cell death and (ii) the
implications of this to the development of UV-induced cutaneous malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3257110
PMID: 22272113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Apr;40(8):3511-23. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr1203. Epub 2011
Dec 17.

E2F7 represses a network of oscillating cell cycle genes to control S-phase
progression.

Westendorp B(1), Mokry M, Groot Koerkamp MJ, Holstege FC, Cuppen E, de Bruin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

E2F transcription factors are known to be important for timely activation of
G(1)/S and G(2)/M genes required for cell cycle progression, but transcriptional 
mechanisms for deactivation of cell cycle-regulated genes are unknown. Here, we
show that E2F7 is highly expressed during mid to late S-phase, occupies promoters
of G(1)/S-regulated genes and represses their transcription. ChIP-seq analysis
revealed that E2F7 binds preferentially to genomic sites containing the TTCCCGCC 
motif, which closely resembles the E2F consensus site. We identified 89 target
genes that carry E2F7 binding sites close to the transcriptional start site and
that are directly repressed by short-term induction of E2F7. Most of these target
genes are known to be activated by E2Fs and are involved in DNA replication,
metabolism and DNA repair. Importantly, induction of E2F7 during G(0)-G(1)/S
resulted in S-phase arrest and DNA damage, whereas expression of E2F7 during
G(2)/M failed to disturb cell cycle progression. These findings provide strong
evidence that E2F7 directly controls the downswing of oscillating G(1)/S genes
during S-phase progression.

PMCID: PMC3333892
PMID: 22180533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Genetics. 2011 Aug;188(4):897-905. doi: 10.1534/genetics.111.128421. Epub 2011
May 19.

Hox and a newly identified E2F co-repress cell death in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Winn J(1), Carter M, Avery L, Cameron S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75235-9148, USA. jennifer.winn@utsouthwestern.edu

The development of an organism depends on individual cells receiving and
executing their specific fates, although how this process is regulated remains
largely unknown. Here, we identify a mechanism by which a specific cell fate,
apoptosis, is determined through the cooperative efforts of Hox and E2F proteins.
E2F transcription factors are critical, conserved regulators of the cell cycle
and apoptosis. However, little is known about the two most recently discovered
mammalian E2Fs-E2F7 and E2F8. In the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, we identify
a novel E2F7/8 homolog, EFL-3, and show that EFL-3 functions cooperatively with
LIN-39, providing the first example in which these two major developmental
pathways-E2F and Hox-are able to directly regulate the same target gene. Our
studies demonstrate that LIN-39 and EFL-3 function in a cell type-specific
context to regulate transcription of the egl-1 BH3-only cell death gene and to
determine cell fate during development.

PMCID: PMC3176086
PMID: 21596899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Gastroenterology. 2011 Jul;141(1):326-37, 337.e1-3. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2011.03.047. Epub 2011 Mar 27.

The promoter of human telomerase reverse transcriptase is activated during liver 
regeneration and hepatocyte proliferation.

Sirma H(1), Kumar M, Meena JK, Witt B, Weise JM, Lechel A, Ande S, Sakk V,
Guguen-Guillouzo C, Zender L, Rudolph KL, Günes C.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institute, Hamburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Telomerase activity has not been detected in healthy human
liver biopsy samples, but it is up-regulated in most human liver tumors. It is
not clear whether telomerase is activated in response to acute or chronic liver
injury. Telomerase activity is closely associated with expression of its
catalytic subunit, telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT). We analyzed the
activity of the human TERT (hTERT) promoter during liver regeneration in vivo and
hepatocyte proliferation in vitro.
METHODS: We used hTERTp-lacZ transgenic mice, which contain an 8.0-kilobase pair 
fragment of the hTERT gene promoter, to study the role of TERT in liver
regeneration following partial hepatectomy. As an in vitro model, we used the
HepaRG cell line as a new model system for human hepatocyte proliferation and
differentiation.
RESULTS: Activity of the hTERT promoter increased significantly after partial
hepatectomy; it was also induced in hepatocytes, based on immunohistologic
analysis. Similar to the in vivo results, telomerase activity and hTERT
expression were up-regulated in proliferating HepaRG cells and repressed in
response to growth arrest and differentiation. Promoter mapping revealed that a
proximal 0.3-kilobase pair fragment contains all elements necessary for
regulation of hTERT in HepaRG cells. We identified E2F2 and E2F7 as transcription
factors that control the differential expression of hTERT in proliferating
hepatocytes, in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: hTERT is induced in hepatocytes during liver regeneration,
indicating a functional role for telomerase in human liver.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21447332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Invest Dermatol. 2011 May;131(5):1077-84. doi: 10.1038/jid.2010.430. Epub 2011 
Jan 20.

Loss of E2F7 expression is an early event in squamous differentiation and causes 
derepression of the key differentiation activator Sp1.

Hazar-Rethinam M(1), Cameron SR, Dahler AL, Endo-Munoz LB, Smith L, Rickwood D,
Saunders NA.

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Pathobiology Group, Diamantina Institute, Princess Alexandra
Hospital, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Squamous differentiation is controlled by key transcription factors such as Sp1
and E2F. We have previously shown that E2F1 can suppress transcription of the
differentiation-specific gene, transglutaminase type 1 (TG1), by an indirect
mechanism mediated by Sp1. Transient transfection of E2F1-E2F6 indicated that
E2F-mediated reduction of Sp1 transcription was not responsible for E2F-mediated 
suppression of squamous differentiation. However, we found that E2F4 and E2F7,
but not E2Fs 1, 2, 3, 5, or 6, could suppress the activation of the Sp1 promoter 
in differentiated keratinocytes (KCs). E2F4-mediated suppression could not be
antagonized by E2Fs 1, 2, 3, 5, or 6 and was localized to a region of the human
Sp1 promoter spanning -139 to + 35 bp. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis, as
well as transient overexpression and short hairpin RNA knockdown experiments
indicate that E2F7 binds to a unique binding site located between -139 and -119
bp of the Sp1 promoter, and knockdown of E2F7 in proliferating KCs leads to a
derepression of Sp1 expression and the induction of TG1. In contrast, E2F4
knockdown in proliferating KCs did not alter Sp1 expression. These data indicate 
that loss of E2F7 during the initiation of differentiation leads to the
derepression of Sp1 and subsequent transcription of differentiation-specific
genes such as TG1.

PMID: 21248772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Toxicol In Vitro. 2010 Oct;24(7):1962-70. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2010.08.007. Epub
2010 Aug 21.

Validation of reference gene stability for APAP hepatotoxicity studies in
different in vitro systems and identification of novel potential toxicity
biomarkers.

Fox BC(1), Devonshire AS, Schutte ME, Foy CA, Minguez J, Przyborski S, Maltman D,
Bokhari M, Marshall D.

Author information: 
(1)LGC Limited, Queens Road, Teddington, Middlesex TW11 0LY, United Kingdom.

Liver cell lines and primary hepatocytes are becoming increasingly valuable for
in vitro toxicogenomic studies, with RT-qPCR enabling the analysis of gene
expression profiles following exposure to potential hepatotoxicants. Supporting
the accurate normalisation of RT-qPCR data requires the identification of
reference genes which have stable expression during in vitro toxicology studies. 
Therefore, we performed a comprehensive analysis of reference gene stability in
two routinely used cell types, (HepG2 cells and primary rat hepatocytes), and two
in vitro culture systems, (2D monolayer and 3D scaffolds). A robust reference
gene validation strategy was performed, consisting of geNorm analysis, to test
for pair wise variation in gene expression, and statistical analysis using
analysis of variance. This strategy identified stable reference genes with
respect to acetaminophen treatment and time in HepG2 cells (GAPDH and PPIA), and 
with respect to acetaminophen treatment and culture condition in primary
hepatocytes (18S rRNA and a-tubulin). Following the selection of reference genes,
the novel target genes E2F7 and IL-11RA were identified as potential toxicity
biomarkers for acetaminophen treatment. We conclude that accurate quantification 
of gene expression requires the use of a validated normalisation strategy for
each species and experimental system employed.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20732408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. BMC Med Genomics. 2009 Dec 15;2:68. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-2-68.

A transcriptomic computational analysis of mastic oil-treated Lewis lung
carcinomas reveals molecular mechanisms targeting tumor cell growth and survival.

Moulos P(1), Papadodima O, Chatziioannou A, Loutrari H, Roussos C, Kolisis FN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Research and Biotechnology, National Hellenic Research
Foundation, Athens, Greece. pmoulos@eie.gr

BACKGROUND: Mastic oil from Pistacia lentiscus variation chia, a blend of
bioactive terpenes with recognized medicinal properties, has been recently shown 
to exert anti-tumor growth activity through inhibition of cancer cell
proliferation, survival, angiogenesis and inflammatory response. However, no
studies have addressed its mechanisms of action at genome-wide gene expression
level.
METHODS: To investigate molecular mechanisms triggered by mastic oil, Lewis Lung 
Carcinoma cells were treated with mastic oil or DMSO and RNA was collected at
five distinct time points (3-48 h). Microarray expression profiling was performed
using Illumina mouse-6 v1 beadchips, followed by computational analysis. For a
number of selected genes, RT-PCR validation was performed in LLC cells as well as
in three human cancer cell lines of different origin (A549, HCT116, K562). PTEN
specific inhibition by a bisperovanadium compound was applied to validate its
contribution to mastic oil-mediated anti-tumor growth effects.
RESULTS: In this work we demonstrated that exposure of Lewis lung carcinomas to
mastic oil caused a time-dependent alteration in the expression of 925 genes. GO 
analysis associated expression profiles with several biological processes and
functions. Among them, modifications on cell cycle/proliferation, survival and
NF-kappaB cascade in conjunction with concomitant regulation of genes encoding
for PTEN, E2F7, HMOX1 (up-regulation) and NOD1 (down-regulation) indicated some
important mechanistic links underlying the anti-proliferative, pro-apoptotic and 
anti-inflammatory effects of mastic oil. The expression profiles of Hmox1, Pten
and E2f7 genes were similarly altered by mastic oil in the majority of test
cancer cell lines. Inhibition of PTEN partially reversed mastic oil effects on
tumor cell growth, indicating a multi-target mechanism of action. Finally,
k-means clustering, organized the significant gene list in eight clusters
demonstrating a similar expression profile. Promoter analysis in a representative
cluster revealed shared putative cis-elements suggesting a common regulatory
transcription mechanism.
CONCLUSIONS: Present results provide novel evidence on the molecular basis of
tumor growth inhibition mediated by mastic oil and set a rational basis for
application of genomics and bioinformatic methodologies in the screening of
natural compounds with potential cancer chemopreventive activities.

PMCID: PMC2801511
PMID: 20003503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 1;69(5):1800-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2725. Epub
2009 Feb 17.

E2F7 can regulate proliferation, differentiation, and apoptotic responses in
human keratinocytes: implications for cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
formation.

Endo-Munoz L(1), Dahler A, Teakle N, Rickwood D, Hazar-Rethinam M, Abdul-Jabbar
I, Sommerville S, Dickinson I, Kaur P, Paquet-Fifield S, Saunders N.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Unit, Cancer Collaborative Group, Princess Alexandra
Hospital, Wooloongabba, Queensland 4102, Australia.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 1;69(17):7130.

The E2F family of transcription factors plays a crucial role in the regulation of
genes involved in cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. In
keratinocytes, the inhibition of E2F is a key step in the control and initiation 
of squamous differentiation. Because the product of the recently identified
E2F7a/E2F7b gene has been shown to repress E2F-regulated promoters, and to be
abundant in skin, we examined its role in the epidermis. Our results indicate
that E2F7b mRNA expression is selectively associated with proliferation-competent
keratinocytes. Moreover, E2F7 was able to antagonize E2F1-induced proliferation
and apoptosis. In contrast, although E2F7 was able to inhibit proliferation and
initiate differentiation, it was unable to antagonize the differentiation
suppression induced by E2F1. These data indicate that E2F7-mediated suppression
of proliferation and apoptosis acts through E2F1-dependent pathways, whereas
E2F7-induced differentiation acts through an E2F1-independent pathway. These data
also suggest that proliferation, differentiation, and survival of primary human
keratinocytes can be controlled by the relative ratio of E2F1 to E2F7. Because
deregulated proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis are hallmarks of
cancer, we examined the expression levels of E2F1 and E2F7 in cutaneous squamous 
cell carcinomas (CSCC). We found that both genes were overexpressed in CSCCs
compared with normal epidermis. Furthermore, inhibition of E2F7 in a SCC cell
line sensitized the cells to UV-induced apoptosis and doxorubicin-induced
apoptosis. Combined, these data suggest that the selected disruption of E2F1 and 
E2F7 in keratinocytes is likely to contribute to CSCC formation and may prove to 
be a viable therapeutic target.

PMID: 19223542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Trends Cell Biol. 2009 Mar;19(3):111-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2009.01.002. Epub 2009
Feb 7.

Atypical E2Fs: new players in the E2F transcription factor family.

Lammens T(1), Li J, Leone G, De Veylder L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Systems Biology, Flanders Institute for Biotechnology
(VIB), 9052 Gent, Belgium.

As major regulators of the cell cycle, apoptosis and differentiation, E2F
transcription factors have been studied extensively in a broad range of
organisms. The recent identification of atypical E2F family members further
expands our structural, functional and molecular view of the cellular E2F
activity. Unlike other family members, atypical E2Fs have a duplicated
DNA-binding domain and control gene expression without heterodimerization with
dimerization partner proteins. Recently, knockout strategies in plants and
mammals have pinpointed that atypical E2Fs have a crucial role in plant cell size
control, endocycle regulation, proliferation and apoptotic response upon DNA
stress. Their position at the crossroads of proliferation and DNA stress response
marks these novel E2F proteins as interesting study objects in the field of tumor
biology.

PMCID: PMC2808192
PMID: 19201609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 23;105(38):14721-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0806510105. Epub 2008 Sep 11.

Atypical E2F activity restrains APC/CCCS52A2 function obligatory for endocycle
onset.

Lammens T(1), Boudolf V, Kheibarshekan L, Zalmas LP, Gaamouche T, Maes S,
Vanstraelen M, Kondorosi E, La Thangue NB, Govaerts W, Inzé D, De Veylder L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Systems Biology, Flanders Institute for Biotechnology and 
Department of Molecular Genetics, Ghent University, 9052 Gent, Belgium.

The endocycle represents an alternative cell cycle that is activated in various
developmental processes, including placental formation, Drosophila oogenesis, and
leaf development. In endocycling cells, mitotic cell cycle exit is followed by
successive doublings of the DNA content, resulting in polyploidy. The timing of
endocycle onset is crucial for correct development, because polyploidization is
linked with cessation of cell division and initiation of terminal
differentiation. The anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) activator genes
CDH1, FZR, and CCS52 are known to promote endocycle onset in human, Drosophila,
and Medicago species cells, respectively; however, the genetic pathways governing
development-dependent APC/C(CDH1/FZR/CCS52) activity remain unknown. We report
that the atypical E2F transcription factor E2Fe/DEL1 controls the expression of
the CDH1/FZR orthologous CCS52A2 gene from Arabidopsis thaliana. E2Fe/DEL1
misregulation resulted in untimely CCS52A2 transcription, affecting the timing of
endocycle onset. Correspondingly, ectopic CCS52A2 expression drove cells into the
endocycle prematurely. Dynamic simulation illustrated that E2Fe/DEL1 accounted
for the onset of the endocycle by regulating the temporal expression of CCS52A2
during the cell cycle in a development-dependent manner. Analogously, the
atypical mammalian E2F7 protein was associated with the promoter of the
APC/C-activating CDH1 gene, indicating that the transcriptional control of APC/C 
activator genes by atypical E2Fs might be evolutionarily conserved.

PMCID: PMC2567204
PMID: 18787127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. EMBO Rep. 2008 Mar;9(3):252-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7401158. Epub 2008 Jan 18.

DNA-damage response control of E2F7 and E2F8.

Zalmas LP(1), Zhao X, Graham AL, Fisher R, Reilly C, Coutts AS, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Medical Sciences Division, John Radcliffe
Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxon, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.

Here, we report that the two recently identified E2F subunits, E2F7 and E2F8, are
induced in cells treated with DNA-damaging agents where they have an important
role in dictating the outcome of the DNA-damage response. The
DNA-damage-dependent induction coincides with the binding of E2F7 and E2F8 to the
promoters of certain E2F-responsive genes, most notably that of the E2F1 gene, in
which E2F7 and E2F8 coexist in a DNA-binding complex. As a consequence, E2F7 and 
E2F8 repress E2F target genes, such as E2F1, and reducing the level of each
subunit results in an increase in E2F1 expression and activity. Importantly,
depletion of either E2F7 or E2F8 prevents the cell-cycle effects that occur in
response to DNA damage. Thus, E2F7 and E2F8 act upstream of E2F1, and influence
the ability of cells to undergo a DNA-damage response. E2F7 and E2F8, therefore, 
underpin the DNA-damage response.

PMCID: PMC2267382
PMID: 18202719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Dev Cell. 2008 Jan;14(1):62-75. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2007.10.017.

Synergistic function of E2F7 and E2F8 is essential for cell survival and
embryonic development.

Li J(1), Ran C, Li E, Gordon F, Comstock G, Siddiqui H, Cleghorn W, Chen HZ,
Kornacker K, Liu CG, Pandit SK, Khanizadeh M, Weinstein M, Leone G, de Bruin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2008 Jan;14(1):1-3.

The E2f7 and E2f8 family members are thought to function as transcriptional
repressors important for the control of cell proliferation. Here, we have
analyzed the consequences of inactivating E2f7 and E2f8 in mice and show that
their individual loss had no significant effect on development. Their combined
ablation, however, resulted in massive apoptosis and dilation of blood vessels,
culminating in lethality by embryonic day E11.5. A deficiency in E2f7 and E2f8
led to an increase in E2f1 and p53, as well as in many stress-related genes.
Homo- and heterodimers of E2F7 and E2F8 were found on target promoters, including
E2f1. Importantly, loss of either E2f1 or p53 suppressed the massive apoptosis in
double-mutant embryos. These results identify E2F7 and E2F8 as a unique
repressive arm of the E2F transcriptional network that is critical for embryonic 
development and control of the E2F1-p53 apoptotic axis.

PMCID: PMC2253677
PMID: 18194653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Dev Cell. 2008 Jan;14(1):1-3. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2007.12.017.

E2F7 and E2F8 keep the E2F family in balance.

Moon NS(1), Dyson N.

Author information: 
(1)MGH Cancer Center, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Erratum in
    Dev Cell. 2008 Feb;14(2):312.

Comment on
    Dev Cell. 2008 Jan;14(1):62-75.

An article by Li and colleagues (in this issue of Developmental Cell) shows that 
the atypical E2Fs, E2F7 and E2F8, are critical for mouse development. One of the 
important functions of these family members stems from a negative feedback loop
in which E2F7 and E2F8 limit the expression of E2F1 and prevent E2F1-dependent
apoptosis.

PMID: 18194644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Jan 1;13(1):144-51.

Clinical relevance of E2F family members in ovarian cancer--an evaluation in a
training set of 77 patients.

Reimer D(1), Sadr S, Wiedemair A, Stadlmann S, Concin N, Hofstetter G,
Müller-Holzner E, Marth C, Zeimet AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Innsbruck Medical University,
Innsbruck, Austria.

PURPOSE: The major obstacle in treating ovarian cancer is the rapid development
of platinum resistance during therapy. Deregulation of members of the E2F family 
of transcription factors is crucially involved in carcinogenesis and probably in 
mechanisms underlying platinum resistance. We therefore investigated the
relevance of the whole set of E2F family members in predicting clinical outcome
and their significance in predicting platinum resistance.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Real-time PCR of all E2F family members was done from 77
ovarian carcinomas, defined as our training set, and 8 healthy control samples.
The correlation with clinicopathologic characteristics, platinum resistance, and 
survival was investigated. Furthermore, the cross-talk of E2F family members was 
assessed for its value in predicting survival and platinum resistance.
RESULTS: The proliferation-promoting E2F1 and E2F2 were associated with grade 3
tumors and residual disease >2 cm in diameter after initial surgery. Survival
analyses showed low expression of E2F1 or E2F2 to be significantly associated
with favorable disease-free and overall survival (E2F1, P = 0.039 and 0.047,
respectively; E2F2, P = 0.009 and 0.006, respectively). In contrast, high
expression of inhibiting E2F4 or E2F7 predicted favorable disease-free and
overall survival (E2F4, P = 0.047 and 0.042, respectively; E2F7, P = 0.048 and
0.042, respectively). A high E2F2 to E2F4 ratio was the most valuable prognostic 
variable for disease-free survival in multivariate analysis (hazard ratio, 6.494;
P = 0.002). Tumors considered platinum resistant were associated with lower E2F4 
and E2F7 expression (P = 0.012 and 0.009, respectively) compared with
platinum-sensitive tumors. Again, ratios of E2F1 or E2F2 to E2F7 were the most
favorable variables in predicting platinum resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: We here show that deregulation of both proliferation-promoting and
proliferation-inhibiting E2F transcription factors and their cross-talk is
crucially involved in the tumor biology of ovarian cancer and influences clinical
outcome. Furthermore, down-regulation of E2F7 may contribute to mechanisms
underlying platinum resistance, and calculation of ratios of
proliferation-promoting E2F1 to E2F7 could serve as a putative predictor of
platinum resistance.

PMID: 17200349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Sep 22;33(17):5458-70. Print 2005.

Characterization of E2F8, a novel E2F-like cell-cycle regulated repressor of
E2F-activated transcription.

Christensen J(1), Cloos P, Toftegaard U, Klinkenberg D, Bracken AP, Trinh E,
Heeran M, Di Stefano L, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Research & Innovation Centre (BRIC) Fruebjergvej 3, 2100 Copenhagen Ø,
Denmark.

The E2F family of transcription factors are downstream effectors of the
retinoblastoma protein, pRB, pathway and are essential for the timely regulation 
of genes necessary for cell-cycle progression. Here we describe the
characterization of human and murine E2F8, a new member of the E2F family.
Sequence analysis of E2F8 predicts the presence of two distinct E2F-related DNA
binding domains suggesting that E2F8 and, the recently, identified E2F7 form a
subgroup within the E2F family. We show that E2F transcription factors bind the
E2F8 promoter in vivo and that expression of E2F8 is being induced at the G1/S
transition. Purified recombinant E2F8 binds specifically to a consensus
E2F-DNA-binding site indicating that E2F8, like E2F7, binds DNA without the
requirement of co-factors such as DP1. E2F8 inhibits E2F-driven promoters
suggesting that E2F8 is transcriptional repressor like E2F7. Ectopic expression
of E2F8 in diploid human fibroblasts reduces expression of E2F-target genes and
inhibits cell growth consistent with a role for repressing E2F transcriptional
activity. Taken together, these data suggest that E2F8 has an important role in
turning of the expression of E2F-target genes in the S-phase of the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC1236722
PMID: 16179649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Oncogene. 2005 Jul 21;24(31):5000-4.

E2F-8: an E2F family member with a similar organization of DNA-binding domains to
E2F-7.

Logan N(1), Graham A, Zhao X, Fisher R, Maiti B, Leone G, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK.

E2F is a family of transcription factors implicated in cell cycle control. To
understand the role of E2F in controlling cell cycle progression, it is necessary
to clarify the breadth of the E2F family. To date, seven E2F subunits have been
identified. We report here the characterization of a new E2F subunit, E2F-8,
which resembles the organization of E2F-7 in the presence of two separate
DNA-binding domains, the integrity of which is required for E2F-8 to bind to DNA.
Furthermore, like E2F-7, we find that E2F-8 can repress transcription and delay
cell cycle progression. The similarities between E2F-7 and E2F-8 define a new
subgroup of the E2F family, and further imply that E2F-7 and E2F-8 may act
through overlapping mechanisms in mediating cell cycle control.

PMID: 15897886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 6;280(18):18211-20. Epub 2005 Feb 18.

Cloning and characterization of mouse E2F8, a novel mammalian E2F family member
capable of blocking cellular proliferation.

Maiti B(1), Li J, de Bruin A, Gordon F, Timmers C, Opavsky R, Patil K, Tuttle J, 
Cleghorn W, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology
and Medical Genetics, and Department of Molecular Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The E2F transcription factor family plays a crucial and well established role in 
cell cycle progression. Deregulation of E2F activities in vivo leads to
developmental defects and cancer. Based on current evidence in the field,
mammalian E2Fs can be functionally categorized into either transcriptional
activators (E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3a) or repressors (E2F3b, E2F4, E2F5, E2F6, and
E2F7). We have identified a novel E2F family member, E2F8, which is conserved in 
mice and humans and has its counterpart in Arabidopsis thaliana (E2Ls).
Interestingly, E2F7 and E2F8 share unique structural features that distinguish
them from other mammalian E2F repressor members, including the presence of two
distinct DNA-binding domains and the absence of DP-dimerization,
retinoblastoma-binding, and transcriptional activation domains. Similar to E2F7, 
overexpression of E2F8 significantly slows down the proliferation of primary
mouse embryonic fibroblasts. These observations, together with the fact that E2F7
and E2F8 can homodimerize and are expressed in the same adult tissues, suggest
that they may have overlapping and perhaps synergistic roles in the control of
cellular proliferation.

PMID: 15722552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Curr Biol. 2005 Jan 11;15(1):59-63.

The DP-E2F-like gene DEL1 controls the endocycle in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Vlieghe K(1), Boudolf V, Beemster GT, Maes S, Magyar Z, Atanassova A, de Almeida 
Engler J, De Groodt R, Inzé D, De Veylder L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Systems Biology, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for
Biotechnology, Ghent University, Technologiepark 927, Gent B-9052, Belgium.

Endoreduplication or DNA replication without mitosis is widespread in nature.
Well-known examples are fruit fly polytene chromosomes and cereal endosperm.
Although endocycles are thought to be driven by the same regulators as those that
control the G1-S transition of the mitotic cell cycle, the molecular mechanisms
that differentiate mitotically dividing cells from endoreduplicating ones are
largely unknown. A novel class of atypical E2F-like proteins has recently been
identified and is designated E2F7 in mammals and DP-E2F-like (DEL) in Arabidopsis
thaliana . We demonstrate that loss of DEL1 function resulted in increased ploidy
levels, whereas ectopic expression of DEL1 reduced endoreduplication. Ploidy
changes were correlated with altered expression of a subset of E2F target genes
encoding proteins necessary for DNA replication. Because DEL1 proteins were
postulated to antagonize the E2F pathway, we generated DEL1-E2Fa-DPa triple
transgenics. DEL1 inhibited the endoreduplication phenotype, but not the ectopic 
cell divisions that resulted from the overexpression of both E2Fa and DPa,
illustrating that DEL1 specifically represses the endocycle. Because DEL1
transcripts were detected exclusively in mitotically dividing cells, we conclude 
that DEL1 is an important novel inhibitor of the endocycle and preserves the
mitotic state of proliferating cells by suppressing transcription of genes that
are required for cells to enter the DNA endoreduplication cycle.

PMID: 15649366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Oncogene. 2004 Jul 1;23(30):5138-50.

E2F-7: a distinctive E2F family member with an unusual organization of
DNA-binding domains.

Logan N(1), Delavaine L, Graham A, Reilly C, Wilson J, Brummelkamp TR, Hijmans
EM, Bernards R, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Davidson Building, University 
of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK.

The E2F family of transcription factors play an important role in regulating cell
cycle progression. We report here the characterization and functional properties 
of a new member of the human E2F family, referred to as E2F-7. E2F-7 has two
separate DNA-binding domains, a feature that distinguishes E2F-7 from other
mammalian E2F proteins, but resembling the organization of recently isolated
E2F-like proteins from Arabidopsis. E2F-7 binds to DNA independently of a DP
partner and delays cell cycle progression. Interestingly, E2F-7 modulates the
transcription properties of other E2F proteins. A mutational analysis indicates
that the integrity of both DNA-binding domains is required for cell cycle delay
and transcriptional modulation. Biochemical results and protein modelling studies
suggest that in binding to DNA interactions occur between the two DNA-binding
domains, most probably as a homodimer, thereby mimicking the organization of an
E2F/DP heterodimer. These structural and functional properties of E2F-7 imply a
unique role in regulating cellular proliferation.

PMID: 15133492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. EMBO J. 2003 Dec 1;22(23):6289-98.

E2F7, a novel E2F featuring DP-independent repression of a subset of
E2F-regulated genes.

Di Stefano L(1), Jensen MR, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Department of Experimental Oncology, Via
Ripamonti 435, 20141 Milan, Italy.

The E2F family of transcription factors play an essential role in the regulation 
of cell cycle progression. In a screen for E2F-regulated genes we identified a
novel E2F family member, E2F7. Like the recently identified E2F-like proteins of 
Arabidopsis, E2F7 has two DNA binding domains and binds to the E2F DNA binding
consensus site independently of DP co-factors. Consistent with being an E2F
target gene, we found that the expression of E2F7 is cell cycle regulated.
Ectopic expression of E2F7 results in suppression of E2F target genes and
accumulation of cells in G1. Furthermore, E2F7 associates with E2F-regulated
promoters in vivo, and this association increases in S phase. Interestingly,
however, E2F7 binds only a subset of E2F-dependent promoters in vivo, and in
agreement with this, inhibition of E2F7 expression results in specific
derepression of these promoters. Taken together, these data demonstrate that E2F7
is a unique repressor of a subset of E2F target genes whose products are required
for cell cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC291854
PMID: 14633988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 24;278(43):42041-9. Epub 2003 Jul 31.

Identification and characterization of E2F7, a novel mammalian E2F family member 
capable of blocking cellular proliferation.

de Bruin A(1), Maiti B, Jakoi L, Timmers C, Buerki R, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology
and Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

The mammalian E2F family of transcription factors plays a crucial role in the
regulation of cellular proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation. Consistent 
with its biological role in a number of important cellular processes, E2F
regulates the expression of genes involved in cell cycle, DNA replication, DNA
repair, and mitosis. It has proven difficult, however, to determine the specific 
roles played by the various known family members in these cellular processes. The
work presented here now extends the complexity of this family even further by the
identification of a novel E2F family member, which we now term E2F7. Like the
expression of the known E2F activators, E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3, the expression of
E2F7 is growth-regulated, at least in part, through E2F binding elements on its
promoter, and its protein product is localized to the nucleus and associates with
DNA E2F recognition sites with high affinity. A number of salient features,
however, make this member unique among the E2F family. First, the E2F7 gene
encodes a protein that possesses two distinct DNA-binding domains and that lacks 
a dimerization domain as well as a transcriptional activation and a
retinoblastoma-binding domain. In contrast to the E2F activators, E2F7 can block 
the E2F-dependent activation of a subset of E2F target genes as well as mitigate 
cellular proliferation of mouse embryo fibroblasts. These findings identify E2F7 
as a novel member of the mammalian E2F transcription factor family that has
properties of a transcriptional repressor capable of negatively influencing
cellular proliferation.

PMID: 12893818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


