
1. Exp Ther Med. 2016 Mar;11(3):864-872. Epub 2016 Jan 18.

Expression profile analysis based on DNA microarray for patients undergoing
off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery.

Sun Y(1), Gao Y(1), Sun J(2), Liu X(1), Ma D(1), Ma C(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, The First Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China. (2)Cancer Center, The First Hospital of
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China.

Off-pump coronary artery bypass (OPCAB) surgery is the most effective treatment
for coronary heart disease. The aim of this study was to explore the effects of
OPCAB on the basis of the associated molecular mechanisms. GSE12486 expression
profiles downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database (GEO) were analyzed
to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Principal component
analysis (PCA) was conducted based on the expression profiles of DEGs. Function
and pathway enrichment of upregulated DEGs was performed, followed by
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network construction. Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis (GSEA) was used for miRNA enrichment analysis based on expression
profiles and prediction of their association with the disease. Cytoscape was
applied to construct miRNA regulatory networks of DEGs. In total 64 DEGs were
identified, including 63 upregulated and 1 downregulated gene. The first
principal component in the PCA analysis was able to distinguish between pre- and 
post-OPCAB samples. Upregulated DEGs mainly enriched 20 Gene Ontology terms, such
as chemokine activity, and 5 pathways including the chemokine signaling pathway. 
The constructed PPI network contained 234 edges and 55 nodes, and 10 upregulated 
hub nodes, including FBJ murine osteosarcoma viral oncogene homolog (FOS), were
screened. A total of 36 miRNAs, including MIR-224 and MIR-7, were screened by
GSEA enrichment analysis. A miRNA regulatory network including 176 edges and 97
nodes was constructed, showing the regulatory relationships between miRNAs and
DEGs. For example, early growth response 2 (EGR2) was regulated by 8 miRNAs
including MIR-150, MIR-142-3P, MIR-367 and MIR-224. The identified DEGs might
play important roles in patients pre- and post-OPCAB surgery via the regulation
of associated genes.

PMCID: PMC4774345
PMID: 26998004  [PubMed]


2. Exp Neurol. 2016 Mar 12;279:243-260. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2016.03.012. [Epub 
ahead of print]

The multiple sclerosis drug fingolimod (FTY720) stimulates neuronal gene
expression, axonal growth and regeneration.

Anastasiadou S(1), Knöll B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, Ulm University, Albert-Einstein-Allee
11, 89081 Ulm, Germany. (2)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, Ulm University, 
Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany. Electronic address:
bernd.knoell@uni-ulm.de.

Fingolimod (FTY720) is a new generation oral treatment for multiple sclerosis
(MS). So far, FTY720 was mainly considered to target trafficking of immune cells 
but not brain cells such as neurons. Herein, we analyzed FTY720's potential to
directly alter neuronal function. In CNS neurons, we identified a FTY720 governed
gene expression response. FTY720 upregulated immediate early genes (IEGs)
encoding for neuronal activity associated transcription factors such as c-Fos,
FosB, Egr1 and Egr2 and induced actin cytoskeleton associated genes (actin
isoforms, tropomyosin, calponin). Stimulation of primary neurons with FTY720
enhanced neurite growth and altered growth cone morphology. In accordance, FTY720
enhanced axon regeneration in mice upon facial nerve axotomy. We identified
components of a FTY720 engaged signaling cascade including S1P receptors,
G12/13G-proteins, RhoA-GTPases and the transcription factors SRF/MRTF. In
summary, we uncovered a broader cellular and therapeutic operation mode of
FTY720, suggesting beneficial FTY720 effects also on CNS neurons during MS
therapy and for treatment of other neurodegenerative diseases requiring
neuroprotective and neurorestorative processes.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26980486  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Dev Biol. 2016 Mar 3. pii: S0012-1606(15)30251-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.02.030. [Epub ahead of print]

The analysis of novel distal Cebpa enhancers and silencers using a
transcriptional model reveals the complex regulatory logic of hematopoietic
lineage specification.

Bertolino E(1), Reinitz J(2), Manu(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, The University of Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. Electronic address: eric.bertolino@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, The University of Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60637, USA; Department of Statistics, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA; Department of Ecology and Evolution and Institute of
Genomics and Systems Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. 
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolution and Institute of Genomics and Systems
Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA; Department of
Biology, University of North Dakota, 10 Cornell Street, Stop 9019, Grand Forks,
ND 58202-9019, USA. Electronic address: manu.manu@und.edu.

C/EBPa plays an instructive role in the macrophage-neutrophil cell-fate decision 
and its expression is necessary for neutrophil development. How Cebpa itself is
regulated in the myeloid lineage is not known. We decoded the cis-regulatory
logic of Cebpa, and two other myeloid transcription factors, Egr1 and Egr2, using
a combined experimental-computational approach. With a reporter design capable of
detecting both distal enhancers and silencers, we analyzed 46 putative
cis-regulatory modules (CRMs) in cells representing myeloid progenitors, and
derived early macrophages or neutrophils. In addition to novel enhancers, this
analysis revealed a surprisingly large number of silencers. We determined the
regulatory roles of 15 potential transcriptional regulators by testing 32,768
alternative sequence-based transcriptional models against CRM activity data. This
comprehensive analysis allowed us to infer the cis-regulatory logic for most of
the CRMs. Silencer-mediated repression of Cebpa was found to be effected mainly
by TFs expressed in non-myeloid lineages, highlighting a previously unappreciated
contribution of long-distance silencing to hematopoietic lineage resolution. The 
repression of Cebpa by multiple factors expressed in alternative lineages
suggests that hematopoietic genes are organized into densely interconnected
repressive networks instead of hierarchies of mutually repressive pairs of
pivotal TFs. More generally, our results demonstrate that de novo cis-regulatory 
dissection is feasible on a large scale with the aid of transcriptional modeling.
(1)Current address: Department of Biology, University of North Dakota, 10 Cornell
Street, Stop 9019, Grand Forks, ND 58202-9019, USA.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26945717  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2016 Mar 3. pii: ATVBAHA.115.306770. [Epub ahead
of print]

Regulation of Vascular Smooth Muscle Cell Dysfunction Under Diabetic Conditions
by miR-504.

Reddy MA(1), Das S(1), Zhuo C(1), Jin W(1), Wang M(1), Lanting L(1), Natarajan
R(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Diabetes Complications and Metabolism, Beckman Research
Institute of City of Hope, Duarte, CA. (2)From the Department of Diabetes
Complications and Metabolism, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, Duarte,
CA. rnatarajan@coh.org mreddy@coh.org.

OBJECTIVE: Diabetes mellitus accelerates proatherogenic and proinflammatory
phenotype of vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) associated with vascular
complications. Evidence shows that microRNAs (miRNAs) play key roles in VSMC
functions, but their role under diabetic conditions is unclear. We profiled
miRNAs in VSMC from diabetic mice and examined their role in VSMC dysfunction.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: High throughput small RNA-sequencing identified 135
differentially expressed miRNAs in VSMC from type 2 diabetic db/db mice
(db/dbVSMC) versus nondiabetic db/+ mice. Several of these miRNAs were known to
regulate VSMC functions. We further focused on miR-504, because it was highly
upregulated in db/dbVSMC, and its function in VSMC is unknown. miR-504 and its
host gene Fgf13 were significantly increased in db/dbVSMC and in aortas from
db/db mice. Bioinformatics analysis predicted that miR-504 targets including
signaling adaptor Grb10 and transcription factor Egr2 could regulate growth
factor signaling. We experimentally validated Grb10 and Egr2 as novel targets of 
miR-504. Overexpression of miR-504 in VSMC inhibited contractile genes and
enhanced extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 activation, proliferation, and
migration. These effects were blocked by miR-504 inhibitors. Grb10 knockdown
mimicked miR-504 functions and increased inflammatory genes. Egr2
knockdown-inhibited anti-inflammatory Socs1 and increased proinflammatory genes. 
Furthermore, high glucose and palmitic acid upregulated miR-504 and inflammatory 
genes, but downregulated Grb10.
CONCLUSIONS: Diabetes mellitus misregulates several miRNAs including miR-504 that
can promote VSMC dysfunction. Because changes in many of these miRNAs are
sustained in diabetic VSMC even after in vitro culture, they may be involved in
metabolic memory of vascular complications. Targeting such mechanisms could offer
novel therapeutic strategies for diabetic complications.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 26941017  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Anim Genet. 2016 Mar 1. doi: 10.1111/age.12413. [Epub ahead of print]

Transcriptional profiling of subcutaneous adipose tissue in Italian Large White
pigs divergent for backfat thickness.

Zambonelli P(1), Gaffo E(2), Zappaterra M(1), Bortoluzzi S(2), Davoli R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural and-Food Sciences (DISTAL), Bologna University, Via
Fratelli Rosselli 107, 42123, Reggio Emilia, Italy. (2)Department of Molecular
Medicine, University of Padova, Via Gabelli 63, 35121, Padova, Italy.

Fat deposition is a widely studied trait in pigs because of its implications with
animal growth efficiency, technological and nutritional characteristics of meat
products, but the global framework of the biological and molecular processes
regulating fat deposition in pigs is still incomplete. This study describes the
backfat tissue transcription profile in Italian Large White pigs and reports
genes differentially expressed between fat and lean animals according to RNA-seq 
data. The backfat transcription profile was characterised by the expression of
23 483 genes, of which 54.1% were represented by known genes. Of 63 418 expressed
transcripts, about 80% were non-previously annotated isoforms. By comparing the
expression level of fat vs. lean pigs, we detected 86 robust differentially
expressed transcripts, 72 more highly expressed (e.g. ACP5, BCL2A1, CCR1, CD163, 
CD1A, EGR2, ENPP1, GPNMB, INHBB, LYZ, MSR1, OLR1, PIK3AP1, PLIN2, SPP1, SLC11A1, 
STC1) and 14 lower expressed (e.g. ADSSL1, CDO1, DNAJB1, HSPA1A, HSPA1B, HSPA2,
HSPB8, IGFBP5, OLFML3) in fat pigs. The main functional categories enriched in
differentially expressed genes were immune system process, response to stimulus, 
cell activation and skeletal system development, for the overexpressed genes, and
unfolded protein binding and stress response, for the underexpressed genes, which
included five heat shock proteins. Adipose tissue alterations and impaired stress
response are linked to inflammation and, in turn, to adipose tissue secretory
activity, similar to what is observed in human obesity. Our results provide the
opportunity to identify biomarkers of carcass fat traits to improve the pig
production chain and to identify genetic factors that regulate the observed
differential expression.

© 2016 Stichting International Foundation for Animal Genetics.

PMID: 26931818  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Eur J Immunol. 2016 Mar 2. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545905. [Epub ahead of print]

Fasciola hepatica tegumental antigens induce anergic like T cells via dendritic
cells in a mannose receptor dependent manner.

Aldridge A(1), O'Neill SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fundamental and Translational Immunology group, School of Biotechnology,
Faculty of Science and Health, Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin,
Ireland.

FoxP3(+) Treg cells and anergic T cells are the two regulatory phenotypes of
T-cell responses associated with helminth infection. Here, we examine the T-cell 
responses in mice during Fasciola hepatica infection, and to its tegumental
antigens (FhTeg) that are shed from the fluke every 2-3 hours. FhTeg comprises a 
rich source of glycoproteins, mainly oligomannose N-glycans that bind to mannose 
receptor. This study demonstrated a novel mechanism for the T-cell
unresponsiveness observed during F. hepatica infection and after injection with
FhTeg. Markers of T cell anergy, such as GRAIL, EGR2, ICOS and ITCH, are enhanced
amongst CD4(+) T-cell populations during infection and following FhTeg injection.
This is characterised by a lack of cytokine responses and reduced proliferative
activity which can be reversed with the addition of IL-2. FhTeg activated
dendritic cells (DCs) suppress T cells in vitro as measured by enhanced GRAIL and
CTLA4 by RNA and supressed cytokine expression in anti-CD3 stimulated CD4(+)  T
cells. FhTeg-treated DCs have enhanced MR expression which is critical for
DC-CD4(+) T cell communication. Taken together, this study presents markers of
anergy in a mouse model of F. hepatica infection, and improves our understanding 
of host-pathogen interactions and how helminths modulate host immunity. This
article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26931640  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. J Orthop Res. 2016 Feb 22. doi: 10.1002/jor.23209. [Epub ahead of print]

RNA-seq analysis of clinical-grade osteochondral allografts reveals activation of
early response genes.

Lin Y(1,)(2), Lewallen EA(1), Camilleri ET(1), Bonin CA(1), Jones DL(1),
Dudakovic A(1), Galeano-Garces C(1), Wang W(1,)(3), Karperien MJ(4), Larson
AN(1), Dahm DL(1), Stuart MJ(1), Levy BA(1), Smith J(1), Ryssman DB(1),
Westendorf JJ(1), Im HJ(5), van Wijnen AJ(1), Riester SM(1), Krych AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 55905.
(2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, WuHan Orthopedics Hospital/Puai Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430033,
China. (4)Department of Developmental BioEngineering, University of Twente,
Enschede, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Biochemistry, Rush University Medical
Center, Chicago, IL, 60612.

Preservation of osteochondral allografts used for transplantation is critical to 
ensure favorable outcomes for patients after surgical treatment of cartilage
defects. To study the biological effects of protocols currently used for
cartilage storage, we investigated differences in gene expression between stored 
allograft cartilage and fresh cartilage from living donors using high throughput 
molecular screening strategies. We applied next generation RNA sequencing
(RNA-seq) and real-time reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (RT-qPCR) to assess genome-wide differences in mRNA expression between
stored allograft cartilage and fresh cartilage tissue from living donors. Gene
ontology analysis was used to characterize biological pathways associated with
differentially expressed genes. Our studies establish reduced levels of mRNAs
encoding cartilage related extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins (i.e., COL1A1,
COL2A1, COL10A1, ACAN, DCN, HAPLN1, TNC, and COMP) in stored cartilage. These
changes occur concomitantly with increased expression of 'early response genes'
that encode transcription factors mediating stress/cytoprotective responses (i.e.
EGR1, EGR2, EGR3, MYC, FOS, FOSB, FOSL1, FOSL2, JUN, JUNB and JUND). The elevated
expression of 'early response genes' and reduced levels of ECM-related mRNAs in
stored cartilage allografts suggests that tissue viability may be maintained by a
cytoprotective program that reduces cell metabolic activity. These findings have 
potential implications for future studies focused on quality assessment and
clinical optimization of osteochondral allografts used for cartilage
transplantation. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26909883  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Epilepsy Behav. 2016 Jan 13. pii: S1525-5050(15)00675-7. doi:
10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.12.020. [Epub ahead of print]

Overexpression of the immediate-early genes Egr1, Egr2, and Egr3 in two strains
of rodents susceptible to audiogenic seizures.

López-López D(1), Gómez-Nieto R(2), Herrero-Turrión MJ(3), García-Cairasco N(4), 
Sánchez-Benito D(1), Ludeña MD(5), López DE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Neuroscience of Castilla y León (INCyL), University of
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain; Salamanca Institute for Biomedical Research (IBSAL),
Spain. (2)Institute for Neuroscience of Castilla y León (INCyL), University of
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain; Salamanca Institute for Biomedical Research (IBSAL),
Spain; Department of Cell Biology and Pathology, School of Medicine, University
of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. (3)Institute for Neuroscience of Castilla y León 
(INCyL), University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. (4)Physiology Department,
Ribeirão Preto School of Medicine, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto,
Brazil. (5)Department of Cell Biology and Pathology, School of Medicine,
University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. (6)Institute for Neuroscience of
Castilla y León (INCyL), University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain; Salamanca
Institute for Biomedical Research (IBSAL), Spain; Department of Cell Biology and 
Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
Electronic address: lopezde@usal.es.

Genetic animal models of epilepsy are an important tool for further understanding
the basic cellular mechanisms underlying epileptogenesis and for developing novel
antiepileptic drugs. We conducted a comparative study of gene expression in the
inferior colliculus, a nucleus that triggers audiogenic seizures, using two
animal models, the Wistar audiogenic rat (WAR) and the genetic audiogenic seizure
hamster (GASH:Sal). For this purpose, both models were exposed to high intensity 
auditory stimulation, and 60min later, the inferior colliculi were collected. As 
controls, intact Wistar rats and Syrian hamsters were subjected to stimulation
and tissue preparation protocols identical to those performed on the experimental
animals. Ribonucleic acid was isolated, and microarray analysis comparing the
stimulated Wistar and WAR rats showed that the genomic profile of these animals
displayed significant (fold change, |FC|=2.0 and p<0.05) upregulation of 38 genes
and downregulation of 47 genes. Comparison of gene expression profiles between
stimulated control hamsters and stimulated GASH:Sal revealed the upregulation of 
10 genes and the downregulation of 5 genes. Among the common genes that were
altered in both models, we identified the zinc finger immediate-early growth
response gene Egr3. The Egr3 protein is a transcription factor that is induced by
distinct stress-elicited factors. Based on immunohistochemistry, this protein was
expressed in the cochlear nucleus complex, the inferior colliculus, and the
hippocampus of both animal models as well as in lymphoma tumors of the GASH:Sal. 
Our results support that the overexpression of the Egr3 gene in both models might
contribute to neuronal viability and development of lymphoma in response to
stress associated with audiogenic seizures. This article is part of a Special
Issue entitled Genetic Models-Epilepsy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26775236  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 9;7(6):6676-92. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6791.

MiRNAs and piRNAs from bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell extracellular vesicles
induce cell survival and inhibit cell differentiation of cord blood hematopoietic
stem cells: a new insight in transplantation.

De Luca L(1), Trino S(1), Laurenzana I(1), Simeon V(1), Calice G(1), Raimondo
S(2), Podestà M(3), Santodirocco M(4), Di Mauro L(4), La Rocca F(1), Caivano
A(1), Morano A(1), Frassoni F(5), Cilloni D(2), Del Vecchio L(6,)(7), Musto P(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Preclinical and Translational Research, IRCCS-Centro di
Riferimento Oncologico della Basilicata (CROB), Rionero in Vulture, 85028 (PZ),
Italy. (2)Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Turin,
Turin 10126, Italy. (3)Stem Cell Center, S. Martino Hospital, Genova 16132,
Italy. (4)Transfusion Medicine Unit, Puglia Cord Blood Bank, IRCCS-Casa Sollievo 
della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, 71013 (FG), Italy. (5)Laboratorio Cellule
Staminali Post Natali e Terapie Cellulari, Giannina Gaslini Institute, Genova
16148, Italy. (6)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate S.C.a R.L., Naples, 80145, Italy. 
(7)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, Federico II
University, Naples 80131, Italy. (8)Scientific Direction, IRCCS-Centro di
Riferimento Oncologico Basilicata (CROB), Rionero in Vulture, 85028 (PZ), Italy.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSC), including umbilical cord blood CD34+ stem cells
(UCB-CD34+), are used for the treatment of several diseases. Although different
studies suggest that bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSC) support
hematopoiesis, the exact mechanism remains unclear. Recently, extracellular
vesicles (EVs) have been described as a novel avenue of cell communication, which
may mediate BM-MSC effect on HSC. In this work, we studied the interaction
between UCB-CD34+ cells and BM-MSC derived EVs. First, by sequencing EV derived
miRNAs and piRNAs we found that EVs contain RNAs able to influence UCB-CD34+ cell
fate. Accordingly, a gene expression profile of UCB-CD34+ cells treated with EVs,
identified about 100 down-regulated genes among those targeted by EV-derived
miRNAs and piRNAs (e.g. miR-27b/MPL, miR-21/ANXA1, miR-181/EGR2), indicating that
EV content was able to modify gene expression profile of receiving cells.
Moreover, we demonstrated that UCB-CD34+ cells, exposed to EVs, significantly
changed different biological functions, becoming more viable and less
differentiated. UCB-CD34+ gene expression profile also identified 103
up-regulated genes, most of them codifying for chemokines, cytokines and their
receptors, involved in chemotaxis of different BM cells, an essential function of
hematopoietic reconstitution. Finally, the exposure of UCB-CD34+ cells to EVs
caused an increased expression CXCR4, paralleled by an in vivo augmented
migration from peripheral blood to BM niche in NSG mice. This study demonstrates 
the existence of a powerful cross talk between BM-MSC and UCB-CD34+ cells,
mediated by EVs, providing new insight in the biology of cord blood
transplantation.

PMID: 26760763  [PubMed - in process]


10. Int J Cancer. 2016 Jun 1;138(11):2732-44. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29999. Epub 2016 Feb
8.

Hepatic miR-126 is a potential plasma biomarker for detection of hepatitis B
virus infected hepatocellular carcinoma.

Ghosh A(1), Ghosh A(1), Datta S(1), Dasgupta D(1), Das S(1), Ray S(2), Gupta
S(3), Datta S(1), Chowdhury A(1), Chatterjee R(4), Mohapatra SK(5), Banerjee
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatology and School of Digestive and Liver Diseases, Centre
for Liver Research, Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and Research,
Kolkata, India. (2)Division of Gastro-Intestinal Surgery, School of Digestive and
Liver Diseases, Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and Research,
Kolkata, India. (3)Centre for Liver and Biliary Surgery, Indraprastha Apollo
Hospital, New Delhi, India. (4)Human Genetics Unit, Indian Statistical Institute,
Kolkata, India. (5)National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Kalyani, India.

Controversies about the origin of circulating miRNAs have encouraged us to
identify organ specific circulating miRNAs as disease biomarkers. To identify
liver-specific miRNAs for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), global expression
profiling of miRNAs in liver tissue of HBV-HCC and HBV-control with no or mild
fibrosis was evaluated. A total of 40 differentially expressed miRNAs were
identified in HCC. Among ten highly altered miRNAs, six miRNAs were successfully 
validated in tissues, whereas only two miRNAs, miR-126 and miR-142-3p showed
increased expression in plasma of HBV-HCC compared to HBV-non-HCC patients.
Subsequently, ROC curve analysis revealed that neither miR-126 nor miR-142-3p
performed better than AFP in discriminating HCC from non-HCC while combination of
each with AFP showed significantly higher efficiency rather than AFP alone (AUC: 
0.922, 0.908 vs. 0.88; sensitivity: 0.84, 0.86 vs. 0.82 and specificity: 0.92,
0.94 vs. 0.86 respectively). Interestingly, triple combination of markers
(miR-126<U+2009>+<U+2009>miR-142-3p<U+2009>+<U+2009>AFP) showed no additive effect on efficiency (AUC: 0.925)
over the dual combination. Again, the expression of only miR-126 was noticed
significantly higher in HBV-HCC patients with low-AFP [<250 ng/ml] compared to
either non-HCC or liver cirrhosis (AUC: 0.77, 0.64, respectively). Furthermore,
no alteration in expression of mir-126 in HCV-HCC or non-viral-HCC revealed that 
miR-126<U+2009>+<U+2009>AFP might be specific to HBV-HCC. To understand the physiological role 
of these two miRNAs in hepato-carcinogenesis, target genes related to cancer
pathways (APAF1, APC2, CDKN2A, IRS1, CRKL, LIFR, EGR2) were verified. Thus,
combination of circulating miR-126<U+2009>+<U+2009>AFP is a promising noninvasive diagnostic
biomarker for HBV-HCC and may be useful in the management of HCC patients.

© 2016 UICC.

PMID: 26756996  [PubMed - in process]


11. Mol Biol Evol. 2016 Jan 6. pii: msw001. [Epub ahead of print]

"Reverse Genomics" Predicts Function of Human Conserved Noncoding Elements.

Marcovitz A(1), Jia R(2), Bejerano G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University. (2)Department of
Computer Science, Stanford University. (3)Department of Developmental Biology,
Stanford University Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University bejerano@stanford.edu.

Evolutionary changes in cis-regulatory elements are thought to play a key role in
morphological and physiological diversity across animals. Many conserved
noncoding elements (CNEs) function as cis-regulatory elements, controlling gene
expression levels in different biological contexts. However, determining specific
associations between CNEs and related phenotypes is a challenging task. Here, we 
present a computational "reverse genomics" approach that predicts the phenotypic 
functions of human CNEs. We identify thousands of human CNEs that were lost in at
least two independent mammalian lineages (IL-CNEs), and match their evolutionary 
profiles against a diverse set of phenotypes recently annotated across multiple
mammalian species. We identify 2,759 compelling associations between human CNEs
and a diverse set of mammalian phenotypes. We discuss multiple CNEs, including a 
predicted ear element near BMP7, a pelvic CNE in FBN1, a brain morphology element
in UBE4B, and an aquatic adaptation forelimb CNE near EGR2, and provide a full
list of our predictions. As more genomes are sequenced and more traits are
annotated across species, we expect our method to facilitate the interpretation
of noncoding mutations in human disease and expedite the discovery of individual 
CNEs that play key roles in human evolution and development.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26744417  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Immunol Res. 2016 Jan 6. [Epub ahead of print]

Cloning and characterizing of the murine IRF-3 gene promoter region.

Xu HG(1,)(2), Liu L(1), Gao S(1), Jin R(1), Ren W(1), Zhou GP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, 300 Guang Zhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, Jiangsu Province, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, 210029, Jiangsu Province, China. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 300 Guang 
Zhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, Jiangsu Province, China. gpzhou2003@126.com.

The interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) plays essential roles in inflammation 
and immune response. Here, we cloned the nucleotide sequence of the 5'-flanking
region of the murine IRF-3 gene (mIRF-3) and characterized the molecular
mechanisms controlling the mIRF-3 transcriptional activity in NIH3T3 cells.
Analyses of a series of 5' deletion constructs demonstrated that a 301 bp region 
(-255/+46) of the mIRF-3 gene is sufficient for full promoter activity. This
region contains IK1, Egr2, Cmyb, E2F1 and YY1 putative transcription factor
binding sites. Mutation of Egr2 or YY1 site led to 52-68 % decrease of the mIRF-3
promoter activity, and double Egr2 and YY1 mutation reduced the promoter activity
to 20 % of the wild-type promoter activity. Furthermore, knockingdown of
endogenous Egr2 or YY1 by a siRNA strategy markedly inhibited the mIRF-3 promoter
activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that Egr2 and YY1 interact 
with the mIRF-3 promoter in vivo. These results suggested that the basal promoter
activity of the mIRF-3 gene is regulated by transcription factors Egr2 and YY1 in
NIH3T3 cells.

PMID: 26740329  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Gene. 2016 Mar 10;578(2):281-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.12.041. Epub 2015 Dec
23.

Analysis of the zebrafish sox9b promoter: Identification of elements that
recapitulate organ-specific expression of sox9b.

Burns FR(1), Lanham KA(2), Xiong KM(3), Gooding AJ(4), Peterson RE(2), Heideman
W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Center, School of Medicine and Public
Health, University of Wisconsin, 1300 University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA. 
Electronic address: flpburns@gmail.com. (2)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology
Center, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin, 1300
University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA; Pharmaceutical Sciences Division,
School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin, 777 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI
53705, USA. (3)Pharmaceutical Sciences Division, School of Pharmacy, University
of Wisconsin, 777 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53705, USA; Department of
Biomolecular Chemistry, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of
Wisconsin, 420 Henry Mall, Madison, WI 53705, USA; Immunoassay Research and
Development, Beckman Coulter Inc., 1000 Lake Hazeltine Dr., Chaska, MN 55318,
USA. (4)Pharmaceutical Sciences Division, School of Pharmacy, University of
Wisconsin, 777 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

The SRY-related high-mobility box 9 (SOX9) gene is expressed in many different
tissues. To better understand the DNA elements that control tissue-specific
expression, we cloned and sequenced a 2.5kb fragment lying 5' to the zebrafish
sox9b gene transcriptional start site. Three regions of this clone contained
stable secondary structures that hindered cloning, sequencing, and amplification.
This segment and smaller fragmentswere inserted 5' of an EGFP reporter and
transgenic fish were raised with the different reporters. Reporter expression was
also observed in embryos directly injected with the constructs to transiently
express the reporter. Heart expression required only a very short 5' sequence, as
a 0.6kb sox9b fragment produced reporter expression in heart in transgenic
zebrafish, and transient experiments showed heart expression from a minimal sox9b
promoter region containing a conserved TATA box and an EGR2 element (-74/+29 bp).
Reporter expression in transgenic skeletal muscle was consistently lower than in 
other tissues. Jaw, brain, and notochord expression was strong with the
full-length clone, but was dramatically reduced as the size of the fragment
driving the reporter decreased from approximately 1.8 to 0.9kb. The 2.5kb region 
5' of the sox9b contained 7 conserved non-coding elements (CNEs) that included
putative hypoxia inducible factor 1a (HIF1a), CAAT box (CCAAT), early growth
response protein 2 (EGR2), and core promoter elements. While a synthetic fragment
containing all 7 CNEs produced some degree of reporter expression in muscle, jaw,
heart and brain, the degree of reporter expression was considerably lower than
that produced by the full length clone. These results can account for the
tissue-specific expression of sox9b in the developing zebrafish.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26721460  [PubMed - in process]


14. J Immunol. 2016 Feb 1;196(3):1102-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1502100. Epub 2015 Dec
30.

Expression of Early Growth Response Gene-2 and Regulated Cytokines Correlates
with Recovery from Guillain-Barré Syndrome.

Doncel-Pérez E(1), Mateos-Hernández L(2), Pareja E(3), García-Forcada Á(1),
Villar M(2), Tobes R(3), Romero Ganuza F(1), Vila Del Sol V(1), Ramos R(4),
Fernández de Mera IG(2), de la Fuente J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Nacional de Parapléjicos, Servicio de Salud de Castilla La Mancha,
45071 Toledo, Spain; (2)SaBio, Instituto de Investigación en Recursos Cinegéticos
IREC-CSIC-UCLM-JCCM, 13005 Ciudad Real, Spain; (3)Oh no sequences! Research
Group, Era7 Bioinformatics, 18001 Granada, Spain; (4)Fundación Parque Científico 
de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain; and. (5)SaBio, Instituto de Investigación en
Recursos Cinegéticos IREC-CSIC-UCLM-JCCM, 13005 Ciudad Real, Spain; Department of
Veterinary Pathobiology, Center for Veterinary Health Sciences, Oklahoma State
University, Stillwater, OK 74078 jose_delafuente@yahoo.com.

Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is an immune-mediated peripheral neuropathy. The
goal of this research was the identification of biomarkers associated with
recovery from GBS. In this study, we compared the transcriptome of PBMCs from a
GBS patient and her healthy twin to discover possible correlates of disease
progression and recovery. The study was then extended using GBS and spinal cord
injury unrelated patients with similar medications and healthy individuals. The
early growth response gene-2 (EGR2) was upregulated in GBS patients during
disease recovery. The results provided evidence for the implication of EGR2 in
GBS and suggested a role for EGR2 in the regulation of IL-17, IL-22, IL-28A, and 
TNF-ß cytokines in GBS patients. These results identified biomarkers associated
with GBS recovery and suggested that EGR2 overexpression has a pivotal role in
the downregulation of cytokines implicated in the pathophysiology of this acute
neuropathy.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26718337  [PubMed - in process]


15. Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2016 Mar;109(3):188-98. doi: 10.1016/j.acvd.2015.10.002.
Epub 2015 Dec 23.

Krox20 heterozygous mice: A model of aortic regurgitation associated with
decreased expression of fibrillar collagen genes.

Théron A(1), Odelin G(2), Faure E(2), Avierinos JF(3), Zaffran S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Aix Marseille Université, GMGF UMR_S910, Faculté de Médecine, 27, boulevard
Jean-Moulin, 13385 Marseille, France; Inserm, U910, Faculté de Médecine, 13385
Marseille, France; AP-HM, Hôpital de la Timone, Département de Chirurgie
Cardiaque, 13005 Marseille, France. (2)Aix Marseille Université, GMGF UMR_S910,
Faculté de Médecine, 27, boulevard Jean-Moulin, 13385 Marseille, France; Inserm, 
U910, Faculté de Médecine, 13385 Marseille, France. (3)Aix Marseille Université, 
GMGF UMR_S910, Faculté de Médecine, 27, boulevard Jean-Moulin, 13385 Marseille,
France; Inserm, U910, Faculté de Médecine, 13385 Marseille, France; AP-HM,
Hôpital de la Timone, Département de Cardiologie, 13005 Marseille, France. (4)Aix
Marseille Université, GMGF UMR_S910, Faculté de Médecine, 27, boulevard
Jean-Moulin, 13385 Marseille, France; Inserm, U910, Faculté de Médecine, 13385
Marseille, France. Electronic address: stephane.zaffran@univ-amu.fr.

BACKGROUND: The mechanism involved in the onset of aortic valve (AoV) disease
remains unclear despite its poor prognosis and frequency. Recently, we reported
that Krox20 (EGR2 in humans) is involved in AoV development and dysfunction.
AIM: Analyze Krox20 heterozygous mice (Krox20(+/-)) to discover whether
incomplete expression of Krox20 can cause valvular diseases.
METHODS: Transcriptional levels of Col1a2/COL1A2 and Krox20/EGR2 in AoVs from
Krox20(+/-) mice and human patients operated on for severe aortic regurgitation
were evaluated by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR). Human control valves were obtained from three transplanted patients
without AoV disease. Twenty-one heterozygous Krox20(+/-) mice were compared with 
35 controls at different ages. Three independent measurements of valve thickness 
were performed on magnified tissue sections using Image J software. In vivo valve
structure and function were evaluated using the high-frequency Vevo(®) 2100
echocardiogram.
RESULTS: qRT-PCR analysis using AoVs from patients with severe aortic
regurgitation showed a decrease in EGR2 expression associated with significant
downregulation of COL1A2 expression (P<0.05). Similar results were observed in
the AoVs of Krox20(+/-) mice. Anatomical examination revealed that incomplete
invalidation of Krox20 caused significant thickening of the aortic leaflet
compared with controls (145±22 vs. 75±24µm; P=0.01). Within the mutant group,
this thickening worsened significantly over time (Krox20(+/-) mice aged>7
vs.<7months: 136±48 vs. 102±41µm; P<0.001). Moreover, the aortic leaflets of
embryonic day 18.5 Krox20(+/-) embryos were significantly more thickened than
those from controls, suggesting that this disease begins during embryonic
development. Echo-Doppler analysis showed a significant increase in AoV
dysfunction in heterozygous versus control mice (53% vs. 17%; P<0.001),
suggesting a tight relationship between valve architecture and function.
Morphometric analysis revealed that the most severe AoV dysfunction was always
associated with the most thickened valves. Classic histological analysis revealed
that mutant AoVs had extracellular matrix disorganization, with features of human
myxomatous degeneration, including excess of proteoglycan deposition in spongiosa
and reduction of collagen fibre in fibrosa, but no calcification.
CONCLUSION: Decreased expression of Krox20 in mice causes degeneration of the
aortic leaflets and disorganization of the extracellular matrix, causing valvular
dysfunction.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26711547  [PubMed - in process]


16. Exp Mol Pathol. 2016 Feb;100(1):151-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.12.011. Epub
2015 Dec 18.

RNA sequencing identifies crucial genes in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC)
progression.

Qiu J(1), Zhang W(2), Xia Q(3), Liu F(4), Li L(5), Zhao S(5), Gao X(4), Zang
C(1), Ge R(1), Sun Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology head and neck surgery, The affiliated Hospital of
Qingdao University, Qingdao, 266003, China. (2)Department of Radiology, The
affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, Qingdao, 266003, China. (3)Department 
of Otolaryngology head and neck surgery, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao,
266071, China. Electronic address: QingshengXiaqsk@163.com. (4)Department of
Otolaryngology head and neck surgery, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao,
266071, China. (5)Department of Otolaryngology head and neck surgery, Shanghai
Chang Zheng Hospital, Shanghai, 200003, China.

PURPOSE: The study aims to uncover molecular mechanisms of PTC (papillary thyroid
carcinoma) progression and provide therapeutic biomarkers.
METHODS: The paired tumor and control tissues were obtained from 5 PTC patients. 
RNA was extracted and cDNA libraries were constructed. RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq)
was performed on the Illumina HiSeq2000 platform using paired-end method. After
preprocessing of the RNA-seq data, gene expression value was calculated by RPKM. 
Then the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified with edgeR.
Functional enrichment and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analyses were
conducted for the DEGs. Module analysis of the PPI network was also performed.
Transcription factors (TFs) of DEGs were predicted.
RESULTS: A cohort of 496 up-regulated DEGs mainly correlating with the ECM
degradation pathways, and 440 down-regulated DEGs predominantly enriching in
transmembrane transport process were identified. Hub nodes in the PPI network
were RRM2 and a set of collagens (COL1A1, COL3A1 and COL5A1), which were also
remarkable in module 3 and module 5, respectively. Genes in module 3 were
associated with cell cycle pathways, while in module 5 were related to ECM
degradation pathways. PLAU, PSG1 and EGR2 were the crucial TFs with higher
transcriptional activity in PTC than in control.
CONCLUSION: Several genes including COL1A1, COL3A1, RRM2, PLAU, and EGR2 might be
used as biomarkers of PTC therapy. Among them, COL1A1 and COL3A1 might exert
their functions via involving in ECM degradation pathway, while RRM2 through cell
cycle pathway. PLAU might be an active TF, whereas EGR2 might be a tumor
suppressor.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26708423  [PubMed - in process]


17. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 23;10(12):e0145342. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145342.
eCollection 2015.

Novel Markers to Delineate Murine M1 and M2 Macrophages.

Jablonski KA(1), Amici SA(1), Webb LM(1,)(2), Ruiz-Rosado Jde D(3), Popovich
PG(4), Partida-Sanchez S(3), Guerau-de-Arellano M(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, Medical Laboratory Science
Division, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.
(2)Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
Ohio, United States of America. (3)Center for Microbial Pathogenesis, The
Research Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, United
States of America. (4)Department of Neuroscience, Wexner Medical Center at The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

Classically (M1) and alternatively activated (M2) macrophages exhibit distinct
phenotypes and functions. It has been difficult to dissect macrophage phenotypes 
in vivo, where a spectrum of macrophage phenotypes exists, and also in vitro,
where low or non-selective M2 marker protein expression is observed. To provide a
foundation for the complexity of in vivo macrophage phenotypes, we performed a
comprehensive analysis of the transcriptional signature of murine M0, M1 and M2
macrophages and identified genes common or exclusive to either subset. We
validated by real-time PCR an M1-exclusive pattern of expression for CD38,
G-protein coupled receptor 18 (Gpr18) and Formyl peptide receptor 2 (Fpr2)
whereas Early growth response protein 2 (Egr2) and c-Myc were M2-exclusive. We
further confirmed these data by flow cytometry and show that M1 and M2
macrophages can be distinguished by their relative expression of CD38 and Egr2.
Egr2 labeled more M2 macrophages (~70%) than the canonical M2 macrophage marker
Arginase-1, which labels 24% of M2 macrophages. Conversely, CD38 labeled most
(71%) in vitro M1 macrophages. In vivo, a similar CD38+ population greatly
increased after LPS exposure. Overall, this work defines exclusive and common M1 
and M2 signatures and provides novel and improved tools to distinguish M1 and M2 
murine macrophages.

PMCID: PMC4689374
PMID: 26699615  [PubMed - in process]


18. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 17;10(12):e0145235. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145235.
eCollection 2015.

Human Dermal Fibroblasts Demonstrate Positive Immunostaining for Neuron- and
Glia- Specific Proteins.

Janmaat CJ(1), de Rooij KE(2,)(3), Locher H(1), de Groot SC(1), de Groot JC(1),
Frijns JH(1), Huisman MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head & Neck Surgery, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands. (2)Percuros B.V., Enschede, the
Netherlands. (3)Department of Radiology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, the Netherlands.

In stem cell cultures from adult human tissue, undesirable contamination with
fibroblasts is frequently present. The presence of fibroblasts obscures the
actual number of stem cells and may result in extracellular matrix production
after transplantation. Identification of fibroblasts is difficult because of the 
lack of specific fibroblast markers. In our laboratory, we isolate and expand
neural-crest-derived stem cells from human hair follicle bulges and investigate
their potential to differentiate into neural cells. To establish cellular
identities, we perform immunohistochemistry with antibodies specific for glial
and neuronal markers, and use fibroblasts as negative control. We frequently
observe that human adult dermal fibroblasts also express some glial and neuronal 
markers. In this study, we have sought to determine whether our observations
represent actual expression of these markers or result from cross-reactivity.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on human adult dermal fibroblasts using
acknowledged glial and neuronal antibodies followed by verification of the data
using RT-qPCR. Human adult dermal fibroblasts showed expression of the
glia-specific markers SOX9, glial fibrillary acidic protein and EGR2 (KROX20) as 
well as for the neuron-specific marker class III ß-tubulin, both at the protein
and mRNA level. Furthermore, human adult dermal fibroblasts showed false-positive
immunostaining for S100ß and GAP43 and to a lower extent for OCT6. Our results
indicate that immunophenotyping as a tool to determine cellular identity is not
as reliable as generally assumed, especially since human adult dermal fibroblasts
may be mistaken for neural cells, indicating that the ultimate proof of glial or 
neuronal identity can only be provided by their functionality.

PMCID: PMC4683011
PMID: 26678612  [PubMed - in process]


19. Wound Repair Regen. 2015 Dec 9. doi: 10.1111/wrr.12392. [Epub ahead of print]

Master regulators in primary skin fibroblast fate reprogramming in a human
ex-vivo model of chronic wounds.

Noizet M(1), Lagoutte E(1), Gratigny M(2), Bouschbacher M(3), Lazareth I(4),
Roest Crollius H(2), Darzacq X(1), Dugast-Darzacq C(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Imaging of Transcription, CNRS UMR8197, Ecole Normale Supérieure,
Institut de Biologie de l'ENS, IBENS, Paris, 75005, France. (2)Dyogen Group, CNRS
UMR8197, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Institut de Biologie de l'ENS, IBENS, Paris,
75005, France. (3)SDRI-URGO, Chenôve, France. (4)Institut de la cicatrisation
Jean-Paul Belmondo, service de médecine vasculaire, groupe hospitalier Paris
Saint Joseph, Paris, France. (5)Univ. Paris Diderot, Paris Cité Sorbonne, Paris, 
France.

Fibroblasts are important players in regulating tissue homeostasis. In the
dermis, they are involved in wound healing where they differentiate into
contractile myofibroblasts leading to wound closure. In non-healing chronic
wounds, fibroblasts fail to undertake differentiation. We established and used a 
human ex-vivo model of chronic wounds where fibroblasts can undergo normal
myofibroblast differentiation, or take on a non differentiable pathological
state. At the whole genome scale, we identified the genes that are differentially
regulated in these two cell fates. By coupling the search of evolutionary
conserved regulatory elements with global gene network expression changes, we
identified transcription factors potentially involved in myofibroblast
differentiation, and constructed a network of relationship between these key
factors. Among these, we found that TCF4, SOX9, EGR2 and FOXS1 are major
regulators of fibroblast to myofibroblast differentiation. Conversely,
downregulation of MEOX2, SIX2 and MAF causes reprogramming of fibroblasts to
myofibroblasts even in absence of TGFbeta, the natural inducer of myofibroblast
differentiation. These results provide insight into the fibroblast
differentiation program and reveal a transcription factor network essential for
cellular reprogramming. They could lead to the development of new therapeutics to
treat fibroblast-related human pathologies. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2015 by the Wound Healing Society.

PMID: 26663515  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. Blood. 2016 Feb 4;127(5):572-81. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-04-643270. Epub 2015 Dec
10.

Essential control of early B-cell development by Mef2 transcription factors.

Herglotz J(1), Unrau L(1), Hauschildt F(1), Fischer M(1), Kriebitzsch N(1), Alawi
M(2), Indenbirken D(3), Spohn M(3), Müller U(1), Ziegler M(1), Schuh W(4), Jäck
HM(4), Stocking C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Retroviral Pathogenesis and. (2)Virus Genomics, Heinrich-Pette-Institute,
Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg, Germany; Bioinformatics
Service Facility, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany; 
and. (3)Virus Genomics, Heinrich-Pette-Institute, Leibniz Institute for
Experimental Virology, Hamburg, Germany; (4)Division of Molecular Immunology,
Department of Internal Medicine III, Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center, University of
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

The sequential activation of distinct developmental gene networks governs the
ultimate identity of a cell, but the mechanisms involved in initiating downstream
programs are incompletely understood. The pre-B-cell receptor (pre-BCR) is an
important checkpoint of B-cell development and is essential for a pre-B cell to
traverse into an immature B cell. Here, we show that activation of myocyte
enhancer factor 2 (Mef2) transcription factors (TFs) by the pre-BCR is necessary 
for initiating the subsequent genetic network. We demonstrate that B-cell
development is blocked at the pre-B-cell stage in mice deficient for Mef2c and
Mef2d TFs and that pre-BCR signaling enhances the transcriptional activity of
Mef2c/d through phosphorylation by the Erk5 mitogen-activating kinase. This
activation is instrumental in inducing Krüppel-like factor 2 and several
immediate early genes of the AP1 and Egr family. Finally, we show that Mef2
proteins cooperate with the products of their target genes (Irf4 and Egr2) to
induce secondary waves of transcriptional regulation. Our findings uncover a
novel role for Mef2c/d in coordinating the transcriptional network that promotes 
early B-cell development.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26660426  [PubMed - in process]


21. Br J Ophthalmol. 2016 Mar;100(3):436-42. doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307366.
Epub 2015 Dec 1.

Investigation of the association of Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome with
IL23R-C1orf141 in Han Chinese Singaporean and ADO-ZNF365-EGR2 in Thai.

Cao S(1), Chee SP(2), Yu HG(3), Sukavatcharin S(4), Wu L(5), Kijlstra A(6), Hou
S(1), Yang P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing, P. R. China Chongqing Eye Institute, Chongqing, P.
R. China Chongqing Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Chongqing, P. R. China.
(2)Singapore National Eye Centre, Singapore, Singapore Department of
Ophthalmology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore, Singapore
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Duke-National University of
Singapore Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore. (3)Department of
Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
Sensory Organs Institute, Medical Research Center, Seoul National University,
Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand. (5)Department of Ophthalmology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, P. R. China.
(6)University Eye Clinic Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: We performed a multistage genome-wide association study of
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome in a Han Chinese population and identified
two novel non-human leukocyte antigen candidate regions previously. The aim of
the study was to replicate the association of IL23R-C1orf141 and ADO-ZNF365-EGR2 
with VKH syndrome in four sets of multinational populations in Asia.
METHOD: We conducted a candidate genes association study involving 185 patients
with VKH syndrome and 287 normal controls from Han Chinese Singaporeans, non-Han 
Chinese, Thais and Koreans. Genotyping of 16 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) within IL23R-C1orf141 and ADO-ZNF365-EGR2 loci was performed using the
Sequenom MassARRAY system or by Taqman SNP assays.
RESULTS: Eight SNPs in IL23R-Clorf141 showed an association with VKH syndrome
only in Han Chinese Singaporeans (p=8.49×10(-5) to 1.02×10(-3),
pcorrection=1.69×10(-4) to 2.04×10(-3)) but not in the other groups tested. One
SNP rs1884444 in IL23R-Clorf141 was found to be weakly associated with VKH
syndrome in the Han Chinese Singaporeans, but significance was lost following
Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. Five SNPs in ADO-ZNF365-EGR2 were
found to be associated with VKH syndrome in Thai patients with VKH (p=0.014,
pc=0.028) but not in the other three ethnic groups tested.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirmed the genetic associations between SNPs in
IL23R-C1orf141 and VKH syndrome in Han Chinese Singaporeans but not in other
Asian populations. In addition, we also successfully replicated the association
of VKH syndrome with ADO-ZNF365-EGR2 in a Thai population.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26628628  [PubMed - in process]


22. Addict Biol. 2015 Nov 24. doi: 10.1111/adb.12330. [Epub ahead of print]

Stable immediate early gene expression patterns in medial prefrontal cortex and
striatum after long-term cocaine self-administration.

Gao P(1), Limpens JH(2), Spijker S(3), Vanderschuren LJ(2,)(4), Voorn P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurosciences, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (2)Brain Center Rudolf
Magnus, Department of Translational Neuroscience, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Neuroscience
Campus Amsterdam, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Animals in Science and Society, Division of Behavioural
Neuroscience, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the
Netherlands.

The transition from casual to compulsive drug use is thought to occur as a
consequence of repeated drug taking leading to neuroadaptive changes in brain
circuitry involved in emotion and cognition. At the basis of such
neuroadaptations lie changes in the expression of immediate early genes (IEGs)
implicated in transcriptional regulation, synaptic plasticity and intracellular
signalling. However, little is known about how IEG expression patterns change
during long-term drug self-administration. The present study, therefore, compares
the effects of 10 and 60-day self-administration of cocaine and sucrose on the
expression of 17 IEGs in brain regions implicated in addictive behaviour, i.e.
dorsal striatum, ventral striatum and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). Increased 
expression after cocaine self-administration was found for 6 IEGs in dorsal and
ventral striatum (c-fos, Mkp1, Fosb/<U+0394>Fosb, Egr2, Egr4, and Arc) and 10 IEGs in
mPFC (same 6 IEGs as in striatum, plus Bdnf, Homer1, Sgk1 and Rgs2). Five of
these 10 IEGs (Egr2, Fosb/<U+0394>Fosb, Bdnf, Homer1 and Jun) and Trkb in mPFC were
responsive to long-term sucrose self-administration. Importantly, no major
differences were found between IEG expression patterns after 10 or 60<U+2009>days of
cocaine self-administration, except Fosb/<U+0394>Fosb in dorsal striatum and Egr2 in
mPFC, whereas the amount of cocaine obtained per session was comparable for
short-term and long-term self-administration. These steady changes in IEG
expression are, therefore, associated with stable self-administration behaviour
rather than the total amount of cocaine consumed. Thus, sustained impulses to IEG
regulation during prolonged cocaine self-administration may evoke neuroplastic
changes underlying compulsive drug use.

© 2015 Society for the Study of Addiction.

PMID: 26598422  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. J Immunol. 2015 Dec 1;195(11):5272-84. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501367. Epub 2015
Oct 30.

Pak2 Controls Acquisition of NKT Cell Fate by Regulating Expression of the
Transcription Factors PLZF and Egr2.

O'Hagan KL(1), Zhao J(1), Pryshchep O(1), Wang CR(1), Phee H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611. (2)Department of
Microbiology-Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University,
Chicago, IL 60611 hyewonp@amgen.com.

NKT cells constitute a small population of T cells developed in the thymus that
produce large amounts of cytokines and chemokines in response to lipid Ags.
Signaling through the Va14-Ja18 TCR instructs commitment to the NKT cell lineage,
but the precise signaling mechanisms that instruct their lineage choice are
unclear. In this article, we report that the cytoskeletal remodeling protein,
p21-activated kinase 2 (Pak2), was essential for NKT cell development. Loss of
Pak2 in T cells reduced stage III NKT cells in the thymus and periphery. Among
different NKT cell subsets, Pak2 was necessary for the generation and function of
NKT1 and NKT2 cells, but not NKT17 cells. Mechanistically, expression of Egr2 and
promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger (PLZF), two key transcription factors for
acquiring the NKT cell fate, were markedly diminished in the absence of Pak2.
Diminished expression of Egr2 and PLZF were not caused by aberrant TCR signaling,
as determined using a Nur77-GFP reporter, but were likely due to impaired
induction and maintenance of signaling lymphocyte activation molecule 6
expression, a TCR costimulatory receptor required for NKT cell development. These
data suggest that Pak2 controls thymic NKT cell development by providing a signal
that links Egr2 to induce PLZF, in part by regulating signaling lymphocyte
activation molecule 6 expression.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4654230
PMID: 26519537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nat Commun. 2015 Oct 28;6:8698. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9698.

Ndrg1 is a T-cell clonal anergy factor negatively regulated by CD28 costimulation
and interleukin-2.

Oh YM(1,)(2,)(3), Park HB(1,)(2,)(4), Shin JH(3), Lee JE(1,)(2,)(3), Park
HY(1,)(2), Kho DH(3), Lee JS(3), Choi H(5), Okuda T(6), Kokame K(6), Miyata T(6),
Kim IH(7), Lee SH(3), Schwartz RH(5), Choi K(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, 103 Daehak-ro, Chongno-gu, Seoul 110-799, Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, 103 Daehak-ro, Chongno-gu, Seoul 110-799, Korea. (3)Specific Organs
Cancer Branch, Research Institute National Cancer Center, Gyeonggi-do 410-769,
Korea. (4)Hematologic Malignancy Branch, Research Institute National Cancer
Center, Gyeonggi-do 410-769, Korea. (5)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular
Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. (6)Department of Molecular
Pathogenesis, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Osaka 565-8565,
Japan. (7)Molecular Imaging and Therapy Branch, Research Institute National
Cancer Center, Gyeonggi-do 410-769, Korea.

Induction of T-cell clonal anergy involves serial activation of transcription
factors, including NFAT and Egr2/3. However, downstream effector mechanisms of
these transcription factors are not fully understood yet. Here we identify Ndrg1 
as an anergy factor induced by Egr2. Ndrg1 is upregulated by anergic signalling
and maintained at high levels in resting anergic T cells. Overexpression of Ndrg1
mimics the anergic state and knockout of the gene prevents anergy induction.
Interestingly, Ndrg1 is phosphorylated and degraded by CD28 signalling in a
proteasome-dependent manner, explaining the costimulation dependence of anergy
prevention. Similarly, IL-2 treatment of anergic T cells, under conditions that
lead to the reversal of anergy, also induces Ndrg1 phosphorylation and
degradation. Finally, older Ndrg1-deficient mice show T-cell hyperresponsiveness 
and Ndrg1-deficient T cells aggravate inducible autoimmune inflammation. Thus,
Ndrg1 contributes to the maintenance of clonal anergy and inhibition of
T-cell-mediated inflammation.

PMID: 26507712  [PubMed - in process]


25. Brain Res. 2015 Dec 10;1629:126-34. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2015.10.021. Epub
2015 Oct 20.

Chronic methamphetamine treatment reduces the expression of synaptic plasticity
genes and changes their DNA methylation status in the mouse brain.

Cheng MC(1), Hsu SH(2), Chen CH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yuli Mental Health Research Center, Yuli Branch,
Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan; Center for General Education, 
St. Mary<U+05F3>s Junior College of Medicine, Nursing and Management, Yilan County,
Taiwan. Electronic address: cmc@mail.vhyl.gov.tw. (2)Department of Psychiatry,
Yuli Mental Health Research Center, Yuli Branch, Taipei Veterans General
Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan. (3)Department of Psychiatry, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital at Linkou and Department and Graduate school of Biomedical Sciences
Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Methamphetamine (METH) is a highly addictive psychostimulant that may cause
long-lasting synaptic dysfunction and abnormal gene expression. We aimed to
explore the differential expression of synaptic plasticity genes in chronic
METH-treated mouse brain. We used the RT(2) Profiler PCR Array and the real-time 
quantitative PCR to characterize differentially expressed synaptic plasticity
genes in the frontal cortex and the hippocampus of chronic METH-treated mice
compared with normal saline-treated mice. We further used pyrosequencing to
assess DNA methylation changes in the CpG region of the five immediate early
genes (IEGs) in chronic METH-treated mouse brain. We detected six downregulated
genes in the frontal cortex and the hippocampus of chronic METH-treated mice,
including five IEGs (Arc, Egr2, Fos, Klf10, and Nr4a1) and one neuronal receptor 
gene (Grm1), compared with normal saline-treated group, but only four genes (Arc,
Egr2, Fos, and Nr4a1) were confirmed to be different. Furthermore, we found
several CpG sites of the Arc and the Fos that had significant changes in DNA
methylation status in the frontal cortex of chronic METH-treated mice, while the 
klf10 and the Nr4a1 that had significant changes in the hippocampus. Our results 
show that chronic administration of METH may lead to significant downregulation
of the IEGs expression in both the frontal cortex and the hippocampus, which may 
partly account for the molecular mechanism of the action of METH. Furthermore,
the changes in DNA methylation status of the IEGs in the brain indicate that an
epigenetic mechanism-dependent transcriptional regulation may contribute to METH 
addiction, which warrants additional study.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26496011  [PubMed - in process]


26. Nat Commun. 2015 Oct 14;6:8584. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9584.

The Lin28/let-7 axis is critical for myelination in the peripheral nervous
system.

Gökbuget D(1), Pereira JA(1), Bachofner S(1), Marchais A(2), Ciaudo C(1), Stoffel
M(1), Schulte JH(3), Suter U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, ETH Zurich,
Otto-Stern-Weg 7, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland. (2)Department of Biology, Institute
of Agricultural Sciences, ETH Zurich, Universitaetsstrasse 2, 8092 Zurich,
Switzerland. (3)Department of Pediatric Oncology and Haematology, Children's
Hospital Essen, 45122 Essen, Germany.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are crucial regulators of myelination in the peripheral
nervous system (PNS). However, the miRNAs species involved and the underlying
mechanisms are largely unknown. We found that let-7 miRNAs are highly abundant
during PNS myelination and that their levels are inversely correlated to the
expression of lin28 homolog B (Lin28B), an antagonist of let-7 accumulation.
Sustained expression of Lin28B and consequently reduced levels of let-7 miRNAs
results in a failure of Schwann cell myelination in transgenic mouse models and
in cell culture. Subsequent analyses revealed that let-7 miRNAs promote
expression of the myelination-driving master transcription factor Krox20 (also
known as Egr2) through suppression of myelination inhibitory Notch signalling. We
conclude that the Lin28B/let-7 axis acts as a critical driver of PNS myelination,
in particular by regulating myelination onset, identifying this pathway also as a
potential therapeutic target in demyelinating diseases.

PMCID: PMC4634210
PMID: 26466203  [PubMed - in process]


27. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 25;10(8):e0134706. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134706.
eCollection 2015.

Interleukin 21 Controls mRNA and MicroRNA Expression in CD40-Activated Chronic
Lymphocytic Leukemia Cells.

De Cecco L(1), Capaia M(2), Zupo S(3), Cutrona G(3), Matis S(4), Brizzolara A(2),
Orengo AM(2), Croce M(2), Marchesi E(1), Ferrarini M(4), Canevari S(1), Ferrini
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics and Bioinformatics, Department of Experimental Oncology
and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan,
Italy. (2)Laboratory of Biotherapy, IRCCS-AOU San Martino-IST, Istituto Nazionale
per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genoa, Italy. (3)Laboratory of Molecular Diagnostics, 
IRCCS-AOU San Martino-IST, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genoa,
Italy. (4)Scientific Direction, IRCCS-AOU San Martino-IST, Istituto Nazionale per
la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genoa, Italy.

Several factors support CLL cell survival in the microenvironment. Under
different experimental conditions, IL21 can either induce apoptosis or promote
CLL cell survival. To investigate mechanisms involved in the effects of IL21, we 
studied the ability of IL21 to modulate gene and miRNA expressions in
CD40-activated CLL cells. IL21 was a major regulator of chemokine production in
CLL cells and it modulated the expression of genes involved in cell movement,
metabolism, survival and apoptosis. In particular, IL21 down-regulated the
expression of the chemokine genes CCL4, CCL3, CCL3L1, CCL17, and CCL2, while it
up-regulated the Th1-related CXCL9 and CXCL10. In addition, IL21 down-regulated
the expression of genes encoding signaling molecules, such as CD40, DDR1 and
PIK3CD. IL21 modulated a similar set of genes in CLL and normal B-cells (e.g.
chemokine genes), whereas other genes, including MYC, TNF, E2F1, EGR2 and GAS-6, 
were regulated only in CLL cells. An integrated analysis of the miRNome and gene 
expression indicated that several miRNAs were under IL21 control and these could,
in turn, influence the expression of potential target genes. We focused on
hsa-miR-663b predicted to down-regulate several relevant genes. Transfection of
hsa-miR-663b or its specific antagonist showed that this miRNA regulated CCL17,
DDR1, PIK3CD and CD40 gene expression. Our data indicated that IL21 modulates the
expression of genes mediating the crosstalk between CLL cells and their
microenvironment and miRNAs may take part in this process.

PMCID: PMC4549109
PMID: 26305332  [PubMed - in process]


28. Sci Rep. 2015 Aug 24;5:13396. doi: 10.1038/srep13396.

CAMKII-conditional deletion of histone deacetylase 2 potentiates acute
methamphetamine-induced expression of immediate early genes in the mouse nucleus 
accumbens.

Torres OV(1), McCoy MT(1), Ladenheim B(1), Jayanthi S(1), Brannock C(1), Tulloch 
I(2), Krasnova IN(1), Cadet JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, DHHS/NIH/NIDA Intramural Research
Program, 251 Bayview Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21224. (2)Department of Psychology,
Stevenson University, Stevenson, MD 21283.

Methamphetamine (METH) produces increases in the expression of immediate early
genes (IEGs) and of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in the rat nucleus accumbens
(NAc). Here, we tested whether HDAC2 deletion influenced the effects of METH on
IEG expression in the NAc. Microarray analyses showed no baseline differences in 
IEG expression between wild-type (WT) and HDAC2 knockout (KO) mice.
Quantitative-PCR analysis shows that an acute METH injection produced
time-dependent increases in mRNA levels of several IEGs in both genotypes.
Interestingly, HDAC2KO mice displayed greater METH-induced increases in Egr1 and 
Egr2 mRNA levels measured at one hour post-injection. The levels of Fosb, Fra2,
Egr1, and Egr3 mRNAs stayed elevated in the HDAC2KO mice 2 hours after the METH
injection whereas these mRNAs had normalized in the WT mice. In WT mice, METH
caused increased HDAC2 recruitment to the promoters some IEGs at 2 hours post
injection. METH-induced prolonged increases in Fosb, Fra2, Egr1, and Egr3 mRNA
levels in HDAC2KO mice were associated with increased enrichment of
phosphorylated CREB (pCREB) on the promoters of these genes. Based on our
observations, we hypothesize that HDAC2 may regulate the expression of these
genes, in part, by prolonging the actions of pCREB in the mouse NAc.

PMCID: PMC4547138
PMID: 26300473  [PubMed - in process]


29. J Biol Chem. 2015 Oct 2;290(40):24294-307. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.636407. Epub
2015 Aug 13.

Microprocessor complex subunit DiGeorge syndrome critical region gene 8 (Dgcr8)
is required for schwann cell myelination and myelin maintenance.

Lin HP(1), Oksuz I(1), Hurley E(2), Wrabetz L(2), Awatramani R(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Neurology and Center for Genetic Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611 and. (2)Hunter
James Kelly Research Institute, University at Buffalo, State University of New
York, Buffalo, New York 14203. (3)From the Department of Neurology and Center for
Genetic Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois 60611 and r-awatramani@northwestern.edu.

We investigated the role of a key component of the Microprocessor complex, DGCR8,
in the regulation of myelin formation and maintenance. We found that
conditionally ablating Dgcr8 in Schwann cells (SCs) during development results in
an arrest of SC differentiation. Dgcr8 conditional knock-out (cKO) SCs fail to
form 1:1 relationships with axons or, having achieved this, fail to form myelin
sheaths. The expression of genes normally found in immature SCs, such as
sex-determining region Y-box 2 (Sox2), is increased in Dgcr8 cKO SCs, whereas the
expression of myelin-related genes, including the master regulatory transcription
factor early growth response 2 (Egr2), is decreased. Additionally, expression of 
a novel gene expression program involving sonic hedgehog (Shh), activated de novo
in injured nerves, is elevated in Dgcr8 cKOs but not in Egr2 null mice, a model
of SC differentiation arrest, suggesting that the injury-related gene expression 
program in Dgcr8 cKOs cannot be attributed to differentiation arrest. Inducible
ablation of Dgcr8 in adult SCs results in gene expression changes similar to
those found in cKOs, including an increase in the expression of Sox2 and Shh.
Analyses of these nerves mainly reveal normal myelin thickness and axon size
distribution but some dedifferentiated SCs and increased macrophage infiltration.
Together our data suggest that Dgcr8 is responsible for modulation of gene
expression programs underlying myelin formation and maintenance as well as
suppression of an injury-related gene expression program.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4591815 [Available on 2016-10-02]
PMID: 26272614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Development. 2015 Sep 15;142(18):3188-97. doi: 10.1242/dev.123034. Epub 2015 Aug 
6.

Human epidermal neural crest stem cells as a source of Schwann cells.

Sakaue M(1), Sieber-Blum M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Centre for Life,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK. (2)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Centre for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK
maya.sieber-blum@ncl.ac.uk.

We show that highly pure populations of human Schwann cells can be derived
rapidly and in a straightforward way, without the need for genetic manipulation, 
from human epidermal neural crest stem cells [hEPI-NCSC(s)] present in the bulge 
of hair follicles. These human Schwann cells promise to be a useful tool for
cell-based therapies, disease modelling and drug discovery. Schwann cells are
glia that support axons of peripheral nerves and are direct descendants of the
embryonic neural crest. Peripheral nerves are damaged in various conditions,
including through trauma or tumour-related surgery, and Schwann cells are
required for their repair and regeneration. Schwann cells also promise to be
useful for treating spinal cord injuries. Ex vivo expansion of hEPI-NCSC isolated
from hair bulge explants, manipulating the WNT, sonic hedgehog and TGFß
signalling pathways, and exposure of the cells to pertinent growth factors led to
the expression of the Schwann cell markers SOX10, KROX20 (EGR2), p75NTR (NGFR),
MBP and S100B by day 4 in virtually all cells, and maturation was completed by 2 
weeks of differentiation. Gene expression profiling demonstrated expression of
transcripts for neurotrophic and angiogenic factors, as well as JUN, all of which
are essential for nerve regeneration. Co-culture of hEPI-NCSC-derived human
Schwann cells with rodent dorsal root ganglia showed interaction of the Schwann
cells with axons, providing evidence of Schwann cell functionality. We conclude
that hEPI-NCSCs are a biologically relevant source for generating large and
highly pure populations of human Schwann cells.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4582175
PMID: 26251357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Oct;12(4):4989-94. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4098. Epub 2015 Jul
20.

MicroRNA-20a promotes the proliferation and cell cycle of human osteosarcoma
cells by suppressing early growth response 2 expression.

Zhuo W(1), Ge W(2), Meng G(1), Jia S(3), Zhou X(1), Liu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Institute of Orthopedics and
Traumatology, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an,
Shanxi 710000, P.R. China. (2)Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, The PLA
Fifth Thirty Four Hospital, Luoyang, Henan 471000, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Orthopedics, Shanxi Hospital of Chinese Armed Police Forces, Xi'an, Shanxi
710000, P.R. China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are crucial in cancer development. However, the underlying
mechanisms of miRNAs in osteosarcoma (OS) remain largely uncharacterized. The
present study investigated the role of miR-20a in OS cell proliferation. It was
determined that miR-20a expression is markedly upregulated in OS tissues and
cells compared with the matched adjacent normal tissues and h-FOB human
osteoblast cell lines. Ectopic expression of miR-20a promoted the proliferation
and anchorage-independent growth of OS cells, whereas inhibition of miR-20a
reduced this effect. Bioinformatics analysis further revealed early growth
response 2 (EGR2), as a potential target of miR-20a. Data from luciferase
reporter assays showed that miR-20a directly binds to the 3'-untranslated region 
(3'-UTR) of EGR2 mRNA and represses expression at the transcriptional and
translational levels. In functional assays, miR-20a promoted OS cell
proliferation and the cell cycle, which could be suppressed by an inhibitor of
miR-20a. In conclusion, the data provide compelling evidence that miR-20a
functions as an onco-miRNA, which is important in promoting cell proliferation in
OS, and its oncogenic effect is mediated primarily through direct suppression of 
EGR2 expression.

PMCID: PMC4581803
PMID: 26238942  [PubMed - in process]


32. Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):1073-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.3363. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

Chimeric EWSR1-FLI1 regulates the Ewing sarcoma susceptibility gene EGR2 via a
GGAA microsatellite.

Grünewald TG(1,)(2), Bernard V(3), Gilardi-Hebenstreit P(4), Raynal V(1,)(2,)(3),
Surdez D(1,)(2), Aynaud MM(1,)(2), Mirabeau O(1,)(2), Cidre-Aranaz F(5), Tirode
F(1,)(2), Zaidi S(1,)(2), Perot G(6), Jonker AH(1,)(2), Lucchesi C(1,)(2), Le
Deley MC(7), Oberlin O(8), Marec-Bérard P(9), Véron AS(10), Reynaud S(11),
Lapouble E(11), Boeva V(12,)(13), Rio Frio T(3), Alonso J(5), Bhatia S(14),
Pierron G(11), Cancel-Tassin G(15), Cussenot O(15), Cox DG(10), Morton LM(16),
Machiela MJ(16), Chanock SJ(16), Charnay P(4), Delattre O(1,)(2,)(3,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Biology of Cancers Unit, Institut Curie, PSL Research University,
Paris, France. (2)INSERM U830, Institut Curie Research Center, Paris, France.
(3)Institut Curie Genomics of Excellence (ICGex) Platform, Institut Curie
Research Center, Paris, France. (4)École Normale Supérieure (ENS), Institut de
Biologie de l'ENS (IBENS), INSERM U1024, CNRS UMR8197, Paris, France.
(5)Instituto de Investigación de Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos
III, Madrid, Spain. (6)INSERM U916 Biology of Sarcomas, Institut Bergonié,
Bordeaux, France. (7)Département d'Epidémiologie et de Biostatistiques, Institut 
Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. (8)Département de Pédiatrie, Institut Gustave 
Roussy, Villejuif, France. (9)Institute for Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
Leon-Bérard Cancer Center, University of Lyon, Lyon, France. (10)INSERM U1052,
Léon-Bérard Cancer Centre, Cancer Research Center of Lyon, Lyon, France.
(11)Unité Génétique Somatique (UGS), Institut Curie Centre Hospitalier, Paris,
France. (12)INSERM U900, Bioinformatics, Biostatistics, Epidemiology and
Computational Systems Biology of Cancer, Institut Curie Research Center, Paris,
France. (13)Mines ParisTech, Fontainebleau, France. (14)Institute for Cancer
Outcomes and Survivorship, School of Medicine, University of Alabama, Birmingham,
Alabama, USA. (15)Centre de Recherche sur les Pathologies Prostatiques
(CeRePP)-Laboratory for Urology, Research Team 2, UPMC, Hôpital Tenon, Paris,
France. (16)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics (DCEG), National Cancer 
Institute (NCI), Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):964-5.

Deciphering the ways in which somatic mutations and germline susceptibility
variants cooperate to promote cancer is challenging. Ewing sarcoma is
characterized by fusions between EWSR1 and members of the ETS gene family,
usually EWSR1-FLI1, leading to the generation of oncogenic transcription factors 
that bind DNA at GGAA motifs. A recent genome-wide association study identified
susceptibility variants near EGR2. Here we found that EGR2 knockdown inhibited
proliferation, clonogenicity and spheroidal growth in vitro and induced
regression of Ewing sarcoma xenografts. Targeted germline deep sequencing of the 
EGR2 locus in affected subjects and controls identified 291 Ewing-associated
SNPs. At rs79965208, the A risk allele connected adjacent GGAA repeats by
converting an interspaced GGAT motif into a GGAA motif, thereby increasing the
number of consecutive GGAA motifs and thus the EWSR1-FLI1-dependent enhancer
activity of this sequence, with epigenetic characteristics of an active
regulatory element. EWSR1-FLI1 preferentially bound to the A risk allele, which
increased global and allele-specific EGR2 expression. Collectively, our findings 
establish cooperation between a dominant oncogene and a susceptibility variant
that regulates a major driver of Ewing sarcomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC4591073 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26214589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Eur J Neurol. 2015 Dec;22(12):1548-55. doi: 10.1111/ene.12782. Epub 2015 Jul 24.

The EGR2 gene is involved in axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

Sevilla T(1,)(2,)(3), Sivera R(1), Martínez-Rubio D(2,)(4), Lupo V(2,)(4),
Chumillas MJ(5), Calpena E(2,)(4), Dopazo J(2,)(6), Vílchez JJ(1,)(2,)(3), Palau 
F(2,)(4), Espinós C(2,)(4,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La Fe, Valencia,
Spain. (2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras
(CIBERER), Valencia, Spain. (3)Department of Medicine, University of Valencia,
Valencia, Spain. (4)Program in Genetics and Rare Diseases and IBV/CSIC Associated
Unit, Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain.
(5)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La 
Fe, Valencia, Spain. (6)Program in Computational Genomics, Centro de
Investigación Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain. (7)Department of Genetics,
Universitat de València, Valencia, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: A three-generation family affected by axonal
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) was investigated with the aim of discovering
genetic defects and to further characterize the phenotype.
METHODS: The clinical, nerve conduction studies and muscle magnetic resonance
images of the patients were reviewed. A whole exome sequencing was performed and 
the changes were investigated by genetic studies, in silico analysis and
luciferase reporter assays.
RESULTS: A novel c.1226G>A change (p.R409Q) in the EGR2 gene was identified.
Patients presented with a typical, late-onset axonal CMT phenotype with variable 
severity that was confirmed in the ancillary tests. The in silico studies showed 
that the residue R409 is an evolutionary conserved amino acid. The p.R409Q
mutation, which is predicted as probably damaging, would alter the conformation
of the protein slightly and would cause a decrease of gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of an EGR2 mutation presenting as an axonal
CMT phenotype with variable severity. This study broadens the phenotype of the
EGR2-related neuropathies and suggests that the genetic testing of patients
suffering from axonal CMT should include the EGR2 gene.

© 2015 EAN.

PMID: 26204789  [PubMed - in process]


34. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 21;10(7):e0133916. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133916.
eCollection 2015.

Contribution of Schwann Cells to Remyelination in a Naturally Occurring Canine
Model of CNS Neuroinflammation.

Kegler K(1), Spitzbarth I(1), Imbschweiler I(2), Wewetzer K(3), Baumgärtner W(1),
Seehusen F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany;
Center of Systems Neuroscience, Hannover, Germany. (2)Department of Pathology,
University of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany. (3)Center of Systems
Neuroscience, Hannover, Germany; Department of Functional and Applied Anatomy,
Center of Anatomy, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Gliogenesis under pathophysiological conditions is of particular clinical
relevance since it may provide evidence for regeneration promoting cells
recruitable for therapeutic purposes. There is evidence that neurotrophin
receptor p75 (p75NTR)-expressing cells emerge in the lesioned CNS. However, the
phenotype and identity of these cells, and signals triggering their in situ
generation under normal conditions and certain pathological situations has
remained enigmatic. In the present study, we used a spontaneous, idiopathic and
inflammatory CNS condition in dogs with prominent lympho-histiocytic infiltration
as a model to study the phenotype of Schwann cells and their relation to Schwann 
cell remyelination within the CNS. Furthermore, the phenotype of
p75NTR-expressing cells within the injured CNS was compared to their counter-part
in control sciatic nerve and after peripheral nerve injury. In addition,
organotypic slice cultures were used to further elucidate the origin of
p75NTR-positive cells. In cerebral and cerebellar white and grey matter lesions
as well as in the brain stem, p75NTR-positive cells co-expressed the
transcription factor Sox2, but not GAP-43, GFAP, Egr2/Krox20, periaxin and
PDGFR-a. Interestingly, and contrary to the findings in control sciatic nerves,
p75NTR-expressing cells only co-localized with Sox2 in degenerative neuropathy,
thus suggesting that such cells might represent dedifferentiated Schwann cells
both in the injured CNS and PNS. Moreover, effective Schwann cell remyelination
represented by periaxin- and P0-positive mature myelinating Schwann cells, was
strikingly associated with the presence of p75NTR/Sox2-expressing Schwann cells. 
Intriguingly, the emergence of dedifferentiated Schwann cells was not affected by
astrocytes, and a macrophage-dominated inflammatory response provided an adequate
environment for Schwann cells plasticity within the injured CNS. Furthermore,
axonal damage was reduced in brain stem areas with p75NTR/Sox2-positive cells.
This study provides novel insights into the involvement of Schwann cells in CNS
remyelination under natural occurring CNS inflammation. Targeting
p75NTR/Sox2-expressing Schwann cells to enhance their differentiation into
competent remyelinating cells appears to be a promising therapeutic approach for 
inflammatory/demyelinating CNS diseases.

PMCID: PMC4510361
PMID: 26196511  [PubMed - in process]


35. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Sep 11;465(1):5-11. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.07.072. Epub 2015 Jul 17.

The Tax oncogene enhances ELL incorporation into p300 and P-TEFb containing
protein complexes to activate transcription.

Fufa TD(1), Byun JS(1), Wakano C(1), Fernandez AG(1), Pise-Masison CA(1), Gardner
K(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (2)National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: gardnerk@mail.nih.gov.

The eleven-nineteen lysine-rich leukemia protein (ELL) is a key regulator of RNA 
polymerase II mediated transcription. ELL facilitates RNA polymerase II
transcription pause site entry and release by dynamically interacting with p300
and the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). In this study, we
investigated the role of ELL during the HTLV-1 Tax oncogene induced
transactivation. We show that ectopic expression of Tax enhances ELL
incorporation into p300 and P-TEFb containing transcriptional complexes and the
subsequent recruitment of these complexes to target genes in vivo. Depletion of
ELL abrogates Tax induced transactivation of the immediate early genes Fos, Egr2 
and NF-kB, suggesting that ELL is an essential cellular cofactor of the Tax
oncogene. Thus, our study identifies a novel mechanism of ELL-dependent
transactivation of immediate early genes by Tax and provides the rational for
further defining the genome-wide targets of Tax and ELL.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26188510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Brain Behav Immun. 2015 Nov;50:209-20. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2015.07.009. Epub 2015 
Jul 14.

Microbes & neurodevelopment--Absence of microbiota during early life increases
activity-related transcriptional pathways in the amygdala.

Stilling RM(1), Ryan FJ(2), Hoban AE(1), Shanahan F(3), Clarke G(4), Claesson
MJ(2), Dinan TG(4), Cryan JF(5).

Author information: 
(1)APC Microbiome Institute, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland; Department
of Anatomy and Neuroscience, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. (2)APC
Microbiome Institute, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland; Department of
Microbiology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. (3)APC Microbiome
Institute, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. (4)APC Microbiome Institute,
University College Cork, Cork, Ireland; Department of Psychiatry and
Neurobehavioural Sciences, University College Cork, Ireland. (5)APC Microbiome
Institute, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland; Department of Anatomy and
Neuroscience, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. Electronic address:
j.cryan@ucc.ie.

The mammalian amygdala is a key emotional brain region for eliciting social
behaviour, critically involved in anxiety and fear-related behaviours, and hence 
a focus of research on neurodevelopmental and stress-related disorders such as
autism and anxiety. Recently, increasing evidence implicates host-microbe
interactions in the aetiology of these conditions. Germ-free (GF) mice, devoid of
any microbiota throughout organismal maturation, are a well-established tool to
study the effects of absence of the microbiota on host physiology. A growing body
of independently replicated findings confirm that GF animals demonstrate altered 
anxiety-related behaviour and impaired social behaviour. However, the underlying 
mechanisms of this interaction and the nature of the pathways involved are only
insufficiently understood. To further elucidate the molecular underpinnings of
microbe-brain interaction, we therefore exploited unbiased genome-wide
transcriptional profiling to determine gene expression in the amygdala of GF and 
GF mice that have been colonised after weaning. Using RNA-sequencing and a
comprehensive downstream analysis pipeline we studied the amygdala transcriptome 
and found significant differences at the levels of differential gene expression, 
exon usage and RNA-editing. Most surprisingly, we noticed upregulation of several
immediate early response genes such as Fos, Fosb, Egr2 or Nr4a1 in association
with increased CREB signalling in GF mice. In addition, we found differential
expression and recoding of several genes implicated in brain physiology processes
such as neurotransmission, neuronal plasticity, metabolism and morphology. In
conclusion, our data suggest altered baseline neuronal activity in the amygdala
of germ-free animals, which is established during early life and may have
implications for understanding development and treatment of neurodevelopmental
disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26184083  [PubMed - in process]


37. Muscle Nerve. 2015 Dec;52(6):1110-3. doi: 10.1002/mus.24774.

A case of neuromyotonia and axonal motor neuropathy: A report of a HINT1 mutation
in the United States.

Jerath NU(1), Shy ME(1), Grider T(1), Gutmann L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, 200
Hawkins Drive, Iowa City, Iowa, 52246, USA.

INTRODUCTION: HINT1 mutations cause an autosomal recessive distal hereditary
motor axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia. This is a case report of a HINT1
mutation in the United States.
METHODS: A 30-year-old man of Slovenian heritage and no significant family
history presented with scoliosis as a child and later developed neuromyotonia and
distal weakness. Electrodiagnostic testing revealed an axonal motor neuropathy
and neuromyotonic discharges. Previous diagnostic work-up, including testing for 
Cx32, MPZ, PMP-22, NF-L, EGR2, CLCN1, DM1, DM2, SMN exon 7/8, emerin, LMNA, MPK, 
SCNA4, acid maltase gene, paraneoplastic disorder, and a sural nerve biopsy, was 
negative.
RESULTS: Genetic testing for a HINT1 mutation was performed and revealed a
homozygous mutation at p.Arg37Pro.
CONCLUSION: This entity should be distinguished clinically and genetically from
myotonic dystrophy and channelopathies with the clinical features of
neuromyotonia and an axonal neuropathy. This case illustrates the importance of
identifying the correct phenotype to avoid unnecessary and costly evaluations.
Muscle Nerve 52: 1110-1113, 2015.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26182879  [PubMed - in process]


38. Psychiatry Res. 2015 Aug 30;228(3):958-60. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2015.05.035.
Epub 2015 Jun 6.

Resequencing of early growth response 2 (EGR2) gene revealed a recurrent
patient-specific mutation in schizophrenia.

Hu TM(1), Chen CH(2), Chuang YA(1), Hsu SH(1), Cheng MC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yuli Mental Health Research Center, Yuli Branch,
Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan. (2)Department of Psychiatry,
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou and Department and Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (3)Department of
Psychiatry, Yuli Mental Health Research Center, Yuli Branch, Taipei Veterans
General Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan; Center for General Education, St. Mary<U+05F3>s
Junior College of Medicine, Nursing and Management, Yilan County, Taiwan.
Electronic address: uncle055@yahoo.com.

Abnormal myelination is considered as part of the pathophysiology of
schizophrenia. We resequenced the genomic DNA of the EGR2, which has a specific
function in the myelination of peripheral nervous system, in 543 schizophrenic
patients and 554 non-psychotic controls. We identified six known SNPs, which were
not associated with schizophrenia. Nevertheless, we discovered 24 rare mutations,
some of them were patient-specific, including a recurrent mutation
(p.P173_Y174insP), which might be associated with the pathogenesis of
schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26119399  [PubMed - in process]


39. Coll Antropol. 2015 Mar;39(1):261-5.

Genetic determination of motor neuron disease and neuropathy.

Vrebalov Cindro P, Vrebalov Cindro V.

Following the completion of the Human Genome Project, a lot of progress has been 
made in understanding the genetic basis of motor neuron diseases (MNDs) and
neuropathies. Spinal Muscular Atrophies (SMA) are caused by mutations in the SMN1
gene localized on Chromosome 5q11. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) has been
found to have at least 18 different types, many of them associated to different
genetic loci (e.g. SOD1, ALS2, SETX, FUS, VAPB, ANG, TARDBP and others), but many
of the forms have still not been associated with a particular gene. Sensomotoric 
hereditary neuropathies (Charcot-Marie-Tooth) are a large heterogeneous group of 
various hereditary neuropathies, which have also been associated with a wide
spectrum of genetic mutations, such as PMP22, LITAF, EGR2, P0 protein, KIF1B,
MFN2, RAB7 and others. It is also apparent that more genes are being implicated, 
mutations discovered, and phenotypes recognised and broadened. Therefore, a lot
of continuing, additional research effort will be required in the coming years to
illuminate pathogenic mechanisms that underlie motor neuron diseases and
neuropathies and that could lead to new and improved treatments.

PMID: 26040103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 14;290(33):20455-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.634816. Epub
2015 May 15.

Early Growth Response Genes 2 and 3 Regulate the Expression of Bcl6 and
Differentiation of T Follicular Helper Cells.

Ogbe A(1), Miao T(2), Symonds AL(2), Omodho B(3), Singh R(3), Bhullar P(3), Li
S(4), Wang P(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Biosciences, Department of Life Sciences, Brunel
University, Kingston Lane, UB8 3PH, United Kingdom and the Blizard Institute of
Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and London School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Queen Mary University of London, 4 Newark Street, London E1 2AD, United Kingdom. 
(2)the Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and London School
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 4 Newark Street,
London E1 2AD, United Kingdom. (3)From the Division of Biosciences, Department of
Life Sciences, Brunel University, Kingston Lane, UB8 3PH, United Kingdom and.
(4)From the Division of Biosciences, Department of Life Sciences, Brunel
University, Kingston Lane, UB8 3PH, United Kingdom and su-ling.li@brunel.ac.uk.
(5)the Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and London School
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 4 Newark Street,
London E1 2AD, United Kingdom p.wang@qmul.ac.uk.

T follicular helper (Tfh) cells support differentiation of B cells to plasma
cells and high affinity antibody production in germinal centers (GCs), and Tfh
differentiation requires the function of B cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6). We have now
discovered that early growth response gene 2 (EGR2) and EGR3 directly regulate
the expression of Bcl6 in Tfh cells, which is required for their function in
regulation of GC formation. In the absence of EGR2 and -3, the expression of BCL6
in Tfh cells is defective, leading to impaired differentiation of Tfh cells,
resulting in a failure to form GCs following virus infection and defects in
production of antiviral antibodies. Enforced expression of BCL6 in
EGR2/3-deficient CD4 T cells partially restored Tfh differentiation and GC
formation in response to virus infection. Our findings demonstrate a novel
function of EGR2/3 that is important for Tfh cell development and Tfh
cell-mediated B cell immune responses.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4536451
PMID: 25979336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Glia. 2015 May 14. doi: 10.1002/glia.22855. [Epub ahead of print]

Differential Sox10 genomic occupancy in myelinating glia.

Lopez-Anido C(1,)(2), Sun G(3), Koenning M(4), Srinivasan R(1), Hung HA(1,)(5),
Emery B(4), Keles S(5), Svaren J(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 53705.
(2)Comparative Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 53705. (3)Department of Biostatistics and 
Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 53705. 
(4)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience and the Centre for Neuroscience
Research, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. (5)Cellular and
Molecular Pathology Graduate Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin, 53705. (6)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 53705.

Myelin is formed by specialized myelinating glia: oligodendrocytes and Schwann
cells in the central and peripheral nervous systems, respectively. While there
are distinct developmental aspects and regulatory pathways in these two cell
types, myelination in both systems requires the transcriptional activator Sox10. 
Sox10 interacts with cell type-specific transcription factors at some loci to
induce myelin gene expression, but it is largely unknown how Sox10
transcriptional networks globally compare between oligodendrocytes and Schwann
cells. We used in vivo ChIP-Seq analysis of spinal cord and peripheral nerve
(sciatic nerve) to identify unique and shared Sox10 binding sites and assess
their correlation with active enhancers and transcriptional profiles in
oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells. Sox10 binding sites overlap with active
enhancers and critical cell type-specific regulators of myelination, such as
Olig2 and Myrf in oligodendrocytes, and Egr2/Krox20 in Schwann cells. Sox10 sites
also associate with genes critical for myelination in both oligodendrocytes and
Schwann cells and are found within super-enhancers previously defined in brain.
In Schwann cells, Sox10 sites contain binding motifs of putative partners in the 
Sp/Klf, Tead, and nuclear receptor protein families. Specifically, siRNA analysis
of nuclear receptors Nr2f1 and Nr2f2 revealed downregulation of myelin genes Mbp 
and Ndrg1 in primary Schwann cells. Our analysis highlights different mechanisms 
that establish cell type-specific genomic occupancy of Sox10, which reflects the 
unique characteristics of oligodendrocyte and Schwann cell differentiation. GLIA 
2015.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4644515 [Available on 2016-11-14]
PMID: 25974668  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


42. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2015 Jun;47(6):431-40. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmv032. Epub 2015 May 2.

miR-330-3p controls cell proliferation by targeting early growth response 2 in
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Liu X(1), Shi H(1), Liu B(1), Li J(2), Liu Y(2), Yu B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Qiqihar
Medical University, Qiqihar 161000, China. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
the Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150086,
China. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, the Second Affiliated Hospital of
Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150086, China yubaiquan76@163.com.

Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is one of the most common lung cancers, and
microRNAs (miRNAs) have been reported to play essential roles in NSCLC. Recent
studies have indicated that miR-330-3p expression is up-regulated in NSCLC
samples and in tissues of NSCLC brain metastasis. In this study, up-regulation of
miR-330-3p expression was confirmed in NSCLC and 20 NSCLC patient samples.
Furthermore, miR-330-3p was over-expressed in NSCLC cell lines A549 and H23, and 
the promotive function of miR-330-3p was investigated in regulating NSCLC cell
proliferation and cell cycle distribution. To identify potential target genes of 
miR-330-3p in NSCLC, the miRNA target prediction databases were used. Luciferase 
activity assay and real-time RT-PCR analysis confirmed that miR-330-3p is
negatively correlated with the expression of early growth response 2 (EGR2).
Moreover, it was also found that EGR2 mRNA contains two potential binding sites
for miR-330-3p. Knock-down of EGR2 with siRNA was demonstrated to have a similar 
effect as the over-expression of miR-330-3p in NSCLC cell lines. Taken together, 
our results show that EGR2 is a target of miR-330-3p.

© The Author 2015. Published by ABBS Editorial Office in association with Oxford 
University Press on behalf of the Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 25935837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Neurotox Res. 2015 Aug;28(2):108-21. doi: 10.1007/s12640-015-9529-9. Epub 2015
Apr 25.

Salidroside-Mediated Neuroprotection is Associated with Induction of Early Growth
Response Genes (Egrs) Across a Wide Therapeutic Window.

Lai W(1), Zheng Z, Zhang X, Wei Y, Chu K, Brown J, Hong G, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Biomedical Research & Development, Fujian University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, No. 1 Huatou Road, Minhou Shangjie, Fuzhou, China.

Salidroside exhibits anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidative, and anti-apoptotic
properties. To identify whether salidroside might be a candidate for treating
ischemic stroke, we investigated the effects of salidroside or vehicle, given
daily for 6 days, after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) for 2 h and
reperfusion for either 1 or 48 h in rats. Salidroside reduced cerebral infarct
volume and significantly improved neurological scores whether started after 1 or 
48 h of reperfusion. Microarray analysis showed that 20 % (133/678) of the genes 
down-regulated by ischemia and 1 h of reperfusion were up-regulated by
salidroside, whereas 13 % (105/829) of the genes induced by ischemia-reperfusion 
were inhibited by salidroside, suggesting that salidroside can reverse effects of
ischemia-reperfusion on gene expression. The main enriched functional categories 
induced by salidroside were genes related to synaptic plasticity, whereas
salidroside inhibited genes related to inflammation. Induction of Egr1, Egr2,
Egr4, and Arc by salidroside was confirmed by qRT-PCR and western blotting in
ischemic brains treated after either 1 or 48 h of reperfusion. The potential
protective role of Egr4 in salidroside-mediated neuroprotection was subsequently 
investigated in CoCl2-treated PC12 cells. Egr4 was dose-dependently induced by
salidroside in PC12 cells, and depleting Egr4 with target-specific siRNA
increased caspase-3 activity and Bax, but decreased Bcl-xl, which were reversed
by salidroside. Finally, we confirmed that salidroside inhibited the
Bax/Bcl-xl-related apoptosis after MCAO with reperfusion. In conclusion,
salidroside is highly neuroprotective with a wide therapeutic time window after
ischemia-reperfusion injury in the rat, and this partially involves induction of 
Egrs, leading to inhibition of Bax/Bcl-xl-related apoptosis.

PMID: 25911293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Neuroinflammation. 2015 Mar 15;12:52. doi: 10.1186/s12974-015-0273-0.

Cannabidiol, a non-psychoactive cannabinoid, leads to EGR2-dependent anergy in
activated encephalitogenic T cells.

Kozela E(1), Juknat A(2), Kaushansky N(3), Ben-Nun A(4), Coppola G(5), Vogel
Z(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)The Dr Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Center for the Biology of Addictive
Diseases, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
ewa.kozela@weizmann.ac.il. (2)The Dr Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Center for the
Biology of Addictive Diseases, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, 
Tel Aviv, Israel. Ana.juknat@weizmann.ac.il. (3)Neurobiology Department, Weizmann
Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. nathali.kaushansky@weizmann.ac.il.
(4)Immunology Department, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.
avi.ben-nun@weizmann.ac.il. (5)Neurology Department, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
gcoppola@ucla.edu. (6)The Dr Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Center for the Biology
of Addictive Diseases, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel. vogelz@post.tau.ac.il. (7)Neurobiology Department, Weizmann
Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. vogelz@post.tau.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: Cannabidiol (CBD), the main non-psychoactive cannabinoid, has been
previously shown by us to ameliorate clinical symptoms and to decrease
inflammation in myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG)35-55-induced mouse
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis model of multiple sclerosis as well as 
to decrease MOG35-55-induced T cell proliferation and IL-17 secretion. However,
the mechanisms of CBD anti-inflammatory activities are unclear.
METHODS: Here we analyzed the effects of CBD on splenocytes (source of accessory 
T cells and antigen presenting cells (APC)) co-cultured with MOG35-55-specific T 
cells (TMOG) and stimulated with MOG35-55. Using flow cytometry, we evaluated the
expression of surface activation markers and inhibitory molecules on T cells and 
B cells. TMOG cells were purified using CD4 positive microbead selection and
submitted for quantitative PCR and microarray of mRNA transcript analyzes. Cell
signaling studies in purified TMOG were carried out using immunoblotting.
RESULTS: We found that CBD leads to upregulation of CD69 and
lymphocyte-activation gene 3 (LAG3) regulatory molecules on CD4(+)CD25(-)
accessory T cells. This subtype of CD4(+)CD25(-)CD69(+)LAG3(+) T cells has been
recognized as induced regulatory phenotype promoting anergy in activated T cells.
Indeed, we observed that CBD treatment results in upregulation of EGR2 (a key T
cell anergy inducer) mRNA transcription in stimulated TMOG cells. This was
accompanied by elevated levels of anergy promoting genes such as IL-10
(anti-inflammatory cytokine), STAT5 (regulatory factor), and LAG3 mRNAs, as well 
as of several enhancers of cell cycle arrest (such as Nfatc1, Casp4, Cdkn1a, and 
Icos). Moreover, CBD exposure leads to a decrease in STAT3 and to an increase in 
STAT5 phosphorylation in TMOG cells, positive and negative regulators of Th17
activity, respectively. In parallel, we observed decreased levels of major
histocompatibility complex class II (MHCII), CD25, and CD69 on CD19(+) B cells
following CBD treatment, showing diminished antigen presenting capabilities of B 
cells and reduction in their pro-inflammatory functions.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggests that CBD exerts its immunoregulatory effects via
induction of CD4(+)CD25(-)CD69(+)LAG3(+) cells in MOG35-55-activated APC/TMOG
co-cultures. This is accompanied by EGR2-dependent anergy of stimulated TMOG
cells as well as a switch in their intracellular STAT3/STAT5 activation balance
leading to the previously observed decrease in Th17 activity.

PMCID: PMC4363052
PMID: 25880134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Semin Immunol. 2015 Feb;27(1):26-32. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2015.02.005. Epub 2015
Apr 2.

The transcriptional programs of iNKT cells.

Kim EY(1), Lynch L(2), Brennan PJ(3), Cohen NR(4), Brenner MB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, 15 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, United States; Division of
Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Smith
Building, 5th Floor, 1 Jimmy Fund Way, Boston, MA 02115, United States.
Electronic address: edyyongkim@gmail.com. (2)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology
and Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Smith Building, 5th Floor, 1 Jimmy
Fund Way, Boston, MA 02115, United States; Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes
and Hypertension, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 221 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA
02115, United States. Electronic address: llynch3@partners.org. (3)Division of
Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Smith
Building, 5th Floor, 1 Jimmy Fund Way, Boston, MA 02115, United States.
Electronic address: pbrennan3@partners.org. (4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University, 5(th)
floor, 3 Blackfan Circle, Boston, MA 02115, United States. Electronic address:
nadia.cohen@wyss.harvard.edu. (5)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and
Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Smith Building, 5th Floor, 1 Jimmy Fund
Way, Boston, MA 02115, United States. Electronic address:
mbrenner@research.bwh.harvard.edu.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are innate T cells that express a
semi-invariant T cell receptor (TCR) and recognize lipid antigens presented by
CD1d molecules. As part of innate immunity, iNKT cells rapidly produce large
amounts of cytokines after activation and regulate the function of innate and
adaptive immune cells in antimicrobial immunity, tumor rejection and inflammatory
diseases. Global transcriptional profiling has advanced our understanding of all 
aspects of iNKT cell biology. In this review, we discuss transcriptional analyses
of iNKT cell development, functional subsets of iNKT cells, and global
comparisons of iNKT cells to other innate and adaptive immune cells. Global
transcriptional analysis revealed that iNKT cells have a transcriptional profile 
distinct from NK cells and MHC-restricted T cells, both during thymic development
and in the periphery. The transcription factors EGR2 and PLZF (and microRNA like 
miR-150) are key regulators of the iNKT cell transcriptome during development.
PLZF is one of several factors that control the homing and maintenance of
organ-specific iNKT cell populations. As in MHC-restricted T cells, specific
transcription factors are characteristic of functional subsets of iNKT cells,
such as the transcription factor T-bet in the NKT1 subset. Exciting future
directions for global transcriptional analyses include iNKT cells in disease
models, diverse NKT cells and human studies.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 25841627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Cardiovasc Res. 2015 Jun 1;106(3):387-97. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvv121. Epub 2015 Mar 
30.

MicroRNA-150 protects the mouse heart from ischaemic injury by regulating cell
death.

Tang Y(1), Wang Y(1), Park KM(1), Hu Q(1), Teoh JP(1), Broskova Z(1), Ranganathan
P(1), Jayakumar C(1), Li J(1), Su H(1), Tang Y(1), Ramesh G(1), Kim IM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Center, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, GA, USA. (2)Vascular Biology Center, Medical College of
Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University
CB-3717, 1459 Laney Walker Blvd, Augusta, GA, USA ilkim@gru.edu.

AIMS: Cardiac injury is accompanied by dynamic changes in the expression of
microRNAs (miRs). For example, miR-150 is down-regulated in patients with acute
myocardial infarction, atrial fibrillation, dilated and ischaemic cardiomyopathy 
as well as in various mouse heart failure (HF) models. Circulating miR-150 has
been recently proposed as a better biomarker of HF than traditional clinical
markers such as brain natriuretic peptide. We recently showed using the
ß-arrestin-biased ß-blocker, carvedilol that ß-arrestin1-biased ß1-adrenergic
receptor cardioprotective signalling stimulates the processing of miR-150 in the 
heart. However, the potential role of miR-150 in ischaemic injury and HF is
unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we show that genetic deletion of miR-150 in mice
causes abnormalities in cardiac structural and functional remodelling after MI.
The cardioprotective roles of miR-150 during ischaemic injury were in part
attributed to direct repression of the pro-apoptotic genes egr2 (zinc-binding
transcription factor induced by ischaemia) and p2x7r (pro-inflammatory ATP
receptor) in cardiomyocytes.
CONCLUSION: These findings reveal a pivotal role for miR-150 as a regulator of
cardiomyocyte survival during cardiac injury.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2015. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4447807 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25824147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 24;10(3):e0121169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121169.
eCollection 2015.

T-cell activation and early gene response in dogs.

Mortlock SA(1), Wei J(2), Williamson P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Science, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. 
(2)Faculty of Veterinary Science, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia; 
Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.

T-cells play a crucial role in canine immunoregulation and defence against
invading pathogens. Proliferation is fundamental to T-cell differentiation,
homeostasis and immune response. Initiation of proliferation following receptor
mediated stimuli requires a temporally programmed gene response that can be
identified as immediate-early, mid- and late phases. The immediate-early response
genes in T-cell activation engage the cell cycle machinery and promote subsequent
gene activation events. Genes involved in this immediate-early response in dogs
are yet to be identified. The present study was undertaken to characterise the
early T-cell gene response in dogs to improve understanding of the genetic
mechanisms regulating immune function. Gene expression profiles were
characterised using canine gene expression microarrays and quantitative reverse
transcription PCR (qRT-PCR), and paired samples from eleven dogs. Significant
functional annotation clusters were identified following stimulation with
phytohemagluttinin (PHA) (5µg/ml), including the Toll-like receptor signaling
pathway and phosphorylation pathways. Using strict statistical criteria, 13
individual genes were found to be differentially expressed, nine of which have
ontologies that relate to proliferation and cell cycle control. These included,
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2/COX2), early growth response 1
(EGR1), growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible gene (GADD45B),
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate-induced protein 1 (PMAIP1), V-FOS FBJ murine
osteosarcoma viral oncogene homolog (FOS), early growth response 2 (EGR2),
hemogen (HEMGN), polo-like kinase 2 (PLK2) and polo-like kinase 3 (PLK3).
Differential gene expression was re-examined using qRT-PCR, which confirmed that 
EGR1, EGR2, PMAIP1, PTGS2, FOS and GADD45B were significantly upregulated in
stimulated cells and ALAS2 downregulated. PTGS2 and EGR1 showed the highest
levels of response in these dogs. Both of these genes are involved in cell cycle 
regulation. This study provides a comprehensive analysis of the early T-cell gene
response to activation in dogs.

PMCID: PMC4372360
PMID: 25803042  [PubMed - in process]


48. J Neurosci. 2015 Mar 11;35(10):4151-6. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3534-14.2015.

Distribution of monocarboxylate transporters in the peripheral nervous system
suggests putative roles in lactate shuttling and myelination.

Domènech-Estévez E(1), Baloui H(1), Repond C(2), Rosafio K(2), Médard JJ(1),
Tricaud N(3), Pellerin L(2), Chrast R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical Genetics and. (2)Physiology, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, CH-1005 Switzerland. (3)INSERM U1051, Institut des Neurosciences de
Montpellier (INM), Université de Montpellier 1 and 2, 34967 Montpellier, France, 
and. (4)Departments of Medical Genetics and Department of Neuroscience and
Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, 17177 Stockholm,
Sweden roman.chrast@ki.se.

Lactate, a product of glycolysis, has been shown to play a key role in the
metabolic support of neurons/axons in the CNS by both astrocytes and
oligodendrocytes through monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs). Despite such
importance in the CNS, little is known about MCT expression and lactate function 
in the PNS. Here we show that mouse MCT1, MCT2, and MCT4 are expressed in the
PNS. While DRG neurons express MCT1, myelinating Schwann cells (SCs) coexpress
MCT1 and MCT4 in a domain-specific fashion, mainly in regions of noncompact
myelin. Interestingly, SC-specific downregulation of MCT1 expression in rat
neuron/SC cocultures led to increased myelination, while its downregulation in
neurons resulted in a decreased amount of neurofilament. Finally, pure rat SCs
grown in the presence of lactate exhibited an increase in the level of expression
of the main myelin regulator gene Krox20/Egr2 and the myelin gene P0. These data 
indicate that lactate homeostasis participates in the regulation of the SC
myelination program and reveal that similar to CNS, PNS axon-glial metabolic
interactions are most likely mediated by MCTs.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/354151-06$15.00/0.

PMID: 25762662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Ideggyogy Sz. 2014 Nov 30;67(11-12):420-5.

The modifying effect a PMP22 deletion in a family with Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1
neuropathy due to an EGR2 mutation.

Reményi V, Inczédy-Farkas G, Gál A, Bereznai B, Pál Z, Karcagi V, Mechler F,
Molnár MJ.

BACKGROUND: Mutations of both the PMP22 and EGR2 genes cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
(CMT) disease type 1. Deletion of the PMP22 gene, results in hereditary
neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies. More publications exist about the 
interaction of PMP22 duplication and other CMT-causing gene mutations. In these
cases the intrafamiliar discordant phenotypes draw the attention to the possible 
role of modifying genes. The gene-gene interactions between the PMP22 and EGR2
genes are not well understood.
CASE REPORT: We report two brothers with late onset CMT1 due to a c. 1142 G>A
(Arg381His) heterozygous substitution in the EGR2 gene. Additionally, the older
brother with the less severe symptoms harbored the PMP22 gene deletion also.
CONCLUSION: The coexistence of the two genetic alterations did not aggravate the 
clinical symptoms. Moreover, the PMP22 deletion appeared to have a beneficial
modifying effect, thus implying potential gene-gene interaction of PMP22 and
EGR2. PMP22 deletion may increase Schwann cells proliferation and compensate the 
dominant-negative effect of the Arg381 His substitution in the EGR2 gene.

PMID: 25720245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Neurosci. 2015 Feb 18;35(7):3073-84. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3699-14.2015.

The PDZ-domain protein Whirlin facilitates mechanosensory signaling in mammalian 
proprioceptors.

de Nooij JC(1), Simon CM(2), Simon A(3), Doobar S(4), Steel KP(5), Banks RW(6),
Mentis GZ(7), Bewick GS(8), Jessell TM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience, and Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics,
sd382@columbia.edu tmj1@columbia.edu g.s.bewick@abdn.ac.uk. (2)Pathology and Cell
Biology, Motor Neuron Center for Biology and Disease. (3)School of Medical
Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, United Kingdom.
(4)Departments of Neuroscience, and Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics.
(5)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire CB10 1SA, United
Kingdom, and. (6)School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, University of
Durham, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom. (7)Pathology and Cell Biology, Neurology,
Motor Neuron Center for Biology and Disease. (8)School of Medical Sciences,
University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, United Kingdom, sd382@columbia.edu
tmj1@columbia.edu g.s.bewick@abdn.ac.uk. (9)Departments of Neuroscience, and
Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Kavli Institute for Brain Science, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032,
sd382@columbia.edu tmj1@columbia.edu g.s.bewick@abdn.ac.uk.

Mechanoreception is an essential feature of many sensory modalities.
Nevertheless, the mechanisms that govern the conversion of a mechanical force to 
distinct patterns of action potentials remain poorly understood. Proprioceptive
mechanoreceptors reside in skeletal muscle and inform the nervous system of the
position of body and limbs in space. We show here that Whirlin/Deafness autosomal
recessive 31 (DFNB31), a PDZ-scaffold protein involved in vestibular and auditory
hair cell transduction, is also expressed by proprioceptive sensory neurons
(pSNs) in dorsal root ganglia in mice. Whirlin localizes to the peripheral
sensory endings of pSNs and facilitates pSN afferent firing in response to muscle
stretch. The requirement of Whirlin in both proprioceptors and hair cells
suggests that accessory mechanosensory signaling molecules define common features
of mechanoreceptive processing across sensory systems.

Copyright © 2015 de Nooij et al.

PMCID: PMC4331628
PMID: 25698744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nat Commun. 2015 Feb 19;6:6329. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7329.

TGF-ß3-expressing CD4+CD25(-)LAG3+ regulatory T cells control humoral immune
responses.

Okamura T(1), Sumitomo S(2), Morita K(2), Iwasaki Y(2), Inoue M(2), Nakachi S(2),
Komai T(2), Shoda H(2), Miyazaki J(3), Fujio K(2), Yamamoto K(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan [2] Max
Planck-The University of Tokyo Center for Integrative Inflammology, The
University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8505, Japan.
(2)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. (3)Division
of Stem Cell Regulation Research, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine,
2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Autoantibodies induce various autoimmune diseases, including systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE). We previously described that CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG3(+) regulatory
T cells (LAG3(+) Treg) are regulated by Egr2, a zinc-finger transcription factor 
required for the induction of T-cell anergy. We herein demonstrate that LAG3(+)
Treg produce high amounts of TGF-ß3 in an Egr2- and Fas-dependent manner. LAG3(+)
Treg require TGF-ß3 to suppress B-cell responses in a murine model of lupus.
Moreover, TGF-ß3- and LAG3(+) Treg-mediated suppression requires PD-1 expression 
on B cells. We also show that TGF-ß3-expressing human LAG3(+) Treg suppress
antibody production and that SLE patients exhibit decreased frequencies of
LAG3(+) Treg. These results clarify the mechanism of B-cell regulation and
suggest therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC4346620
PMID: 25695838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2014 Nov;2(6):522-9. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.106. Epub 2014 Aug 
21.

The allelic spectrum of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease in over 17,000 individuals
with neuropathy.

DiVincenzo C(1), Elzinga CD(1), Medeiros AC(1), Karbassi I(1), Jones JR(1), Evans
MC(1), Braastad CD(1), Bishop CM(1), Jaremko M(1), Wang Z(1), Liaquat K(1),
Hoffman CA(1), York MD(1), Batish SD(1), Lupski JR(2), Higgins JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Quest Diagnostics, Athena Diagnostics Marlborough, Massachusetts.
(2)Departments of Molecular and Human Genetics and Pediatrics, Baylor College of 
Medicine Houston, Texas.

We report the frequency, positive rate, and type of mutations in 14 genes (PMP22,
GJB1, MPZ, MFN2, SH3TC2, GDAP1, NEFL, LITAF, GARS, HSPB1, FIG4, EGR2, PRX, and
RAB7A) associated with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) in a cohort of 17,880
individuals referred to a commercial genetic testing laboratory. Deidentified
results from sequencing assays and multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA) were analyzed including 100,102 Sanger sequencing, 2338
next-generation sequencing (NGS), and 21,990 MLPA assays. Genetic abnormalities
were identified in 18.5% (n = 3312) of all individuals. Testing by Sanger and
MLPA (n = 3216) showed that duplications (dup) (56.7%) or deletions (del) (21.9%)
in the PMP22 gene accounted for the majority of positive findings followed by
mutations in the GJB1 (6.7%), MPZ (5.3%), and MFN2 (4.3%) genes. GJB1 del and
mutations in the remaining genes explained 5.3% of the abnormalities. Pathogenic 
mutations were distributed as follows: missense (70.6%), nonsense (14.3%),
frameshift (8.7%), splicing (3.3%), in-frame deletions/insertions (1.8%),
initiator methionine mutations (0.8%), and nonstop changes (0.5%). Mutation
frequencies, positive rates, and the types of mutations were similar between
tests performed by either Sanger (n = 17,377) or NGS (n = 503). Among patients
with a positive genetic finding in a CMT-related gene, 94.9% were positive in one
of four genes (PMP22, GJB1, MPZ, or MFN2).

PMCID: PMC4303222
PMID: 25614874  [PubMed]


53. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 13;290(11):6937-50. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.622878. Epub 2015
Jan 22.

Dynamic regulation of Schwann cell enhancers after peripheral nerve injury.

Hung HA(1), Sun G(2), Keles S(2), Svaren J(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Waisman Center, Cellular and Molecular Pathology Graduate Program,
and. (2)Departments of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics and. (3)From the
Waisman Center, Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin 53705 jpsvaren@wisc.edu.

Myelination of the peripheral nervous system is required for axonal function and 
long term stability. After peripheral nerve injury, Schwann cells transition from
axon myelination to a demyelinated state that supports neuronal survival and
ultimately remyelination of axons. Reprogramming of gene expression patterns
during development and injury responses is shaped by the actions of distal
regulatory elements that integrate the actions of multiple transcription factors.
We used ChIP-seq to measure changes in histone H3K27 acetylation, a mark of
active enhancers, to identify enhancers in myelinating rat peripheral nerve and
their dynamics after demyelinating nerve injury. Analysis of injury-induced
enhancers identified enriched motifs for c-Jun, a transcription factor required
for Schwann cells to support nerve regeneration. We identify a c-Jun-bound
enhancer in the gene for Runx2, a transcription factor induced after nerve
injury, and we show that Runx2 is required for activation of other induced genes.
In contrast, enhancers that lose H3K27ac after nerve injury are enriched for
binding sites of the Sox10 and early growth response 2 (Egr2/Krox20)
transcription factors, which are critical determinants of Schwann cell
differentiation. Egr2 expression is lost after nerve injury, and many
Egr2-binding sites lose H3K27ac after nerve injury. However, the majority of
Egr2-bound enhancers retain H3K27ac, indicating that other transcription factors 
maintain active enhancer status after nerve injury. The global epigenomic changes
in H3K27ac deposition pinpoint dynamic changes in enhancers that mediate the
effects of transcription factors that control Schwann cell myelination and
peripheral nervous system responses to nerve injury.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4358118
PMID: 25614629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Sci Rep. 2015 Jan 13;5:7750. doi: 10.1038/srep07750.

A novel function for Egr4 in posterior hindbrain development.

Bae CJ(1), Jeong J(2), Saint-Jeannet JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Basic Science &Craniofacial Biology, College of Dentistry,
New York University, New York, USA [2] Permanent address: Ministry of Food and
Drug Safety, 187 Osongsaengmyeong2(i)-ro, Osong-eup, Cheongwon-gun,
Chungcheongbuk-do 363-700, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Basic Science
&Craniofacial Biology, College of Dentistry, New York University, New York, USA.

Segmentation of the vertebrate hindbrain is an evolutionarily conserved process. 
Here, we identify the transcription factor early growth response 4 (egr4) as a
novel regulator of posterior hindbrain development in Xenopus. egr4 is
specifically and transiently expressed in rhombomeres 5 and 6 (r5/r6), and Egr4
knockdown causes a loss of mafb/kreisler and krox20/egr2 expression in r5/r6 and 
r5, respectively. This phenotype can be fully rescued by injection of frog or
mouse Egr4 mRNA. Moreover Egr4-depleted embryos exhibit a specific loss of the
neural crest stream adjacent to r5, and have inner ear defects. While the
homeodomain protein vHnf1/Hnf1b directly activates Mafb and Krox20 expression in 
the mouse hindbrain to specify r5, we show that in Xenopus this process is
indirect through the activation of Egr4. We provide evidence that rearrangements 
in the regulatory sequences around egr4 and mafb genes may account for this
difference.

PMCID: PMC4291570
PMID: 25583070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cell Res. 2015 Feb;25(2):208-24. doi: 10.1038/cr.2015.3. Epub 2015 Jan 13.

Anticancer immunotherapy by CTLA-4 blockade: obligatory contribution of IL-2
receptors and negative prognostic impact of soluble CD25.

Hannani D(1), Vétizou M(1), Enot D(2), Rusakiewicz S(3), Chaput N(3), Klatzmann
D(4), Desbois M(3), Jacquelot N(1), Vimond N(3), Chouaib S(5), Mateus C(6),
Allison JP(7), Ribas A(8), Wolchok JD(9), Yuan J(9), Wong P(9), Postow M(9),
Mackiewicz A(10), Mackiewicz J(10), Schadendorff D(11), Jaeger D(12), Zörnig I,
Hassel J, Korman AJ(13), Bahjat K(14), Maio M(15), Calabro L(15), Teng MW(16),
Smyth MJ(16), Eggermont A(17), Robert C(18), Kroemer G(19), Zitvogel L(20).

Author information: 
(1)1] Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France [2] INSERM U1015,
Villejuif, France [3] Université Paris Sud-XI, Faculté de Médecine, Le Kremlin
Bicêtre, France. (2)1] Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France [2] INSERM
U848, Villejuif, France [3] Metabolomics Platform, Institut Gustave Roussy,
Villejuif, France. (3)1] Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France [2]
INSERM U1015, Villejuif, France [3] Center of Clinical Investigations in
Biotherapies of Cancer (CICBT) 507, Villejuif, France. (4)1] INSERM, Unité Mixte 
de Recherche_S959, I, Paris, France [2] Assistance-Publique Hopitaux de Paris,
Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Biotherapy, Paris, France. (5)INSERM U753, Villejuif, 
France. (6)1] Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France [2] Department of
Medical Oncology, IGR, Villejuif, France. (7)Department of Immunology, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (8)University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (9)Ludwig Center for Cancer Immunotherapy,
Department of Immunology, and Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. (10)1] Department of Diagnostics and Cancer
Immunology, Greater Poland Cancer Centre, Poznan, Poland [2] Chair of Medical
Biotechnology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(11)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Essen, Germany. (12)National
Center for Tumor Diseases, University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(13)Bristol-Myers Squibb, Redwood City, CA, USA. (14)Earle A Chiles Research
Institute, Robert W. Franz Cancer Center, Providence Portland Medical Center,
Portland, OR, USA. (15)Medical Oncology and Immunotherapy, Department of
Oncology, University Hospital of Siena, Istituto Toscano Tumori, Siena, Italy.
(16)1] QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, 4006, Queensland,
Australia [2] School of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Herston, QLD
4006, Queensland, Australia. (17)1] Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif,
France [2] INSERM U1015, Villejuif, France [3] INSERM U981, Villejuif, France.
(18)1] Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France [2] INSERM U1015,
Villejuif, France [3] Department of Medical Oncology, IGR, Villejuif, France [4] 
INSERM U981, Villejuif, France. (19)1] Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif,
France [2] INSERM U848, Villejuif, France [3] Metabolomics Platform, Institut
Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France [4] Equipe 11 labellisée Ligue contre le
Cancer, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, INSERM U 1138, Paris, France [5] Pôle
de Biologie, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, Paris, France [6]
Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France. (20)1] Gustave
Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France [2] INSERM U1015, Villejuif, France [3]
Université Paris Sud-XI, Faculté de Médecine, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France [4]
Department of Medical Oncology, IGR, Villejuif, France.

Erratum in
    Cell Res. 2015 Mar;25(3):399-400. Zörnig, Inka [added]; Hassel, Jessica [added].

The cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4)-blocking antibody ipilimumab
induces immune-mediated long-term control of metastatic melanoma in a fraction of
patients. Although ipilimumab undoubtedly exerts its therapeutic effects via
immunostimulation, thus far clinically useful, immunologically relevant
biomarkers that predict treatment efficiency have been elusive. Here, we show
that neutralization of IL-2 or blocking the a and ß subunits of the IL-2 receptor
(CD25 and CD122, respectively) abolished the antitumor effects and the
accompanying improvement of the ratio of intratumoral T effector versus
regulatory cells (Tregs), which were otherwise induced by CTLA-4 blockade in
preclinical mouse models. CTLA-4 blockade led to the reduction of a suppressive
CD4(+) T cell subset expressing Lag3, ICOS, IL-10 and Egr2 with a concomitant
rise in IL-2-producing effector cells that lost FoxP3 expression and accumulated 
in regressing tumors. While recombinant IL-2 improved the therapeutic efficacy of
CTLA-4 blockade, the decoy IL-2 receptor a (IL-2Ra, sCD25) inhibited the
anticancer effects of CTLA-4 blockade. In 262 metastatic melanoma patients
receiving ipilimumab, baseline serum concentrations of sCD25 represented an
independent indicator of overall survival, with high levels predicting resistance
to therapy. Altogether, these results unravel a role for IL-2 and IL-2 receptors 
in the anticancer activity of CTLA-4 blockade. Importantly, our study provides
the first immunologically relevant biomarker, namely elevated serum sCD25, that
predicts resistance to CTLA-4 blockade in patients with melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4650573
PMID: 25582080  [PubMed - in process]


56. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2015 Jan;64:95-103. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2014.12.008. Epub 2014 
Dec 30.

Early growth response 2 (Egr-2) expression is triggered by NF-<U+03BA>B activation.

Nafez S(1), Oikawa K(1), Odero GL(2), Sproule M(2), Ge N(2), Schapansky J(1),
Abrenica B(2), Hatherell A(2), Cadonic C(3), Zhang S(4), Song X(5), Kauppinen
T(6), Glazner GW(1), Grilli M(7), Czubryt MP(8), Eisenstat DD(9), Albensi BC(10).

Author information: 
(1)St. Boniface Hospital Research; University of Manitoba, Dept. of Pharmacology 
& Therapeutics, Winnipeg MB, Canada. (2)St. Boniface Hospital Research, Winnipeg 
MB, Canada. (3)St. Boniface Hospital Research; University of Manitoba - Graduate 
Program in Biomedical Engineering, Winnipeg MB, Canada. (4)Manitoba Institute of 
Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg MB, Canada. (5)Dept. of Medical
Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton AB, Canada. (6)University of Manitoba, 
Dept. of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Winnipeg MB, Canada. (7)Dept.
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara Italy. (8)St.
Boniface Hospital Research; University of Manitoba, Dept. of Physiology, Winnipeg
MB, Canada. (9)Depts. of Pediatrics, Medical Genetics and Oncology, University of
Alberta, Edmonton AB, Canada. (10)St. Boniface Hospital Research; University of
Manitoba - Graduate Program in Biomedical Engineering; University of Manitoba,
Dept. of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Winnipeg MB, Canada. Electronic address:
balbensi@sbrc.ca.

Transcription factors are known to play multiple roles in cellular function.
Investigators report that factors such as early growth response (Egr) protein and
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) are activated in the brain during cancer, brain
injury, inflammation, and/or memory. To explore NF-<U+03BA>B activity further, we
investigated the transcriptomes of hippocampal slices following electrical
stimulation of NF-<U+03BA>B p50 subunit knockout mice (p50-/-) versus their controls
(p50+/+). We found that the early growth response gene Egr-2 was upregulated by
NF-<U+03BA>B activation, but only in p50+/+ hippocampal slices. We then stimulated HeLa 
cells and primary cortical neurons with tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa) to
activate NF-<U+03BA>B and increase the expression of Egr-2. The Egr-2 promoter sequence 
was analyzed for NF-<U+03BA>B binding sites and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays were performed to confirm promoter occupancy in vivo. We discovered that
NF-<U+03BA>B specifically binds to an NF-<U+03BA>B consensus binding site within the proximal
promoter region of Egr-2. Luciferase assay demonstrated that p50 was able to
transactivate the Egr-2 promoter in vitro. Small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated
p50 knockdown corroborated other Egr-2 expression studies. We show for the first 
time a novel link between NF-<U+03BA>B activation and Egr-2 expression with Egr-2
expression directly controlled by the transcriptional activity of NF-<U+03BA>B.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25553923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Immunol. 2015 Feb 1;194(3):960-72. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402143. Epub 2014 Dec
29.

CD26-mediated induction of EGR2 and IL-10 as potential regulatory mechanism for
CD26 costimulatory pathway.

Hatano R(1), Ohnuma K(2), Otsuka H(2), Komiya E(2), Taki I(2), Iwata S(2), Dang
NH(3), Okumura K(4), Morimoto C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Therapy Development and Innovation for Immune Disorders and
Cancers, Graduate School of Medicine, Juntendo University, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan;
Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo 113-8421, Japan; and. (2)Department of Therapy Development and Innovation
for Immune Disorders and Cancers, Graduate School of Medicine, Juntendo
University, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan; (3)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University
of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610. (4)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo
University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan; and. (5)Department
of Therapy Development and Innovation for Immune Disorders and Cancers, Graduate 
School of Medicine, Juntendo University, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan;
morimoto@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

CD26 is associated with T cell signal transduction processes as a costimulatory
molecule, and CD26(+) T cells have been suggested to be involved in the
pathophysiology of diverse autoimmune diseases. Although the cellular and
molecular mechanisms involved in CD26-mediated T cell activation have been
extensively evaluated by our group and others, potential negative feedback
mechanisms to regulate CD26-mediated activation still remain to be elucidated. In
the present study, we examine the expression of inhibitory molecules induced via 
CD26-mediated costimulation. We show that coengagement of CD3 and CD26 induces
preferential production of IL-10 in human CD4(+) T cells, mediated through NFAT
and Raf-MEK-ERK pathways. A high level of early growth response 2 (EGR2) is also 
induced following CD26 costimulation, possibly via NFAT and AP-1-mediated
signaling, and knockdown of EGR2 leads to decreased IL-10 production.
Furthermore, CD3/CD26-stimulated CD4(+) T cells clearly suppress proliferative
activity and effector cytokine production of bystander T cells in an
IL-10-dependent manner. Taken together, our data suggest that robust CD26
costimulatory signaling induces preferential expression of EGR2 and IL-10 as a
potential mechanism for regulating CD26-mediated activation.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25548232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Dairy Sci. 2015 Mar;98(3):1961-71. doi: 10.3168/jds.2014-8731. Epub 2014 Dec
26.

Reductions in milk <U+0394>9-desaturation ratios to oral dosing of cobalt-acetate are
accompanied by the downregulation of SCD1 in lactating ewes.

Toral PG(1), Hervás G(2), Frutos P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Ganadería de Montaña (CSIC-ULE), Finca Marzanas s/n, 24346
Grulleros, León, Spain. Electronic address: pablo.toral@csic.es. (2)Instituto de 
Ganadería de Montaña (CSIC-ULE), Finca Marzanas s/n, 24346 Grulleros, León,
Spain.

Oral administration of cobalt has been proven to alter milk fatty acid (FA)
composition consistent with an inhibition of mammary stearoyl-coenzyme A
desaturase (SCD) activity in ruminants, but the mechanisms explaining its mode of
action remain uncertain. In this study, Co (as Co-acetate) was dosed to lactating
ewes with the aims of examining mammary gene expression during Co-induced changes
in milk FA composition, and estimating the endogenous synthesis of SCD products
in milk of sheep fed an 18:3n-3-enriched diet. Twelve Assaf ewes fed a diet
supplemented with 2% linseed oil were allocated to 2 experimental groups and
received an oral drench supplying either 0 (control) or 9 mg of Co/kg of body
weight per day. Treatments were administered in 3 equal doses at 8-h intervals
for 6 d. No effects of Co administration on animal performance were observed. The
changes in milk FA (namely, reductions in most cis-9-containing FA) were
consistent with an inhibition of SCD in the absence of detectable effects on the 
relative importance of mammary de novo synthesis and FA uptake. The high
proportion of endogenous cis-9 trans-11 18:2 observed in this study (89%) would
agree with a greater supply of trans-11 18:1 of ruminal origin in ewes fed
linseed oil, compared with previous estimates in sheep fed a diet without lipid
supplementation. Differences between studies could also be related to
diet-induced changes in SCD activity. Altogether, both mechanisms would support
that basal diet composition is a major determinant of the relative contribution
of <U+0394>9-desaturation to milk FA profile. Similarly, the consumption of a diet rich 
in 18:3n-3 might also explain the low proportion of milk cis-9 18:1 estimated to 
derive from <U+0394>9-desaturation (29%). The administration of Co to ewes fed linseed
oil allowed to discriminate minor 18:3 isomers in milk, such as cis-9 trans-12
cis-15 18:3, as SCD products. Finally, Co dosing lowered the mRNA abundance of
SCD1 in the mammary secretory tissue (33%), whereas no changes were detected in
the SCD5 isoform or in the studied transcription factors (SREBF1, PPARG, SP1, and
EGR2). These results suggest that the mode of action of Co in dairy ewes would be
at least partly mediated by the downregulation of SCD1.

Copyright © 2015 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25547303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Mar;35(5):866-83. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01489-14. Epub 2014 Dec
22.

An Arf-Egr-C/EBPß pathway linked to ras-induced senescence and cancer.

Salotti J(1), Sakchaisri K(1), Tourtellotte WG(2), Johnson PF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Frederick, Maryland, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Feinberg School 
of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA. (3)Mouse Cancer
Genetics Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
Frederick, Maryland, USA johnsope@mail.nih.gov.

Oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) protects normal cells from transformation by
Ras, whereas cells lacking p14/p19(Arf) or other tumor suppressors can be
transformed. The transcription factor C/EBPß is required for OIS in primary
fibroblasts but is downregulated by H-Ras(V12) in immortalized NIH 3T3 cells
through a mechanism involving p19(Arf) loss. Here, we report that members of the 
serum-induced early growth response (Egr) protein family are also downregulated
in 3T3(Ras) cells and directly and redundantly control Cebpb gene transcription. 
Egr1, Egr2, and Egr3 recognize three sites in the Cebpb promoter and associate
transiently with this region after serum stimulation, coincident with Cebpb
induction. Codepletion of all three Egrs prevented Cebpb expression, and serum
induction of Egrs was significantly blunted in 3T3(Ras) cells. Egr2 and Egr3
levels were also reduced in Ras(V12)-expressing p19(Arf) null mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs), and overall Egr DNA-binding activity was suppressed in
Arf-deficient but not wild-type (WT) MEFs, leading to Cebpb downregulation.
Analysis of human cancers revealed a strong correlation between EGR levels and
CEBPB expression, regardless of whether CEBPB was increased or decreased in
tumors. Moreover, overexpression of Egrs in tumor cell lines induced CEBPB and
inhibited proliferation. Thus, our findings identify the Arf-Egr-C/EBPß axis as
an important determinant of cellular responses (senescence or transformation) to 
oncogenic Ras signaling.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4323493
PMID: 25535333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Development. 2015 Jan 1;142(1):185-95. doi: 10.1242/dev.109652.

Molecular dissection of segment formation in the developing hindbrain.

Labalette C(1), Wassef MA(2), Desmarquet-Trin Dinh C(1), Bouchoucha YX(2), Le Men
J(2), Charnay P(3), Gilardi-Hebenstreit P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Normale Supérieure, Institut de Biologie de l'ENS (IBENS), Inserm U1024,
CNRS UMR 8197, Paris F-75005, France. (2)Ecole Normale Supérieure, Institut de
Biologie de l'ENS (IBENS), Inserm U1024, CNRS UMR 8197, Paris F-75005, France
Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, IFD, 4 Place Jussieu, Paris 75252,
Cedex 05, France. (3)Ecole Normale Supérieure, Institut de Biologie de l'ENS
(IBENS), Inserm U1024, CNRS UMR 8197, Paris F-75005, France
patrick.charnay@ens.fr.

Although many components of the genetic pathways that provide positional
information during embryogenesis have been identified, it remains unclear how
these signals are integrated to specify discrete tissue territories. Here, we
investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying the formation of one of the
hindbrain segments, rhombomere (r) 3, specified by the expression of the gene
krox20. Dissecting krox20 transcriptional regulation has identified several input
pathways: Hox paralogous 1 (PG1) factors, which both directly activate krox20 and
indirectly repress it via Nlz factors, and the molecular components of an
Fgf-dependent effector pathway. These different inputs are channelled through a
single initiator enhancer element to shape krox20 initial transcriptional
response: Hox PG1 and Nlz factors define the anterior-posterior extent of the
enhancer's domain of activity, whereas Fgf signalling modulates the magnitude of 
activity in a spatially uniform manner. Final positioning of r3 boundaries
requires interpretation of this initial pattern by a krox20 positive-feedback
loop, orchestrated by another enhancer. Overall, this study shows how positional 
information provided by different patterning mechanisms is integrated through a
gene regulatory network involving two cis-acting elements operating on the same
gene, thus offering a comprehensive view of the delimitation of a territory.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25516974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cell Rep. 2014 Dec 24;9(6):2152-65. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.11.027. Epub 2014 
Dec 11.

Functional and developmental identification of a molecular subtype of brain
serotonergic neuron specialized to regulate breathing dynamics.

Brust RD(1), Corcoran AE(2), Richerson GB(3), Nattie E(2), Dymecki SM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Department of Physiology & Neurobiology, Geisel School 
of Medicine at Dartmouth, One Medical Center Road, Lebanon, NH 03756-0001, USA.
(3)Departments of Neurology and Molecular Physiology & Biophysics, University of 
Iowa, 200 Hawkins Drive, 2151 RCP, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA; Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, 601 Highway 6 West, Iowa City, IA 52246, USA. (4)Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
Electronic address: dymecki@genetics.med.harvard.edu.

Serotonergic neurons modulate behavioral and physiological responses from
aggression and anxiety to breathing and thermoregulation. Disorders involving
serotonin (5HT) dysregulation are commensurately heterogeneous and numerous. We
hypothesized that this breadth in functionality derives in part from a
developmentally determined substructure of distinct subtypes of 5HT neurons each 
specialized to modulate specific behaviors. By manipulating developmentally
defined subgroups one by one chemogenetically, we find that the Egr2-Pet1
subgroup is specialized to drive increased ventilation in response to carbon
dioxide elevation and acidosis. Furthermore, this subtype exhibits intrinsic
chemosensitivity and modality-specific projections-increasing firing during
hypercapnic acidosis and selectively projecting to respiratory chemosensory but
not motor centers, respectively. These findings show that serotonergic regulation
of the respiratory chemoreflex is mediated by a specialized molecular subtype of 
5HT neuron harboring unique physiological, biophysical, and hodological
properties specified developmentally and demonstrate that the serotonergic system
contains specialized modules contributing to its collective functional breadth.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4351711
PMID: 25497093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Brain Behav Immun. 2015 Jul;47:186-92. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2014.11.008. Epub 2014 
Dec 1.

Cytokine-induced sleep: Neurons respond to TNF with production of chemokines and 
increased expression of Homer1a in vitro.

Karrer M(1), Lopez MA(1), Meier D(1), Mikhail C(2), Ogunshola OO(3), Müller
AF(1), Strauss L(1), Tafti M(2), Fontana A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Immunology, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstr.
190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. (2)Center for Integrative Genomics (CIG),
University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. (3)Institute of Veterinary
Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (4)Institute of
Experimental Immunology, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstr. 190, 8057 Zurich,
Switzerland. Electronic address: fontana.adriano7@gmail.com.

Interactions of neurons with microglia may play a dominant role in sleep
regulation. TNF may exert its somnogeneic effects by promoting attraction of
microglia and their processes to the vicinity of dendrites and synapses. We found
TNF to stimulate neurons (i) to produce CCL2, CCL7 and CXCL10, chemokines acting 
on mononuclear phagocytes and (ii) to stimulate the expression of the macrophage 
colony stimulating factor (M-CSF/Csf1), which leads to elongation of microglia
processes. TNF may also act on neurons by affecting the expression of genes
essential in sleep-wake behavior. The neuronal expression of Homer1a mRNA,
increases during spontaneous and enforced periods of wakefulness. Mice with a
deletion of Homer1a show a reduced wakefulness with increased non-rapid eye
movement (NREM) sleep during the dark period. Recently the TNF-dependent increase
of NREM sleep in the dark period of mice with CD40-induced immune activation was 
found to be associated with decreased expression of Homer1a. In the present study
we investigated the effects of TNF and IL-1ß on gene expression in cultures of
the neuronal cell line HT22 and cortical neurons. TNF slightly increased the
expression of Homer1a and IL-1ß profoundly enhanced the expression of Early
growth response 2 (Egr2). The data presented here indicate that the decreased
expression of Homer1a, which was found in the dark period of mice with
CD40-induced increase of NREM sleep is not due to inhibitory effects of TNF and
IL-1ß on the expression of Homer1a in neurons.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25476601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Bone Miner Res. 2015 May;30(5):765-74. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2409.

ERK1 and ERK2 regulate chondrocyte terminal differentiation during endochondral
bone formation.

Chen Z(1), Yue SX, Zhou G, Greenfield EM, Murakami S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH,
USA.

Chondrocytes in the epiphyseal cartilage undergo terminal differentiation prior
to their removal through apoptosis. To examine the role of ERK1 and ERK2 in
chondrocyte terminal differentiation, we generated Osterix (Osx)-Cre; ERK1(-/-) ;
ERK2(flox/flox) mice (conditional knockout Osx [cKOosx]), in which ERK1 and ERK2 
were deleted in hypertrophic chondrocytes. These cKOosx mice were grossly normal 
in size at birth, but by 3 weeks of age exhibited shorter long bones.
Histological analysis in these mice revealed that the zone of hypertrophic
chondrocytes in the growth plate was markedly expanded. In situ hybridization and
quantitative real-time PCR analyses demonstrated that Matrix metalloproteinase-13
(Mmp13) and Osteopontin expression was significantly decreased, indicating
impaired chondrocyte terminal differentiation. Moreover, Egr1 and Egr2,
transcription factors whose expression is restricted to the last layers of
hypertrophic chondrocytes in wild-type mice, were also strongly downregulated in 
these cKOosx mice. In transient transfection experiments in the RCS rat
chondrosarcoma cell line, the expression of Egr1, Egr2, or a constitutively
active mutant of MEK1 increased the activity of an Osteopontin promoter, whereas 
the MEK1-induced activation of the Osteopontin promoter was inhibited by the
coexpression of Nab2, an Egr1 and Egr2 co-repressor. These results suggest that
MEK1-ERK signaling activates the Osteopontin promoter in part through Egr1 and
Egr2. Finally, our histological analysis of cKOosx mice demonstrated
enchondroma-like lesions in the bone marrow that are reminiscent of human
metachondromatosis, a skeletal disorder caused by mutations in PTPN11. Our
observations suggest that the development of enchondromas in metachondromatosis
may be caused by reduced extracellular signal-regulated kinase/mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (ERK MAPK) signaling.

© 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMCID: PMC4487783 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25401279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Feb;45(2):480-91. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444991. Epub 2014 Dec
2.

Immature dendritic cells convert anergic nonregulatory T cells into Foxp3- IL-10+
regulatory T cells by engaging CD28 and CTLA-4.

Pletinckx K(1), Vaeth M, Schneider T, Beyersdorf N, Hünig T, Berberich-Siebelt F,
Lutz MB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and Immunobiology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany.

Anergic T cells can survive for long time periods passively in a hyporesponsive
state without obvious active functions. Thus, the immunological reason for their 
maintenance is unclear. Here, we induced peptide-specific anergy in T cells from 
mice by coculturing these cells with immature murine dendritic cells (DCs). We
found that these anergic, nonsuppressive IL-10(-) Foxp3(-) CTLA-4(+) CD25(low)
Egr2(+) T cells could be converted into suppressive IL-10(+) Foxp3(-) CTLA-4(+)
CD25(high) Egr2(+) cells resembling type-1 Treg cells (Tr1) when stimulated a
second time by immature DCs in vitro. Addition of TGF-ß during anergy induction
favored Foxp3(+) Treg-cell induction, while TGF-ß had little effect when added to
the second stimulation. Expression of both CD28 and CTLA-4 molecules on anergic
T cells was required to allow their conversion into Tr1-like cells. Suppressor
activity was enabled via CD28-mediated CD25 upregulation, acting as an IL-2 sink,
together with a CTLA-4-mediated inhibition of NFATc1/a activation to shut down
IL-2-mediated proliferation. Together, these data provide evidence and
mechanistical insights into how persistent anergic T cells may serve as a resting
memory pool for Tr1-like cells.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25382658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Inflammation. 2015;38(3):972-7. doi: 10.1007/s10753-014-0059-z.

The roles of Egr-2 in autoimmune diseases.

Zhang M(1), Wang Y, Wang JS, Liu J, Liu MM, Yang HB.

Author information: 
(1)Suzhou Municipal Center for Disease Prevention and Control, 72 Sanxiang Road, 
Suzhou, 215004, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.

Being a member of the early growth response (Egr) family of transcription
factors, Egr-2 is expressed in a variety of cell types of the immune system.
Recent findings imply that Egr-2 is important in the development and function of 
T helper (Th) 17 cell, regulatory T (Treg) cell, as well as dendritic cell (DC). 
Although these cells perform significantly in the pathogenesis of autoimmune
diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, multiple sclerosis, and systemic 
sclerosis, the roles of Egr-2 in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases can not 
be neglected. In this article, we will discuss recent findings about the
important roles of Egr-2 in immune cells and the possible pathological roles of
Egr-2 in autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 25381473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Nov 18;111(46):16484-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1417215111. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

EGR2 is critical for peripheral naïve T-cell differentiation and the T-cell
response to influenza.

Du N(1), Kwon H(1), Li P(1), West EE(1), Oh J(1), Liao W(1), Yu Z(2), Ren M(1),
Leonard WJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Immunology Center, and. (2)Pathology
Core, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892-1674. (3)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Immunology
Center, and wjl@helix.nih.gov.

Early growth response 2 (EGR2) transcription factor negatively regulates T-cell
activation, in contrast to the positive regulation of this process by EGR1. Here,
we unexpectedly found that EGR2 promotes peripheral naïve T-cell differentiation,
with delayed T-cell receptor-induced proliferation in naïve T cells from Egr2
conditional knockout (CKO) mice and decreased production of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, IL-9,
and IL-17A in cells subjected to T-helper differentiation. Moreover, genes that
promote T-cell activation, including Tbx21 and Notch1, had decreased expression
in Egr2 CKO T cells and are direct EGR2 target genes. Following influenza
infection, Egr2 CKO mice had delayed viral clearance, more weight loss, and more 
severe pathological changes in the lung than did WT and Egr1 KO mice, with
decreased production of effector cytokines, increased infiltration of
antigen-specific memory-precursor CD8(+) T cells, and lower numbers of
lung-resident memory CD8(+) T cells. Thus, unexpectedly, EGR2 can function as a
positive regulator that is essential for naïve T-cell differentiation and in vivo
T-cell responses to a viral infection.

PMCID: PMC4246296
PMID: 25368162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Int J Rheum Dis. 2014 Oct 28. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12509. [Epub ahead of print]

Dysregulation of anergy-related factors involved in regulatory T cells defects in
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus patients: Rapamycin and Vitamin D efficacy in
restoring regulatory T cells.

Banica LM(1,)(2), Besliu AN(1), Pistol GC(1), Stavaru C(1), Vlad V(3), Predeteanu
D(3,)(4), Ionescu R(3,)(4), Stefanescu M(1), Matache C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cantacuzino National Institute of Research and Development for Microbiology
and Immunology, Cellular and Molecular Immunity Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biology,
University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania. (3)Department of Rheumatology and
Internal Medicine, Sf. Maria Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. (4)Carol
Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.

AIM: Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) patients display dysfunctions in T cell
activation and anergy. Therefore the aims of our study were to explore the
expression of anergy-related factors in CD4(+) T cells in relationship with
regulatory T cells (Tregs) frequency in SLE patients and to identify strategies
to redress these defects.
METHOD: Casitas B-cell lymphoma b (Cbl-b) and 'gene related to anergy in
lymphocytes' (GRAIL) proteins were analyzed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) from SLE patients and healthy donors (HD) by immunoblotting. cbl-b,
grail, growth response factors (egr)2 and egr3 messenger RNAs (mRNAs) were
evaluated by real-time polymerase chain reaction in SLE and HD PBMCs and CD4(+) T
cells. Phenotypic and functional characterization of CD4(+) T cells was performed
by flow cytometry. Tregs expansion protocol consisted in culturing CD4(+) T cells
for 14 or 21 days of experimental activation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28
monoclonal antibodies, human recombinant interleukin (hrIL)-2, in the absence or 
presence of rapamycin (Rapa) or 1,25-(OH)2D3 (vitamin D: VitD).
RESULTS: SLE PBMCs expressed low levels of Cbl-b and GRAIL proteins. Both SLE
PBMCs and CD4(+) T cells expressed low levels of egr2/3 mRNAs. SLE patients had a
reduced number of Tregs with impaired suppressive activity. An association
between egr2 mRNA level in CD4(+) T cells and Tregs percentage was identified.
Experimental activation of CD4(+) T cells in the presence of hrIL-2 and Rapa or
VitD induced the expansion of SLE Tregs. However, on long-term, only Rapa
exposure of SLE CD4(+) T cells yielded high numbers of Tregs with sustained
suppressive activity.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest a new strategy to correct defects in CD4(+) T
cell tolerance mechanisms that may prove beneficial in SLE.

© 2014 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and Wiley Publishing 
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25351606  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


68. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jan;11(1):386-92. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2709. Epub 2014 Oct 20.

Comparative transcriptome analysis between metastatic and non-metastatic gastric 
cancer reveals potential biomarkers.

Feng D(1), Ye X(2), Zhu Z(3), Wei Z(3), Cai Q(3), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Changhai Hospital, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Health Statistics, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 
200433, P.R. China. (3)Department of Gastrointestine Surgery, Shanghai Changzheng
Hospital, Shanghai 200003, P.R. China.

The transcriptome of metastatic gastric cancer (GC) was compared to that of
non-metastatic GC to identify metastasis-related biomarkers. The gene expression 
dataset GSE21328, comprising 2 metastatic GC samples and 2 non-metastatic GC
samples, was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. Differential
expression analysis was performed with the package limma of Bioconductor to
identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment
analysis was performed to identify significantly altered biological functions. In
addition, the transcriptional regulatory and protein-protein interaction networks
were constructed with information from the UCSC genome browser and STRING
database, respectively, followed by functional enrichment analysis of all of the 
genes in these two networks. A total of 584 DEGs were identified, of which 175
were upregulated and 409 downregulated. Clustering analysis confirmed that these 
genes can distinguish metastatic from non-metastatic GC. Upregulated genes were
enriched for the xenobiotic metabolic process, while downregulated genes were
enriched for immune response and related pathways. Among the 584 DEGs, six genes 
(DAND5, EGR2, FOXD1, LMO2, PRRX2 and STAT1) were shown to encode transcription
factors, which were used to establish the transcriptional regulatory network with
169 target genes, forming 175 nodes. The proteins of this network were
significantly enriched for the process of negative regulation of cell
differentiation. In conclusion, this study identified a range of DEGs in
metastatic GC, which may enhance our current knowledge on this disease. Among
these genes, STAT1 and EGR2 may constitute potential biomarkers of GC metastasis.

PMID: 25334039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Front Neural Circuits. 2014 Sep 12;8:109. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2014.00109.
eCollection 2014.

Development of glycinergic innervation to the murine LSO and SPN in the presence 
and absence of the MNTB.

Altieri SC(1), Zhao T(2), Jalabi W(3), Maricich SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Richard King Mellon Foundation Institute for Pediatric Research and Department
of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, PA, USA ; Department of
Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (2)Richard King
Mellon Foundation Institute for Pediatric Research and Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Case
Western Reserve University Cleveland, OH, USA.

Neurons in the superior olivary complex (SOC) integrate excitatory and inhibitory
inputs to localize sounds in space. The majority of these inhibitory inputs have 
been thought to arise within the SOC from the medial nucleus of the trapezoid
body (MNTB). However, recent work demonstrates that glycinergic innervation of
the SOC persists in Egr2; En1(CKO) mice that lack MNTB neurons, suggesting that
there are other sources of this innervation (Jalabi et al., 2013). To study the
development of MNTB- and non-MNTB-derived glycinergic SOC innervation, we
compared immunostaining patterns of glycine transporter 2 (GlyT2) at several
postnatal ages in control and Egr2; En1(CKO) mice. GlyT2 immunostaining was
present at birth (P0) in controls and reached adult levels by P7 in the superior 
paraolivary nucleus (SPN) and by P12 in the lateral superior olive (LSO). In
Egr2; En1(CKO) mice, glycinergic innervation of the LSO developed at a similar
rate but was delayed by one week in the SPN. Conversely, consistent reductions in
the number of GlyT2(+) boutons located on LSO somata were seen at all ages in
Egr2; En1(CKO) mice, while these numbers reached control levels in the SPN by
adulthood. Dendritic localization of GlyT2+ boutons was unaltered in both the LSO
and SPN of adult Egr2; En1(CKO) mice. On the postsynaptic side, adult Egr2;
En1(CKO) mice had reduced glycine receptor a1 (GlyRa1) expression in the LSO but 
normal levels in the SPN. GlyRa2 was not expressed by LSO or SPN neurons in
either genotype. These findings contribute important information for
understanding the development of MNTB- and non-MNTB-derived glycinergic pathways 
to the mouse SOC.

PMCID: PMC4162373
PMID: 25309335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Immunol. 2015 Feb;63(2):406-11. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2014.09.013. Epub 2014 
Oct 11.

TCR stimulation without co-stimulatory signals induces expression of
"tolerogenic" genes in memory CD4 T cells but does not compromise cell
proliferation.

Xie A(1), Zheng X(2), Khattar M(3), Schroder P(3), Stepkowski S(4), Xia J(5),
Chen W(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunobiology and Transplantation Research, Department of Surgery, 
Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX
77030, United States; Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Union Hospital,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of
Medicine, Ruijin Hospital, Luwan Branch, Shanghai 200020, China. (3)Department of
Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Toledo College of Medicine,
Toledo OH 43614, United States. (4)Department of Medical Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Toledo College of Medicine, Toledo OH 43614, United
States. Electronic address: Stanislaw.Stepkowski@utoledo.edu. (5)Department of
Cardiovascular Surgery, Union Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, China. Electronic address:
jiahong.xia@mail.hust.edu.cn. (6)Center for Immunobiology and Transplantation
Research, Department of Surgery, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston
Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, United States; Department of Medical
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Toledo College of Medicine, Toledo OH 
43614, United States.

Memory T cells resist co-stimulatory blockade and present a unique therapeutic
challenge in transplantation and autoimmune diseases. Herein, we determined
whether memory T cells express less "tolerogenic" genes than naïve T cells to
reinforce a proliferative response under the deprivation of co-stimulatory
signals. The expression of ~40 tolerogenic genes in memory and naïve CD4(+) T
cells was thus assessed during an in vitro TCR stimulation without
co-stimulation. Briefly, upon TCR stimulation with an anti-CD3 mAb alone, memory 
CD4(+) T cells exhibited more proliferation than naïve CD4(+) T cells. To our
surprise, at 24h upon anti-CD3 mAb stimulation, memory CD4(+) T cells expressed
more than a 5-fold higher level of the transcription factor Egr2 and a 20-fold
higher level of the transmembrane E3 ubiquitin ligase GRAIL than those in naïve T
cells. Hence, the high-level expression of tolerogenic genes, Egr2 and GRAIL, in 
memory CD4(+) T cells does not prevent cell proliferation. Importantly, anti-CD3 
mAb-stimulated memory CD4(+) T cells expressed high protein/gene levels of
phosphorylated STAT5, Nedd4, Bcl-2, and Bcl-XL. Therefore,
co-stimulation-independent proliferation of memory CD4(+) T cells may be due to
elevated expression of molecules that support cell proliferation and survival,
but not lack of tolerogenic molecules.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25306961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Brain. 2014 Oct 9;7:74. doi: 10.1186/s13041-014-0074-x.

Behavioral characterization of mice overexpressing human dysbindin-1.

Shintani N(1), Onaka Y(2), Hashimoto R(3,)(4), Takamura H(5), Nagata T(6),
Umeda-Yano S(7), Mouri A(8), Mamiya T(9), Haba R(10), Matsuzaki S(11,)(12,)(13), 
Katayama T(14), Yamamori H(15,)(16), Nakazawa T(17), Nagayasu K(18), Ago Y(19),
Yagasaki Y(20), Nabeshima T(21), Takeda M(22,)(23), Hashimoto H(24,)(25,)(26).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Osaka University, 1-6 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
shintani@phs.osaka-u.ac.jp. (2)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropharmacology,
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, 1-6 Yamadaoka,
Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. onaka@phs.osaka-u.ac.jp. (3)Molecular Research
Center for Children's Mental Development, United Graduate School of Child
Development, Osaka University, Kanazawa University, Hamamatsu University School
of Medicine, Chiba University and University of Fukui, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita,
Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. hashimor@psy.med.osaka-u.ac.jp. (4)Department of
Psychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, 
Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. hashimor@psy.med.osaka-u.ac.jp. (5)Molecular Research
Center for Children's Mental Development, United Graduate School of Child
Development, Osaka University, Kanazawa University, Hamamatsu University School
of Medicine, Chiba University and University of Fukui, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita,
Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. takamura@ugscd.osaka-u.ac.jp. (6)Laboratory of Molecular 
Neuropharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, 
1-6 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. t.nagata718@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Molecular Neuropsychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
umeda@mnp.med.osaka-u.ac.jp. (8)Department of Chemical Pharmacology, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Meijo University, 150 Yagotoyama, Tempaku-ku, 
Nagoya, 468-8503, Japan. amouri@meijo-u.ac.jp. (9)Department of Chemical
Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Meijo University, 150
Yagotoyama, Tempaku-ku, Nagoya, 468-8503, Japan. mamiya@meijo-u.ac.jp.
(10)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Osaka University, 1-6 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
ryota.haba@fujifilm.com. (11)Molecular Research Center for Children's Mental
Development, United Graduate School of Child Development, Osaka University,
Kanazawa University, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Chiba University
and University of Fukui, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
matsuzaki@ugscd.osaka-u.ac.jp. (12)Molecular Brain Science, United Graduate
School of Child Development, Osaka University, Kanazawa University, Hamamatsu
University School of Medicine, Chiba University and University of Fukui, 2-2
Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. matsuzaki@ugscd.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(13)Anatomy and Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, 2-2 
Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. matsuzaki@ugscd.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(14)Molecular Brain Science, United Graduate School of Child Development, Osaka
University, Kanazawa University, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Chiba
University and University of Fukui, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
katayama@ugscd.osaka-u.ac.jp. (15)Molecular Research Center for Children's Mental
Development, United Graduate School of Child Development, Osaka University,
Kanazawa University, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Chiba University
and University of Fukui, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
yamamori@mnp.med.osaka-u.ac.jp. (16)Department of Molecular Neuropsychiatry,
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka,
565-0871, Japan. yamamori@mnp.med.osaka-u.ac.jp. (17)iPS Cell-based Research
Project on Brain Neuropharmacology and Toxicology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, 1-6 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871,
Japan. nakazawa@phs.osaka-u.ac.jp. (18)iPS Cell-based Research Project on Brain
Neuropharmacology and Toxicology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Osaka University, 1-6 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
knagayasu@phs.osaka-u.ac.jp. (19)Laboratory of Medicinal Pharmacology, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, 1-6 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka,
565-0871, Japan. YAgo@mednet.ucla.edu. (20)Department of Mental Disorder
Research, National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and
Psychiatry, 4-1-1 Ogawahigashicho, Kodaira, Tokyo, 187-8502, Japan.
yagasaki@research.twmu.ac.jp. (21)Department of Regional Pharmaceutical Care &
Sciences, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Meijo University, 150
Yagotoyama, Tenpaku-ku, Nagoya, 468-8503, Japan. tnabeshi@ccalumni.meijo-u.ac.jp.
(22)Molecular Research Center for Children's Mental Development, United Graduate 
School of Child Development, Osaka University, Kanazawa University, Hamamatsu
University School of Medicine, Chiba University and University of Fukui, 2-2
Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. mtakeda@psy.med.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(23)Department of Psychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, 2-2 
Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. mtakeda@psy.med.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(24)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Osaka University, 1-6 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
hasimoto@phs.osaka-u.ac.jp. (25)Molecular Research Center for Children's Mental
Development, United Graduate School of Child Development, Osaka University,
Kanazawa University, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Chiba University
and University of Fukui, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
hasimoto@phs.osaka-u.ac.jp. (26)iPS Cell-based Research Project on Brain
Neuropharmacology and Toxicology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Osaka University, 1-6 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
hasimoto@phs.osaka-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The dysbindin-1 gene (DTNBP1: dystrobrevin binding protein 1) is a
promising schizophrenia susceptibility gene, known to localize almost exclusively
to neurons in the brain, and participates in the regulation of neurotransmitter
release, membrane-surface receptor expression, and synaptic plasticity. Sandy
mice, with spontaneous Dtnbp1 deletion, display behavioral abnormalities relevant
to symptoms of schizophrenia. However, it remains unknown if dysbindin-1
gain-of-function is beneficial or detrimental.
RESULTS: To answer this question and gain further insight into the
pathophysiology and therapeutic potential of dysbindin-1, we developed transgenic
mice expressing human DTNBP1 (Dys1A-Tg) and analyzed their behavioral phenotypes.
Dys1A-Tg mice were born viable in the expected Mendelian ratios, apparently
normal and fertile. Primary screening of behavior and function showed a marginal 
change in limb grasping in Dys1A-Tg mice. In addition, Dys1A-Tg mice exhibited
increased hyperlocomotion after methamphetamine injection. Transcriptomic
analysis identified several up- and down-regulated genes, including the
immediate-early genes Arc and Egr2, in the prefrontal cortex of Dys1A-Tg mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The present findings in Dys1A-Tg mice support the role of
dysbindin-1 in psychiatric disorders. The fact that either overexpression
(Dys1A-Tg) or underexpression (Sandy) of dysbindin-1 leads to behavioral
alterations in mice highlights the functional importance of dysbindin-1 in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4201722
PMID: 25298178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Korean Neurosurg Soc. 2014 Jun;55(6):370-4. doi: 10.3340/jkns.2014.55.6.370.
Epub 2014 Jun 30.

A case of cauda equina syndrome in early-onset chronic inflammatory demyelinating
polyneuropathy clinically similar to charcot-marie-tooth disease type 1.

Lee SE(1), Park SW(1), Ha SY(2), Nam TK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Chung-Ang University Hospital, Chung-Ang
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Neurology,
Haeundae Paik Hospital, Inje University, Busan, Korea.

To present a case of cauda equina syndrome (CES) caused by chronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) which seemed clinically similar to
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type1 (CMT1). CIDP is an immune-mediated
polyneuropathy, either progressive or relapsing-remitting. It is a non-hereditary
disorder characterized by symmetrical motor and sensory deficits. Rarely, spinal 
nerve roots can be involved, leading to CES by hypertrophic cauda equina. A
34-year-old man presented with low back pain, radicular pain, bilateral
lower-extremity weakness, urinary incontinence, and constipation. He had had
musculoskeletal deformities, such as hammertoes and pes cavus, since age 10.
Lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging showed diffuse thickening of the cauda
equina. Electrophysiological testing showed increased distal latency, conduction 
blocks, temporal dispersion, and severe nerve conduction velocity slowing (3
m/s). We were not able to find genetic mutations at the PMP 22, MPZ, PRX, and
EGR2 genes. The pathologic findings of the sural nerve biopsy revealed thinly
myelinated nerve fibers with Schwann cells proliferation. We performed a
decompressive laminectomy, intravenous IgG (IV-IgG) and oral steroid. At 1 week
after surgery, most of his symptoms showed marked improvements except foot
deformities. There was no relapse or aggravation of disease for 3 years. We
diagnosed the case as an early-onset CIDP with cauda equine syndrome, whose
initial clinical findings were similar to those of CMT1, and successfully managed
with decompressive laminectomy, IV-IgG and oral steroid.

PMCID: PMC4166336
PMID: 25237436  [PubMed]


73. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Dec;44(12):3646-57. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444848. Epub 2014 Oct
28.

The adaptor protein SAP regulates type II NKT-cell development, cytokine
production, and cytotoxicity against lymphoma.

Weng X(1), Liao CM, Bagchi S, Cardell SL, Stein PL, Wang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.

CD1d-restricted NKT cells represent a unique lineage of immunoregulatory T cells 
that are divided into two groups, type I and type II, based on their TCR usage.
Because there are no specific tools to identify type II NKT cells, little is
known about their developmental requirements and functional regulation. In our
previous study, we showed that signaling lymphocytic activation molecule
associated protein (SAP) is essential for the development of type II NKT cells.
Here, using a type II NKT-cell TCR transgenic mouse model, we demonstrated that
CD1d-expressing hematopoietic cells, but not thymic epithelial cells, meditate
efficient selection of type II NKT cells. Furthermore, we showed that SAP
regulates type II NKT-cell development by controlling early growth response 2
protein and promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger expression. SAP-deficient 24aß
transgenic T cells (24aß T cells) exhibited an immature phenotype with reduced
Th2 cytokine-producing capacity and diminished cytotoxicity to CD1d-expressing
lymphoma cells. The impaired IL-4 production by SAP-deficient 24aß T cells was
associated with reduced IFN regulatory factor 4 and GATA-3 induction following
TCR stimulation. Collectively, these data suggest that SAP is critical for
regulating type II NKT cell responses. Aberrant responses of these T cells may
contribute to the immune dysregulation observed in X-linked lymphoproliferative
disease caused by mutations in SAP.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4261009
PMID: 25236978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Pathol Oncol Res. 2014 Oct;20(4):799-803. doi: 10.1007/s12253-014-9838-y. Epub
2014 Sep 13.

WWP2: a multifunctional ubiquitin ligase gene.

Chen W(1), Jiang X, Luo Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Sichuan North Medical College, Nanchong,
637100, People's Republic of China.

The ubiquitin-proteasome system plays an important role in various celluar
processes. WWP2, a recently identified ubiquitin E3 ligase, has been proved a
multifunctional gene by degradation a series of targets via ubiquitin-dependent
proteasome system, including PETN, Smads, Oct4, EGR2, TIRF and so. Hereafter, we 
reviewed the recent research process about the function of WWP2.

PMID: 25216927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cancer Discov. 2014 Sep;4(9):995-7. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-14-0743.

Tracing the roots of cancer evolution.

Jiang Y(1), Elemento O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New
York, New York. Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, 
New York. (2)Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York. Institute for Precision Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, New York. Sandra and Edward Meyer Cancer Center, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, New York. ole2001@med.cornell.edu.

SUMMARY: By comparing the genomes of progenitor cells and mature cells of
lymphoid and myeloid lineages in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL), Damm and colleagues confirmed that CLL originates from preleukemic CD34(+)
progenitor cells and identified early CLL mutations that are associated with
these progenitor cells. Moreover, they discovered that deregulation of B-cell
receptor signaling may be one of the hallmarks of CLL, particularly in tumors
with EGR2 mutations.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4155509
PMID: 25185189  [PubMed - in process]


76. Arch Pharm Res. 2015;38(5):865-75. doi: 10.1007/s12272-014-0470-x. Epub 2014 Aug 
28.

Gene expression profiling in the striatum of amphetamine-treated spontaneously
hypertensive rats which showed amphetamine conditioned place preference and
self-administration.

dela Peña I(1), de la Peña JB, Kim BN, Han DH, Noh M, Cheong JH.

Author information: 
(1)Uimyung Research Institute for Neuroscience, Sahmyook University, 26-21
Kongreung-2-dong, Hwarangro-815, Nowon-gu, Seoul, 139-742, Korea.

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), the most commonly diagnosed
neurobehavioral disorder of childhood, is usually treated with psychostimulants
(e.g., amphetamine). Little is known about the neuronal and behavioral
consequences of chronic amphetamine use or abuse in individuals with ADHD. Of all
ADHD animal models, the spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) is the most
validated and widely used. Here, we analyzed striatal transcriptomes in
amphetamine-pretreated SHRs (5 mg/kg, i.p. for 7 days [twice daily]), which
showed a conditioned place preference to and self-administration of amphetamine. 
Microarray analyses revealed increased mRNA expression of 55 genes (>1.65-fold
increase), while 17 genes were downregulated (<0.6-fold) in the striatum of SHRs.
The main functional categories overrepresented among the differentially expressed
genes in the striatum include those involved in transcription (e.g., Cebpb,
Per2), genes associated with angiogenesis (e.g., Kdr, Klf5), cell adhesion (e.g.,
Col11a1, Ctgf), apoptosis (e.g., Nfkbia, Perp) and neuronal development (e.g.,
Egr2, Nr4a3). In conclusion, we dissected the striatal transcriptional responses 
to the reinforcing effects of repeated amphetamine treatment in the SHR model of 
ADHD. Future studies should determine the influence of these altered transcripts 
on amphetamine reinforcement in amphetamine-treated SHRs, and the clinical
relevance of the present findings with regard to amphetamine use/abuse in ADHD
individuals.

PMID: 25163681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Nat Genet. 2014 Sep;46(9):1007-11. doi: 10.1038/ng.3061. Epub 2014 Aug 10.

Genome-wide association analysis of Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome identifies two 
new susceptibility loci at 1p31.2 and 10q21.3.

Hou S(1), Du L(1), Lei B(1), Pang CP(2), Zhang M(3), Zhuang W(4), Zhang M(5),
Huang L(6), Gong B(6), Wang M(7), Zhang Q(1), Hu K(1), Zhou Q(1), Qi J(1), Wang
C(1), Tian Y(8), Ye Z(1), Liang L(1), Yu H(1), Li H(1), Zhou Y(1), Cao Q(1), Liu 
Y(1), Bai L(1), Liao D(1), Kijlstra A(9), Xu J(10), Yang Z(11), Yang P(12).

Author information: 
(1)1] The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing,
China. [2] Chongqing Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Chongqing, China. [3]
Chongqing Eye Institute, Chongqing, China. (2)Department of Ophthalmology and
Visual Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China. (4)Department of Ophthalmology,
People's Hospital of Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, Yinchuan, China.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Xingtai Eye Hospital, Xingtai, China. (6)The
Sichuan Provincial Key Laboratory for Human Disease Gene Study, Hospital of the
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China and Sichuan Provincial
People's Hospital, Chengdu, China. (7)1] Department of Occupational Medicine and 
Environmental Health, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, China. [2] Center for Cancer Genomics, Wake Forest University School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA. (8)1] The First Affiliated Hospital
of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China. [2] Chongqing Key Laboratory
of Ophthalmology, Chongqing, China. [3] Chongqing Eye Institute, Chongqing,
China. [4] University Clinic for Ophthalmology Maastricht, Maastricht, the
Netherlands. (9)University Clinic for Ophthalmology Maastricht, Maastricht, the
Netherlands. (10)1] Center for Cancer Genomics, Wake Forest University School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA. [2] School of Public Health, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China. (11)1] The Sichuan Provincial Key Laboratory for
Human Disease Gene Study, Hospital of the University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China and Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, Chengdu, China. [2]
School of Medicine, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu, China. [3]. (12)1] The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China. [2] Chongqing Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology,
Chongqing, China. [3] Chongqing Eye Institute, Chongqing, China. [4].

To identify new genetic risk factors for Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome, we 
conducted a genome-wide association study of 2,208,258 SNPs in 774 cases and
2,009 controls with follow-up in a collection of 415 cases and 2,006 controls and
a further collection of 349 cases and 1,588 controls from a Han Chinese
population. We identified three loci associated with VKH syndrome susceptibility 
(IL23R-C1orf141, rs117633859, P(combined) = 3.42 × 10(-21), odds ratio (OR) =
1.82; ADO-ZNF365-EGR2, rs442309, P(combined) = 2.97 × 10(-11), OR = 1.37; and
HLA-DRB1/DQA1, rs3021304, P(combined) = 1.26 × 10(-118), OR = 2.97). The five
non-HLA genes were all expressed in human iris tissue. IL23R was also expressed
in the ciliary body, and EGR2 was expressed in the ciliary body and choroid. The 
risk G allele of rs117633859 in the promoter region of IL23R exhibited low
transcriptional activation in a cell-based reporter assay and was associated with
diminished IL23R mRNA expression in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

PMID: 25108386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015 Apr;86(4):378-84. doi:
10.1136/jnnp-2014-308211. Epub 2014 Aug 4.

Nerve ultrasound depicts peripheral nerve enlargement in patients with
genetically distinct Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

Noto Y(1), Shiga K(2), Tsuji Y(1), Mizuta I(1), Higuchi Y(3), Hashiguchi A(3),
Takashima H(3), Nakagawa M(4), Mizuno T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Department of Medical Education and
Primary Care, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (3)Department of Neurology and Geriatrics, Kagoshima
University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan.
(4)North Medical Center, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015 Apr;86(4):362.

OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the ultrasound (US) features of peripheral nerves
including nerve roots in patients with different types of Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease (CMT), and the association between US findings, clinical features and
parameters of nerve conduction studies (NCS) in CMT1A.
METHODS: US of median, sural and great auricular nerves and the C6 nerve root was
performed in patients with CMT1A (n=20), MPZ-associated CMT (n=3),
NEFL-associated CMT (n=4), EGR2-associated CMT (n=1), ARHGEF10-associated CMT
(n=1) and in controls (n=30). In patients with CMT1A, we analysed the
correlations between US findings and the following parameters: age, CMT
Neuropathy Score (CMTNS) and NCS indices of the median nerve.
RESULTS: Cross-sectional areas (CSAs) of all the nerves were significantly
increased in patients with CMT1A compared with that in controls. In
MPZ-associated CMT, increased CSAs were found in the median nerve at wrist and in
the great auricular nerve, whereas it was not increased in patients with
NEFL-associated CMT. In patients with CMT1A, there was a positive correlation
between CMTNS and the CSAs in the median nerves or great auricular nerves. In
median nerves in patients with CMT1A, we found a negative correlation between the
nerve conduction velocity and the CSA.
CONCLUSIONS: Nerve US may aid in differentiating among the subtypes of CMT in
combination with NCS. In CMT1A, the median nerve CSA correlates with the disease 
severity and peripheral nerve function.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25091364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 23;9(7):e102076. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102076.
eCollection 2014.

T-cells null for the MED23 subunit of mediator express decreased levels of KLF2
and inefficiently populate the peripheral lymphoid organs.

Kasper LH(1), Fukuyama T(1), Brindle PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, United States of America.

MED23, a subunit of the Mediator coactivator complex, is important for the
expression of a subset of MAPK/ERK pathway-responsive genes, the constituents of 
which vary between cell types for reasons that are not completely clear. MAPK/ERK
pathway-dependent processes are essential for T-cell development and function,
but whether MED23 has a role in this context is unknown. We generated Med23
conditional knockout mice and induced Med23 deletion in early T-cell development 
using the lineage specific Lck-Cre transgene. While the total cell number and
distribution of cell populations in the thymuses of Med23flox/flox;Lck-Cre mice
were essentially normal, MED23 null T-cells failed to efficiently populate the
peripheral lymphoid organs. MED23 null thymocytes displayed decreased expression 
of the MAPK/ERK-responsive genes Egr1, Egr2, as well as of the membrane
glycoprotein Cd52 (CAMPATH-1). MED23 null CD4 single-positive thymocytes also
showed decreased expression of KLF2 (LKLF), a T-cell master regulatory
transcription factor. Indeed, similarities between the phenotypes of mice lacking
MED23 or KLF2 in T-cells suggest that KLF2 deficiency in MED23 null T-cells is
one of their key defects. Mechanistic experiments using MED23 null MEFs further
suggest that MED23 is required for full activity of the MAPK-responsive
transcription factor MEF2, which has previously been shown to mediate Klf2
expression. In summary, our data indicate that MED23 has critical roles in
enabling T-cells to populate the peripheral lymphoid organs, possibly by
potentiating MEF2-dependent expression of the T-cell transcription factor KLF2.

PMCID: PMC4108324
PMID: 25054639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 15;9(7):e101807. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101807.
eCollection 2014.

Effects of an oxycodone conjugate vaccine on oxycodone self-administration and
oxycodone-induced brain gene expression in rats.

Pravetoni M(1), Pentel PR(1), Potter DN(2), Chartoff EH(2), Tally L(3), LeSage
MG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Minneapolis Medical Research Foundation, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States
of America; University of Minnesota, School of Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America; University of Minnesota, School
of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of
America. (2)Harvard Medical School, Department of Psychiatry, McLean Hospital,
Belmont, Massachusetts, United States of America. (3)Minneapolis Medical Research
Foundation, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America.

Prescription opioid abuse is an increasing public health concern in the USA. A
vaccine comprising a hapten (OXY) conjugated to the carrier protein keyhole
limpet hemocyanin (OXY-KLH) has been shown to attenuate the antinociceptive
effects of oxycodone. Here, the vaccine's ability to prevent acquisition of
intravenous (i.v.) oxycodone self-administration was studied in rats. Effects of 
vaccination on oxycodone-induced changes in the expression of several genes
within the mesolimbic system, which are regulated by chronic opiate use, were
also examined. Vaccination with OXY-KLH reduced the proportion of rats acquiring 
i.v. self-administration of oxycodone under a fixed ratio (FR) 3 schedule of
reinforcement compared to control rats immunized with the unconjugated KLH
carrier protein. Vaccination significantly reduced the mean number of infusions
at FR3, total number of infusions, and total oxycodone intake during the entire
protocol. Compared to oxycodone self-administering control rats immunized with
the carrier alone, rats vaccinated with the OXY-KLH immunogen showed increased
levels of adenylate cyclase 5 (Adcy5) and decreased levels of early growth
response protein 2 (Egr2) and the early immediate gene c-Fos in the striatum.
These data suggest that vaccination with OXY-KLH can attenuate the reinforcing
effects of oxycodone at a clinically-relevant exposure level. Analysis of mRNA
expression identified some addiction-relevant markers that may be of interest in 
understanding oxycodone effects or the protection provided by vaccination.

PMCID: PMC4099132
PMID: 25025380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Front Behav Neurosci. 2014 Jun 11;8:212. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00212.
eCollection 2014.

CREB activity in dopamine D1 receptor expressing neurons regulates
cocaine-induced behavioral effects.

Bilbao A(1), Rieker C(2), Cannella N(1), Parlato R(3), Golda S(4), Piechota M(4),
Korostynski M(4), Engblom D(2), Przewlocki R(4), Schütz G(2), Spanagel R(1),
Parkitna JR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychopharmacology, Central Institute of Mental Health, Faculty
of Medicine Mannheim, University of Heidelberg Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Department
of Molecular Biology of the Cell I, DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, German Cancer Research
Center Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Department of Molecular Biology of the Cell I,
DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, German Cancer Research Center Heidelberg, Germany ; Institute
of Applied Physiology, University of Ulm Ulm, Germany ; Department of Medical
Biology, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Heidelberg
Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Department of Molecular Neuropharmacology, Institute of
Pharmacology of the Polish Academy of Sciences Krakow, Poland. (5)Department of
Molecular Biology of the Cell I, DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, German Cancer Research
Center Heidelberg, Germany ; Department of Molecular Neuropharmacology, Institute
of Pharmacology of the Polish Academy of Sciences Krakow, Poland.

Erratum in
    Front Behav Neurosci. 2014;8:239.
    Front Behav Neurosci. 2014;8:239.

It is suggested that striatal cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB)
regulates sensitivity to psychostimulants. To test the cell-specificity of this
hypothesis we examined the effects of a dominant-negative CREB protein variant
expressed in dopamine receptor D1 (D1R) neurons on cocaine-induced behaviors. A
transgenic mouse strain was generated by pronuclear injection of a BAC-derived
transgene harboring the A-CREB sequence under the control of the D1R gene
promoter. Compared to wild-type, drug-naïve mutants showed moderate alterations
in gene expression, especially a reduction in basal levels of activity-regulated 
transcripts such as Arc and Egr2. The behavioral responses to cocaine were
elevated in mutant mice. Locomotor activity after acute treatment, psychomotor
sensitization after intermittent drug injections and the conditioned locomotion
after saline treatment were increased compared to wild-type littermates.
Transgenic mice had significantly higher cocaine conditioned place preference,
displayed normal extinction of the conditioned preference, but showed an
augmented cocaine-seeking response following priming-induced reinstatement. This 
enhanced cocaine-seeking response was associated with increased levels of
activity-regulated transcripts and prodynorphin. The primary reinforcing effects 
of cocaine were not altered in the mutant mice as they did not differ from
wild-type in cocaine self-administration under a fixed ratio schedule at the
training dose. Collectively, our data indicate that expression of a
dominant-negative CREB variant exclusively in neurons expressing D1R is
sufficient to recapitulate the previously reported behavioral phenotypes
associated with virally expressed dominant-negative CREB.

PMCID: PMC4052973
PMID: 24966820  [PubMed]


82. Cancer Discov. 2014 Sep;4(9):1088-101. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-14-0104. Epub
2014 Jun 11.

Acquired initiating mutations in early hematopoietic cells of CLL patients.

Damm F(1), Mylonas E(1), Cosson A(2), Yoshida K(3), Della Valle V(4), Mouly E(4),
Diop M(1), Scourzic L(4), Shiraishi Y(5), Chiba K(5), Tanaka H(5), Miyano S(5),
Kikushige Y(6), Davi F(7), Lambert J(8), Gautheret D(9), Merle-Béral H(7), Sutton
L(10), Dessen P(1), Solary E(11), Akashi K(6), Vainchenker W(12), Mercher T(4),
Droin N(12), Ogawa S(13), Nguyen-Khac F(14), Bernard OA(15).

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Medicale (INSERM) U985;
Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif; (2)INSERM U1138; Université Pierre et Marie
Curie-Paris 6; (3)Cancer Genomics Project, Graduate School of Medicine;
Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto; (4)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Medicale
(INSERM) U985; Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif; Université Paris-Sud;
(5)Laboratory of DNA Information Analysis and Laboratory of Sequence Data
Analysis, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo; (6)Medicine and Biosystemic Science; and Center for Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, Kyushu University Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Fukuoka, Japan. (7)INSERM U1138; Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6;
Service d'Hématologie Biologique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP; (8)Université 
Paris Diderot, Hôpital Saint-Louis, SBIM; (9)Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif; 
Université Paris-Sud, Institut de Génétique et Microbiologie, CNRS UMR 8621,
Orsay; (10)Service d'Hématologie Clinique, Centre Hospitalier Victor Dupouy,
Argenteuil, France; (11)INSERM U1009; Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif; Ligue
Nationale Contre le Cancer, Equipe labellisée, Paris; Université Paris-Sud;
(12)INSERM U1009; Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif; Université Paris-Sud;
(13)Cancer Genomics Project, Graduate School of Medicine; Department of Pathology
and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto;
olivier.bernard@inserm.fr florence.nguyen-khac@psl.aphp.fr sogawa-tky@umin.ac.jp.
(14)INSERM U1138; Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6; Service d'Hématologie
Biologique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP; olivier.bernard@inserm.fr
florence.nguyen-khac@psl.aphp.fr sogawa-tky@umin.ac.jp. (15)Institut National de 
la Santé et de la Recherche Medicale (INSERM) U985; Institut Gustave Roussy,
Villejuif; Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, Equipe labellisée, Paris; Université
Paris-Sud; olivier.bernard@inserm.fr florence.nguyen-khac@psl.aphp.fr
sogawa-tky@umin.ac.jp.

Appropriate cancer care requires a thorough understanding of the natural history 
of the disease, including the cell of origin, the pattern of clonal evolution,
and the functional consequences of the mutations. Using deep sequencing of
flow-sorted cell populations from patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL), we established the presence of acquired mutations in multipotent
hematopoietic progenitors. Mutations affected known lymphoid oncogenes, including
BRAF, NOTCH1, and SF3B1. NFKBIE and EGR2 mutations were observed at unexpectedly 
high frequencies, 10.7% and 8.3% of 168 advanced-stage patients, respectively.
EGR2 mutations were associated with a shorter time to treatment and poor overall 
survival. Analyses of BRAF and EGR2 mutations suggest that they result in
deregulation of B-cell receptor (BCR) intracellular signaling. Our data propose
disruption of hematopoietic and early B-cell differentiation through the
deregulation of pre-BCR signaling as a phenotypic outcome of CLL mutations and
show that CLL develops from a pre-leukemic phase.SIGNIFICANCE: The origin and
pathogenic mechanisms of CLL are not fully understood. The current work indicates
that CLL develops from pre-leukemic multipotent hematopoietic progenitors
carrying somatic mutations. It advocates for abnormalities in early B-cell
differentiation as a phenotypic convergence of the diverse acquired mutations
observed in CLL.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24920063  [PubMed - in process]


83. BMC Syst Biol. 2014 May 15;8:55. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-8-55.

TGF-ß stimulation in human and murine cells reveals commonly affected biological 
processes and pathways at transcription level.

Abnaof K(1), Mallela N, Walenda G, Meurer SK, Seré K, Lin Q, Smeets B, Hoffmann
K, Wagner W, Zenke M, Weiskirchen R, Fröhlich H.

Author information: 
(1)Bonn-Aachen International Center for IT, University of Bonn, Dahlmannstr, 2,
53113 Bonn, Germany. abnaof@bit.uni-bonn.de.

BACKGROUND: The TGF-ß signaling pathway is a fundamental pathway in the living
cell, which plays a key role in many central cellular processes. The complex and 
sometimes contradicting mechanisms by which TGF-ß yields phenotypic effects are
not yet completely understood. In this study we investigated and compared the
transcriptional response profile of TGF-ß1 stimulation in different cell types.
For this purpose, extensive experiments are performed and time-course microarray 
data are generated in human and mouse parenchymal liver cells, human mesenchymal 
stromal cells and mouse hematopoietic progenitor cells at different time points. 
We applied a panel of bioinformatics methods on our data to uncover common
patterns in the dynamic gene expression response in respective cells.
RESULTS: Our analysis revealed a quite variable and multifaceted transcriptional 
response profile of TGF-ß1 stimulation, which goes far beyond the
well-characterized classical TGF-ß1 signaling pathway. Nonetheless, we could
identify several commonly affected processes and signaling pathways across cell
types and species. In addition our analysis suggested an important role of the
transcription factor EGR1, which appeared to have a conserved influence across
cell-types and species. Validation via an independent dataset on A549 lung
adenocarcinoma cells largely confirmed our findings. Network analysis suggested
explanations, how TGF-ß1 stimulation could lead to the observed effects.
CONCLUSIONS: The analysis of dynamical transcriptional response to TGF-ß
treatment experiments in different human and murine cell systems revealed
commonly affected biological processes and pathways, which could be linked to
TGF-ß1 via network analysis. This helps to gain insights about TGF-ß pathway
activities in these cell systems and its conserved interactions between the
species and tissue types.

PMCID: PMC4049504
PMID: 24886091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cell Tissue Res. 2014 Sep;357(3):633-43. doi: 10.1007/s00441-014-1877-x. Epub
2014 May 22.

Expression and effects of epidermal growth factor on human periodontal ligament
cells.

Teramatsu Y(1), Maeda H, Sugii H, Tomokiyo A, Hamano S, Wada N, Yuda A, Yamamoto 
N, Koori K, Akamine A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endodontology and Operative Dentistry, Faculty of Dental
Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Repair of damaged periodontal ligament (PDL) tissue is an essential challenge in 
tooth preservation. Various researchers have attempted to develop efficient
therapies for healing and regenerating PDL tissue based on tissue engineering
methods focused on targeting signaling molecules in PDL stem cells and other
mesenchymal stem cells. In this context, we investigated the expression of
epidermal growth factor (EGF) in normal and surgically wounded PDL tissues and
its effect on chemotaxis and expression of osteoinductive and angiogenic factors 
in human PDL cells (HPDLCs). EGF as well as EGF receptor (EGFR) expression was
observed in HPDLCs and entire PDL tissue. In a PDL tissue-injured model of rat,
EGF and IL-1ß were found to be upregulated in a perilesional pattern.
Interleukin-1ß induced EGF expression in HPDLCs but not EGFR. It also increased
transforming growth factor-a (TGF-a) and heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor
(HB-EGF) expression. Transwell assays demonstrated the chemotactic activity of
EGF on HPDLCs. In addition, EGF treatment significantly induced secretion of bone
morphogenetic protein 2 and vascular endothelial growth factor, and gene
expression of interleukin-8 (IL-8), and early growth response-1 and -2 (EGR-1/2).
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells developed well-formed tube networks when
cultured with the supernatant of EGF-treated HPDLCs. These results indicated that
EGF upregulated under inflammatory conditions plays roles in the repair of
wounded PDL tissue, suggesting its function as a prospective agent to allow the
healing and regeneration of this tissue.

PMID: 24850273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2014;37(2):69-73.

[The functions of CD4+CD25-LAG3+ regulatory T cells and Egr2 in the regulation of
autoimmunity].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujio K(1), Okamura T, Sumitomo S, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo.

Regulatory T cells (Treg) are important mechanisms that regulate autoimmunity and
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (CD25+Treg) have been extensively
investigated. Recently, we have identified CD4+CD25-LAG3+ regulatory T cells
(LAG3+Treg) that express an anergy associated transcription factor Egr2. Egr2
regulates IL-10 production in response to IL-27, and Egr2-deficiency in T cells
and B cells results in systemic autoimmunity with increased IL-17 production.
Moreover, addition of Egr3 deficiency to Egr2-deficient mice significantly
accelerates systemic autoimmunity without functional impairment of CD25+Treg,
indicating cooperative autoimmune-regulation by Egr2 and Egr3. The linkage
between Egr2 and systemic autoimmunity is also suggested by the fact that
stimulation with Ly108, a candidate lupus susceptibility gene in lupus-prone
NZM2410 mice, induces Egr2 expression in T cells. Collectively, LAG3+Treg and
Egr2 are the unique regulators of autoimmunity and further examination may help
to understand and control immune responses.

PMID: 24835133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2014 Oct;17(10):1647-58. doi:
10.1017/S1461145714000455. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Long-lasting alterations in 5-HT2A receptor after a binge regimen of
methamphetamine in mice.

Chiu HY(1), Chan MH(2), Lee MY(1), Chen ST(1), Zhan ZY(3), Chen HH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Tzu Chi University,701, Section 3,
Chung-Yang Road, Hualien,Taiwan. (2)Institute of Neuroscience, National Chengchi 
University,Wenshan District, Taipei City,Taiwan. (3)Department of Life
Science,Tzu Chi University,Hualien,Taiwan.

The repeated administration of methamphetamine (MA) to animals in a single-day
'binge' dosing regimen produces damage to dopamine and serotonin terminals and
psychosis-like behaviours similar to those observed in MA abusers. The present
study aimed to examine the effects of MA binge exposure on 5-HT2A receptors, the 
subtype of serotonin receptors putatively involved in psychosis. ICR male mice
were treated with MA (4 × 5 mg/kg) or saline at 2 h intervals. Recognition memory
and social behaviours were sequentially evaluated by a novel location recognition
test, a novel object recognition test, a social interaction and a nest-building
test to confirm the persistent cognitive and behavioural impairments after this
dosing regimen. Subsequently, a hallucinogenic 5-HT2A/2C receptor agonist
2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine (DOI)-induced head-twitch, molecular and
electrophysiological responses were monitored. Finally, the levels of 5-HT2C,
5-HT1A, 5-HT2A and mGlu2 receptors in the medial prefrontal cortex were
determined. MA binge exposure produced recognition memory impairment, reduced
social behaviours, and increased DOI-induced head-twitch response, c-Fos and
Egr-2 expression and field potentials in the medial prefrontal cortex.
Furthermore, MA binge exposure increased 5-HT2A and decreased mGlu2 receptor
expression in the medial frontal cortex, whereas 5-HT2C and 5-HT1A receptors were
unaffected. These data reveal that the increased behavioural, molecular and
electrophysiological responses to DOI might be associated with an up-regulation
of 5-HT2A receptors in the medial prefrontal cortex after MA binge exposure.
Identifying the biochemical alterations that parallel the behavioural changes in 
a mouse model of MA binge exposure may facilitate targeting therapies for
treatment of MA-related psychiatric disorders.

PMID: 24763081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Jun;164A(6):1512-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36446. Epub 2014
Apr 8.

Phenotypic variability in Waardenburg syndrome resulting from a 22q12.3-q13.1
microdeletion involving SOX10.

Jelena B(1), Christina L, Eric V, Fabiola QR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, UCLA, Los Angeles, California.

Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is a neurocristopathy characterized by pigmentation
abnormalities of the skin, hair, and iris, as well as sensorineural hearing loss.
Contiguous gene deletions encompassing SOX10 are rare, which limits conclusions
about genotype-phenotype correlation regarding patient prognosis and management. 
This study adds to the existing body of knowledge by characterizing a 2.4 Mb
deletion [arr[hg19] 22q12.3-q13.1 (36467502-38878207)x1] encompassing SOX10 and
53 additional RefSeq genes in a 15-year-old female with atypical WS. The patient 
presented with developmental delay, profound bilateral sensorineural hearing
loss, heterochromia iridis, hypotonia, and bilateral finger contractures.
Published genomic and phenotypic profiles of patients with SOX10-encompassing
deletions point toward several plausible candidate gene that could account for
the considerable clinical heterogeneity. These studies suggest the existence of
modifiers among the co-deleted, dosage-sensitive genes (e.g., MYH9) and among
genes whose effect may depend on the unmasking of recessive mutations (e.g.,
PLA2G6). Finally, we highlight evidence illustrating extensive interconnectivity 
of SOX10-hypothesizing that haploinsufficiency of SOX10 may "unmask" subtler
effects on expression or epistasis associated with variants in SOX10 targets
(e.g., DHH), in its partners (e.g., PAX3, EGR2), and in genes with functional
overlap (e.g., SOX8, SOX9).

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24715709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2014 May 23;289(21):15118-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.536490. Epub
2014 Apr 7.

Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 1 (TREM-1)-mediated Bcl-2
induction prolongs macrophage survival.

Yuan Z(1), Syed MA(2), Panchal D(2), Joo M(3), Colonna M(4), Brantly M(5),
Sadikot RT(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Gainesville, Florida 32610, the
Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida 32610. (2)the Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep
Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois 60612. (3)the Department of
Immunology, Pusan University, Yangsan 626-870, Korea, and. (4)the Department of
Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110. (5)the Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610. (6)From the Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Gainesville, Florida 32610, the Division of Pulmonary, Critical
Care and Sleep Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610,
rtsadikot@ufl.edu.

Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 1 (TREM-1) is a
superimmunoglobulin receptor expressed on myeloid cells that plays an important
role in the amplification of inflammation. Recent studies suggest a role for
TREM-1 in tumor-associated macrophages with relationship to tumor growth and
progression. Whether the effects of TREM-1 on inflammation and tumor growth are
mediated by an alteration in cell survival signaling is not known. In these
studies, we show that TREM-1 knock-out macrophages exhibit an increase in
apoptosis of cells in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) suggesting a role for 
TREM-1 in macrophage survival. Specific ligation of TREM-1 with monoclonal TREM-1
(mTREM-1) or overexpression of TREM-1 with adeno-TREM-1 induced B-cell lymphoma-2
(Bcl-2) with depletion of the key executioner caspase-3 prevents the cleavage of 
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. TREM-1 knock-out cells showed lack of induction of
Bcl2 with an increase in caspase-3 activation in response to lipopolysaccharide. 
In addition overexpression of TREM-1 with adeno-TREM-1 led to an increase in
mitofusins (MFN1 and MFN2) and knockdown of TREM-1 decreased the expression of
mitofusins suggesting that TREM-1 contributes to the maintenance of mitochondrial
integrity favoring cell survival. Investigations into potential mechanisms by
which TREM-1 alters cell survival showed that TREM-1-induced Bcl-2 in an
Egr2-dependent manner. Furthermore, our data shows that expression of Egr2 in
response to specific ligation of TREM-1 is ERK mediated. These data for the first
time provide novel mechanistic insights into the role of TREM-1 as an
anti-apoptotic protein that prolongs macrophage survival.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4031561
PMID: 24711453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Cell Tissue Res. 2014 May;356(2):287-98. doi: 10.1007/s00441-014-1834-8. Epub
2014 Apr 8.

Crucial transcription factors in tendon development and differentiation: their
potential for tendon regeneration.

Liu H(1), Zhu S, Zhang C, Lu P, Hu J, Yin Z, Ma Y, Chen X, OuYang H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, 866 Yu Hang Tang Road, Hangzhou, 310058, China.

Tendons that connect muscles to bone are often the targets of sports injuries.
The currently unsatisfactory state of tendon repair is largely attributable to
the limited understanding of basic tendon biology. A number of tendon
lineage-related transcription factors have recently been uncovered and provide
clues for the better understanding of tendon development. Scleraxis and Mohawk
have been identified as critical transcription factors in tendon development and 
differentiation. Other transcription factors, such as Sox9 and Egr1/2, have also 
been recently reported to be involved in tendon development. However, the
molecular mechanisms and application of these transcription factors remain
largely unclear and this prohibits their use in tendon therapy. Here, we
systematically review and analyze recent findings and our own data concerning
tendon transcription factors and tendon regeneration. Based on these findings, we
provide interaction and temporal programming maps of transcription factors, as a 
basis for future tendon therapy. Finally, we discuss future directions for tendon
regeneration with differentiation and trans-differentiation approaches based on
transcription factors.

PMID: 24705622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Front Immunol. 2014 Mar 17;5:115. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00115. eCollection
2014.

Definition of a Family of Tissue-Protective Cytokines Using Functional Cluster
Analysis: A Proof-of-Concept Study.

Mengozzi M(1), Ermilov P(1), Annenkov A(2), Ghezzi P(1), Pearl F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Brighton and Sussex Medical School , Falmer , UK. (2)Bone and Joint Research
Unit, Bart's and The London School of Medicine, William Harvey Research
Institute, Queen Mary University of London , London , UK. (3)Translational Drug
Discovery Group, School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex , Falmer , UK.

The discovery of the tissue-protective activities of erythropoietin (EPO) has
underlined the importance of some cytokines in tissue-protection, repair, and
remodeling. As such activities have been reported for other cytokines, we asked
whether we could define a class of tissue-protective cytokines. We therefore
explored a novel approach based on functional clustering. In this pilot study, we
started by analyzing a small number of cytokines (30). We functionally classified
the 30 cytokines according to their interactions by using the bioinformatics tool
STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes), followed by
hierarchical cluster analysis. The results of this functional clustering were
different from those obtained by clustering cytokines simply according to their
sequence. We previously reported that the protective activity of EPO in a model
of cerebral ischemia was paralleled by an upregulation of synaptic plasticity
genes, particularly early growth response 2 (EGR2). To assess the predictivity of
functional clustering, we tested some of the cytokines clustering close to EPO
(interleukin-11, IL-11; kit ligand, KITLG; leukemia inhibitory factor, LIF;
thrombopoietin, THPO) in an in vitro model of human neuronal cells for their
ability to induce EGR2. Two of these, LIF and IL-11, induced EGR2 expression.
Although these data would need to be extended to a larger number of cytokines and
the biological validation should be done using more robust in vivo models, rather
then just one cell line, this study shows the feasibility of this approach. This 
type of functional cluster analysis could be extended to other fields of cytokine
research and help design biological experiments.

PMCID: PMC3955874
PMID: 24672526  [PubMed]


91. Neurochem Res. 2014 May;39(5):875-82. doi: 10.1007/s11064-014-1283-5. Epub 2014
Mar 20.

Social isolation stress-induced fear memory deficit is mediated by down-regulated
neuro-signaling system and Egr-1 expression in the brain.

Okada R(1), Matsumoto K, Tsushima R, Fujiwara H, Tsuneyama K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medicinal Pharmacology, Institute of Natural Medicine, University 
of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama, 930-0194, Japan.

We previously reported that social isolation (SI) rearing of rodents not only
elicits a variety of behavioral abnormalities including attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder-like behaviors, but also impairs fear memory in mice. This
study aimed to clarify a putative mechanism underlying SI-induced conditioned
fear memory deficit. Mice were group-housed (GH) or socially isolated for 2 weeks
or more before the experiments. SI animals acquired contextual and auditory fear 
memory elucidated at 90 min and 4 h after training, respectively; however, they
showed significantly impaired contextual and auditory memory performance at 24 h 
and 4 days after the training, respectively, indicating SI-induced deficit of the
consolidation process of fear memory. Neurochemical studies conducted after
behavioral tests revealed that SI mice had a significantly down-regulated level
of Egr-1 but not Egr-2 in the hippocampal and cortical cytosolic fractions
compared with those levels in the GH control animals. Moreover, in the SI group, 
phosphorylated levels of synaptic plasticity-related signaling proteins in the
hippocampus, NR1 subunit of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor, glutamate receptor 1, 
and calmodulin-dependent kinase II but not cyclic AMP-responsive element binding 
protein were significantly down-regulated compared with those levels in GH
animals, whereas non-phosphorylated levels of these proteins were not affected by
SI. These findings suggest that dysfunctions of Egr-1 and neuro-signaling systems
are involved in SI-induced deficits of fear memory consolidation in mice.

PMID: 24647971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Bone Miner Res. 2014 Aug;29(8):1859-71. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2222.

Age-related impairment of bones' adaptive response to loading in mice is
associated with sex-related deficiencies in osteoblasts but no change in
osteocytes.

Meakin LB(1), Galea GL, Sugiyama T, Lanyon LE, Price JS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Science, University of Bristol, Langford, Bristol, UK.

Bones adjust their mass and architecture to be sufficiently robust to withstand
functional loading by adapting to their strain environment. This mechanism
appears less effective with age, resulting in low bone mass. In male and female
young adult (17-week-old) and old (19-month-old) mice, we investigated the effect
of age in vivo on bones' adaptive response to loading and in vitro in primary
cultures of osteoblast-like cells derived from bone cortices. Right tibias were
axially loaded on alternate days for 2 weeks. Left tibias were non-loaded
controls. In a separate group, the number of sclerostin-positive osteocytes and
the number of periosteal osteoblasts were analyzed 24 hours after a single
loading episode. The responses to strain of the primary osteoblast-like cells
derived from these mice were assessed by EGR2 expression, change in cell number
and Ki67 immunofluorescence. In young male and female mice, loading increased
trabecular thickness and the number of trabecular connections. Increase in the
number of trabecular connections was impaired with age but trabecular thickness
was not. In old mice, the loading-related increase in periosteal apposition of
the cortex was less than in young ones. Age was associated with a lesser
loading-related increase in osteoblast number on the periosteal surface but had
no effect on loading-related reduction in the number of sclerostin-positive
osteocytes. In vitro, strain-related proliferation of osteoblast-like cells was
lower in cells from old than young mice. Cells from aged female mice demonstrated
normal entry into the cell cycle but subsequently arrested in G2 phase, reducing 
strain-related increases in cell number. Thus, in both male and female mice,
loading-related adaptive responses are impaired with age. This impairment is
different in females and males. The deficit appears to occur in osteoblasts'
proliferative responses to strain rather than earlier strain-related responses in
the osteocytes.

© 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMCID: PMC4258100
PMID: 24644060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Neuropharmacology. 2014 Jun;81:215-23. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2014.02.006.
Epub 2014 Feb 15.

N-acetylcysteine modulates hallucinogenic 5-HT(2A) receptor agonist-mediated
responses: behavioral, molecular, and electrophysiological studies.

Lee MY(1), Chiang CC(2), Chiu HY(3), Chan MH(4), Chen HH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Tzu Chi University, 701, Section 3,
Chung-Yang Road, Hualien 97004, Taiwan. (2)School of Medicine, Tzu Chi
University, 701, Section 3, Chung-Yang Road, Hualien 97004, Taiwan. (3)Department
of Pharmacy, Hualien, Tzu Chi General Hospital, 707, Section 3, Chung-Yang Road, 
Hualien 97004, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Neuroscience, National Changchi
University, 64, Sec. 2, ZhiNan Road, Wenshan District, Taipei City 11605, Taiwan;
Research Center for Mind, Brain, and Learning, National Changchi University, 64, 
Sec. 2, ZhiNan Road, Wenshan District, Taipei City 11605, Taiwan. (5)Department
of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Tzu Chi University, 701, Section 3, Chung-Yang
Road, Hualien 97004, Taiwan; Center for Neuropsychiatric Research, National
Health Research Institutes, 35 Keyan Road, Zhunan, Miaoli County 35053, Taiwan.
Electronic address: hwei5514@gmail.com.

N-acetylcysteine (NAC) has been reported to reverse the psychotomimetic effects
in the rodent phencyclidine model of psychosis and shown beneficial effects in
treating patients with schizophrenia. The effect of NAC has been associated with 
facilitating the activity of cystine-glutamate antiporters on glial cells
concomitant with the release of non-vesicular glutamate, which mainly stimulates 
the presynaptic metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 2 receptors (mGluR2).
Recent evidence demonstrated that functional interactions between serotonin
5-HT2A receptor (5-HT(2A)R) and mGluR2 are responsible to unique cellular
responses when targeted by hallucinogenic drugs. The present study determined the
effects of NAC on hallucinogenic 5-HT(2A)R agonist
(±)1-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl)-2-aminopropane (DOI)-elicited behavioral and
molecular responses in mice and DOI-evoked field potentials in the mouse cortical
slices. NAC significantly attenuated DOI-induced head twitch response and
expression of c-Fos and Egr-2 in the infralimbic and motor cortex and suppressed 
the increase in the frequency of excitatory field potentials elicited by DOI in
the medial prefrontal cortex. In addition, the cystine-glutamate antiporter
inhibitor (S)-4-carboxyphenylglycine (CPG) and the mGluR2 antagonist LY341495
reversed the suppressing effects of NAC on DOI-induced head twitch and molecular 
responses and increased frequency of excitatory field potentials, supporting that
NAC attenuates the 5-HT(2A)R-mediated hallucinogenic effects via increased
activity of cystine-glutamate antiporter followed by activation of mGluR2
receptors. These findings implicate NAC as a potential therapeutic agent for
hallucinations and psychosis associated with hallucinogen use and schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24534112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Immunol. 2014 Mar 15;192(6):2643-50. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302076. Epub 2014
Feb 14.

Tuberous sclerosis 1 promotes invariant NKT cell anergy and inhibits invariant
NKT cell-mediated antitumor immunity.

Wu J(1), Shin J, Xie D, Wang H, Gao J, Zhong XP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University 
Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710;

Development of effective immune therapies for cancer patients requires better
understanding of hurdles that prevent the generation of effective antitumor
immune responses. Administration of a-galactosylceramide (a-GalCer) in animals
enhances antitumor immunity via activation of the invariant NKT (iNKT) cells.
However, repeated injections of a-GalCer result in long-term unresponsiveness or 
anergy of iNKT cells, severely limiting its efficacy in tumor eradication. The
mechanisms leading to iNKT cell anergy remain poorly understood. We report in
this study that the tuberous sclerosis 1 (TSC1), a negative regulator of mTOR
signaling, plays a crucial role in iNKT cell anergy. Deficiency of TSC1 in iNKT
cells results in resistance to a-GalCer-induced anergy, manifested by increased
expansion of and cytokine production by iNKT cells in response to secondary Ag
stimulation. It is correlated with impaired upregulation of programmed death-1,
Egr2, and Grail. Moreover, TSC1-deficient iNKT cells display enhanced antitumor
immunity in a melanoma lung metastasis model. Our data suggest targeting TSC1/2
as a strategy for boosting antitumor immune therapy.

PMCID: PMC3965184
PMID: 24532578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Cell Sci. 2014 Apr 15;127(Pt 8):1805-15. doi: 10.1242/jcs.139733. Epub 2014 Feb
12.

Fluctuation of Rac1 activity is associated with the phenotypic and
transcriptional heterogeneity of glioma cells.

Yukinaga H(1), Shionyu C, Hirata E, Ui-Tei K, Nagashima T, Kondo S,
Okada-Hatakeyama M, Naoki H, Matsuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Biology of Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Phenotypic heterogeneity of cancer cells is caused not only by genetic and
epigenetic alterations but also by stochastic variation of intracellular
signaling molecules. Using cells that stably express Förster resonance energy
transfer (FRET) biosensors, we show here a correlation between a temporal
fluctuation in the activity of Rac1 and the invasive properties of C6 glioma
cells. By using long-term time-lapse imaging, we found that Rac1 activity in C6
glioma cells fluctuated over a timescale that was substantially longer than that 
of the replication cycle. Because the relative level of Rac1 activity in each
cell was unaffected by a suspension-adhesion procedure, we were able to sort C6
glioma cells according to the levels of Rac1 activity, yielding Rac1(high) and
Rac1(low) cells. The Rac1(high) cells invaded more efficiently than did Rac1(low)
cells in a Matrigel invasion assay. We assessed the transcriptional profiles of
Rac1(high) and Rac1(low) cells and performed gene ontology analysis. Among the 14
genes that were most associated with the term 'membrane' (membrane-related genes)
in Rac1(high) cells, we identified four genes that were associated with glioma
invasion and Rac1 activity by using siRNA knockdown experiments. Among the
transcription factors upregulated in Rac1(high) cells, Egr2 was found to
positively regulate expression of the four membrane-related invasion-associated
genes. The identified signaling network might cause the fluctuations in Rac1
activity and the heterogeneity in the invasive capacity of glioma cells.

PMID: 24522191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Development. 2014 Feb;141(4):940-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.104901.

An essential role for LPA signalling in telencephalon development.

Geach TJ(1), Faas L, Devader C, Gonzalez-Cordero A, Tabler JM, Brunsdon H, Isaacs
HV, Dale L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Anatomy Building, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK.

Erratum in
    Development. 2014 Jun;141(11):2360.

Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) has wide-ranging effects on many different cell
types, acting through G-protein-coupled receptors such as LPAR6. We show that
Xenopus lpar6 is expressed from late blastulae and is enriched in the mesoderm
and dorsal ectoderm of early gastrulae. Expression in gastrulae is an early
response to FGF signalling. Transcripts for lpar6 are enriched in the neural
plate of Xenopus neurulae and loss of function caused forebrain defects, with
reduced expression of telencephalic markers (foxg1, emx1 and nkx2-1). Midbrain
(en2) and hindbrain (egr2) markers were unaffected. Foxg1 expression requires
LPAR6 within ectoderm and not mesoderm. Head defects caused by LPAR6 loss of
function were enhanced by co-inhibiting FGF signalling, with defects extending
into the hindbrain (en2 and egr2 expression reduced). This is more severe than
expected from simple summation of individual defects, suggesting that LPAR6 and
FGF have overlapping or partially redundant functions in the anterior neural
plate. We observed similar defects in forebrain development in loss-of-function
experiments for ENPP2, an enzyme involved in the synthesis of extracellular LPA. 
Our study demonstrates a role for LPA in early forebrain development.

PMID: 24496630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Hum Pathol. 2014 Apr;45(4):691-700. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.11.003. Epub 2013
Nov 13.

Gene expression signatures of primary and metastatic uterine leiomyosarcoma.

Davidson B(1), Abeler VM(2), Førsund M(2), Holth A(2), Yang Y(3), Kobayashi Y(4),
Chen L(4), Kristensen GB(5), Shih IeM(6), Wang TL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, 
N-0424 Oslo, Norway; The Medical Faculty, University of Oslo, N-0316 Oslo,
Norway. Electronic address: bend@medisin.uio.no. (2)Department of Pathology,
Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, N-0424 Oslo, Norway.
(3)Genomic Core Facility, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)Departments of Gynecology and
Obstetrics, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA;
Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21231, 
USA. (5)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo
University Hospital, N-0424 Oslo, Norway; Institute for Medical Informatics,
Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, N-0424 Oslo, Norway.
(6)Departments of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA; Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. (7)Departments of Gynecology and
Obstetrics, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA;
Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21231, 
USA. Electronic address: tlw@welch.jhu.edu.

Leiomyosarcoma (LMS) is the most common uterine sarcoma. Although the disease is 
relatively rare, it is responsible for considerable mortality due to frequent
metastasis and chemoresistance. The molecular events related to LMS metastasis
are unknown to date. The present study compared the global gene expression
patterns of primary uterine LMSs and LMS metastases. Gene expression profiles of 
13 primary and 15 metastatic uterine LMSs were analyzed using the HumanRef-8
BeadChip from Illumina. Differentially expressed candidate genes were validated
using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
immunohistochemistry. To identify differently expressed genes between primary and
metastatic tumors, we performed one-way analysis of variance with
Benjamini-Hochberg correction. This led to identification of 203 unique probes
that were significantly differentially expressed in the 2 tumor groups by greater
than 1.58-fold with P < .01, of which 94 and 109 were overexpressed in primary
and metastatic LMSs, respectively. Genes overexpressed in primary uterine LMSs
included OSTN, NLGN4X, NLGN1, SLITRK4, MASP1, XRN2, ASS1, RORB, HRASLS, and
TSPAN7. Genes overexpressed in LMS metastases included TNNT1, FOLR3, TDO2, CRYM, 
GJA1, TSPAN10, THBS1, SGK1, SHMT1, EGR2, and AGT. Quantitative real-time PCR
confirmed significant anatomical site-related differences in FOLR3, OSTN, and
NLGN4X levels; and immunohistochemistry showed significant differences in TDO2
expression. Gene expression profiling differentiates primary uterine LMSs from
LMS metastases. The molecular signatures unique to primary and metastatic LMSs
may aid in understanding tumor progression in this cancer and in providing a
molecular basis for prognostic studies and therapeutic target discovery.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3965648
PMID: 24485798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 15;192(4):1972-81. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302623. Epub 2014
Jan 24.

a-Galactosylceramide but not phenyl-glycolipids induced NKT cell anergy and
IL-33-mediated myeloid-derived suppressor cell accumulation via upregulation of
egr2/3.

Huang JR(1), Tsai YC, Chang YJ, Wu JC, Hung JT, Lin KH, Wong CH, Yu AL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan 11271;

Strategies for cancer immunotherapy include activating immune system for
therapeutic benefit or blockade of immune checkpoints. To harness innate immunity
to fight cancer, a-galactosylceramide (a-GalCer) has been used to activate NKT
cells. Unfortunately, administration of a-GalCer causes long-term NKT cell
anergy, but the molecular mechanism is unclear. In this study, we showed that
a-GalCer-triggered egr2/3, which induced programmed death 1 and cbl-b in NKT
cells, leading to NKT cell anergy. We also uncovered the induction of the
immunosuppressive myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) in the spleen by
a-GalCer that might attenuate its antitumor efficacy. The accumulation of MDSC
was accompanied by 20-fold rise in their arg-1 mRNAs and enhanced expression of
programmed death 1/programmed death ligand 1. Furthermore, a-GalCer-induced
egr-2/3 in hepatic NKT cells upregulated their TRAIL in addition to Fas ligand
(FasL) and induced alarm signaling molecule IL-33 in Kupffer cells, presumably
because of liver damage triggered by TRAIL/FasL. We further demonstrated that
IL-33-stimulated macrophages produce G-CSF, which in turn, boosted MDSCs. Thus,
a-GalCer-induced FasL/TRAIL and IL-33 provided a novel mechanism underlying
a-GalCer-induced hepatotoxicity and MDSC accumulation. In contrast, analogs of
a-GalCer containing phenyl group in the lipid tail could neither induce NKT
anergy nor enhance MDSCs accumulation. Furthermore, tumor-infiltrating MDSCs in
mice injected repeatedly with a-GalCer were 2-fold higher than those treated with
phenyl-glycolipids. These results not only revealed the induction of MDSC via
IL-33 as a new mechanism for a-GalCer-elicited immunosuppression but also
provided one of the mechanisms underlying the superior antitumor potency of
phenyl-glycolipids. Our findings have important implications for the development 
of NKT-stimulatory glycolipids as vaccine adjuvants and anticancer therapeutics.

PMID: 24465013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2014 Jan 20;369(1637):20120471. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2012.0471. Print 2014 Mar 5.

Parent-of-origin genetic background affects the transcriptional levels of
circadian and neuronal plasticity genes following sleep loss.

Tinarelli F(1), Garcia-Garcia C, Nicassio F, Tucci V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia, , via Morego, 30, 16163 Genova, Italy.

Sleep homoeostasis refers to a process in which the propensity to sleep increases
as wakefulness progresses and decreases as sleep progresses. Sleep is tightly
organized around the circadian clock and is regulated by genetic and epigenetic
mechanisms. The homoeostatic response of sleep, which is classically triggered by
sleep deprivation, is generally measured as a rebound effect of
electrophysiological measures, for example delta sleep. However, more recently,
gene expression changes following sleep loss have been investigated as biomarkers
of sleep homoeostasis. The genetic background of an individual may affect this
sleep-dependent gene expression phenotype. In this study, we investigated whether
parental genetic background differentially modulates the expression of genes
following sleep loss. We tested the progeny of reciprocal crosses of AKR/J and
DBA/2J mouse strains and we show a parent-of-origin effect on the expression of
circadian, sleep and neuronal plasticity genes following sleep deprivation. Thus,
we further explored, by in silico, specific functions or upstream mechanisms of
regulation and we observed that several upstream mechanisms involving signalling 
pathways (i.e. DICER1, PKA), growth factors (CSF3 and BDNF) and transcriptional
regulators (EGR2 and ELK4) may be differentially modulated by parental effects.
This is the first report showing that a behavioural manipulation (e.g. sleep
deprivation) in adult animals triggers specific gene expression responses
according to parent-of-origin genomic mechanisms. Our study suggests that the
same mechanism may be extended to other behavioural domains and that the
investigation of gene expression following experimental manipulations should take
seriously into account parent-of-origin effects.

PMCID: PMC3895995
PMID: 24446504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 7;111(1):E119-28. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1320777110. Epub 2013 Dec 16.

Effective functional maturation of invariant natural killer T cells is
constrained by negative selection and T-cell antigen receptor affinity.

Bedel R(1), Berry R, Mallevaey T, Matsuda JL, Zhang J, Godfrey DI, Rossjohn J,
Kappler JW, Marrack P, Gapin L.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Department of Immunology, National Jewish Health and University of 
Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, CO 80206.

The self-reactivity of their T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) is thought to
contribute to the development of immune regulatory cells, such as invariant NK T 
cells (iNKT). In the mouse, iNKT cells express TCRs composed of a unique
Va14-Ja18 rearrangement and recognize lipid antigens presented by CD1d molecules.
We created mice expressing a transgenic TCR-ß chain that confers high affinity
for self-lipid/CD1d complexes when randomly paired with the mouse iNKT Va14-Ja18 
rearrangement to study their development. We show that although iNKT cells
undergo agonist selection, their development is also shaped by negative selection
in vivo. In addition, iNKT cells that avoid negative selection in these mice
express natural sequence variants of the canonical TCR-a and decreased affinity
for self/CD1d. However, limiting the affinity of the iNKT TCRs for "self" leads
to inefficient Egr2 induction, poor expression of the iNKT lineage-specific
zinc-finger transcription factor PLZF, inadequate proliferation of iNKT cell
precursors, defects in trafficking, and impaired effector functions. Thus, proper
development of fully functional iNKT cells is constrained by a limited range of
TCR affinity that plays a key role in triggering the iNKT cell-differentiation
pathway. These results provide a direct link between the affinity of the TCR
expressed by T-cell precursors for self-antigens and the proper development of a 
unique population of lymphocytes essential to immune responses.

PMCID: PMC3890789
PMID: 24344267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2014 Feb;34(2):258-67. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2013.182.
Epub 2013 Dec 4.

A new role for downstream Toll-like receptor signaling in mediating immediate
early gene expression during focal cerebral ischemia.

Famakin BM(1), Mou Y(1), Johnson K(2), Spatz M(1), Hallenbeck J(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Stroke Branch,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (2)National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders & Stroke, Section on Bioinformatics, Information
Technology & Bioinformatics Program, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.

To better understand the role of downstream Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling
during acute cerebral ischemia, we performed cDNA microarrays, on brain RNA, and 
cytokine arrays, on serum, from wild type (WT), MyD88-/- and TRIF-mutant mice, at
baseline and following permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO). The
acute stress response pathway was among the top pathways identified by Ingenuity 
Pathway Analysis of microarray data. We used real-time polymerase chain reaction 
to confirm the expression of four immediate early genes; EGR1, EGR2, ARC, Nurr77,
in this pathway, and insulin degrading enzyme (IDE). Compared to WT, baseline
immediate early gene expression was increased up to10-fold in MyD88-/- and
TRIF-mutant mice. However, following pMCAO, immediate early gene expression
remained unchanged, from this elevated baseline in these mice, but increased up
to 12-fold in WT. Furthermore, expression of IDE, which also degrades ß-amyloid, 
decreased significantly only in TRIF-mutant mice. Finally, sE-Selectin, sICAM,
sVCAM-1, and MMP-9 levels were significantly decreased only in MyD88-/- compared 
with WT mice. We thus report a new role for downstream TLR signaling in immediate
early gene expression during acute cerebral ischemia. We also show that the TRIF 
pathway regulates IDE expression; a major enzyme that clears ß-amyloid from the
brain.

PMCID: PMC3915199
PMID: 24301291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Cell. 2013 Nov 7;52(3):314-24. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.10.009.

Acetylation of RNA polymerase II regulates growth-factor-induced gene
transcription in mammalian cells.

Schröder S(1), Herker E, Itzen F, He D, Thomas S, Gilchrist DA, Kaehlcke K, Cho
S, Pollard KS, Capra JA, Schnölzer M, Cole PA, Geyer M, Bruneau BG, Adelman K,
Ott M.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA; University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2013 Nov 7;52(3):287-8.

Lysine acetylation regulates transcription by targeting histones and nonhistone
proteins. Here we report that the central regulator of transcription, RNA
polymerase II, is subject to acetylation in mammalian cells. Acetylation occurs
at eight lysines within the C-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest polymerase
subunit and is mediated by p300/KAT3B. CTD acetylation is specifically enriched
downstream of the transcription start sites of polymerase-occupied genes
genome-wide, indicating a role in early stages of transcription initiation or
elongation. Mutation of lysines or p300 inhibitor treatment causes the loss of
epidermal growth-factor-induced expression of c-Fos and Egr2, immediate-early
genes with promoter-proximally paused polymerases, but does not affect expression
or polymerase occupancy at housekeeping genes. Our studies identify acetylation
as a new modification of the mammalian RNA polymerase II required for the
induction of growth factor response genes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3936344
PMID: 24207025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. JAKSTAT. 2013 Apr 1;2(2):e23952. doi: 10.4161/jkst.23952.

Egr2 and Egr3 are the unique regulators for systemic autoimmunity.

Sumitomo S(1), Fujio K, Okamura T, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology; Graduate School of Medicine; The
University of Tokyo; Tokyo, Japan.

Systemic autoimmunity is characterized by widespread inflammation, autoantibody
production and immune complex deposition. The regulatory mechanisms for the
systemic autoimmunity are not fully understood. A paper by Li et al. revealed
that Egr2 and Egr3, transcription factors required for T-cell anergy, are the
regulators for systemic autoimmune disease. They showed evidence that Egr2 and
Egr3 control cytokine productions and cell proliferation via SOCS and Batf
regulation.

PMCID: PMC3710327
PMID: 24058814  [PubMed]


104. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Sep 21;14:94. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-94.

Diagnostic laboratory testing for Charcot Marie Tooth disease (CMT): the spectrum
of gene defects in Norwegian patients with CMT and its implications for future
genetic test strategies.

Østern R(1), Fagerheim T, Hjellnes H, Nygård B, Mellgren SI, Nilssen Ø.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of North-Norway, Tromsø
NO9038, Norway. Rune.Andre.Helland.Ostern@unn.no.

BACKGROUND: Current genetic test algorithms for Charcot Marie Tooth (CMT) disease
are based on family details and comprehensive clinical and neurophysiological
data gathered under ideal conditions for clinical assessment. However, in a
diagnostic laboratory setting relying on external test requisitions and patient
samples, such conditions are not always met. Our objective was therefore to
perform a retrospective evaluation of the data given in laboratory request forms 
and to assess their quality and applicability with regard to the recommended
algorithms for CMT diagnostics. As we are the main test centre for CMT in Norway 
our results also provide an overview of the spectrum of gene defects in the
Norwegian CMT population.
METHODS: Genetic testing was performed according to polyneuropathy type;
demyelinating/mixed: PMP22 duplication, MPZ, EGR2, LITAF, NEFL, PMP22, GJB1,
axonal: MFN2, MPZ, NEFL, and GJB1.
RESULTS: Diagnostic testing of index patients was requested in 435 of the 549
cases. Seventy-two (16.6%) positive molecular genetic findings were made. The
majority (94.6%) of mutation positive cases showed disease onset before 50 years 
of age. PMP22 (duplication), MPZ, GJB1 and MFN2 mutations constituted 95.8% of
the positive findings. Within the nerve conduction study groups, mutation
detection rates were; demyelinating 33.8%; mixed 29.0%; axonal 8.8%; unspecified 
16.5%.
CONCLUSION: We suggest a simplified algorithm intended for referral centres,
dealing with DNA/blood samples, which involves the assessment of age at onset and
neurophysiological data followed by testing of four genes; PMP22 (duplication),
MPZ, GJB1 and MFN2. Patients negative for mutations in those four genes should be
subjected to evaluation at an interdisciplinary inherited neuropathy clinic with 
the capacity for extended molecular genetic analysis by next generation
sequencing.

PMCID: PMC3849068
PMID: 24053775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Neurosci. 2013 Sep 18;33(38):15044-9. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2604-13.2013.

Sound localization ability and glycinergic innervation of the superior olivary
complex persist after genetic deletion of the medial nucleus of the trapezoid
body.

Jalabi W(1), Kopp-Scheinpflug C, Allen PD, Schiavon E, DiGiacomo RR, Forsythe ID,
Maricich SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
44106, Department of Cell Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Leicester,
Leicester, LE1 9HN, United Kingdom, Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy,
University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14642, and Richard King Mellon
Institute for Pediatric Research, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15224.

The medial nucleus of the trapezoid body (MNTB) in the superior olivary complex
(SOC) is an inhibitory hub considered critical for binaural sound localization.
We show that genetic ablation of MNTB neurons in mice only subtly affects this
ability by prolonging the minimum time required to detect shifts in sound
location. Furthermore, glycinergic innervation of the SOC is maintained without
an MNTB, consistent with the existence of parallel inhibitory inputs. These
findings redefine the role of MNTB in sound localization and suggest that the
inhibitory network is more complex than previously thought.

PMCID: PMC3858601
PMID: 24048834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 4;8(9):e73635. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073635. eCollection 
2013.

Lrig2-deficient mice are protected against PDGFB-induced glioma.

Rondahl V(1), Holmlund C, Karlsson T, Wang B, Faraz M, Henriksson R, Hedman H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Sciences, Oncology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The leucine-rich repeats and immunoglobulin-like domains (LRIG)
proteins constitute an integral membrane protein family that has three members:
LRIG1, LRIG2, and LRIG3. LRIG1 negatively regulates growth factor signaling, but 
little is known regarding the functions of LRIG2 and LRIG3. In oligodendroglial
brain tumors, high expression of LRIG2 correlates with poor patient survival.
Lrig1 and Lrig3 knockout mice are viable, but there have been no reports on
Lrig2-deficient mice to date.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Lrig2-deficient mice were generated by the
ablation of Lrig2 exon 12 (Lrig2E12). The Lrig2E12-/- mice showed a transiently
reduced growth rate and an increased spontaneous mortality rate; 20-25% of these 
mice died before 130 days of age, with the majority of the deaths occurring
before 50 days. Ntv-a transgenic mice with different Lrig2 genotypes were
transduced by intracranial injection with platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)
B-encoding replication-competent avian retrovirus (RCAS)-producing DF-1 cells.
All injected Lrig2E12+/+ mice developed Lrig2 expressing oligodendroglial brain
tumors of lower grade (82%) or glioblastoma-like tumors of higher grade (18%).
Lrig2E12-/- mice, in contrast, only developed lower grade tumors (77%) or had no 
detectable tumors (23%). Lrig2E12-/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) showed
altered induction-kinetics of immediate-early genes Fos and Egr2 in response to
PDGF-BB stimulation. However, Lrig2E12-/- MEFs showed no changes in Pdgfra or
Pdgfrß levels or in levels of PDGF-BB-induced phosphorylation of Pdgfra, Pdgfrß, 
Akt, or extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2).
Overexpression of LRIG1, but not of LRIG2, downregulated PDGFRa levels in
HEK-293T cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The phenotype of Lrig2E12-/- mice showed that Lrig2 was a promoter
of PDGFB-induced glioma, and Lrig2 appeared to have important molecular and
developmental functions that were distinct from those of Lrig1 and Lrig3.

PMCID: PMC3762791
PMID: 24023893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jan 15;23(2):155-66. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0194. Epub 2013
Oct 5.

Early growth response-2 signaling mediates immunomodulatory effects of human
multipotential stromal cells.

Barbeau DJ(1), La KT, Kim DS, Kerpedjieva SS, Shurin GV, Tamama K.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine ,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

While most studies have suggested multipotential stromal cell or mesenchymal stem
cell (MSC) therapies are useful for immune-mediated diseases, MSCs'
immunomodulatory effects were not entirely reproduced in some studies, indicating
the necessity to determine the underlying mechanism of MSCs' effects on immune
response regulation to maximize their immunomodulatory effects. We have
identified the transcription factor early growth response gene-2 (EGR2) as a
novel molecular switch regulating known immunomodulatory molecules in human MSCs.
EGR2 binds to the promoter regions of these genes, interleukin-6 (IL6), leukemia 
inhibitory factor (LIF), indoleamine dioxygenase-1 (IDO1), and
cyclooxygenase-2/prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (COX2/PTGS2), and siRNA
against EGR2 was shown to downregulate these genes and reduce the production of
prostaglandin E2, an immunomodulatory mediator produced downstream of COX2/PTGS2.
Moreover, EGR2 knockdown restores T-lymphocyte proliferation reduced by MSC
coculture. Therefore, EGR2 is a potential target for the optimization of
immunomodulatory properties of MSC-based therapies.

PMCID: PMC3887418
PMID: 24007274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 21;8(8):e72278. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072278. eCollection
2013.

Unique transcriptional profile of sustained ligand-activated preconditioning in
pre- and post-ischemic myocardium.

Ashton KJ(1), Tupicoff A, Williams-Pritchard G, Kiessling CJ, See Hoe LE,
Headrick JP, Peart JN.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences and Medicine, Bond University, Queensland,
Australia. keashton@bond.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Opioidergic SLP (sustained ligand-activated preconditioning) induced 
by 3-5 days of opioid receptor (OR) agonism induces persistent protection against
ischemia-reperfusion (I-R) injury in young and aged hearts, and is
mechanistically distinct from conventional preconditioning responses. We thus
applied unbiased gene-array interrogation to identify molecular effects of SLP in
pre- and post-ischemic myocardium.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Male C57Bl/6 mice were implanted with 75 mg
morphine or placebo pellets for 5 days. Resultant SLP did not modify cardiac
function, and markedly reduced dysfunction and injury in perfused hearts
subjected to 25 min ischemia/45 min reperfusion. Microarray analysis identified
14 up- and 86 down-regulated genes in normoxic hearts from SLP mice (=1.3-fold
change, FDR=5%). Induced genes encoded sarcomeric/contractile proteins (Myh7,
Mybpc3,Myom2,Des), natriuretic peptides (Nppa,Nppb) and stress-signaling elements
(Csda,Ptgds). Highly repressed genes primarily encoded chemokines
(Ccl2,Ccl4,Ccl7,Ccl9,Ccl13,Ccl3l3,Cxcl3), cytokines (Il1b,Il6,Tnf) and other
proteins involved in inflammation/immunity (C3,Cd74,Cd83,
Cd86,Hla-dbq1,Hla-drb1,Saa1,Selp,Serpina3), together with endoplasmic stress
proteins (known: Dnajb1,Herpud1,Socs3; putative: Il6, Gadd45g,Rcan1) and
transcriptional controllers (Egr2,Egr3, Fos,Hmox1,Nfkbid). Biological themes
modified thus related to inflammation/immunity, together with
cellular/cardiovascular movement and development. SLP also modified the
transcriptional response to I-R (46 genes uniquely altered post-ischemia), which 
may influence later infarction/remodeling. This included up-regulated
determinants of cellular resistance to oxidant (Mgst3,Gstm1,Gstm2) and other
forms of stress (Xirp1,Ankrd1,Clu), and repression of stress-response genes
(Hspa1a,Hspd1,Hsp90aa,Hsph1,Serpinh1) and Txnip.
CONCLUSIONS: Protection via SLP is associated with transcriptional repression of 
inflammation/immunity, up-regulation of sarcomeric elements and natriuretic
peptides, and modulation of cell stress, growth and development, while
conventional protective molecules are unaltered.

PMCID: PMC3749099
PMID: 23991079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Front Mol Neurosci. 2013 Aug 9;6:20. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2013.00020. eCollection
2013.

L-type CaV1.2 deletion in the cochlea but not in the brainstem reduces noise
vulnerability: implication for CaV1.2-mediated control of cochlear BDNF
expression.

Zuccotti A(1), Lee SC, Campanelli D, Singer W, Satheesh SV, Patriarchi T, Geisler
HS, Köpschall I, Rohbock K, Nothwang HG, Hu J, Hell JW, Schimmang T, Rüttiger L, 
Knipper M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Physiology of Hearing, Hearing Research Center Tübingen, Department 
of Otolaryngology, University of Tübingen Tübingen, Germany.

Voltage-gated L-type Ca(2+) channels (L-VGCCs) like CaV1.2 are assumed to play a 
crucial role for controlling release of trophic peptides including brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF). In the inner ear of the adult mouse, besides the
well-described L-VGCC CaV1.3, CaV1.2 is also expressed. Due to lethality of
constitutive CaV1.2 knock-out mice, the function of this ion channel as well as
its putative relationship to BDNF in the auditory system is entirely elusive. We 
recently described that BDNF plays a differential role for inner hair cell (IHC) 
vesicles release in normal and traumatized condition. To elucidate a presumptive 
role of CaV1.2 during this process, two tissue-specific conditional mouse lines
were generated. To distinguish the impact of CaV1.2 on the cochlea from that on
feedback loops from higher auditory centers CaV1.2 was deleted, in one mouse
line, under the Pax2 promoter (CaV1.2(Pax2)) leading to a deletion in the spiral 
ganglion neurons, dorsal cochlear nucleus, and inferior colliculus. In the second
mouse line, the Egr2 promoter was used for deleting CaV1.2 (CaV1.2(Egr2)) in
auditory brainstem nuclei. In both mouse lines, normal hearing threshold and
equal number of IHC release sites were observed. We found a slight reduction of
auditory brainstem response wave I amplitudes in the CaV1.2(Pax2) mice, but not
in the CaV1.2(Egr2) mice. After noise exposure, CaV1.2(Pax2) mice had
less-pronounced hearing loss that correlated with maintenance of ribbons in IHCs 
and less reduced activity in auditory nerve fibers, as well as in higher brain
centers at supra-threshold sound stimulation. As reduced cochlear BDNF mRNA
levels were found in CaV1.2(Pax2) mice, we suggest that a CaV1.2-dependent step
may participate in triggering part of the beneficial and deteriorating effects of
cochlear BDNF in intact systems and during noise exposure through a pathway that 
is independent of CaV1.2 function in efferent circuits.

PMCID: PMC3739414
PMID: 23950737  [PubMed]


110. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Aug 6;14(8):16226-39. doi: 10.3390/ijms140816226.

Involvement of miR-20a in promoting gastric cancer progression by targeting early
growth response 2 (EGR2).

Li X(1), Zhang Z, Yu M, Li L, Du G, Xiao W, Yang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Xinqiao Road, Chongqing 400037, China. xiangsonlee@163.com

Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common cancers, with high incidences in
East Asia. microRNAs (miRNAs) play essential roles in the carcinogenesis of GC.
miR-20a was elevated in GC, while the potential function of miR-20a was poorly
understood. miR-20a expression was examined in GC tissues and cell lines. The
effects of miR-20a on the growth, migration, invasion, and chemoresistance of GC 
cells were examined. Luciferase reporter assay and Western blot were used to
screen the target of miR-20a. miR-20a was increased in GC tissues and cell lines.
miR-20a promoted the growth, migration and invasion of GC cells, enhanced the
chemoresistance of GC cells to cisplatin and docetaxel. Luciferase activity and
Western blot confirmed that miR-20a negatively regulated EGR2 expression.
Overexpression of EGR2 significantly attenuated the oncogenic effect of miR-20a. 
miR-20a was involved in the carcinogenesis of GC through modulation of the EGR2
signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3759908
PMID: 23924943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Am J Pathol. 2013 Oct;183(4):1197-208. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.06.016. Epub
2013 Jul 30.

Early growth response 3 (Egr-3) is induced by transforming growth factor-ß and
regulates fibrogenic responses.

Fang F(1), Shangguan AJ, Kelly K, Wei J, Gruner K, Ye B, Wang W, Bhattacharyya S,
Hinchcliff ME, Tourtellotte WG, Varga J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois.

Members of the early growth response (Egr) gene family of transcription factors
have nonredundant biological functions. Although Egr-3 is implicated primarily in
neuromuscular development and immunity, its regulation and role in tissue repair 
and fibrosis has not been studied. We now show that in normal skin fibroblasts,
Egr-3 was potently induced by transforming growth factor-ß via canonical Smad3.
Moreover, transient Egr-3 overexpression was sufficient to stimulate fibrotic
gene expression, whereas deletion of Egr-3 resulted in substantially attenuated
transforming growth factor-ß responses. Genome-wide expression profiling in
fibroblasts showed that genes associated with tissue remodeling and wound healing
were prominently up-regulated by Egr-3. Notably, <5% of fibroblast genes
regulated by Egr-1 or Egr-2 were found to be coregulated by Egr-3, revealing
substantial functional divergence among these Egr family members. In a mouse
model of scleroderma, development of dermal fibrosis was accompanied by
accumulation of Egr-3-positive myofibroblasts in the lesional tissue. Moreover,
skin biopsy samples from patients with scleroderma showed elevated Egr-3 levels
in the dermis, and Egr-3 mRNA levels correlated with the extent of skin
involvement. These results provide the first evidence that Egr-3, a functionally 
distinct member of the Egr family with potent effects on inflammation and
immunity, is up-regulated in scleroderma and is necessary and sufficient for
profibrotic responses, suggesting important and distinct roles in the
pathogenesis of fibrosis.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3791870
PMID: 23906810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Med. 2013 Aug 28;19:223-9. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2013.00013.

Erythropoietin (EPO) increases myelin gene expression in CG4 oligodendrocyte
cells through the classical EPO receptor.

Cervellini I(1), Annenkov A, Brenton T, Chernajovsky Y, Ghezzi P, Mengozzi M.

Author information: 
(1)Brighton & Sussex Medical School, Falmer, United Kingdom.

Erythropoietin (EPO) has protective effects in neurodegenerative and
neuroinflammatory diseases, including in animal models of multiple sclerosis,
where EPO decreases disease severity. EPO also promotes neurogenesis and is
protective in models of toxic demyelination. In this study, we asked whether EPO 
could promote neurorepair by also inducing remyelination. In addition, we
investigated whether the effect of EPO could be mediated by the classical
erythropoietic EPO receptor (EPOR), since it is still questioned if EPOR is
functional in nonhematopoietic cells. Using CG4 cells, a line of rat
oligodendrocyte precursor cells, we found that EPO increases the expression of
myelin genes (myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein [MOG] and myelin basic protein 
[MBP]). EPO had no effect in wild-type CG4 cells, which do not express EPOR,
whereas it increased MOG and MBP expression in cells engineered to overexpress
EPOR (CG4-EPOR). This was reflected in a marked increase in MOG protein levels,
as detected by Western blot. In these cells, EPO induced by 10-fold the early
growth response gene 2 (Egr2), which is required for peripheral myelination.
However, Egr2 silencing with a siRNA did not reverse the effect of EPO,
indicating that EPO acts through other pathways. In conclusion, EPO induces the
expression of myelin genes in oligodendrocytes and this effect requires the
presence of EPOR. This study demonstrates that EPOR can mediate neuroreparative
effects.

PMCID: PMC3769529
PMID: 23821361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 21;8(6):e66267. Print 2013.

Comparative Transcriptome Analysis of Adipose Tissues Reveals that ECM-Receptor
Interaction Is Involved in the Depot-Specific Adipogenesis in Cattle.

Lee HJ(1), Jang M, Kim H, Kwak W, Park W, Hwang JY, Lee CK, Jang GW, Park MN, Kim
HC, Jeong JY, Seo KS, Kim H, Cho S, Lee BY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Genomics and Bioinformatics, National Institute of Animal
science, Rural Development Administration, Suwon, Republic of Korea.

Adipocytes mainly function as energy storage and endocrine cells. Adipose tissues
showed the biological and genetic difference based on their depots. The
difference of adipocytes between depots might be influenced by the inherent
genetic programing for adipogenesis. We used RNA-seq technique to investigate the
transcriptomes in 3 adipose tissues of omental (O), subcutaneous (S) and
intramuscular (I) fats in cattle. Sequence reads were obtained from Illumina
HiSeq2000 and mapped to the bovine genome using Tophat2. Differentially expressed
genes (DEG) between adipose tissues were detected by EdgeR. We identified 5797,
2156, and 5455 DEGs in the comparison between OI, OS, and IS respectively and
also found 5657 DEGs in the comparison between the intramuscular and the combined
omental and subcutaneous fats (C) (FDR<0.01). Depot specifically up- and down-
regulated DEGs were 853 in S, 48 in I, and 979 in O. The numbers of DEGs and
functional annotation studies suggested that I had the different genetic profile 
compared to other two adipose tissues. In I, DEGs involved in the developmental
process (eg. EGR2, FAS, and KLF7) were up-regulated and those in the immune
system process were down-regulated. Many DEGs from the adipose tissues were
enriched in the various GO terms of developmental process and KEGG pathway
analysis showed that the ECM-receptor interaction was one of commonly enriched
pathways in all of the 3 adipose tissues and also functioned as a sub-pathway of 
other enriched pathways. However, genes involved in the ECM-receptor interaction 
were differentially regulated depending on the depots. Collagens, main ECM
constituents, were significantly up-regulated in S and integrins, transmembrane
receptors, were up-regulated in I. Different laminins were up-regulated in the
different depots. This comparative transcriptome analysis of three adipose
tissues suggested that the interactions between ECM components and transmembrane 
receptors of fat cells depend on the depot specific adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3689780
PMID: 23805208  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


114. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2013 Jun;18(2):113-29. doi: 10.1111/jns5.12026.

Autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease: from genes to phenotypes.

Tazir M(1), Bellatache M, Nouioua S, Vallat JM.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Neurologie, University Hospital Mustapha Bacha, Alger, Algeria.
meriem.tazir@sante.dz

The prevalence of Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease or hereditary motor and
sensory neuropathy (HMSN) varies in different populations. While in some
countries of Western Europe, the United States and Japan the dominant form of
HMSN is the most frequent, in other countries such as those of the Mediterranean 
Basin, the autosomal recessive form (AR-CMT) is more common. Autosomal recessive 
CMT cases are generally characterized by earlier onset, usually before the age of
2 or 3 years, and rapid clinical progression that results in severe
polyneuropathy and more marked distal limb deformities such as pes equino-varus, 
claw-like hands, and often major spinal deformities. Recent clinical,
morphological and molecular investigations of CMT families with autosomal
recessive inheritance allowed the identification of many genes such as GDAP1,
MTMR2, SBF2, NDRG1, EGR2, SH3TC2, PRX, FGD4, and FIG4, implicated in
demyelinating forms (ARCMT1 or CMT4), and LMNA, MED25, HINT1, GDAP1, LRSAM1,
NEFL, HSPB1 and MFN2 in axonal forms (ARCMT2). However, many patients remain
without genetic diagnosis to date, prompting investigations into ARCMT families
in order to help discover new genes and common pathways. This review summarizes
recent advances regarding the genotypes and corresponding phenotypes of AR-CMT.

© 2013 Peripheral Nerve Society.

PMID: 23781959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 26;288(30):21678-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.476630. Epub
2013 Jun 14.

Cigarette smoke component acrolein modulates chromatin assembly by inhibiting
histone acetylation.

Chen D(1), Fang L, Li H, Tang MS, Jin C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 
New York, New York 10987, USA.

Chromatin structure and gene expression are both regulated by nucleosome
assembly. How environmental factors influence histone nuclear import and the
nucleosome assembly pathway, leading to changes in chromatin organization and
transcription, remains unknown. Acrolein (Acr) is an a,ß-unsaturated aldehyde,
which is abundant in the environment, especially in cigarette smoke. It has
recently been implicated as a potential major carcinogen of smoking-related lung 
cancer. Here we show that Acr forms adducts with histone proteins in vitro and in
vivo and preferentially reacts with free histones rather than with nucleosomal
histones. Cellular fractionation analyses reveal that Acr exposure specifically
inhibits acetylations of N-terminal tails of cytosolic histones H3 and H4,
modifications that are important for nuclear import and chromatin assembly.
Notably, Acr exposure compromises the delivery of histone H3 into chromatin and
increases chromatin accessibility. Moreover, changes in nucleosome occupancy at
several genomic loci are correlated with transcriptional responses to Acr
exposure. Our data provide new insights into mechanisms whereby environmental
factors interact with the genome and influence genome function.

PMCID: PMC3724627
PMID: 23770671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;45(8):1825-32. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.06.003. Epub 2013 Jun 8.

Early growth response 2 (Egr2) plays opposing roles in committing C3H10T1/2 stem 
cells to adipocytes and smooth muscle-like cells.

Wang SS(1), Huang HY, Chen SZ, Li X, Liu Y, Zhang WT, Tang QQ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, The Ministry of Education, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University Shanghai Medical College,
Shanghai 200032, PR China.

Early growth response 2 (Egr2) is a zinc-finger transcription factor that acts as
an important modulator of a variety of physiological processes, such as cell
differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis. Here we showed that Egr2 was
downregulated by bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathways during the
commitment of C3H10T1/2 stem cells to adipocyte lineage. Overexpression of Egr2
completely prevented BMP4-induced adipocyte lineage commitment of C3H10T1/2 stem 
cells, while simultaneously stimulating early smooth muscle-like differentiation.
We also demonstrated that Egr2-induced early smooth muscle-like differentiation
is transforming growth factor ß1-independent. Egr2 can activate the transcription
of early smooth muscle cell specific genes smooth muscle protein 22a and calponin
1. Together, the results indicated a novel role for Egr2 in repressing adipocyte 
lineage commitment and promoting early smooth muscle-like cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23751188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Brain. 2013 Jul;136(Pt 7):2262-78. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt130. Epub 2013 Jun 6.

Epigenetic induction of the Ink4a/Arf locus prevents Schwann cell
overproliferation during nerve regeneration and after tumorigenic challenge.

Gomez-Sanchez JA(1), Gomis-Coloma C, Morenilla-Palao C, Peiro G, Serra E, Serrano
M, Cabedo H.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias de Alicante UMH-CSIC, San Juan de Alicante 03550,
Spain.

The number of Schwann cells is fitted to axonal length in peripheral nerves. This
relationship is lost when tumorigenic stimuli induce uncontrolled Schwann cell
proliferation, generating tumours such us neurofibromas and schwannomas. Schwann 
cells also re-enter the cell cycle following nerve injury during the process of
Wallerian degeneration. In both cases proliferation is finally arrested. We show 
that in neurofibroma, the induction of Jmjd3 (jumonji domain containing 3,
histone lysine demethylase) removes trimethyl groups on lysine-27 of histone-H3
and epigenetically activates the Ink4a/Arf-locus, forcing Schwann cells towards
replicative senescence. Remarkably, blocking this mechanism allows unrestricted
proliferation, inducing malignant transformation of neurofibromas. Interestingly,
our data suggest that in injured nerves, Schwann cells epigenetically activate
the same locus to switch off proliferation and enter the senescence programme.
Indeed, when this pathway is genetically blocked, Schwann cells fail to drop out 
of the cell cycle and continue to proliferate. We postulate that the
Ink4a/Arf-locus is expressed as part of a physiological response that prevents
uncontrolled proliferation of the de-differentiated Schwann cell generated during
nerve regeneration, a response that is also activated to avoid overproliferation 
after tumorigenic stimuli in the peripheral nervous system.

PMID: 23748155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Gene. 2013 Sep 10;526(2):246-50. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.05.055. Epub 2013 Jun
4.

Lack of association of EGR2 variants with bipolar disorder in Japanese
population.

Balan S(1), Yamada K, Iwayama Y, Toyota T, Ohnishi T, Maekawa M, Toyoshima M,
Iwata Y, Suzuki K, Kikuchi M, Ujike H, Inada T, Kunugi H, Ozaki N, Iwata N, Nanko
S, Kato T, Yoshikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Psychiatry, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama
351-0198, Japan.

The early growth response gene 2 (EGR2) has been recently reported to be
associated with bipolar disorder in the Korean population. However replication
studies in independent cohorts of same and different ethnicities are essential
for establishing the credibility of a genotype-phenotype association. With this
notion, in the present study we have performed a replication study of the
reported association of SNPs in EGR2 in a case-control study comprising of 867
unrelated Japanese bipolar disorder patients and 895 age-, sex- and
ethnicity-matched controls. Results showed no significant differences in allele
and genotype frequencies of EGR2 SNPs between bipolar disorder patients and
controls and also in a sex-stratified genetic analysis. The haplotype and
meta-analyses also showed no significant association with bipolar disorder. In
conclusion, this is the first replication study of the previously reported
association of EGR2 with bipolar disorder in a larger sample set and the results 
showed that the EGR2 gene is unlikely to contribute to the susceptibility of
bipolar disorder in a Japanese cohort.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23747400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. FEBS Lett. 2013 Aug 2;587(15):2346-51. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.05.059. Epub
2013 Jun 6.

miR-150 promotes the proliferation of lung cancer cells by targeting P53.

Zhang N(1), Wei X, Xu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Throracic Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.
zhangnidoc@vip.163.com

Lung cancer is one of the most common causes for cancer-related death. Previous
studies suggested that uncontrolled cell proliferation induced by activation of
pro-cancer genes or inhibition of cancer suppressor genes plays an important role
in the pathogenesis of lung cancer. Here, we demonstrate that miR-150 is
aberrantly upregulated in lung cancer tissue and negatively correlates with the
expression of the proapoptotic gene p53 but not EGR2. We show that miR-150
specifically targets the 3'-UTR of p53 and regulates its expression. Inhibition
of miR-150 effectively delays cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis,
accompanied by increased p53 protein expression. Our data reveals the mechanisms 
underlying miR-150 regulated lung cancer pathogenesis, which might be beneficial 
for lung cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23747308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. PLoS One. 2013 May 27;8(5):e63467. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063467. Print 2013.

Gene expression changes under cyclic mechanical stretching in rat retinal glial
(Müller) cells.

Wang X(1), Fan J, Zhang M, Sun Z, Xu G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, Eye and ENT Hospital,
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: The retina is subjected to tractional forces in various conditions. As
the predominant glial element in the retina, Müller cells are active players in
all forms of retinal injury and disease. In this study, we aim to identify
patterns of gene expression changes induced by cyclic mechanical stretching in
Müller cells.
METHODS: Rat Müller cells were seeded onto flexible bottom culture plates and
subjected to a cyclic stretching regimen of 15% equibiaxial stretching for 1 and 
24 h. RNA was extracted and amplified, labeled, and hybridized to rat genome
microarrays. The expression profiles were analyzed using GeneSpring software, and
gene ontology analysis and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
were used to select, annotate, and visualize genes by function and pathway. The
selected genes of interest were further validated by Quantitative Real-time PCR
(qPCR).
RESULTS: Microarray data analysis showed that at 1 and 24 h, the expression of
532 and 991 genes in the Müller cells significantly (t-test, p<0.05) differed
between the mechanically stretched and unstretched groups. Of these genes, 56
genes at 1 h and 62 genes at 24 h showed more than a twofold change in
expression. Several genes related to response to stimulus (e.g., Egr2, IL6), cell
proliferation (e.g., Areg, Atf3), tissue remodeling (e.g., PVR, Loxl2), and
vasculogenesis (e.g., Epha2, Nrn1) were selected and validated by qPCR. KEGG
pathway analysis showed significant changes in MAPK signaling at both time
points.
CONCLUSIONS: Cyclic mechanical strain induces extensive changes in the gene
expression in Müller cells through multiple molecular pathways. These results
indicate the complex mechanoresponsive nature of Müller cells, and they provide
novel insights into possible molecular mechanisms that would account for many
retinal diseases in which the retina is often subjected to mechanical forces,
such as pathological myopia and proliferative vitreoretinopathy.

PMCID: PMC3664568
PMID: 23723984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 12;288(28):20488-98. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.447250. Epub
2013 May 29.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling promotes proliferation and
survival in osteoprogenitors by increasing early growth response 2 (EGR2)
expression.

Chandra A(1), Lan S, Zhu J, Siclari VA, Qin L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Maintaining bone architecture requires continuous generation of osteoblasts from 
osteoprogenitor pools. Our previous study of mice with epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) specifically inactivated in osteoblast lineage cells revealed
that EGFR stimulates bone formation by expanding the population of mesenchymal
progenitors. EGFR ligands are potent regulators for the osteoprogenitor pool, but
the underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. Here we demonstrate that
activation of EGFR increases the number of osteoprogenitors by promoting cell
proliferation and suppressing either serum depletion-induced or TNFa-induced
apoptosis mainly through the MAPK/ERK pathway. Mouse calvarial organ culture
revealed that EGF elevated the number of proliferative cells and decreased the
number of apoptotic cells, which led to increased osteoblasts. Microarray
analysis of MC3T3 cells, an osteoprogenitor cell line, revealed that EGFR
signaling stimulates the expression of MCL1, an antiapoptotic protein, and a
family of EGR transcription factors (EGR1, -2, and -3). The up-regulation of MCL1
and EGR2 by EGF was further confirmed in osteoprogenitors close to the calvarial 
bone surface. Overexpression of NAB2, a co-repressor for EGRs, attenuated the
EGF-induced increase in osteoprogenitor number. Interestingly, knocking down the 
expression of EGR2, but not EGR1 or -3, resulted in a similar effect. Using
inhibitor, adenovirus overexpression, and siRNA approaches, we demonstrate that
EGFR signaling activates the MAPK/ERK pathway to stimulate the expression of
EGR2, which in turn leads to cell growth and MCL1-mediated cell survival. Taken
together, our data clearly demonstrate that EGFR-induced EGR2 expression is
critical for osteoprogenitor maintenance and new bone formation.

PMCID: PMC3711314
PMID: 23720781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2014;26(4):587-98. doi: 10.1071/RD12380.

The novel porcine gene early growth response 4 (Egr4) is differentially expressed
in the ovaries of Erhualian and Pietrain pigs.

Wang J(1), Zhao Y(1), Gu K(1), Yu P(1), Zhang B(1), Wang W(1), Yang J(1), Xu
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Nanjing 210095, China.

The early growth response 4 (Egr4) gene plays a critical role in human and mouse 
fertility. In the present study, Affymetrix microarray gene chips were used to
evaluate differential gene expression in the ovaries between Erhualian and
Pietrain pigs. In all, 487 and 573 transcripts were identified with significantly
higher and lower expression, respectively, in Erhualian compared with Pietrain
sows. The Egr4 gene, one of the differentially expressed genes, was cloned and
its genomic structure was analysed. Egr4 expression is increased 120-fold in
ovaries from Erhualian sows. The full-length cDNA of porcine Egr4 was obtained by
in silico cloning and 5' rapid amplification of cDNA ends. The gene consists of
two exons and its predicted protein contains a Cys2His2 zinc finger structure.
The porcine transcript is alternatively spliced by exon sequence deletion,
producing two different mRNAs differing at the 5' end of Exon 2. Egr4 transcripts
were detected in the central nervous system, including the cerebrum, cerebellum, 
hypothalamus and pituitary gland, and were highly expressed in the ovary. The
Egr4 gene was evaluated as a candidate gene for porcine reproductivity. To
investigate the role of Egr4 in the ovary, Egr4 was knocked down using short
interference (si) RNA in porcine granulosa cells. Knockdown of Egr4 using siRNA
effectively inhibited Egr4 mRNA and protein expression and knockdown
significantly affected the expression of Bax, P450arom, P450scc, Egr1, Egr2, and 
Egr3. In conclusion, these observations establish an important role for Egr4 in
the porcine ovary.

PMID: 23719176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Sep;43(9):2484-96. doi: 10.1002/eji.201243046. Epub 2013 Jul 
1.

Egr2 induced during DC development acts as an intrinsic negative regulator of DC 
immunogenicity.

Miah MA(1), Byeon SE, Ahmed MS, Yoon CH, Ha SJ, Bae YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon,
Gyeonggi-do, South Korea; Department of Physiology, Bangladesh Agricultural
University, Mymensingh, Bangladesh.

Early growth response gene 2 (Egr2), which encodes a zinc finger transcription
factor, is rapidly and transiently induced in various cell types independently of
de novo protein synthesis. Although a role for Egr2 is well established in T-cell
development, Egr2 expression and its biological function in dendritic cells (DCs)
have not yet been described. Here, we demonstrate Egr2 expression during DC
development, and its role in DC-mediated immune responses. Egr2 is expressed in
the later stage of DC development from BM precursor cells. Even at steady state, 
Egr2 is highly expressed in mouse splenic DCs. Egr2-knockdown (Egr2-KD) DCs
showed increased levels of major histocompatability complex (MHC) class I and II 
and co-stimulatory molecules, and enhanced antigen uptake and migratory
capacities. Furthermore, Egr2-KD abolished SOCS1 expression and signal transducer
and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) activation during DC development,
probably resulting in the enhancement of IL-12 expression and Th1 immunogenicity 
of a DC vaccine. DC-mediated cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) activation and
antitumor immunity were significantly enhanced by Egr2-KD, and impaired by Egr2
overexpression in antigen-pulsed DC vaccines. These data suggest that Egr2 acts
as an intrinsic negative regulator of DC immunogenicity and can be an attractive 
molecular target for DC vaccine development.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23716134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Nat Neurosci. 2013 Jul;16(7):856-64. doi: 10.1038/nn.3414. Epub 2013 May 26.

BMP signaling specifies the development of a large and fast CNS synapse.

Xiao L(1), Michalski N, Kronander E, Gjoni E, Genoud C, Knott G, Schneggenburger 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Synaptic Mechanisms, Brain Mind Institute, School of Life
Science, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland.

Large excitatory synapses with multiple active zones ensure reliable and fast
information transfer at specific points in neuronal circuits. However, the
mechanisms that determine synapse size in CNS circuits are largely unknown. Here 
we use the calyx of Held synapse, a major relay in the auditory system, to
identify and study signaling pathways that specify large nerve terminal size and 
fast synaptic transmission. Using genome-wide screening, we identified bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) as candidate signaling molecules in the area of
calyx synapses. Conditional deletion of BMP receptors in the auditory system of
mice led to aberrations of synapse morphology and function specifically at the
calyx of Held, with impaired nerve terminal growth, loss of monoinnervation and
less mature transmitter release properties. Thus, BMP signaling specifies large
and fast-transmitting synapses in the auditory system in a process that shares
homologies with, but also extends beyond, retrograde BMP signaling at Drosophila 
neuromuscular synapses.

PMID: 23708139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;45(8):1585-93. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.04.029. Epub 2013 May 10.

MiR-224 impairs adipocyte early differentiation and regulates fatty acid
metabolism.

Peng Y(1), Xiang H, Chen C, Zheng R, Chai J, Peng J, Jiang S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Swine Genetics and Breeding of Agricultural Ministry,
College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University,
Wuhan, People's Republic of China. pyongdong123@163.com

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small ~22 nucleotide regulatory RNAs that regulate the
stability and translation of cognate messenger RNAs (mRNAs). MicroRNAs
participate in the regulation of adipogenesis and identification of the full
repertoire of MicroRNAs expressed in adipose tissue is likely to improve our
understanding of adipose tissue growth and development significantly. In the
present study, it is found that miR-224-5p abundance decreases first and then
increases during adipogenesis of 3T3-L1 cells. And early growth response 2 (EGR2)
and Acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 4 (ACSL4) are direct targets of 
miR-224-5p. Further studies in mouse 3T3-L1 cell-line shows that miR-224-5p is a 
novel negative regulator of adipocyte differentiation through
post-transcriptional regulation of early growth response 2 during early
adipogenesis. Furthermore, miR-224-5p could regulate fatty acid metabolism
through Acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 4 at terminal
differentiation. It indicates that miR-224 plays different roles on different
stages of adipogenesis.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23665235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Aug;11(8):912-22. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0002-T. Epub
2013 Apr 19.

miR-150 blocks MLL-AF9-associated leukemia through oncogene repression.

Bousquet M(1), Zhuang G, Meng C, Ying W, Cheruku PS, Shie AT, Wang S, Ge G, Wong 
P, Wang G, Safe S, Zhou B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA.

The microRNA miR-150, a critical regulator of hematopoiesis, is downregulated in 
mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL). In this study, miR-150 acts as a potent leukemic
tumor suppressor by blocking the oncogenic properties of leukemic cells. By using
MLL-AF9-transformed cells, we demonstrate that ectopic expression of miR-150
inhibits blast colony formation, cell growth, and increases apoptosis in vitro.
More importantly, ectopic expression of miR-150 in MLL-AF9-transformed cells
completely blocked the development of myeloid leukemia in transplanted mice.
Furthermore, gene expression profiling revealed that miR-150 altered the
expression levels of more than 30 "stem cell signature" genes and many others
that are involved in critical cancer pathways. In addition to the known miR-150
target Myb, we also identified Cbl and Egr2 as bona fide targets and
shRNA-mediated suppression of these genes recapitulated the pro-apoptotic effects
observed in leukemic cells with miR-150 ectopic expression. In conclusion, we
demonstrate that miR-150 is a potent leukemic tumor suppressor that regulates
multiple oncogenes.IMPLICATIONS: These data establish new, key players for the
development of therapeutic strategies to treat MLL-AF9-related leukemia.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23604034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Aug;1833(8):1936-46. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.04.007. Epub 2013 Apr 17.

A role for miR-142-3p in colony-stimulating factor 1-induced monocyte
differentiation into macrophages.

Lagrange B(1), Martin RZ, Droin N, Aucagne R, Paggetti J, Largeot A, Itzykson R, 
Solary E, Delva L, Bastie JN.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de Médecine, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France.

The differentiation of human peripheral blood monocytes into macrophages can be
reproduced ex vivo by culturing the cells in the presence of colony-stimulating
factor 1 (CSF1). Using microarray profiling to explore the role of microRNAs
(miRNAs), we identified a dramatic decrease in the expression of the
hematopoietic specific miR-142-3p. Up- and down-regulation of this miRNA in
primary human monocytes altered CSF1-induced differentiation of monocytes, as
demonstrated by changes in the expression of the cell surface markers CD16 and
CD163. One of the genes whose expression is repressed by miR-142-3p encodes the
transcription factor Early Growth Response 2 (Egr2). In turn, Egr2 associated
with its co-repressor NGFI-A (Nerve Growth Factor-Induced gene-A) binding protein
2 (NAB2) binds to the pre-miR-142-3p promoter to negatively regulate its
expression. Interestingly, the expression of miR-142-3p is abnormally low in
monocytes from patients with the most proliferative forms of chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), and miR-142-3p re-expression in CMML dysplastic
monocytes can improve their differentiation potential. Altogether, miR-142-3p
which functions in a molecular circuitry with Egr2 is an actor of CSF1-induced
differentiation of human monocytes whose expression could be altered in CMML.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23602969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Jun 7;544:89-93. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.03.048. Epub 2013
Apr 9.

Distal segment extracts of the degenerated rat sciatic nerve induce bone marrow
stromal cells to express Schwann cell markers in vitro.

Wang H(1), Zhang H, Liu M, Wang N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital,
Key Laboratory of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, PR, China. whtel@163.com

Bone marrow stromal cells (MSCs) have the ability to support nerve regeneration
when transplanted into lesion sites, but the mechanism is unclear. We
hypothesized that specific factors in the lesioned microenvironment induce the
differentiation of transplanted MSCs into functional Schwann-like cells. To test 
this hypothesis and determine the origin of such factors, we investigated the
effects of different extracts from degenerated rat sciatic nerves on MSCs in
vitro. After 3 days of degeneration, extracts from the distal segment (Ds) and
proximal segment (Ps) of the rat sciatic nerve were used in experiments. After 1 
day of treatment, the morphology of MSCs cultured with Ds extracts were spindle
shaped, and the cells interconnected with each other, followed by gradual loss of
typical morphology during culture. After 7 days of treatment, western blotting
and RT-PCR analyses indicated that the cells cultured with Ds extracts had
significantly higher expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), Sox10,
Oct6, and early growth response 2(Egr2) than that of cells cultured with Ps
extracts and the untreated cells. Our study suggests that, in the
microenvironments of nerve lesions, specific factors induce MSCs to differentiate
into functional Schwann-like cells, which may originate from the Ds of the
degenerated nerve. These results may help to elucidate the mechanisms by which
MSCs function in peripheral nerve repair.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23583596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Neuroscience. 2013 Jul 23;243:89-96. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.03.052.
Epub 2013 Apr 3.

Chronic co-administration of nicotine and methamphetamine causes differential
expression of immediate early genes in the dorsal striatum and nucleus accumbens 
of rats.

Saint-Preux F(1), Bores LR, Tulloch I, Ladenheim B, Kim R, Thanos PK, Volkow ND, 
Cadet JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, NIDA IRP, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Nicotine and methamphetamine (METH) cause addiction by triggering neuroplastic
changes in brain reward pathways though they each engage distinct molecular
targets (nicotine receptors and dopamine transporters respectively). Addiction to
both drugs is very prevalent, with the vast majority of METH users also being
smokers of cigarettes. This co-morbid occurrence thus raised questions about
potential synergistic rewarding effects of the drugs. However, few studies have
investigated the chronic neurobiological changes associated with co-morbid
nicotine and METH addiction. Here we investigated the effects of these two drugs 
alone and in combination on the expression of several immediate early genes
(IEGs) that are sensitive to drug exposures. Chronic exposure to either nicotine 
or METH caused significant decreases in the expression of fosb, fra1, and fra2 in
the nucleus accumbens (NAc) but not in the dorsal striatum whereas the drug
combination increased fra2 expression in both structures. Except for junB mRNA
levels that were decreased by the three drug treatments in the NAc, there were no
significant changes in the Jun family members. Of the Egr family members, NAc
egr2 expression was decreased after nicotine and the drug combination whereas NAc
egr3 was decreased after METH and the drug combination. The drug combination also
increased striatal egr3 expression. The Nr4a family member, nr4a2/nurr1, showed
increased striatal expression after all three drug treatments, while striatal
nr4a3/nor-1 expression was increased by the drug combination whereas NAc
nr4a1/nurr77 was decreased by nicotine and the drug combination. These
observations suggest that, when given in combination, the two drugs exert
distinct effects on the expression of IEGs in dopaminergic projection areas from 
those elicited by each drug alone. The significance of these changes in IEG
expression and in other molecular markers in fostering co-morbid METH and
nicotine abuse needs to be further evaluated.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3665347
PMID: 23562942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Immunol. 2013 Oct;55(3-4):283-91. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2013.03.006. Epub
2013 Mar 30.

Egr2-dependent gene expression profiling and ChIP-Seq reveal novel biologic
targets in T cell anergy.

Zheng Y(1), Zha Y, Spaapen RM, Mathew R, Barr K, Bendelac A, Gajewski TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Immunol. 2013 Dec;56(4):530.

T cell anergy is one of the mechanisms contributing to peripheral tolerance,
particularly in the context of progressively growing tumors and in tolerogenic
treatments promoting allograft acceptance. We recently reported that early growth
response gene 2 (Egr2) is a critical transcription factor for the induction of
anergy in vitro and in vivo, which was identified based on its ability to
regulate the expression of inhibitory signaling molecules diacylglycerol kinase
(DGK)-a and -<U+03B6>. We reasoned that other transcriptional targets of Egr2 might
encode additional factors important for T cell anergy and immune regulation.
Thus, we conducted two sets of genome-wide screens: gene expression profiling of 
wild type versus Egr2-deleted T cells treated under anergizing conditions, and a 
ChIP-Seq analysis to identify genes that bind Egr2 in anergic cells. Merging of
these data sets revealed 49 targets that are directly regulated by Egr2. Among
these are inhibitory signaling molecules previously reported to contribute to T
cell anergy, but unexpectedly, also cell surface molecules and secreted factors, 
including lymphocyte-activation gene 3 (Lag3), Class-I-MHC-restricted T cell
associated molecule (Crtam), Semaphorin 7A (Sema7A), and chemokine CCL1. These
observations suggest that anergic T cells might not simply be functionally inert,
and may have additional functional properties oriented towards other cellular
components of the immune system.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3646929
PMID: 23548837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Immunol. 2013 May 1;190(9):4500-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203158. Epub 2013 Mar
27.

Mast cell FceRI-induced early growth response 2 regulates CC chemokine ligand
1-dependent CD4+ T cell migration.

Wu Z(1), Macneil AJ, Junkins R, Li B, Berman JN, Lin TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University and Izaak
Walton Killam Health Centre, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3K 6R8, Canada.

Mast cells are well positioned in host tissue for detecting environmental
signals, including allergens, leading to activation of the high-affinity IgE
receptor FceRI, and initiating a signaling cascade that perpetuates the
production of biologically potent mediators, including chemokines. We have
identified a novel target of mast cell FceRI activity in the transcription factor
early growth response 2 (Egr2) and sought to characterize its function therein.
Egr2 was transiently activated following FceRI-mediated signaling, targeted the
promoter of the chemokine CCL1, and was critical for allergen-induced mast cell
CCL1 production. Egr2-deficient mast cells were incapable of directing CD4(+) T
cell migration via the CCL1-CCR8 axis. In a model of allergic asthma,
reconstitution of mast cell-deficient mice with Egr2-deficient mast cells
demonstrated that mast cell Egr2 was essential for migration of CD4(+) T cells to
the inflamed lung. These findings position Egr2 as a critical regulator of mast
cell-directed CD4(+) T cell migration.

PMID: 23536637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 24;288(21):14906-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.454355. Epub
2013 Mar 27.

Regulation of primary response genes in B cells.

Fowler T(1), Suh H, Buratowski S, Roy AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sackler School of Biomedical Science, Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

Deregulated gene expression in B cells often results in various lymphoid
malignancies and immune deficiencies. Therefore, understanding signal-induced
gene regulatory pathways involved during B cell activation is important to tackle
pathologies associated with altered B cell function. Primary response genes
(PRGs) are rapidly induced upon signaling in B cells and other cell types and
often encode oncogenic transcription factors, which are associated with various
malignancies. However, an important issue that remains unclear is whether the
fundamental mechanism of activation of these genes is essentially the same under 
such diverse conditions. c-fos is a PRG that is induced rapidly upon activation
of B cells in response to a wide variety of stimuli. Using the c-fos gene as a
candidate PRG, we addressed here how it is regulated in response to
tumor-promoting and antigen-mimicking signals. Our results show that although the
mRNA was induced and extinguished within minutes in response to both signals,
surprisingly, apparently full-length unspliced pre-mRNA persisted for several
hours in both cases. However, although the mitogenic signal resulted in a more
sustained mRNA response that persisted for 4 h, antigenic signaling resulted in a
more robust but very transient response that lasted for <1 h. Moreover, the
pre-mRNA profile exhibited significant differences between the two signals.
Additionally, the splicing regulation was also observed with egr-2, but not with 
c-myc. Together, these results suggest a previously underappreciated regulatory
step in PRG expression in B cells.

PMCID: PMC3663512
PMID: 23536186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2013 Jun;114(11):1519-26. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01500.2012. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

Primary gene response to mechanical loading in healing rat Achilles tendons.

Eliasson P(1), Andersson T, Hammerman M, Aspenberg P.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedics, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of
Health Science, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
pernilla.eliasson@gmail.com

Loading can stimulate tendon healing. In healing rat Achilles tendons, we have
found more than 150 genes upregulated or downregulated 3 h after one loading
episode. We hypothesized that these changes were preceded by a smaller number of 
regulatory genes and thus performed a microarray 15 min after a short loading
episode, to capture the primary response to loading. We transected the Achilles
tendon of 54 rats and allowed them to heal. The hind limbs were unloaded by
tail-suspension during the entire experiment, except during the loading episode. 
The healing tendon tissue was analyzed by mechanical testing, microarray, and
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Mechanical testing
showed that 5 min of loading each day for 4 days created stronger tissue. The
microarray analysis after one loading episode identified 15 regulated genes. Ten 
genes were analyzed in a repeat experiment with new rats using qRT-PCR. This
confirmed the increased expression of four genes: early growth response 2 (Egr2),
c-Fos, FosB, and regulation of G protein signaling 1 (Rgs1). The other genes were
unaltered. We also analyzed the expression of early growth response 1 (Egr1),
which is often co-regulated with c-Fos or Egr2, and found that this was also
increased after loading. Egr1, Egr2, c-Fos, and FosB are transcription factors
that can be triggered by numerous stimuli. However, Egr1 and Egr2 are necessary
for normal tendon development, and can induce ectopic expression of tendon
markers. The five regulated genes appear to constitute a general activation
machinery. The further development of gene regulation might depend on the tissue 
context.

PMID: 23519232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58325. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058325. Epub 2013 Mar 11.

Inactivation of DNA-dependent protein kinase promotes heat-induced apoptosis
independently of heat-shock protein induction in human cancer cell lines.

Okazawa S(1), Furusawa Y, Kariya A, Hassan MA, Arai M, Hayashi R, Tabuchi Y,
Kondo T, Tobe K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan.

The inhibition of DNA damage response pathway seems to be an attractive strategy 
for cancer therapy. It was previously reported that in rodent cells exposed to
heat stress, cell growth was promoted by the activity of DNA-dependent protein
kinase (DNA-PK), an enzyme involved in DNA non-homologous end joining (NHEJ)
required for double-strand break repair. The absence of a functioning DNA-PK was 
associated with down regulation of heat shock protein 70 (HSP70). The objective
of this study is thus to investigate the role of DNA-PK inhibition in
heat-induced apoptosis in human cell lines. The inhibitors of phosphorylation of 
the DNA-PK catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) at Ser2056, such as NU7026 and NU7441,
were utilized. Furthermore, knock down of DNA-PKcs was carried out using small
interfering RNA (siDNA-PKcs). For heat exposure, cells were placed in water bath 
at 44°C for 60 min. Apoptosis was evaluated after 24 h incubation flow
cytometrically. Proteins were extracted after 24 h and analyzed for HSP70 and
HSP40 expression by Western blotting. Total RNA was extracted 6 h after treatment
and analyzed using a GeneChip® microarray system to identify and select the
up-regulated genes (=1.5 fold). The results showed an enhancement in heat-induced
apoptosis in absence of functioning DNA-PKcs. Interestingly, the expression
levels of HSP70 and HSP40 were elevated in the absence of DNA-PKcs under heat
stress. The results of genetic network analysis showed that HSPs and JUN genes
were up-regulated independently of DNA-PKcs in exposed parent and knock out
cells. In the presence of functioning DNA-PKcs, there was an observed
up-regulation of anti-apoptotic genes, such as NR1D1, whereas in the absence of
DNA-PKcs the pro-apoptotic genes, such as EGR2, were preferentially up-regulated.
From these findings, we concluded that in human cells, the inactivation of
DNA-PKcs can promote heat-induced apoptosis independently of heat-shock proteins.

PMCID: PMC3594312
PMID: 23505488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Mar 29;433(1):96-101. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.02.058. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

NF<U+03BA>B and MAPK signalling pathways mediate TNFa-induced Early Growth Response gene
transcription leading to aromatase expression.

To SQ(1), Knower KC, Clyne CD.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Drug Discovery Laboratory, Prince Henry's Institute of Medical
Research, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia.

The Early Growth Response genes EGR2 and EGR3 play an important role in mediating
TNFa induced aromatase expression via the adipose specific promoter PI.4. The
upstream signalling pathway stimulated by TNFa to initiate this is unknown. The
aim of this present study was to determine the signalling pathways activated by
TNFa which result in EGR2 and EGR3 transcription, and ultimately activation of
PI.4. The NF<U+03BA>B inhibitor BAY-11-7082 dose-dependently inhibited transcription of 
EGR2 and EGR3 mRNA as well as total and PI.4-specific CYP19A1 mRNA. The MAPK
pathway inhibitor U0126, inhibitor of MEK1/2 had the same effect, however
inhibition of c-Jun and JNK1,2,3 with SP600125 did not lead to down-regulation.
We provide evidence for the first time that EGR2 and EGR3 are regulated by NF<U+03BA>B
and MAPK signalling pathways downstream of TNFa stimulation in breast adipose
fibroblasts, and that this in turn is upstream of CYP19A1 transcription via PI.4.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23485457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Cells. 2013 Apr;35(4):298-304. doi: 10.1007/s10059-013-2302-0. Epub 2013 Feb 
26.

Hypermethylation of EBF3 and IRX1 genes in synovial fibroblasts of patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis.

Park SH(1), Kim SK, Choe JY, Moon Y, An S, Park MJ, Kim DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Arthritis and Autoimmunity Research
Center, School of Medicine, Catholic University of Daegu, Daegu 705-718, Korea.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, systemic inflammatory disease of unknown 
origin, which exhibits a complex heterogeneity in its pathophysiological
background, resulting in differential responses to a range of therapies and poor 
long-term prognosis. RA synovial fibroblasts (RASFs) are key player cells in RA
pathogenesis. Identification of DNA methylation biomarkers is a field that
provides potential for improving the process of diagnosis and prognosis of
various human diseases. We utilized a genome-wide technique, methylated DNA
isolation assay (MeDIA), in combination with a high resolution CpG microarray for
discovery of novel hypermethylated genes in RASFs. Thirteen genes (APEX1, EBF3,
EGR2, EN1, IRX1, IRX6, KIF12, LHX2, MIPOL1, SGTA, SIN3A, TOLLIP, and ZHX2) with
three consecutive hypermethylated probes were isolated as candidate genes through
two CpG microarrays. Pyrosequencing assay was performed to validate the
methylation status of TGF-ß signaling components, EBF3 and IRX1 genes in RASFs
and osteoarthritis (OA) SFs. Hypermethylation at CpG sites in the EBF3 and IRX1
genes was observed with a high methylation index (MI) in RASFs (52.5% and 41.4%, 
respectively), while a lower MI was observ ed in OASFs and h ealthy SFs (13.2%
for EBF3 and 4.3% for IRX1). In addition, RT-PCR analysis showed a remarkable
decrease in their mRNA expression in the RA group, compared with the OA or
healthy control, and their reduction levels correlated with MI. The current
findings suggest that methylation-associated down-regulation of EBF3 and IRX1
genes may play an important role in a pathogenic effect of TGF-ß on RASFs.
However, further clinical validation with large numbers of patients is needed in 
order to confirm our findings.

PMCID: PMC3887890
PMID: 23456299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2013;36(1):40-6.

[Toward therapeutic application of IL-10-producing regulatory T cells].

[Article in Japanese]

Iwasaki Y(1), Fujio K, Okamura T, Yanai A, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo.

IL-10 is an anti-inflammatory cytokine with an important role in preventing
inflammatory and autoimmune responses. IL-10 is also important for suppressive
function of inducible regulatory T (iTreg) cells, several types of which were
reported in succession. Type1 regulatory T (Tr1) cell is a representative of
IL-10-prroducing regulatory T cells. Although specific surface markers or origin 
of Tr1 cells have not fully been clarified yet, IL-27 was recently reported to
induce IL-10 production in T cells and be an inducer of Tr1 cells. We previously 
reported that CD4(+)CD25(-)lymphocyte activation gene (LAG-3)(+) Treg (LAG3(+)
Treg) is one of the peripherally inducible Tregs and functions as an
immune-regulator through IL-10 production. We found that the expression level of 
Egr-2, a transcription factor required for T cell anergy induction, is elevated
in LAG3(+) Treg and that forced expression of Egr-2 induces LAG-3 expression and 
IL-10 production. Egr-2 has been suggested to be a key player of regulatory
function in LAG3(+) Treg. In this study, we review Tr1 cells and the mechanism of
IL-10 induction by IL-27 in T cells. Also, we introduce LAG3(+) Treg and discuss 
the therapeutic potential of these regulatory T cells.

PMID: 23445731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Brain. 2013 Feb;136(Pt 2):549-63. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws353.

Loss of SOX10 function contributes to the phenotype of human Merlin-null
schwannoma cells.

Doddrell RD(1), Dun XP, Shivane A, Feltri ML, Wrabetz L, Wegner M, Sock E,
Hanemann CO, Parkinson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Plymouth, Devon, PL6
8BU, UK.

Loss of the Merlin tumour suppressor causes abnormal de-differentiation and
proliferation of Schwann cells and formation of schwannoma tumours in patients
with neurofibromatosis type 2. Within the mature peripheral nerve the normal
development, differentiation and maintenance of myelinating and non-myelinating
Schwann cells is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include
SOX10, OCT6 (now known as POU3F1), NFATC4 and KROX20 (also known as Egr2). We
have examined for the first time how their regulation of Schwann cell development
is disrupted in primary human schwannoma cells. We find that induction of both
KROX20 and OCT6 is impaired, whereas enforced expression of KROX20 drives both
myelin gene expression and cell cycle arrest in Merlin-null cells. Importantly,
we show that human schwannoma cells have reduced expression of SOX10 protein and 
messenger RNA. Analysis of mouse SOX10-null Schwann cells shows they display many
of the characteristics of human schwannoma cells, including increased expression 
of platelet derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGFRB) messenger RNA and
protein, enhanced proliferation, increased focal adhesions and schwannoma-like
morphology. Correspondingly, reintroduction of SOX10 into human Merlin-null cells
restores the ability of these cells to induce KROX20 and myelin protein zero
(MPZ), localizes NFATC4 to the nucleus, reduces cell proliferation and suppresses
PDGFRB expression. Thus, we propose that loss of the SOX10 protein, which is
vital for normal Schwann cell development, is also key to the pathology of
Merlin-null schwannoma tumours.

PMCID: PMC3572932
PMID: 23413263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Curr Opin Immunol. 2013 Apr;25(2):161-7. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2013.01.003. Epub
2013 Feb 9.

Transcriptional regulation of the NKT cell lineage.

Constantinides MG(1), Bendelac A.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Immunology and Department of Pathology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

How expression of canonical semi-invariant TCRs leads to innate-like effector
differentiation is a central enigma of NKT cell development. NKT thymic
precursors undergo elevated TCR signals leading to increased Egr2, which directly
induces their signature transcription factor, PLZF. PLZF is necessary and
sufficient to induce a multipotent, unbiased effector program that precedes
terminal differentiation into T-bet(high) NK1.1(+) (NKT1) cells and recently
identified NKT2 and NKT17 sublineages. Major variations in polarized NKT
sublineages have been uncovered in different mouse strains and in several
mutants, with direct impact on NKT cell function but also, unexpectedly, on the
development and function of conventional T cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3647452
PMID: 23402834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Immunol. 2013 Mar 1;190(5):2121-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202145. Epub 2013 Jan
25.

A role for Ly108 in the induction of promyelocytic zinc finger transcription
factor in developing thymocytes.

Dutta M(1), Kraus ZJ, Gomez-Rodriguez J, Hwang SH, Cannons JL, Cheng J, Lee SY,
Wiest DL, Wakeland EK, Schwartzberg PL.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The promyelocytic zinc finger transcription factor (PLZF) is required for the
development of activated phenotypes in NKT and other innate T lymphocytes.
Although strong TCR stimulation has been implicated in the induction of PLZF, the
factors regulating PLZF expression are incompletely understood. We show in this
study that costimulation of preselection double-positive thymocytes through the
signaling lymphocyte activation molecule family receptor Ly108 markedly enhanced 
PLZF expression compared with that induced by TCR stimulation alone.
Costimulation with Ly108 increased expression of early growth response protein
(Egr)-2 and binding of Egr-2 to the promoter of Zbtb16, which encodes PLZF, and
resulted in PLZF levels similar to those seen in NKT cells. In contrast,
costimulation with anti-CD28 failed to enhance Egr-2 binding and Zbtb16
expression. Moreover, mice lacking Ly108 showed decreased numbers of
PLZF-expressing CD4(+) T cells. Together, these results support a potential role 
for Ly108 in the induction of PLZF.

PMCID: PMC3578000
PMID: 23355739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Apr;93(4):561-71. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1211606. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

Leptin up-regulates TLR2 in human monocytes.

Jaedicke KM(1), Roythorne A, Padget K, Todryk S, Preshaw PM, Taylor JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Newcastle University, Framlington Place, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
katrin.jaedicke@ncl.ac.uk

The adipokine leptin elicits changes in the expression of the activation markers 
CD40 and CD69 in PBMCs and DCs, yet its effect on PRRs remains to be elucidated. 
Serum leptin concentrations are elevated in obesity and T2DM, which are both
diseases associated with a proinflammatory state. We therefore investigated a
possible role for leptin in monocyte TLR and CD14 expression. Leptin increased
TLR2 cell-surface and mRNA expression in THP-1 and primary human monocytes. In
contrast, leptin had no effect on monocyte TLR4 expression in THP-1 or primary
monocytes. CD14 cell-surface and mRNA expression were increased after leptin
stimulation in THP-1 monocytes. However, no change in cell-surface CD14
expression was observed after leptin treatment in primary human monocytes. Leptin
also up-regulated the expression of PU.1 and EGR2, transcription factors involved
in myeloid cell differentiation. Additionally, leptin potentiated Escherichia
coli and Porphyromonas gingivalis LPS-induced TNF-a secretion in THP-1 monocytes.
In conclusion, we show that leptin and LPS differentially influence monocyte
phenotype and demonstrate, for the first time, a regulatory effect of leptin on
the monocyte expression of TLR2. Leptin-stimulated TLR2 expression may potentiate
innate immunity and inflammation in conditions of hyperleptinemia, such as
obesity and T2DM.

PMID: 23341537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Feb;138(1):193-203. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2413-5.
Epub 2013 Jan 22.

Involvement of early growth response factors in TNFa-induced aromatase expression
in breast adipose.

To SQ(1), Simpson ER, Knower KC, Clyne CD.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Drug Discovery Laboratory, Prince Henry's Institute of Medical
Research, PO BOX 5152, Clayton, VIC 3168, Australia.

Expression of the oestrogen producing enzyme, aromatase, is regulated in a
tissue-specific manner by its encoding gene CYP19A1. In post-menopausal women,
the major site for oestrogen production in the breast is the adipose, where
CYP19A1 transcription is driven by the distal promoter I.4 (PI.4). Transcripts
via this promoter are also elevated in breast adipose fibroblasts (BAFs) adjacent
to a tumour. PI.4 expression is stimulated by a number of cytokines, and TNFa is 
one such factor. The transcriptional mechanisms induced by TNFa to stimulate PI.4
are poorly characterised. We show that the early growth response (Egr)
transcription factors play an important role in the TNFa-induced signalling
pathway resulting in elevated PI.4 transcription. TNFa treatment of BAFs
increases mRNA levels of all four Egr family members, with EGR2 being the most
highly expressed. Overexpression of EGR2 causes an increase in endogenous CYP19A1
expression in preadipocyte Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome cells, driven by
increases in PI.4-specific transcripts. PI.4 luciferase reporter activity is
increased in a dose-dependent manner by EGR2, EGR3 and EGR4, with EGR2 showing
the most potent activation of promoter activity. Deletion analysis indicates that
this promoter activity is being indirectly mediated by a short region of the
promoter not containing any previously characterised binding sites, and we
further show that EGR2 does not bind directly or indirectly to this promoter
region. However, siRNA knockdown of the Egrs reduces the total and PI.4-derived
CYP19A1 transcription in BAFs. These studies unveil a novel component of the
aromatase gene regulatory network and further enhance the complexity of oestrogen
production in the breast.

PMID: 23338760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Mar 1;536:69-73. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.12.053. Epub 2013
Jan 16.

Chronic treatment with LY341495 decreases 5-HT(2A) receptor binding and
hallucinogenic effects of LSD in mice.

Moreno JL(1), Holloway T, Rayannavar V, Sealfon SC, González-Maeso J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 1425 Madison Avenue,
Box 1229, New York, NY 10029, United States.

Hallucinogenic drugs, such as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), mescaline and
psilocybin, alter perception and cognitive processes. All hallucinogenic drugs
have in common a high affinity for the serotonin 5-HT(2A) receptor. Metabotropic 
glutamate 2/3 (mGlu2/3) receptor ligands show efficacy in modulating the cellular
and behavioral responses induced by hallucinogenic drugs. Here, we explored the
effect of chronic treatment with the mGlu2/3 receptor antagonist
2S-2-amino-2-(1S,2S-2-carboxycyclopropan-1-yl)-3-(xanth-9-yl)-propionic acid
(LY341495) on the hallucinogenic-like effects induced by LSD (0.24mg/kg). Mice
were chronically (21 days) treated with LY341495 (1.5mg/kg), or vehicle, and
experiments were carried out one day after the last injection. Chronic treatment 
with LY341495 down-regulated [(3)H]ketanserin binding in somatosensory cortex of 
wild-type, but not mGlu2 knockout (KO), mice. Head-twitch behavior, and
expression of c-fos, egr-1 and egr-2, which are responses induced by
hallucinogenic 5-HT(2A) agonists, were found to be significantly decreased by
chronic treatment with LY341495. These findings suggest that repeated blockade of
the mGlu2 receptor by LY341495 results in reduced 5-HT(2A) receptor-dependent
hallucinogenic effects of LSD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3578056
PMID: 23333599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 15;431(3):437-43. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.12.150. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

Differential expression analysis throughout the weaning period in the mouse
cerebral cortex.

Maeda N(1), Kawakami S, Ohmoto M, le Coutre J, Vinyes-Pares G, Arigoni F, Okada
S, Abe K, Aizawa H, Misaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

At weaning, mammals switch from drinking mother's milk to eating foods of
environmental origin. These foods contain natural compounds with novel tastes and
textures, which are provided to the young for the first time following the
termination of breastfeeding. This novel eating experience may alter the
cognitive brain function of mammalian babies, increasing their reactions to their
food environments. Because the cerebral cortex is a central organ for cognition
and learning, we investigated differences in whole-gene expression profiles in
the mouse cerebral cortex using microarray analysis before and after weaning. Of 
45,037 murine genes, 35 genes were upregulated and 31 genes were downregulated,
in response to weaning. In particular, immediate early genes, molecular
chaperones, and myelin-related genes were upregulated. In situ hybridization
analysis revealed that the mRNA for an immediate early gene, Egr-2/KROX-20, was
transported from the nucleus to the cell body at layer 5/6 of the somatosensory
cortex during weaning. In contrast, in animals without any food supply other than
mother's milk, Egr-2/KROX-20 mRNA was retained within the nucleus at the
somatosensory cortex. These data suggest that the novel experience of food intake
modulates gene expression profiles in the murine cerebral cortex at the weaning
stage.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23333325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2013 Jan;17(1):1-7.

Significant pathways detection in osteoporosis based on the bibliometric network.

Sun GJ(1), Guo T, Chen Y, Xu B, Guo JH, Zhao JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Osteoporosis is a significant public health issue worldwide. The
underlying mechanism of osteoporosis is an imbalance between bone resorption and 
bone formation. However, the exact pathology is still unclear, and more related
genes are on demand.
AIM: Here, we aim to identify the differentially expressed genes in osteoporosis 
patients and control.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Biblio-MetReS, a tool to reconstruct gene and protein
networks from automated literature analysis, was used for identifying potential
interactions among target genes. Relevant signaling pathways were also identified
through pathway enrichment analysis.
RESULTS: Our results showed that 56 differentially expressed genes were
identified. Of them, STAT1, CXCL10, SOCS3, ADM, THBS1, SOD2, and ERG2 have been
demonstrated involving in osteoporosis. Further, a bibliometric network was
constructed between DEGs and other genes through the Biblio-MetReS.
CONCLUSIONS: The results showed that STAT1 could interact with CXCL10 through
Toll-like receptor signaling pathway and Chemokine signaling pathway. STAT1
interacted with SOCS3 through JAK/STAT pathway.

PMID: 23329517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Iran J Parasitol. 2012;7(4):8-16.

Molecular Characterization of Echinococcus granulosus from Hydatid Cysts Isolated
from Human and Animals in Golestan Province, North of Iran.

Gholami Sh(1), Sosari M, Fakhar M, Sharif M, Daryani A, Hashemi M, Vahadi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology and Mycology, Faculty of Medicine, Mazandaran
University of Medical Sciences, Sari, Iran.

BACKGROUND: The aim of the present study was to determine the molecular
characteristics of Echinococcus granulosus from paraffin-embedded tissues of
hydatid cysts isolated from human and protoscoleces of hydatid cysts from sheep, 
cattle and camel isolates using PCR- RFLP of ITS1- rDNA analysis in Golestan
Province, northern Iran.
METHODS: E. granulosus isolates from human patients infected with hydatid cyst
and protoscoleces from hydatid cysts of sheep, cattle and camel isolates were
collected from different hospitals and the abattoir throughout the Golestan
Province. In all, 60 E. granulosus genomic DNA were extracted and examined by PCR
- ITS1 of rDNA and amplified using BD1 / 4S and EGF1 / EGR2 primers, followed by 
RFLP using Alu1, Msp1 and TaqI restriction enzymes.
RESULTS: The PCR-ITS1 products obtained from sheep, cattle and human isolates
were similar to sheep strain (1000 bp and 391 bp). Majority of the camel samples 
yielded 295 bp DNA bands. RFLP -ITS1 of E. granulosus with Taq1 in human, sheep
and cattle isolates showed similar patterns in the number and size of DNA. RFLP
methods in camel isolates showed a different genotype, using Taq1, whereas no DNA
bands were observed using Alu1 in camel and human isolates. Therefore, two
clearly distinguishable banding patterns of E. granulosus were obtained with the 
three enzymes, which separating human, sheep and cattle isolates from the camel
origin.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate the possible of transmission of the G1 and G6
genotypes of E. granulosus between livestock animals and human in Golestan
Province.

PMCID: PMC3537467
PMID: 23323086  [PubMed]


147. Immunity. 2013 Feb 21;38(2):237-49. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.09.012. Epub 2013 
Jan 11.

The transcription factor NFAT exhibits signal memory during serial T cell
interactions with antigen-presenting cells.

Marangoni F(1), Murooka TT, Manzo T, Kim EY, Carrizosa E, Elpek NM, Mempel TR.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Interactions with antigen-presenting cells (APCs) interrupt T cell migration
through tissues and trigger signaling pathways that converge on the activation
of transcriptional regulators, including nuclear factor of activated T cells
(NFAT), which control T cell function and differentiation. Both stable and
unstable modes of cognate T cell-APC interactions have been observed in vivo, but
the functional significance of unstable, serial contacts has remained unclear.
Here we used multiphoton intravital microscopy in lymph nodes and tumors to show 
that while NFAT nuclear import was fast (t(1/2 max)~1 min), nuclear export was
slow (t(1/2)~20 min) in T cells. During delayed export, nuclear NFAT constituted 
a short-term imprint of transient TCR signals and remained transcriptionally
active for the T cell tolerance gene Egr2, but not for the effector gene Ifng,
which required continuous TCR triggering for expression. This provides a
potential mechanistic basis for the observation that a predominance of unstable
APC interactions correlates with the induction of T cell tolerance.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3582823
PMID: 23313588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Stem Cells Int. 2012;2012:428403. doi: 10.1155/2012/428403. Epub 2012 Dec 6.

Early growth response genes signaling supports strong paracrine capability of
mesenchymal stem cells.

Tamama K(1), Barbeau DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

MSCs provide a promising method for cell therapy through their wound healing and 
tissue regenerative properties. Originally, MSCs' role in wound healing was
thought to be tied to their multipotency, but it is now accepted that MSCs
mediate the healing process through their strong paracrine capability. EGF was
shown to facilitate in vitro expansion of MSCs without altering multipotency. Our
previous data suggest that the molecular machinery underlying MSCs' strong
paracrine capability lies downstream of EGFR signaling, and we focus on
transcription factors EGR1 and EGR2. Evidence suggests that EGR1 regulates
angiogenic and fibrogenic factor production in MSCs, and an EGFR-EGR1-EGFR
ligands autocrine loop is one of the underlying mechanisms supporting their
strong paracrine machinery through EGR1. EGR2 appears to regulate the expression 
of immunomodulatory molecules. Chronic nonhealing wounds are ischemic,
inflammatory, and often fibrotic, and the hypoxic micro-environment of these
wounds may compromise MSCs' wound healing properties in vivo by upregulating the 
EGR1's fibrogenic effects and downregulating the EGR2's immuno-modulatory
effects. Thus, these transcription factors can be potential targets in the
optimization of cell-based therapies. Further study in vitro is required to
understand MSCs' paracrine machinery and to optimize it as a tool for effective
cell-based therapies.

PMCID: PMC3529451
PMID: 23304166  [PubMed]


149. Dev Neurobiol. 2013 May;73(5):384-98. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22069. Epub 2013 Feb 27.

Embryonic origins of the mouse superior olivary complex.

Marrs GS(1), Morgan WJ, Howell DM, Spirou GA, Mathers PH.

Author information: 
(1)Sensory Neuroscience Research Center, West Virginia University School of
Medicine, Morgantown, WV 26508, USA.

Many areas of the central nervous system are organized into clusters of cell
groups, with component cell groups exhibiting diverse but related functions. One 
such cluster, the superior olivary complex (SOC), is located in the ventral
auditory brainstem in mammals. The SOC is an obligatory contact point for most
projection neurons of the ventral cochlear nucleus and plays central roles in
many aspects of monaural and binaural information processing. Despite their
important interrelated functions, little is known about the embryonic origins of 
SOC nuclei, due in part to a paucity of developmental markers to distinguish
individual cell groups. In this report, we present a collection of novel markers 
for the developing SOC nuclei in mice, including the transcription factors FoxP1,
MafB, and Sox2, and the lineage-marking transgenic line En1-Cre. We use these
definitive markers to examine the rhombic lip and rhombomeric origins of SOC
nuclei and demonstrate that they can serve to uniquely identify SOC nuclei and
subnuclei in newborn pups. The markers are also useful in identifying distinct
nuclear domains within the presumptive SOC as early as embryonic day (E) 14.5,
well before morphological distinction of individual nuclei is evident. These
findings indicate that the mediolateral and dorsoventral position of SOC nuclei
characteristic of the adult brainstem is established during early neurogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4217651
PMID: 23303740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Brain Res. 2013 May 20;1511:115-25. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.12.017. Epub
2012 Dec 19.

Egr2-neurons control the adult respiratory response to hypercapnia.

Ray RS(1), Corcoran AE, Brust RD, Soriano LP, Nattie EE, Dymecki SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

`The early growth response 2 transcription factor, Egr2, establishes a population
of brainstem neurons essential for normal breathing at birth. Egr2-null mice die 
perinatally of respiratory insufficiency characterized by subnormal respiratory
rate and severe apneas. Here we bypass this lethality using a noninvasive
pharmacogenetic approach to inducibly perturb neuron activity postnatally, and
ask if Egr2-neurons control respiration in adult mice. We found that the normal
ventilatory increase in response to elevated tissue CO2 was impaired, blunted by 
63.1 ± 8.7% after neuron perturbation due to deficits in both respiratory
amplitude and frequency. By contrast, room-air breathing was unaffected,
suggesting that the drive for baseline breathing may not require those
Egr2-neurons manipulated here. Of the multiple brainstem sites proposed to affect
ventilation in response to hypercapnia, only the retrotrapezoid nucleus, a
portion of the serotonergic raphé, and a portion of the A5 nucleus have a history
of Egr2 expression. We recently showed that acute inhibition of serotonergic
neurons en masse blunts the CO2 chemoreflex in adults, causing a difference in
hypercapnic response of ~50% after neuron perturbation through effects on
respiratory amplitude only. The suppressed respiratory frequency upon
perturbation of Egr2-neurons thus may stem from non-serotonergic neurons within
the Egr2 domain. Perturbation of Egr2-neurons did not affect body temperature,
even on exposure to ambient 4°C. These findings support a model in which
Egr2-neurons are a critical component of the respiratory chemoreflex into
adulthood. Methodologically, these results highlight how pharmacogenetic
approaches allow neuron function to be queried in unanesthetized adult animals,
reaching beyond the roadblocks of developmental lethality and compensation as
well as the anatomical disturbances associated with invasive methods. This
article is part of a Special Issue entitled Optogenetics (7th BRES).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3947592
PMID: 23261662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Brain. 2012 Dec;135(Pt 12):3551-66. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws299.

Curcumin derivatives promote Schwann cell differentiation and improve neuropathy 
in R98C CMT1B mice.

Patzkó A(1), Bai Y, Saporta MA, Katona I, Wu X, Vizzuso D, Feltri ML, Wang S,
Dillon LM, Kamholz J, Kirschner D, Sarkar FH, Wrabetz L, Shy ME.

Author information: 
(1)Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Drive, 1188
Medical Laboratories, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Erratum in
    Brain. 2014 Dec;137(Pt 12):e316.

Comment in
    Brain. 2012 Dec;135(Pt 12):3527-8.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1B is caused by mutations in myelin protein
zero. R98C mice, an authentic model of early onset Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
type 1B, develop neuropathy in part because the misfolded mutant myelin protein
zero is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum where it activates the unfolded
protein response. Because oral curcumin, a component of the spice turmeric, has
been shown to relieve endoplasmic reticulum stress and decrease the activation of
the unfolded protein response, we treated R98C mutant mice with daily gastric
lavage of curcumin or curcumin derivatives starting at 4 days of age and analysed
them for clinical disability, electrophysiological parameters and peripheral
nerve morphology. Heterozygous R98C mice treated with curcumin dissolved in
sesame oil or phosphatidylcholine curcumin performed as well as wild-type
littermates on a rotarod test and had increased numbers of large-diameter axons
in their sciatic nerves. Treatment with the latter two compounds also increased
compound muscle action potential amplitudes and the innervation of neuromuscular 
junctions in both heterozygous and homozygous R98C animals, but it did not
improve nerve conduction velocity, myelin thickness, G-ratios or myelin period.
The expression of c-Jun and suppressed cAMP-inducible POU (SCIP)-transcription
factors that inhibit myelination when overexpressed-was also decreased by
treatment. Consistent with its role in reducing endoplasmic reticulum stress,
treatment with curcumin dissolved in sesame oil or phosphatidylcholine curcumin
was associated with decreased X-box binding protein (XBP1) splicing. Taken
together, these data demonstrate that treatment with curcumin dissolved in sesame
oil or phosphatidylcholine curcumin improves the peripheral neuropathy of R98C
mice by alleviating endoplasmic reticulum stress, by reducing the activation of
unfolded protein response and by promoting Schwann cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3577101
PMID: 23250879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Pharmacol Rep. 2012;64(5):1091-104.

Effects of morphine on immediate-early gene expression in the striatum of
C57BL/6J and DBA/2J mice.

Ziólkowska B(1), Korostynski M, Piechota M, Kubik J, Przewlocki R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuropharmacology, Institute of Pharmacology, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Smetna 12, PL 31-343 Kraków, Poland. nfziolko@cyf-kr.edu.pl

BACKGROUND: Immediate early gene (IEG) induction elicited by drugs of abuse may
contribute to development of plastic changes in the brain responsible for
drug-induced behavioral changes leading to addiction. The aim of the present
study was to characterize the changes in IEG expression in the striatum and
nucleus accumbens produced by an acute or chronic administration of morphine.
METHODS: In order to search for a possible relationship between morphine-induced 
IEG expression and behavior, the experiment was performed on two inbred strains
of mice, C57BL/6J and DBA/2J, which differ markedly in their sensitivity to the
rewarding and locomotor stimulatory actions of opiates. Gene expression was
assessed using RT-PCR and DNA microarrays.
RESULTS: The experiments demonstrated a prolonged or a delayed up-regulation of
14 IEG in the striatum at 4 h after morphine administration. Among them, a
cluster of 8 genes, including 6 inducible transcription factors (c-fos, fra-2,
junB, zif268 (egr1), egr2, NGFI-B) and 2 effector IEG (arc and mkp1) seemed to be
regulated in concert in response to morphine. This group of genes was induced to 
a greater degree after chronic than acute morphine administration selectively in 
C57BL/6J mice and the difference bore apparently no relationship to
opiate-produced locomotor activation. The strain-selective regulation was also
demonstrated for cyclin L2 and tPA after an acute morphine injection.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that morphine up-regulates many IEG in the mouse
striatum at a strikingly delayed time-point and that these changes are
genotype-dependent. They also suggest inter-strain differences in the development
of striatal neuroadaptations to chronic morphine treatment.

PMID: 23238466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Nat Neurosci. 2013 Jan;16(1):48-54. doi: 10.1038/nn.3281. Epub 2012 Dec 9.

A role for Schwann cell-derived neuregulin-1 in remyelination.

Stassart RM(1), Fledrich R, Velanac V, Brinkmann BG, Schwab MH, Meijer D, Sereda 
MW, Nave KA.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine, Department of Neurogenetics,
Göttingen, Germany.

After peripheral nerve injury, axons regenerate and become remyelinated by
resident Schwann cells. However, myelin repair never results in the original
myelin thickness, suggesting insufficient stimulation by neuronal growth factors.
Upon testing this hypothesis, we found that axonal neuregulin-1 (NRG1) type III
and, unexpectedly, also NRG1 type I restored normal myelination when
overexpressed in transgenic mice. This led to the observation that Wallerian
degeneration induced de novo NRG1 type I expression in Schwann cells themselves. 
Mutant mice lacking a functional Nrg1 gene in Schwann cells are fully myelinated 
but exhibit impaired remyelination in adult life. We suggest a model in which
loss of axonal contact triggers denervated Schwann cells to transiently express
NRG1 as an autocrine/paracrine signal that promotes Schwann cell differentiation 
and remyelination.

PMID: 23222914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Immunol. 2013 Jan 1;190(1):58-65. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200868. Epub 2012 Nov 
30.

Early growth response gene-2 controls IL-17 expression and Th17 differentiation
by negatively regulating Batf.

Miao T(1), Raymond M, Bhullar P, Ghaffari E, Symonds AL, Meier UC, Giovannoni G, 
Li S, Wang P.

Author information: 
(1)Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and London School of
Medicine and Dentistry, London E1 2AD, United Kingdom.

Early growth response gene (Egr)-2 is important for the maintenance of T cell
homeostasis and controls the development of autoimmune disease. However, the
underlying mechanisms are unknown. We have now discovered that Egr-2, which is
induced by TGF-ß and IL-6, negatively regulates the expression of IL-17, but not 
IL-2 or IFN-<U+03B3>, in effector T cells. In the absence of Egr-2, CD4 T cells produce 
high levels of Th17 cytokines, which renders mice susceptible to experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis induction. T cells lacking Egr-2 show increased
propensity for Th17, but not Th1 or Th2, differentiation. Control of IL-17
expression and Th17 differentiation by Egr-2 is due to inhibition of Batf, a
transcription factor that regulates IL-17 expression and Th17 differentiation.
Egr-2 interacts with Batf in CD4 T cells and suppresses its interaction with DNA 
sequences derived from the IL-17 promoter, whereas the activation of STAT3 and
expression of retinoic acid-related orphan receptor <U+03B3>t are unchanged in Th17
cells in the absence of Egr-2. Thus, Egr-2 plays an important role to
intrinsically control Th17 differentiation. We also found that CD4 T cells from
multiple sclerosis patients have reduced expression of Egr-2 and increased
expression of IL-17 following stimulation with anti-CD3 in vitro. Collectively,
our results demonstrate that Egr-2 is an intrinsic regulator that controls Th17
differentiation by inhibiting Batf activation, which may be important for the
control of multiple sclerosis development.

PMID: 23203924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Neural Dev. 2012 Nov 20;7:37. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-7-37.

Schwann cell myelination requires Dynein function.

Langworthy MM(1), Appel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, MS 8108, 
Aurora, CO, 80045, USA.

BACKGROUND: Interaction of Schwann cells with axons triggers signal transduction 
that drives expression of Pou3f1 and Egr2 transcription factors, which in turn
promote myelination. Signal transduction appears to be mediated, at least in
part, by cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) because elevation of cAMP levels
can stimulate myelination in the absence of axon contact. The mechanisms by which
the myelinating signal is conveyed remain unclear.
RESULTS: By analyzing mutations that disrupt myelination in zebrafish, we learned
that Dynein cytoplasmic 1 heavy chain 1 (Dync1h1), which functions as a motor for
intracellular molecular trafficking, is required for peripheral myelination. In
dync1h1 mutants, Schwann cell progenitors migrated to peripheral nerves but then 
failed to express Pou3f1 and Egr2 or make myelin membrane. Genetic mosaic
experiments revealed that robust Myelin Basic Protein expression required Dync1h1
function within both Schwann cells and axons. Finally, treatment of dync1h1
mutants with a drug to elevate cAMP levels stimulated myelin gene expression.
CONCLUSION: Dync1h1 is required for retrograde transport in axons and mutations
of Dync1h1 have been implicated in axon disease. Our data now provide evidence
that Dync1h1 is also required for efficient myelination of peripheral axons by
Schwann cells, perhaps by facilitating signal transduction necessary for
myelination.

PMCID: PMC3520773
PMID: 23167977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49503. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049503. Epub 2012 Nov 12.

Egr2::cre mediated conditional ablation of dicer disrupts histogenesis of
mammalian central auditory nuclei.

Rosengauer E(1), Hartwich H, Hartmann AM, Rudnicki A, Satheesh SV, Avraham KB,
Nothwang HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurogenetics, Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg,
Oldenburg, Germany.

Histogenesis of the auditory system requires extensive molecular orchestration.
Recently, Dicer1, an essential gene for generation of microRNAs, and miR-96 were 
shown to be important for development of the peripheral auditory system. Here, we
investigated their role for the formation of the auditory brainstem.
Egr2::Cre-mediated early embryonic ablation of Dicer1 caused severe disruption of
auditory brainstem structures. In adult animals, the volume of the cochlear
nucleus complex (CNC) was reduced by 73.5%. This decrease is in part attributed
to the lack of the microneuronal shell. In contrast, fusiform cells, which
similar to the granular cells of the microneural shell are derived from Egr2
positive cells, were still present. The volume reduction of the CNC was already
present at birth (67.2% decrease). The superior olivary complex was also
drastically affected in these mice. Nissl staining as well as Vglut1 and
Calbindin 1 immunolabeling revealed that principal SOC nuclei such as the medial 
nucleus of the trapezoid body and the lateral superior olive were absent. Only
choline acetyltransferase positive neurons of the olivocochlear bundle were
observed as a densely packed cell group in the ventrolateral area of the SOC.
Mid-embryonic ablation of Dicer1 in the ventral cochlear nucleus by
Atoh7::Cre-mediated recombination resulted in normal formation of the cochlear
nucleus complex, indicating an early embryonic requirement of Dicer1.
Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of miR-96 demonstrated low expression in the
embryonic brainstem and up-regulation thereafter, suggesting that other microRNAs
are required for proper histogenesis of the auditory brainstem. Together our data
identify a critical role of Dicer activity during embryonic development of the
auditory brainstem.

PMCID: PMC3495878
PMID: 23152916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Endocrinology. 2013 Jan;154(1):270-82. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1792. Epub 2012 Nov
13.

Ablation of Egr2-positive cells in male mouse anterior pituitary leads to
atypical isolated GH deficiency.

Bouchoucha YX(1), Charnay P, Gilardi-Hebenstreit P.

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France.

In this study, we have investigated the expression and function of the
transcription factor early growth response factor 2 (Egr2)/Krox20 in the
developing anterior pituitary. Egr2 is initially expressed in all differentiating
hormonal cells types, but its expression is mostly restricted to the somatotroph 
lineage after birth. Egr2 knockout results in anterior pituitary hypoplasia.
However, the analysis of a conditional mutant demonstrates that this phenotype
does not originate from a lack of Egr2 expression in the pituitary. Using an Egr2
allele driving a Cre-activable toxin gene, we performed a genetic ablation of
Egr2-positive cells in the pituitary. During the postnatal period, this ablation 
leads to specific and progressive depletion of the somatotroph population,
creating a novel model of early-onset isolated GH deficiency (GHD). Mutant
animals were subjected to a complete metabolic analysis, revealing atypical and
expected features. Consistent with an adult-onset isolated GHD model, mutant
animals are hypoglycemic and display increased insulin sensitivity and glucose
clearance. This latter phenotype is in contrast to the glucose intolerance
observed in another early-onset GHD model. Surprisingly, increased insulin
sensitivity is not accompanied by a modified balance between fat and lean
tissues, but by reduced metabolic adaptability between glucose and lipid
oxidation conditions. This suggests that the relationship between these metabolic
features and insulin sensitivity should be reconsidered. In conclusion, our
mutant may be a valuable genetic model with which to study the effects of
long-term GH deficiency, in conditions of normal pancreatic function and
unaffected balance between fat and glucose metabolism.

PMID: 23150495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Exp Med. 2012 Nov 19;209(12):2157-63. doi: 10.1084/jem.20120342. Epub 2012 Nov 
5.

Transcriptional regulator early growth response gene 2 (Egr2) is required for T
cell anergy in vitro and in vivo.

Zheng Y(1), Zha Y, Driessens G, Locke F, Gajewski TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and 2 Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

T cell receptor engagement in the absence of costimulation results in a
hyporesponsive state termed anergy. Understanding the transcriptional regulation 
of other T cell differentiation states has provided critical information
regarding the biology of T cell regulation in vivo. However, the transcriptional 
regulation of T cell anergy has been poorly understood. Using the key anergy
target gene diacylglycerol kinase (DGK) a as a focal point, we identified early
growth response gene 2 (Egr2) as a central transcription factor that regulates
the anergic state. Conditional Egr2 deletion in peripheral T cells abolishes
induced expression of DGK-a and other anergy genes and restores Ras/MAPK
signaling, IL-2 production, and proliferation upon attempted anergy induction.
Using superantigen- and tumor-induced anergy models, we found that Egr2 is
necessary for anergy induction in vivo. Collectively, our results implicate Egr2 
as an essential transcriptional regulator of the T cell anergy program.

PMCID: PMC3501351
PMID: 23129747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Neurochem. 2013 Jan;124(1):100-8. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12074. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Unique gene alterations are induced in FACS-purified Fos-positive neurons
activated during cue-induced relapse to heroin seeking.

Fanous S(1), Guez-Barber DH, Goldart EM, Schrama R, Theberge FR, Shaham Y, Hope
BT.

Author information: 
(1)Behavioral Neuroscience Branch, IRP/NIDA/NIH/DHHS, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Cue-induced heroin seeking after prolonged withdrawal is associated with neuronal
activation and altered gene expression in prefrontal cortex (PFC). However, these
previous studies assessed gene expression in all neurons regardless of their
activity state during heroin seeking. Using Fos as a marker of neural activity,
we describe distinct molecular alterations induced in activated versus
non-activated neurons during cue-induced heroin seeking after prolonged
withdrawal. We trained rats to self-administer heroin for 10 days (6 h/day) and
assessed cue-induced heroin seeking in extinction tests after 14 or 30 days. We
used fluorescent-activated cell sorting (FACS) to purify Fos-positive and
Fos-negative neurons from PFC 90 min after extinction testing. Flow cytometry
showed that Fos-immunoreactivity was increased in less than 10% of sparsely
distributed PFC neurons. mRNA levels of the immediate early genes fosB, arc,
egr1, and egr2, as well as npy and map2k6, were increased in Fos-positive, but
not Fos-negative, neurons. In support of these findings, double-label
immunohistochemistry indicated substantial coexpression of neuropeptide Y (NPY)- 
and Arc-immunoreactivity in Fos-positive neurons. Our data indicate that
cue-induced relapse to heroin seeking after prolonged withdrawal induces unique
molecular alterations within activated PFC neurons that are distinct from those
observed in the surrounding majority of non-activated neurons.

Published 2012. This article is a US Government work and is in the public domain 
in the USA.

PMCID: PMC3518644
PMID: 23113797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl. 2012;(193):iv-22. doi: 10.1111/ane.12013.

Genetic epidemiology of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

Braathen GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Research Group, Research Centre, Akershus University Hospital,
Lørenskog, Norway. g.j.braathen@medisin.uio.no

BACKGROUND: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common inherited
disorder of the peripheral nervous system. The frequency of different CMT
genotypes has been estimated in clinic populations, but prevalence data from the 
general population is lacking. Point mutations in the mitofusin 2 (MFN2) gene has
been identified exclusively in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2 (CMT2), and in 
a single family with intermediate CMT. MFN2 point mutations are probably the most
common cause of CMT2. The CMT phenotype caused by mutation in the myelin protein 
zero (MPZ) gene varies considerably, from early onset and severe forms to late
onset and milder forms. The mechanism is not well understood. The myelin protein 
zero (P(0) ) mediates adhesion in the spiral wraps of the Schwann cell's myelin
sheath. X-linked Charcot-Marie Tooth disease (CMTX) is caused by mutations in the
connexin32 (cx32) gene that encodes a polypeptide which is arranged in hexameric 
array and form gap junctions.
AIMS: Estimate prevalence of CMT. Estimate frequency of Peripheral Myelin Protein
22 (PMP22) duplication and point mutations, insertions and deletions in Cx32,
Early growth response 2 (EGR2), MFN2, MPZ, PMP22 and Small integral membrane
protein of lysosome/late endosome (SIMPLE) genes. Description of novel mutations 
in Cx32, MFN2 and MPZ. Description of de novo mutations in MFN2.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Our population based genetic epidemiological survey
included persons with CMT residing in eastern Akershus County, Norway. The
participants were interviewed and examined by one geneticist/neurologist, and
classified clinically, neurophysiologically and genetically. Two-hundred and
thirty-two consecutive unselected and unrelated CMT families with available DNA
from all regions in Norway were included in the MFN2 study. We screened for point
mutations in the MFN2 gene. We describe four novel mutations, two in the
connexin32 gene and two in the MPZ gene.
RESULTS: A total of 245 affected from 116 CMT families from the general
population of eastern Akershus county were included in the genetic
epidemiological survey. In the general population 1 per 1214 persons (95% CI
1062-1366) has CMT. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1 (CMT1), CMT2 and
intermediate CMT were found in 48.2%, 49.4% and 2.4% of the families,
respectively. A mutation in the investigated genes was found in 27.2% of the CMT 
families and in 28.6% of the affected. The prevalence of the PMP22 duplication
and mutations in the Cx32, MPZ and MFN2 genes was found in 13.6%, 6.2%, 1.2%,
6.2% of the families, and in 19.6%, 4.8%, 1.1%, 3.2% of the affected,
respectively. None of the families had point mutations, insertions or deletions
in the EGR2, PMP22 or SIMPLE genes. Four known and three novel mitofusin 2 (MFN2)
point mutations in 8 unrelated Norwegian CMT families were identified. The novel 
point mutations were not found in 100 healthy controls. This corresponds to 3.4% 
(8/232) of CMT families having point mutations in MFN2. The phenotypes were
compatible with CMT1 in two families, CMT2 in four families, intermediate CMT in 
one family and distal hereditary motor neuronopathy (dHMN) in one family. A point
mutation in the MFN2 gene was found in 2.3% of CMT1, 5.5% of CMT2, 12.5% of
intermediate CMT and 6.7% of dHMN families. Two novel missense mutations in the
MPZ gene were identified. Family 1 had a c.368G>A (Gly123Asp) transition while
family 2 and 3 had a c.103G>A (Asp35Asn) transition. The affected in family 1 had
early onset and severe symptoms compatible with Dejerine-Sottas syndrome (DSS),
while affected in family 2 and 3 had late onset, milder symptoms and axonal
neuropathy compatible with CMT2. Two novel connexin32 mutations that cause early 
onset X-linked CMT were identified. Family 1 had a deletion c.225delG (R75fsX83) 
which causes a frameshift and premature stop codon at position 247 while family 2
had a c.536G>A (Cys179Tyr) transition which causes a change of the highly
conserved cysteine residue, i.e. disruption of at least one of three disulfide
bridges. The mean age at onset was in the first decade and the nerve conduction
velocities were in the intermediate range.
DISCUSSION: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is the most common inherited neuropathy. 
At present 47 hereditary neuropathy genes are known, and an examination of all
known genes would probably only identify mutations in approximately 50% of those 
with CMT. Thus, it is likely that at least 30-50 CMT genes are yet to be
identified. The identified known and novel point mutations in the MFN2 gene
expand the clinical spectrum from CMT2 and intermediate CMT to also include
possibly CMT1 and the dHMN phenotypes. Thus, genetic analyses of the MFN2 gene
should not be restricted to persons with CMT2. The phenotypic variation caused by
different missense mutations in the MPZ gene is likely caused by different
conformational changes of the MPZ protein which affects the functional tetramers.
Severe changes of the MPZ protein cause dysfunctional tetramers and predominantly
uncompacted myelin, i.e. the severe phenotypes congenital hypomyelinating
neuropathy and DSS, while milder changes cause the phenotypes CMT1 and CMT2. The 
two novel mutations in the connexin32 gene are more severe than the majority of
previously described mutations possibly due to the severe structural change of
the gap junction they encode.
CONCLUSION: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is the most common inherited disorder of 
the peripheral nervous system with an estimated prevalence of 1 in 1214. CMT1 and
CMT2 are equally frequent in the general population. The prevalence of PMP22
duplication and of mutations in Cx32, MPZ and MFN2 is 19.6%, 4.8%, 1.1% and 3.2%,
respectively. The ratio of probable de novo mutations in CMT families was
estimated to be 22.7%. Genotype- phenotype correlations for seven novel mutations
in the genes Cx32 (2), MFN2 (3) and MPZ (2) are described. Two novel phenotypes
were ascribed to the MFN2 gene, however further studies are needed to confirm
that MFN2 mutations can cause CMT1 and dHMN.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 23106488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Neurosci Res. 2013 Jan;91(1):105-15. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23131. Epub 2012 Oct 17.

Calcineurin-nuclear factor of activated T cells regulation of Krox-20 expression 
in Schwann cells requires elevation of intracellular cyclic AMP.

Kipanyula MJ(1), Woodhoo A, Rahman M, Payne D, Jessen KR, Mirsky R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, Sokoine University of Agriculture, Chuo
Kikuu, Morogoro, Tanzania.

The transcription factor Krox-20 (Egr2) is a master regulator of Schwann cell
myelination. In mice from which calcineurin B had been excised in cells of the
neural crest lineage, calcineurin-nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT)
signaling was required for neuregulin-related Schwann cell myelination (Kao et
al. [2009] Immunity 12:359-372). Whether NFAT signaling required simultaneous
elevation of intracellular cAMP levels was not explored. In vivo, Krox-20
expression requires continuous axon-Schwann cell signaling that in Schwann cell
cultures can be mimicked by elevation of intracellular cAMP. We have investigated
the role of the calcineurin-NFAT pathway in Krox-20 induction in purified rat
Schwann cell cultures. Activation of this pathway requires elevation of
intracellular Ca(2+) levels. The calcium ionophore A23187 or ionomycin was used
to increase intracellular Ca(2+) levels in Schwann cell cultures that had been
treated with dibutyryl cAMP to induce Krox-20. Increase in Ca(2+) levels
significantly potentiated Krox-20 induction, determined by Krox-20 immunolabeling
of individual cells and Western blotting. Levels of the myelin proteins periaxin 
and P(0) were also elevated. The potentiating effect was blocked by cyclosporin
A, a specific blocker of the calcineurin-NFAT pathway. We found that, in the
absence of cAMP elevation, treatment with A23187 alone failed to induce Krox-20
expression, indicating that NFAT upregulation of Krox-20 requires elevation of
cAMP levels in Schwann cells. P-VIVIT, another specific inhibitor of
calcineurin-NFAT interaction, blocked Krox-20 induction in response to dibutyryl 
cAMP and ionophore. HA-NFAT1 (1-460)-GFP translocated to the nucleus on treatment
with dibutyryl cAMP with or without added ionophore. NFAT isoforms 1-4 were
detected in purified Schwann cells by quantitative RT-PCR.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23073893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Brain Behav Immun. 2013 Jan;27(1):133-44. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.10.004. Epub
2012 Oct 13.

CD40 activation induces NREM sleep and modulates genes associated with sleep
homeostasis.

Gast H(1), Müller A, Lopez M, Meier D, Huber R, Dechent F, Prinz M, Emmenegger Y,
Franken P, Birchler T, Fontana A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, University Hospital Berne, University of
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

The T-cell derived cytokine CD40 ligand is overexpressed in patients with
autoimmune diseases. Through activation of its receptor, CD40 ligand leads to a
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor 1 (TNFR1) dependent impairment of locomotor 
activity in mice. Here we report that this effect is explained through a
promotion of sleep, which was specific to non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep
while REM sleep was suppressed. The increase in NREM sleep was accompanied by a
decrease in EEG delta power during NREM sleep and by a decrease in the expression
of transcripts in the cerebral cortex known to be associated with homeostatic
sleep drive, such as Homer1a, Early growth response 2, Neuronal pentraxin 2, and 
Fos-like antigen 2. The effect of CD40 activation was mimicked by peripheral TNF 
injection and prevented by the TNF blocker etanercept. Our study indicates that
sleep-wake dysregulation in autoimmune diseases may result from CD40 induced
TNF:TNFR1 mediated alterations of molecular pathways, which regulate sleep-wake
behavior.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23072727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Immunity. 2012 Oct 19;37(4):685-96. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.08.001. Epub 2012 
Sep 27.

The transcription factors Egr2 and Egr3 are essential for the control of
inflammation and antigen-induced proliferation of B and T cells.

Li S(1), Miao T, Sebastian M, Bhullar P, Ghaffari E, Liu M, Symonds AL, Wang P.

Author information: 
(1)Bioscience, Brunel University, UK.

Lymphocytes provide optimal responses against pathogens with minimal inflammatory
pathology. However, the intrinsic mechanisms regulating these responses are
unknown. Here, we report that deletion of both transcription factors Egr2 and
Egr3 in lymphocytes resulted in a lethal autoimmune syndrome with excessive serum
proinflammatory cytokines but also impaired antigen receptor-induced
proliferation of B and T cells. Egr2- and Egr3-defective B and T cells had
hyperactive signal transducer and activator of transcription-1 (STAT1) and STAT3 
while antigen receptor-induced activation of transcription factor AP-1 was
severely impaired. We discovered that Egr2 and/or Egr3 directly induced
expression of suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 (SOCS1) and SOCS3, inhibitors of
STAT1 and STAT3, and also blocked the function of Batf, an AP-1 inhibitor, in B
and T cells. Thus, Egr2 and Egr3 regulate B and T cell function in adaptive
immune responses and homeostasis by promoting antigen receptor signaling and
controlling inflammation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3477314
PMID: 23021953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Dec;6(6):1325-32. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.1082. Epub 2012 Sep 13.

Detection of significant pathways in osteoporosis based on graph clustering.

Xiao H(1), Shan L, Zhu H, Xue F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Fengxian Central Hospital, Shanghai 201400, P.R.
China.

Osteoporosis is the most common and serious skeletal disorder among the elderly, 
characterized by a low bone mineral density (BMD). Low bone mass in the elderly
is highly dependent on their peak bone mass (PBM) as young adults. Circulating
monocytes serve as early progenitors of osteoclasts and produce significant
molecules for bone metabolism. An improved understanding of the biology and
genetics of osteoclast differentiation at the pathway level is likely to be
beneficial for the development of novel targeted approaches for osteoporosis. The
objective of this study was to explore gene expression profiles comprehensively
by grouping individual differentially expressed genes (DEGs) into gene sets and
pathways using the graph clustering approach and Gene Ontology (GO) term
enrichment analysis. The results indicated that the DEGs between high and low PBM
samples were grouped into nine gene sets. The genes in clusters 1 and 8
(including GBP1, STAT1, CXCL10 and EIF2AK2) may be associated with osteoclast
differentiation by the immune system response. The genes in clusters 2, 7 and 9
(including SOCS3, SOD2, ATF3, ADM EGR2 and BCL2A1) may be associated with
osteoclast differentiation by responses to various stimuli. This study provides a
number of candidate genes that warrant further investigation, including DDX60,
HERC5, RSAD2, SIGLEC1, CMPK2, MX1, SEPING1, EPSTI1, C9orf72, PHLDA2, PFKFB3,
PLEKHG2, ANKRD28, IL1RN and RNF19B.

PMID: 22992777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Feb;28(2):291-301. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1754.

Estrogen receptor-a is required for the osteogenic response to mechanical loading
in a ligand-independent manner involving its activation function 1 but not 2.

Windahl SH(1), Saxon L, Börjesson AE, Lagerquist MK, Frenkel B, Henning P, Lerner
UH, Galea GL, Meakin LB, Engdahl C, Sjögren K, Antal MC, Krust A, Chambon P,
Lanyon LE, Price JS, Ohlsson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Nutrition, Centre for Bone and Arthritis
Research, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.

Estrogen receptor-a (ERa) is crucial for the adaptive response of bone to loading
but the role of endogenous estradiol (E2) for this response is unclear. To
determine in vivo the ligand dependency and relative roles of different ERa
domains for the osteogenic response to mechanical loading, gene-targeted mouse
models with (1) a complete ERa inactivation (ERa(-/-) ), (2) specific
inactivation of activation function 1 (AF-1) in ERa (ERaAF-1(0) ), or (3)
specific inactivation of ERaAF-2 (ERaAF-2(0) ) were subjected to axial loading of
tibia, in the presence or absence (ovariectomy [ovx]) of endogenous E2. Loading
increased the cortical bone area in the tibia mainly as a result of an increased 
periosteal bone formation rate (BFR) and this osteogenic response was similar in 
gonadal intact and ovx mice, demonstrating that E2 (ligand) is not required for
this response. Female ERa(-/-) mice displayed a severely reduced osteogenic
response to loading with changes in cortical area (-78%<U+2009>±<U+2009>15%, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) and
periosteal BFR (-81%<U+2009>±<U+2009>9%, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) being significantly lower than in wild-type 
(WT) mice. ERaAF-1(0) mice also displayed a reduced response to mechanical
loading compared with WT mice (cortical area -40%<U+2009>±<U+2009>11%, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05 and periosteal 
BFR -41%<U+2009>±<U+2009>8%, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01), whereas the periosteal osteogenic response to loading
was unaffected in ERaAF-2(0) mice. Mechanical loading of transgenic estrogen
response element (ERE)-luciferase reporter mice did not increase luciferase
expression in cortical bone, suggesting that the loading response does not
involve classical genomic ERE-mediated pathways. In conclusion, ERa is required
for the osteogenic response to mechanical loading in a ligand-independent manner 
involving AF-1 but not AF-2.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMCID: PMC3575695
PMID: 22972752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. RNA. 2012 Oct;18(10):1910-20. doi: 10.1261/rna.033019.112. Epub 2012 Aug 22.

IRES-dependent translation of egr2 is induced under inflammatory conditions.

Rübsamen D(1), Blees JS, Schulz K, Döring C, Hansmann ML, Heide H, Weigert A,
Schmid T, Brüne B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry I, Goethe-University Frankfurt, 60590 Frankfurt,
Germany.

Adjusting translation is crucial for cells to rapidly adapt to changing
conditions. While pro-proliferative signaling via the PI3K-mTOR-pathway is known 
to induce cap-dependent translation, stress conditions, such as nutrient
deprivation or hypoxia often activate alternative modes of translation, e.g., via
internal ribosome entry sites (IRESs). As the effects of inflammatory conditions 
on translation are only poorly characterized, we aimed at identifying
translationally deregulated targets in inflammatory settings. For this purpose,
we cocultured breast tumor cells with conditioned medium of activated
monocyte-derived macrophages (CM). Polysome profiling and microarray analysis
identified early growth response-2 (egr2) to be regulated at the level of
translation. Using bicistronic reporter assays, we found that egr2 contains an
IRES within its 5' UTR, which facilitated enhanced translation upon CM treatment.
We further provide evidence that the activity of egr2-IRES was induced by IL-1ß
and p38-MAPK signaling. In addition, we identified several potential IRES
trans-acting factors (ITAFs) such as polypyrimidine tract binding protein (PTB)
and hnRNP-A1 that directly bind to the egr2-5'UTR. In summary, our data provide
evidence that egr2 expression is translationally regulated via an IRES element,
which is responsive to an inflammatory environment.

PMCID: PMC3446713
PMID: 22915601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Sep 4;109(36):14532-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1212264109. Epub 2012 Aug 21.

Selective inhibition of CD4+ T-cell cytokine production and autoimmunity by BET
protein and c-Myc inhibitors.

Bandukwala HS(1), Gagnon J, Togher S, Greenbaum JA, Lamperti ED, Parr NJ,
Molesworth AM, Smithers N, Lee K, Witherington J, Tough DF, Prinjha RK, Peters B,
Rao A.

Author information: 
(1)La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Bromodomain-containing proteins bind acetylated lysine residues on histone tails 
and are involved in the recruitment of additional factors that mediate histone
modifications and enable transcription. A compound, I-BET-762, that inhibits
binding of an acetylated histone peptide to proteins of the bromodomain and
extra-terminal domain (BET) family, was previously shown to suppress the
production of proinflammatory proteins by macrophages and block acute
inflammation in mice. Here, we investigated the effect of short-term treatment
with I-BET-762 on T-cell function. Treatment of naïve CD4(+) T cells with
I-BET-762 during the first 2 d of differentiation had long-lasting effects on
subsequent gene expression and cytokine production. Gene expression analysis
revealed up-regulated expression of several antiinflammatory gene products,
including IL-10, Lag3, and Egr2, and down-regulated expression of several
proinflammatory cytokines including GM-CSF and IL-17. The short 2-d treatment
with I-BET-762 inhibited the ability of antigen-specific T cells, differentiated 
under Th1 but not Th17 conditions in vitro, to induce pathogenesis in an adoptive
transfer model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. The suppressive
effects of I-BET-762 on T-cell mediated inflammation in vivo were accompanied by 
decreased recruitment of macrophages, consistent with decreased GM-CSF production
by CNS-infiltrating T cells. These effects were mimicked by an inhibitor of c-myc
function, implicating reduced expression of c-myc and GM-CSF as one avenue by
which I-BET-762 suppresses the inflammatory functions of T cells. Our study
demonstrates that inhibiting the functions of BET-family proteins during early
T-cell differentiation causes long-lasting suppression of the proinflammatory
functions of Th1 cells.

PMCID: PMC3437860
PMID: 22912406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012 Nov;53(5):639-45. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2012.08.003. Epub
2012 Aug 12.

Adenosine A(3) receptor-induced proliferation of primary human coronary smooth
muscle cells involving the induction of early growth response genes.

Hinze AV(1), Mayer P, Harst A, von Kügelgen I.

Author information: 
(1)Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices, 53175 Bonn, Germany.

In human coronary smooth muscle cells adenosine A(2B) receptors mediate the
inhibition of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-induced proliferation via
induction of the transcription factor nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group A,
member 1 (NR4A1). In the absence of PDGF, adenosine analogues increased
proliferation. In the present study we characterised the adenosine receptor
mediating the increase in proliferation of these cells and identified involved
transcription factors. Cultured human coronary smooth muscle cells were treated
with selective A(3) receptor ligands. Effects on proliferation were determined by
counting cells and measuring changes in impedance. The induction of transcription
factors was assessed by qPCR. The A(3) receptor agonist 2-chloro-IB-MECA
(2-chloro-N(6)-(3-iodobenzyl)adenosine-5'-N-methylcarboxamide) enhanced the
number of human coronary smooth muscle cells with a half-maximal concentration of
only 1 nM. 2-chloro-IB-MECA also increased the expression of the transcription
factors early growth response protein (EGR)2 and EGR3, but not of EGR1, NR4A1,
NR4A2 and NR4A3. The responses to 2-chloro-IB-MECA were blocked by two A(3)
receptor antagonists, MRS1523
(3-propyl-6-ethyl-5[(ethylthio)carbonyl]-2-phenyl-4-propyl-3-pyridine-carboxylate
; 10-300 µM) and VUF 5574
(N-(2-methoxyphenyl)-N'-[2-(3-pyridinyl)-4-quinazolinyl]-urea; 1-100 nM, as well 
as by the phospholipase C-inhibitor U73343 (0.2 µM). Small interfering RNA
directed against EGR2 and EGR3 abolished the increases in proliferation induced
by 2-chloro-IB-MECA. In summary, this is the first report demonstrating a
coupling of smooth muscle adenosine A(3) receptors to increases in proliferation 
of human coronary smooth cells by the activation of phospholipase C and an
induction of the transcriptions factors EGR2 and EGR3. The results facilitate the
understanding of the role of adenosine A(3) receptors in the cardiovascular
system.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22906537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Bone. 2012 Oct;51(4):643-50. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2012.07.015. Epub 2012 Jul 26.

Early growth response 2 negatively modulates osteoclast differentiation through
upregulation of Id helix-loop-helix proteins.

Kim HJ(1), Hong JM, Yoon KA, Kim N, Cho DW, Choi JY, Lee IK, Kim SY.

Author information: 
(1)Skeletal Diseases Genome Research Center, Kyungpook National University and
Hospital, Daegu 700-412, Republic of Korea. biohjk@hanmail.net

Early growth response 2 (Egr2) is a zinc finger transcription factor that acts as
an important modulator of various physiological processes. In this study, we show
that Egr2 negatively regulates receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL)-induced
osteoclast differentiation. The overexpression of Egr2 in bone marrow-derived
macrophages (BMMs) suppresses the formation of multinuclear osteoclasts and the
expression of osteoclastogenic markers, including nuclear factor of activated T
cells c1 (NFATc1). On the other hand, Egr2 overexpression does not impact the
phagocytic activity of osteoclast precursors or the expression of
macrophage-specific markers in the presence of the osteoclastogenic stimuli,
RANKL and M-CSF. We further demonstrate that Egr2 induces the expression of the
inhibitors of differentiation/DNA binding (Ids) helix-loop-helix (HLH)
transcription factors, which are important repressors in RANKL-mediated
osteoclastogenesis. Egr2 transactivates the Id2 promoter and increases its
recruitment to the Id2 promoter region. In addition, Egr2-dependent induction of 
Id2 promoter activity, and its binding to the Id2 promoter is abrogated by the
overexpression of the Egr2 repressor, NGFI-A binding protein 2 (Nab2).
Accordingly, coexpression with Nab2 restores Egr2-mediated suppression of
osteoclast differentiation. Furthermore, knockdown of Egr2 using shRNA enhances
osteoclastogenesis and decreases Id2 gene expression. Ectopic expression of Id2
reverses the phenotype mediated by Egr2 silencing. Taken together, our results
identify Egr2 as an important modulator of RANKL-induced osteoclast
differentiation and provide the link between RANKL, Egr2 and Id proteins in
osteoclast-lineage cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22842221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Comp Neurol. 2013 Feb 15;521(3):697-708. doi: 10.1002/cne.23200.

The interfascicular trigeminal nucleus: a precerebellar nucleus in the mouse
defined by retrograde neuronal tracing and genetic fate mapping.

Fu Y(1), Tvrdik P, Makki N, Machold R, Paxinos G, Watson C.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Australia, Randwick, New South Wales 2031, Australia.

We have found a previously unreported precerebellar nucleus located among the
emerging fibers of the motor root of the trigeminal nerve in the mouse, which we 
have called the interfascicular trigeminal nucleus (IF5). This nucleus had
previously been named the tensor tympani part of the motor trigeminal nucleus
(5TT) in rodent brain atlases, because it was thought to be a subset of small
motor neurons of the motor trigeminal nucleus innervating the tensor tympani
muscle. However, following injection of retrograde tracer in the cerebellum, the 
labeled neurons in IF5 were found to be choline acetyltransferase (ChAT)
negative, indicating that they are not motor neurons. The cells of IF5 are
strongly labeled in mice from Wnt1Cre and Atoh1 CreER lineage fate mapping, in
common with the major precerebellar nuclei that arise from the rhombic lip and
that issue mossy fibers. Analysis of sections from mouse Hoxa3, Hoxb1, and Egr2
Cre labeled lineages shows that the neurons of IF5 arise from rhombomeres caudal 
to rhombomere 4, most likely from rhombomeres 6-8. We conclude that IF5 is a
significant precerebellar nucleus in the mouse that shares developmental gene
expression characteristics with mossy fiber precerebellar nuclei that arise from 
the caudal rhombic lip.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3936347
PMID: 22829396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e39674. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039674. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

Combinatorial action of miRNAs regulates transcriptional and post-transcriptional
gene silencing following in vivo PNS injury.

Adilakshmi T(1), Sudol I, Tapinos N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuroscience Laboratory, Weis Center for Research, Geisinger Clinic,
Danville, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Injury response in the peripheral nervous system (PNS) is characterized by rapid 
alterations in the genetic program of Schwann cells. However, the epigenetic
mechanisms modulating these changes remain elusive. Here we show that sciatic
nerve injury in mice induces a cohort of 22 miRNAs, which coordinate Schwann cell
differentiation and dedifferentiation through a combinatorial modulation of their
positive and negative gene regulators. These miRNAs and their targeted mRNAs form
functional complexes with the Argonaute-2 protein to mediate post-transcriptional
gene silencing. MiR-138 and miR-709 show the highest affinity amongst the cohort,
for binding and regulation of Egr2, Sox-2 and c-Jun expression following injury. 
Moreover, miR-709 participates in the formation of epigenetic silencing complexes
with H3K27me3 and Argonaute-1 to induce transcriptional gene silencing of the
Egr2 promoter. Collectively, we identified a discrete cohort of miRNAs as the
central epigenetic regulators of the transition between differentiation and
dedifferentiation during the acute phase of PNS injury.

PMCID: PMC3391190
PMID: 22792185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2012;52(6):399-404.

[Genetic diagnosis and molecular pathology of inherited neuropathy].

[Article in Japanese]

Takashima H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Geriatrics, Kagoshima University Graduate School
of Medical and Dental Sciences.

Recent advances in genetic analysis technology have enabled a surprising progress
in genetic diagnosis in the field of neurological disease research.
High-throughput molecular biology techniques, such as microarrays and
next-generation sequencing, are the major contributors to this progress and to
new discoveries. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT), a known hereditary motor and 
sensory neuropathy, is clinically and genetically heterogeneous. Genetic studies 
have revealed at least 35 disease causing-genes responsible for
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Genetic studies have revealed that abnormalities in 
the following factors are the cause of inherited neuropathies: myelin components,
transcription factors controlling myelination, myelin maintenance system,
differentiation factors related to the peripheral nerve, neurofilaments, protein 
transfer system, mitochondrial proteins, DNA repair, RNA/protein synthesis, ion
channels, and aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase. On the other hand concomitant with the
increase in the number of genes that must be screened for mutations, the labor
and reagent costs for molecular genetic testing have increased significantly.
Therefore, new methodology for detecting gene mutations is required. Based on the
recent progress in DNA analysis methods, resequencing microarray appears to be an
economical and highly sensitive method for detecting mutations. We have been
screening CMT patients for mutations using originally designed microarray DNA
chips since 2007, thencehaving identified disease causing mutations in MPZ, GJB1,
PMP22, EGR2, MFN2, NEFL, PRX, AARS, GARS, DNM2, and SETX genes in CMT patients.

PMID: 22790800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Clin Genet. 2013 Apr;83(4):388-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2012.01910.x. Epub
2012 Jul 5.

Mutational analysis of PMP22, EGR2, LITAF and NEFL in Greek Charcot-Marie-Tooth
type 1 patients.

Koutsis G, Pandraud A, Karadima G, Panas M, Reilly MM, Floroskufi P, Wood NW,
Houlden H.

PMID: 22765307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2012 Jun;17(2):206-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1529-8027.2012.00403.x.

A novel EGR2 mutation within a family with a mild demyelinating form of
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

Shiga K(1), Noto Y, Mizuta I, Hashiguchi A, Takashima H, Nakagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. kenshiga@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

Mutations of the early growth response 2 (EGR2) gene have been reported in a
variety of severe demyelinating neuropathies such as autosomal recessive
congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy, autosomal dominant child-onset
Dejerine-Sottas neuropathy, and autosomal dominant adult-onset
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT). Here, we report on a heterozygous mutation in 
EGR2 (c.1160C>A), which results in threonine at position 387 being changed to
asparagine, in a family with a mild demyelinating form of adult-onset CMT. Of
note, both the proband and her asymptomatic son exhibited neither pes cavus nor
champagne-bottle leg atrophy, suggesting that the heterozygous T387N mutation may
result in a relatively mild phenotype of demyelinating CMT.

© 2012 Peripheral Nerve Society.

PMID: 22734907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Oct 1;39(1):149-55. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2012.06.004. Epub 2012 Jun 9.

Genetic and functional analyses of early growth response (EGR) family genes in
schizophrenia.

Cheng MC(1), Chuang YA, Lu CL, Chen YJ, Luu SU, Li JM, Hsu SH, Chen CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yuli Mental Health Research Center, Yuli Veterans
Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: Early growth response genes (EGR1, 2, 3, and 4) encode a family of
nuclear proteins that function as transcriptional regulators. They are involved
in the regulation of synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory, and are
implicated in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia.
METHODS: We conducted a genetic association analysis of 14 SNPs selected from the
EGR1, 2, 3, and 4 genes of 564 patients with schizophrenia and 564 control
subjects. We also conducted Western blot analysis and promoter activity assay to 
characterize the EGR genes associated with schizophrenia
RESULTS: We did not detect a true genetic association of these 14 SNPs with
schizophrenia in this sample. However, we observed a nominal over-representation 
of C/C genotype of rs9990 of EGR2 in female schizophrenia as compared to female
control subjects (p=0.012, uncorrected for multiple testing). Further study
showed that the average mRNA level of the EGR2 gene in the lymphoblastoid cell
lines of female schizophrenia patients was significantly higher than that in
female control subjects (p=0.002). We also detected a nominal association of 4
SNPs (rs6747506, rs6718289, rs2229294, and rs3813226) of the EGR4 gene that form 
strong linkage disequilibrium with schizophrenia in males. Reporter gene assay
showed that the haplotype T-A derived from rs6747506 and rs6718289 at the
promoter region had significantly reduced promoter activity compared with the
haplotype A-G.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest a tendency of gender-specific association of EGR2
and EGR4 in schizophrenia, with an elevated expression of EGR2 in lympoblastoid
cell lines of female schizophrenia patients and a reduced EGR4 gene expression in
male schizophrenia patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22691714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Brain. 2012 Jul;135(Pt 7):2032-47. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws140. Epub 2012 Jun 10.

MpzR98C arrests Schwann cell development in a mouse model of early-onset
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1B.

Saporta MA(1), Shy BR, Patzko A, Bai Y, Pennuto M, Ferri C, Tinelli E, Saveri P, 
Kirschner D, Crowther M, Southwood C, Wu X, Gow A, Feltri ML, Wrabetz L, Shy ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Mutations in myelin protein zero (MPZ) cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1B.
Many dominant MPZ mutations, including R98C, present as infantile onset
dysmyelinating neuropathies. We have generated an R98C 'knock-in' mouse model of 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1B, where a mutation encoding R98C was targeted to the
mouse Mpz gene. Both heterozygous (R98C/+) and homozygous (R98C/R98C) mice
develop weakness, abnormal nerve conduction velocities and morphologically
abnormal myelin; R98C/R98C mice are more severely affected. MpzR98C is retained
in the endoplasmic reticulum of Schwann cells and provokes a transitory,
canonical unfolded protein response. Ablation of Chop, a mediator of the protein 
kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase unfolded protein response pathway
restores compound muscle action potential amplitudes of R98C/+ mice but does not 
alter the reduced conduction velocities, reduced axonal diameters or clinical
behaviour of these animals. R98C/R98C Schwann cells are developmentally arrested 
in the promyelinating stage, whereas development is delayed in R98C/+ mice. The
proportion of cells expressing c-Jun, an inhibitor of myelination, is elevated in
mutant nerves, whereas the proportion of cells expressing the promyelinating
transcription factor Krox-20 is decreased, particularly in R98C/R98C mice. Our
results provide a potential link between the accumulation of MpzR98C in the
endoplasmic reticulum and a developmental delay in myelination. These mice
provide a model by which we can begin to understand the early onset
dysmyelination seen in patients with R98C and similar mutations.

PMCID: PMC3381724
PMID: 22689911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Sep 1;21(17):3896-909. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds217. Epub 2012 Jun
7.

Retrocochlear function of the peripheral deafness gene Cacna1d.

Satheesh SV(1), Kunert K, Rüttiger L, Zuccotti A, Schönig K, Friauf E, Knipper M,
Bartsch D, Nothwang HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurogenetics, Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg, 26111
Oldenburg, Germany.

Hearing impairment represents the most common sensory deficit in humans. Genetic 
mutations contribute significantly to this disorder. Mostly, only malfunction of 
the ear is considered. Here, we assessed the role of the peripheral deafness gene
Cacna1d, encoding the L-type channel Ca(v)1.3, in downstream processing of
acoustic information. To this end, we generated a mouse conditional
Cacna1d-eGFP(flex) allele. Upon pairing with Egr2::Cre mice, Ca(v)1.3 was ablated
in the auditory brainstem, leaving the inner ear intact. Structural assessment of
the superior olivary complex (SOC), an essential auditory brainstem center,
revealed a dramatic volume reduction (43-47%) of major nuclei in young adult
Egr2::Cre;Cacna1d-eGFP(flex) mice. This volume decline was mainly caused by a
reduced cell number (decline by 46-56%). Abnormal formation of the lateral
superior olive was already present at P4, demonstrating an essential perinatal
role of Ca(v)1.3 in the SOC. Measurements of auditory brainstem responses
demonstrated a decreased amplitude in the auditory nerve between 50 and 75 dB
stimulation in Egr2::Cre;Cacna1d-eGFP(flex) knockout mice and increased
amplitudes in central auditory processing centers. Immunohistochemical studies
linked the amplitude changes in the central auditory system to reduced expression
of K(v)1.2. No changes were observed for K(v)1.1, KCC2, a determinant of
inhibitory neurotransmission, and choline acetyltransferase, a marker of efferent
olivocochlear neurons. Together, these analyses identify a crucial retrocochlear 
role of Ca(v)1.3 and demonstrate that mutations in deafness genes can affect
sensory cells and neurons alike. As a corollary, hearing aids have to address
central auditory processing deficits as well.

PMID: 22678062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 12;109(24):9617-22. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1200554109. Epub 2012 May 29.

Erythropoietin-induced changes in brain gene expression reveal induction of
synaptic plasticity genes in experimental stroke.

Mengozzi M(1), Cervellini I, Villa P, Erbayraktar Z, Gökmen N, Yilmaz O,
Erbayraktar S, Manohasandra M, Van Hummelen P, Vandenabeele P, Chernajovsky Y,
Annenkov A, Ghezzi P.

Author information: 
(1)Brighton and Sussex Medical School, Falmer BN19RY, United Kingdom.

Erythropoietin (EPO) is a neuroprotective cytokine in models of ischemic and
nervous system injury, where it reduces neuronal apoptosis and inflammatory
cytokines and increases neurogenesis and angiogenesis. EPO also improves
cognition in healthy volunteers and schizophrenic patients. We studied the effect
of EPO administration on the gene-expression profile in the ischemic cortex of
rats after cerebral ischemia at early time points (2 and 6 h). EPO treatment
up-regulated genes already increased by ischemia. Hierarchical clustering and
analysis of overrepresented functional categories identified genes implicated in 
synaptic plasticity-Arc, BDNF, Egr1, and Egr2, of which Egr2 was the most
significantly regulated. Up-regulation of Arc, BDNF, Dusp5, Egr1, Egr2, Egr4, and
Nr4a3 was confirmed by quantitative PCR. We investigated the up-regulation of
Egr2/Krox20 further because of its role in neuronal plasticity. Its elevation by 
EPO was confirmed in an independent in vivo experiment of cerebral ischemia in
rats. Using the rat neuroblastoma B104, we found that wild-type cells that do not
express EPO receptor (EPOR) do not respond to EPO by inducing Egr2. However,
EPOR-expressing B104 cells induce Egr2 early upon incubation with EPO, indicating
that Egr2 induction is a direct effect of EPO and that EPOR mediates this effect.
Because these changes occur in vivo before decreased inflammatory cytokines or
neuronal apoptosis is evident, these findings provide a molecular mechanism for
the neuroreparative effects of cytokines and suggest a mechanism of
neuroprotection by which promotion of a plastic phenotype results in decreased
inflammation and neuronal death.

PMCID: PMC3386063
PMID: 22645329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jul;32(14):2894-903. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06728-11. Epub 2012 May
21.

Phosphorylation of distinct sites in MeCP2 modifies cofactor associations and the
dynamics of transcriptional regulation.

Gonzales ML(1), Adams S, Dunaway KW, LaSalle JM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Genome Center, University of California, 
Davis, California, USA.

Mutations in the gene encoding methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) lead to
disrupted neuronal function and can cause the neurodevelopmental disorder Rett
syndrome. MeCP2 is a transcriptional regulator that binds to methylated DNA and
is most abundant in neuronal nuclei. The mechanisms by which MeCP2 regulates gene
expression remain ambiguous, as it has been reported to function as a
transcriptional silencer or activator and to execute these activities through
both gene-specific and genome-wide mechanisms. We hypothesized that
posttranslational modifications of MeCP2 may be important for reconciling these
apparently contradictory functions. Our results demonstrate that MeCP2 contains
multiple posttranslational modifications, including phosphorylation, acetylation,
and ubiquitylation. Phosphorylation of MeCP2 at S229 or S80 influenced selective 
in vivo interactions with the chromatin factors HP1 and SMC3 and the cofactors
Sin3A and YB-1. pS229 MeCP2 was specifically enriched at the RET promoter, and
phosphorylation of MeCP2 was necessary for differentiation-induced activation and
repression of the MeCP2 target genes RET and EGR2. These results demonstrate that
phosphorylation is one of several factors that are important for interpreting the
complexities of MeCP2 transcriptional modulation.

PMCID: PMC3416191
PMID: 22615490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Blood. 2012 Jun 14;119(24):e161-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-01-402453. Epub 2012 
May 1.

Dynamic epigenetic enhancer signatures reveal key transcription factors
associated with monocytic differentiation states.

Pham TH(1), Benner C, Lichtinger M, Schwarzfischer L, Hu Y, Andreesen R, Chen W, 
Rehli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

Cellular differentiation is orchestrated by lineage-specific transcription
factors and associated with cell type-specific epigenetic signatures. In the
present study, we used stage-specific, epigenetic "fingerprints" to deduce key
transcriptional regulators of the human monocytic differentiation process. We
globally mapped the distribution of epigenetic enhancer marks (histone H3 lysine 
4 monomethylation, histone H3 lysine 27 acetylation, and the histone variant
H2AZ), describe general properties of marked regions, and show that cell
type-specific epigenetic "fingerprints" are correlated with specific, de
novo-derived motif signatures at all of the differentiation stages studied (ie,
hematopoietic stem cells, monocytes, and macrophages). We validated the novel, de
novo-derived, macrophage-specific enhancer signature, which included ETS, CEBP,
bZIP, EGR, E-Box and NF-<U+03BA>B motifs, by ChIP sequencing for a subset of motif
corresponding transcription factors (PU.1, C/EBPß, and EGR2), confirming their
association with differentiation-associated epigenetic changes. We describe
herein the dynamic enhancer landscape of human macrophage differentiation,
highlight the power of genome-wide epigenetic profiling studies to reveal novel
functional insights, and provide a unique resource for macrophage biologists.

PMID: 22550342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Neuromuscul Disord. 2012 Aug;22(8):742-6. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2012.04.002. Epub
2012 Apr 28.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy due to a novel EGR2 gene mutation with mild
phenotype--usefulness of human mapping chip linkage analysis in a Czech family.

Safka Broková D(1), Nevímalová S, Mazanec R, Rautenstrauss B, Seeman P.

Author information: 
(1)DNA Laboratory, Department of Child Neurology, Charles University 2nd Medical 
School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
dana.brozkova@seznam.cz

Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathies (CMT) are a group of clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous disorders of the peripheral nervous system. Selection of candidate 
disease genes for mutation analysis is sometimes difficult since more than 40
genes and loci are known to be associated with CMT neuropathies. Hence a Czech
family Cz-CMT with demyelinating type of autosomal dominant CMT disease was
investigated by genome-wide linkage analysis by means of single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) arrays. Among 35 regions with linkage, five carried known CMT 
genes. In the final result a novel early growth response 2 - missense mutation
c.1235 A>G, p.Glu412Gly was found. Surprisingly, the more severely affected
proband carried an additional heterozygous myelin protein zero variant
p.Asp246Asn detected previously, which may modify the phenotype. However, this
MPZ variant is benign in heterozygous state alone, because it is also carried by 
the patient's healthy father.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22546699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Glia. 2012 Sep;60(9):1269-78. doi: 10.1002/glia.22346. Epub 2012 Apr 24.

Regulation of Schwann cell differentiation and proliferation by the Pax-3
transcription factor.

Doddrell RD(1), Dun XP, Moate RM, Jessen KR, Mirsky R, Parkinson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Exeter, Plymouth,
Devon, United Kingdom.

Pax-3 is a paired domain transcription factor that plays many roles during
vertebrate development. In the Schwann cell lineage, Pax-3 is expressed at an
early stage in Schwann cells precursors of the embryonic nerve, is maintained in 
the nonmyelinating cells of the adult nerve, and is upregulated in Schwann cells 
after peripheral nerve injury. Consistent with this expression pattern, Pax-3 has
previously been shown to play a role in repressing the expression of the myelin
basic protein gene in Schwann cells. We have studied the role of Pax-3 in Schwann
cells and have found that it controls not only the regulation of cell
differentiation but also the survival and proliferation of Schwann cells. Pax-3
expression blocks both the induction of Oct-6 and Krox-20 (K20) by cyclic AMP and
completely inhibits the ability of K20, the physiological regulator of
myelination in the peripheral nervous system, to induce myelin gene expression in
Schwann cells. In contrast to other inhibitors of myelination, we find that Pax-3
represses myelin gene expression in a c-Jun-independent manner. In addition to
this, we find that Pax-3 expression alone is sufficient to inhibit the induction 
of apoptosis by TGFß1 in Schwann cells. Expression of Pax-3 is also sufficient to
induce the proliferation of Schwann cells in the absence of added growth factors 
and to reverse K20-induced exit from the cell cycle. These findings indicate new 
roles for the Pax-3 transcription factor in controlling the differentiation and
proliferation of Schwann cells during development and after peripheral nerve
injury.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22532290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Ann Neurol. 2012 May;71(5):719-23. doi: 10.1002/ana.23527.

Homozygous deletion of an EGR2 enhancer in congenital amyelinating neuropathy.

Funalot B(1), Topilko P, Arroyo MA, Sefiani A, Hedley-Whyte ET, Yoldi ME, Richard
L, Touraille E, Laurichesse M, Khalifa E, Chauzeix J, Ouedraogo A, Cros D,
Magdelaine C, Sturtz FG, Urtizberea JA, Charnay P, Bragado FG, Vallat JM.

Author information: 
(1)National Referral Center for Rare Peripheral Neuropathies, University
Hospital, Limoges, France. benoit.funalot@unilim.fr

The transcription factor EGR2 is expressed in Schwann cells, where it controls
peripheral nerve myelination. Mutations of EGR2 have been found in patients with 
congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy or Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1D. In 
a patient with congenital amyelinating neuropathy, we observed pathological
abnormalities recapitulating the peripheral nervous system phenotype of
homozygous Egr2-null mice. This patient, born from consanguineous parents, showed
no EGR2 immunoreactivity in Schwann cells and harbored a homozygous
10.7-kilobase-long deletion encompassing a myelin-specific enhancer of EGR2. This
regulatory mutation is the first genetic abnormality associated with congenital
amyelinating neuropathy in humans.

Copyright © 2012 American Neurological Association.

PMID: 22522483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 May 4;421(2):375-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.023. Epub 2012 Apr 9.

Regulation of the bovine SCD5 promoter by EGR2 and SREBP1.

Lengi AJ(1), Corl BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy Science, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, VA 24061-0315, United States.

In rodents, the transcription factors early growth response 2 (EGR2) and sterol
regulatory element binding protein 1a (SREBP1a) regulate transcription of the
stearoyl-CoA desaturase 2 (SCD2) gene during peripheral nerve myelination, which 
may be important for synthesis of the lipid component of myelin. Most non-rodent 
genomes do not contain the SCD2 gene, but rather express SCD5 in brain and
nervous tissues. In this paper, we asked whether bovine SCD5 is regulated in a
similar manner to rodent SCD2. Expression of EGR2 did not result in an increase
in endogenous SCD5 mRNA expression in JEG3 cells, but did result in activation of
truncated bovine SCD5 promoter luciferase reporter constructs. Similar results
were obtained with expression of the active form of SREBP1a; however, unlike
rodent SCD2, there was no synergistic activation of the bovine SCD5 promoter
reporters when EGR2 and SREBP1a were co-expressed. Mutation of the putative EGR2 
binding site in the SCD5 promoter abolished activation by SREBP1a, suggesting
that EGR2 and SREBP1a bind to the same site in the SCD5 promoter. Finally, we
have identified a region of the bovine SCD5 promoter between 505 and 305 base
pairs upstream of the transcriptional start site that appears to be important for
maintaining basal levels of transcription of this gene. While it appears that
there are some differences between the regulation of rodent SCD2 and bovine SCD5,
the promoters of both genes can be activated by EGR2 and SREBP1a. This is the
first report of potential regulators of SCD5 transcription.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22510410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Aug;40(14):6449-60. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks313. Epub 2012
Apr 9.

Genome-wide analysis of EGR2/SOX10 binding in myelinating peripheral nerve.

Srinivasan R(1), Sun G, Keles S, Jones EA, Jang SW, Krueger C, Moran JJ, Svaren
J.

Author information: 
(1)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.

Myelin is essential for the rapidity of saltatory nerve conduction, and also
provides trophic support for axons to prevent axonal degeneration. Two critical
determinants of myelination are SOX10 and EGR2/KROX20. SOX10 is required for
specification of Schwann cells from neural crest, and is required at every stage 
of Schwann cell development. Egr2/Krox20 expression is activated by axonal
signals in myelinating Schwann cells, and is required for cell cycle arrest and
myelin formation. To elucidate the integrated function of these two transcription
factors during peripheral nerve myelination, we performed in vivo ChIP-Seq
analysis of myelinating peripheral nerve. Integration of these binding data with 
loss-of-function array data identified a range of genes regulated by these
factors. In addition, although SOX10 itself regulates Egr2/Krox20 expression,
leading to coordinate activation of several major myelin genes by the two
factors, there is a large subset of genes that are activated independent of EGR2.
Finally, the results identify a set of SOX10-dependent genes that are expressed
in early Schwann cell development, but become subsequently repressed by
EGR2/KROX20.

PMCID: PMC3413122
PMID: 22492709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Apr;71 Suppl 2:i96-100. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-200588.

Roles of LAG3 and EGR2 in regulatory T cells.

Okamura T(1), Fujio K, Sumitomo S, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Regulatory T cells (Tregs) participate in the maintenance of tolerance to
self-antigens and suppressive control of excessive immune responses to exogenous 
antigens. A lack or dysfunction of these cells is responsible for the
pathogenesis and development of many autoimmune diseases. It is well known that
CD4 Tregs play a major role in controlling immune responses and can be classified
into two main populations: thymus-derived naturally occurring Tregs (nTregs) and 
induced Tregs (iTregs) generated from CD4(+)CD25(-) precursors in the peripheral 
lymphoid organs. The most extensively studied Tregs are the nTregs, which express
the interleukin 2 (IL-2) receptor CD25 and the transcription factor Forkhead box 
P3 (Foxp3). On the other hand, iTregs contain multiple heterogeneous subsets,
including interleukin (IL)-10-producing CD4 type I Tregs (Tr1 cells) and
transforming growth factor -ß-producing Th3 cells, and so on. However, the extent
of the contribution of iTregs to immunoregulation in normal animals has been
difficult to evaluate because of the lack of suitable cell surface markers. It
has been found recently that IL-10-secreting iTregs can be delineated as
CD4(+)CD25(-)Foxp3(-) T cells that characteristically express both the lymphocyte
activation gene-3 (LAG3) and the early growth response gene-2 (EGR2). In this
review, opinions about the roles of LAG3 and EGR2 in Tregs are presented.

PMID: 22460149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Korean J Parasitol. 2012 Mar;50(1):7-13. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2012.50.1.7. Epub 2012 
Mar 6.

Gene expression profiles in genetically different mice infected with Toxoplasma
gondii: ALDH1A2, BEX2, EGR2, CCL3 and PLAU.

Ismail HA(1), Quan JH, Wei Z, Choi IW, Cha GH, Shin DW, Lee YH, Song CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Research Institute for Medical Science,
Chungnam National University School of Medicine, Daejeon 301-131, Korea.

Toxoplasma gondii can modulate host cell gene expression; however, determining
gene expression levels in intermediate hosts after T. gondii infection is not
known much. We selected 5 genes (ALDH1A2, BEX2, CCL3, EGR2 and PLAU) and compared
the mRNA expression levels in the spleen, liver, lung and small intestine of
genetically different mice infected with T. gondii. ALDH1A2 mRNA expressions of
both mouse strains were markedly increased at day 1-4 postinfection (PI) and then
decreased, and its expressions in the spleen and lung were significantly higher
in C57BL/6 mice than those of BALB/c mice. BEX2 and CCR3 mRNA expressions of both
mouse strains were significantly increased from day 7 PI and peaked at day 15-30 
PI (P<0.05), especially high in the spleen liver or small intestine of C57BL/6
mice. EGR2 and PLAU mRNA expressions of both mouse strains were significantly
increased after infection, especially high in the spleen and liver. However,
their expression patterns were varied depending on the tissue and mouse strain.
Taken together, T. gondii-susceptible C57BL/6 mice expressed higher levels of
these 5 genes than did T. gondii-resistant BALB/c mice, particularly in the
spleen and liver. And ALDH1A2 and PLAU expressions were increased acutely,
whereas BEX2, CCL3 and EGR2 expressions were increased lately. Thus, these
demonstrate that host genetic factors exert a strong impact on the expression of 
these 5 genes and their expression patterns were varied depending on the gene or 
tissue.

PMCID: PMC3309055
PMID: 22451728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Glia. 2012 Mar;60(3):393-403.

Cthrc1 is a negative regulator of myelination in Schwann cells.

Apra C(1), Richard L, Coulpier F, Blugeon C, Gilardi-Hebenstreit P, Vallat JM,
Lindner V, Charnay P, Decker L.

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Normale Supérieure, IBENS, Developmental Biology Section, 75230 Paris
cedex 05, France.

The analysis of the molecular mechanisms involved in the initial interaction
between neurons and Schwann cells is a key issue in understanding the myelination
process. We recently identified Cthrc1 (Collagen triple helix repeat containing
1) as a gene upregulated in Schwann cells upon interaction with the axon. Cthrc1 
encodes a secreted protein previously shown to be involved in migration and
proliferation in different cell types. We performed a functional analysis of
Cthrc1 in Schwann cells by loss-of- and gain-of-function approaches using RNA
interference knockdown in cell culture and a transgenic mouse line that
overexpresses the gene. This work establishes that Cthrc1 enhances Schwann cell
proliferation but prevents myelination. In particular, time-course analysis of
myelin formation intransgenic animals reveals that overexpression of Cthrc1 in
Schwann cells leads to a delay in myelin formation with cells maintaining a
proliferative state. Our data, therefore, demonstrate that Cthrc1 plays a
negative regulatory role, fine-tuning the onset of peripheral myelination.

PMCID: PMC3505855
PMID: 22379615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Neurochem. 2012 May;121(4):639-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07711.x. Epub 
2012 Mar 28.

Activation of Elk-1 participates as a neuroprotective compensatory mechanism in
models of Huntington's disease.

Anglada-Huguet M(1), Giralt A, Perez-Navarro E, Alberch J, Xifró X.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Biologia Cel·lular, Immunologia i Neurociències, Facultat de
Medicina, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

The transcription factor Elk-1 has been revealed as neuroprotective against toxic
stimuli. In this study, we explored the neuroprotective capacity of Elk-1 in
Huntington's disease. To this aim, we used two exon-1 mutant huntingtin (mhtt)
mouse models (R6/1 and R6/2), and a full-length mhtt striatal cell model
(STHdh(Q111/Q111) ). Analysis of Elk-1 and pElk-1(Ser383) in the striatum of R6
mice revealed increased levels during the disease progression. Similarly, Elk-1
and pElk-1(Ser383) levels were increased in STHdh(Q111/Q111) cells when compared 
with wild-type cells. In addition, we observed a predominant nuclear localization
of Elk-1 in STHdh(Q111/Q111) cells, and in the striatum of 30-week-old R6/1 mice.
Nuclear Elk-1 did not colocalize with mhtt aggregates, suggesting a higher
transcriptional activity. In agreement, the knock-down of Elk-1 decreased
immediate early genes expression in STHdh(Q111/Q111) cells, but not in wild-type 
cells. Interestingly, reduction of Elk-1 levels by siRNAs transfection promoted
cell death and caspase 3 cleavage in STHdh(Q111/Q111) cells, but not in wild-type
cells. In summary, we propose that increased protein levels, phosphorylation and 
nuclear localization of Elk-1 observed in exon-1 and full-length Huntington's
disease models could be a compensatory mechanism activated by striatal cells in
response to the presence of mhtt that contributes to neuroprotection.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2012 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 22372926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Affect Disord. 2012 May;138(3):387-96. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2012.01.011. Epub
2012 Feb 25.

Family-based association study of early growth response gene 3 with child bipolar
I disorder.

Gallitano AL(1), Tillman R, Dinu V, Geller B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Arizona College of
Medicine-Phoenix, 425 N. 5th St., Phoenix, AZ 85004, USA.
amelia@email.arizona.edu

BACKGROUND: The risk for relapse of child bipolar I disorder (BP-I) is highly
correlated with environmental factors. Immediate early genes of the early growth 
response (EGR) gene family are activated at high levels in the brain in response 
to environmental events, including stress, and mediate numerous neurobiological
processes that have been associated with mental illness risk. The objective of
this study is to evaluate whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in EGR
genes are associated with the risk to develop child bipolar I disorder.
METHODS: To investigate whether EGR genes may influence susceptibility to child
bipolar I disorder (BP-I), we used Family Based Association Tests to examine
whether SNPs in each of the EGR genes were associated with illness in 49
families.
RESULTS: Two SNPs in EGR3 displayed nominally significant associations with child
BP-I (p=0.027 and p=0.028); though neither was statistically significant
following correction for multiple comparisons. Haplotype association analysis
indicated that these SNPs are in linkage disequilibrium (LD). None of the SNPs
tested in EGR1, EGR2, or EGR4 was associated with child BP-I.
LIMITATIONS: This study was limited by small sample size, which resulted in it
being underpowered to detect a significant association after correction for
multiple comparisons.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study revealed a preliminary finding suggesting that EGR3, a
gene that translates environmental stimuli into long-term changes in the brain,
warrants further investigation for association with risk for child BP-I disorder 
in a larger sample. Such studies may help reveal mechanisms by which environment 
can interact with genetic predisposition to influence this severe mental illness.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3349283
PMID: 22370066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Nat Genet. 2012 Feb 12;44(3):323-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.1085.

Common variants near TARDBP and EGR2 are associated with susceptibility to Ewing 
sarcoma.

Postel-Vinay S(1), Véron AS, Tirode F, Pierron G, Reynaud S, Kovar H, Oberlin O, 
Lapouble E, Ballet S, Lucchesi C, Kontny U, González-Neira A, Picci P, Alonso J, 
Patino-Garcia A, de Paillerets BB, Laud K, Dina C, Froguel P, Clavel-Chapelon F, 
Doz F, Michon J, Chanock SJ, Thomas G, Cox DG, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U Génétique et Biologie des Cancers, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

Ewing sarcoma, a pediatric tumor characterized by EWSR1-ETS fusions, is
predominantly observed in populations of European ancestry. We performed a
genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 401 French individuals with Ewing
sarcoma, 684 unaffected French individuals and 3,668 unaffected individuals of
European descent and living in the United States. We identified candidate risk
loci at 1p36.22, 10q21 and 15q15. We replicated these loci in two independent
sets of cases and controls. Joint analysis identified associations with rs9430161
(P = 1.4 × 10(-20); odds ratio (OR) = 2.2) located 25 kb upstream of TARDBP,
rs224278 (P = 4.0 × 10(-17); OR = 1.7) located 5 kb upstream of EGR2 and, to a
lesser extent, rs4924410 at 15q15 (P = 6.6 × 10(-9); OR = 1.5). The major risk
haplotypes were less prevalent in Africans, suggesting that these loci could
contribute to geographical differences in Ewing sarcoma incidence. TARDBP shares 
structural similarities with EWSR1 and FUS, which encode RNA binding proteins,
and EGR2 is a target gene of EWSR1-ETS. Variants at these loci were associated
with expression levels of TARDBP, ADO (encoding cysteamine dioxygenase) and EGR2.

PMID: 22327514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Nat Immunol. 2012 Feb 5;13(3):264-71. doi: 10.1038/ni.2230.

Elevated and sustained expression of the transcription factors Egr1 and Egr2
controls NKT lineage differentiation in response to TCR signaling.

Seiler MP(1), Mathew R, Liszewski MK, Spooner CJ, Barr K, Meng F, Singh H,
Bendelac A.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Immunology and The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Apr;14(4):413. Spooner, Chauncey [corrected to Spooner,
Chauncey J].

Interactions driven by the T cell antigen receptor (TCR) determine the lineage
fate of CD4(+)CD8(+) thymocytes, but the molecular mechanisms that induce the
lineage-determining transcription factors are unknown. Here we found that
TCR-induced transcription factors Egr2 and Egr1 had higher and more-prolonged
expression in precursors of the natural killer T (NKT) than in cells of
conventional lineages. Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by deep sequencing 
showed that Egr2 directly bound and activated the promoter of Zbtb16, which
encodes the NKT lineage-specific transcription factor PLZF. Egr2 also bound the
promoter of Il2rb, which encodes the interleukin 2 (IL-2) receptor ß-chain, and
controlled the responsiveness to IL-15, which signals the terminal
differentiation of the NKT lineage. Thus, we propose that persistent higher
expression of Egr2 specifies the early and late stages of NKT lineage
differentiation, providing a discriminating mechanism that enables TCR signaling 
to 'instruct' a thymic lineage.

PMCID: PMC3288314
PMID: 22306690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Neurosci. 2012 Feb 1;32(5):1517-27. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2895-11.2012.

The nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase chromatin remodeling (NuRD) complex is 
required for peripheral nerve myelination.

Hung H(1), Kohnken R, Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Pathology Graduate Program, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA.

Several key transcription factors and coregulators important to peripheral nerve 
myelination have been identified, but the contributions of specific chromatin
remodeling complexes to peripheral nerve myelination have not been analyzed.
Chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 4 (Chd4) is the core catalytic subunit 
of the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) chromatin remodeling complex.
Previous studies have shown Chd4 interacts with Nab (NGFI-A/Egr-binding)
corepressors, which are required for early growth response 2 (Egr2/Krox20), to
direct peripheral nerve myelination by Schwann cells. In this study, we examined 
the developmental importance of the NuRD complex in peripheral nerve myelination 
through the generation of conditional Chd4 knock-out mice in Schwann cells
(Chd4(loxP/loxP); P0-cre). Chd4 conditional null mice were found to have delayed 
myelination, radial sorting defects, hypomyelination, and the persistence of
promyelinating Schwann cells. Loss of Chd4 leads to elevated expression of
immature Schwann cell genes (Id2, c-Jun, and p75), and sustained expression of
the promyelinating Schwann cell gene, Oct6/Scip, without affecting the levels of 
Egr2/Krox20. Furthermore, Schwann cell proliferation is upregulated in Chd4-null 
sciatic nerve. In vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation studies reveal recruitment
of Chd4 and another NuRD component, Mta2, to genes that are positively and
negatively regulated by Egr2 during myelination. Together, these results
underscore the necessity of Chd4 function to guide proper terminal
differentiation of Schwann cells and implicate the NuRD chromatin remodeling
complex as a requisite factor in timely and stable peripheral nerve myelination.

PMCID: PMC3292862
PMID: 22302795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Neurogenetics. 2012 Feb;13(1):77-82. doi: 10.1007/s10048-012-0313-1. Epub 2012
Jan 25.

Vincristine exacerbates asymptomatic Charcot-Marie-tooth disease with a novel
EGR2 mutation.

Nakamura T(1), Hashiguchi A, Suzuki S, Uozumi K, Tokunaga S, Takashima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Geriatrics, Kagoshima University Graduate School
of Medical and Dental Sciences, Sakuragaoka 8-35-1, Kagoshima City, Kagoshima,
890-8520, Japan.

Neurotoxicity is a common side effect of vincristine (VCR) treatment. Severe
exacerbations of neuropathy have been reported in patients with
Charcot-Marie-tooth disease (CMT) 1A with duplication of the peripheral myelin
protein 22 (PMP22) gene. However, whether or not VCR exacerbates neuropathies
through mutations in other CMT-associated genes besides PMP22 duplication has not
been well studied. The purpose of this study was to identify mutations in any
CMT-associated genes in a patient with hypersensitivity to VCR. We performed
clinical, electrophysiological, and genetic examinations of a 23-year-old woman, 
who was hypersensitive to low-dose VCR, and her healthy mother. DNA analysis was 
performed using our specially designed resequencing array that simultaneously
screens for 28 CMT-associated genes. Electrophysiological studies revealed that
the patient and her healthy mother had demyelinating polyneuropathy. Furthermore,
they showed the same novel mutation in the early growth response 2 (EGR2) gene.
Recognizing pre-existing asymptomatic CMT by electrophysiological studies and
genetic analysis before VCR treatment allowed us to prevent severe VCR-induced
neuropathy.

PMID: 22271166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 17;109(3):899-904. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1118462109. Epub 2012 Jan 4.

Analysis of sirtuin 1 expression reveals a molecular explanation of IL-2-mediated
reversal of T-cell tolerance.

Gao B(1), Kong Q, Kemp K, Zhao YS, Fang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

The type III histone deacetylase sirtuin 1 (Sirt1) is a suppressor of both innate
and adoptive immune responses. We have recently found that Sirt1 expression is
highly induced in anergic T cells. However, the transcriptional program to
regulate Sirt1 expression in T cells remains uncharacterized. Here we report that
the early responsive genes 2 and 3, which can be up-regulated by T-cell
receptor-mediated activation of nuclear factor of activated T-cell transcription 
factors and are involved in peripheral T-cell tolerance, bind to the sirt1
promoter to transcript sirt1 mRNA. In addition, the forkhead transcription
factor, FoxO3a, interacts with early responsive genes 2/3 on the sirt1 promoter
to synergistically regulate Sirt1 expression. Interestingly, IL-2, a cytokine
that can reverse T-cell anergy, suppresses sirt1 transcription by sequestering
FoxO3a to the cytoplasm through activating the PI3K-AKT pathway. Expression of
the constitutively active form of FoxO3a blocks IL-2-mediated reversal of T-cell 
tolerance by retaining sirt1 expression. Our findings here provide a molecular
explanation of IL-2-mediated reversion of T-cell anergy.

PMCID: PMC3271862
PMID: 22219356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Cancer Lett. 2012 May 28;318(2):214-20. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2011.12.019. Epub
2011 Dec 17.

Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) induces a functional
tumor-associated phenotype for oral fibroblasts.

Dai L(1), Qin Z, Defee M, Toole BP, Kirkwood KL, Parsons C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, United States.

The Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is the causative agent of Kaposi
sarcoma (KS), the most common HIV/AIDS-associated tumor worldwide. Involvement of
the oral cavity portends a poor prognosis for patients with KS, but mechanisms
for KSHV regulation of the oral tumor microenvironment are largely unknown.
Infiltrating fibroblasts are found with KS lesions, and KSHV establishes latent
infection within human primary fibroblasts in vitro, but contributions for
KSHV-infected fibroblasts to the KS microenvironment have not been previously
characterized. Secretion of pro-migratory factors and intratumoral invasion are
characteristics of tumor-associated fibroblasts (TAF) found in the
microenvironment of non-viral malignancies. In the present study, we show that
latent KSHV infection of primary human fibroblasts isolated from the oral cavity 
enhances their secretion of KS-promoting cytokines and intrinsic invasiveness
through VEGF-dependent mechanisms. Moreover, we find that KSHV induces these
effects through Sp1- and Egr2-dependent transcriptional activation of the
Extracellular Matrix MetalloPRoteinase INducer (emmprin). These data implicate
KSHV activation of emmprin in the induction of a "TAF-like" phenotype for oral
fibroblasts in the KS microenvironment and support the potential utility of
targeting TAFs and/or emmprin in the treatment of oral KS.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3303930
PMID: 22186301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Apr 1;21(7):1581-91. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr595. Epub 2011 Dec
15.

Distal enhancers upstream of the Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1A disease gene PMP22.

Jones EA(1), Brewer MH, Srinivasan R, Krueger C, Sun G, Charney KN, Keles S,
Antonellis A, Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
WI 53705, USA.

Myelin insulates axons in the peripheral nervous system to allow rapid
propagation of action potentials, and proper myelination requires the precise
regulation of genes encoding myelin proteins, including PMP22. The correct gene
dosage of PMP22 is critical; a duplication of PMP22 is the most common cause of
the peripheral neuropathy Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease (CMT) (classified as type
1A), while a deletion of PMP22 leads to another peripheral neuropathy, hereditary
neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies. Recently, duplications upstream of
PMP22, but not containing the gene itself, were reported in patients with CMT1A
like symptoms, suggesting that this region contains regulators of PMP22. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of two transcription factors known to
upregulate PMP22-EGR2 and SOX10-we found several enhancers in this upstream
region that contain open chromatin and direct reporter gene expression in tissue 
culture and in vivo in zebrafish. These studies provide a novel means to identify
critical regulatory elements in genes that are required for myelination, and
elucidate the functional significance of non-coding genomic rearrangements.

PMCID: PMC3298281
PMID: 22180461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Neurosci. 2011 Nov 30;31(48):17358-69. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3931-11.2011.

MicroRNAs modulate Schwann cell response to nerve injury by reinforcing
transcriptional silencing of dedifferentiation-related genes.

Viader A(1), Chang LW, Fahrner T, Nagarajan R, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

In the peripheral nervous system, Schwann cells (SCs) surrounding damaged axons
undergo an injury response that is driven by an intricate transcriptional program
and is critical for nerve regeneration. To examine whether these injury-induced
changes in SCs are also regulated posttranscriptionally by miRNAs, we performed
miRNA expression profiling of mouse sciatic nerve distal segment after crush
injury. We also characterized the SC injury response in mice containing SCs with 
disrupted miRNA processing due to loss of Dicer. We identified 87 miRNAs that
were expressed in mouse adult peripheral nerve, 48 of which were dynamically
regulated after nerve injury. Most of these injury-regulated SC miRNAs were
computationally predicted to inhibit drivers of SC
dedifferentiation/proliferation and thereby re-enforce the transcriptional
program driving SC remyelination. SCs deficient in miRNAs manifested a delay in
the transition between the distinct differentiation states required to support
peripheral nerve regeneration. Among the miRNAs expressed in adult mouse SCs,
miR-34a and miR-140 were identified as functional regulators of SC
dedifferentiation/proliferation and remyelination, respectively. We found that
miR-34a interacted with positive regulators of dedifferentiation and
proliferation such as Notch1 and Ccnd1 to control cell cycle dynamics in SCs.
miR-140 targeted the transcription factor Egr2, a master regulator of
myelination, and modulated myelination in DRG/SC cocultures. Together, these
results demonstrate that SC miRNAs are important modulators of the SC
regenerative response after nerve damage.

PMCID: PMC3388739
PMID: 22131398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Exp Mol Med. 2012 Feb 29;44(2):121-9. doi: 10.3858/emm.2012.44.2.007.

Genetic association of the EGR2 gene with bipolar disorder in Korea.

Kim SH(1), Song JY, Joo EJ, Lee KY, Shin SY, Lee YH, Ahn YM, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Seoul National University Hospital, Korea.

The early growth response gene 2 (EGR2) is located at chromosome 10q21, one of
the susceptibility loci in bipolar disorder (BD). EGR2 is involved in cognitive
function, myelination, and signal transduction related to neuregulin-ErbB
receptor, Bcl-2 family proteins, and brain-derived neurotrophic factor. This
study investigated the genetic association of the EGR2 gene with BD and
schizophrenia (SPR) in Korea. In 946 subjects (350 healthy controls, 352 patients
with BD, and 244 with SPR), nine single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the
EGR2 gene region were genotyped. Five SNPs showed nominally significant allelic
associations with BD (rs2295814, rs61865882, rs10995315, rs2297488, and
rs2297489), and the positive associations of all except rs2297488 remained
significant after multiple testing correction. Linkage disequilibrium structure
analysis revealed two haplotype blocks. Among the common identified haplotypes
(frequency > 5%), 'T-G-A-C-T (block 1)' and 'A-A-G-C (block 2)' haplotypes were
over-represented, while 'C-G-G-T-T (block 1)' haplotype was under-represented in 
BD. In contrast, no significant associations were found with SPR. Although an
extended analysis with a larger sample size or independent replication is
required, these findings suggest a genetic association of EGR2 with BD. Combined 
with a plausible biological function of EGR2, the EGR2 gene is a possible
susceptibility gene in BD.

PMCID: PMC3296808
PMID: 22089088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jan;32(2):333-47. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05917-11. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Satb1 ablation alters temporal expression of immediate early genes and reduces
dendritic spine density during postnatal brain development.

Balamotis MA(1), Tamberg N, Woo YJ, Li J, Davy B, Kohwi-Shigematsu T, Kohwi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley,
California, USA.

Complex behaviors, such as learning and memory, are associated with rapid changes
in gene expression of neurons and subsequent formation of new synaptic
connections. However, how external signals are processed to drive specific
changes in gene expression is largely unknown. We found that the genome organizer
protein Satb1 is highly expressed in mature neurons, primarily in the cerebral
cortex, dentate hilus, and amygdala. In Satb1-null mice, cortical layer
morphology was normal. However, in postnatal Satb1-null cortical pyramidal
neurons, we found a substantial decrease in the density of dendritic spines,
which play critical roles in synaptic transmission and plasticity. Further, we
found that in the cerebral cortex, Satb1 binds to genomic loci of multiple
immediate early genes (IEGs) (Fos, Fosb, Egr1, Egr2, Arc, and Bdnf) and other key
neuronal genes, many of which have been implicated in synaptic plasticity. Loss
of Satb1 resulted in greatly alters timing and expression levels of these IEGs
during early postnatal cerebral cortical development and also upon stimulation in
cortical organotypic cultures. These data indicate that Satb1 is required for
proper temporal dynamics of IEG expression. Based on these findings, we propose
that Satb1 plays a critical role in cortical neurons to facilitate neuronal
plasticity.

PMCID: PMC3255767
PMID: 22064485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 3;287(6):3946-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.252742. Epub 2011
Nov 2.

Loading-related regulation of transcription factor EGR2/Krox-20 in bone cells is 
ERK1/2 protein-mediated and prostaglandin, Wnt signaling pathway-, and
insulin-like growth factor-I axis-dependent.

Zaman G(1), Sunters A, Galea GL, Javaheri B, Saxon LK, Moustafa A, Armstrong VJ, 
Price JS, Lanyon LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Basic Sciences, Royal Veterinary College, London, NW1
0TU, United Kingdom. gzaman@rvc.ac.uk

Of the 1,328 genes revealed by microarray to be differentially regulated by
disuse, or at 8 h following a single short period of osteogenic loading of the
mouse tibia, analysis by predicting associated transcription factors from
annotated affinities revealed the transcription factor EGR2/Krox-20 as being more
closely associated with more pathways and functions than any other. Real time
quantitative PCR confirmed up-regulation of Egr2 mRNA expression by loading of
the tibia in vivo. In vitro studies where strain was applied to primary cultures 
of mouse tibia-derived osteoblastic cells and the osteoblast UMR106 cell line
also showed up-regulation of Egr2 mRNA expression. In UMR106 cells, inhibition of
ß1/ß3 integrin function had no effect on strain-related Egr2 expression, but it
was inhibited by a COX2-selective antagonist and imitated by exogenous
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). This response to PGE(2) was mediated chiefly through the
EP1 receptor and involved stimulation of PKC and attenuation by cAMP/PKA. Neither
activators nor inhibitors of nitric oxide, estrogen signaling, or LiCl had any
effect on Egr2 mRNA expression, but it was increased by both insulin-like growth 
factor-1 and high, but not low, dose parathyroid hormone and exogenous Wnt-3a.
The increases by strain, PGE2, Wnt-3a, and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate were
attenuated by inhibition of MEK-1. EGR2 appears to be involved in many of the
signaling pathways that constitute early responses of bone cells to strain. These
pathways all have multiple functions. Converting their strain-related responses
into coherent "instructions" for adaptive (re)modeling is likely to depend upon
their contextual activation, suppression, and interaction probably on more than
one occasion.

PMCID: PMC3281728
PMID: 22049075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Immunobiology. 2012 Jan;217(1):28-36. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2011.08.008. Epub 2011
Aug 27.

Cell invasion and strain dependent induction of suppressor of cytokine
signaling-1 by Toxoplasma gondii.

Stutz A(1), Kessler H, Kaschel ME, Meissner M, Dalpke AH.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Infectious Diseases - Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University
Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Toxoplasma gondii is an intracellular parasite that has to cope with the
microbicidal actions of IFN<U+03B3>. Previously we reported that parasite-mediated
induction of suppressor of cytokine signaling protein 1 (SOCS1) contributes to
inhibition of IFN<U+03B3> signaling. However, the signaling requirements remained
elusive. We now show that induction of SOCS1 and inhibition of nitric oxide
production by IFN<U+03B3> was independent of stimulation of Toll-like receptors.
Instead, infection by T. gondii resulted in induction of egr transcription
factors which have been reported to regulate SOCS expression. Indeed, induction
of egr2 as well as SOCS1 was dependent on p38 MAP kinase and blockade of egr
inhibited SOCS1 expression. Moreover, we found that Mic8, a previously identified
invasion factor of T. gondii, was necessary for SOCS1 regulation and escape of
IFN<U+03B3> mediated nitric oxide secretion within macrophages. Surprisingly, when
further analyzing Mic8 deficient parasites we noted that inhibition of IFN<U+03B3>
mediated up-regulation of MHC-class II and ICAM1 molecules was independent of
cell invasion. Furthermore, these inhibitory effects were equally observed in
type I and II strains of T. gondii and were dependent on excreted and secreted
antigens. In contrast, only the virulent RH type I strain additionally induced
SOCS1 and efficiently inhibited nitric oxide secretion by IFN<U+03B3>. The results show 
that T. gondii makes use of two different mechanisms to escape from IFN<U+03B3> activity
with one mode being strain dependent and relying on active cell invasion and
SOCS1 induction.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4116597
PMID: 22015046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2011 Dec;21(6):336-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ghir.2011.09.001. Epub
2011 Oct 4.

Transcriptional response of peripheral blood mononuclear cells to recombinant
human growth hormone in a routine four-days IGF-I generation test.

Welzel M(1), Appari M, Bramswig N, Riepe FG, Holterhus PM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Pediatrics,
Christian-Albrechts University, Kiel, Germany. m.welzel@pediatrics.uni-kiel.de

BACKGROUND: There are very few laboratory markers which reflect the biological
sensitivity of children to recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) treatment.
Genome-wide transcriptional changes in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) 
have been widely used as functional readout for different pharmacological
stimuli.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize transcriptional changes in PBMC induced by rhGH during
a routine short-term IGF-I generation test (IGFGT) in children with growth
disorders.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Blood was obtained for IGF-I determination and
RNA-preparation from PBMC of 12 children before and after 4days treatment with
30µgrhGH/kg body weight/day s.c. Transcriptional changes were assessed by
cDNA-microarrays in the first six children. Selected genes were validated in all 
12 cases by RT-qPCR.
RESULTS: Serum IGF-I rose in all patients except one (p<0.0001), confirming
biological response to rhGH. Unsupervised microarray data analysis in the first
six children revealed 313 transcripts with abundant transcriptional changes but
considerable inter-individual variability of response patterns. Many patients
showed a large cluster of up-regulated genes, including EGR1, EGR2, FOS and to a 
lesser extent STAT2 and 5b. Exemplarily, EGR1, EGR2 and FOS data were
independently reproduced by RT-qPCR. Gene ontology analysis revealed that
pathways involved in cell proliferation and immune functions were significantly
over represented.
CONCLUSION: The IGFGT is a suitable method for measuring reproducible and
biologically conclusive transcriptional changes in PBMC. As our unsupervised data
analysis strategy exposed a considerable inter-individual variability of response
profiles a search for molecules of diagnostic and even prognostic value needs to 
be based on large long-term studies.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21975122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Jan;5(1):177-83. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2011.595. Epub 2011 Sep 22.

Obtain osteoarthritis related molecular signature genes through regulation
network.

Li Y(1), Wang B, Lv G, Xiong G, Liu WD, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Spinal Surgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Hunan 410011, PR China.

Osteoarthritis (OA), also known as degenerative joint disease or osteoarthrosis, 
is the most common form of arthritis. OA occurs when cartilage in the joints
wears down over time. We used the GSE1919 series to identify potential genes that
correlated to OA. The aim of our study was to obtain a molecular signature of OA 
through the regulation network based on differentially expressed genes. From the 
result of regulation network construction in OA, a number of transcription
factors (TFs) and pathways closely related to OA were linked by our method.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> also arises as hub nodes in our
transcriptome network and certain TFs containing CEBPD, EGR2 and ETS2 were shown 
to be related to OA by a previous study.

PMID: 21946934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Neuroscience. 2011 Dec 1;197:121-31. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.08.031.
Epub 2011 Sep 10.

Microarray analysis of gene expression changes in the brains of NR2B-induced
memory-enhanced mice.

Li C(1), Dong S, Wang H, Hu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Brain Functional Genomics, MOE & STCSM, Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China.

Glutamate N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors play a pivotal role in different 
forms of memory. The dysfunction of NMDA receptors contributes to the pathology
of central nervous system (CNS) disorders. To further investigate the role of the
NMDA receptors in brain processes, we analyzed and compared the gene expression
profiles in the hippocampus of NR2B overexpression-induced memory-enhanced mice
(Tg mice) with those of their wild-type littermates. Results reveal that 249
genes, which are mainly involved in neurotransmission, signal transduction,
cytoskeletal structure, hormone activity, and transcription, were significantly
affected in Tg mice. Interestingly, the intracellular calcium channel proteins
ryanodine receptor (RyR) 1 and 3, as well as functionally related proteins such
as the histidine-rich calcium-binding protein and triadin 2, were upregulated.
The Homer-1c protein was also increased in Tg mice and formed a complex with the 
RyR protein in the mouse brain, suggesting that Homer-1c is an important
modulator in both intracellular calcium signaling and overall neuronal signaling 
by simultaneously interacting with the NMDA receptors and RyR. Western blot and
real-time PCR results show that the expression of phospho-CREB, c-fos, and the
immediate-early genes Egr2 and Egr4 were also upregulated in Tg mice. The current
study demonstrates that a chronic increase in the activation of NMDA receptors
affected the expression of a large number of genes and may provide important
clues for a better understanding of the molecular mechanism of NMDA
receptor-modulated learning and memory, as well as of CNS disorders.

Copyright Â© 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21925573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Neurosci. 2011 Sep 7;31(36):12880-8. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1721-11.2011.

Breathing without CO(2) chemosensitivity in conditional Phox2b mutants.

Ramanantsoa N(1), Hirsch MR, Thoby-Brisson M, Dubreuil V, Bouvier J, Ruffault PL,
Matrot B, Fortin G, Brunet JF, Gallego J, Goridis C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U676,
Hôpital Robert Debré, 75019 Paris, France.

Breathing is a spontaneous, rhythmic motor behavior critical for maintaining
O(2), CO(2), and pH homeostasis. In mammals, it is generated by a neuronal
network in the lower brainstem, the respiratory rhythm generator (Feldman et al.,
2003). A century-old tenet in respiratory physiology posits that the respiratory 
chemoreflex, the stimulation of breathing by an increase in partial pressure of
CO(2) in the blood, is indispensable for rhythmic breathing. Here we have
revisited this postulate with the help of mouse genetics. We have engineered a
conditional mouse mutant in which the toxic PHOX2B(27Ala) mutation that causes
congenital central hypoventilation syndrome in man is targeted to the
retrotrapezoid nucleus, a site essential for central chemosensitivity. The
mutants lack a retrotrapezoid nucleus and their breathing is not stimulated by
elevated CO(2) at least up to postnatal day 9 and they barely respond as
juveniles, but nevertheless survive, breathe normally beyond the first days after
birth, and maintain blood PCO(2) within the normal range. Input from peripheral
chemoreceptors that sense PO(2) in the blood appears to compensate for the
missing CO(2) response since silencing them by high O(2) abolishes rhythmic
breathing. CO(2) chemosensitivity partially recovered in adulthood. Hence, during
the early life of rodents, the excitatory input normally afforded by elevated
CO(2) is dispensable for life-sustaining breathing and maintaining CO(2)
homeostasis in the blood.

PMID: 21900566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Genetica. 2011 Aug;139(8):1009-18. doi: 10.1007/s10709-011-9602-0. Epub 2011 Sep 
7.

Multi-locus species tree of the chub genus Squalius (Leuciscinae: Cyprinidae)
from western Iberia: new insights into its evolutionary history.

Waap S(1), Amaral AR, Gomes B, Manuela Coelho M.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biologia Ambiental, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa,
Campo Grande, 1749-016 Lisbon, Portugal. silkewaap@gmail.com

The phylogenetic relationships of the genus Squalius are believed to be well
established based on the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene. Here, we inferred the
phylogenetic relationships of all species inhabiting most of the western Iberia
river systems using a nuclear multi-locus approach and different species tree
methods: concatenation and coalescent-based methods (BEST and
minimize-deep-coalescence). The dataset comprised sequences of seven coding and
three non-coding regions belonging to seven nuclear genes, which were chosen to
cover multiple biological functions: amh, bmp4, ef1a, egr2, irbp, rh and rpl8. We
provide evidence for a conflicting topology between the nuDNA species tree and
the widely reported mtDNA gene tree. S. pyrenaicus is rendered paraphyletic in
all nuDNA species trees, with populations of the Tagus/Colares clustering with S.
carolitertii, while populations from the Guadiana, Sado and Almargem form a
separate clade. Although a larger sampling size encompassing the full spectrum of
Squalius populations in western Iberia is still needed to fully elucidate the
phylogeography and species delimitation of this genus, our results suggest that
the two S. pyrenaicus clades may represent different species.

PMID: 21898047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. EMBO J. 2011 Sep 6;30(21):4450-64. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.317.

Epigenetic silencing of the oncogenic miR-17-92 cluster during PU.1-directed
macrophage differentiation.

Pospisil V(1), Vargova K, Kokavec J, Rybarova J, Savvulidi F, Jonasova A, Necas
E, Zavadil J, Laslo P, Stopka T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathological Physiology and Center of Experimental Hematology,
First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.

The oncogenic cluster miR-17-92 encodes seven related microRNAs that regulate
cell proliferation, apoptosis and development. Expression of miR-17-92 cluster is
decreased upon cell differentiation. Here, we report a novel mechanism of the
regulation of miR-17-92 cluster. Using transgenic PU.1(-/-) myeloid progenitors
we show that upon macrophage differentiation, the transcription factor PU.1
induces the secondary determinant Egr2 which, in turn, directly represses
miR-17-92 expression by recruiting histone demethylase Jarid1b leading to histone
H3 lysine K4 demethylation within the CpG island at the miR-17-92 promoter.
Conversely, Egr2 itself is targeted by miR-17-92, indicating existence of mutual 
regulatory relationship between miR-17-92 and Egr2. Furthermore, restoring EGR2
levels in primary acute myeloid leukaemia blasts expressing elevated levels of
miR-17-92 and low levels of PU.1 and EGR2 leads to downregulation of miR-17-92
and restored expression of its targets p21CIP1 and BIM. We propose that upon
macrophage differentiation PU.1 represses the miR-17-92 cluster promoter by an
Egr-2/Jarid1b-mediated H3K4 demethylation mechanism whose deregulation may
contribute to leukaemic states.

PMCID: PMC3230374
PMID: 21897363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Domest Anim Endocrinol. 2011 Nov;41(4):195-206. doi:
10.1016/j.domaniend.2011.07.001. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Characterization of serum-free buffalo granulosa cell culture and analysis of
genes involved in terminal differentiation from FSH- to LH-responsive phenotype.

Monga R(1), Sharma I, Datta TK, Singh D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Laboratory, Animal Biochemistry Division, National
Dairy Research Institute, Haryana, India.

In the present study, buffalo granulosa cells were cultured under serum-free
conditions and characterized to study the changes in gene expression associated
with the transition of granulosa cells from estrogen- to progesterone-secreting
phenotype. The cells were cultured in vitro under completely serum-free
conditions for 8 d. Gene expression and hormone analysis showed that on day 4
granulosa cells exhibit FSH responsiveness with preovulatory phenotype having
highest CYP19 gene expression and 17ß-estradiol production, whereas a significant
increase in transcript abundance of STAR, CYP11, and HSD3B genes accompanied with
an increase in progesterone production was observed on day 8. Cells treated with 
LH on day 4 followed by gene expression analysis at 1, 2, 4, 6, 18, and 24 h
showed significant increase in transcripts of LH-responsive genes. In conclusion,
culture condition used in the present study showed that granulosa cells were FSH 
responsive and attained attributes of granulosa cells of dominant follicles at
day 4 with highest CYP19 and LHR gene expression beyond which they acquired the
ability to luteinize and thus were more LH responsive. In addition, after LH
treatment, analysis of early LH-responsive genes (EGR2, RUNX1, and NR4A1) on day 
4 showed that granulosa cells at this stage in culture exhibits phenotype similar
to that of preovulatory follicles before LH surge in vivo and corresponds to the 
in vivo transition of well-orchestrated gene expression profile after LH surge.
The characterized culture conditions represent a suitable in vitro model for
analysis of genes involved in terminal differentiation of granulosa cells from
FSH- to LH-responsive phenotype during folliculogenesis in buffalo.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21885231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Brain. 2011 Sep;134(Pt 9):2664-76. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr184. Epub 2011 Aug 11.

Genetic spectrum of hereditary neuropathies with onset in the first year of life.

Baets J(1), Deconinck T, De Vriendt E, Zimon M, Yperzeele L, Van Hoorenbeeck K,
Peeters K, Spiegel R, Parman Y, Ceulemans B, Van Bogaert P, Pou-Serradell A,
Bernert G, Dinopoulos A, Auer-Grumbach M, Sallinen SL, Fabrizi GM, Pauly F, Van
den Bergh P, Bilir B, Battaloglu E, Madrid RE, Kabzinska D, Kochanski A,
Topaloglu H, Miller G, Jordanova A, Timmerman V, De Jonghe P.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Group, VIB Department of Molecular Genetics, University of
Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, B-2610 Antwerpen, Belgium.

Early onset hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies are rare disorders
encompassing congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy with disease onset in the
direct post-natal period and Dejerine-Sottas neuropathy starting in infancy. The 
clinical spectrum, however, reaches beyond the boundaries of these two
historically defined disease entities. De novo dominant mutations in PMP22, MPZ
and EGR2 are known to be a typical cause of very early onset hereditary
neuropathies. In addition, mutations in several other dominant and recessive
genes for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease may lead to similar phenotypes. To estimate
mutation frequencies and to gain detailed insights into the genetic and
phenotypic heterogeneity of early onset hereditary neuropathies, we selected a
heterogeneous cohort of 77 unrelated patients who presented with symptoms of
peripheral neuropathy within the first year of life. The majority of these
patients were isolated in their family. We performed systematic mutation
screening by means of direct sequencing of the coding regions of 11 genes: MFN2, 
PMP22, MPZ, EGR2, GDAP1, NEFL, FGD4, MTMR2, PRX, SBF2 and SH3TC2. In addition,
screening for the Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1A duplication on chromosome
17p11.2-12 was performed. In 35 patients (45%), mutations were identified.
Mutations in MPZ, PMP22 and EGR2 were found most frequently in patients
presenting with early hypotonia and breathing difficulties. The recessive genes
FGD4, PRX, MTMR2, SBF2, SH3TC2 and GDAP1 were mutated in patients presenting with
early foot deformities and variable delay in motor milestones after an uneventful
neonatal period. Several patients displaying congenital foot deformities but an
otherwise normal early development carried the Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1A
duplication. This study clearly illustrates the genetic heterogeneity underlying 
hereditary neuropathies with infantile onset.

PMCID: PMC3170533
PMID: 21840889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 16;286(37):32483-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.267765. Epub
2011 Jul 20.

Effects of simulated microgravity on expression profile of microRNA in human
lymphoblastoid cells.

Mangala LS(1), Zhang Y, He Z, Emami K, Ramesh GT, Story M, Rohde LH, Wu H.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Biophysics Laboratory, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058,
USA. lingegowda.s.mangala@nasa.gov

This study explores the changes in expression of microRNA (miRNA) and related
genes under simulated microgravity conditions. In comparison with static 1 × g,
microgravity has been shown to alter global gene expression patterns and protein 
levels in cultured cells or animals. miRNA has recently emerged as an important
regulator of gene expression, possibly regulating as many as one-third of all
human genes. However, very little is known about the effect of altered gravity on
miRNA expression. To test the hypothesis that the miRNA expression profile would 
be altered in zero gravity resulting in altered regulation of gene expression
leading to metabolic or functional changes in cells, we cultured TK6 human
lymphoblastoid cells in a high aspect ratio vessel (bioreactor) for 72 h either
in the rotating condition to model microgravity in space or in the static
condition as a control. Expression of several miRNAs was changed significantly in
the simulated microgravity condition including miR-150, miR-34a, miR-423-5p,
miR-22, miR-141, miR-618, and miR-222. To confirm whether this altered miRNA
expression correlates with gene expression and functional changes of the cells,
we performed DNA microarray and validated the related genes using quantitative
RT-PCR. Expression of several transcription factors including EGR2, ETS1, and
c-REL was altered in simulated microgravity conditions. Taken together, the
results reported here indicate that simulated microgravity alters the expression 
of miRNAs and genes in TK6 cells. To our knowledge, this study is the first to
report the effects of simulated microgravity on the expression of miRNA and
related genes.

PMCID: PMC3173213
PMID: 21775437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Fertil Steril. 2011 Aug;96(2):439-44. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.05.062. Epub
2011 Jun 24.

Early growth response-2 expression in uterine leiomyoma cells: regulation and
function.

Yin P(1), Navarro A, Fang F, Xie A, Coon JS, Richardson C, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the regulation of early growth response-2 (Egr-2) by
transforming growth factor ß3 (TGF-ß3) and its functions in cultured human
uterine leiomyoma smooth muscle cells.
DESIGN: Laboratory research.
SETTING: Academic medical center.
PATIENT(S): Primary leiomyoma cells from patients with symptomatic leiomyomata.
INTERVENTION(S): Tissue culture followed by RNA and protein analysis.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Cell proliferation, alteration in extracellular matrix
component expression.
RESULT(S): In vivo mRNA levels of Egr-2 were statistically significantly higher
in leiomyoma tissues compared with matched myometrial tissues, and showed a
statistically significant correlation with TGF-ß3 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels in 
leiomyoma tissues. In primary leiomyoma smooth muscle cells, TGF-ß3 statistically
significantly induced Egr-2 gene expression in a dose-dependent and
time-dependent manner. Small interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown of Egr-2 markedly 
increased the level of the proliferation marker proliferating cell nuclear
antigen and the expression of proto-oncogene c-myc. On the other hand, ablation
of Egr-2 stimulated collagen-1A1 and collagen-3A1 transcription and inhibited
dermatopontin gene expression. However, the mRNA levels of a-smooth muscle actin 
and fibronectin were not affected by Egr-2 knockdown.
CONCLUSION(S): We demonstrated that TGF-ß3 regulated Egr-2 gene expression and
presented evidence that Egr-2 decreases collagen production and stimulates
dermatopontin gene expression.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3143242
PMID: 21703609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Development. 2011 Jul;138(13):2673-80. doi: 10.1242/dev.062224. Epub 2011 May 25.

Gpr126 is essential for peripheral nerve development and myelination in mammals.

Monk KR(1), Oshima K, Jörs S, Heller S, Talbot WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

In peripheral nerves, Schwann cells form the myelin sheath that insulates axons
and allows rapid propagation of action potentials. Although a number of
regulators of Schwann cell development are known, the signaling pathways that
control myelination are incompletely understood. In this study, we show that
Gpr126 is essential for myelination and other aspects of peripheral nerve
development in mammals. A mutation in Gpr126 causes a severe congenital
hypomyelinating peripheral neuropathy in mice, and expression of differentiated
Schwann cell markers, including Pou3f1, Egr2, myelin protein zero and myelin
basic protein, is reduced. Ultrastructural studies of Gpr126-/- mice showed that 
axonal sorting by Schwann cells is delayed, Remak bundles (non-myelinating
Schwann cells associated with small caliber axons) are not observed, and Schwann 
cells are ultimately arrested at the promyelinating stage. Additionally, ectopic 
perineurial fibroblasts form aberrant fascicles throughout the endoneurium of the
mutant sciatic nerve. This analysis shows that Gpr126 is required for Schwann
cell myelination in mammals, and defines new roles for Gpr126 in axonal sorting, 
formation of mature non-myelinating Schwann cells and organization of the
perineurium.

PMCID: PMC3109596
PMID: 21613327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. PLoS One. 2011 May 9;6(5):e19481. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019481.

Elevated miR-499 levels blunt the cardiac stress response.

Shieh JT(1), Huang Y, Gilmore J, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, California,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The heart responds to myriad stresses by well-described
transcriptional responses that involve long-term changes in gene expression as
well as more immediate, transient adaptations. MicroRNAs quantitatively regulate 
mRNAs and thus may affect the cardiac transcriptional output and cardiac
function. Here we investigate miR-499, a microRNA embedded within a
ventricular-specific myosin heavy chain gene, which is expressed in heart and
skeletal muscle.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We assessed miR-499 expression in human tissue to
confirm its potential relevance to human cardiac gene regulation. Using a
transgenic mouse model, we found that elevated miR-499 levels caused cellular
hypertrophy and cardiac dysfunction in a dose-dependent manner. Global gene
expression profiling revealed altered levels of the immediate early stress
response genes (Egr1, Egr2 and Fos), ß-myosin heavy chain (Myh7), and skeletal
muscle actin (Acta1). We verified the effect of miR-499 on the immediate early
response genes by miR-499 gain- and loss-of-function in vitro. Consistent with a 
role for miR-499 in blunting the response to cardiac stress, asymptomatic
miR-499-expressing mice had an impaired response to pressure overload and
accentuated cardiac dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: Elevated miR-499 levels affect cardiac gene expression and
predispose to cardiac stress-induced dysfunction. miR-499 may titrate the cardiac
response to stress in part by regulating the immediate early gene response.

PMCID: PMC3090396
PMID: 21573063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. PLoS One. 2011 May 10;6(5):e19890. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019890.

The Ras/MAPK pathway is required for generation of iNKT cells.

Hu T(1), Gimferrer I, Simmons A, Wiest D, Alberola-Ila J.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America.

iNKT cells derive from CD4(+)CD8(+) DP thymocytes, and are selected by
thymocyte-thymocyte interactions through signals from their invariant Va14-Ja18
TCR and from the costimulatory molecules SLAMF1 and SLAMF6. Genetic studies have 
demonstrated the contribution of different signaling pathways to this process.
Surprisingly, current models imply that the Ras/MAPK pathway, one of the critical
mediators of conventional aß T cell positive selection, is not necessary for iNKT
cell development. Using mice defective at different levels of this pathway our
results refute this paradigm, and demonstrate that Ras, and its downstream
effectors Egr-1 and Egr-2 are required for positive selection of iNKT cells.
Interestingly our results also show that there are differences in the
contributions of several of these molecules to the development of iNKT and
conventional aß T cells.

PMCID: PMC3091886
PMID: 21572967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Bull Acad Natl Med. 2010 Apr-May;194(4-5):743-4.

[Krox20 inactivation in the PNS leads to CNS/PNS boundary transgression by
central glia].

[Article in French]

Charnay P(1), Coulpier F, Decker L, Funalot B, Vallat JM, Garcia-Bragado F,
Topilko P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U1024, CNRS UMR 8197, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Plate-forme
Transcriptome, IBENS, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cédex 05, France.

CNS/PNS interfaces constitute cell boundaries, defining territories with
different neuronal and glial contents. Despite their potential implications for
regenerative medicine, the mechanisms that restrict oligodendrocytes and
astrocytes to the CNS and Schwann cells to the PNS are not known in mammals. To
investigate the involvement of peripheral glia and myelin in CNS/PNS boundary
maintenance, we first studied mutant mice. We found that inactivation of
Krox20/Egr2, a master regulatory gene for myelination in Schwann cells, resulted 
in CNS/PNS boundary transgression by astrocytes and oligodendrocytes, and in
myelination of nerve root axons by oligodendrocytes. In contrast, no such
migration was observed in mice with the Trembler(J) mutation, which prevents PNS 
myelination without affecting Krox20 expression. These findings suggest that
CNS/PNS boundary maintenance requires a new Krox20 function independent of
myelination control. We also examined a patient with congenital amyelinating
neuropathy, whose Schwann cells lack KROX20 protein. Interestingly, the patient's
nerve roots were also invaded by oligodendrocytes and astrocytes, indicating that
CNS/PNS boundary transgression by central glia can occur in human pathological
situations and that the underlying mechanisms are the same as in mutant mice.

PMID: 21568047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 14;6(4):e18498. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018498.

Early growth response gene-2 (Egr-2) regulates the development of B and T cells.

Li S(1), Symonds AL, Zhu B, Liu M, Raymond MV, Miao T, Wang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Brunel University, Uxbridge, London, United
Kingdom. su-ling.li@brunel.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Understanding of how transcription factors are involved in lymphocyte
development still remains a challenge. It has been shown that Egr-2 deficiency
results in impaired NKT cell development and defective positive selection of T
cells. Here we investigated the development of T, B and NKT cells in Egr-2
transgenic mice and the roles in the regulation of distinct stages of B and T
cell development.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: The expression of Egr1, 2 and 3 were analysed at different 
stages of T and B cell development by RT-PCT and results showed that the
expression was strictly regulated at different stages. Forced expression of Egr-2
in CD2(+) lymphocytes resulted in a severe reduction of CD4(+)CD8(+) (DP) cells
in thymus and pro-B cells in bone marrow, which was associated with reduced
expression of Notch1 in ISP thymocytes and Pax5 in pro-B cells, suggesting that
retraction of Egr-2 at the ISP and pro-B cell stages is important for the
activation of lineage differentiation programs. In contrast to reduction of DP
and pro-B cells, Egr-2 enhanced the maturation of DP cells into single positive
(SP) T and NKT cells in thymus, and immature B cells into mature B cells in bone 
marrow.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that Egr-2 expressed in restricted stages of
lymphocyte development plays a dynamic, but similar role for the development of
T, NKT and B cells.

PMCID: PMC3077377
PMID: 21533228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2011 Aug 31;178(1):146-55. doi:
10.1016/j.resp.2011.04.013. Epub 2011 Apr 16.

Prenatal development of central rhythm generation.

Champagnat J(1), Morin-Surun MP, Bouvier J, Thoby-Brisson M, Fortin G.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiologie et Développement (UPR 3294, CNRS), Neuro-Sud Paris (IFR 144),
Centre de Recherche de Gif-sur Yvette (CNRS, FRC 3115), Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
jean.champagnat@iaf.cnrs-gif.fr

Foetal breathing in mice results from prenatal activity of the two coupled
hindbrain oscillators considered to be responsible for respiratory rhythm
generation after birth: the pre-Bötzinger complex (preBötC) is active shortly
before the onset of foetal breathing; the parafacial respiratory group (e-pF in
embryo) starts activity one day earlier. Transcription factors have been
identified that are essential to specify neural progenitors and lineages forming 
each of these oscillators during early development of the neural tube: Hoxa1,
Egr2 (Krox20), Phox2b, Lbx1 and Atoh1 for the e-pF; Dbx1 and Evx1 for the preBötC
which eventually grow contralateral axons requiring expression of Robo3.
Inactivation of the genes encoding these factors leads to mis-specification of
these neurons and distinct breathing abnormalities: apneic patterns and loss of
central chemosensitivity for the e-pF (central congenital hypoventilation
syndrome, CCHS, in humans), complete loss of breathing for the preBötC,
right-left desynchronized breathing in Robo3 mutants. Mutations affecting
development in more rostral (pontine) respiratory territories change the shape of
the inspiratory drive without affecting the rhythm. Other (primordial) embryonic 
oscillators start in the mouse three days before the e-pF, to generate low
frequency (LF) rhythms that are probably required for activity-dependent
development of neurones at embryonic stages; in the foetus, however, they are
actively silenced to avoid detrimental interaction with the on-going respiratory 
rhythm. Altogether, these observations provide a strong support to the previously
proposed hypothesis that the functional organization of the respiratory generator
is specified at early stages of development and is dual in nature, comprising two
serially non-homologous oscillators.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21527363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Am J Pathol. 2011 May;178(5):2077-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.01.035.

The early growth response gene Egr2 (Alias Krox20) is a novel transcriptional
target of transforming growth factor-ß that is up-regulated in systemic sclerosis
and mediates profibrotic responses.

Fang F(1), Ooka K, Bhattacharyya S, Wei J, Wu M, Du P, Lin S, Del Galdo F,
Feghali-Bostwick CA, Varga J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Erratum in
    Am J Pathol. 2011 Jul;179(1):537. Bhattachyya, Swati [corrected to Bhattacharyya,
Swati].

Although the early growth response-2 (Egr-2, alias Krox20) protein shows
structural and functional similarities to Egr-1, these two related
early-immediate transcription factors are nonredundant. Egr-2 plays essential
roles in peripheral nerve myelination, adipogenesis, and immune tolerance;
however, its regulation and role in tissue repair and fibrosis remain poorly
understood. We show herein that transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß induced a
Smad3-dependent sustained stimulation of Egr2 gene expression in normal
fibroblasts. Overexpression of Egr-2 was sufficient to stimulate collagen gene
expression and myofibroblast differentiation, whereas these profibrotic TGF-ß
responses were attenuated in Egr-2-depleted fibroblasts. Genomewide
transcriptional profiling revealed that multiple genes associated with tissue
remodeling and wound healing were up-regulated by Egr-2, but the Egr-2-regulated 
gene expression profile overlapped only partially with the Egr-1-regulated gene
profile. Levels of Egr-2 were elevated in lesional tissue from mice with
bleomycin-induced scleroderma. Moreover, elevated Egr-2 was noted in biopsy
specimens of skin and lung from patients with systemic sclerosis. These results
provide the first evidence that Egr-2 is a functionally distinct transcription
factor that is both necessary and sufficient for TGF-ß-induced profibrotic
responses and is aberrantly expressed in lesional tissue in systemic sclerosis
and in a murine model of scleroderma. Together, these findings suggest that Egr-2
plays an important nonredundant role in the pathogenesis of fibrosis. Targeting
Egr-2 might represent a novel therapeutic strategy to control fibrosis.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3081194
PMID: 21514423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 29;6(3):e18335. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018335.

Serum response factor regulates immediate early host gene expression in
Toxoplasma gondii-infected host cells.

Wiley M(1), Teygong C, Phelps E, Radke J, Blader IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America.

Toxoplasma gondii is a wide spread pathogen that can cause severe and even fatal 
disease in fetuses and immune-compromised hosts. As an obligate intracellular
parasite, Toxoplasma must alter the environment of its host cell in order to
establish its replicative niche. This is accomplished, in part, by secretion of
factors into the host cell that act to modulate processes such as transcription. 
Previous studies demonstrated that genes encoding transcription factors such as
c-jun, junB, EGR1, and EGR2 were amongst the host genes that were the most
rapidly upregulated following infection. In cells stimulated with growth factors,
these genes are regulated by a transcription factor named Serum Response Factor. 
Serum Response Factor is a ubiquitously expressed DNA binding protein that
regulates growth and actin cytoskeleton genes via MAP kinase or actin
cytoskeletal signaling, respectively. Here, we report that Toxoplasma infection
leads to the rapid activation of Serum Response Factor. Serum Response Factor
activation is a Toxoplasma-specific event since the transcription factor is not
activated by the closely related protozoan parasite, Neospora caninum. We further
demonstrate that Serum Response Factor activation requires a parasite-derived
secreted factor that signals via host MAP kinases but independently of the host
actin cytoskeleton. Together, these data define Serum Response Factor as a host
cell transcription factor that regulates immediate early gene expression in
Toxoplasma-infected cells.

PMCID: PMC3066233
PMID: 21479245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Jun;25(6):1027-39. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0387. Epub 2011 Mar 
24.

Characterization of a MAPK scaffolding protein logic gate in gonadotropes.

Choi SG(1), Ruf-Zamojski F, Pincas H, Roysam B, Sealfon SC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Systems Biology and Department of Neurology, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, Annenberg 14-94, Box 1137, One Gustave L. Levy Place,
New York, New York 10029, USA.

In the pituitary gonadotropes, both protein kinase C (PKC) and MAPK/ERK signaling
cascades are activated by GnRH. Phosphoprotein-enriched in astrocytes 15 (PEA-15)
is a cytosolic ERK scaffolding protein, which is expressed in LßT2 gonadotrope
cells. Pharmacological inhibition of PKC and small interfering RNA-mediated
silencing of Gaq/11 revealed that GnRH induces accumulation of phosphorylated
PEA-15 in a PKC-dependent manner. To investigate the potential role of PEA-15 in 
GnRH signaling, we examined the regulation of ERK subcellular localization and
the activation of ribosomal S6 kinase, a substrate of ERK. Results obtained by
cellular fractionation/Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry revealed
that GnRH-induced accumulation of phosphorylated ERK in the nucleus was
attenuated when PEA-15 expression was reduced. Conversely, in the absence of GnRH
stimulation, PEA-15 anchors ERK in the cytosol. Our data suggest that
GnRH-induced nuclear translocation of ERK requires its release from PEA-15, which
occurs upon PEA-15 phosphorylation by PKC. Additional gene-silencing experiments 
in GnRH-stimulated cells demonstrated that ribosomal S6 kinase activation was
dependent on both PEA-15 and PKC. Furthermore, small interfering RNA-mediated
knockdown of PEA-15 caused a reduction in GnRH-stimulated expression of early
response genes Egr2 and c-Jun, as well as gonadotropin FSHß-subunit gene
expression. PEA-15 knockdown increased LHß and common a-glycoprotein subunit
mRNAs, suggesting a possible role in differential regulation of gonadotropin
subunit gene expression. We propose that PEA-15 represents a novel point of
convergence of the PKC and MAPK/ERK pathways under GnRH stimulation. PKC, ERK,
and PEA-15 form an AND logic gate that shapes the response of the gonadotrope
cell to GnRH.

PMCID: PMC3100603
PMID: 21436256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Hippocampus. 2012 Mar;22(3):631-42. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20926. Epub 2011 Mar 18.

Distinctive features of Egr transcription factor regulation and DNA binding
activity in CA1 of the hippocampus in synaptic plasticity and consolidation and
reconsolidation of fear memory.

Cheval H(1), Chagneau C, Levasseur G, Veyrac A, Faucon-Biguet N, Laroche S, Davis
S.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, Centre de Neurosciences Paris-Sud, UMR 8195, Orsay, F-91405, France.
helene.cheval@ed.ac.uk

Activity-dependent regulation of Egr1/Zif268, a transcription factor (TF) of the 
Egr family, is essential for stabilization of dentate gyrus synaptic plasticity
and consolidation and reconsolidation of several forms of memory. The gene can be
rapidly induced in selective brain circuits after certain types of learning or
after recall. Here, we focused on area CA1 and examined regulation of Egr1, Egr2,
and Egr3 mRNA and protein, and their DNA binding activity to the Egr response
element (ERE) at different times after LTP in vivo and after learning and recall 
of a fear memory. We found LTP in CA1 leads to rapid induction of the three Egrs,
however only Egr1 protein was overexpressed without a co-ordinated change in
binding activity, indicating a fundamental difference between CA1 and dentate
gyrus LTP. Our investigations in fear memory reveal that both learning and
retrieval lead to an increase in binding of constitutively expressed Egr1 and
Egr3 to the ERE, but not Egr2. Memory recall was also associated with increased
Egr1 protein translation. The nature and temporal dynamics of these changes and
tests for interactions between TFs suggest that in addition to ERE-mediated
transcription, Egr1 in CA1 may interact with the TF c-Fos to regulate genes via
other DNA response elements.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21425206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Neurosci. 2011 Mar 16;31(11):4242-50. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5893-10.2011.

Regulation of the PMP22 gene through an intronic enhancer.

Jones EA(1), Lopez-Anido C, Srinivasan R, Krueger C, Chang LW, Nagarajan R,
Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wisconsin 53705, USA.

Successful myelination of the peripheral nervous system depends upon induction of
major protein components of myelin, such as peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22).
Myelin stability is also sensitive to levels of PMP22, as a 1.4 Mb duplication on
human chromosome 17, resulting in three copies of PMP22, is the most common cause
of the peripheral neuropathy Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. The transcription
factor Egr2/Krox20 is required for induction of high level expression of Pmp22 in
Schwann cells but its activation elements have not yet been determined. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of the rat Pmp22 locus, we found a major
peak of Egr2 binding within the large intron of the Pmp22 gene. Analysis of a 250
bp region within the largest intron showed that it is strongly activated by Egr2 
expression in reporter assays. Moreover, this region contains conserved binding
sites not only for Egr2 but also for Sox10, which is also required for Schwann
cell development. Our analysis shows that Sox10 is required for optimal activity 
of the intronic site as well as PMP22 expression. Finally, mouse transgenic
analysis revealed tissue-specific expression of this intronic sequence in
peripheral nerve. Overall, these data show that Egr2 and Sox10 activity are
directly involved in mediating the developmental induction of Pmp22 expression.

PMCID: PMC3100536
PMID: 21411665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Zoolog Sci. 2011 Mar;28(3):189-94. doi: 10.2108/zsj.28.189.

Heparanase modulation of early growth response gene expression.

Yan X(1), Jin S, Li S, Gong F, Zhang D, Zhang X, Li JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China.

Heparan sulfate (HS), a polysaccharide ubiquitously expressed in animals, is
essential for development and homeostasis. Degradation of HS by heparanase, an
endoglucuronidase, may affect pathophysiological function. Expression of the
heparanase gene has been found elevated in a number of pathological conditions.
The goal of this work was to investigate the impact of heparanase on expression
of other genes. DNA microarray analysis revealed that 1, 042 genes in the cortex 
and 1,039 genes in the thalamus are up- or down-regulated more than 2-fold in
mouse brain overexpresssing human heparanase. Of these genes, two of the early
growth response genes, Egr1 and Egr2, are substantially upregulated in the
cortex, but essentially unchanged in the thalamus. RT-PCR analysis demonstrated a
significant increase of Egr2, but a minor increase of Egr1, in human embryonic
kidney cells stably overexpressing heparanase. The upregulated expression of Egr 
genes is also observed in hepatoma cells with upregulated expression of
heparanase. Earlier studies reported that Egr1 induced heparanase expression; our
findings suggest a possible reciprocal regulation of Egr and heparanase
expression. Furthermore, overexpression of heparanase influenced expression of
most genes involved in heparan sulfate proteoglycan biosynthesis, albeit to a
different degree in the cortex and thalamus of the transgenic mice.

PMID: 21385059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2011 Jun 1;35(4):1014-21. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2011.02.004. Epub 2011 Feb 18.

Repeated electroconvulsive seizure treatment in rats reduces inducibility of
early growth response genes and hyperactivity in response to cocaine
administration.

Park HG(1), Kim SH, Kim HS, Ahn YM, Kang UG, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Regulated expression of immediate early genes (IEGs) in the brain reflects
neuronal activity in response to various stimuli and recruits specific gene
programs involved in long-term neuronal modification and behavioral alterations. 
Repeated electroconvulsive seizure (ECS) treatment reduces the expression level
of several IEGs, such as c-fos, which play important roles in
psychostimulant-induced behavioral changes. In this study, we investigated the
effects of repeated ECS treatment on the basal expression level of IEGs and its
effects on cocaine-induced activation of IEGs and locomotor activity in rats.
Repeated ECS treatment for 10days (E10×) reduced Egr1, Egr2, Egr3, and c-fos mRNA
and protein levels in the rat frontal cortex at 24h after the last ECS treatment,
and these changes were evident in the neuronal cells of the prefrontal cortex. In
particular, downregulation of Egr1 and c-fos was evident until 5days after the
last ECS treatment. Moreover, E10× pretreatment attenuated the cocaine-induced
increase in Egr1, Egr2, and c-fos expression in the rat frontal cortex, whereas
phosphorylation of ERK1/2, one of the representative upstream activators of these
genes, increased significantly following cocaine treatment. Additionally, E10×
pretreatment attenuated the increase in locomotor activity in response to a
cocaine injection. In conclusion, repeated ECS treatment reduced the expression
and inducibility of Egrs and c-fos, which could attenuate the response of the
brain to psychostimulants.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21334415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Hum Genet. 2011 May;56(5):364-8. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.20. Epub 2011 Feb 17.

Molecular diagnosis and clinical onset of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease in Japan.

Abe A(1), Numakura C, Kijima K, Hayashi M, Hashimoto T, Hayasaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Yamagata,
Japan.

Erratum in
    J Hum Genet. 2011 Oct;56(10):751.

Comment in
    J Hum Genet. 2011 May;56(5):341-2.

To study the genetic background of Japanese Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT)
patients, we analyzed qualitative and quantitative changes in the disease-causing
genes mainly by denaturing high performance liquid chromatography and multiplex
ligation-dependent probe analysis in 227 patients with demyelinating CMT and 127 
patients with axonal CMT. In demyelinating CMT, we identified 53 patients with
PMP22 duplication, 10 patients with PMP22 mutations, 20 patients with MPZ
mutations, eight patients with NEFL mutations, 19 patients with GJB1 mutations,
one patient with EGR2 mutation, five patients with PRX mutations and no mutations
in 111 patients. In axonal CMT, we found 14 patients with MFN2 mutations, one
patient with GARS mutation, five patients with MPZ mutations, one patient with
GDAP1 mutation, six patients with GJB1 mutations and no mutations in 100
patients. Most of the patients carrying PMP22, MPZ, NEFL, PRX and MFN2 mutations 
showed early onset, whereas half of the patients carrying PMP22 duplication and
all patients with GJB1 or MPZ mutations showing axonal phenotype were adult
onset. Our data showed that a low prevalence of PMP22 duplication and high
frequency of an unknown cause are features of Japanese CMT. Low prevalence of
PMP22 duplication is likely associated with the mild symptoms due to genetic
and/or epigenetic modifying factors.

PMID: 21326314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Neurosci. 2011 Feb 2;31(5):1863-72. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4230-10.2011.

Maternal influenza viral infection causes schizophrenia-like alterations of
5-HT2A and mGlu2 receptors in the adult offspring.

Moreno JL(1), Kurita M, Holloway T, López J, Cadagan R, Martínez-Sobrido L,
García-Sastre A, González-Maeso J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

Epidemiological studies indicate that maternal influenza viral infection
increases the risk for schizophrenia in the adult offspring. The serotonin and
glutamate systems are suspected in the etiology of schizophrenia, as well as in
the mechanism of action of antipsychotic drugs. The effects of hallucinogens,
such as psilocybin and mescaline, require the serotonin 5-HT(2A) receptor, and
induce schizophrenia-like psychosis in humans. In addition, metabotropic
glutamate receptor mGlu(2/3) agonists show promise as a new treatment for
schizophrenia. Here, we investigated the level of expression and behavioral
function of 5-HT(2A) and mGlu(2) receptors in a mouse model of maternal influenza
viral infection. We show that spontaneous locomotor activity is diminished by
maternal infection with the mouse-adapted influenza A/WSN/33 (H1N1) virus. The
behavioral responses to hallucinogens and glutamate antipsychotics are both
affected by maternal exposure to influenza virus, with increased head-twitch
response to hallucinogens and diminished antipsychotic-like effect of the
glutamate agonist. In frontal cortex of mice born to influenza virus-infected
mothers, the 5-HT(2A) receptor is upregulated and the mGlu(2) receptor is
downregulated, an alteration that may be involved in the behavioral changes
observed. Additionally, we find that the cortical 5-HT(2A) receptor-dependent
signaling pathways are significantly altered in the offspring of infected
mothers, showing higher c-fos, egr-1, and egr-2 expression in response to the
hallucinogenic drug DOI. Identifying a biochemical alteration that parallels the 
behavioral changes observed in a mouse model of prenatal viral infection may
facilitate targeting therapies for treatment and prevention of schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC3037097
PMID: 21289196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Neurosci Lett. 2011 Apr 15;493(3):76-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.01.046. Epub
2011 Jan 27.

Metabotropic glutamate mGlu2 receptor is necessary for the pharmacological and
behavioral effects induced by hallucinogenic 5-HT2A receptor agonists.

Moreno JL(1), Holloway T, Albizu L, Sealfon SC, González-Maeso J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 1425 Madison Avenue,
Box 1229, New York, NY 10029, United States.

Hallucinogenic drugs, including mescaline, psilocybin and lysergic acid
diethylamide (LSD), act at serotonin 5-HT2A receptors (5-HT2ARs). Metabotropic
glutamate receptor 2/3 (mGluR2/3) ligands show efficacy in modulating the
responses induced by activation of 5-HT2ARs. The formation of a 5-HT2AR-mGluR2
complex suggests a functional interaction that affects the hallucinogen-regulated
cellular signaling pathways. Here, we tested the cellular and behavioral effects 
of hallucinogenic 5-HT2AR agonists in mGluR2 knockout (mGluR2-KO) mice. Mice were
intraperitoneally injected with the hallucinogens DOI (2 mg/kg) and LSD (0.24
mg/kg), or vehicle. Head-twitch behavioral response, expression of c-fos, which
is induced by all 5-HT2AR agonists, and expression of egr-2, which is
hallucinogen-specific, were determined in wild type and mGluR2-KO mice.
[(3)H]Ketanserin binding displacement curves by DOI were performed in mouse
frontal cortex membrane preparations. Head twitch behavior was abolished in
mGluR2-KO mice. The high-affinity binding site of DOI was undetected in mGluR2-KO
mice. The hallucinogen DOI induced c-fos in both wild type and mGluR2-KO mice.
However, the induction of egr-2 by DOI was eliminated in mGlu2-KO mice. These
findings suggest that the 5-HT2AR-mGluR2 complex is necessary for the
neuropsychological responses induced by hallucinogens.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3064746
PMID: 21276828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2011 Jan;167(1):51-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2010.07.043. Epub
2010 Dec 28.

Krox20 inactivation in the PNS leads to CNS/PNS boundary transgression by central
glia.

Coulpier F(1), Decker L, Funalot B, Vallat JM, Garcia-Bragado F, Charnay P,
Topilko P.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1024, CNRS UMR 8197, IBENS, plate-forme Transcriptome, École normale 
supérieure, 46, rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris cedex 05, France.

CNS/PNS interfaces constitute cell boundaries, since they delimit territories
with different neuronal and glial contents. Despite their potential interest in
regenerative medicine, the mechanisms restricting oligodendrocytes and astrocytes
to the CNS, and Schwann cells to the PNS in mammals are not known. To investigate
the involvement of peripheral glia and myelin in the maintenance of the CNS/PNS
boundary, we have first made use of different mouse mutants. We show that
inactivation of Krox20/Egr2, a master regulatory gene for myelination in Schwann 
cells, results in transgression of the CNS/PNS boundary by astrocytes and
oligodendrocytes and in myelination of nerve root axons by oligodendrocytes. In
contrast, such migration does not occur with the Trembler(J) mutation, which
prevents PNS myelination without affecting Krox20 expression. Altogether these
data suggest that maintenance of the CNS/PNS boundary requires a new Krox20
function separable from myelination control. Finally, we have analyzed a human
patient affected by a congenital amyelinating neuropathy, associated with the
absence of the KROX20 protein in Schwann cells. In this case, the nerve roots
were also invaded by oligodendrocytes and astrocytes. This indicates that
transgression of the CNS/PNS boundary by central glia can occur in pathological
situations in humans and suggests that the underlying mechanisms are common with 
the mouse.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21193208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jan 11;108(2):632-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1008848108.
Epub 2010 Dec 27.

Egr1 mediates p53-independent c-Myc-induced apoptosis via a noncanonical
ARF-dependent transcriptional mechanism.

Boone DN(1), Qi Y, Li Z, Hann SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232-2175, USA.

c-Myc is frequently deregulated in human cancers. Although deregulated c-Myc
leads to tumor growth, it also triggers apoptosis in partnership with tumor
suppressors such as ARF and p53. Apoptosis induced by c-Myc is a critical
fail-safe mechanism for the cell to protect against unrestrained proliferation.
Despite the plethora of information on c-Myc, the molecular mechanism of how
c-Myc induces both transformation and apoptosis is unclear. Oncogenic c-Myc can
indirectly induce the expression of the tumor suppressor ARF, which leads to
apoptosis through the stabilization of p53, but both c-Myc and ARF have apoptotic
activities that are independent of p53. In cells without p53, ARF directly binds 
to c-Myc protein and inhibits c-Myc-induced hyperproliferation and transformation
with a concomitant inhibition of canonical c-Myc target gene induction. However, 
ARF is an essential cofactor for p53-independent c-Myc-induced apoptosis. Here we
show that ARF is necessary for c-Myc to drive transcription of a unique
noncanonical target gene, Egr1. In contrast, c-Myc induces another family member,
Egr2, through a canonical mechanism that is inhibited by ARF. We further
demonstrate that Egr1 is essential for p53-independent c-Myc-induced apoptosis,
but not ARF-independent c-Myc-induced apoptosis. Therefore, ARF binding switches 
the inherent activity of c-Myc from a proliferative to apoptotic protein without 
p53 through a unique noncanonical transcriptional mechanism. These findings also 
provide evidence that cofactors can differentially regulate specific
transcriptional programs of c-Myc leading to different biological outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3021028
PMID: 21187408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 Dec 27;4:175. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-175.

Bio-informatics analysis of a gene co-expression module in adipose tissue
containing the diet-responsive gene Nnat.

Li X(1), Thomason PA, Withers DJ, Scott J.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Medicine Department, Imperial College
London, South Kensington, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK.
xinzhong.li@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Obesity causes insulin resistance in target tissues - skeletal
muscle, adipose tissue, liver and the brain. Insulin resistance predisposes to
type-2 diabetes (T2D) and cardiovascular disease (CVD). Adipose tissue
inflammation is an essential characteristic of obesity and insulin resistance.
Neuronatin (Nnat) expression has been found to be altered in a number of
conditions related to inflammatory or metabolic disturbance, but its
physiological roles and regulatory mechanisms in adipose tissue, brain,
pancreatic islets and other tissues are not understood.
RESULTS: We identified transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) conserved in the
Nnat promoter, and transcription factors (TF) abundantly expressed in adipose
tissue. These include transcription factors concerned with the control of:
adipogenesis (Ppar<U+03B3>, Klf15, Irf1, Creb1, Egr2, Gata3); lipogenesis (Mlxipl,
Srebp1c); inflammation (Jun, Stat3); insulin signalling and diabetes
susceptibility (Foxo1, Tcf7l2). We also identified NeuroD1 the only documented TF
that controls Nnat expression. We identified KEGG pathways significantly
associated with Nnat expression, including positive correlations with
inflammation and negative correlations with metabolic pathways (most prominently 
oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, pyruvate metabolism)
and protein turnover. 27 genes, including; Gstt1 and Sod3, concerned with
oxidative stress; Sncg and Cxcl9 concerned with inflammation; Ebf1, Lgals12 and
Fzd4 involved in adipogenesis; whose expression co-varies with Nnat were
identified, and conserved transcription factor binding sites identified on their 
promoters. Functional networks relating to each of these genes were identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis shows that Nnat is an acute diet-responsive gene in
white adipose tissue and hypothalamus; it may play an important role in
metabolism, adipogenesis, and resolution of oxidative stress and inflammation in 
response to dietary excess.

PMCID: PMC3022651
PMID: 21187013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Brain Res. 2011 Feb 28;1376:60-5. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.12.058. Epub 2010 
Dec 24.

Gene expression associated with an enriched environment after transient focal
ischemia.

Shono Y(1), Yokota C, Kuge Y, Kido S, Harada A, Kokame K, Inoue H, Hotta M,
Hirata K, Saji H, Tamaki N, Minematsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cerebrovascular Medicine, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular
Center, Japan.

Recent studies have demonstrated that animals housed in an enriched environment
after an experimental stroke obtained a better functional outcome than those
housed in a standard cage; however, little is known about the gene expression
associated with this functional recovery. The purpose of the present study was to
elucidate the expression of genes in an enriched environment after experimental
stroke in the ischemic and non-ischemic sides of the cortices. Transient focal
brain ischemia was produced by the occlusion of the right middle cerebral artery 
(t-MCAO) in male Sprague-Dawley rats. The rats were divided into 3 groups:
ischemic rats housed in the enriched environment, ischemic rats housed in
standard cages, and non-ischemic rats in standard cages. Four weeks after t-MCAO,
the rats were sacrificed and gene expression was examined. Motor function was
improved in ischemic rats housed in the enriched environment compared with those 
in standard cages; however, there were no significant differences in the size of 
the infarct area between the ischemic rats in the enriched environment and those 
in standard cages. Decreases in the expression of Egr-1, -2, and BDNF mRNA in
both sides of the cortices were detected in rats housed in the enriched
environment, indicating that gene expression was altered throughout the brain at 
4 weeks after transient focal ischemia.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21185809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 16;5(12):e14346. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014346.

A rare myelin protein zero (MPZ) variant alters enhancer activity in vitro and in
vivo.

Antonellis A(1), Dennis MY, Burzynski G, Huynh J, Maduro V, Hodonsky CJ, Khajavi 
M, Szigeti K, Mukkamala S, Bessling SL, Pavan WJ, McCallion AS, Lupski JR, Green 
ED; NISC Comparative Sequencing Program.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Myelin protein zero (MPZ) is a critical structural component of
myelin in the peripheral nervous system. The MPZ gene is regulated, in part, by
the transcription factors SOX10 and EGR2. Mutations in MPZ, SOX10, and EGR2 have 
been implicated in demyelinating peripheral neuropathies, suggesting that
components of this transcriptional network are candidates for harboring
disease-causing mutations (or otherwise functional variants) that affect MPZ
expression.
METHODOLOGY: We utilized a combination of multi-species sequence comparisons,
transcription factor-binding site predictions, targeted human DNA re-sequencing, 
and in vitro and in vivo enhancer assays to study human non-coding MPZ variants.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Our efforts revealed a variant within the first intron of MPZ
that resides within a previously described SOX10 binding site is associated with 
decreased enhancer activity, and alters binding of nuclear proteins.
Additionally, the genomic segment harboring this variant directs tissue-relevant 
reporter gene expression in zebrafish.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first reported MPZ variant within a cis-acting
transcriptional regulatory element. While we were unable to implicate this
variant in disease onset, our data suggests that similar non-coding sequences
should be screened for mutations in patients with neurological disease.
Furthermore, our multi-faceted approach for examining the functional significance
of non-coding variants can be readily generalized to study other loci important
for myelin structure and function.

PMCID: PMC3002941
PMID: 21179557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Development. 2011 Jan;138(2):317-26. doi: 10.1242/dev.057299.

Hindbrain patterning requires fine-tuning of early krox20 transcription by
Sprouty 4.

Labalette C(1), Bouchoucha YX, Wassef MA, Gongal PA, Le Men J, Becker T,
Gilardi-Hebenstreit P, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Normale Supérieure, IBENS, Paris Cedex 75230, France.

Vertebrate hindbrain segmentation is an evolutionarily conserved process that
involves a complex interplay of transcription factors and signalling pathways.
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signalling plays a major role, notably by
controlling the expression of the transcription factor Krox20 (Egr2), which is
required for the formation and specification of two segmental units: rhombomeres 
(r) 3 and 5. Here, we explore the molecular mechanisms downstream of FGF
signalling and the function of Sprouty 4 (Spry4), a negative-feedback regulator
of this pathway, in zebrafish. We show that precise modulation of FGF signalling 
by Spry4 is required to determine the appropriate onset of krox20 transcription
in r3 and r5 and, ultimately, rhombomere size in the r3-r5 region. FGF signalling
acts by modulating the activity of krox20 initiator enhancer elements B and C; in
r5, we show that this regulation is mediated by direct binding of the
transcription factor MafB to element B. By contrast, FGF signalling does not
control the krox20 autoregulatory element A, which is responsible for
amplification and maintenance of krox20 expression. Therefore, early krox20
transcription sets the blueprint for r3-r5 patterning. This work illustrates the 
necessity for fine-tuning in a common and fundamental patterning process, based
on a bistable cell-fate choice involving the coupling of an extracellular
gradient with a positive-feedback loop. In this mode of patterning, precision and
robustness can be achieved by the introduction of a negative-feedback loop,
which, in the hindbrain, is mediated by Spry4.

PMID: 21177344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 18;286(7):5855-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.153106. Epub 2010 
Dec 20.

EGR1 and EGR2 involvement in vertebrate tendon differentiation.

Lejard V(1), Blais F, Guerquin MJ, Bonnet A, Bonnin MA, Havis E, Malbouyres M,
Bidaud CB, Maro G, Gilardi-Hebenstreit P, Rossert J, Ruggiero F, Duprez D.

Author information: 
(1)Université Pierre et Marie Curie, CNRS UMR 7622, Paris 75005, France.

The molecules involved in vertebrate tendon formation during development remain
largely unknown. To date, only two DNA-binding proteins have been identified as
being involved in vertebrate tendon formation, the basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor Scleraxis and, recently, the Mohawk homeobox gene. We
investigated the involvement of the early growth response transcription factors
Egr1 and Egr2 in vertebrate tendon formation. We established that Egr1 and Egr2
expression in tendon cells was correlated with the increase of collagen
expression during tendon cell differentiation in embryonic limbs. Vertebrate
tendon differentiation relies on a muscle-derived FGF (fibroblast growth factor) 
signal. FGF4 was able to activate the expression of Egr genes and that of the
tendon-associated collagens in chick limbs. Egr gene misexpression experiments
using the chick model allowed us to establish that either Egr gene has the
ability to induce de novo expression of the reference tendon marker scleraxis,
the main tendon collagen Col1a1, and other tendon-associated collagens Col3a1,
Col5a1, Col12a1, and Col14a1. Mouse mutants for Egr1 or Egr2 displayed reduced
amounts of Col1a1 transcripts and a decrease in the number of collagen fibrils in
embryonic tendons. Moreover, EGR1 and EGR2 trans-activated the mouse Col1a1
proximal promoter and were recruited to the tendon regulatory regions of this
promoter. These results identify EGRs as novel DNA-binding proteins involved in
vertebrate tendon differentiation by regulating type I collagen production.

PMCID: PMC3037698
PMID: 21173153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Arch Neurol. 2010 Dec;67(12):1498-505. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.303.

Analyzing histopathological features of rare charcot-marie-tooth neuropathies to 
unravel their pathogenesis.

Benedetti S(1), Previtali SC, Coviello S, Scarlato M, Cerri F, Di Pierri E,
Piantoni L, Spiga I, Fazio R, Riva N, Natali Sora MG, Dacci P, Malaguti MC,
Munerati E, Grimaldi LM, Marrosu MG, De Pellegrin M, Ferrari M, Comi G, Quattrini
A, Bolino A.

Author information: 
(1)San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) neuropathies are very heterogeneous
disorders from both a clinical and genetic point of view. The CMT genes
identified so far encode different proteins that are variably involved in
regulating Schwann cells and/or axonal functions. However, the function of most
of these proteins still remains to be elucidated.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize a large cohort of patients with demyelinating, axonal,
and intermediate forms of CMT neuropathy.
DESIGN: A cohort of 131 unrelated patients were screened for mutations in 12
genes responsible for CMT neuropathies. Demyelinating, axonal, and intermediate
forms of CMT neuropathy were initially distinguished as usual on the basis of
electrophysiological criteria and clinical evaluation. A sural nerve biopsy was
also performed for selected cases. Accordingly, patients underwent first-level
analysis of the genes most frequently mutated in each clinical form of CMT
neuropathy.
RESULTS: Although our cohort had a particularly high percentage of cases of rare 
axonal and intermediate CMT neuropathies, we found mutations in 40% of patients. 
Among identified changes, 7 represented new mutations occurring in the MPZ, GJB1,
EGR2, MFN2, NEFL, and HSBP1/HSP27 genes. Histopathological analysis performed in 
selected cases revealed morphological features, which correlated with the
molecular diagnosis and provided evidence of the underlying pathogenetic
mechanism.
CONCLUSION: Clinical and pathological analysis of patients with CMT neuropathies 
contributes to our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of CMT neuropathies.

PMID: 21149811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 29;5(10):e13703. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013703.

The LARGE principle of cellular reprogramming: lost, acquired and retained gene
expression in foreskin and amniotic fluid-derived human iPS cells.

Wolfrum K(1), Wang Y, Prigione A, Sperling K, Lehrach H, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Aging Group, Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

Human amniotic fluid cells (AFCs) are routinely obtained for prenatal diagnostics
procedures. Recently, it has been illustrated that these cells may also serve as 
a valuable model system to study developmental processes and for application in
regenerative therapies. Cellular reprogramming is a means of assigning greater
value to primary AFCs by inducing self-renewal and pluripotency and, thus,
bypassing senescence. Here, we report the generation and characterization of
human amniotic fluid-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (AFiPSCs) and
demonstrate their ability to differentiate into the trophoblast lineage after
stimulation with BMP2/BMP4. We further carried out comparative transcriptome
analyses of primary human AFCs, AFiPSCs, fibroblast-derived iPSCs (FiPSCs) and
embryonic stem cells (ESCs). This revealed that the expression of key
senescence-associated genes are down-regulated upon the induction of pluripotency
in primary AFCs (AFiPSCs). By defining distinct and overlapping gene expression
patterns and deriving the LARGE (Lost, Acquired and Retained Gene Expression)
Principle of Cellular Reprogramming, we could further highlight that AFiPSCs,
FiPSCs and ESCs share a core self-renewal gene regulatory network driven by OCT4,
SOX2 and NANOG. Nevertheless, these cell types are marked by distinct gene
expression signatures. For example, expression of the transcription factors,
SIX6, EGR2, PKNOX2, HOXD4, HOXD10, DLX5 and RAXL1, known to regulate
developmental processes, are retained in AFiPSCs and FiPSCs. Surprisingly,
expression of the self-renewal-associated gene PRDM14 or the developmental
processes-regulating genes WNT3A and GSC are restricted to ESCs. Implications of 
this, with respect to the stability of the undifferentiated state and long-term
differentiation potential of iPSCs, warrant further studies.

PMCID: PMC2966395
PMID: 21060825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Nat Neurosci. 2010 Dec;13(12):1472-80. doi: 10.1038/nn.2686. Epub 2010 Nov 7.

Yy1 as a molecular link between neuregulin and transcriptional modulation of
peripheral myelination.

He Y(1), Kim JY, Dupree J, Tewari A, Melendez-Vasquez C, Svaren J, Casaccia P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Genetics and Genomics, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

Fast axonal conduction depends on myelin, which is formed by Schwann cells in the
PNS. We found that the transcription factor Yin Yang 1 (YY1) is crucial for
peripheral myelination. Conditional ablation of Yy1 in the Schwann cell lineage
resulted in severe hypomyelination, which occurred independently of altered
Schwann cell proliferation or apoptosis. In Yy1 mutant mice, Schwann cells
established a 1:1 relationship with axons but were unable to myelinate them. The 
Schwann cells expressed low levels of myelin proteins and of Egr2 (also called
Krox20), which is an important regulator of peripheral myelination. In vitro,
Schwann cells that lacked Yy1 did not upregulate Egr2 in response to neuregulin1 
and did not express myelin protein zero. This phenotype was rescued by
overexpression of Egr2. In addition, neuregulin-induced phosphorylation of YY1
was required for transcriptional activation of Egr2. Thus, YY1 emerges as an
important activator of peripheral myelination that links neuregulin signaling
with Egr2 expression.

PMCID: PMC3142946
PMID: 21057508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Stem Cell Rev. 2011 Jun;7(2):394-403. doi: 10.1007/s12015-010-9198-2.

Efficient generation of schwann cells from human embryonic stem cell-derived
neurospheres.

Ziegler L(1), Grigoryan S, Yang IH, Thakor NV, Goldstein RS.

Author information: 
(1)Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Gonda 
Building, Old Campus, 52900, Ramat-Gan, Israel.

Schwann cells (SC), the glial cells of peripheral nerves, are involved in many
diseases including Charcot Marie Tooth and neurofibromatosis, and play a pivotal 
role in peripheral nerve regeneration. Although it is possible to obtain human SC
from nerve biopsies, they are difficult to maintain and expand in culture. Here
we describe an efficient system for directing the differentiation of human
embryonic stem cells (hESC) into cells with the morphological and molecular
characteristics of SC. Neurospheres were generated from hESC using stromal cell
induction and grown under conditions supportive of SC differentiation. After 8
weeks, hESC-derived SC expressed characteristic markers GFAP, S100, HNK1, P75,
MBP and PMP-22, and were observed in close association with hESC-derived
neurites. ~60% of the cells were double-immunostained for the SC markers
GFAP/S100. RT-PCR analysis confirmed the expression of GFAP, S100, P75, PMP-22
and MBP and demonstrated expression of the SC markers P0, KROX20 and PLP in the
cultures. Expression of CAD19 was observed in 2 and 4 week cultures and then was 
down-regulated, consistent with its expression in SC precursor, but not mature
stages. Co-culture of hESC-derived SC with rat, chick or hESC-derived axons in
compartmentalized microfluidic chambers resulted in tight association of the SC
with axons. Apparent wrapping of the axons by SC was occasionally observed,
suggestive of myelination. Our method for generating SC from hESC makes available
a virtually unlimited source of human SC for studies of their role in nerve
regeneration and modeling of disease.

PMID: 21052870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Neurochem. 2010 Dec;115(6):1409-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07045.x. Epub
2010 Nov 4.

Locus-wide identification of Egr2/Krox20 regulatory targets in myelin genes.

Jang SW(1), Srinivasan R, Jones EA, Sun G, Keles S, Krueger C, Chang LW,
Nagarajan R, Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA.

Myelination of peripheral nerves by Schwann cells depends upon a gene regulatory 
network controlled by early growth response Egr2/Krox20, which is specifically
required for Schwann cells to initiate and maintain myelination. To elucidate the
mechanism by which Egr2 regulates gene expression during myelination, we have
performed chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis on myelinating rat sciatic nerve
in vivo. The resulting samples were applied to a tiled microarray consisting of a
broad spectrum of genes that are activated or repressed in Egr2-deficient mice.
The results show extensive binding within myelin-associated genes, as well as
some genes that become repressed in myelinating Schwann cells. Many of the Egr2
peaks coincide with regions of open chromatin, which is a marker of enhancer
regions. In addition, further analysis showed that there is substantial
colocalization of Egr2 binding with Sox10, a transcription factor required for
Schwann cell specification and other stages of Schwann cell development. Finally,
we have found that Egr2 binds to promoters of several lipid biosynthetic genes,
which is consistent with their dramatic up-regulation during the formation of
lipid-rich myelin. Overall, this analysis provides a locus-wide profile of Egr2
binding patterns in major myelin-associated genes using myelinating peripheral
nerve.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2010 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMCID: PMC3260055
PMID: 21044070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Int J Oncol. 2010 Dec;37(6):1407-16.

Identification and characterization of early growth response 2, a zinc-finger
transcription factor, as a p53-regulated proapoptotic gene.

Yokota I(1), Sasaki Y, Kashima L, Idogawa M, Tokino T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, Chuo-ku, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.

Tumor suppressor p53 is a transcription factor that induces growth arrest and/or 
apoptosis in response to cellular stress. In recent years, many genes have been
identified as p53-regulated genes; however, no single target gene has been shown 
to be required for the apoptotic effect. Using microarray analysis, we have
identified the transcription factor early growth response 2 (EGR2) as a target of
the p53 family, specifically p53, p63 and p73. EGR2 expression was up-regulated
by DNA damage-induced p53 activity, as well as by overexpression of p53 family
genes. Furthermore, we identified a responsive element to p53, TAp63, and TAp73
within the EGR2 gene. This response element is highly conserved between human and
rodents. We also found that overexpression of EGR2 induced apoptosis when
combined with anticancer agents. Conversely, inactivation of EGR2 attenuated
p53-mediated apoptosis. The results presented here suggest that EGR2 is a direct 
transcriptional target of p53 family that can in part mediate the p53-dependent
apoptotic pathway.

PMID: 21042708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 23;5(9):e12904. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012904.

EGR-2 is not required for in vivo CD4 T cell mediated immune responses.

Ramón HE(1), Cejas PJ, LaRosa D, Rahman A, Harris JE, Zhang J, Hunter C, Choi Y, 
Turka LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The zinc finger transcription factor EGR-2 has been shown to play an 
important role in the induction of T cell anergy and the regulation of peripheral
T cell tolerance. In vitro, a prior study has show that T cells deficient in
EGR-2 are hyperproliferative to IL-2 and produce elevated levels of the effector 
cytokine IFN-<U+03B3>. EGR-2 deficient mice have increased levels of CD44(high) T cells 
in peripheral lymphoid organs, and with age, develop autoimmune-like features.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show that despite increased numbers of cells bearing 
an activated CD44(high)CD62L(low) phenotype, T cells from young healthy EGR-2
deficient mice have normal proliferative and cytokine responses, and the mice
themselves mount normal immune responses against minor histocompatibility
antigens, and the pathogens Toxoplasma gondii and lymphocytic choriomeningitis
virus.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that EGR-2 is not required to mount normal
acute in vivo immune responses against foreign antigens, and suggest instead that
it may serve to regulate the response to chronic antigenic exposure, such as that
which occurs to autoantigens.

PMCID: PMC2944839
PMID: 20886122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Virol. 2010 Dec;84(23):12405-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01415-10. Epub 2010 Sep 22.

Cellular immediate-early gene expression occurs kinetically upstream of
Epstein-Barr virus bzlf1 and brlf1 following cross-linking of the B cell antigen 
receptor in the Akata Burkitt lymphoma cell line.

Ye J(1), Gradoville L, Miller G.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University School
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) lytic activator genes bzlf1 and brlf1 are
conventionally referred to as immediate-early (IE) genes. However, previous
studies showed that the earliest expression of these genes was blocked by
cycloheximide when the EBV lytic cycle was induced by histone deacetylase (HDAC) 
inhibitors and protein kinase C agonists. Anti-IgG activates a complex signal
transduction pathway that leads to EBV lytic activation in the Akata cell line.
Here we demonstrate that in Akata cells, where lytic cycle activation occurs very
rapidly after anti-IgG treatment, de novo protein synthesis is also required for 
induction of bzlf1 and brlf1 expression. New protein synthesis is required up to 
1.25 h after application of anti-IgG; bzlf1 and brlf1 mRNAs can be detected 1.5 h
after anti-IgG. Five cellular IE genes were shown to be expressed by 1 h after
addition of anti-IgG, and their expression preceded that of bzlf1 and brlf1.
These include early growth response genes (egr1, egr2, and egr3) and nuclear
orphan receptors (nr4a1 and nr4a3). These genes were activated by anti-IgG
treatment of Akata cells with and without the EBV genome; therefore, their
expression was not dependent on expression of any EBV gene product. EGR1, EGR2,
and EGR3 proteins were kinetically upstream of ZEBRA and Rta proteins. Expression
of EGR1, ZEBRA, and Rta proteins were inhibited by bisindolylmaleimide X, a
selective inhibitor of PKC. The findings suggest a revised model in which the
signal transduction cascade activated by cross-linking of the B cell receptor
induces expression of cellular IE genes, such as early growth response and
nuclear orphan receptor genes, whose products, in turn, regulate bzlf1 and brlf1 
expression.

PMCID: PMC2976389
PMID: 20861250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Blood. 2010 Nov 11;116(19):3964-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-01-263830. Epub 2010 
Aug 17.

Krox20/EGR2 deficiency accelerates cell growth and differentiation in the
monocytic lineage and decreases bone mass.

Gabet Y(1), Baniwal SK, Leclerc N, Shi Y, Kohn-Gabet AE, Cogan J, Dixon A, Bachar
M, Guo L, Turman JE Jr, Frenkel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Keck School of Medicine at
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Krox20/EGR2, one of the 4 early growth response genes, is a highly conserved
transcription factor implicated in hindbrain development, peripheral nerve
myelination, tumor suppression, and monocyte/macrophage cell fate determination. 
Here, we established a novel role for Krox20 in postnatal skeletal metabolism.
Microcomputed tomographic analysis of 4- and 8-week-old mice revealed a low bone 
mass phenotype (LBM) in both the distal femur and the vertebra of Krox20(+/-)
mice. This was attributable to accelerated bone resorption as demonstrated in
vivo by increased osteoclast number and serum C-terminal telopeptides, a marker
for collagen degradation. Krox20 haploinsufficiency did not reduce bone formation
in vivo, nor did it compromise osteoblast differentiation in vitro. In contrast, 
growth and differentiation were significantly stimulated in preosteoclast
cultures derived from Krox20(+/-) splenocytes, suggesting that the LBM is
attributable to Krox20 haploinsufficiency in the monocytic lineage. Furthermore, 
Krox20 silencing in preosteoclasts increased cFms expression and response to
macrophage colony-stimulating factor, leading to a cell-autonomous stimulation of
cell-cycle progression. Our data indicate that the antimitogenic role of Krox20
in preosteoclasts is the predominant mechanism underlying the LBM phenotype of
Krox20-deficient mice. Stimulation of Krox20 expression in preosteoclasts may
present a viable therapeutic strategy for high-turnover osteoporosis.

PMCID: PMC2981544
PMID: 20716776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(8-9):1375-82. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.103080cf.

Vestigial like gene family expression in Xenopus: common and divergent features
with other vertebrates.

Faucheux C(1), Naye F, Tréguer K, Fédou S, Thiébaud P, Théze N.

Author information: 
(1)UMR CNRS 5164, Université Bordeaux 2, 146 rue Léo Saignat, Bordeaux, France.

The Drosophila Vestigial and Scalloped proteins form heterodimers that control
wing development and are involved in muscle differentiation. Four vestigial like 
genes have been described in mammals. Similar to the Drosophila vestigial gene,
they encode a short conserved domain (TONDU) required for interaction with the
mammalian paralogues of Drosophila Scalloped (i.e., TEAD proteins). We previously
identified two TEAD genes in Xenopus laevis and we report here the expression of 
four distinct vestigial like genes in Xenopus (vgll1-4) that represent amphibian 
orthologs of the mammalian vestigial like genes. Vgll1 has a unique expression
pattern which is restricted to epidermal cells, both in the embryo and in the
adult. Vgll2 is expressed in the skeletal muscle lineage downstream of myogenic
factors and in the embryonic brain similar to the avian and mammalian
orthologues. Vgll3 expression is transient, identifies embryonic hindbrain
rhombomere 2, and is negatively regulated by en2, but not by egr2. Vgll4 is
mainly expressed in anterior neural structures. In summary, the four Xenopus vgll
genes have unique/complex expression profiles and they are differently expressed 
during embryogenesis. Moreover, these amphibian vestigial like genes display
distinct responses to the major signaling pathways (i.e., activin, FGF or BMP)
that orchestrate pattern-formation during early development.

PMID: 20712000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Exp Neurol. 2010 Nov;226(1):47-57. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2010.08.002. Epub
2010 Aug 7.

Regulation of peripheral myelination by Src-like kinases.

Hossain S(1), Fragoso G, Mushynski WE, Almazan G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

Fyn, a nonreceptor Src-like tyrosine kinase (SLK), plays an important role in
oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelination in the brain. However, its role
in myelination of peripheral nerves remains undefined. Here we report that
selective inhibitors of SLKs (PP2 and SU6656) caused a dose-dependent decrease in
the accumulation of several myelin proteins, including myelin basic protein
(MBP), protein zero (P0) and myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) in rat Schwann 
cell-dorsal root ganglion neuron (SC-DRGN) co-cultures. Interestingly, SLK
inhibition was insufficient to completely abrogate myelin synthesis, as removal
of PP2 after several days of treatment permitted a partial recovery of myelin
proteins expression. Furthermore, fewer and shorter myelinated segments formed in
the continuous presence of PP2, although the myelin formed was normally
compacted. PP2 also decreased the number of SCs expressing Krox-20, a
master-regulatory transcription factor expressed by myelinating SCs, by 50%.
These results were corroborated by selective knockdown of Fyn and Lyn kinases
using siRNA. Extracellular matrix is important to SC differentiation and
peripheral myelination. Using phospho-specific antibodies, we showed that
addition of extracellular matrix extracts to SC-DRGN co-cultures resulted in the 
activation of ERK, Akt and p38 MAPK, three protein kinases involved in SC
proliferation, differentiation and peripheral myelination. PP2 blocked the
phosphorylation of all three kinases. Our results support a role for SLKs in the 
initiation of peripheral myelination via the activation of p38, Akt and ERK,
which regulate Krox-20 expression and peripheral myelination.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20696161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2010 Oct 5;153B(7):1355-60. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.31115.

EGR3 as a potential susceptibility gene for schizophrenia in Korea.

Kim SH(1), Song JY, Joo EJ, Lee KY, Ahn YM, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Early growth response (EGR) genes play critical roles in signal transduction in
the brain, which is involved in neuronal activation, brain development, and
synaptic plasticity. EGR genes, including EGR2, EGR3, and EGR4, showed
significant association with schizophrenia in Japanese schizophrenic pedigrees.
In particular, EGR3, which resides at the chromosomal location 8p21.3, was
suggested to be a potential susceptibility gene in schizophrenia based on a study
of Japanese cases. However, this requires further replication with an independent
sample set. We investigated the association of the EGR3 and EGR2 genes, which
were suggested as potential susceptibility genes for schizophrenia supported by
both genetic association and postmortem brain expression studies, with
schizophrenia in Korean patients. Along with 350 healthy individuals, 244
schizophrenic patients were analyzed. Among the four examined single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of EGR3 (rs1008949, rs7009708, rs35201266, and rs3750192),
SNP rs35201266 in intron 1 of the EGR3 gene showed a significant association with
schizophrenia (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0008, <U+03C7>(2)<U+2009>=<U+2009>11.156, OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.493), which withstands multiple 
testing correction. In addition, the "T-G-C-G" haplotype of EGR3 was
under-represented in the patients with schizophrenia (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0073, <U+03C7>(2)<U+2009>=<U+2009>7.188,
OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.697). However, an association between the SNPs of EGR2 (rs2295814 and
rs2297488) and schizophrenia was not found. These findings are consistent with
the previous genetic association of the EGR3 gene in Japanese cohorts, which is
the first replication concerning the association of EGR3 with schizophrenia in an
independent cohort. Taken together, EGR3 could be suggested as a compelling
susceptibility gene in schizophrenia.

PMID: 20687139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Ukr Biokhim Zh (1999). 2010 Jan-Feb;82(1):100-7.

[Changes in genes expression caused by overexpression of the transcription factor
ZXDC in embryonic kidney cell line HEK293].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Halkin OV, Minchenko OH.

The transcription factor ZXDC, a member of ZXD protein family, forms
transcriptionally active complex with ZXDA and participates in the regulation of 
MHCII gene expression. In this work we investigate the expression of a large
group of genes in kidney embry cell of line HEK293 with overexpression of
transcription factor ZXDC for identification of genes, which transcription is
controlled by this transcription factor. We have shown that overexpression of the
transcription factor ZXDC in kidney embryo cell of HEK293 line significantly
changes the level of expression of large group of genes, which control the
behavior of different cell processes, in particular cell cycle, cell
proliferation and differentiation. The expression of most of these genes is
significantly increased in the kidney cell line HEK293 with overexpression of
transcription factor ZXDC, in particular EGR2, BDNF, CDKN1C and IL5Ra genes. Our 
results clearly demonstrated that transcription factor ZXDC plays a significant
role in the regulation of expression of a large group of genes, which control
important cell processes.

PMID: 20684234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Neurosci Res. 2010 Sep;88(12):2558-68. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22418.

Reduction of Dicer impairs Schwann cell differentiation and myelination.

Verrier JD(1), Semple-Rowland S, Madorsky I, Papin JE, Notterpek L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, McKnight Brain Institute,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610-0244, USA.

The process of Schwann cell myelination requires precisely coordinated gene
expression. At the onset of myelination, there is an increase in the expression
of differentiation-promoting transcription factors that regulate key Schwann cell
genes. Further control of myelin gene expression occurs at the
posttranscriptional level and, in part, is mediated by RNA binding proteins and
micro-RNAs (miRNAs). miRNAs are small, endogenously derived RNA molecules that
repress gene expression by specifically binding to their mRNA targets. In the
experiments described here, we tested whether miRNAs were essential in
controlling myelination by reducing the levels of Dicer, an essential
endoribonuclease in miRNA biogenesis. We decreased the expression of Dicer by
about 60% within Schwann cells using a lentiviral vector expressing an shRNA
against Dicer. The reduced levels of Dicer led to a decrease in the steady-state 
expression of selected miRNAs and of the transcription factors Oct6 and
Egr2/Krox20, both of which are critical for Schwann cells differentiation and
myelination. In contrast, the levels of c-jun and Sox2 were up-regulated by the
reduction in Dicer and were associated with an increase in Schwann cell
proliferation. In dorsal root ganglion cocultures, Schwann cells transduced with 
Dicer shRNA synthesized less myelin, which was accompanied by significant
reductions in the levels of myelin basic protein and protein zero. These findings
support a critical role for Dicer and miRNAs in Schwann cell differentiation and 
myelination.

PMCID: PMC3124220
PMID: 20648646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Neuromuscul Disord. 2010 Aug;20(8):534-9. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2010.05.001.

Clinical characterization and genetic analysis of a possible novel type of
dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

Lee YC(1), Lee TC, Lin KP, Lin MW, Chang MH, Soong BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

A family of dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease with eleven members, six of them
symptomatic, was characterized clinically and genetically. The ages at onset
ranged from 10 to 45 years, and the clinical severity varied from no symptom to
being wheelchair-bound. The median motor nerve conduction velocities ranged from 
16.5 to 45.7 m/s. Men were more severely affected. The sural nerve biopsies in
two patients featured demyelinating changes. No mutation in PMP22, MPZ, GJB1,
NEFL, LITAF, EGR2, MFN2, HSP27, HSP22, GADP1, YARS, and DNM2 genes was found in
the proband. Haplotype analyzes excluded linkage to the previously reported
dominant CMT loci. A genomewide screen with 400 microsatellite markers and
multipoint linkage analyzes revealed that the highest LOD score was around 1.6 on
chromosome 3q28-q29, suggestive of a weak but possible linkage at this locus. The
results of this study implicate the existence of a novel genetic locus for this
syndrome.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20627571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2010 Jul 28;17(3):743-56. doi: 10.1677/ERC-09-0118. Print
2010 Sep.

Microarray analysis reveals differential expression of benign and malignant
pheochromocytoma.

Waldmann J(1), Fendrich V, Holler J, Buchholz M, Heinmöller E, Langer P,
Ramaswamy A, Samans B, Walz MK, Rothmund M, Bartsch DK, Slater EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Baldingerstrasse, D-35043
Marburg, Germany. jwaldman@med.uni-marburg.de

The diagnosis of a malignant pheochromocytoma (PC) can only be established by the
presence of distant metastases, but a subset of apparently benign PCs develop
metastases. We have employed a microarray analysis to identify a typical gene
expression profile which distinguishes malignant from benign PC. Total RNA was
isolated from fresh-frozen tissue of five benign and five malignant PCs. The
reference consisted of laser microdissected tissue from normal adrenal medulla.
After generating Cy3- and Cy5-fluorescently labeled cDNAs, F-chips containing 11 
540 spots were hybridized. Data were analyzed with the IMAGENE 3.0 software. Gene
expression levels were validated by real-time (RT)-PCR and immunohistochemistry
(IHC). The analysis revealed a more than twofold difference in expression between
benign and malignant PCs in 132 genes: 19 were up-regulated and 113 were
down-regulated. Expression differences of six genes (calsequestrin, NNAT,
neurogranin, secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC), EGR2, and
MAOB) were confirmed by RT-PCR in 25 PCs. IHC for calsequestrin revealed an
overexpression in malignant PCs (7/10 vs 1/10, P=0.03). Comparative analysis by
microarray of all ten PCs (benign/malignant) versus normal adrenal medulla
revealed a more than twofold expression difference in 455/539 and 491/671 genes
respectively. Several of these genes are known to participate on adrenal
tumorigenesis, potential tumor suppressor genes, and oncogenes. Comprehensive
gene expression analysis of malignant and benign PCs revealed different gene
profiles, which could be used to discriminate between malignant and benign PCs.
Based on these findings, the strategy for further follow-up and treatment could
be modified accordingly.

PMID: 20562231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Neurosci. 2010 Jun 2;30(22):7722-8. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0876-10.2010.

MicroRNA-deficient Schwann cells display congenital hypomyelination.

Yun B(1), Anderegg A, Menichella D, Wrabetz L, Feltri ML, Awatramani R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

MicroRNAs, by modulating gene expression, have been implicated as regulators of
various cellular and physiological processes, including differentiation,
proliferation, and cancer. Here, we study the role of microRNAs in Schwann cell
(SC) differentiation by conditional removal of the microRNA processing enzyme
Dicer1. We reveal that both male and female mice lacking Dicer1 in SC (Dicer1
conditional knock-outs) display a severe neurological phenotype resembling
congenital hypomyelination. Ultrastructural analyses show that many SC lacking
Dicer1 are stalled in differentiation at the promyelinating state and fail to
myelinate axons. Gene expression analyses reveal a failure to extinguish genes
characteristic of the undifferentiated state such as Sox2, Jun, and Ccnd1. Sox2
and Jun are well characterized negative regulators of SC differentiation.
Consistent with Sox2/Jun maintenance, Egr2, a master regulator of the myelinating
program, is drastically downregulated and likely accounts for the myelination
defect. We posit a model wherein microRNAs are critical for downregulation of
antecedent programs of gene expression. In SC differentiation, this is
particularly relevant in the key developmental transition from a promyelinating
to myelinating SC.

PMCID: PMC2906453
PMID: 20519547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Muscle Nerve. 2010 Jun;41(6):888-9. doi: 10.1002/mus.21663.

Adult onset Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1D with an Arg381Cys mutation of
EGR2.

Briani C, Taioli F, Lucchetta M, Bombardi R, Fabrizi GM.

PMID: 20513111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Sep 1;111(1):207-17. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22690.

EGR1, EGR2, and EGR3 activate the expression of their coregulator NAB2
establishing a negative feedback loop in cells of neuroectodermal and epithelial 
origin.

Kumbrink J(1), Kirsch KH, Johnson JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, University of Munich, Munich 80336, Germany.

The inducible zinc finger transcription factors EGR1, EGR2, and EGR3 regulate the
expression of numerous genes involved in differentiation, growth, and response to
extracellular signals. Their activity is modulated in part through NAB2 which is 
induced by the same stimuli. In melanoma and carcinoma cells EGR1 activates NAB2 
expression. In T lymphocytes EGR2 and EGR3 have been shown to inhibit NAB2
expression. Therefore, we investigated the influence of EGR2 and EGR3 on NAB2
expression in melanoma and carcinoma cells. Here, we show that like EGR1, EGR2
and EGR3 induced NAB2 expression in these cells. EGR1 and EGR3 act in concert on 
the NAB2 promoter and are more potent activators of NAB2 transcription than EGR2.
EGR1-, EGR2-, and EGR3-induced NAB2 promoter activity is mediated through similar
cis-regulatory elements and the activation by each EGR is repressed by NAB2.
Kinetic studies suggest that induction of EGR1 leads to low NAB2 expression,
while EGR2 and EGR3 are necessary for maximal and sustained expression. As
already shown for EGR1, reduction of EGR2 or EGR3 expression by siRNAs reduced
endogenous NAB2 levels. Depletion of EGR3 also resulted in a reduction of EGR2
levels confirming EGR2 as a target gene of EGR3. Our results suggest that in many
cells of neuroectodermal and epithelial origin EGR1, EGR2, and EGR3 activate NAB2
transcription which is in turn repressed by NAB2, thus establishing a negative
feedback loop. This points to a complex relationship between the EGR factors and 
NAB2 expression likely depending on the cellular context.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2930072
PMID: 20506119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. BMC Genomics. 2010 May 26;11:331. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-331.

Functional and gene network analyses of transcriptional signatures characterizing
pre-weaned bovine mammary parenchyma or fat pad uncovered novel inter-tissue
signaling networks during development.

Piantoni P(1), Bionaz M, Graugnard DE, Daniels KM, Everts RE, Rodriguez-Zas SL,
Lewin HA, Hurley HL, Akers M, Loor JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

BACKGROUND: The neonatal bovine mammary fat pad (MFP) surrounding the mammary
parenchyma (PAR) is thought to exert proliferative effects on the PAR through
secretion of local modulators of growth induced by systemic hormones. We used
bioinformatics to characterize transcriptomics differences between PAR and MFP
from approximately 65 d old Holstein heifers. Data were mined to uncover
potential crosstalk through the analyses of signaling molecules preferentially
expressed in one tissue relative to the other.
RESULTS: Over 9,000 differentially expressed genes (DEG; False discovery rate
<or= 0.05) were found of which 1,478 had a >or=1.5-fold difference between PAR
and MFP. Within the DEG highly-expressed in PAR vs. MFP (n = 736) we noted
significant enrichment of functions related to cell cycle, structural
organization, signaling, and DNA/RNA metabolism. Only actin cytoskeletal
signaling was significant among canonical pathways. DEG more highly-expressed in 
MFP vs. PAR (n = 742) belong to lipid metabolism, signaling, cell movement, and
immune-related functions. Canonical pathways associated with metabolism and
signaling, particularly immune- and metabolism-related were
significantly-enriched. Network analysis uncovered a central role of MYC, TP53,
and CTNNB1 in controlling expression of DEG highly-expressed in PAR vs. MFP.
Similar analysis suggested a central role for PPARG, KLF2, EGR2, and EPAS1 in
regulating expression of more highly-expressed DEG in MFP vs. PAR. Gene network
analyses revealed putative inter-tissue crosstalk between cytokines and growth
factors preferentially expressed in one tissue (e.g., ANGPTL1, SPP1, IL1B in PAR 
vs. MFP; ADIPOQ, IL13, FGF2, LEP in MFP vs. PAR) with DEG preferentially
expressed in the other tissue, particularly transcription factors or pathways
(e.g., MYC, TP53, and actin cytoskeletal signaling in PAR vs. MFP; PPARG and
LXR/RXR Signaling in MFP vs. PAR).
CONCLUSIONS: Functional analyses underscored a reciprocal influence in
determining the biological features of MFP and PAR during neonatal development.
This was exemplified by the potential effect that the signaling molecules
(cytokines, growth factors) released preferentially (i.e., more highly-expressed)
by PAR or MFP could have on molecular functions or signaling pathways enriched in
the MFP or PAR. These bidirectional interactions might be required to coordinate 
mammary tissue development under normal circumstances or in response to
nutrition.

PMCID: PMC2890563
PMID: 20504330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Eur J Neurol. 2011 Jan;18(1):39-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2010.03037.x.

Genetic epidemiology of Charcot-Marie-Tooth in the general population.

Braathen GJ(1), Sand JC, Lobato A, Høyer H, Russell MB.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty Division Akershus University Hospital, University of Oslo, Norway.
g.j.braathen@medisin.uio.no

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: the frequency of different Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT)
genotypes has been estimated in clinic populations, but prevalence data from the 
general population are lacking.
METHODS: our population-based genetic epidemiological survey included persons
with CMT residing in eastern Akershus County, Norway. The participants were
interviewed and examined by one geneticist/neurologist and classified clinically,
neurophysiologically and genetically.
RESULTS: two hundred and forty-five persons from 116 families had CMT. This
corresponds to 1 per 1214 persons (95% CI 1062-1366) have CMT in the general
population. CMT1 (motor conduction velocity (MCV) <38 m/s), CMT2 (MCV >38 m/s)
and CMT intermediate (MCV 25-45 m/s) were found in 48.2%, 49.4% and 2.4% of the
families. A total of 27.2% of the families and 28.6% of the affected had a
mutation in the investigated CMT genes. The prevalence of the peripheral myelin
protein 22 (PMP22) duplication and point mutation in the connexin32 (Cx32),
myelin protein zero (MPZ) and mitofusin2 (MFN2) genes was found in 13.6%, 6.2%,
1.2%, 6.2% of the families, and in 19.6%, 4.8%, 1.1%, 3.2% of the affected,
respectively. None of the families had point mutations in the early growth
response 2 (EGR2), PMP22 or small integral membrane protein of lysosome/late
endosome (SIMPLE) genes.
CONCLUSIONS: CMT is the most common inherited neuropathy. At present, 43 CMT
genes are known, and an examination of all known genes would probably only
identify mutations in approximately 50% of those with CMT. Thus, it is probable
that at least 30-50 CMT genes are yet to be identified.

PMID: 20482598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2010;33(2):92-8.

CD4+CD25-LAG-3+ T cells in mouse and human.

Sumitomo S(1), Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine, the
University of Tokyo.

We have recently reported a murine novel regulatory T cell population,
CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG-3(+) regulatory T cells (Tregs). Microarray analysis revealed
that CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG-3(+) Tregs had a unique mRNA expression profile that was
different from the conventional CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells. In particular, 
CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG-3(+) Tregs characteristically expressed early growth response
gene 2 (Egr-2) that was reported to be associated with the induction of anergy.
CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG-3(+) Tregs produced high-amount of IL-10 in response to TCR
stimulation and showed immunosuppressive activity in vitro and in vivo.
Retroviral gene transfer of Eg-2 converted naïve CD4(+) T cells into
IL-10-secreting and LAG-3-expressing T cells, and Egr-2 transduced CD4(+) T cells
exhibited antigen-specific immunosuppressive capacity in vivo. On the basis of
these observations, we have attempted to identify a human counterpart of murine
CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG-3(+) Tregs in human. CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG-3(+) T cells were found in
human in similar pattern as murine CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG-3(+) Tregs. In the
quantitative PCR, human CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG-3(+) T cells expressed high levels of
IL-10. From the microarray analysis, we found the close similarity between human 
CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG-3(+) T cells and murine CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG-3(+) Tregs. Therefore, 
human CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG-3(+) T cells might be a human counterpart of murine
CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG-3(+) Tregs.

PMID: 20453445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Neurosci. 2010 Apr 28;30(17):5958-67. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0017-10.2010.

CNS/PNS boundary transgression by central glia in the absence of Schwann cells or
Krox20/Egr2 function.

Coulpier F(1), Decker L, Funalot B, Vallat JM, Garcia-Bragado F, Charnay P,
Topilko P.

Author information: 
(1)Plate-forme Transcriptome and Developmental Biology Section, Inserm, Unité
1024, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche
8197, Institut de Biologie de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75230 Paris, France.

CNS/PNS interfaces constitute cell boundaries, because they delimit territories
with different neuronal and glial contents. Despite their potential interest in
regenerative medicine, the mechanisms restricting oligodendrocytes and astrocytes
to the CNS and Schwann cells to the PNS in mammals are not known. To investigate 
the involvement of peripheral glia and myelin in the maintenance of the CNS/PNS
boundary, we have first made use of different mouse mutants. We show that
depletion of Schwann cells and boundary cap cells or inactivation of Krox20/Egr2,
a master regulatory gene for myelination in Schwann cells, results in
transgression of the CNS/PNS boundary by astrocytes and oligodendrocytes and in
myelination of nerve root axons by oligodendrocytes. In contrast, such migration 
does not occur with the Trembler(J) mutation, which prevents PNS myelination
without affecting Krox20 expression. Altogether, these data suggest that
maintenance of the CNS/PNS boundary requires a Krox20 function separable from
myelination control. Finally, we have analyzed a human patient affected by a
congenital amyelinating neuropathy, associated with the absence of the KROX20
protein in Schwann cells. In this case, the nerve roots were also invaded by
oligodendrocytes and astrocytes. This indicates that transgression of the CNS/PNS
boundary by central glia can occur in pathological situations in humans and
suggests that the underlying mechanisms are common with the mouse.

PMID: 20427655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Exp Med. 2010 May 10;207(5):923-31. doi: 10.1084/jem.20092531. Epub 2010 Apr
26.

Calcineurin regulates innate antifungal immunity in neutrophils.

Greenblatt MB(1), Aliprantis A, Hu B, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Transplant. 2011 Jun;11(6):1111.

Patients taking immunosuppressive drugs, like cyclosporine A (CsA), that inhibit 
calcineurin are highly susceptible to disseminated fungal infections, although it
is unclear how these drugs suppress resistance to these opportunistic pathogens. 
We show that in a mouse model of disseminated Candida albicans infection,
CsA-induced susceptibility to fungal infection maps to the innate immune system. 
To further define the cell types targeted by CsA, we generated mice with a
conditional deletion of calcineurin B (CnB) in neutrophils. These mice displayed 
markedly decreased resistance to infection with C. albicans, and both
CnB-deficient and CsA-treated neutrophils showed a defect in the ex vivo killing 
of C. albicans. In response to the fungal-derived pathogen-associated molecular
pattern zymosan, neutrophils lacking CnB displayed impaired up-regulation of
genes (IL-10, Cox2, Egr1, and Egr2) regulated by nuclear factor of activated T
cells, the best characterized CnB substrate. This activity was Myd88 independent 
and was reproduced by stimulation with the beta(1,3) glucan curdlan, indicating
that dectin-1, rather than toll-like receptors, is the upstream activator of
calcineurin. Our results suggest that disseminated fungal infections seen in
CsA-treated patients are not just a general consequence of systemic suppression
of adaptive immunity but are, rather, a result of the specific blockade of
evolutionarily conserved innate pathways for fungal resistance.

PMCID: PMC2867274
PMID: 20421389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Charcot-Marie-Tooth Neuropathy Type 4.

Bird TD.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
1998 Sep 24.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 4 (CMT4) is a group
of progressive motor and sensory axonal and demyelinating neuropathies that are
distinguished from other forms of CMT by autosomal recessive inheritance.
Affected individuals have the typical CMT phenotype of distal muscle weakness and
atrophy associated with sensory loss and, frequently, pes cavus foot deformity.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CMT4 subtypes is based on clinical findings, 
neurophysiologic studies, and molecular genetic testing. Detection of biallelic
pathogenic variants in one of the following 11 genes establishes the diagnosis:
GDAP1 (CMT4A), MTMR2 (CMT4B1), SBF2 (CMT4B2), SBF1 (CMT4B3), SH3TC2 (CMT4C),
NDRG1 (CMT4D), EGR2 (CMT4E), PRX (CMT4F), HK1 (CMT4G), FGD4 (CMT4H), and FIG4
(CMT4J).
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment by a team including a
neurologist, physiatrist, orthopedic surgeon, physical and occupational
therapists; special shoes and/or ankle/foot orthoses to correct foot drop and aid
walking; surgery as needed for severe pes cavus; forearm crutches, canes,
wheelchairs as needed for mobility; exercise as tolerated; symptomatic treatment 
of pain, depression, sleep apnea, restless leg syndrome. Prevention of secondary 
complications: Daily heel cord stretching to prevent Achilles' tendon shortening.
Surveillance: Monitoring gait and condition of feet to determine need for
bracing, special shoes, surgery. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Obesity (which
makes ambulation more difficult); medications (e.g., vincristine, isoniazid,
nitrofurantoin) known to cause nerve damage. Other: Career and employment
counseling.
GENETIC COUNSELING: The CMT4 subtypes are inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. Parents of an affected individual are obligate carriers of the
CMT4-related pathogenic variant present in their family. At conception, each sib 
of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of
being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a
carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal testing for
pregnancies at increased risk are possible if the pathogenic variants in an
affected family member are known.

PMID: 20301641  [PubMed]


261. Charcot-Marie-Tooth Neuropathy Type 1.

Bird TD.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
1998 Aug 31.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 1 (CMT1) is a
demyelinating peripheral neuropathy characterized by distal muscle weakness and
atrophy, sensory loss, and slow nerve conduction velocity. It is usually slowly
progressive and often associated with pes cavus foot deformity and bilateral foot
drop. Affected individuals usually become symptomatic between age five and 25
years. Fewer than 5% of individuals become wheelchair dependent. Life span is not
shortened.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: CMT1A (70%-80% of all CMT1) involves duplication of PMP22.
CMT1B (6%-10% of all CMT1) is associated with single-nucleotide variants in MPZ. 
CMT1C (1%-2% of all CMT1) is associated with pathogenic variants in LITAF, and
CMT1D (<2% of all CMT1) is associated with pathogenic variants in EGR2. CMT1E
(<5% of all CMT1) is associated with single-nucleotide variants in PMP22.
CMT2E/1F (<5% of all CMT1) is associated with pathogenic variants in NEFL.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment by a multidisciplinary team
including a neurologist, physiatrist, orthopedic surgeon, physical and
occupational therapists; special shoes and/or ankle/foot orthoses to correct foot
drop and aid walking; surgery as needed for severe pes cavus; forearm crutches,
canes, wheelchairs as needed for mobility; exercise as tolerated. Prevention of
secondary complications: Daily heel cord stretching to prevent Achilles' tendon
shortening. Surveillance: Regular foot examination for pressure sores.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Obesity (makes ambulation more difficult);
medications (e.g., vincristine, isoniazid, nitrofurantoin) known to cause nerve
damage. Pregnancy management: Affected pregnant women may experience worsening
symptoms during or after gestation; a higher occurrence of presentation
anomalies, use of forceps, and operative delivery; and/or an increased incidence 
of post-partum bleeding.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CMT1 is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. About two 
thirds of probands with CMT1A have inherited the PMP22 duplication; about one
third have CMT1A as the result of a de novo pathogenic variant. Similar data are 
not available for the other subtypes of CMT1. The offspring of an individual with
any of the subtypes of CMT1 have a 50% chance of inheriting the altered gene.
Prenatal testing is possible if the pathogenic variant has been identified in the
family. Requests for prenatal testing for typically adult-onset diseases that do 
not affect intellect or life span are uncommon.

PMID: 20301384  [PubMed]


262. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jun 1;19(11):2313-20. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq092. Epub 2010 Mar 
1.

Regulatory polymorphisms in EGR2 are associated with susceptibility to systemic
lupus erythematosus.

Myouzen K(1), Kochi Y, Shimane K, Fujio K, Okamura T, Okada Y, Suzuki A, Atsumi
T, Ito S, Takada K, Mimori A, Ikegawa S, Yamada R, Nakamura Y, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Autoimmune Diseases, Center for Genomic Medicine, RIKEN, Tokyo 
113-0033, Japan.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease induced by the
combinations of environmental and genetic factors. Recently, mice in which the
early growth response 2 (EGR2) gene, a zinc-finger transcription factor, is
conditionally knocked out in CD2(+) T cells have been shown to develop a
lupus-like autoimmune disease. Here, we evaluated if polymorphisms in the EGR2
gene influence SLE susceptibility in humans. We first analyzed the effect of SNPs
in the EGR2 region on EGR2 expression, and a significant positive correlation
with expression was identified in an SNP located at the 5' flanking region of
EGR2 (rs10761670, R=0.23, P=0.00072). We then performed a case-control
association study using three sets of SLE cohorts by genotyping 14 tag SNPs in
the EGR2 gene region. A peak of association with SLE susceptibility was observed 
for rs10761670 [Pooled: OR = 1.23 (95% CI 1.10-1.37), P=0.00023). This SNP was
also associated with susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis (RA) [OR = 1.15 (95% 
CI 1.05-1.26), P = 0.0019), suggesting that EGR2 is a common risk factor for SLE 
and RA. Among the SNPs in complete linkage disequilibrium with rs10761670 (r(2) =
1.0), two SNPs (rs1412554 and rs1509957) affected the binding of transcription
factors and transcriptional activity in vitro, suggesting that they may be
candidates of causal regulatory variants in this region. Therefore, EGR2 is a
genetic risk factor for SLE, in which increased gene expression may contribute to
SLE pathogenesis.

PMID: 20194224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2010 Apr;209(2):163-74. doi:
10.1007/s00213-010-1784-0. Epub 2010 Feb 19.

The serotonin 2C receptor potently modulates the head-twitch response in mice
induced by a phenethylamine hallucinogen.

Canal CE(1), Olaghere da Silva UB, Gresch PJ, Watt EE, Sanders-Bush E, Airey DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN, 37232, USA. clinton.canal@ufl.edu

RATIONALE: Hallucinogenic serotonin 2A (5-HT(2A)) receptor partial agonists, such
as (+ or -)-1-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl)-2-aminopropane hydrochloride (DOI),
induce a frontal cortex-dependent head-twitch response (HTR) in rodents, a
behavioral proxy of a hallucinogenic response that is blocked by 5-HT(2A)
receptor antagonists. In addition to 5-HT(2A) receptors, DOI and most other
serotonin-like hallucinogens have high affinity and potency as partial agonists
at 5-HT(2C) receptors.
OBJECTIVES: We tested for involvement of 5-HT(2C) receptors in the HTR induced by
DOI.
RESULTS: Comparison of 5-HT(2C) receptor knockout and wild-type littermates
revealed an approximately 50% reduction in DOI-induced HTR in knockout mice.
Also, pretreatment with either the 5-HT(2C) receptor antagonist SB206553 or
SB242084 eradicated a twofold difference in DOI-induced HTR between the standard 
inbred mouse strains C57BL/6J and DBA/2J, and decreased the DOI-induced HTR by at
least 50% in both strains. None of several measures of 5-HT(2A) receptors in
frontal cortex explained the strain difference, including 5-HT(2A) receptor
density, Galpha(q) or Galpha(i/o) protein levels, phospholipase C activity, or
DOI-induced expression of Egr1 and Egr2. 5-HT(2C) receptor density in the brains 
of C57BL/6J and DBA/2J was also equivalent, suggesting that 5-HT(2C)
receptor-mediated intracellular signaling or other physiological modulators of
the HTR may explain the strain difference in response to DOI.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the HTR to DOI in mice is strongly modulated by
5-HT(2C) receptor activity. This novel finding invites reassessment of
hallucinogenic mechanisms involving 5-HT(2) receptors.

PMCID: PMC2868321
PMID: 20165943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2010 Apr 16;34(3):506-9. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.02.005. Epub 2010 Feb 6.

No association between EGR gene family polymorphisms and schizophrenia in the
Chinese population.

Liu BC(1), Zhang J, Wang L, Li XW, Wang Y, Ji J, Yang FP, Wan CL, Gao LH, Xu YF, 
Feng GY, He L, Zhao XZ, He G.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Center, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200030, PR China.

Early growth response (EGR) genes are thought to have a role in the pathogenesis 
of schizophrenia because of their conserved DNA binding domain and biologically
activity in neuronal plasticity. This zinc-finger motif could influence gene
post-translational modification and expression. The multigenetic association
model, using markers in genes of similar or antagonistic biological effects
within a signal pathway or gene family, might be more appropriate to this aspect 
of the schizophrenia hypothesis than the single gene strategy. In this study we
investigated the role of EGR1, EGR2, EGR3 and EGR4 within the EGR family. Taqman 
technology was used to examine 12 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) covering
these four genes in 2044 Chinese Han subjects. Case-control analyses were
performed to detect association of these 4 genes with schizophrenia and
multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) analysis was employed to examine their
potential gene-gene interaction in schizophrenia. Neither allelic nor genotypic
single-locus tests revealed any significant association between EGR1-4 and the
risk of schizophrenia nor was any such association found with regard to
interaction within EGR1-4 (p(min)=0.623, CV Consistency=10/10). We concluded that
although multiple candidate genes are involved in schizophrenogenic development, 
the EGR family may not play a major role in schizophrenia susceptibility in the
Chinese Han population.

Crown Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20144677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. BMC Neurosci. 2010 Jan 27;11:9. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-11-9.

Levetiracetam attenuates hippocampal expression of synaptic plasticity-related
immediate early and late response genes in amygdala-kindled rats.

Christensen KV(1), Leffers H, Watson WP, Sánchez C, Kallunki P, Egebjerg J.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular Biology, Discovery Biology Research, H, Lundbeck A/S,
DK-2500 Valby, Denmark. kvc@lundbeck.com

BACKGROUND: The amygdala-kindled rat is a model for human temporal lobe epilepsy 
and activity-dependent synaptic plasticity. Hippocampal RNA isolated from
amygdala-kindled rats at different kindling stages was analyzed to identify
kindling-induced genes. Furthermore, effects of the anti-epileptic drug
levetiracetam on kindling-induced gene expression were examined.
RESULTS: Cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2), Protocadherin-8 (Pcdh8) and TGF-beta-inducible
early response gene-1 (TIEG1) were identified and verified as differentially
expressed transcripts in the hippocampus of kindled rats by in situ hybridization
and quantitative RT-PCR. In addition, we identified a panel of 16 additional
transcripts which included Arc, Egr3/Pilot, Homer1a, Ania-3, MMP9, Narp, c-fos,
NGF, BDNF, NT-3, Synaptopodin, Pim1 kinase, TNF-alpha, RGS2, Egr2/krox-20 and
beta-A activin that were differentially expressed in the hippocampus of
amygdala-kindled rats. The list consists of many synaptic plasticity-related
immediate early genes (IEGs) as well as some late response genes encoding
transcription factors, neurotrophic factors and proteins that are known to
regulate synaptic remodelling. In the hippocampus, induction of IEG expression
was dependent on the afterdischarge (AD) duration. Levetiracetam, 40 mg/kg,
suppressed the development of kindling measured as severity of seizures and AD
duration. In addition, single animal profiling also showed that levetiracetam
attenuated the observed kindling-induced IEG expression; an effect that
paralleled the anti-epileptic effect of the drug on AD duration.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study provides mRNA expression data that suggest that
levetiracetam attenuates expression of genes known to regulate synaptic
remodelling. In the kindled rat, levetiracetam does so by shortening the AD
duration thereby reducing the seizure-induced changes in mRNA expression in the
hippocampus.

PMCID: PMC2848232
PMID: 20105316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2010 Mar;10(2):155-67.

Dexamethasone synergizes with lenalidomide to inhibit multiple myeloma tumor
growth, but reduces lenalidomide-induced immunomodulation of T and NK cell
function.

Gandhi AK(1), Kang J, Capone L, Parton A, Wu L, Zhang LH, Mendy D, Lopez-Girona
A, Tran T, Sapinoso L, Fang W, Xu S, Hampton G, Bartlett JB, Schafer P.

Author information: 
(1)Celgene Corporation, Summit, New Jersey, USA, San Diego, California, USA.
agandhi@celgene.com

To determine the effect of dexamethasone on the antimyeloma effects of
lenalidomide, we tested in vitro proliferation, tumor suppressor gene expression,
caspase activity, cell cycling, and apoptosis levels in a series of multiple
myeloma (MM) and plasma cell leukemia cell lines treated with lenalidomide and
dexamethasone, alone or in combination. The effect of dexamethasone on the
immunomodulatory activities of lenalidomide such as T cell and natural killer
(NK) cell activation was measured via interleukin [IL]-2 production, and
interferon-gamma and granzyme B production respectively. Lenalidomide inhibited
proliferation in most cell lines tested, and this effect was enhanced by
dexamethasone. This effect was observed in MM cells containing the high-risk
cytogenetic abnormalities t(4;14), t(14;16), del17p, del13, and hypodiploidy.
Mechanistically, lenalidomide plus dexamethasone synergistically induced
expression of the tumor suppressor genes Egr1, Egr2, Egr3, p15, p21, and p27 in
MM cell lines and MM patient cells. The combination activated caspases 3, 8, and 
9; and induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Lenalidomide alone increased T
cell production of IL-2, and NK cell production of interferon-gamma and granzyme 
B. Notably, dexamethasone antagonized these immunostimulatory effects of
lenalidomide in a dose-dependent manner. These data further elucidate the
mechanism of action of lenalidomide and dexamethasone in MM, and suggest that use
of low-dose dexamethasone with lenalidomide may retain the antiproliferative
effect of lenalidomide while permitting greater immunomodulatory effects of this 
combination regimen.

PMID: 20088798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Feb 12;392(3):340-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.12.182. Epub 2010 Jan 11.

MiR-150 promotes gastric cancer proliferation by negatively regulating the
pro-apoptotic gene EGR2.

Wu Q(1), Jin H, Yang Z, Luo G, Lu Y, Li K, Ren G, Su T, Pan Y, Feng B, Xue Z,
Wang X, Fan D.

Author information: 
(1)Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, China.

Accumulating evidence suggests small non-coding RNAs (microRNAs) play important
roles in human cancer progression. In the present study, we found miR-150 was
overexpressed in gastric cancer cell lines and tissues. Ectopic expression of
miR-150 promoted tumorigenesis and proliferation of gastric cancer cells.
Luciferase reporter assay demonstrated that EGR2 was a direct target of miR-150. 
Collectively, our study demonstrated that overexpression of miR-150 in gastric
cancer could promote proliferation and growth of cancer cells at least partially 
through directly targeting the tumor-suppressor EGR2, suggesting a potential
strategy for the development of miRNA-based treatment of gastric cancer.

PMID: 20067763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 26;285(9):6508-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.078444. Epub 2010 
Jan 7.

Down-regulation of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-3 (TIMP-3) expression is
necessary for adipocyte differentiation.

Bernot D(1), Barruet E, Poggi M, Bonardo B, Alessi MC, Peiretti F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U626, Faculté de Médecine, Université de la Méditérranée, 27 Boulevard
Jean Moulin, Marseilles 13385 Cedex 5, France.

Matrix metalloproteinase activity is essential for proper extracellular matrix
remodeling that takes place during adipose tissue formation. Four tissue
inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs) regulate their activity. However,
the role of TIMPs in adipocyte differentiation is poorly understood. We found
that the expression of all TIMPs was modified during adipocyte differentiation,
but that of TIMP-3 was distinguished by its extreme down-regulation. TIMP-3
expression was closely linked to the differentiation process. Indeed, it remained
low during the adipocyte differentiation but increased when cell differentiation 
was prevented. We identified the transcription factor Sp1 as being responsible
for the regulation of TIMP-3 expression during adipocyte differentiation.
Overexpression of TIMP-3 reduced adipocyte differentiation, underlining its
active role in this process. TIMP-3 overexpression decreased the expression of
the early and obligate key inductors of adipogenesis Krüppel-like factor 4
(Klf4), early growth response 2 (Egr2/Krox20), and CAAT/enhancer-binding protein 
beta (C/EBPbeta). Our results indicate that during preadipocyte differentiation, 
the Sp1-dependent decrease in TIMP-3 expression is required for the successful
implementation of the adipocyte differentiation program.

PMCID: PMC2825446
PMID: 20056610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. BMC Med Genomics. 2009 Dec 21;2:70. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-2-70.

Identifying significant genetic regulatory networks in the prostate cancer from
microarray data based on transcription factor analysis and conditional
independency.

Yeh HY(1), Cheng SW, Lin YC, Yeh CY, Lin SF, Soo VW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, HsinChu 300,
Taiwan. d926708@oz.nthu.edu.tw

BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer is a world wide leading cancer and it is
characterized by its aggressive metastasis. According to the clinical
heterogeneity, prostate cancer displays different stages and grades related to
the aggressive metastasis disease. Although numerous studies used microarray
analysis and traditional clustering method to identify the individual genes
during the disease processes, the important gene regulations remain unclear. We
present a computational method for inferring genetic regulatory networks from
micorarray data automatically with transcription factor analysis and conditional 
independence testing to explore the potential significant gene regulatory
networks that are correlated with cancer, tumor grade and stage in the prostate
cancer.
RESULTS: To deal with missing values in microarray data, we used a
K-nearest-neighbors (KNN) algorithm to determine the precise expression values.
We applied web services technology to wrap the bioinformatics toolkits and
databases to automatically extract the promoter regions of DNA sequences and
predicted the transcription factors that regulate the gene expressions. We adopt 
the microarray datasets consists of 62 primary tumors, 41 normal prostate tissues
from Stanford Microarray Database (SMD) as a target dataset to evaluate our
method. The predicted results showed that the possible biomarker genes related to
cancer and denoted the androgen functions and processes may be in the development
of the prostate cancer and promote the cell death in cell cycle. Our predicted
results showed that sub-networks of genes SREBF1, STAT6 and PBX1 are strongly
related to a high extent while ETS transcription factors ELK1, JUN and EGR2 are
related to a low extent. Gene SLC22A3 may explain clinically the differentiation 
associated with the high grade cancer compared with low grade cancer. Enhancer of
Zeste Homolg 2 (EZH2) regulated by RUNX1 and STAT3 is correlated to the
pathological stage.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide a computational framework to reconstruct the genetic
regulatory network from the microarray data using biological knowledge and
constraint-based inferences. Our method is helpful in verifying possible
interaction relations in gene regulatory networks and filtering out incorrect
relations inferred by imperfect methods. We predicted not only individual gene
related to cancer but also discovered significant gene regulation networks. Our
method is also validated in several enriched published papers and databases and
the significant gene regulatory networks perform critical biological functions
and processes including cell adhesion molecules, androgen and estrogen
metabolism, smooth muscle contraction, and GO-annotated processes. Those
significant gene regulations and the critical concept of tumor progression are
useful to understand cancer biology and disease treatment.

PMCID: PMC2805685
PMID: 20025723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Cereb Cortex. 2010 Aug;20(8):1915-25. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp262. Epub 2009 Dec
16.

Mkl transcription cofactors regulate structural plasticity in hippocampal
neurons.

O'Sullivan NC(1), Pickering M, Di Giacomo D, Loscher JS, Murphy KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Neurotherapeutics Research Group, UCD Schools of Biomolecular and
Biomedical Science, UCD Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Dublin,
Ireland. ruthger.righart@unige.ch

Expressed throughout the central nervous system, the myocardin-related,
megakaryoblastic acute leukemia 1 and 2 (Mkl1/2) are transcriptional cofactors
that can be found tethered in the cytoplasm to monomeric actin but on synaptic
activation translocate to the nucleus and associate with transcription factors
such as serum response factor (SRF) to regulate expression of structural genes.
This implies a potential role for Mkls in linking synaptic activity, through
gene-expression control, to neuronal structural plasticity. Here, we present
evidence that Mkls, particularly Mkl2, are powerful regulators of neuronal
structure in vitro. Moreover, using the passive avoidance-conditioning paradigm, 
we identify learning-associated alterations of neuronal Mkl expression that
appear to contribute to 2 phases of gene regulation during memory consolidation
in the hippocampus. Gene regulation immediately after learning includes Egr2 and 
may be facilitated by downregulation of Mkls likely releasing ternary complex
factor-regulated SRF activity. The second transcriptional phase occurs later at
the 3-h postavoidance time point when Mkl accumulates in the nucleus of
hippocampal neurons and there is enhanced transcription of Mkl-dependent
structural genes that may contribute to the elaboration of new, memory-associated
synapses known to appear over the subsequent 3-h period.

PMID: 20016002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Jun 23;89(24):1714-6.

[Experimental identification of drugs with function of targeted up-regulating ID4
expression: bioinformatics-based prediction and preliminary validation].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang B(1), Lu XC, Liu LH, Zhu HL, Chi XH, Yao SQ, Lou FD, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing
100853, China.

OBJECTIVE: To screen new candidate molecular-targeted anti-leukemia compounds
with potential functions of targeted up-regulating ID4 gene expression.
METHODS: Promoter region of ID4 gene including the upstream - 3000 bp sequence of
transcriptional start site and message RNA sequence were fished out. Online
promoter analysis tools of TESS and Genomax were used to search possible sequence
of transcriptional start site and message RNA sequence were fished out. Online
promoter analysis tools of TESS and Genomax were used to search possible
cis-acting structure from human transcription factor database. The activity of
related drugs with potential effects upon ID4 gene expression was analyzed using 
SAGE database. GEO database was applied to search the gene expression profiling
regulated by ID4 gene. Finally, similar analysis between gene expression
profiling by ID4 and genome-wide profiling regulated by 163 known drugs or active
compounds was manipulated to screen the drugs and candidate compounds with
similar gene expression profiling with ID4 gene. MOLT4 cell line was treated with
the above candidate active compounds to investigate the ID4 gene expression by
RT-PCR assay.
RESULTS: ID4 gene had a type II promoter with a typical TATA box in upstream -45 
bp of transcription start site. The 1300 bp-length promoter of ID4 gene contained
a few cis-acting structures classified into two function types, i. e. positive
regulatory type, including transcription factors Spl and c-Myb, cAMP,
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and estrogen receptor (ER), and negative regulatory 
type, including Wilms tumor-1 (WT1) and early growth response-2 (EGR2). The
similarity of gene expression profiling was identified between cAMP and ID4 gene.
ID4 gene expression was induced in MOLT4 cell line after treatment with calcium
dibutyryladenosine cyclophosphate at the concentration of 0.1 mmol/L.
CONCLUSION: The comprehensive bioinformatic analysis, based upon the combination 
of regulatory sequence prediction of promoter, similarity analysis of gene
expression profiling and literature review, can be considered as a practical tool
in screening the candidate drugs with the activity of targeted regulating
functional genes. Calcium dibutyryladenosine cyclophosphate can induce ID4 gene
expression in leukemic cells.

PMID: 19957534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Jan;40(1):232-41. doi: 10.1002/eji.200939567.

Early growth response 2 regulates the survival of thymocytes during positive
selection.

Lawson VJ(1), Weston K, Maurice D.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell and Molecular Biology, Institute of Cancer Research, London,
UK.

The early growth response (Egr) transcription factor family regulates multiple
steps during T-cell development. We examine here the role played by Egr2 in
positive selection. In double-positive cells, Egr2 is upregulated immediately
following TCR ligation, and its expression requires both the MAPK and calcineurin
signaling pathways. Inducible transgenic and knockout mice were generated to
cause gain- or loss-of-function of Egr2 in double-positive cells, and had
reciprocal effects; more mature single-positive cells were made when Egr2 was
overexpressed, and fewer when Egr2 was absent. These defects were associated with
changes in the survival of positively selected cells rather than perturbation of 
positive selection or immediate post-selection signaling. The survival function
of Egr2 at least partly depends upon its ability to activate the
cytokine-mediated survival pathway, likely through negative regulation of both
the IL-7R and suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (Socs1), the molecular switch
whose downregulation normally results in restored responsiveness to cytokine
signaling following selection. While gain of Egr2 caused a decrease in Socs1
mRNA, loss of Egr2 resulted in downregulation of IL-7R, upregulation of Socs1,
and inhibition of Stat5 phosphorylation and IL-7-mediated survival
post-selection. Therefore, expression of Egr2 following positive selection links 
the initial TCR signaling event to subsequent survival of signaled cells.

PMID: 19877014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Anesthesiology. 2009 Nov;111(5):1052-64. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e3181bbcb2a.

Age-associated changes in cardiac gene expression after preconditioning.

Liu L(1), Zhu J, Glass PS, Brink PR, Rampil IJ, Rebecchi MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Stony Brook University School of Medicine, New
York 11794, USA. lixliu@notes.cc.sunysb.edu

BACKGROUND: Cardiac protection afforded by ischemic preconditioning (IPC) and
anesthetic preconditioning (APC) are significantly reduced in the senescent
myocardium. The authors hypothesized that age would differentially modulate gene 
expression induced by IPC and APC in vivo.
METHODS: Affymetrix RAT EXON ST 1.0 gene chips (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) were
used to explore the transcriptional response to IPC and APC in Fisher 344 male
rats (young, 3-5 months, and old, 20-24 months, respectively). Both cohorts,
young and old, were divided into three groups: (1) sham control, (2) IPC, and (3)
APC. After a total of 90 min, the heart was removed, and the total RNA and
protein were extracted.
RESULTS: Thirty-one transcripts were increased in the young animals subjected to 
IPC, particularly transcriptional regulators (Atf3, Egr-1, Btg2, Egr2), cytokines
(interleukin 6, CSF1, Myd88), chemokines (Cxcl10, Ccl2, Ccl7), regulators of
growth and inflammation (Reg3g, Hamp), remodeling and cell adhesion migration
(Cyr61, Tfpi2, Timp1), regulators of apoptosis/cell death (Birc3, Arntl, Hamp,
Phlda1), and cell cycle control/DNA repairs (Rrad, Gadd45b, Gadd45g). In
contrast, only one transcript increased (Atf3) in the old animals subjected to
IPC. No changes in gene expression were found in the young or the old animals
subjected to APC.
CONCLUSIONS: Early-phase IPC and APC induced different genomic responses. The
absence of detectable changes associated with early-phase APC suggests a
posttranscriptional or posttranslational mechanism. The absence of a genomic
response in the senescent myocardium (except for IPC-induced Atf3) could underlie
the failure of IPC to provide any cardiac protective benefit to older animals.

PMID: 19858872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Med Wieku Rozwoj. 2009 Apr-Jun;13(2):146-53.

[Charcot-Marie-Tooth disorders with autosomal recessive inheritance. Search for
the molecular diagnostics model].

[Article in Polish]

Kabzinska D(1), Franaszczyk M, Kochanski A.

Author information: 
(1)Zespól Chorób Nerwowo-Miesniowych Instytutu Medycyny Doswiadczalnej i
Klinicznej im. M.J. Mossakowskiego Polskiej Akademii Nauk, ul. A. Pawinskiego 5, 
02-106 Warszawa.

THE AIM was focused on molecular analysis of the selected genes associated with
autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathies (AR-CMT) and construction of
a molecular diagnostic algorithm in this group of disorders in the Polish
population.MATERIAL AND METHODS: We analyzed a group of 138 subjects from 62
families with probably autosomal recessive inheritance and the control group of
52 individuals. The studies covered molecular genetic analysis of PMP22 gene
dosage (real-time polymerase chain reaction and polymerase chain reaction
restriction fragments length polymorphisms), analysis of coding regions of the
GDAP1, PRX, EGR2 and CTDP1 genes using: mutation screening (single strand
conformation polymorphism and heteroduplex analysis), sequencing and
bioinformatics approach to the gene sequence variants.
RESULTS: Thirty sequence variants have been found in the analysed genes, 5
pathogenic mutations in the GDAP1 gene and 2 pathogenic mutations in the PRX
gene. On the basis of bioinformatic analysis other nucleotide changes have been
categorized as harmless polymorphisms and variants of unknown pathogenic effect.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study focused on the autosomal recessive
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease in the Polish population. Our results show the
difficulties in the interpretation of the pathogenic effect of the sequence
variants (pathogenic mutation or polymorphism) which is essential for molecular
diagnostics in CMT disease.

PMID: 19837996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Neurosci Lett. 2009 Nov 13;465(2):194-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2009.09.014. Epub 
2009 Sep 16.

c-Jun, krox-20, and integrin beta4 expression following chronic nerve compression
injury.

Pham K(1), Nassiri N, Gupta R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, Irvine, Irvine,
CA, United States.

Limited work has been done to investigate the molecular mechanisms behind the
process of demyelination and remyelination that occurs in response to chronic
nerve compression (CNC) injury. In the present study, we investigated the
expression of the transcription factors krox-20 and c-jun, positive and negative 
regulators of myelination, respectively. A decrease in krox-20 expression and an 
increase in c-jun expression in both its phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated
states were observed. In addition, we investigated the role of integrins,
specifically the beta4 subunit of the alpha6beta4 dimer, as a possible upstream
signal transducer in the signaling cascade leading to demyelination. We detected 
a decrease in beta4 integrin expression at 2 and 4 weeks post-injury and a
concomitant relocalization to the Schmidt-Lanterman Incisures, suggesting a role 
for the beta4 integrin in facilitating Schwann cell-extracellular matrix
interaction. The observed changes in transcription factor and integrin expression
are temporally correlated with the process of demyelination, and suggest further 
investigation to define their definitive role in regulating the myelin response
to CNC injury.

PMCID: PMC3262774
PMID: 19765400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Neurosci. 2009 Sep 9;29(36):11123-33. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2232-09.2009.

Atoh1-lineal neurons are required for hearing and for the survival of neurons in 
the spiral ganglion and brainstem accessory auditory nuclei.

Maricich SM(1), Xia A, Mathes EL, Wang VY, Oghalai JS, Fritzsch B, Zoghbi HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA. smm18@case.edu

Atoh1 is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor necessary for the
specification of inner ear hair cells and central auditory system neurons derived
from the rhombic lip. We used the Cre-loxP system and two Cre-driver lines
(Egr2(Cre) and Hoxb1(Cre)) to delete Atoh1 from different regions of the cochlear
nucleus (CN) and accessory auditory nuclei (AAN). Adult Atoh1-conditional
knock-out mice (Atoh1(CKO)) are behaviorally deaf, have diminished auditory
brainstem evoked responses, and have disrupted CN and AAN morphology and
connectivity. In addition, Egr2; Atoh1(CKO) mice lose spiral ganglion neurons in 
the cochlea and AAN neurons during the first 3 d of life, revealing a novel
critical period in the development of these neurons. These new mouse models of
predominantly central deafness illuminate the importance of the CN for support of
a subset of peripheral and central auditory neurons.

PMCID: PMC2743121
PMID: 19741118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2009 Jun;14(2):125-36. doi:
10.1111/j.1529-8027.2009.00222.x.

Mutational analysis of GJB1, MPZ, PMP22, EGR2, and LITAF/SIMPLE in Serbian
Charcot-Marie-Tooth patients.

Keckarevic-Markovic M(1), Milic-Rasic V, Mladenovic J, Dackovic J, Kecmanovic M, 
Keckarevic D, Savic-Pavicevic D, Romac S.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
milica@bio.bg.ac.rs

Comment in
    J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2010 Jun;15(2):156-7.

We report the results of mutational analysis in the following genes: GJB1, MPZ,
PMP22, EGR2, and LITAF/SIMPLE in 57 Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) patients of Serbian
origin without the PMP22 duplication. We found 10 different mutations in 14 CMT
patients: 6 mutations in GJB1, 3 in MPZ, and 1 in PMP22. Five of six GJB1
mutations are reported for the first time, and the most frequent one appears to
be a founder mutation in the Serbian population. No mutations were found in EGR2 
or LITAF. Thus, GJB1 mutation analysis should be done in patients without the
PMP22 duplication and male-to-male transmission of CMT.

PMID: 19691535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 18;106(33):13974-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0906872106. Epub 2009 Aug 4.

CD4+CD25-LAG3+ regulatory T cells controlled by the transcription factor Egr-2.

Okamura T(1), Fujio K, Shibuya M, Sumitomo S, Shoda H, Sakaguchi S, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Regulatory T cells (Tregs) are engaged in the maintenance of immunological
self-tolerance and immune homeostasis. IL-10 has an important role in maintaining
the normal immune state. Here, we show that IL-10-secreting Tregs can be
delineated in normal mice as CD4(+)CD25(-)Foxp3(-) T cells that express
lymphocyte activation gene 3 (LAG-3), an MHC-class-II-binding CD4 homolog.
Although approximately 2% of the CD4(+)CD25(-) T cell population consisted of
CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG3(+) T cells in the spleen, CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG3(+) T cells are
enriched to approximately 8% in the Peyer's patch. They are hypoproliferative
upon in vitro antigenic stimulation and suppress in vivo development of colitis. 
Gene expression analysis reveals that CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG3(+) Tregs
characteristically express early growth response gene 2 (Egr-2), a key molecule
for anergy induction. Retroviral gene transfer of Egr-2 converts naïve CD4(+) T
cells into the IL-10-secreting and LAG-3-expressing phenotype, and
Egr-2-transduced CD4(+) T cells exhibit antigen-specific immunosuppressive
capacity in vivo. Unlike Foxp3(+) natural Tregs, high-affinity interactions with 
selecting peptide/MHC ligands expressed in the thymus do not induce the
development of CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG3(+) Tregs. In contrast, the number of
CD4(+)CD25(-)LAG3(+) Tregs is influenced by the presence of environmental
microbiota. Thus, IL-10-secreting Egr-2(+)LAG3(+)CD4(+) Tregs can be exploited
for the control of peripheral immunity.

PMCID: PMC2729005
PMID: 19666526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Oct;29(19):5348-56. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00407-09. Epub 2009 Aug 
3.

The HECT-type E3 ubiquitin ligase AIP2 inhibits activation-induced T-cell death
by catalyzing EGR2 ubiquitination.

Chen A(1), Gao B, Zhang J, McEwen T, Ye SQ, Zhang D, Fang D.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery and Molecular Microbiology
and Immunology, University of Missouri-Columbia School of Medicine, One Hospital 
Dr., Columbia, MO 65212, USA.

E3 ubiquitin ligases, which target specific molecules for proteolytic
destruction, have emerged as key regulators of immune functions. Several E3
ubiquitin ligases, including c-Cbl, Cbl-b, GRAIL, Itch, and Nedd4, have been
shown to negatively regulate T-cell activation. Here, we report that the
HECT-type E3 ligase AIP2 positively regulates T-cell activation. Ectopic
expression of AIP2 in mouse primary T cells enhances their proliferation and
interleukin-2 production by suppressing the apoptosis of T cells. AIP2 interacts 
with and promotes ubiquitin-mediated degradation of EGR2, a zinc finger
transcription factor that has been found to regulate Fas ligand (FasL) expression
during activation-induced T-cell death. Suppression of AIP2 expression by small
RNA interference upregulates EGR2, inhibits EGR2 ubiquitination and FasL
expression, and enhances the apoptosis of T cells. Therefore, AIP2 regulates
activation-induced T-cell death by suppressing EGR2-mediated FasL expression via 
the ubiquitin pathway.

PMCID: PMC2747983
PMID: 19651900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2009 Sep 12;364(1529):2469-76. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2009.0090.

Developmental basis of the rostro-caudal organization of the brainstem
respiratory rhythm generator.

Champagnat J(1), Morin-Surun MP, Fortin G, Thoby-Brisson M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche de Gif, UPR 2216 (Neurobiologie Génétique et Intégrative),
IFR 2118 (Institut de Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard), CNRS, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, 
France. jean.champagnat@iaf.cnrs-gif.fr

The Hox genetic network plays a key role in the anteroposterior patterning of the
rhombencephalon at pre- and early-segmental stages of development of the neural
tube. In the mouse, it controls development of the entire brainstem respiratory
neuronal network, including the pons, the parafacial respiratory group (pFRG) and
the pre-Bötzinger complex (preBötC). Inactivation of Krox20/Egr2 eliminates the
pFRG activity, thereby causing life-threatening neonatal apnoeas alternating with
respiration at low frequency. Another respiratory abnormality, the complete
absence of breathing, is induced when neuronal synchronization fails to develop
in the preBötC. The present paper summarizes data on a third type of respiratory 
deficits induced by altering Hox function at pontine levels. Inactivation of
Hoxa2, the most rostrally expressed Hox gene in the hindbrain, disturbs embryonic
development of the pons and alters neonatal inspiratory shaping without affecting
respiratory frequency and apnoeas. The same result is obtained by the Phox2a(+/-)
mutation modifying the number of petrosal chemoafferent neurons, by eliminating
acetylcholinesterase and by altering Hox-dependent development of the pons with
retinoic acid administration at embryonic day 7.5. In addition, embryos treated
with retinoic acid provide a mouse model for hyperpnoeic episodic breathing,
widely reported in pre-term neonates, young girls with Rett's syndrome, patients 
with Joubert syndrome and adults with Cheyne-Stokes respiration. We conclude that
specific respiratory deficits in vivo are assignable to anteroposterior segments 
of the brainstem, suggesting that the adult respiratory neuronal network is
functionally organized according to the rhombomeric, Hox-dependent segmentation
of the brainstem in embryos.

PMCID: PMC2865123
PMID: 19651648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Aug;12(8):961-3. doi: 10.1038/nn0809-961.

Practice makes perfect, even for breathing.

Feldman JL(1), Kam K, Janczewski WA.

Author information: 
(1)The authors are in the Department of Neurobiology, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
feldman@ucla.edu

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Aug;12(8):1028-35.

PMCID: PMC2810466
PMID: 19636348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Immunity. 2009 Jul 17;31(1):72-83. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.04.017.

Deltex1 is a target of the transcription factor NFAT that promotes T cell anergy.

Hsiao HW(1), Liu WH, Wang CJ, Lo YH, Wu YH, Jiang ST, Lai MZ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei 11221, Taiwan, ROC.

The molecular process underlying T cell anergy is incompletely understood.
Deltex1 (DTX1) is a Notch target with unknown physiological function. Here we
show that Dtx1 was a transcription target of nuclear factor of activated T cells 
(NFAT) and participated in T cell anergy. DTX1 protein was upregulated during T
cell anergy, and transgenic expression of Dtx1 attenuated T cell activation. DTX1
inhibited T cell activation by both E3-dependent and E3-independent mechanisms.
In addition, DTX1 suppressed T cell activation in the absence of its
Notch-binding domain. Importantly, DTX1 regulated the expression of two
anergy-associated molecules, growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible 45 beta
(Gadd45 beta) and Cbl-b. DTX1 interacted with early growth response 2 (Egr-2) for
optimum expression of Cbl-b. Furthermore, deficiency of DTX1 augmented T cell
activation, conferred resistance to anergy induction, enhanced autoantibody
generation, and increased inflammation. DTX1 therefore represents a component
downstream of calcium-NFAT signaling that regulates T cell anergy.

PMID: 19592273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Aug;12(8):1028-35. doi: 10.1038/nn.2354. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

Genetic identification of an embryonic parafacial oscillator coupling to the
preBötzinger complex.

Thoby-Brisson M(1), Karlén M, Wu N, Charnay P, Champagnat J, Fortin G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique UPR2216, Gif sur Yvette, France.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Aug;12(8):961-3.

The hindbrain transcription factors Phox2b and Egr2 (also known as Krox20) are
linked to the development of the autonomic nervous system and rhombomere-related 
regulation of breathing, respectively. Mutations in these proteins can lead to
abnormal breathing behavior as a result of an alteration in an unidentified
neuronal system. We characterized a bilateral embryonic parafacial (e-pF)
population of rhythmically bursting neurons at embryonic day (E) 14.5 in mice.
These cells expressed Phox2b, were derived from Egr2-expressing precursors and
their development was dependent on the integrity of the Egr2 gene. Silencing or
eliminating the e-pF oscillator, but not the putative inspiratory oscillator
(preBötzinger complex, preBötC), led to an abnormally slow rhythm, demonstrating 
that the e-pF controls the respiratory rhythm. The e-pF oscillator, the only one 
active at E14.5, entrained and then coupled with the preBötC, which emerged
independently at E15.5. These data establish the dual organization of the
respiratory rhythm generator at the time of its inception, when it begins to
drive fetal breathing.

PMID: 19578380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Sep;23(9):1505-18. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0085. Epub 2009 Jun 
25.

Novel regulators of Fgf23 expression and mineralization in Hyp bone.

Liu S(1), Tang W, Fang J, Ren J, Li H, Xiao Z, Quarles LD.

Author information: 
(1)The Kidney Institute, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas
66160, USA.

We used gene array analysis of cortical bone to identify Phex-dependent gene
transcripts associated with abnormal Fgf23 production and mineralization in Hyp
mice. We found evidence that elevation of Fgf23 expression in osteocytes is
associated with increments in Fgf1, Fgf7, and Egr2 and decrements in Sost, an
inhibitor in the Wnt-signaling pathway, were observed in Hyp bone. beta-Catenin
levels were increased in Hyp cortical bone, and TOPflash luciferase reporter
assay showed increased transcriptional activity in Hyp-derived osteoblasts,
consistent with Wnt activation. Moreover, activation of Fgf and Wnt-signaling
stimulated Fgf23 promoter activity in osteoblasts. We also observed reductions in
Bmp1, a metalloproteinase that metabolizes the extracellular matrix protein Dmp1.
Alterations were also found in enzymes regulating the posttranslational
processing and stability of Fgf23, including decrements in the
glycosyltransferase Galnt3 and the proprotein convertase Pcsk5. In addition, we
found that the Pcsk5 and the glycosyltransferase Galnt3 were decreased in Hyp
bone, suggesting that reduced posttranslational processing of FGF23 may also
contribute to increased Fgf23 levels in Hyp mice. With regard to mineralization, 
we identified additional candidates to explain the intrinsic mineralization
defect in Hyp osteoblasts, including increases in the mineralization inhibitors
Mgp and Thbs4, as well as increases in local pH-altering factors, carbonic
anhydrase 12 (Car12) and 3 (Car3) and the sodium-dependent citrate transporter
(Slc13a5). These studies demonstrate the complexity of gene expression
alterations in bone that accompanies inactivating Phex mutations and identify
novel pathways that may coordinate Fgf23 expression and mineralization of
extracellular matrix in Hyp bone.

PMCID: PMC2737552
PMID: 19556340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Chem Res Toxicol. 2008 Dec;21(12):2245-56. doi: 10.1021/tx8001934.

Genome-wide transcriptional responses to acrolein.

Thompson CA(1), Burcham PC.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology and Anaesthesiology Unit, School of Medicine and Pharmacology,
The University of Western Australia, Perth WA 6009, Australia.

The lipid peroxidation product and environmental pollutant acrolein participates 
in many diseases. Because of its formation during tobacco combustion, its role in
various smoking-related respiratory conditions including lung cancer has received
increasing attention. As a reactive electrophile, acrolein seems likely to
disrupt many biochemical pathways, but these are poorly characterized on a
genome-wide basis. This study used microarrays to study short-term
transcriptional responses of A549 human lung cells to acrolein, with cells
exposed to 100 microM acrolein for 1, 2, or 4 h prior to RNA extraction and
transcription profiling. Major pathways dysregulated by acrolein included those
involved in apoptosis, cell cycle control, transcription, cell signaling, and
protein biosynthesis. Although HMOX1 is a widely used marker of transcriptional
responses to acrolein, this gene was the sole upregulated member of the
Nrf2-driven family of antioxidant response genes. Transcript levels of several
members of the metallothionein class of cytoprotective metal-chelating proteins
decreased strongly in response to acrolein. Other novel findings included strong 
and persistent upregulation of several members of the early growth response (EGR)
class of zinc finger transcription factors. Real-time PCR and Western blotting
confirmed strong upregulation of a key member of this family (EGR-2), the DNA
damage response gene GADD45beta, the heat shock response participant Hsp70, and
also HMOX1. Consistent with changes in Nur77 mRNA levels during the microarray
study, Western blotting confirmed strong Nur77 induction at the protein level,
raising the possibility that this death-inducing protein contributes to the loss 
of cell viability during acrolein exposure. Collectively, the transcriptional
response to acrolein is complex and dynamic, with future work needed to determine
whether acrolein-responsive genes identified in this study contribute to cell and
tissue injury in the smoke-exposed lung.

PMID: 19548348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 24;284(30):20111-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.022426. Epub
2009 Jun 1.

Induction of myelin protein zero by early growth response 2 through upstream and 
intragenic elements.

Jang SW(1), Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA.

The Mpz (myelin protein zero) gene codes for the principal component of myelin in
the peripheral nervous system, and mutations in this gene cause human peripheral 
myelinopathies. Expression of the Mpz gene is controlled by two major
transactivators that coordinate Schwann cell development: Egr2/Krox20 and Sox10. 
Our in vivo ChIP-chip analysis in myelinating peripheral nerve identified major
sites of Egr2 interaction within the first intron of the Mpz gene and
approximately 5 kb upstream of the transcription start site. In addition, the
sites of Egr2 binding display many of the hallmarks associated with enhancer
elements. Interestingly, the upstream Egr2 binding sites lie proximal to the
divergently transcribed succinate dehydrogenase C gene, but Sdhc expression was
not affected by the massive induction of Mpz mediated by Egr2. Mpz induction was 
greatly enhanced in the presence of the Egr2 binding sites, and removal of them
markedly diminished transgenic expression of a construct derived from the Mpz
locus. Sox10 was also found to be associated with the upstream region, and its
binding was required for Egr2-mediated activation in this distal regulatory
region. Our findings highlight that peripheral nerve-specific expression of Mpz
is primarily regulated by both upstream and intron-associated regulatory
elements. Overall, these results provide a locus-wide analysis of the role and
activity of Egr2 in regulation of the Mpz gene within its native chromosomal
context.

PMCID: PMC2740437
PMID: 19487693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Dev Cell. 2009 May;16(5):764-71. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.04.006.

Mediator MED23 links insulin signaling to the adipogenesis transcription cascade.

Wang W(1), Huang L, Huang Y, Yin JW, Berk AJ, Friedman JM, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Adipocyte differentiation is orchestrated by multiple signaling pathways and a
temporally regulated transcriptional cascade. However, the mechanisms by which
insulin signaling is linked to this cascade remain unclear. Here we show that the
Med23 subunit of the Mediator Complex and its interacting transcription factor
Elk1 are critical regulators of adipogenesis. Med23(-/-) embryonic fibroblast
cells were refractory to hormone-induced adipogenesis. Knockdown of either Med23 
or Elk1, or overexpression of dominant-negative Elk1, inhibited adipogenesis. In 
the absence of either Elk1 or Med23, Krox20, an immediate early gene stimulated
by insulin during adipogenesis, was uninducible. Moreover, the adipogenic defect 
in Med23-deficient cells was rescued by ectopic expression of Krox20 or one of
its downstream factors, C/EBPbeta or PPARgamma. Mechanistically, the
insulin-stimulated, Med23-deficient preinitiation complex failed to initiate
robust transcription of Krox20. Collectively, our results suggest that Med23
serves as a critical link transducing insulin signaling to the transcriptional
cascade during adipocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2835773
PMID: 19460352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Neuroreport. 2009 Jun 17;20(9):869-74. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e32832c619b.

Elevation of somatic Ca2+ upregulates genes Nr4a1 and Egr2, but not Bdnf and Arc.

Pinato G(1), Pegoraro S, Visentini M, Ruaro ME, Torre V.

Author information: 
(1)International School for Advanced Studies, Trieste, Italy. pinato@sissa.it

Blockage of Ca2+ uptake with thapsigargin, a specific antagonist of
sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase pumps, causes an increase of somatic
Ca2+, with negligible changes of Ca2+ levels in dendrites. Treatment with
thapsigargin in the presence of blockers of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartic acid)
receptors upregulates some activity-dependent genes (Egr2 and Nr4a1), leaving
unaltered the expression level of other activity-dependent genes (Bdnf and Arc). 
These results show that the elevation of somatic Ca2+ can initiate transcription 
of specific genes, independently of activation of NMDA receptors, but that
transcription of other genes is not initiated by a simple elevation of
intracellular Ca2+.

PMID: 19436228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jul;29(14):3894-904. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01598-08. Epub 2009 May
11.

Histone acetyltransferase CBP is vital to demarcate conventional and innate CD8+ 
T-cell development.

Fukuyama T(1), Kasper LH, Boussouar F, Jeevan T, van Deursen J, Brindle PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny
Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Defining the chromatin modifications and transcriptional mechanisms that direct
the development of different T-cell lineages is a major challenge in immunology. 
The transcriptional coactivators CREB binding protein (CBP) and the closely
related p300, which comprise the KAT3 family of histone/protein lysine
acetyltransferases, interact with over 50 T-lymphocyte-essential transcriptional 
regulators. We show here that CBP, but not p300, modulates the thymic development
of conventional adaptive T cells versus those having unconventional innate
functions. Conditional inactivation of CBP in the thymus yielded CD8
single-positive (SP) thymocytes with an effector-, memory-, or innate-like T-cell
phenotype. In this regard, CD8 SP thymocytes in CBP mutant mice were
phenotypically similar to those reported for Itk and Rlk protein tyrosine kinase 
mutants, including the increased expression of the T-cell master regulatory
transcription factor eomesodermin (Eomes) and the interleukin-2 and -15 receptor 
beta chain (CD122) and an enhanced ability to rapidly produce gamma interferon.
CBP was required for the expression of the Itk-dependent genes Egr2, Egr3, and
Il2, suggesting that CBP helps mediate Itk-responsive transcription. CBP
therefore defines a nuclear component of the signaling pathways that demarcate
the development of innate and adaptive naïve CD8(+) T cells in the thymus.

PMCID: PMC2704754
PMID: 19433445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Brain Res Bull. 2009 Aug 14;79(6):441-4. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2009.04.015.
Epub 2009 May 5.

The influences of propofol and dexmedetomidine on circadian gene expression in
rat brain.

Yoshida Y(1), Nakazato K, Takemori K, Kobayashi K, Sakamoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5 Sendagi, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-8603, Japan. s7100@nms.ac.jp

INTRODUCTION: There are circadian genes whose expressions were affected by
sevoflurane. We hypothesized that propofol and dexmedetomidine also have
influences on the expressions of circadian genes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seven-week-old rats were cannulated and propofol (600
microg/kg/min, 1 ml/h, n=6: group P6H), dexmedetomidine (1 microg/kg/min, 1 ml/h,
n=6: group D6H), 10% lipid (1 ml/h, n=6: group L) and normal saline (1 ml/h, n=6:
group N) were infused intravenously for 6h; rats were decapitated soon or 24h
after awakening from anesthesia (groups P24H n=6 and D24H n=6). Real time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction was performed using rat whole brain and
the expressions of circadian genes were measured.
RESULTS: In the P6H group and the P24H group, the whole expressions of seven
genes were changed significantly compared with the L group. In the D6H group, the
whole expression of seven genes was changed significantly compared with the N
group. In the P6H group, all gene expressions except for Tef (thyrotroph
embryonic factor) were changed significantly compared with the L group. In this
group, the expression of Dbp (D site albumin promoter binding protein) was
increased, and the others were decreased. In the D6H group, all gene expressions 
except for Dbp and Tef were decreased significantly compared with the N group.
For the two anesthetics, the expression patterns were different only in Dbp.
CONCLUSION: We showed that propofol and dexmedetomidine have influences on the
circadian gene expressions.

PMID: 19422889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Neuroscience. 2009 Aug 4;162(1):118-27. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.04.052. 
Epub 2009 May 3.

A role for dopamine D2 receptors in reversal learning.

De Steno DA(1), Schmauss C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Reversal learning has been shown to require intact serotonergic innervation of
the forebrain neocortex. Whether dopamine acting through D2 receptors plays a
complementary role in this anatomic area is still unclear. Here we show that mice
lacking dopamine D2 receptors exhibited significantly impaired performance in the
reversal learning phase of an attention-set-shifting task (ASST) and that wild
type mice treated chronically with the D2-like receptor antagonist haloperidol
exhibited the same cognitive deficit. The test-phase-specific deficits of D2
mutants and haloperidol-treated mice were also accompanied by deficits in the
induction of expression of early growth response gene 2 (egr-2), a regulatory
transcription factor previously shown to be selectively induced in the
ventrolateral orbital frontal cortex and the pre- and infralimbic medial
prefrontal cortex of ASST-tested mice. D2-receptor knockout mice and
haloperidol-treated wild type, however, exhibited lower egr-2 expression in these
anatomic regions after completion of an ASST-test phase that required reversal
learning but not after completion of set-shifting phases without rule reversals. 
In contrast, mice treated chronically with clozapine, an atypical neuroleptic
drug with lower D2-receptor affinity and broader pharmacological effects, had
deficits in compound discrimination phases of the ASST, but also these deficits
were accompanied by lower egr-2 expression in the same anatomic subregions. Thus,
the findings indicate that egr-2 expression is a sensitive indicator of
test-phase-specific performance in the ASST and that normal function of D2
receptors in subregions of the orbital frontal and the medial prefrontal cortex
is required for cognitive flexibility in tests involving rule reversals.

PMCID: PMC2873774
PMID: 19401217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Sep;50(9):4173-84. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-3136.
Epub 2009 Apr 22.

Embryonic corneal Schwann cells express some Schwann cell marker mRNAs, but no
mature Schwann cell marker proteins.

Conrad AH(1), Albrecht M, Pettit-Scott M, Conrad GW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506-4901,
USA. aconrad@ksu.edu

PURPOSE: Embryonic chick nerves encircle the cornea in pericorneal tissue until
embryonic day (E)9, then penetrate the anterior corneal stroma, invade the
epithelium, and branch over the corneal surface through E20. Adult corneal
nerves, cut during transplantation or LASIK, never fully regenerate. Schwann
cells (SCs) protect nerve fibers and augment nerve repair. This study evaluates
SC differentiation in embryonic chick corneas.
METHODS: Fertile chicken eggs were incubated from E0 at 38 degrees C, 45%
humidity. Dissected permeabilized corneas plus pericorneal tissue were
immunostained for SC marker proteins. Other corneas were paraffin embedded,
sectioned, and processed by in situ hybridization for corneal-, nerve-related,
and SC marker gene expression. E9 to E20 corneas, dissected from pericorneal
tissue, were assessed by real-time PCR (QPCR) for mRNA expression.
RESULTS: QPCR revealed unchanging low to moderate SLIT2/ROBO and NTN/UNC5 family,
BACE1, and CADM3/CADM4 expressions, but high NEO1 expression. EGR2 and POU3F1
expressions never surpassed PAX3 expression. ITGNA6/ITGNB4 expressions increased 
20-fold; ITGNB1 expression was high. SC marker S100 and MBP expressions
increased; MAG, GFAP, and SCMP expressions were very low. Antibodies against the 
MPZ, MAG, S100, and SCMP proteins immunostained along pericorneal nerves, but not
along corneal nerves. In the cornea, SLIT2 and SOX10 mRNAs were expressed in
anterior stroma and epithelium, whereas PAX3, S100, MBP, and MPZL1 mRNAs were
expressed only in corneal epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: Embryonic chick corneas contain SCs, as defined by SOX10 and PAX3
transcription, which remain immature, at least in part because of stromal
transcriptional and epithelial translational regulation of some SC marker gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC2771572
PMID: 19387082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Jun 1;107(3):537-47. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22155.

Redox-sensitive regulation of gene expression in human primary macrophages
exposed to inorganic arsenic.

Bourdonnay E(1), Morzadec C, Fardel O, Vernhet L.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U620, Group Toxicité des contaminants de l'environnement, 2 avenue du
Pr. Léon Bernard, 35043 Rennes, France.

Inorganic arsenic is an environmental contaminant toxic for key immune cells. We 
recently reported that low micromolar concentrations of arsenic trioxide
(As(2)O(3)) alter functions and differentiation gene program of human
macrophages. Particularly, prolonged treatment with As(2)O(3) concomitantly
reverses expression of a macrophage-specific gene subset and triggers reactive
oxygen species (ROS) production, suggesting a possible role of cell stress in
As(2)O(3) gene effects. This study was thus designed to determine whether
redox-sensitive signaling pathways could mediate gene expression in
metalloid-exposed macrophages. Our results show that As(2)O(3)-dependent
alterations of stress (HMOX1 and GCLM) and macrophage-specific (MMP9, CCL22, and 
CXCL2) gene expression are not mediated by ROS or related signaling pathways.
Notably, As(2)O(3) alters neither activity of the redox-sensitive transcription
factor Sp1 nor that of AP-1 or NF-kappaB. In contrast, N-acetylcysteine, a potent
cysteine reductive compound, significantly prevents up-regulation of HMOX1, GCLM,
and CXCL2 genes, and repression of MMP9 and CCL22 genes induced by As(2)O(3). In 
addition, we demonstrate that As(2)O(3) markedly alters nuclear levels of Nrf2
and Bach1, two redox-sensitive regulators of stress genes, and represses
expression of the transcription factor EGR2 which is involved in mouse macrophage
differentiation; such effects are reduced by N-acetylcysteine. Finally, we report
that genetic invalidation of EGR2 gene partially mimics metalloid effects; it
significantly represses CCL22 gene expression and weakly induces that of CXCL2.
In conclusion, our results demonstrate that As(2)O(3) alters macrophage gene
expression through redox-sensitive signaling pathways unrelated to ROS production
and reveal the transcription factor EGR2 as a new molecular target of arsenic.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19350554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Immunol Cell Biol. 2009 Jul;87(5):361-3. doi: 10.1038/icb.2009.20. Epub 2009 Mar 
31.

It's up to you Egr2.

Bassiri H(1), Nichols KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

PMID: 19333249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Presse Med. 2009 Sep;38(9):1325-34. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2009.01.014. Epub 2009 Mar
26.

[Hereditary peripheral neuropathies].

[Article in French]

Vallat JM(1), Tazir M, Calvo J, Funalot B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de référence neuropathies périphériques rares, Service de neurologie,
Hôpital universitaire Dupuytren, CHU de Limoges, Limoges, France.
jean-michel.vallat@unilim.fr

Currently more than 30 genes are known to be responsible for genetically
determined neuropathies. Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is the most frequent
of these hereditary neuropathies, with a prevalence of 4.7 to 36 per 100 000. In 
its demyelinating forms (CMT1), approximately 70% of cases are associated with a 
duplication of the PMP22gene. In its axonal forms (CMT2), 10-20% of the cases may
be associated with a mutation of the MFN2gene. For North African patients with
recessive transmission, a mutation of the LMNA gene must be sought. It is
essential to stress the great variability of the phenotype--clinical,
electrophysiological, and histologic--between and within families. A detailed
analysis of these criteria, together with consideration of ethnic origin, may
guide the search for the causal mutation. Whether the case involves certainly
hereditary transmission or a sporadic form, it is desirable to be able to examine
the maximum number of the patient's kin, both clinically and
electrophysiologically. The forms with recessive transmission usually have a very
early onset and are more serious than the dominant forms. The early- and very
early-onset forms of CMT are increasingly better distinguished: congenital
hypomyelination neuropathy (mutations of PMP22, MPZ or EGR2), or more axonal
forms, including SMARD1 (Spinal muscle atrophy with respiratory distress;
mutations of IGHMBP2) and EOHMSN (Early-onset hereditary motor and sensory
neuropathy; mutations of MFN2). The prevention of cutaneous (ulcerations), bone, 
and amputation complications is very important in patients with hereditary
sensory and autonomic neuropathies, because of the severity of the sensory
disorders.

PMID: 19327944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 1;284(18):12562-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M901121200. Epub 2009 
Mar 6.

Inverse regulation of plasticity-related immediate early genes by calcineurin in 
hippocampal neurons.

Lam BY(1), Zhang W, Enticknap N, Haggis E, Cader MZ, Chawla S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge CB2 1PD, United Kingdom.

In the mammalian hippocampus, changes in the expression of immediate early genes 
(IEGs) is thought to contribute to long term plastic changes in neurons brought
about by learning tasks and high frequency stimulation of synapses. The
phosphatase calcineurin has emerged as an important negative regulator of
hippocampus-dependent learning and long term potentiation. Here we investigated
the possibility that the constraining action of calcineurin on hippocampal
plasticity is mediated in part by regulation of gene expression through negative 
control of transcription factors, such as cAMP-response element (CRE)-binding
protein (CREB). We assessed the effect of calcineurin inhibitors on CREB
activation by neuronal activity and show that calcineurin activity is in fact
required for CREB-mediated gene expression. However, inhibition of calcineurin
had disparate effects on the transcriptional induction of CREB-dependent IEGs. We
find that the IEG c-fos is unaffected by suppression of calcineurin activity, the
plasticity-related genes Egr1/Zif268 and Egr2/Krox-20 are up-regulated, and genes
encoding the orphan nuclear hormone receptors Nor1 and Nur77 are down-regulated. 
We further show that the up-regulation of particular IEGs is probably due to the 
presence of serum response elements (SREs) in their promoters, because
SRE-mediated gene expression is enhanced by calcineurin blockers. Moreover,
expression of the c-fos gene, which is unaffected by calcineurin inhibitors,
could be down-regulated by mutating the SRE. Conversely, SRE-mediated c-fos
induction in the absence of a functional CRE was enhanced by calcineurin
inhibitors. Our experiments thus implicate calcineurin as a negative regulator of
SRE-dependent neuronal genes.

PMCID: PMC2673322
PMID: 19270309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Neurosci. 2009 Feb 25;29(8):2312-21. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2168-08.2009.

Congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy with lethal conduction failure in mice
carrying the Egr2 I268N mutation.

Baloh RH(1), Strickland A, Ryu E, Le N, Fahrner T, Yang M, Nagarajan R, Milbrandt
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, and Hope Center for Neurological Diseases, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. rbaloh@wustl.edu

Mouse models of human disease are helpful for understanding the pathogenesis of
the disorder and ultimately for testing potential therapeutic agents. Here, we
describe the engineering and characterization of a mouse carrying the I268N
mutation in Egr2, observed in patients with recessively inherited
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease type 4E, which is predicted to alter the
ability of Egr2 to interact with the Nab transcriptional coregulatory proteins.
Mice homozygous for Egr2(I268N) develop a congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy
similar to their human counterparts. Egr2(I268N) is expressed at normal levels in
developing nerve but is unable to interact with Nab proteins or to properly
activate transcription of target genes critical for proper peripheral myelin
development. Interestingly, Egr2(I268N/I268N) mutant mice maintain normal weight 
and have only mild tremor until 2 weeks after birth, at which point they rapidly 
develop worsening weakness and uniformly die within several days. Nerve
electrophysiology revealed conduction block, and neuromuscular junctions showed
marked terminal sprouting similar to that seen in animals with pharmacologically 
induced blockade of action potentials or neuromuscular transmission. These
studies describe a unique animal model of CMT, whereby weakness is due to
conduction block or neuromuscular junction failure rather than secondary axon
loss and demonstrate that the Egr2-Nab complex is critical for proper peripheral 
nerve myelination.

PMCID: PMC2679588
PMID: 19244508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Cell Death Differ. 2009 May;16(5):782-9. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.11. Epub 2009 Feb 
20.

The transcription factors Egr1 and Egr2 have opposing influences on adipocyte
differentiation.

Boyle KB(1), Hadaschik D, Virtue S, Cawthorn WP, Ridley SH, O'Rahilly S, Siddle
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Metabolic Research Laboratories,
Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK.

The zinc finger-containing transcription factors Egr1 (Krox24) and Egr2 (Krox20) 
have been implicated in the proliferation and differentiation of many cell types.
Egr2 has earlier been shown to play a positive role in adipocyte differentiation,
but the function of Egr1 in this context is unknown. We compared the roles of
Egr1 and Egr2 in the differentiation of murine 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Egr1 protein
was rapidly induced after addition of differentiation cocktail, whereas Egr2
protein initially remained low before increasing on days 1 and 2, concomitant
with the disappearance of Egr1. In marked contrast to the effects of Egr2,
differentiation was inhibited by ectopic expression of Egr1 and potentiated by
knockdown of Egr1. The pro-adipogenic effects of Egr1 knockdown were particularly
notable when isobutylmethylxanthine (IBMX) was omitted from the differentiation
medium. However, knockdown of Egr1 did not affect CCAAT/enhancer binding protein 
(C/EBP)beta protein expression or phosphorylation of CREB Ser133. Further, Egr1
did not directly affect the activity of promoters for the master adipogenic
transcription factors, C/EBPalpha or peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma2, as assessed in luciferase reporter assays. These data indicate
that Egr1 and Egr2 exert opposing influences on adipocyte differentiation and
that the careful regulation of both is required for maintaining appropriate
levels of adipogenesis. Further, the pro-differentiation effects of IBMX involve 
suppression of the inhibitory influence of Egr1.

PMCID: PMC2670277
PMID: 19229250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Reproduction. 2009 May;137(5):843-55. doi: 10.1530/REP-08-0457. Epub 2009 Feb 18.

Rapid effects of LH on gene expression in the mural granulosa cells of mouse
periovulatory follicles.

Carletti MZ(1), Christenson LK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, 3075 KLSIC, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, Kansas 66160,
USA.

LH acts on periovulatory granulosa cells by activating the PKA pathway as well as
other cell signaling cascades to increase the transcription of specific genes
necessary for ovulation and luteinization. Collectively, these cell signaling
responses occur rapidly (within minutes); however, presently no high throughput
studies have reported changes before 4 h after the LH surge. To identify early
response genes that are likely critical for initiation of ovulation and
luteinization, mouse granulosa cells were collected before and 1 h after hCG.
Fifty-seven gene transcripts were significantly (P<0.05) upregulated and three
downregulated following hCG. Twenty-four of these transcripts were known to be
expressed after the LH/hCG surge at later time points, while 36 were unknown to
be expressed by periovulatory granulosa cells. Temporal expression of several
transcripts, including the transcription factors Nr4a1, Nr4a2, Egr1, Egr2, Btg1, 
and Btg2, and the epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like ligands Areg and Ereg, were 
analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR, and their putative roles in granulosa cell
function are discussed. Epigen (Epgn), another member of the family of EGF-like
ligands was identified for the first time in granulosa cells as rapidly induced
by LH/hCG. We demonstrate that Epgn initiates cumulus expansion, similar to the
other EGF-receptor ligands Areg and Ereg. These studies illustrate that a number 
of changes in gene expression occur in vivo in response to LH, and that many of
the differentially expressed genes are transcription factors that we would
predict in turn modulate granulosa cell gene expression to ultimately impact the 
processes of ovulation and luteinization.

PMCID: PMC3118672
PMID: 19225042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Nat Immunol. 2009 Mar;10(3):231-3. doi: 10.1038/ni0309-231.

Developing NKT cells need their calcium.

Godfrey DI, Stankovic S, Baxter AG.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2009 Mar;10(3):306-13.

PMID: 19221550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 17;284(16):10831-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808683200. Epub 2009
Feb 13.

Krox20 controls the transcription of its various targets in the developing
hindbrain according to multiple modes.

Desmazières A(1), Charnay P, Gilardi-Hebenstreit P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U784, 46 Rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

The zinc finger transcription factor Krox20 plays an essential role in the
vertebrate hindbrain segmentation process. It positively or negatively controls a
large variety of other regulatory genes, coordinating delimitation of segmental
territories, specification of their identity, and maintenance of their integrity.
We have investigated the molecular mechanisms of Krox20 transcriptional control
by performing a detailed structure-function analysis of the protein in the
developing chick hindbrain. This revealed an unsuspected diversity in the modes
of action of a transcription factor in a single tissue, since regulation of each 
of the five tested target genes requires different parts of the protein and/or
presumably different co-factors. The multiplicity of Krox20 functions might rely 
on this diversity. Investigation of known Krox20 co-factors was initiated in
relation to this analysis. Nab was shown to act as a negative feedback modulator 
of the different Krox20 activating functions in the hindbrain. HCF-1 was found to
bind to a Krox20 N-terminal region, which was shown to rely on multiple elements,
including acidic domains, to convey Nab activation and Krox20 autoregulation.

PMCID: PMC2667770
PMID: 19218566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Pediatr Res. 2009 May;65(5):493-8. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e31819d90a1.

Long-term reduction of hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic factor activity
after fetal-neonatal iron deficiency in adult rats.

Tran PV(1), Fretham SJ, Carlson ES, Georgieff MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
55455, USA.

Fetal-neonatal iron deficiency acutely alters hippocampal biochemistry, neural
morphology, and electrophysiology accompanied by a downregulation of
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). These changes provide a cellular and
molecular basis for observed short-term learning and memory impairments. However,
the etiology of residual, long-term hippocampal neurotransmission abnormalities
and learning impairments after treatment remain unclear. Because BDNF modulates
learning and memory, we assessed its expression in 65-d-old formerly iron
deficient (FID) male rats that had been iron deficient during the fetal-neonatal 
period and treated with iron since postnatal day 7. BDNF-III and -IV mRNAs and
BDNF protein expression remained down-regulated in FID rats when compared with
the always iron-sufficient rats. Expressions of BDNF activity-dependent
downstream targets (3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA reductase and immediate early 
genes c-fos, early growth response gene 1 and 2) were reduced in FID rats. In
turn, hippocampal expressions of direct targets of early-growth response genes,
including hypoxia-inducible factor 1, dual-specificity phosphatase 4, IGF 2, and 
myelin basic protein were also diminished in FID rats. Collectively,
fetal-neonatal iron deficiency lowers hippocampal BDNF expression and function
beyond the period of iron deficiency. These findings may underlie the persistence
of learning deficits seen after fetal-neonatal iron deficiency.

PMCID: PMC2715440
PMID: 19190544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Science. 2009 Jan 30;323(5914):651-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1166562.

Calcineurin/NFAT signaling is required for neuregulin-regulated Schwann cell
differentiation.

Kao SC(1), Wu H, Xie J, Chang CP, Ranish JA, Graef IA, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Schwann cells develop from multipotent neural crest cells and form myelin sheaths
around axons that allow rapid transmission of action potentials. Neuregulin
signaling through the ErbB receptor regulates Schwann cell development; however, 
the downstream pathways are not fully defined. We find that mice lacking
calcineurin B1 in the neural crest have defects in Schwann cell differentiation
and myelination. Neuregulin addition to Schwann cell precursors initiates an
increase in cytoplasmic Ca2+, which activates calcineurin and the downstream
transcription factors NFATc3 and c4. Purification of NFAT protein complexes shows
that Sox10 is an NFAT nuclear partner and synergizes with NFATc4 to activate
Krox20, which regulates genes necessary for myelination. Our studies demonstrate 
that calcineurin and NFAT are essential for neuregulin and ErbB signaling, neural
crest diversification, and differentiation of Schwann cells.

PMCID: PMC2790385
PMID: 19179536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Nat Immunol. 2009 Mar;10(3):306-13. doi: 10.1038/ni.1696. Epub 2009 Jan 25.

The gene encoding early growth response 2, a target of the transcription factor
NFAT, is required for the development and maturation of natural killer T cells.

Lazarevic V(1), Zullo AJ, Schweitzer MN, Staton TL, Gallo EM, Crabtree GR,
Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2009 Mar;10(3):231-3.

The influence of signals transmitted by the phosphatase calcineurin and the
transcription factor NFAT on the development and function of natural killer T
(NKT) cells is unclear. In this report, we demonstrate that the transcription
factor early growth response 2 (Egr2), a target gene of NFAT, was specifically
required for the ontogeny of NKT cells but not that of conventional CD4(+) or
CD8(+) T cells. NKT cells developed normally in the absence of Egr1 or Egr3,
which suggests that Egr2 is a specific regulator of NKT cell differentiation. We 
found that Egr2 was important in the selection, survival and maturation of NKT
cells. Our findings emphasize the importance of the calcineurin-NFAT-Egr2 pathway
in the development of the NKT lymphocyte lineage.

PMCID: PMC2728767
PMID: 19169262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Hum Genet. 2009 Feb;54(2):94-7. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2008.13. Epub 2009 Jan 16.

Neurofilament light chain polypeptide gene mutations in Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease: nonsense mutation probably causes a recessive phenotype.

Abe A(1), Numakura C, Saito K, Koide H, Oka N, Honma A, Kishikawa Y, Hayasaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Yamagata,
Japan.

The neurofilament light chain polypeptide (NEFL) forms the major intermediate
filament in neurons and axons. NEFL mutation is a cause of axonal or
demyelinating forms of dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT). We
investigated NEFL in 223 Japanese CMT patients who were negative for PMP22, MPZ, 
GJB1, LITAF, EGR2, GDAP1, MTMR2 and PRX in the demyelinating form and negative
for MFN2, MPZ, GJB1, HSP27, HSP22 and GARS in the axonal form. We detected four
heterozygous missense mutations--Pro8Leu, Glu90Lys, Asn98Ser and Glu396Lys--in
five unrelated patients and a homozygous nonsense mutation, Glu140Stop, in one
other patient. All patients had mildly to moderately delayed nerve conduction
velocities, possibly caused by a loss of large diameter fibers. This is the first
report of a homozygous nonsense mutation of NEFL. Results of our study show that 
nonsense NEFL mutations probably cause a recessive phenotype, in contrast to
missense mutations, which cause a dominant phenotype.

PMID: 19158810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Clin Chim Acta. 2009 Mar;401(1-2):90-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2008.11.019. Epub 2008
Nov 27.

Altered brain gene expression profiles associated with the pathogenesis of
phenylketonuria in a mouse model.

Park JW(1), Park ES, Choi EN, Park HY, Jung SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul,
South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a 
deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), which catalyzes the conversion of 
phenylalanine to tyrosine. The resultant hyperphenylalaninemia causes mental
retardation, seizure, and abnormalities in behavior and movement.
METHODS: We analyzed gene expression profiles in brain tissues of Pah(enu2) mice 
to elucidate the mechanisms involved in phenylalanine-induced neurological
damage. The altered gene expression was confirmed by real-time PCR and Western
blotting. To identify markers associated with neurological damage, we examined
TTR expression in serum by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Gene expression profiling of brain tissue from a mouse model of PKU
revealed overexpression of transthyretin (Ttr), sclerostin domain containing 1
(Sostdc1), alpha-Klotho (Kl), prolactin receptor (Prlr), and early growth
response 2 (Egr2). In contrast to its overexpression in the brain, TTR expression
was low in the sera of PKU mice offered unrestricted access to a diet containing 
phenylalanine. Expression of TTR decreased in a time-dependent manner in
phenylalanine-treated HepG2 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that Ttr, Sostdc1, Kl, Prlr, and Egr2 can be
involved in the pathogenesis of PKU and that phenylalanine might have a direct
effect on the level of TTR in serum.

PMID: 19073163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Hum Mutat. 2009 Mar;30(3):472-6. doi: 10.1002/humu.20873.

Simultaneous mutation and copy number variation (CNV) detection by multiplex
PCR-based GS-FLX sequencing.

Goossens D(1), Moens LN, Nelis E, Lenaerts AS, Glassee W, Kalbe A, Frey B, Kopal 
G, De Jonghe P, De Rijk P, Del-Favero J.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Molecular Genomics Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, Flanders
Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), Belgium.

We evaluated multiplex PCR amplification as a front-end for high-throughput
sequencing, to widen the applicability of massive parallel sequencers for the
detailed analysis of complex genomes. Using multiplex PCR reactions, we sequenced
the complete coding regions of seven genes implicated in peripheral neuropathies 
in 40 individuals on a GS-FLX genome sequencer (Roche). The resulting dataset
showed highly specific and uniform amplification. Comparison of the GS-FLX
sequencing data with the dataset generated by Sanger sequencing confirmed the
detection of all variants present and proved the sensitivity of the method for
mutation detection. In addition, we showed that we could exploit the multiplexed 
PCR amplicons to determine individual copy number variation (CNV), increasing the
spectrum of detected variations to both genetic and genomic variants. We conclude
that our straightforward procedure substantially expands the applicability of the
massive parallel sequencers for sequencing projects of a moderate number of
amplicons (50-500) with typical applications in resequencing exons in positional 
or functional candidate regions and molecular genetic diagnostics.

2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19058222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. In Silico Biol. 2008;8(3-4):363-76.

MaXlab: a novel application for the cross comparison and integration of
biological signatures from microarray studies.

Khalid S(1), Khan M, Gorle CB, Fraser K, Wang P, Liu X, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology/Bioinformatics Group, Microarray Facility, Division of
BioSciences, Brunel University, Uxbridge, UK.

Microarray gene expression datasets are continually being placed in public
repositories. As a result, one of the most important emerging challenges is that 
which enables researchers to take full advantage of such previously accumulated
data to discover or validate common genes in similar biological systems. In light
of this we have designed the MaXlab software to not only cross-compare available 
array data from different laboratories but also extract further knowledge from
gene expression patterns embedded within published data. More importantly MaXlab 
offers a flexible and automated solution applicable for microarray technologies
including cDNA and Affymetrix gene chips generating expression profiles for
common genes with biological significance. We have identified several sets of
genes previously unknown to be commonly expressed across studies investigating
related biological questions. Among them is the identification of 17 genes
involved in the dysregulation of immune tolerance including the crucial
transcription factor Egr2. In addition, we have identified 175 genes commonly
expressed in basal and luminal breast tumours in response to the chemotherapeutic
drug doxorubicin. The universal expression and characterisation of these
encouraging genes identified through MaXlab suggests that they may play a common 
role in the mechanism of disease and hence act as an incentive for further
investigation for identifying potential therapeutic targets. Overall, MaXlab is
an attractive application for molecular biologists extracting the intersection
between microarray datasets together with the gene expression profiles, from
which biologists are able to infer further biological insights. The software
together with file formats and additional material is freely available at
http://www.immuno-software.org.

PMID: 19032168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Nutr. 2008 Dec;138(12):2495-501. doi: 10.3945/jn.108.091553.

Early-life iron deficiency anemia alters neurotrophic factor expression and
hippocampal neuron differentiation in male rats.

Tran PV(1), Carlson ES, Fretham SJ, Georgieff MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Neurobehavioral Development, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Fetal-neonatal iron deficiency alters hippocampal neuronal morphology, reduces
its volume, and is associated with acute and long-term learning impairments.
However, neither the effects of early-life iron deficiency anemia on growth,
differentiation, and survival of hippocampal neurons nor regulation of the
neurotrophic factors that mediate these processes has been investigated. We
compared hippocampal expression of neurotrophic factors in male rats made iron
deficient (ID) from gestational d 2 to postnatal d (P) 7 to iron-sufficient
controls at P7, 15, and 30 with quantitative RT-PCR, Western analysis, and
immunohistology. Iron deficiency downregulated brain-derived neurotrophic factor 
(BDNF) expression in the hippocampus without compensatory upregulation of its
specific receptor, tyrosine-receptor kinase B. Consistent with low overall BDNF
activity, we found lower expression of early-growth response gene-1 and -2,
transcriptional targets of BDNF signaling. Doublecortin expression, a marker of
differentiating neurons, was reduced during peak iron deficiency, suggesting
impaired neuronal differentiation in the ID hippocampus. In contrast, iron
deficiency upregulated hippocampal nerve growth factor, epidermal growth factor, 
and glial-derived neurotrophic factor accompanied by an increase in neurotrophic 
receptor p75 expression. Our findings suggest that fetal-neonatal iron deficiency
lowers BDNF function and impairs neuronal differentiation in the hippocampus.

PMCID: PMC2911361
PMID: 19022978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Immunol. 2008 Dec 1;181(11):7778-85.

Egr2 is required for Bcl-2 induction during positive selection.

Lauritsen JP(1), Kurella S, Lee SY, Lefebvre JM, Rhodes M, Alberola-Ila J, Wiest 
DL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Immunobiology Working Group, Fox Chase Cancer
Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

The repertoire of TCR specificities is established by a selection process in the 
thymus, during which precursor survival and maturation is dictated by the nature 
of the TCR signals. The differences in signals that determine whether precursors 
will survive and mature or be induced to die remain poorly understood. Among the 
molecular effectors involved in executing the differentiation process initiated
by TCR-ligand interactions is a family of Zn-finger transcription factors termed 
early growth response genes (Egr). Indeed, ablation of the Egr1 gene impairs
ligand-induced maturation (positive selection) but not ligand-induced deletion
(negative selection). The partial impairment of positive selection by Egr1
deficiency is not enhanced by simultaneous deletion of another Egr family member,
Egr3. Accordingly, we asked whether this results from compensation by another
family member, Egr2. In this manuscript, we demonstrate that deletion of Egr2
impairs positive selection of both CD4 and CD8 single-positive thymocytes.
Interestingly, many of the genes involved in positive selection and T cell
differentiation are up-regulated normally in the Egr2-deficient thymocytes.
However, Bcl-2 up-regulation is not sustained during late stages of positive
selection. This defect is at least partially responsible for the developmental
blockade in Egr2-deficient thymocytes, as enforced expression of Bcl-2 rescues T 
cell development in Egr2(-/-) thymocytes. Taken together, these data suggest that
Egr2 plays a central role in the up-regulation of the survival molecule Bcl-2
during positive selection.

PMCID: PMC2587029
PMID: 19017967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Feb 1;18(3):525-34. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn380. Epub 2008 Nov
10.

Reciprocal co-regulation of EGR2 and MECP2 is disrupted in Rett syndrome and
autism.

Swanberg SE(1), Nagarajan RP, Peddada S, Yasui DH, LaSalle JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Rowe Program in Human
Genetics, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Mutations in MECP2, encoding methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2), cause the
neurodevelopmental disorder Rett syndrome (RTT). Although MECP2 mutations are
rare in idiopathic autism, reduced MeCP2 levels are common in autism cortex.
MeCP2 is critical for postnatal neuronal maturation and a modulator of
activity-dependent genes such as Bdnf (brain-derived neurotropic factor) and
JUNB. The activity-dependent early growth response gene 2 (EGR2), required for
both early hindbrain development and mature neuronal function, has predicted
binding sites in the promoters of several neurologically relevant genes including
MECP2. Conversely, MeCP2 family members MBD1, MBD2 and MBD4 bind a methylated CpG
island in an enhancer region located in EGR2 intron 1. This study was designed to
test the hypothesis that MECP2 and EGR2 regulate each other's expression during
neuronal maturation in postnatal brain development. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis showed EGR2 binding to the MECP2 promoter and MeCP2 binding to the
enhancer region in EGR2 intron 1. Reduction in EGR2 and MeCP2 levels in cultured 
human neuroblastoma cells by RNA interference reciprocally reduced expression of 
both EGR2 and MECP2 and their protein products. Consistent with a role of MeCP2
in enhancing EGR2, Mecp2-deficient mouse cortex samples showed significantly
reduced EGR2 by quantitative immunofluorescence. Furthermore, MeCP2 and EGR2 show
coordinately increased levels during postnatal development of both mouse and
human cortex. In contrast to age-matched Controls, RTT and autism postmortem
cortex samples showed significant reduction in EGR2. Together, these data support
a role of dysregulation of an activity-dependent EGR2/MeCP2 pathway in RTT and
autism.

PMCID: PMC2638799
PMID: 19000991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Front Neurosci. 2008 Jul 7;2(1):47-55. doi: 10.3389/neuro.01.002.2008.
eCollection 2008.

Distinct functions of egr gene family members in cognitive processes.

Poirier R(1), Cheval H, Mailhes C, Garel S, Charnay P, Davis S, Laroche S.

Author information: 
(1)Univ. Paris Sud, Laboratoire de Neurobiologie de l'Apprentissage, de la
Mémoire et de la Communication Orsay, France. Roseline.Poirier@u-psud.fr

The different gene members of the Egr family of transcriptional regulators have
often been considered to have related functions in brain, based on their
co-expression in many cell-types and structures, the relatively high homology of 
the translated proteins and their ability to bind to the same consensus DNA
binding sequence. Recent research, however, suggest this might not be the case.
In this review, we focus on the current understanding of the functional roles of 
the different Egr family members in learning and memory. We briefly outline
evidence from mutant mice that Egr1 is required specifically for the
consolidation of long-term memory, while Egr3 is primarily essential for
short-term memory. We also review our own recent findings from newly generated
forebrain-specific conditional Egr2 mutant mice, which revealed that Egr2, as
opposed to Egr1 and Egr3, is dispensable for several forms of learning and memory
and on the contrary can act as an inhibitory constraint for certain cognitive
functions. The studies reviewed here highlight the fact that Egr family members
may have different, and in certain circumstances antagonistic functions in the
adult brain.

PMCID: PMC2570062
PMID: 18982106  [PubMed]


313. Front Behav Neurosci. 2007 Dec 30;1:6. doi: 10.3389/neuro.08.006.2007.
eCollection 2007.

Paradoxical role of an Egr transcription factor family member, Egr2/Krox20, in
learning and memory.

Poirier R(1), Cheval H, Mailhes C, Charnay P, Davis S, Laroche S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie de l'Apprentissage, Univ Paris Sud France.
roseline.poirier@ u-psud.fr

It is well established that Egr1/zif268, a member of the Egr family of
transcription factors, is critical for the consolidation of several forms of
memories. Recently, the Egr3 family member has also been implicated in learning
and memory. Because Egr family members encode closely related zinc-finger
transcription factors sharing a highly homologous DNA binding domain that
recognises the same DNA sequence, they may have related functions in brain.
Another Egr family member expressed in brain, Egr2/Krox20 is known to be crucial 
for normal hindbrain development and has been implicated in several inherited
peripheral neuropathies; however, due to Egr2-null mice perinatal lethality, its 
potential role in cognitive functions in the adult has not been yet explored.
Here, we generated Egr2 conditional mutant mice allowing postnatal,
forebrain-specific Cre-mediated Egr2 excision and tested homozygous, heterozygous
and control littermates on a battery of behavioural tasks to evaluate motor
capacity, exploratory behaviour, emotional reactivity and learning and memory
performance in spatial and non-spatial tasks. Egr2-deficient mice had no sign of 
locomotor, exploratory or anxiety disturbances. Surprisingly, they also had no
impairment in spatial learning and memory, taste aversion memory or fear memory
using a trace conditioning paradigm. On the contrary, Egr2-deficient mice had
improved performance in motor learning on a rotarod, and in object recognition
memory. These results clearly do not extend the phenotypic consequences resulting
from either Egr1 or Egr3 loss-of-function to Egr2. In contrast, they indicate
that Egr family members may have different, and in certain circumstances
antagonistic functions in the adult brain.

PMCID: PMC2525857
PMID: 18958188  [PubMed]


314. Neurol Res. 2009 Apr;31(3):283-8. doi: 10.1179/174313208X346080. Epub 2008 Sep
29.

Late onset autosomal dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth 2 neuropathy in a Costa Rican
family.

Berghoff C(1), Berghoff M, Leal A, Morera B, Contreras C, Barrantes R,
Rautenstrauss B, Del Valle G, Heuss D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, LWL-Klinik Muenster, Münster, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the clinical, electrophysiologic and morphologic features 
of a Costa Rican family with an autosomal dominant inherited Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
(CMT) neuropathy.
METHODS: The field study took place in Costa Rica, Central America. Seven
patients underwent neurological examinations and standard electrodiagnostic
tests, and a sural nerve biopsy was taken from one patient. Fifteen family
members were screened for gene defects associated with CMT disease.
RESULTS: Characteristic features of this family were a late age of onset (35-56
years), positive sensory symptoms and muscle cramps. Based on electrodiagnostic
and morphologic data, the patients were classified as having a CMT2 neuropathy.
The CMT1A duplication/HNPP deletion and point mutations in genes PMP22, MPZ, Cx32
and EGR2 implicated in the most common types of CMT disease were excluded.
Subsequently, almost all known CMT loci were excluded by linkage analysis.
DISCUSSION: Features of this family were a late age of onset and positive sensory
symptoms. This new autosomal dominant CMT neuropathy is associated with an
unknown gene defect.

PMID: 18826755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 5;283(49):34101-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804951200. Epub 2008
Sep 23.

Kinase networks integrate profiles of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-mediated gene
expression in hippocampus.

Coba MP(1), Valor LM, Kopanitsa MV, Afinowi NO, Grant SG.

Author information: 
(1)Genes to Cognition, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10
1SA, United Kingdom.

The postsynaptic N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor activates multiple kinases 
and changes the phosphorylation of many postsynaptic proteins organized in
signaling networks. Because the NMDA receptor is known to regulate gene
expression, it is important to examine whether networks of kinases control
signaling to gene expression. We examined the requirement of multiple kinases and
NMDA receptor-interacting proteins for gene expression in mouse hippocampal
slices. Protocols that induce long-term depression (LTD) and long-term
potentiation (LTP) activated common kinases and overlapping gene expression
profiles. Combinations of kinases were required for induction of each gene.
Distinct combinations of kinases were required to up-regulate Arc, Npas4, Egr2,
and Egr4 following either LTP or LTD protocols. Consistent with the combinatorial
data, a mouse mutant model of the human cognition disease gene SAP102, which
couples ERK kinase to the NMDA receptor, showed deregulated expression of
specific genes. These data support a network model of postsynaptic integration
where kinase signaling networks are recruited by differential synaptic activity
and control both local synaptic events and activity-dependent gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2662229
PMID: 18815127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Glia. 2008 Nov 1;56(14):1541-51. doi: 10.1002/glia.20767.

The molecular machinery of myelin gene transcription in Schwann cells.

Svaren J(1), Meijer D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, School of Veterinary Medicine and
Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

During late fetal life, Schwann cells in the peripheral nerves singled out by the
larger axons will transit through a promyelinating stage before exiting the cell 
cycle and initiating myelin formation. A network of extra- and intracellular
signaling pathways, regulating a transcriptional program of cell differentiation,
governs this progression of cellular changes, culminating in a highly
differentiated cell. In this review, we focus on the roles of a number of
transcription factors not only in myelination, during normal development, but
also in demyelination, following nerve trauma. These factors include
specification factors involved in early development of Schwann cells from neural 
crest (Sox10) as well as factors specifically required for transitions into the
promyelinating and myelinating stages (Oct6/Scip and Krox20/Egr2). From this
description, we can glean the first, still very incomplete, contours of a gene
regulatory network that governs myelination and demyelination during development 
and regeneration.

PMCID: PMC2930200
PMID: 18803322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Exp Med. 2008 Sep 29;205(10):2295-307. doi: 10.1084/jem.20080187. Epub 2008 Sep
8.

Early growth response gene 2 (Egr-2) controls the self-tolerance of T cells and
prevents the development of lupuslike autoimmune disease.

Zhu B(1), Symonds AL, Martin JE, Kioussis D, Wraith DC, Li S, Wang P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and London School of Medicine
and Dentistry, University of London, London E1 2AT, England, UK.

Maintaining tolerance of T cells to self-antigens is essential to avoid
autoimmune disease. How self-reactive T cells are kept functionally inactive is, 
however, unknown. In this study, we show that early growth response gene 2
(Egr-2), a zinc-finger transcription factor, is expressed in CD44(high) T cells
and controls their proliferation and activation. In the absence of Egr-2,
CD44(high), but not CD44(low) T cells, are hyperreactive and hyperproliferative
in vivo. The accumulation of activated CD4(+)CD44(high) T cells leads to the
development of a late onset lupuslike autoimmune disease characterized by the
accumulation of interferon (IFN)-gamma and interleukin (IL)-17-producing CD4(+) T
cells, loss of tolerance to nuclear antigens, massive infiltration of T cells
into multiple organs and glomerulonephritis. We found that the expression of
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21cip1 was impaired in Egr-2-deficient T
cells, whereas the expression of IFN-gamma and IL-17 in response to T cell
receptor ligation was significantly increased, suggesting that Egr-2 activates
the expression of genes involved in the negative regulation of T cell
proliferation and inflammation. These results demonstrate that Egr-2 is an
intrinsic regulator of effector T cells and controls the expansion of
self-reactive T cells and development of autoimmune disease.

PMCID: PMC2556781
PMID: 18779345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Infect Immun. 2008 Oct;76(10):4703-12. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01447-07. Epub 2008 Aug
4.

Toxoplasma gondii rhoptry discharge correlates with activation of the early
growth response 2 host cell transcription factor.

Phelps ED(1), Sweeney KR, Blader IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

Toxoplasma gondii is a ubiquitous apicomplexan parasite that can cause severe
disease in fetuses and immune-compromised patients. Rhoptries, micronemes, and
dense granules, which are secretory organelles unique to Toxoplasma and other
apicomplexan parasites, play critical roles in parasite growth and virulence. To 
understand how these organelles modulate infected host cells, we sought to
identify host cell transcription factors triggered by their release. Early growth
response 2 (EGR2) is a host cell transcription factor that is rapidly upregulated
and activated in Toxoplasma-infected cells but not in cells infected with the
closely related apicomplexan parasite Neospora caninum. EGR2 upregulation
occurred only when live parasites were in direct contact with the host cell and
not from exposure to cell extracts that contain dense granule or micronemal
proteins. When microneme-mediated attachment was blocked by pretreating parasites
with a calcium chelator, EGR2 expression was significantly reduced. In contrast, 
when host cells were infected with parasites in the presence of cytochalasin D,
which allows rhoptry secretion but prevents parasite invasion, EGR2 was
activated. Finally, we demonstrate that Toxoplasma activation of host p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase is necessary but not sufficient for EGR2
activation. Collectively, these data indicate that EGR2 is specifically
upregulated by a parasite-derived secreted factor that is most likely a resident 
rhoptry protein.

PMCID: PMC2546823
PMID: 18678671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Neurosci. 2008 Jul 23;28(30):7563-73. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1659-08.2008.

Analysis of peripheral nerve expression profiles identifies a novel myelin
glycoprotein, MP11.

Ryu EJ(1), Yang M, Gustin JA, Chang LW, Freimuth RR, Nagarajan R, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The myelin sheath insulates axons and allows for rapid salutatory conduction in
the nervous system of all vertebrates. The formation of peripheral myelin
requires expression of the transcription factor Egr2, which is responsible for
inducing such essential myelin-associated genes as Mpz, Mbp, Pmp22, and Mag.
Using microarray analysis to compare gene expression patterns in peripheral nerve
during development, during remyelination after nerve injury, and in a congenital 
hypomyelinating mouse model, we identified an evolutionarily conserved novel
component of myelin called Mp11 (myelin protein of 11 kDa). The Mp11 genomic
locus contains multiple conserved Egr binding sites, and Mp11 induction is
regulated by the expression of Egr2. Similar to other Egr2-dependent genes, it is
induced during developmental myelination and remyelination after nerve injury.
Mp11 is a glycoprotein expressed preferentially in the myelin of the peripheral
nervous system versus CNS and is specifically localized to the Schmidt-Lanterman 
incisures and paranodes of peripheral nerve. The Mp11 protein contains no
identifiable similarity to other known protein domains or motifs. However, like
other myelin genes, strict Mp11 expression levels are a requirement for the in
vitro myelination of DRG neurons, indicating that this previously uncharacterized
gene product is a critical component of peripheral nervous system myelin.

PMCID: PMC2643251
PMID: 18650334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Neurosci Methods. 2008 Sep 15;174(1):10-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.06.016.
Epub 2008 Jun 27.

Differential gene expression profiling of large and small retinal ganglion cells.

Ivanov D(1), Dvoriantchikova G, Barakat DJ, Nathanson L, Shestopalov VI.

Author information: 
(1)Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, 1638 NW 10th Avenue, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Different sub-populations of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) vary in their
sensitivity to pathological conditions such as retinal ischemia, diabetic
retinopathy and glaucoma. Comparative transcriptomic analysis of such groups will
likely reveal molecular determinants of differential sensitivity to stress.
However, gene expression profiling of primary neuronal sub-populations represent 
a challenge due to the cellular heterogeneity of retinal tissue. In this
manuscript, we report the use of a fluorescent neural tracer to specifically
label and selectively isolate RGCs with different soma sizes by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) for the purpose of differential gene
expression profiling. We identified 145 genes that were more active in the large 
RGCs and 312 genes in the small RGCs. Differential data were validated by
quantitative RT-PCR, several corresponding proteins were confirmed by
immunohistochemistry. Functional characterization revealed differential activity 
of genes implicated in synaptic transmission, neurotransmitter secretion, axon
guidance, chemotaxis, ion transport and tolerance to stress. An in silico
reconstruction of cellular networks suggested that differences in pathway
activity between the two sub-populations of RGCs are controlled by networks
interconnected by SP-1, Erk2 (MAPK1), Egr1, Egr2 and, potentially, regulated via 
transcription factors C/EBPbeta, HSF1, STAT1- and c-Myc. The results show that
FACS-aided purification of retrogradely labeled cells can be effectively utilized
for transcriptional profiling of adult retinal neurons.

PMCID: PMC4133941
PMID: 18640154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Neuron Glia Biol. 2007 Nov;3(4):377-87. doi: 10.1017/S1740925X08000173.

Interactions of Sox10 and Egr2 in myelin gene regulation.

Jones EA(1), Jang SW, Mager GM, Chang LW, Srinivasan R, Gokey NG, Ward RM,
Nagarajan R, Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53706, USA. jpsvaren@wisc.edu

Myelination in the PNS is accompanied by a large induction of the myelin protein 
zero (Mpz) gene to produce the most abundant component in peripheral myelin.
Analyses of knockout mice have shown that the EGR2/Krox20 and SOX10 transcription
factors are required for Mpz expression. Our recent work has shown that the
dominant EGR2 mutations associated with human peripheral neuropathies cause
disruption of EGR2/SOX10 synergy at specific sites, including a conserved
enhancer element in the first intron of the Mpz gene. Further investigation of
Egr2/Sox10 interactions reveals that activation of the Mpz intron element by Egr2
requires both Sox10-binding sites. In addition, both Egr1 and Egr3 cooperate with
Sox10 to activate this element, which indicates that this capacity is conserved
among Egr family members. Finally, a conserved composite structure of
Egr2/Sox10-binding sites in the genes encoding Mpz, myelin-associated
glycoprotein and myelin basic protein genes was used to screen for similar
modules in other myelin genes, revealing a potential regulatory element in the
periaxin gene. Overall, these results elucidate a working model for developmental
regulation of Mpz expression, several facets of which extend to regulation of
other peripheral myelin genes.

PMCID: PMC2605513
PMID: 18634568  [PubMed]


322. J Neurosci. 2008 Jun 4;28(23):5891-900. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5187-07.2008.

Disruption of Krox20-Nab interaction in the mouse leads to peripheral neuropathy 
with biphasic evolution.

Desmazières A(1), Decker L, Vallat JM, Charnay P, Gilardi-Hebenstreit P.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U784, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Krox20/Egr2 is a zinc finger transcription factor that plays essential roles in
several developmental processes, including peripheral nervous system myelination 
by Schwann cells, where it acts as a master gene regulator. Krox20 is known to
interact with cofactors of the Nab family and a mutation affecting isoleucine
268, which prevents this interaction, has been shown to result in congenital
hypomyelinating neuropathy in humans. To further investigate the role of this
interaction, we have introduced such a mutation, Krox20(I268F), in the mouse germ
line. Clinical, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural analyses of the
homozygous mutants reveal that they develop a severe hypomyelination phenotype
that mimics the human syndrome. Furthermore, a time-course analysis of the
disease indicates that it follows a biphasic evolution, the hypomyelination phase
being followed by a dramatic demyelination. Although for the regulation of most
analyzed Krox20 target genes the mutation behaves as a loss of function, this is 
not the case for a few of them. This differential effect indicates that the
molecular function of the Krox20-Nab interaction is target dependent and might
explain the degradation of the residual myelin, because of imbalances in its
composition. In conclusion, this work provides a novel and useful model for
severe human peripheral neuropathies.

PMID: 18524893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Cell Biol. 2008 May 19;181(4):625-37. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200803013.

c-Jun is a negative regulator of myelination.

Parkinson DB(1), Bhaskaran A, Arthur-Farraj P, Noon LA, Woodhoo A, Lloyd AC,
Feltri ML, Wrabetz L, Behrens A, Mirsky R, Jessen KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
London WC1E 6BT, England, UK.

Comment in
    J Cell Biol. 2008 May 19;181(4):575-7.

Schwann cell myelination depends on Krox-20/Egr2 and other promyelin
transcription factors that are activated by axonal signals and control the
generation of myelin-forming cells. Myelin-forming cells remain remarkably
plastic and can revert to the immature phenotype, a process which is seen in
injured nerves and demyelinating neuropathies. We report that c-Jun is an
important regulator of this plasticity. At physiological levels, c-Jun inhibits
myelin gene activation by Krox-20 or cyclic adenosine monophosphate. c-Jun also
drives myelinating cells back to the immature state in transected nerves in vivo.
Enforced c-Jun expression inhibits myelination in cocultures. Furthermore, c-Jun 
and Krox-20 show a cross-antagonistic functional relationship. c-Jun therefore
negatively regulates the myelinating Schwann cell phenotype, representing a
signal that functionally stands in opposition to the promyelin transcription
factors. Negative regulation of myelination is likely to have significant
implications for three areas of Schwann cell biology: the molecular analysis of
plasticity, demyelinating pathologies, and the response of peripheral nerves to
injury.

PMCID: PMC2386103
PMID: 18490512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2008 Sep;90(3):349-56. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2008.03.019.
Epub 2008 Apr 3.

Heroin self-administration: II. CNS gene expression following withdrawal and
cue-induced drug-seeking behavior.

Kuntz KL(1), Patel KM, Grigson PS, Freeman WM, Vrana KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine,
R130, 500 University Drive, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. kkuntz@psu.edu

In the accompanying paper, we described incubation of heroin-seeking behavior in 
rats following 14 days of abstinence. To gain an understanding of genomic changes
that accompany this behavioral observation, we measured the expression of genes
previously reported to respond to drugs of abuse. Specifically, after 1 or 14
days of abstinence, mRNA expression was measured for 11 genes in the medial
prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and nucleus accumbens (NAc) immediately following a
single 90 min extinction session. Additionally, the role of contingency was
examined in control rats that received yoked, response-independent heroin
administration. Gene expression was quantified by real-time quantitative PCR.
Expression of five genes (Arc, EGR1, EGR2, Fos, and Homer1b/c) was changed in the
mPFC. EGR1 and EGR2 expression was increased following the 90 min extinction
session in a contingency-specific manner and this increase persisted through the 
14 days of abstinence. Fos expression was also increased after 1 and 14 days of
abstinence, but at 14 days this increase was response-independent (i.e., it
occurred in both the rats with a history of heroin self-administration and in the
yoked controls). Arc expression increased following the extinction session only
in rats with a history of heroin self-administration and only when tested
following 1, but not 14, days of abstinence. Homer 1 b/c decreased after 14 days 
of enforced abstinence in rats that received non-contingent heroin. Expression of
only a single gene (EGR2) was increased in the NAc. These data demonstrate that
behavioral incubation is coincident with altered levels of specific transcripts
and that this response is contingently-specific. Moreover, EGR1 and EGR2 are
specifically upregulated in self-administering rats following extinction and this
finding persists through 14 days of abstinence, suggesting that these genes are
particularly associated with the incubation phenomenon. These latter observations
of persistent changes in gene expression following abstinence may reflect
molecular correlates of relapse liability.

PMCID: PMC4304653
PMID: 18466961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 27;283(26):18187-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803330200. Epub 2008
May 2.

Active gene repression by the Egr2.NAB complex during peripheral nerve
myelination.

Mager GM(1), Ward RM, Srinivasan R, Jang SW, Wrabetz L, Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Training Program, Department of
Comparative Biosciences, Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The Egr2/Krox20 transactivator is required for activation of many
myelin-associated genes during peripheral nerve myelination by Schwann cells.
However, recent work has indicated that Egr2 not only activates genes required
for peripheral nerve myelination but may also be involved in gene repression. The
NAB (NGFI-A/Egr-binding) corepressors interact with Egr2 and are required for
proper coordination of myelin formation. Therefore, NAB proteins could mediate
repression of some Egr2 target genes, although direct repression by Egr2 or NAB
proteins during myelination has not been demonstrated. To define the
physiological role of NAB corepression in gene repression by Egr2, we tested
whether the Egr2.NAB complex directly repressed specific target genes. A screen
for NAB-regulated genes identified several (including Id2, Id4, and Rad) that
declined during the course of peripheral nerve myelination. In vivo chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis of the myelinating sciatic nerve was used to show
developmental association of both Egr2 and NAB2 on the Id2, Id4, and Rad
promoters as they were repressed during the myelination process. In addition,
NAB2 represses transcription by interaction with the chromodomain helicase
DNA-binding protein 4 (CHD4) subunit of the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase
chromatin remodeling complex, and we demonstrate that CHD4 occupies NAB-repressed
promoters in a developmentally regulated manner in vivo. These results illustrate
a novel aspect of genetic regulation of peripheral nerve myelination by showing
that Egr2 directly represses genes during myelination in conjunction with NAB
corepressors. Furthermore, repression of Id2 was found to augment activation of
Mpz (myelin protein zero) expression.

PMCID: PMC2440619
PMID: 18456662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Bull Acad Natl Med. 2007 Oct;191(7):1383-92; discussion 1392-4.

[Boundary cap cells--a nest of neural stem cells in the peripheral nervous
system].

[Article in French]

Topilko P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire du Développement, Inserm 784, Ecole
Normale Supérieure, 45, rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris cedex 05, France.
topilko@biologie.ens.fr

The peripheral nervous system (PNS) is formed by neural crest cells (NCC) that
migrate out of the neural tube in early mid-gestation. NCC give rise to most
components of the PNS, including sensory neurons, glial satellite cells and
Schwann cells. Neural crest cells also give rise to another type of PNS cell
population named boundary cap (BC) cells, that form clusters at the surface of
the neural tube, at entry and exit points of peripheral nerve roots. Using
various genetic tools we were able to trace BC cell progeny during development
and to ablate them in vivo. This revealed a previously unsuspected function of BC
cells: they are required to maintain the integrity of the spinal cord motor
column as, in their absence, motor neurons translocate their cell bodies along
their axons into the periphery. In addition, we found that trunk BC-derived cells
migrated along peripheral axons and colonized spinal nerve roots and dorsal root 
ganglia (DRG). All Schwann cell precursors occupying the dorsal roots were
derived from BC cells. In the DRG, BC-derived cells were the progenitors of both 
neurons (mainly nociceptive afferents) and satellite cells. These unexpected
observations indicate that BC cells constitute a source of peripheral nervous
system (PNS) components that, after the major neural crest ventrolateral
migratory stream, feed a secondary wave of migration to the PNS.

PMID: 18447060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Brain Res. 2008 May 23;1211:1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.03.016. Epub 2008
Mar 20.

Involvement of D1 dopamine receptor in MDMA-induced locomotor activity and
striatal gene expression in mice.

Benturquia N(1), Courtin C, Noble F, Marie-Claire C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neuropsychopharmacologie des addictions, (INSERM U705, CNRS UMR
7157), Universite Paris Descartes, Faculte de pharmacie, Paris, France.

3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), a widely used recreational drug with
psychoactive properties, induces both serotonin and dopamine release in the
brain. In rats and mice MDMA induces behavioural changes and has rewarding
effects but little is known about its cellular effects. We have previously shown 
that the ERK pathway is important for the changes in gene expression observed in 
mice striatum after treatment with this psychostimulant. In this study we
investigated the role of D1 receptors in MDMA-induced locomotor hyperactivity and
regulation of immediate-early genes (Fos, Fosb, Egr1 and Egr2) mRNA levels
requiring ERK activity in mice striatum. We used the selective D1 receptor
antagonist, SCH23390 at a dose (0.05 mg/kg) that did not influence locomotor
activity. This dose totally blocked MDMA-induced locomotor activity but only
partially the increase in transcription levels of Fos, Fosb, Egr1 and Egr2 (24%, 
23%, 22% and 29% respectively). In conclusion, our results showed that D1
receptors play a key role in the acute MDMA-induced hyperlocomotion and that ERK 
pathway is partially under D1 receptors control to induce Fos, FosB, Egr1 and
Egr2 transcription.

PMID: 18433738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Eur J Neurosci. 2008 Apr;27(8):2156-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06155.x.
Epub 2008 Mar 25.

Gene regulation in the frontal cortex of rats exposed to the chronic mild stress 
paradigm, an animal model of human depression.

Orsetti M(1), Di Brisco F, Canonico PL, Genazzani AA, Ghi P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Alimentari, Farmaceutiche e Farmacologiche
(DiSCAFF) Università del Piemonte Orientale A. Avogadro, Via Bovio 6, 28100
Novara, Italy. orsetti@pharm.unipmn.it

In the present study, we have coupled the chronic mild stress (CMS) protocol with
Affymetrix microarray technology to screen the rat genome for gene changes in the
frontal cortex. The aim of our work was to assess whether the CMS protocol could 
be a useful experimental model to provide insights into the molecular basis of
depression. Under our experimental conditions, 59 transcripts changed by more
than +/-1.5-fold between naïve and anhedonic rats and showed significantly
altered expression levels (P < 0.05). Among these, 18 were upregulated (fold
change range +1.509 to +3.161) and 41 were downregulated (fold change range
-1.505 to -2.659). To confirm the data obtained with microarrays, we used
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The results
confirmed the downregulation of Itga6, Camk2a, Plcb1, Cart, Gad1, Homer1 and Th
and the upregulation of Egr2 and Ptgs2 observed in the DNA microarray analysis.
Moreover, the fold change data of the nine validated transcripts from microarray 
analysis and real-time polymerase chain reaction showed a good correlation (r =
0.863, 7 d.f., P < 0.01; slope = 0.976). It is of great interest that
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2, tyrosine hydroxylase, Cart, Homer1 and
glutamate decarboxylase have already been implicated in affective disorders by
different approaches in previous reports. In conclusion, our findings indicate
that the CMS paradigm is a useful preclinical model with which to investigate the
molecular basis of anhedonia and to help in the discovery of novel targets for
antidepressant drugs.

PMID: 18371075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Neuroscience. 2008 Mar 18;152(2):417-28. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.01.012.
Epub 2008 Jan 12.

Induction of early growth response gene 2 expression in the forebrain of mice
performing an attention-set-shifting task.

DeSteno DA(1), Schmauss C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Columbia University, NY, NY 10032, USA.

Early growth response (egr) genes encode transcription factors that are induced
by stimuli that cause synaptic plasticity. Here we show that the expression of
one member of this family, egr-2, is induced in the orbital frontal cortex (OFC) 
and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) of mice performing an attention-set-shifting 
task (ASST). The ASST is a series of two-choice perceptual discriminations
between different odors and textures. Within the OFC and mPFC, different
subregions exhibited egr-2 induction in response to different test-related
features. In the medial OFC and the anterior cingulate subregion of the mPFC,
egr-2 induction occurred in response to exposure to the novel odor stimulus. In
the ventrolateral OFC and the pre- and infralimbic mPFC, additional egr-2
induction occurred during the associative learning phase of the ASST. In the
infralimbic mPFC, further egr-2 induction occurred when mice performed
set-shifting and reversal learning phases of the ASST. Mice with enhanced
set-shifting performance exhibited decreased egr-2 induction in the mPFC
indicating that the magnitude of egr-2 induction correlates with the magnitude of
attentional demand. This decrease was largest in the infralimbic mPFC suggesting 
further that egr-2 induction in this region plays a role in the attentional
control during set-shifting. In contrast to egr-2, neither egr-1 nor egr-3
expression was altered in ASST-tested mice, and no egr-2 induction occurred in
mice that performed a spatial working memory task. These findings suggest a
specific role of egr-2-mediated transcriptional activation in cognitive functions
associated with attention.

PMCID: PMC2323625
PMID: 18280047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Pathol. 2008 Mar;214(4):489-97. doi: 10.1002/path.2306.

Differential gene expression signature between primary and metastatic head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Liu CJ(1), Liu TY, Kuo LT, Cheng HW, Chu TH, Chang KW, Lin SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial, surgery Taipei MacKay Memorial Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a world-wide malignancy. This
study aimed to identify differential gene expression associated with the
progression of disease from primary to metastatic HNSCC. Microdissection
retrieved pure epithelial cells from paired primary tumours and cervical lymph
node metastasis. cDNA microarray analysis and algorithm grouping identified
differential mRNA expression of 301 genes. Quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis clarified the up-regulation of
CCL19, CR2, EGR2, FUCA1, RGS1, and SELL, as well as the down-regulation of IGFBP6
and KLK8 in nodal metastasis compared to primary tumours. Immunohistochemistry
confirmed the up-regulation of SELL and down-regulation of IGFBP6 in nodal
metastasis relative to primary tumours. Interestingly, primary tumours exhibiting
higher FUCA1 and SELL expression were associated with significantly worse patient
survival. In OECM-1 HNSCC cells, inhibition of proliferation, migration, and
anchorage-independent growth was noted following knockdown of SELL expression. In
SAS HNSCC cells, expression of exogenous SELL resulted in increased invasion,
anchorage-independent growth, and xenographic tumourigenesis in nude mice.
Knockdown of FUCA1 and treatment with IGFBP6 inhibited the migration of OECM-1
cells. Knockdown of RGS1 inhibited the anchorage-independent growth of SAS cells.
Our results provide a useful gene signature profile describing the factors
underlying the metastasis of HNSCC to cervical lymph nodes, which may be
beneficial for the treatment of HNSCC metastasis.

PMID: 18213732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Feb;38(2):528-36. doi: 10.1002/eji.200737157.

Opposing regulation of T cell function by Egr-1/NAB2 and Egr-2/Egr-3.

Collins S(1), Lutz MA, Zarek PE, Anders RA, Kersh GJ, Powell JD.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

TCR-induced NF-AT activation leads to the up-regulation of multiple genes
involved in T cell anergy. Since NF-AT is also involved in T cell activation, we 
have endeavored to dissect TCR-induced activating and inhibitory genetic
programs. This approach revealed roles for the early growth response (Egr) family
of transcription factors and the Egr coactivator/corepressor NGFI-A-binding
protein (NAB)2 in regulating T cell function. TCR-induced Egr-1 and NAB2 enhance 
T cell function, while Egr-2 and Egr-3 inhibit T cell function. In this report,
we demonstrate that Egr-2 and Egr-3 are induced by NF-AT in the absence of AP-1, 
while Egr-1 and NAB2 both require AP-1-mediated transcription. Our data suggest
that Egr-3 is upstream of Egr-2, and that mechanistically Egr-2 and Egr-3
suppress Egr-1 and NAB2 expression. Functionally, T cells from Egr-2 and Egr-3
null mice are hyperresponsive while T cells from Egr-3 transgenic, overexpressing
mice are hyporesponsive. Furthermore, an in vivo model of autoimmune pneumonitis 
reveals that T cells from Egr-3 null mice hasten death while Egr-3-overexpressing
T cells cause less disease. Overall, our data suggest that just as the Egr/NAB
network of genes control cell fate in other systems, TCR-induced Egr-1, 2, 3 and 
NAB2 control the fate of antigen recognition in T cells.

PMCID: PMC3598016
PMID: 18203138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 21;283(12):8055-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709500200. Epub 2008 
Jan 15.

Novel pro-survival functions of the Kruppel-like transcription factor Egr2 in
promotion of macrophage colony-stimulating factor-mediated osteoclast survival
downstream of the MEK/ERK pathway.

Bradley EW(1), Ruan MM, Oursler MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

Determining the underlying mechanisms of macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(M-CSF)-mediated osteoclast survival may be important in identifying novel
approaches for treating excessive bone loss. This study investigates
M-CSF-mediated MEK/ERK activation and identifies a downstream effector of this
pathway. M-CSF activates MEK/ERK and induces MEK-dependent expression of the
immediate early gene Egr2. Inhibition of either MEK1/2 or inhibition of Egr2
increases osteoclast apoptosis. In contrast, wild-type Egr2 or an Egr2 point
mutant unable to bind the endogenous repressors Nab1/2 (caEgr2) suppresses basal 
osteoclast apoptosis and rescues osteoclasts from apoptosis induced by MEK1/2 or 
Egr2 inhibition. Mechanistically, Egr2 induces pro-survival Blc2 family member
Mcl1 while stimulating proteasome-mediated degradation of pro-apoptotic Bim. In
addition, Egr2 increased the expression of c-Cbl, the E3 ubiquitin ligase that
catalyzes Bim ubiquitination. M-CSF, therefore, promotes osteoclast survival
through MEK/ERK-dependent induction of Egr2 to control the Mcl1/Bim ratio,
documenting a novel function of Egr2 in promoting survival.

PMID: 18198176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. BMC Mol Biol. 2007 Dec 20;8:117.

Differential regulation of NAB corepressor genes in Schwann cells.

Srinivasan R(1), Jang SW, Ward RM, Sachdev S, Ezashi T, Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI, USA. rsrinivasan@wisc.edu

BACKGROUND: Myelination of peripheral nerves by Schwann cells requires not only
the Egr2/Krox-20 transactivator, but also the NGFI-A/Egr-binding (NAB)
corepressors, which modulate activity of Egr2. Previous work has shown that
axon-dependent expression of Egr2 is mediated by neuregulin stimulation, and NAB 
corepressors are co-regulated with Egr2 expression in peripheral nerve
development. NAB corepressors have also been implicated in macrophage
development, cardiac hypertrophy, prostate carcinogenesis, and feedback
regulation involved in hindbrain development.
RESULTS: To test the mechanism of NAB regulation in Schwann cells, transfection
assays revealed that both Nab1 and Nab2 promoters are activated by Egr2
expression. Furthermore, direct binding of Egr2 at these promoters was
demonstrated in vivo by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of myelinating
sciatic nerve, and binding of Egr2 to the Nab2 promoter was stimulated by
neuregulin in primary Schwann cells. Although Egr2 expression activates the Nab2 
promoter more highly than Nab1, we surprisingly found that only Nab1 - but not
Nab2 - expression levels were reduced in sciatic nerve from Egr2 null mice.
Analysis of the Nab2 promoter showed that it is also activated by ETS proteins
(Ets2 and Etv1/ER81) and is bound by Ets2 in vivo.
CONCLUSION: Overall, these results indicate that induction of Nab2 expression in 
Schwann cells involves not only Egr2, but also ETS proteins that are activated by
neuregulin stimulation. Although Nab1 and Nab2 play partially redundant roles,
regulation of Nab2 expression by ETS factors explains several observations
regarding regulation of NAB genes. Finally, these data suggest that NAB proteins 
are not only feedback inhibitors of Egr2, but rather that co-induction of Egr2
and NAB genes is involved in forming an Egr2/NAB complex that is crucial for
regulation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2235890
PMID: 18096076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Gene Expr Patterns. 2008 Jan;8(2):58-70. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Transcriptome analysis of differentiating spermatogonia stimulated with kit
ligand.

Rossi P(1), Lolicato F, Grimaldi P, Dolci S, Di Sauro A, Filipponi D, Geremia R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Sanita' Pubblica e Biologia Cellulare, Universita' degli Studi
di Roma Tor Vergata, via Montpellier 1, 00133 Rome, Italy.
pellegrino.rossi@med.uniroma2.it

Kit ligand (KL) is a survival factor and a mitogenic stimulus for differentiating
spermatogonia. However, it is not known whether KL also plays a role in the
differentiative events that lead to meiotic entry of these cells. We performed a 
wide genome analysis of difference in gene expression induced by treatment with
KL of spermatogonia from 7-day-old mice, using gene chips spanning the whole
mouse genome. The analysis revealed that the pattern of RNA expression induced by
KL is compatible with the qualitative changes of the cell cycle that occur during
the subsequent cell divisions in type A and B spermatogonia, i.e. the progressive
lengthening of the S phase and the shortening of the G2/M transition. Moreover,
KL up-regulates in differentiating spermatogonia the expression of early meiotic 
genes (for instance: Lhx8, Nek1, Rnf141, Xrcc3, Tpo1, Tbca, Xrcc2, Mesp1, Phf7,
Rtel1), whereas it down-regulates typical spermatogonial markers (for instance:
Pole, Ptgs2, Zfpm2, Egr2, Egr3, Gsk3b, Hnrpa1, Fst, Ptch2). Since KL modifies the
expression of several genes known to be up-regulated or down-regulated in
spermatogonia during the transition from the mitotic to the meiotic cell cycle,
these results are consistent with a role of the KL/kit interaction in the
induction of their meiotic differentiation.

PMID: 18036996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Apr 15;103(6):1938-51.

Opposing effects of glucocorticoids and Wnt signaling on Krox20 and mineral
deposition in osteoblast cultures.

Leclerc N(1), Noh T, Cogan J, Samarawickrama DB, Smith E, Frenkel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Institute for Genetic
Medicine, Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California 90033, USA.

Krox20 is expressed in osteoblasts and chondrocytes, and is required for
trabecular bone formation during embryogenesis. Here we show by RT-qPCR and
Western blot analysis that Krox20 is up-regulated during late stages of
osteoblast differentiation in culture. Glucocorticoids (GCs) rapidly inhibit the 
expression of Krox20 as well its co-activator, HCF-1, resulting in inhibition of 
the Osteocalcin Krox20-binding Enhancer (OKE). GCs also inhibit expression of
EGR1, EGR3, and EGR4. OKE activity, which is dependent on the presence of Runx2, 
was independent of the osteocalcin promoter Runx2 binding site. In contrast to
GCs, activation of the Wnt, but not the BMP or the PTH signaling pathways,
stimulated Krox20 expression as well as activity of the OKE. GC-mediated
suppression of Krox20 expression was compromised, albeit not completely, in the
presence of DKK1, suggesting that the inhibition occurs in both Wnt-dependent and
Wnt-independent manners. Furthermore, Wnt3A partially rescued Krox20 expression
in GC-arrested osteoblast cultures and this was accompanied by rescue of
mineralization. These findings are consistent with a role for Krox20 in
osteoblast function and suggest that this transcription factor may contribute to 
the opposing effects of GCs and Wnt signaling on bone formation.

PMID: 17973254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Neurosci. 2007 Oct 24;27(43):11552-9.

Misexpression of Pou3f1 results in peripheral nerve hypomyelination and axonal
loss.

Ryu EJ(1), Wang JY, Le N, Baloh RH, Gustin JA, Schmidt RE, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Pou3f1/SCIP/Oct-6 is a POU-domain transcription factor that is an important
regulator of peripheral nerve myelination by Schwann cells. Pou3f1-deficient mice
experience a developmental delay in myelination indicating that transient
induction of Pou3f1 is required for normal development of peripheral myelin. The 
mechanism by which Pou3f1 regulates myelination is unclear, because it can both
increase expression of Egr2, a transcription factor that promotes the myelination
program, and also repress the promoters of specific myelin genes such as myelin
protein zero (MPZ) and myelin basic protein (MBP). Therefore, to investigate the 
effects of persistent Pou3f1 expression on peripheral nerve myelination, we
created a conditional transgenic mouse [condPou3f1:MPZ(Cre)] that constitutively 
expresses Pou3f1 specifically in peripheral glia. Examination of sciatic nerves
from condPou3f1:MPZ(Cre) mice revealed persistent hypomyelination and eventual
axonal loss but no evidence of demyelination/remyelination processes or impaired 
Schwann cell proliferation. Nerves from these mice had normal levels of Egr2 mRNA
but decreased levels of MPZ, MBP, and Pmp22 mRNA. Thus, unlike the Pou3f1 null
mice, the condPou3f1:MPZ(Cre) mice exhibit persistent hypomyelination, indicating
that strict control of Pou3f1 expression is critical to proper myelination. Our
findings establish the importance of identifying factor(s) responsible for Pou3f1
downregulation during myelination, because they may play important roles in the
development of peripheral neuropathies.

PMID: 17959798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(24):8648-57. Epub 2007 Oct 15.

An EGR2/CITED1 transcription factor complex and the 14-3-3sigma tumor suppressor 
are involved in regulating ErbB2 expression in a transgenic-mouse model of human 
breast cancer.

Dillon RL(1), Brown ST, Ling C, Shioda T, Muller WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.

Amplification and elevated expression of the ErbB2 receptor tyrosine kinase
occurs in 20% of human breast cancers and is associated with a poor prognosis. We
have previously demonstrated that mammary tissue-specific expression of activated
ErbB2 under the control of its endogenous promoter results in mammary tumor
formation. Tumor development was associated with amplification and overexpression
of ErbB2 at both the transcript and protein levels. Here we demonstrate that the 
EGR2/Krox20 transcription factor and its coactivator CITED1 are coordinately
upregulated during ErbB2 tumor induction. We have identified an EGR2 binding site
in the erbB2 promoter and demonstrated by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
that EGR2 and CITED1 associate specifically with this region of the promoter.
EGR2 and CITED1 were shown to associate, and expression from an erbB2
promoter-reporter construct was stimulated by EGR2 and was further enhanced by
CITED1 coexpression. Furthermore, expression of the 14-3-3sigma tumor suppressor 
led to downregulation of ErbB2 protein levels and relocalization of EGR2 from the
nucleus to the cytoplasm. Taken together, these observations suggest that, in
addition to an increased gene copy number and upregulation of EGR2 and CITED1, an
elevated erbB2 transcript level involves the loss of 14-3-3sigma, which
sequesters a key transcriptional regulator of the erbB2 promoter.

PMCID: PMC2169423
PMID: 17938205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2007 Sep;72(9):954-61.

Transcription factors NFAT2 and Egr1 cooperatively regulate the maturation of
T-lymphoma in vitro.

Koltsova EK(1), Wiest DL, Vavilova TP.

Author information: 
(1)Moscow State Medical Stomatological University, Moscow 127473, Russia.
ekoltsova@gmail.com

We have demonstrated that transcription factors Egr1 and NFAT2 cooperate in
regulation of the early stages of T-lymphocyte development, whereas the related
factors Egr2 and Egr3 do not cooperate with NFAT2. Egr1 and NFAT2 are shown to
cooperatively control gene expression of the regulatory factor Id3 and
recombinase Rag2, whose functions are critical for T-lymphocyte differentiation. 
Thus, the concerted action of the transcription factors Egr1 and NFAT2 can play a
crucial role in regulation of the T cell differentiation in vitro due to the
cooperative regulation of Id3 and Rag2 gene expression.

PMID: 17922653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Epilepsia. 2007;48 Suppl 5:86-95.

Activity-dependent gene expression correlates with interictal spiking in human
neocortical epilepsy.

Rakhade SN(1), Shah AK, Agarwal R, Yao B, Asano E, Loeb JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

Erratum in
    Epilepsia. 2007 Dec;48(12):2380.

Interictal spikes are hallmarks of epileptic neocortex that are used commonly in 
both EEG and electrocorticography (ECoG) to localize epileptic brain regions.
Despite their prevalence, the exact relationship between interictal spiking and
the molecular pathways that drive the production and propagation of seizures is
not known. We have recently identified a common group of genes induced in human
epileptic foci, including EGR1, EGR2, c-fos, and MKP-3. We found that the
expression levels of these genes correlate precisely with the frequency of
interictal activity and can thus serve as markers of epileptic activity. Here, we
explore this further by comparing the expression of these genes within human
epileptic neocortex to both ictal and specific electrical parameters of
interictal spiking from subdural recordings prior to surgical resection in order 
to determine the electrical properties of the human neocortex that correlate best
to the expression of these genes. Seizure frequency as well as quantitative
electrophysiological parameters of interictal spikes including frequency,
amplitude, duration, and area were calculated at each electrode channel and
compared to quantitative real-time RT-PCR measurements of four activity-dependent
genes (c-fos, EGR1, EGR2, and MKP-3) in the underlying neocortical tissue. Local 
neocortical regions of seizure onset had consistently higher spike firing
frequencies and higher spike amplitudes compared to nearby "control" cortex. In
contrast, spike duration was not significantly different between these two areas.
There was no relationship observed between seizure frequency and the expression
levels of activity-dependent genes for the patients examined in this study.
However, within each patient, there were highly significant correlations between 
the expression of three of these genes (c-fos, EGR1, EGR2) and the frequency,
amplitude, and total area of the interictal spikes at individual electrodes. We
conclude that interictal spiking is closely associated with the expression of a
group of activity-dependent transcription factors in neocortical human epilepsy. 
Since there was little correlation between gene expression and seizure frequency,
our results suggest that interictal spiking is a stronger driving force behind
these activity-dependent gene changes and may thus participate in the development
and maintenance of the abnormal neuronal hyperactivity seen in human epileptic
neocortex.

PMID: 17910586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Neural Dev. 2007 Sep 26;2:19.

Distinct roles of Hoxa2 and Krox20 in the development of rhythmic neural networks
controlling inspiratory depth, respiratory frequency, and jaw opening.

Chatonnet F(1), Wrobel LJ, Mézières V, Pasqualetti M, Ducret S, Taillebourg E,
Charnay P, Rijli FM, Champagnat J.

Author information: 
(1)NGI, UPR 2216, Institut de Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard IFR2218, Centre
National de Recherche Scientifique, F-91198 Gif sur Yvette Cedex, France.
Fabrice.Chatonnet@ens-lyon.org

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the involvement of molecular determinants of
segmental patterning of rhombomeres (r) in the development of rhythmic neural
networks in the mouse hindbrain. Here, we compare the phenotypes of mice carrying
targeted inactivations of Hoxa2, the only Hox gene expressed up to r2, and of
Krox20, expressed in r3 and r5. We investigated the impact of such mutations on
the neural circuits controlling jaw opening and breathing in newborn mice,
compatible with Hoxa2-dependent trigeminal defects and direct regulation of Hoxa2
by Krox20 in r3.
RESULTS: We found that Hoxa2 mutants displayed an impaired oro-buccal reflex,
similarly to Krox20 mutants. In contrast, while Krox20 is required for the
development of the rhythm-promoting parafacial respiratory group (pFRG)
modulating respiratory frequency, Hoxa2 inactivation did not affect neonatal
breathing frequency. Instead, we found that Hoxa2-/- but not Krox20-/- mutation
leads to the elimination of a transient control of the inspiratory amplitude
normally occurring during the first hours following birth. Tracing of r2-specific
progenies of Hoxa2 expressing cells indicated that the control of inspiratory
activity resides in rostral pontine areas and required an intact r2-derived
territory.
CONCLUSION: Thus, inspiratory shaping and respiratory frequency are under the
control of distinct Hox-dependent segmental cues in the mammalian brain.
Moreover, these data point to the importance of rhombomere-specific genetic
control in the development of modular neural networks in the mammalian hindbrain.

PMCID: PMC2098766
PMID: 17897445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2008 Mar;11(2):207-16. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

Chronic treatment with aripiprazole induces differential gene expression in the
rat frontal cortex.

Cheng MC(1), Liao DL, Hsiung CA, Chen CY, Liao YC, Chen CH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, Tzu-Chi University, Hualien City, Taiwan.

Chronic treatment of antipsychotic drugs can modulate gene expression in the
brain, which may underscore their clinical efficacy. Aripiprazole is the first
approved antipsychotic drug of the class of dopamine D2 receptor partial agonist,
which has been shown to have similar efficacy and favourable side-effects profile
compared to other antipsychotic drugs. This study aimed to identify differential 
gene expression induced by chronic treatment of aripiprazole. We used
microarray-based gene expression profiling technology, real-time quantitative PCR
and Western blot analysis to identify differentially expressed genes in the
frontal cortex of rats under 4 wk treatment of aripiprazole (10 mg/kg). We were
able to detect ten up-regulated genes, including early growth response gene 1, 2,
4 (Egr1, Egr2, Egr4), chromobox homolog 7 (Cbx7), cannabinoid receptor (Cnr1),
catechol-O-methyltransferase (Comt), protein phosphatase 2c, magnesium dependent 
(Ppm2c), tachykinin receptor 3 (Tacr3), Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome-like gene (Wasl)
and DNA methyltransferase 3a (Dnmt3a). Our data indicate that chronic
administration of aripiprazole can induce differential expression of genes
involved in transcriptional regulation and chromatin remodelling and genes
implicated in the pathogenesis of psychosis.

PMID: 17868501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Glia. 2007 Dec;55(16):1638-47.

Serum and forskolin cooperate to promote G1 progression in Schwann cells by
differentially regulating cyclin D1, cyclin E1, and p27Kip expression.

Iacovelli J(1), Lopera J, Bott M, Baldwin E, Khaled A, Uddin N, Fernandez-Valle
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, University of Central
Florida, Orlando, Florida, USA.

Proliferation of Schwann cells in vitro, unlike most mammalian cells, is not
induced by serum alone but additionally requires cAMP elevation and mitogenic
stimulation. How these agents cooperate to promote progression through the G1
phase of the cell cycle is unclear. We studied the integrative effects of these
compounds on receptor-mediated signaling pathways and regulators of G1
progression. We show that serum alone induces strong cyclical expression of
cyclin D1 and E1, 6 and 12 h after addition, respectively. Serum also promotes
strong but transient erbB2, ERK, and Akt phosphorylation, but Schwann cells
remain arrested in G1 due to high levels of the inhibitor, p27(Kip). Forskolin
with serum promotes G1 progression in 22% of Schwann cells between 18 and 24 h by
inducing a steady decline in p27(Kip) levels that reaches a nadir at 12 h
coinciding with peak cyclin E1 expression. Forskolin also delays
neuregulin-induced loss of erbB2 receptors allowing strong acute activation of
PI3K, sustained erbB2 phosphorylation and G1 progression in 31% of Schwann cells.
We find that the ability of forskolin to decrease p27(Kip) is associated with its
ability to decrease Krox-20 expression that is induced by serum and further
increased by neuregulin. Our results explain why serum is required but
insufficient to stimulate proliferation and identify two routes by which
forskolin promotes proliferation in the presence of serum and neuregulin. These
findings provide insights into how G1 progression and, cell cycle arrest leading 
to myelination are regulated in Schwann cells.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17849471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Onkologie. 2007 Sep;30(8-9):421-6. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Identification of consensus genes and key regulatory elements in 5-fluorouracil
resistance in gastric and colon cancer.

Szöke D(1), Györffy A, Surowiak P, Tulassay Z, Dietel M, Györffy B.

Author information: 
(1)Semmelweis University Budapest, 1st Dept. of Pediatrics, Budapest, Hungary.

BACKGROUND: 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) is widely used in the treatment of gastric and 
colorectal cancer. Recent microrarray studies associated different gene lists
with 5-FU resistance. A major challenge in the genomic era is to find the most
validated genes, and to decipher the regulatory networks responsible for the
expression changes in a set of co-regulated transcripts. Our aim was to find
genes repeatedly associated with 5-FU resistance, and to identify transcription
factors (TFs) having overrepresented binding sites (TFBSs) in the promoter
regions of genes associated with 5-FU resistance.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The analyzed data originated from 5 different publications
describing genome-wide gene expression patterns associated with 5- FU resistance 
in gastric and colorectal cancer. First, a data warehouse containing all genes
associated with resistance was set up. 39 genes were identified which were
repeatedly associated with resistance. Of these, using the EZ-Retrieve web
service, proximal promoter sequences were available for 33 genes. The
MotifScanner software was used to detect TFBSs in this set of sequences.
RESULTS: A total of 200 different TFBSs were identified. Using the statistics
tool of the Java program TOUCAN, 4 binding sites were found to be significantly
overrepresented: NFKappaB50 (p = 0.01), EGR2 (p = 0.027), EGR3 (p = 0.007), and
NGFIC (or EGR4) (p = 0.001). These genes intercept apoptotic pathways at multiple
locations in the tumor cells.
CONCLUSION: We identified a consensus gene list associated with 5-FU resistance, 
performed an in silico comparative promoter analysis, and highlighted the
potential implication of some TFs in the development of chemoresistance.

PMID: 17848813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Diabetes. 2007 Dec;56(12):3033-44. Epub 2007 Sep 10.

Identification of type 2 diabetes genes in Mexican Americans through genome-wide 
association studies.

Hayes MG(1), Pluzhnikov A, Miyake K, Sun Y, Ng MC, Roe CA, Below JE, Nicolae RI, 
Konkashbaev A, Bell GI, Cox NJ, Hanis CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, 5841 S. Maryland Ave., MC6091, 
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to identify DNA polymorphisms
associated with type 2 diabetes in a Mexican-American population.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We genotyped 116,204 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in 281 Mexican Americans with type 2 diabetes and 280 random Mexican
Americans from Starr County, Texas, using the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Mapping
100K set. Allelic association exact tests were calculated. Our most significant
SNPs were compared with results from other type 2 diabetes genome-wide
association studies (GWASs). Proportions of African, European, and Asian ancestry
were estimated from the HapMap samples using structure for each individual to
rule out spurious association due to population substructure.
RESULTS: We observed more significant allelic associations than expected genome
wide, as empirically assessed by permutation (14 below a P of 1 x 10(-4) [8.7
expected]). No significant differences were observed between the proportion of
ancestry estimates in the case and random control sets, suggesting that the
association results were not likely confounded by substructure. A query of our
top approximately 1% of SNPs (P < 0.01) revealed SNPs in or near four genes that 
showed evidence for association (P < 0.05) in multiple other GWAS interrogated:
rs979752 and rs10500641 near UBQLNL and OR52H1 on chromosome 11, rs2773080 and
rs3922812 in or near RALGPS2 on chromosome 1, and rs1509957 near EGR2 on
chromosome 10.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified several SNPs with suggestive evidence for replicated
association with type 2 diabetes that merit further investigation.

PMID: 17846124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Neuromuscul Disord. 2008 Jan;18(1):59-62. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy, a long term follow-up study in an affected
family.

Smit LS(1), Roofthooft D, van Ruissen F, Baas F, van Doorn PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's Hospital, Dr. 
Molewaterplein 60, PO Box 2060, 3000 CB Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
l.s.smit@erasmusmc.nl

Congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy is a rare condition characterized by
prenatal, neonatal or early infantile onset of hypotonia, paresis and areflexia. 
Most of the few patients described in literature die within the first years of
life. Histopathologically there are no or thin myelin sheaths. Mutations have
been described in the following genes, MPZ, EGR2, PMP22, and MTMR2. Here we
describe a family with a heterozygous mutation in MPZ, confirmed in two
generations.

PMID: 17825553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Neurogenetics. 2007 Nov;8(4):257-62. Epub 2007 Aug 24.

Functional, histopathologic and natural history study of neuropathy associated
with EGR2 mutations.

Szigeti K(1), Wiszniewski W, Saifi GM, Sherman DL, Sule N, Adesina AM, Mancias P,
Papasozomenos SCh, Miller G, Keppen L, Daentl D, Brophy PJ, Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Rm 604B, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Mutations in the EGR2 gene cause a spectrum of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and
related inherited peripheral neuropathies. We ascertained ten consecutive
patients with various EGR2 mutations, report a novel de novo mutation, and
provide longitudinal clinical data to characterize the natural history of the
peripheral neuropathy. We confirmed that respiratory compromise and cranial nerve
dysfunction are commonly associated with EGR2 mutations and can be useful in
guiding molecular diagnosis. We also contrast morphological studies in the
context of the I268N homozygous recessive mutation affecting the NAB repressor
binding site and the R359W dominant-negative mutation in the zinc-finger domain.

PMID: 17717711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2007 Jun;14(2):381-91.

A PCR-based expression signature of malignancy in follicular thyroid tumors.

Foukakis T(1), Gusnanto A, Au AY, Höög A, Lui WO, Larsson C, Wallin G, Zedenius
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. theodoros.foukakis@ki.se

The diagnosis of follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) in the absence of metastasis 
can only be established postoperatively. Moreover, high-risk FTCs are often not
identifiable at the time of diagnosis. In this study, we aimed to identify
transcriptional markers of malignancy and high-risk disease in follicular thyroid
tumors. The expression levels of 26 potential markers of malignancy were
determined in a panel of 75 follicular thyroid tumors by a TaqMan quantitative
RT-PCR approach. Logistic regression analysis (LRA) was used for gene selection
and generation of diagnostic and prognostic algorithms. An algorithm based on the
expression levels of five genes (TERT, TFF3, PPARgamma, CITED1, and EGR2) could
effectively predict high-risk disease with a specificity of 98.5%. The metastatic
potential could be predicted in all four cases with apparently benign or
minimally invasive (MI) disease at the time of diagnosis, but poor long-term
outcome. In addition, a second model was produced by implementing two genes (TERT
and TFF3), which was able to distinguish adenomas from de facto carcinomas. When 
this model was tested in an independent series of atypical adenomas (AFTA) and
MI-FTCs, 16 out of 17 AFTAs were classified as 'benign', while MI-FTCs with
vascular invasion (sometimes referred to as 'moderately invasive') and/or large
tumor size tended to classify in the 'malignant' group. The reported models can
be the foundation for the development of reliable preoperative diagnostic and
prognostic tests that can guide the therapeutic approach of follicular thyroid
neoplasms with indeterminate cytology.

PMID: 17639052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Jun;15(3):594-8.

[Bioinformatics scan analysis for predicting drug targeted modulation on ID4 gene
expression].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu XC(1), Chi XH, Lou FD, Zhu HL, Fan H, Li SX, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Hematology, Department of Hematolody, PLA General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

Low expression of ID4 gene is tightly related with carcinogenesis and high
expression shows a definite anti-leukemia effect, though little expression in
some leukemia cells. The main purpose of this preliminary work was to analyze the
construction of ID4 gene promoter and to predict the cis elements in the ID4
promoter region by scanning the drug candidate with bioinformatics method. All
these work are the primary part for finding effective drugs in the treatment of
leukemia via the way of ID4 expression regulation. According to the data in
GenBank and Internet platform, the 5'-untranslated sequence just upstream of ID4 
ORF was virtually cloned. TESS, Genomatix and GenBank databank were used to
analyze the cis elements in this area. RSA was used to find the distribution
patterns for all these possible elements. SAGE and GEO datasets were used to find
active substances which have the effect on the ID4 expression. The rsults
indicated that ID4 had a type II promoter with a typical TATA box-45 bp upstream 
the transcriptional original site. There were a lot of various cis elements in
the 5'-untranslated region upstream, including both positive element candidates
such as Sp1, c-Myb, abaA, GR, ER, Zeste and C/EBPalpha and negative element
candidates such as CCAAT-binding factor, GCF, WT1-KTS, HiNF-C and EGR2. It is
concluded that estrogen, dexamethasone, thyroid hormone and follicle stimulating 
hormone may participate in the regulation of ID4 gene expression in both positive
and negative manners.

PMID: 17605873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Immunol. 2007 Jun 1;178(11):6796-805.

Redundant role for early growth response transcriptional regulators in thymocyte 
differentiation and survival.

Carter JH(1), Lefebvre JM, Wiest DL, Tourtellotte WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University, Chicago IL, 60611, USA.

The early growth response (Egr) family of transcriptional regulators consists of 
four proteins that share highly conserved DNA-binding domains. In many cell
types, they are coexpressed and appear to have cooperative roles in regulating
gene expression during growth and differentiation. Three Egr proteins, Egr1,
Egr2, and Egr3, are induced during thymocyte differentiation in response to
pre-TCR signaling, suggesting they may be critical for some aspects of
pre-TCR-mediated differentiation. Indeed, enforced expression of Egr proteins in 
developing thymocytes can recapitulate some aspects of pre-TCR signaling, but the
mechanisms by which they contribute to beta-selection are still poorly
understood. Egr3 stimulates proliferation of beta-selected thymocytes, and
Egr3-deficient mice have hypocellular thymuses, defects in proliferation, and
impaired progression from double-negative 3 to double-negative 4. Surprisingly,
Egr1-deficient mice exhibit normal beta-selection, indicating that the functions 
of Egr1 during beta-selection are likely compensated by other Egr proteins. In
this study, we show that mice lacking both Egr1 and Egr3 exhibit a more severe
thymic atrophy and impairment of thymocyte differentiation than mice lacking
either Egr1 or Egr3. This is due to a proliferation defect and cell-autonomous
increase in apoptosis, indicating that Egr1 and Egr3 cooperate to promote
thymocyte survival. Microarray analysis of deregulated gene expression in
immature thymocytes lacking both Egr1 and Egr3 revealed a previously unknown role
for Egr proteins in the maintenance of cellular metabolism, providing new insight
into the function of these molecules during T cell development.

PMID: 17513727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Feb 20;104(8):2815-20. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Genetic analysis of the calcineurin pathway identifies members of the EGR gene
family, specifically EGR3, as potential susceptibility candidates in
schizophrenia.

Yamada K(1), Gerber DJ, Iwayama Y, Ohnishi T, Ohba H, Toyota T, Aruga J, Minabe
Y, Tonegawa S, Yoshikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories for Molecular Psychiatry, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama 
351-0198, Japan.

The calcineurin cascade is central to neuronal signal transduction, and genes in 
this network are intriguing candidate schizophrenia susceptibility genes. To
replicate and extend our previously reported association between the PPP3CC gene,
encoding the calcineurin catalytic gamma-subunit, and schizophrenia, we examined 
84 SNPs from 14 calcineurin-related candidate genes for genetic association by
using 124 Japanese schizophrenic pedigrees. Four of these genes (PPP3CC, EGR2,
EGR3, and EGR4) showed nominally significant association with schizophrenia. In a
postmortem brain study, EGR1, EGR2, and EGR3 transcripts were shown to be
down-regulated in the prefrontal cortex of schizophrenic, but not bipolar,
patients. These findings raise a potentially important role for EGR genes in
schizophrenia pathogenesis. Because EGR3 is an attractive candidate gene based on
its chromosomal location close to PPP3CC within 8p21.3 and its functional link to
dopamine, glutamate, and neuregulin signaling, we extended our analysis by
resequencing the entire EGR3 genomic interval and detected 15 SNPs. One of these,
IVS1 + 607A-->G SNP, displayed the strongest evidence for disease association,
which was confirmed in 1,140 independent case-control samples. An in vitro
promoter assay detected a possible expression-regulatory effect of this SNP.
These findings support the previous genetic association of altered calcineurin
signaling with schizophrenia pathogenesis and identify EGR3 as a compelling
susceptibility gene.

PMCID: PMC1815264
PMID: 17360599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Toxicol Lett. 2007 Mar 30;169(3):196-204. Epub 2007 Jan 30.

Krox20 is down-regulated following triazole in vitro embryonic exposure: a
polycompetitor-based assay.

Massa V(1), Gaudenzi G, Sangiorgio L, Cotelli F, Giavini E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Milano, Milano, Italy.
v.massa@ich.ucl.ac.uk

This study was conducted in order to analyse gene-expression alterations in rat
embryos following exposure to triazoles, using an easy-handling approach.
Triazole derivatives have been shown to alter the morphology of cranio-facial
structures and to induce abnormalities in hindbrain patterning and neural crest
cell migration. Specification of hindbrain segments is regulated by retinoic acid
and the hox code. Krox20 was chosen as molecular marker for its specific
distribution in the anterior neural tube. In fact, this zinc-finger protein is
expressed in rhombomere 3 and 5. Mis-regulation of Krox20 levels have shown to
induce severe alterations in the correct patterning of the rhomboencephalon and
the derived structures. In order to analyse Krox20 mRNA levels in rat embryos
exposed in vitro to the triazole derivative triadimefon, a semi-quantitative
approach utilising the competitive RT-PCR was chosen. A lambda phage-based
plasmid construct that could compete with target and internal standard gene at
the same time during enzymatic reaction was generated. Results were confirmed by 
real-time RT-PCR analysis on the same samples. Our data show a down-regulation of
Krox20 transcript levels after exposure to the triazole derivative, implying a
key role of this molecule in the pathogenic pathway induced by triazole exposure.

PMID: 17343997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Physiol Genomics. 2007 Jun 19;30(1):26-34. Epub 2007 Feb 27.

Adrenal transcription regulatory genes modulated by angiotensin II and their role
in steroidogenesis.

Romero DG(1), Rilli S, Plonczynski MW, Yanes LL, Zhou MY, Gomez-Sanchez EP,
Gomez-Sanchez CE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Jackson, Mississippi, USA. dromero@medicine.umsmed.edu

Transcription regulatory genes are crucial modulators of cell physiology and
metabolism whose intracellular levels are tightly controlled to respond to
extracellular stimuli. We studied transcription regulatory genes modulated by
angiotensin II, one of the most important regulators of adrenal cortical cell
function, and their role in adrenal steroidogenesis in H295R human adrenocortical
cells. Angiotensin II-modulated transcription regulatory genes were identified
with high-density oligonucleotide microarrays and the results validated by
real-time RT-PCR. Cotransfection reporter assays were performed in H295R cells to
analyze the role of these transcription regulatory genes in the control of the
expression of 11beta-hydroxylase and aldosterone synthase, the last and unique
enzymes of the glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid biosynthetic pathways,
respectively. We selected a subset of the most regulated genes for reporter
plasmid studies to determine the effect on these enzymes. BHLHB2, BTG2, and SALL1
decreased expression of both enzymes, whereas CITED2, EGR2, ELL2, FOS, FOSB,
HDAC5, MAFF, MITF, NFIL3, NR4A1, NR4A2, NR4A3, PER1, and VDR increased expression
for both enzymes. By the ratio of aldosterone synthase to 11beta-hydroxylase
expression, NFIL3, NR4A1, NR4A2, and NR4A3 show the greatest selectivity toward
upregulating expression of the mineralocorticoid biosynthetic pathway
preferentially. In summary, this study reports for the first time a set of
transcription regulatory genes that are modulated by angiotensin II and their
role in adrenal gland steroidogenesis. Abnormal regulation of the
mineralocorticoid or glucocorticoid biosynthesis pathways is involved in several 
pathophysiological conditions; hence the modulated transcription regulatory genes
described may correlate with adrenal steroidogenesis pathologies.

PMID: 17327493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 May;27(9):3521-9. Epub 2007 Feb 26.

Neuropathy-associated Egr2 mutants disrupt cooperative activation of myelin
protein zero by Egr2 and Sox10.

LeBlanc SE(1), Ward RM, Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Dominant mutations in the early growth response 2 (Egr2/Krox20) transactivator, a
critical regulator of peripheral myelin development, have been associated with
peripheral myelinopathies. These dominant mutants interfere with the expression
of genes required for myelination by Schwann cells, including that for the most
abundant peripheral myelin protein, Myelin protein zero (Mpz). In this study, we 
show that Egr2 mutants specifically affect an Egr2-responsive element within the 
Mpz first intron that also contains binding sites for the transcription factor
Sox10. Furthermore, Egr2 activation through this element is impaired by mutation 
of the Sox10 binding sites. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we found 
that Egr2 and Sox10 bind to this element in myelinating sciatic nerve and that a 
dominant Egr2 mutant does not perturb Egr2 binding but rather attenuates binding 
of Sox10 to the Mpz intron element. Sox10 binding at other sites of Egr2/Sox10
synergy, including a novel site in the Myelin-associated glycoprotein (Mag) gene,
is also reduced by the dominant Egr2 mutant. These results provide the first
demonstration of binding of Egr2/Sox10 to adjacent sites in vivo and also
demonstrate that neuropathy-associated Egr2 mutants antagonize binding of Sox10
at specific sites, thereby disrupting genetic control of the myelination program.

PMCID: PMC1899967
PMID: 17325040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Immunol. 2007 Mar 1;178(5):3038-47.

Early growth response transcriptional regulators are dispensable for macrophage
differentiation.

Carter JH(1), Tourtellotte WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University, 330 E. Chicago Avenue,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Early growth response (Egr) proteins comprise a family of transcriptional
regulators (Egr1-4) that modulate gene expression involved in the growth and
differentiation of many cell types. In particular, Egr1 is widely believed to
have an essential role in regulating monocyte/macrophage differentiation.
However, Egr1-deficient mice have normal numbers of functional macrophages, an
observation that has led to the hypothesis that other Egr proteins may compensate
for Egr1 function in vivo. We examined whether other Egr transcription factors
have a functionally redundant role in monocyte/macrophage differentiation. Egr1
and Egr3 expression was found to be induced in myeloid cells when they were
differentiated into macrophages by treatment with M-CSF, whereas Egr2 was
minimally induced and Egr4 was not detected. In either Egr1/Egr3 or Egr1/Egr2
double homozygous mutant mice, macrophage differentiation and function remained
unimpaired. Additionally, the expression of molecules that broadly inhibit Egr
function failed to block commitment to the monocytic lineage or inhibit the
maturation of monocyte precursors. Finally, several hemopoietic growth factors
were found to induce Egr gene expression, indicating that Egr gene expression is 
not cell lineage specific. Taken together, these results demonstrate that Egr
transcription factors are neither essential for nor specific to
monocyte/macrophage differentiation.

PMID: 17312150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 May;21(5):1175-91. Epub 2007 Feb 13.

Pulse sensitivity of the luteinizing hormone beta promoter is determined by a
negative feedback loop Involving early growth response-1 and Ngfi-A binding
protein 1 and 2.

Lawson MA(1), Tsutsumi R, Zhang H, Talukdar I, Butler BK, Santos SJ, Mellon PL,
Webster NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine 0674, University of California, San Diego,
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0674, USA. mlawson@ucsd.edu

The hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal endocrine axis regulates reproduction through 
estrous phase-dependent release of the heterodimeric gonadotropic glycoprotein
hormones, LH and FSH, from the gonadotropes of the anterior pituitary.
Gonadotropin synthesis and release is dependent upon pulsatile stimulation by the
hypothalamic neuropeptide GnRH. Alterations in pulse frequency and amplitude
alter the relative levels of gonadotropin synthesis and release. The mechanism of
interpretation of GnRH pulse frequency and amplitude by gonadotropes is not
understood. We have examined gene expression in LbetaT2 gonadotropes under
various pulse regimes in a cell perifusion system by microarray and identified
1127 genes activated by tonic or pulsatile GnRH. Distinct patterns of expression 
are associated with each pulse frequency, but the greatest changes occur at a
60-min or less interpulse interval. The immediate early gene mRNAs encoding early
growth response (Egr)1 and Egr2, which activate the gonadotropin LH beta-subunit 
gene promoter, are stably induced at high pulse frequency. In contrast, mRNAs for
the Egr corepressor genes Ngfi-A binding protein Nab1 and Nab2 are stably induced
at low pulse frequency. We show that Ngfi-A binding protein members inhibit
Egr-mediated frequency-dependent induction of the LH beta-subunit promoter. This 
pattern of expression suggests a model of pulse frequency detection that acts by 
suppressing activation by Egr family members at low frequency and allowing
activation at sustained high-frequency pulses.

PMCID: PMC2932486
PMID: 17299135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Neural Dev. 2007 Jan 25;2:4.

Neurotrophin/Trk receptor signaling mediates C/EBPalpha, -beta and NeuroD
recruitment to immediate-early gene promoters in neuronal cells and requires
C/EBPs to induce immediate-early gene transcription.

Calella AM(1), Nerlov C, Lopez RG, Sciarretta C, von Bohlen und Halbach O,
Bereshchenko O, Minichiello L.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Mouse Biology Unit, via Ramarini, 00016
Monterotondo, Italy. AnnaMaria.Calella@usz.ch

BACKGROUND: Extracellular signaling through receptors for neurotrophins mediates 
diverse neuronal functions, including survival, migration and differentiation in 
the central nervous system, but the transcriptional targets and regulators that
mediate these diverse neurotrophin functions are not well understood.
RESULTS: We have identified the immediate-early (IE) genes Fos, Egr1 and Egr2 as 
transcriptional targets of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)/TrkB
signaling in primary cortical neurons, and show that the Fos serum response
element area responds to BDNF/TrkB in a manner dependent on a combined C/EBP-Ebox
element. The Egr1 and Egr2 promoters contain homologous regulatory elements. We
found that C/EBPalpha/beta and NeuroD formed complexes in vitro and in vivo, and 
were recruited to all three homologous promoter regions. C/EBPalpha and NeuroD
co-operatively activated the Fos promoter in transfection assays. Genetic
depletion of Trk receptors led to impaired recruitment of C/EBPs and NeuroD in
vivo, and elimination of Cebpa and Cebpb alleles reduced BDNF induction of Fos,
Egr1 and Egr2 in primary neurons. Finally, defective differentiation of cortical 
dendrites, as measured by MAP2 staining, was observed in both compound Cebp and
Ntrk knockout mice.
CONCLUSION: We here identify three IE genes as targets for BDNF/TrkB signaling,
show that C/EBPalpha and -beta are recruited along with NeuroD to target
promoters, and that C/EBPs are essential mediators of Trk signaling in cortical
neurons. We show also that C/EBPs and Trks are required for cortical dendrite
differentiation, consistent with Trks regulating dendritic differentiation via a 
C/EBP-dependent mechanism. Finally, this study indicates that BDNF induction of
IE genes important for neuronal function depends on transcription factors (C/EBP,
NeuroD) up-regulated during neuronal development, thereby coupling the functional
competence of the neuronal cells to their differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1796876
PMID: 17254333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Dec 15;12(24):7284-93.

Amplification and overexpression of CACNA1E correlates with relapse in favorable 
histology Wilms' tumors.

Natrajan R(1), Little SE, Reis-Filho JS, Hing L, Messahel B, Grundy PE, Dome JS, 
Schneider T, Vujanic GM, Pritchard-Jones K, Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Oncology, Institute of Cancer Research/Royal Marsden NHS Trust,
Sutton, Surrey, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: The most well established molecular markers of poor outcome in Wilms'
tumor are loss of heterozygosity at chromosomes 1p and/or 16q, although to date
no specific genes at these loci have been identified. We have previously shown a 
link between genomic gain of chromosome 1q and tumor relapse and sought to
further elucidate the role of genes on 1q in treatment failure.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization
identified a microamplification harboring a single gene (CACNA1E) at 1q25.3 in 6 
of 76 (7.9%) Wilms' tumors, correlating with a shorter relapse-free survival (P =
0.0044, log-rank test). Further characterization of this gene was carried out by 
measuring mRNA and protein expression as well as stable transfection of HEK293
cells.
RESULTS: Overexpression of the CACNA1E transcript was associated with DNA copy
number (P = 0.0204, ANOVA) and tumor relapse (P = 0.0851, log-rank test).
Immunohistochemistry against the protein product Ca(V)2.3 revealed expression
localized to the apical membrane in the distal tubules of normal kidney but not
to the metanephric blastemal cells of fetal kidney from which Wilms' tumors
arise. Nuclear localization in 99 of 160 (61.9%) Wilms' tumor cases correlated
with a reduced relapse-free survival, particularly in cases treated with
preoperative chemotherapy (P = 0.009, log-rank test). Expression profiling of
stably transfected HEK293 cells revealed specific up-regulation of the immediate 
early response genes EGR1/EGR2/EGR3 and FOS/FOSB, mediated by activation of the
MEK/ERK5/Nur77 pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: These data identify a unique genetic aberration with direct clinical
relevance in Wilms' tumor relapse and provide evidence for a potential novel
mechanism of treatment resistance in these tumors.

PMID: 17189400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Biotechnol Lett. 2007 Jan;29(1):157-63. Epub 2006 Nov 8.

Cloning, chromosomal localization and expression patterns of porcine Kruppel-like
factors 4, -5, -7 and the early growth response factor 2.

Yang HW(1), Xia T, Chen ZL, Feng SQ, Peng Y, Zhou L, Gan L, Yang ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.

Kruppel-like factors (KLF) and the early growth response factor 2 (EGR2) are
important zinc finger transcription factors in vertebrates. We have cloned the
full length coding sequence (CDS) of porcine KLF5, KLF7 and EGR2, which are 1374,
909 and 1416 bp, respectively. KLF4, KLF5 and EGR2 were then chromosomally mapped
to porcine 1q28-29, 11q13-14 and 14q23-25, respectively. Moreover, the tissue
expression patterns of KLF4, KLF5, KLF7 and EGR2 imply their probable roles in
specific tissues. This is the first report of the basic study of these zinc
finger transcription factors in pigs; this information will be helpful for future
functional studies.

PMID: 17091381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Oncol Rep. 2006 Nov;16(5):1053-9.

Array-based comparative genomic hybridization of circulating esophageal tumor
cells.

Kim DH(1), Muto M, Kuwahara Y, Nakanishi Y, Watanabe H, Aoyagi K, Ogawa K,
Yoshida T, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Chome, Tokyo 
104-0045, Japan.

Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) shows a high frequency of lymphatic
and/or systemic metastasis, even when the tumor invades only the submucosa. To
investigate the genetic alterations in circulating esophageal tumor cells, we
performed array-based comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) analysis of 8 DNA
samples of xenografts, which were previously established from the thoracic duct
lymph of 13 ESCC patients. A total of 5 loci (or genes), 10q21.3 (EGR2), 11q13.3 
(CCND1/CyclinD1, FGF4, and EMS1), 11q14 (PAK1), and 22qtel (ARSA) were found to
be candidate amplified loci in the xenograft. In contrast, a total of 24 loci
including 9p21 (p16 and MTAP) were found to be homozygously deleted candidates in
the xenograft. Both p16 homozygous deletion and CCND1 amplification were detected
in 6 (75%) and 5 (62.5%) of the 8 xenografts. Furthermore, by quantitative
Southern blot analysis, we found p16 homozygous deletion in 30.8% (8/26) of the
primary tumors and in 50% (4/8) of the metastasized lymph nodes. The frequency of
CCND1 amplification and p16 homozygous deletion is suggested to be associated
with ESCC progression. Matrigel invasion assays of p16-deleted ESCC cells showed 
that restoring wild-type p16 activity into the cells significantly inhibits
tumor-cell invasion, suggesting that p16 inactivation could be involved in ESCC
invasion. This is the first report showing the genetic alteration of concealed
tumor cells in the thoracic duct lymph. The present gene list should be helpful
for identifying new amplified and deleted genes in primary ESCCs as well as in
metastasized lymph nodes.

PMID: 17016592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Neurosci. 2006 Sep 20;26(38):9771-9.

Peripheral myelin maintenance is a dynamic process requiring constant Krox20
expression.

Decker L(1), Desmarquet-Trin-Dinh C, Taillebourg E, Ghislain J, Vallat JM,
Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U784, Ecole Normale
Supérieure, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Onset of myelination in Schwann cells is governed by several transcription
factors, including Krox20/Egr2, and mutations affecting Krox20 result in various 
human hereditary peripheral neuropathies, including congenital hypomyelinating
neuropathy (CHN) and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT). Similar molecular
information is not available on the process of myelin maintenance. We have
generated conditional Krox20 mutations in the mouse that allowed us to develop
models for CHN and CMT. In the latter case, specific inactivation of Krox20 in
adult Schwann cells results in severe demyelination, involving rapid Schwann cell
dedifferentiation and increased proliferation, followed by an attempt to
remyelinate and a block at the promyelinating stage. These data establish that
Krox20 is not only required for the onset of myelination but that it is also
crucial for the maintenance of the myelinating state. Furthermore, myelin
maintenance appears as a very dynamic process in which Krox20 may constitute a
molecular switch between Schwann cell myelination and demyelination programs.

PMID: 16988048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Cell. 2006 Aug 25;126(4):755-66.

Multilineage transcriptional priming and determination of alternate hematopoietic
cell fates.

Laslo P(1), Spooner CJ, Warmflash A, Lancki DW, Lee HJ, Sciammas R, Gantner BN,
Dinner AR, Singh H.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell 
Biology, The University of Chicago, 929 East 57th Street, GCIS W522, IL 60637,
USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2006 Aug 25;126(4):650-2.

Hematopoietic stem cells and their progenitors exhibit multilineage patterns of
gene expression. Molecular mechanisms underlying the generation and refinement of
these patterns during cell fate determination remain unexplored because of the
absence of suitable experimental systems. Using PU.1(-/-) progenitors, we
demonstrate that at subthreshold levels, this Ets transcription factor regulates 
a mixed pattern (macrophage/neutrophil) of gene expression within individual
myeloid progenitors. Increased PU.1 levels refine the pattern and promote
macrophage differentiation by modulating a novel regulatory circuit comprised of 
counter antagonistic repressors, Egr-1,2/Nab-2 and Gfi-1. Egr-1 and Egr-2
function redundantly to activate macrophage genes and to repress the neutrophil
program. These results are used to assemble and mathematically model a gene
regulatory network that exhibits both graded and bistable behaviors and accounts 
for the onset and resolution of mixed lineage patterns during cell fate
determination.

PMID: 16923394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Neurochem. 2006 Sep;98(5):1678-87.

In vivo detection of Egr2 binding to target genes during peripheral nerve
myelination.

Jang SW(1), LeBlanc SE, Roopra A, Wrabetz L, Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

Egr2/Krox20 is a zinc finger transactivator that regulates a diverse array of
genes required for peripheral nerve myelination. Although several studies have
elucidated the Egr2-regulated gene network, it is not clear if Egr2 regulates its
target genes directly or indirectly through induction of other transactivators.
Moreover, very few Egr2 binding sites have been identified in regulatory elements
of myelin genes. To address this issue, we have successfully adapted chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays to test if Egr2 binds directly to target genes in
myelinating rat sciatic nerve. These experiments demonstrate direct binding of
Egr2 to previously described binding sites within the Schwann cell enhancer of
the myelin basic protein gene. Furthermore, we show Egr2 binding to a conserved
site within the myelin-associated glycoprotein gene. Finally, our experiments
provide the first evidence that Egr2 directly regulates expression of desert
hedgehog, which is critically involved in development, maintenance and
regeneration of multiple nerve elements including myelinated fibers.
Surprisingly, this analysis has identified an apparent preponderance of Egr2
binding sites within conserved intron sequences of several myelin genes.
Application of chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis to myelination in vivo will
prove to be a valuable asset in assaying transcription factor binding and
chromatin modifications during activation of myelin genes.

PMID: 16923174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Clin Genet. 2006 Sep;70(3):253-6.

Mutation analysis of the PMP22, MPZ, EGR2, LITAF, and GJB1 genes in Korean
patients with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 1.

Park HK, Kim BJ, Sung DH, Ki CS, Kim JW.

PMID: 16922730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Genet Med. 2006 Aug;8(8):532-5.

Mutation frequency for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1 in the Chinese
population is similar to that in the global ethnic patients.

Song S(1), Zhang Y, Chen B, Zhang Y, Wang M, Wang Y, Yan M, Zou J, Huang Y, Zhong
N.

Author information: 
(1)Peking University Center of Medical Genetics, Beijing, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the genetic loci/mutations among the Chinese
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1 (CMT1), which accounts for approximately 70%
of Charcot-Marie-Tooth; and to study the genetic heterogeneity and mutation
frequency.
METHODS: CMT1A duplication and mutations at loci of MPZ, Cx32/GJB1, EGR2, and
LITAF/SIMPLE were analyzed among 32 clinically diagnosed CMT1 patients of Chinese
ancestry.
RESULTS: The CMT1A duplication was detected in 62.5% (20/32) CMT1 patients. This 
duplication accounts for the major mutation for Chinese CMT1. Among 12 cases that
have no CMT1A duplication detected, three point mutations including one (3.1%) in
MPZ and two (6.3%) in Cx32 were identified. No mutation was detected in genes
PMP22, EGR2 and LITAF among the remaining nine (28.1%) CMT1 patients.
CONCLUSION: The mutation frequency for the Chinese CMT1 is similar to that seen
in the global ethnic population. Molecular testing of the CMT1A duplication,
along with the loci of MPZ and Cx32, may detect the majority of Chinese CMT1
patients.

PMID: 16912585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Neurobiol Dis. 2006 Oct;24(1):159-69. Epub 2006 Jul 26.

A double point mutation in the DNA-binding region of Egr2 switches its function
from inhibition to induction of proliferation: A potential contribution to the
development of congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy.

Arthur-Farraj P(1), Mirsky R, Parkinson DB, Jessen KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

Mutations in the DNA-binding domain of EGR2 are associated with severe autosomal 
dominant forms of peripheral neuropathy. In this study, we show that one such
Egr2 mutant (S382R, D383Y), when expressed in Schwann cells in vitro, is not
transcriptionally inactive but retains residual wild-type Egr2 functions,
including inhibition of transforming growth factor-beta-induced Schwann cell
death and an ability to induce the cytoskeletal protein periaxin. More
importantly, this mutant Egr2 has aberrant effects in Schwann cells, enhancing
DNA synthesis both in the presence and absence of the putative axonal mitogen,
beta-neuregulin 1. This is in stark contrast to wild-type Egr2, which causes
withdrawal from the cell cycle. Furthermore, mutant Egr2 upregulates cyclin D1
and reduces levels of the cell cycle inhibitor, p27. These observations add
significant new evidence to explain how this mutation leads to congenital
hypomyelinating neuropathy in humans.

PMID: 16872830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Glia. 2006 Sep;54(4):243-57.

Schwann cells and the pathogenesis of inherited motor and sensory neuropathies
(Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease).

Berger P(1), Niemann A, Suter U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich,
Switzerland.

Over the last 15 years, a number of mutations in a variety of genes have been
identified that lead to inherited motor and sensory neuropathies (HMSN), also
called Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT). In this review we will focus on the
molecular and cellular mechanisms that cause the Schwann cell pathologies
observed in dysmyelinating and demyelinating forms of CMT. In most instances, the
underlying gene defects alter primarily myelinating Schwann cells followed by
secondary axonal degeneration. The first set of proteins affected by
disease-causing mutations includes the myelin components PMP22, P0/MPZ,
Cx32/GJB1, and periaxin. A second group contains the regulators of myelin gene
transcription EGR2/Krox20 and SOX10. A third group is composed of intracellular
Schwann cells proteins that are likely to be involved in the synthesis, transport
and degradation of myelin components. These include the myotubularin-related
lipid phosphatase MTMR2 and its regulatory binding partner MTMR13/SBF2, SIMPLE,
and potentially also dynamin 2. Mutations affecting the mitochondrial fission
factor GDAP1 may indicate an important contribution of mitochondria in
myelination or myelin maintenance, whereas the functions of other identified
genes, including NDRG1, KIAA1985, and the tyrosyl-tRNA synthase YARS, are not yet
clear. Mutations in GDAP1, YARS, and the pleckstrin homology domain of dynamin 2 
lead to an intermediate form of CMT that is characterized by moderately reduced
nerve conduction velocity consistent with minor myelin deficits. Whether these
phenotypes originate in Schwann cells or in neurons, or whether both cell types
are directly affected, remains a challenging question. However, based on the
advances in systematic gene identification in CMT and the analyses of the
function and dysfunction of the affected proteins, crucially interconnected
pathways in Schwann cells in health and disease have started to emerge. These
networks include the control of myelin formation and stability, membrane
trafficking, intracellular protein sorting and quality control, and may extend to
mitochondrial dynamics and basic protein biosynthesis.

PMID: 16856148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2006 Jun;11(2):148-55.

SIMPLE mutation analysis in dominant demyelinating Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease:
three novel mutations.

Latour P(1), Gonnaud PM, Ollagnon E, Chan V, Perelman S, Stojkovic T, Stoll C,
Vial C, Ziegler F, Vandenberghe A, Maire I.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogénétique, Laboratoire de Biochimie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Debrousse, Lyon,
France. philippe.latour@chu-lyon.fr

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1C (CMT1C) is caused by mutations in the small
integral membrane protein of the lysosome/late endosome (SIMPLE). We analyzed the
coding sequence of SIMPLE in DNA of 53 unrelated cases of dominant demyelinating 
CMT disease with no mutations in PMP22, GJB1, MPZ, EGR2, and NEFL genes. Four
different missense mutations were observed in six families. The mutation
Gly112Ser was found in two families confirming its frequent occurrence in SIMPLE 
mutations. Three novel mutations were also identified: Ala111Gly (two families), 
Pro135Ser, and Pro135Thr. Familial studies revealed that all carriers of
mutations (n = 38), aged from 1 to 78 years, were symptomatic, notably children
under 10 years (n = 8). Motor conduction velocities in the median nerve ranked
from 16.4 to 32.8 m/s (n = 20). In our series of 968 unrelated dominant
demyelinating CMT cases (1992-2005), the percentage of SIMPLE mutations was 0.6
(6/968).

PMID: 16787513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Neuromolecular Med. 2006;8(1-2):217-42.

Pathomechanisms of mutant proteins in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

Niemann A(1), Berger P, Suter U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Department of Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology, ETH-Hönggerberg, CH-8093 Zürich, Switzerland.

We review the putative functions and malfunctions of proteins encoded by genes
mutated in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT; inherited motor and sensory
neuropathies) in normal and affected peripheral nerves. Some proteins implicated 
in demyelinating CMT, peripheral myelin protein 22, protein zero (P0), and
connexin32 (Cx32/GJB1) are crucial components of myelin. Periaxin is involved in 
connecting myelin to the surrounding basal lamina. Early growth response 2 (EGR2)
and Sox10 are transcriptional regulators of myelin genes. Mutations in the small 
integral membrane protein of lysosome/late endosome, the myotubularin-related
protein 2 (MTMR2), and MTMR13/set-binding factor 2 are involved in vesicle and
membrane transport and the regulation of protein degradation. Pathomechanisms
related to alterations of these processes are a widespread phenomenon in
demyelinating neuropathies because mutations of myelin components may also affect
protein biosynthesis, transport, and/or degradation. Related disease mechanisms
are also involved in axonal neuropathies although there is considerably more
functional heterogeneity. Some mutations, most notably in P0, GJB1,
ganglioside-induced differentiation-associated protein 1 (GDAP1), neurofilament
light chain (NF-L), and dynamin 2 (DNM2), can result in demyelinating or axonal
neuropathies introducing additional complexity in the pathogenesis. Often, this
relates to the intimate connection between Schwann cells and neurons/axons
leading to axonal damage even if the mutation-caused defect is
Schwann-cell-autonomous. This mechanism is likely for P0 and Cx32 mutations and
provides the basis for the unifying hypothesis that also demyelinating
neuropathies develop into functional axonopathies. In GDAP1 and DNM2 mutants,
both Schwann cells and axons/neurons might be directly affected. NF-L mutants
have a primary neuronal defect but also cause demyelination. The major challenge 
ahead lies in determining the individual contributions by neurons and Schwann
cells to the pathology over time and to delineate the detailed molecular
functions of the proteins associated with CMT in health and disease.

PMID: 16775378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Neuromolecular Med. 2006;8(1-2):75-86.

Autosomal-recessive forms of demyelinating Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

Dubourg O(1), Azzedine H, Verny C, Durosier G, Birouk N, Gouider R, Salih M,
Bouhouche A, Thiam A, Grid D, Mayer M, Ruberg M, Tazir M, Brice A, LeGuern E.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U679 (ex U289), la Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France.

Autosomal-recessive forms of Charcot-Marie-Tooth (ARCMT) account for less than
10% of the families in the European CMT population but are more frequent in the
Mediterranean basin and the Middle East because of more widespread consanguinity.
Until now, demyelinating ARCMT was more extensively studied at the genetic level 
than the axonal form. Since 1999, the number of localized or identified genes
responsible for demyelinating ARCMT has greatly increased. Eight genes, EGR2,
GDAP1, KIAA1985, MTMR2, MTMR13, NDRG1, PRX, and CTDP1, have been identified and
two new loci mapped to chromosomes 10q23 and 12p11-q13. In this review, we will
focus on the particular clinical and/or neuropathological features of the
phenotype caused by mutations in each of these genes, which might guide molecular
diagnosis.

PMID: 16775368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Neuromolecular Med. 2006;8(1-2):43-62.

Molecular genetics of autosomal-dominant demyelinating Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease.

Houlden H(1), Reilly MM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuromuscular Disease and Department of Molecular Neurosciences,
National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery and Institute of Neurology,
Queen Square, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous
group of disorders and is the most common inherited neuromuscular disorder, with 
an estimated overall prevalence of 17-40/10,000. Although there has been major
advances in the understanding of the genetic basis of CMT in recent years, the
most useful classification is still a neurophysiological classification that
divides CMT into type 1 (demyelinating; median motor conduction velocity < 38
m/s) and type 2 (axonal; median motor conduction velocity > 38 m/s). An
intermediate type is also increasingly being described. Inheritance can be
autosomal-dominant (AD), X-linked, or autosomal-recessive (AR). AD CMT1 is the
most common type of CMT and was the first form of CMT in which a causative gene
was described. This review provides an up-to-date overview of AD CMT1
concentrating on the molecular genetics as the clinical, neurophysiological, and 
pathological features have been covered elsewhere. Four genes (PMP22, MPZ, LITAF,
and EGR2) have been described in the last 15 yr associated with AD CMTI and a
further gene (NEFL), originally described as causing AD CMT2 can also cause AD
CMT1 (by neurophysiological criteria). Studies have shown many of these genes,
when mutated, can cause a wide range of CMT phenotypes from the relatively mild
CMT1 to the more severe Dejerine-Sottas disease and congenital hypomyelinating
neuropathy, and even in some cases axonal CMT2. This review discusses what is
known about these genes and in particular how they cause a peripheral neuropathy,
when mutated.

PMID: 16775366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Eur J Immunol. 2006 Jun;36(6):1360-3.

The hidden truth about gene expression in Tregs: is it what you don't see that
counts?

Cobbold SP(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Oxford, UK. stephen.cobbold@path.ox.ac.uk

A population of IL-10 secreting regulatory T cells (PI-Tregs) can be induced in a
mouse TCR transgenic model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) by 
intranasal administration of the N-terminal peptide of myelin basic protein. A
paper in this issue of the European Journal of Immunology identifies patterns of 
gene expression that distinguish PI-Treg from naïve T cells after activation in
vivo. PI-Tregs are anergic and the expression of egr2 may be involved in
regulation of the cell cycle. The surprising expression of the Th1 determining
gene T-bet in PI-Tregs may be functionally relevant as transfection of T-bet into
a hybridoma induced some genes associated with regulatory T cells, such as tlr2
and gzmb. In this commentary, PI-Tregs are considered in comparison to other
Tregs, such as the natural CD4(+)CD25(+) and Tr1 cells, and there seems to be
considerable overlap in gene expression between all three Treg populations, but
also with both Th1 and Th2 cells. It is suggested that regulatory activity may be
a common feature of all activated T cells and that a defining principle of a Treg
is the lack of effector functions due to a partial or incomplete differentiation 
to either Th1 or Th2.

PMID: 16708406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Eur J Immunol. 2006 Jun;36(6):1374-85.

Persistent antigenic stimulation alters the transcription program in T cells,
resulting in antigen-specific tolerance.

Anderson PO(1), Manzo BA, Sundstedt A, Minaee S, Symonds A, Khalid S,
Rodriguez-Cabezas ME, Nicolson K, Li S, Wraith DC, Wang P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and London School of Medicine, 
UK.

Repetitive antigen stimulation induces peripheral T cell tolerance in vivo. It is
not known, however, whether multiple stimulations merely suppress T cell
activation or, alternatively, change the transcriptional program to a distinct,
tolerant state. In this study, we have discovered that STAT3 and STAT5 were
activated in response to antigen stimulation in vivo, in marked contrast to the
suppression of AP-1, NF-kappaB and NFAT. In addition, a number of transcription
factors were induced in tolerant T cells following antigen challenge in vivo,
including T-bet, Irf-1 and Egr-2. The altered transcription program in tolerant
cells associates closely with the suppression of cell cycle progression and IL-2 
production, as well as with the induction of IL-10. Studies of T-bet and Egr-2
show that the function of T-bet in peptide treatment-induced regulatory T cells
is not associated with Th1 differentiation, but correlates with the suppression
of IL-2, whereas expression of Egr-2 led to an up-regulation of the cell cycle
inhibitors p21(cip1) and p27(kip). Our results demonstrate a balanced
transcription program regulated by different transcription factors for T cell
activation and/or tolerance during antigen-induced T cell responses. Persistent
antigen stimulation can induce T cell tolerance by changing the balance of
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2652694
PMID: 16708405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Psychiatry. 2006 Jul;11(7):633-48. Epub 2006 May 9.

Specificity and timing of neocortical transcriptome changes in response to BDNF
gene ablation during embryogenesis or adulthood.

Glorioso C(1), Sabatini M, Unger T, Hashimoto T, Monteggia LM, Lewis DA, Mirnics 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, PA
15261, USA.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) has been reported to be critical for the
development of cortical inhibitory neurons. However, the effect of BDNF on the
expression of transcripts whose protein products are involved in gamma amino
butric acid (GABA) neurotransmission has not been assessed. In this study, gene
expression profiling using oligonucleotide microarrays was performed in
prefrontal cortical tissue from mice with inducible deletions of BDNF. Both
embryonic and adulthood ablation of BDNF gave rise to many shared transcriptome
changes. BDNF appeared to be required to maintain gene expression in the
SST-NPY-TAC1 subclass of GABA neurons, although the absence of BDNF did not alter
their general phenotype as inhibitory neurons. Furthermore, we observed
expression alterations in genes encoding early-immediate genes (ARC, EGR1, EGR2, 
FOS, DUSP1, DUSP6) and critical cellular signaling systems (CDKN1c, CCND2,
CAMK1g, RGS4). These BDNF-dependent gene expression changes may illuminate the
biological basis for transcriptome changes observed in certain human brain
disorders.

PMID: 16702976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Mol Carcinog. 2006 Oct;45(10):721-31.

Array-comparative genomic hybridization to detect genomewide changes in
microdissected primary and metastatic oral squamous cell carcinomas.

Liu CJ(1), Lin SC, Chen YJ, Chang KM, Chang KW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is a common worldwide malignancy. However, it
is unclear what, if any, genomic alterations occur as the disease progresses to
invasive and metastatic OSCC. This study used genomewide array-CGH in
microdissected specimens to map genetic alterations found in primary OSCC and
neck lymph node metastases. We used array-based comparative genomic hybridization
(array-CGH) to screen genomewide alterations in eight pairs of microdissected
tissue samples from primary and metastatic OSCC. In addition, 25 primary and
metastatic OSCC tissue pairs were examined with immunohistochemistry for protein 
expression of the most frequently altered genes. The highest frequencies of gains
were detected in LMYC, REL, TERC, PIK3CA, MYB, MDR1, HRAS, GARP, CCND2, FES,
HER2, SIS, and SRY. The highest frequencies of losses were detected in p44S10,
TIF1, LPL, MTAP, BMI1, EGR2, and MAP2K5. Genomic alterations in TGFbeta2,
cellular retinoid-binding protein 1 gene (CRBP1), PIK3CA, HTR1B, HRAS, ERBB3, and
STK6 differed significantly between primary OSCC and their metastatic
counterparts. Genomic alterations in PRKCZ, ABL1, and FGF4 were significantly
different in patients who died compared with those who survived.
Immunohistochemistry confirmed high PIK3CA immunoreactivity in primary and
metastatic OSCC. Higher FGF4 immunoreactivity in primary OSCC is associated with 
a worse prognosis. Loss of CRBP1 immunoreactivity is evident in primary and
metastatic OSCC. Our study suggests that precise genomic profiling can be useful 
in determining gene number changes in OSCC. As our understanding of these changes
grow, this profiling may become a practical tool for clinical evaluation.

PMID: 16676365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Oct;6(8):843-8. Epub 2006 Mar 6.

Differential expression of hoxa2a and hoxa2b genes during striped bass embryonic 
development.

Scemama JL(1), Vernon JL, Stellwag EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Howell Science Complex, East Carolina University,
Greenville, NC 27858, USA. scemamaj@mail.ecu.edu

Here, we report the cloning and expression analysis of two previously
uncharacterized paralogs group 2 Hox genes, striped bass hoxa2a and hoxa2b, and
the developmental regulatory gene egr2. We demonstrate that both Hox genes are
expressed in the rhombomeres of the developing hindbrain and the pharyngeal
arches albeit with different spatio-temporal distributions relative to one
another. While both hoxa2a and hoxa2b share the r1/r2 anterior boundary of
expression characteristic of the hoxa2 paralog genes of other species, hoxa2a
gene expression extends throughout the hindbrain, whereas hoxa2b gene expression 
is restricted to the r2-r5 region. Egr2, which is used in this study as an early 
developmental marker of rhombomeres 3 and 5, is expressed in two distinct bands
with a location and spacing typical for these two rhombomeres in other species.
Within the pharyngeal arches, hoxa2a is expressed at higher levels in the second 
pharyngeal arch, while hoxa2b is more strongly expressed in the posterior arches.
Further, hoxa2b expression within the arches becomes undetectable at 60hpf, while
hoxa2a expression is maintained at least up until the beginning of
chondrogenesis. Comparison of the striped bass HoxA cluster paralog group 2 (PG2)
genes to their orthologs and trans-orthologs shows that the striped bass hoxa2a
gene expression pattern is similar to the overall expression pattern described
for the hoxa2 genes in the lobe-finned fish lineage and for the hoxa2b gene from 
zebrafish. It is notable that the pharyngeal arch expression pattern of the
striped bass hoxa2a gene is more divergent from its sister paralog, hoxa2b, than 
from the zebrafish hoxa2b gene. Overall, our results suggest that differences in 
the Hox PG2 gene complement of striped bass and zebrafish affects both their
rhombomeric and pharyngeal arch expression patterns and may account for the
similarities in pharyngeal arch expression between striped bass hoxa2a and
zebrafish hoxa2b.

PMID: 16581310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 2;281(22):15129-37. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

NAB2 represses transcription by interacting with the CHD4 subunit of the
nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex.

Srinivasan R(1), Mager GM, Ward RM, Mayer J, Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
53706, USA.

Early growth response (EGR) transactivators act as critical regulators of several
physiological processes, including peripheral nerve myelination and progression
of prostate cancer. The NAB1 and NAB2 (NGFI-A/EGR1-binding protein)
transcriptional corepressors directly interact with three EGR family members
(Egr1/NGFI-A/zif268, Egr2/Krox20, and Egr3) and repress activation of their
target promoters. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying NAB
repression, we found that EGR activity is modulated by at least two repression
domains within NAB2, one of which uniquely requires interaction with the CHD4
(chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 4) subunit of the NuRD (nucleosome
remodeling and deacetylase) chromatin remodeling complex. Both NAB proteins can
bind either CHD3 or CHD4, indicating that the interaction is conserved among
these two protein families. Furthermore, we show that repression of the
endogenous Rad gene by NAB2 involves interaction with CHD4 and demonstrate
colocalization of NAB2 and CHD4 on the Rad promoter in myelinating Schwann cells.
Finally, we show that interaction with CHD4 is regulated by alternative splicing 
of the NAB2 mRNA.

PMID: 16574654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2006 Jan;46(1):1-18.

[Molecular genetics of inherited neuropathies].

[Article in Japanese]

Takashima H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Geriatrics, Kagoshima University Graduate School
of Medical and Dental Sciences.

Inherited neuropathies are clinically and genetically heterogeneous. At least 28 
genes and 12 loci have been associated with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) and
related inherited neuropathies. Most causes of inherited neuropathy have been
discovered by positional cloning technique and in the past two years, the pace of
CMT gene discovery has accelerated. Genetic studies have revealed the following
gene mutations as the causes of inherited neuropathies; PMP22, MPZ, EGR2, SOX10, 
SIMPLE/LITAF, ARHGEF10 for CMT1 (autosomal dominant demyelinating form); GDAP1,
MTMR2, SBF2/MTMR13, KIAA1985, NDRG1 PRX for CMT4 (autosomal recessive
demyelinating form), MFN2, KIF1B, RAB7, GARS, NEFL, HSPB1, HSPB8 for CMT2
(autosomal dominant axonal form); LMNA, GAN1, KCC3, TDP1, APTX, SETX for AR-CMT2 
(autosomal recessive axonal form); GIB1 for CMTX (X-linked CMT); DNM2 for CMT-DI 
(autosomal dominant CMT with intermediate nerve conduction velocities); and DHH
for minifascicular neuropathy. These discovered CMT causing genes/proteins
include those which show unpredictable correlations with the peripheral nervous
system. However, these genes/proteins are definitely important for the peripheral
nerve, and their discovery should pave the way for dramatic progress in the
understanding of peripheral nerve biology. On the other hand, genotype-phenotype 
correlations of these genes are also important in order to understand the
pathomechanisms of inherited neuropathy. Because, based on mutation studies, a
large number of genes associated with both the CMT1/4 and CMT2 forms have been
identified, it is usually difficult to predict the causative gene based on
clinical information from patients without specific complications. To clarify the
specific features and molecular mechanisms of five diseases that we previously
reported, we reviewed recent progress in HMSN-P linked to chromosome 3, CMT4F
caused by PRX, CMT4A caused by GDAP1, CMT4B2 caused by SBF2/MTMR13, and SCAN1
caused by TDP1. HMSN-P is characterized by late onset, proximal dominant severe
muscle weakness, fasciculations, muscle cramp and sensory involvement. HMSN-P is 
a primary neuronopathy. Mutations in periaxin are associated with a broad
spectrum of demyelinating neuropathies including DSS, a sensory dominant form and
early onset slowly progressive CMT. Pathologically, loss of myelinated fibers,
demyelination, small onion bulb formations, tomacula formation and myelin
foldings were seen in sural nerves. Absence of septate like junction in the
paranodal loop suggests that periaxin could be required for the adhesion complex.
GDAP1 is a relatively common cause of CMT4. Half of reported patients showed the 
demyelinating form, while the rest showed the axonal form. The typical feature of
CMT4A is paresis of the vocal cords and diaphragm. CMT4B2 is characterized by
autosomal recessive, juvenile onset glaucoma and focally folded myelin in sural
nerves. SBF2/MTMR13 mutations cause CMT4B2. Early onset glaucoma was seen in
patients with nonsense mutations. SBF2/MTMR13 and MTMR2, which is the cause of
CMT4B1, could be acting on the same 3-phosphoinositide signaling pathway.
Clinical phenotypes of patients with TDP1, APTX, or SETX mutations share common
clinical findings, namely cerebellar ataxia and axonal neuropathy. TDP1 and
aprataxin both act on the single strand break repair pathway, with TDP1 working
specifically on topoisomerase I related SSBR. Senataxin is a RNA helicase acting 
on RNA maturation and termination in yeast. Since these three proteins share a
common pathway, disruption in any of them could induce a delay in the
transcription process. The low rate of protein supply could lead to deaths of
large neuronal cells.

PMID: 16541790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. FEBS Lett. 2006 Mar 6;580(6):1635-41. Epub 2006 Feb 17.

Sumoylation of the SOX10 transcription factor regulates its transcriptional
activity.

Girard M(1), Goossens M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U654, Bases Moléculaires et Cellulaires des Maladies Génétiques,
France.

SRY-related HMG box-containing factor 10 (SOX10) is a transcription factor
essential for neural crest development and differentiation, and involved in
Waardenburg syndrome type IV and PCWH syndrome. Here we show that the SOX10
protein is modified by sumoylation, a highly dynamic post-translational
modification that affects stability, activity and localisation of some specific
transcription factors. Three sumoylation consensus sites were found in the SOX10 
protein, all of them are functional and modulate SOX10 activity. Sumoylation does
not affect SOX10 sub-cellular localisation, but represses its transcriptional
activity on two of its target genes, GJB1 and MITF, and modulates its synergy
with its cofactors EGR2 and PAX3 on these promoters.

PMID: 16494873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Arch Histol Cytol. 2005 Dec;68(4):227-34.

Krox-20 gene expression: influencing hindbrain-craniofacial developmental
interactions.

De S(1), Turman JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center and Hospital, Keck School of Medicine;
University of Southern California, USA.

Krox-20 is a C(2)H(2)-type zinc-finger transcription factor that plays an
essential role in hindbrain development. The Krox-20 null mutation results in
hindbrain anomalies that result in neonatal death due to respiratory and feeding 
deficits. Here we review our studies of how the Krox- 20 null mutation impacts
the development of motor and sensory systems critical for the production of
consummatory behaviors (suckling/chewing). First, we demonstrated that Krox-20
null mutants suffer a selective loss of primary jaw-opening muscles during
prenatal development. In vivo and in vitro studies are reviewed that highlight
intrinsic defects in mutant jaw-opener muscles that contribute to muscle
degeneration. Next we focus on the impact of the mutation on proprioceptive
neurons activated during consummatory behaviors. Mesencephalic trigeminal (Me5)
neurons are primary sensory neurons that relay jaw proprioception to the central 
nervous system. These cells are unique because their cell bodies are located in
the central as opposed to the peripheral nervous system. Data are reviewed that
demonstrate the impact of the mutation on Me5 neurons, a cell group traditionally
thought to emerge from the mesencephalon. We show that Krox-20 null mutants have 
twice as many Me5 neurons relative to wildtypes at E15, but by birth have half
the number of Me5 cells as wildtypes. TUNEL assays performed in each set of
studies reveal that Krox-20 expression acts to protect both muscle and
mesencephalic trigeminal neurons against apoptosis, suggesting that Krox-20, in
addition to its role in hindbrain patterning, has a broader, long-lasting role in
development.

PMID: 16477142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Neurosci Lett. 2006 May 8;398(3):235-40. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Regulation of genes involved in dopamine transporter modulation by acute cocaine 
in rat striatum.

Courtin C(1), Crete D, Canestrelli C, Noble F, Marie-Claire C.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 7157, Paris F-75006, France.

It is well established that acute administration of psychostimulants alters
dopamine transport. However, the exact mechanism of this modulation is still
unknown. In this study we examined the mRNA levels of several proteins involved
in the various proposed processes following cocaine administration. The
expression levels of several immediate early genes were also studied. This was
performed in rat striatum using real-time quantitative PCR. As expected, a marked
increase of the immediate early genes Fos, Egr1 and Egr3 was observed. Egr2 was
also found up-regulated. Among the different genes studied only Synaptotagmin4 in
the SNARE family and Synphilin1 in the synaptic vesicles binding family were
modulated by acute cocaine treatment. Interestingly, acute amphetamine treatment 
did not increase either Synaptotagmin4 and Synphilin1 mRNA levels, although
increases in early genes expression were noted.

PMCID: PMC1975760
PMID: 16459018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 3;281(9):5453-60. Epub 2005 Dec 22.

Direct regulation of myelin protein zero expression by the Egr2 transactivator.

LeBlanc SE(1), Jang SW, Ward RM, Wrabetz L, Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Program, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Wisconsin, 2015 Linden Drive, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

During myelination of the peripheral nervous system, the myelin protein zero
(Mpz) gene is induced to produce the most abundant protein component (P(0)) of
mature myelin. Although the basal embryonic expression of Mpz in Schwann cells
has been attributed to regulation by Sox10, the molecular mechanism for the
profound up-regulation of this gene during myelination has not been established. 
In this study, we have identified a highly conserved element within the first
intron of the Mpz gene, which contains binding sites for the early growth
response 2 (Egr2/Krox20) transcription factor, a critical regulator of peripheral
nerve myelination. Egr2 can transactivate the intron element, and the induction
is blocked by two known repressors of Egr2 activity. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we find that Egr2 binds in vivo to the intron
element, but not to the Mpz promoter. Known inducers of Mpz expression such as
forskolin and insulin-like growth factor-1 also activate the element in an
Egr2-dependent manner. In addition, we found that Egr2 can act synergistically
with Sox10 to activate this intron element, suggesting a model in which
cooperative interactions between Egr2 and Sox10 mediate a large increase in Mpz
expression to the high levels found in myelinating Schwann cells.

PMID: 16373334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Neuromuscul Disord. 2006 Jan;16(1):14-8. Epub 2005 Dec 20.

Clinical, electrophysiological and molecular genetic studies in a family with
X-linked dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy presenting a novel mutation in
GJB1 Promoter and a rare polymorphism in LITAF/SIMPLE.

Beauvais K(1), Furby A, Latour P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Neurophysiologie Clinique, Hôpital Yves Le Foll, 22023 Saint-Brieuc, 
France.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is a genetically heterogeneous group of neuropathies.
In the demyelinating form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease with dominant
inheritance, five genes have been incriminated: PMP22, MPZ, LITAF/SIMPLE, EGR2
(CMT1A to D), and GJB1 (CMTX). Here, we report clinical, electrophysiological and
molecular genetic studies in a family with a Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease variable
phenotype, ranging from asymptomatic to moderately affected. The absence of
male-to-male transmission as well as the results of systematic
electrophysiological studies suggested a CMTX secondary to a GJB1 mutation.
Screening for mutations in the coding regions of PMP22, MPZ, EGR2 and GJB1 was
negative. We identified (1) a LITAF/SIMPLE substitution (T49M), absent in 1000
control chromosomes, but which was thought to be a polymorphism because of
discrepancies of segregation when considering the results of electrophysiology;
and (2) a novel substitution T>C in the P2 promoter of GJB1 at position -529, in 
the SOX10 binding site S2. The transmission of this second mutation was
consistent with the electrophysiological data. We emphasise the role of
electrophysiological studies that help to discriminate between asymptomatic
subjects and that bring some additional valuable data to the genetic approach.

PMID: 16373087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Histol Histopathol. 2006 Feb;21(2):167-78.

Identification of gene networks modulated by activin in LbetaT2 cells using DNA
microarray analysis.

Mazhawidza W(1), Winters SJ, Kaiser UB, Kakar SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

Activins, members of the TGFbeta family of proteins, are widely expressed in a
variety of tissues. First identified based on their ability to regulate
biosynthesis and secretion of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), activins have
also been shown to modulate development, cell growth, apoptosis, and
inflammation. Despite their many known functions, the precise mechanisms and
downstream signaling pathways by which activins mediate their diverse effects
remain unknown. We have used a DNA microarray assay to identify genes that are
regulated by activin, alone or in combination with gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH), another major regulator of FSH, in a murine gonadotrope-derived cell line
(LbetaT2). We used mRNA from these cells to screen Affymetrix Mu74av2 mouse Gene 
Chip oligonucleotide microarrays, representing approximately 12,400 mouse genes. 
Treatment of LbetaT2 cells with activin A, a gonadotropin-releasing hormone
agonist (GnRHA) or activin A plus GnRHA resulted in alterations in levels of gene
expression that ranged in magnitude from 15 to 67-fold. Data analysis identified 
268 transcripts that were up- or down-regulated by two-fold or more. Distinct
sets of genes were affected by treatment with activin, GnRHA and activin plus
GnRHA, suggesting interactions between activin and GnRHA. Changes in expression
of seven randomly selected representative genes identified by the microarray
technique were confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR and semi-quantitative
reverse transcription/PCR (RT/PCR). Modulation of expression of genes by activin 
suggests that activin may mediate its effects through a variety of signaling
pathways.

PMID: 16329041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Jul 13;85(26):1809-12.

[The characteristics of gene mutations in Chinese patients with
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang FF(1), Tang BS, Zhao GH, Luo W, Xia K, Liu XM, Xiao JF, Zhang RX, Chen B,
Hang C, Pan Q, Cai F, Guo P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha,
Hunan, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the characteristics of gene mutations in Chinese patients
with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT).
METHODS: Real-time quantitative PCR, PCR-SSCP, and/or direct sequencing were used
to analyze the mutation of the pathogenic genes PMP22, MPZ, CX32, EGR2, GDAP1,
NEFL, HSP22 and HSP27 in 113 probands of CMT families, 45 of which had family
history, from different provinces in China. The whole family members of the
subjects with abnormal electrophoretic bands and 50 normal controls underwent the
same examination.
RESULTS: Thirty-six cases of PMP22 duplication, 7 cases of CX32 mutation, 1 case 
of HSP22 mutation, 1 case of HSP27 mutation, 1 case of MPZ mutation, and 1 case
of GDAP1 mutation were found in the 113 CMT probands. No point mutation was found
in PMP22, EGR2 and NEFL genes.
CONCLUSION: Among the Chinese CMT patients 31.9% are caused by PMP22 duplication,
6.2% by CX32, and 0.9% by HSP22, HSP27, MPZ and GDAP1. Point mutations of PMP22, 
EGR2 and NEFL are rare.

PMID: 16253183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Child Neurol. 2005 Aug;20(8):637-43.

Embryology of the neural crest: its inductive role in the neurocutaneous
syndromes.

Sarnat HB(1), Flores-Sarnat L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Neurology), University of Calgary, Faculty of
Medicine, Alberta Children's Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada.
harvey.sarnat@calgaryhealthregion.ca

Neural crest cells are first recognized at the lateral margin of the neural
placode shortly after gastrulation, although they are not committed to their
diverse fates until later. After dorsal closure of the neural tube, neural crest 
cells separate and migrate throughout the embryo to form many structures of
ectodermal origin (eg, dorsal root and autonomic ganglia, peripheral nerve
sheaths) and mesodermal origin (eg, blood vessels, melanocytes, adipose tissue,
membranous bone, connective tissue, most of the ocular globe). Terminal
differentiation occurs after migration is complete. Three regions of the neural
tube generate neural crest: rhombencephalon, mesencephalon, and prosencephalon,
each with a different migratory pattern. The most important genes promoting
neural crest differentiation and migration are those with a dorsalizing influence
in the vertical axis of the neural tube (eg, PAX3, BMP4, ZIC2), some segmentation
genes (eg, WNT1), genes that inhibit neural crest (eg, EGR2), and neural
crest-specific differentiating genes (eg, SLUG, SOX10). In the neurocutaneous
syndromes, diverse features result from abnormal neural crest differentiation,
providing a more encompassing embryologic basis for these disorders than the
traditional view that these syndromes are somehow related to skin and brain
because both are ectodermal derivatives. Abnormal angiogenesis, areas of abnormal
pigmentation that sometimes follow the lines of Blashko, nerve sheath
proliferations, disorders of chromaffin tissue, lipomes and benign and malignant 
tumors are frequent features. Many defective genes in neurocutaneous syndromes
have an additional function as tumor suppressors. Interactions between genes
associated with these disorders and others essential to neural crest formation,
migration, and differentiation, are a likely molecular genetic basis for these
diseases. The craniofacial abnormalities associated with many cerebral
malformations and cutaneous lesions in some neurocutaneous syndromes emphasize an
important inductive role of the neural tube in the development of non-neural
tissues, mediated through neural crest.

PMID: 16225807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Neuromuscul Disord. 2005 Nov;15(11):764-7. Epub 2005 Sep 29.

Novel EGR2 mutation R359Q is associated with CMT type 1 and progressive
scoliosis.

Mikesová E(1), Hühne K, Rautenstrauss B, Mazanec R, Baránková L, Vyhnálek M,
Horácek O, Seeman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child Neurology, 2nd School of Medicine, Charles University
Prague, V Uvalu 84, 15006 Prague, Czech Republic. mikesova@yahoo.com

Mutations in the early growth response 2 gene (EGR2) cause demyelinating
neuropathies differing in severity and age of onset. We tested 46 unrelated Czech
patients with dominant or sporadic demyelinating CMT neuropathy for mutations in 
the EGR2 gene. One novel de-novo mutation (Arg359Gln, R359Q) was identified in
heterozygous state in a patient with a typical CMT1 phenotype, progressive
moderate thoracolumbar scoliosis and without clinical signs of cranial nerve
dysfunction. This patient is presently less affected compared to previously
described Dejerine-Sottas neuropathy (DSN) patients carrying another substitution
at codon 359 (Arg359Trp, R359W). This report shows that EGR2 mutations are rare
in Czech patients with demyelinating type of CMT and suggests that different
substitutions at codon 359 of EGR2 can cause significantly different phenotypes.

PMID: 16198564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2006 Jan;132(1):19-27. Epub 2005 Sep 17.

Identification of a candidate tumor suppressor gene RHOBTB1 located at a novel
allelic loss region 10q21 in head and neck cancer.

Beder LB(1), Gunduz M, Ouchida M, Gunduz E, Sakai A, Fukushima K, Nagatsuka H,
Ito S, Honjo N, Nishizaki K, Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Okayama University, Okayama, Japan.

PURPOSE: Aims of the study are to narrow-down the hotspot region on 10q21 defined
by previous genome-wide loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis in head and neck
squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) and to define candidate tumor suppressor genes
(TSG) concerned with 10q21.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: LOH analysis was carried out with ten polymorphic
microsatellite markers. Expression analysis was performed by semi-quantitative
RT-PCR, and mutation analysis by PCR and direct sequencing.
RESULTS: LOH analysis on 10q21 in 52 HNSCC indicated distinctive and frequent
allelic loss at D10S589 (42%). Among flanking genes, we found the RHOBTB1 gene as
a candidate TSG, since an intragenic marker demonstrated the highest LOH (44%).
Expression analysis revealed down-regulation of RHOBTB1 mRNA in 37% of tumors.
Interestingly, all the five tumors that showed decreased expression of RHOBTB1
were accompanied with LOH, supporting the haploinsufficiency and class 2 TSG
characteristics of RHOBTB1. No pathogenic mutation of RHOBTB1 was found.
Furthermore, another gene within the region, EGR2, was also taken under scope.
LOH frequencies around the EGR2 gene were relatively low (23 and 33%). Albeit
semi-quantitative expression analysis of EGR2 demonstrated downregulation in 45% 
of tumor samples, no relation was found between the expression levels and LOH
status.
CONCLUSION: Frequent allelic loss and decreased expression of RHOBTB1 suggested
that this gene has a role in tumorigenesis of a subset of HNSCC.

PMID: 16170569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Nat Neurosci. 2005 Jul;8(7):932-40.

Nab proteins are essential for peripheral nervous system myelination.

Le N(1), Nagarajan R, Wang JY, Svaren J, LaPash C, Araki T, Schmidt RE, Milbrandt
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, Box 8118, Saint Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Mutations that disrupt Egr2 transcriptional activity cause severe demyelinating
peripheral neuropathies. Here we provide evidence that Nab1 and Nab2 proteins are
critical transcriptional modulators of Egr2 in myelinating Schwann cells. Like
Egr2, these proteins are essential for Schwann cell differentiation into the
myelinating state. Mice lacking both Nab1 and Nab2 show severe congenital
hypomyelination of peripheral nerves, with Schwann cell development arresting at 
the promyelinating stage, despite elevated Egr2 expression. As observed for Egr2,
Nab proteins are necessary for Schwann cells to exit the cell cycle, downregulate
suppressed cAMP-inducible protein (SCIP) expression and upregulate expression of 
critical myelination genes. The mRNA expression signature of Schwann cells
deficient in both Nab1 and Nab2 is highly similar to that of Egr2-deficient
Schwann cells, further indicating that the Egr2/Nab protein complex is a key
regulator of the Schwann cell myelination program and that disruption of this
transcriptional complex is likely to result in Schwann cell dysfunction in
patients with Egr2 mutations.

PMID: 16136673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Suppl Clin Neurophysiol. 2004;57:228-42.

Genetic evaluation of inherited motor/sensory neuropathy.

Chance PF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Laboratory, Division of Genetics and Developmental Medicine, Box
356320, Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA. pchance@u.washington.edu

Inherited disorders of peripheral nerves represent a common group of neurologic
diseases. Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 1 (CMT1) is a genetically
heterogeneous group of chronic demyelinating polyneuropathies with loci mapping
to chromosome 17 (CMT1A), chromosome 1 (CMT1B), chromosome 16 (CMT1C) and
chromosome 10 (CMT1D). CMT1A is most often associated with a tandem 1.5-megabase 
(Mb) duplication in chromosome 17p11.2-p12. In rare patients it may result from a
point mutation in the peripheral myelin protein-22 (PMP22) gene. CMT1B is
associated with point mutations in the myelin protein zero (Po or MPZ) gene.
Mutations in the SIMPLE gene cause CMT1C, and CMT1D is the result of mutations in
the early response 2 (ERG2 or Krox-20) gene. An X-linked form of CMT1 (CMT1X)
maps to Xq13 and is associated with mutations in the connexin32 (Cx32) gene.
Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 2 (CMT2) is an axonal neuropathy that maps to
chromosome 1p35-p36 (CMT2A), chromosome 3q13-q22 (CMT2B), chromosome 7p14
(CMT2D), chromosome 8p21 (CMT2E), chromosome 1q22-q23 (CMT2F) or chromosome 3q13 
(CMT2G). Two X-linked forms of CMT2 have been reported (CMT2XA and CMT2XB), but
the genes remain unidentified. An area that has recently expanded is the
identification of autosomal recessive forms of CMT type 1 and 2. Of the eight
recessive forms of CMT1 that have been identified to date, only two have been
fully characterized at the molecular level (CMT1 AR B 1 and CMT1 AR D). Point
mutations were found in the myotubularin-related protein-2 (MTM2) gene for CMT1
AR B1. CMT1 AR D is the result of point mutations in the N-myc
downstream-regulated gene 1 (NDRG1). Dejerine-Sottas disease (DSD), also called
hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type III (HMSNIII), is a severe,
infantile-onset demyelinating polyneuropathy syndrome that may be associated with
point mutations in either the PMP22 gene, PO gene, EGR2 gene or the PRX gene (for
the recessive form). It shares considerable clinical and pathological features
with CMT1. Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP) is an 
autosomal dominant disorder that results in a recurrent, episodic demyelinating
neuropathy. HNPP is associated with a 1.5-Mb deletion in chromosome 17p11.2-p12
that results in reduced expression of the PMP22 gene. CMT1A and HNPP are
reciprocal duplication/deletion syndromes that originate from unequal crossover
during germ cell meiosis. Other rare forms of demyelinating peripheral
neuropathies map to chromosome 8q, 10q and 11q.

PMID: 16106622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Cell Metab. 2005 Feb;1(2):93-106.

Krox20 stimulates adipogenesis via C/EBPbeta-dependent and -independent
mechanisms.

Chen Z(1), Torrens JI, Anand A, Spiegelman BM, Friedman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue,
New York, New York 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2005 Feb;1(2):85-6.

Krox20 is a zinc finger-containing transcription factor that is abundantly
expressed in adipose tissue. However, its role in fat cell differentiation has
not been established. In cultured 3T3-L1 cells, Krox20 is rapidly induced by
serum stimulation. Overexpression of Krox20 in both 3T3-L1 preadipocytes and
multipotent NIH3T3 cells promotes adipogenesis in a hormone-dependent manner.
Conversely, RNAi-mediated loss of Krox20 function reduced adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 
cells. Ectopic expression of Krox20 can transactivate the C/EBPbeta promoter and 
increase C/EBPbeta gene expression in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. RNAi-mediated
knockdown of C/EPBbeta diminished Krox20's proadipogenic effect. Finally,
coexpression of Krox20 and C/EBPbeta in naive NIH3T3 cells resulted in the
pronounced induction of a fully differentiated adipocyte phenotype, an effect
previously observed only with PPARgamma. These data indicate that Krox20 is
necessary for adipogenesis and that, when overexpressed, Krox20 potently
stimulates adipogenesis via C/EBPbeta-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

PMID: 16054051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Cell Metab. 2005 Feb;1(2):85-6.

Getting fat: two new players in molecular adipogenesis.

Gonzalez FJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Building 37, Room 3106, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Comment on
    Cell Metab. 2005 Jan;1(1):27-39.
    Cell Metab. 2005 Feb;1(2):93-106.

A transcription factor cascade drives adipogenesis. Two new members of this
cascade have been uncovered--Kruppel-like factor 5 (KLF5), which is induced by
C/EBPbeta and delta and acts in concert with C/EBPalpha, beta, and delta to
activate PPARgamma2 expression, and Krox20, which is upstream of C/EBPbeta
expression and one of the earliest factors induced during adipogenesis.

PMID: 16054047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Physiol Genomics. 2005 Sep 21;23(1):89-102. Epub 2005 Jul 26.

Genetic and pharmacological inactivation of adenosine A2A receptor reveals an
Egr-2-mediated transcriptional regulatory network in the mouse striatum.

Yu L(1), Haverty PM, Mariani J, Wang Y, Shen HY, Schwarzschild MA, Weng Z, Chen
JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

The adenosine A2A receptor (A2AR) is highly expressed in the striatum, where it
modulates motor and emotional behaviors. We used both microarray and
bioinformatics analyses to compare gene expression profiles by genetic and
pharmacological inactivation of A2AR and inferred an A2AR-controlled
transcription network in the mouse striatum. A comparison between vehicle
(VEH)-treated A2AR knockout (KO) mice (A2AR KO-VEH) and wild-type (WT) mice
(WT-VEH) revealed 36 upregulated genes that were partially mimicked by treatment 
with SCH-58261 (SCH; an A2AR antagonist) and 54 downregulated genes that were not
mimicked by SCH treatment. We validated the A2AR as a specific drug target for
SCH by comparing A2AR KO-SCH and A2AR KO-VEH groups. The unique downregulation
effect of A2AR KO was confirmed by comparing A2AR KO-SCH with WT-SCH gene groups.
The distinct striatal gene expression profiles induced by A2AR KO and SCH should 
provide clues to the molecular mechanisms underlying the different phenotypes
observed after genetic and pharmacological inactivation of A2AR. Furthermore,
bioinformatics analysis discovered that Egr-2 binding sites were statistically
overrepresented in the proximal promoters of A2AR KO-affected genes relative to
the unaffected genes. This finding was further substantiated by the demonstration
that the Egr-2 mRNA level increased in the striatum of both A2AR KO and
SCH-treated mice and that striatal Egr-2 binding activity in the promoters of two
A2AR KO-affected genes was enhanced in A2AR KO mice as assayed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Taken together, these results strongly support the existence
of an Egr-2-directed transcriptional regulatory network controlled by striatal
A2ARs.

PMID: 16046619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2005 Jun 13;137(1-2):184-92. Epub 2005 Apr 18.

Molecular reactivity of mesocorticolimbic brain areas of high and low grooming
rats after elevated plus maze exposure.

Koya E(1), Spijker S, Homberg JR, Voorn P, Schoffelmeer AN, De Vries TJ, Smit AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics
and Cognitive Research, Free University, De Boelelaan 1085, 1081 HV, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands. eisuke.koya@falw.vu.nl

High and low grooming rats (HG and LG), selected by extremities in stress-induced
self-grooming on the elevated plus maze (EPM), display differences in stress
coping style on the EPM, their motivation to self-administer cocaine, and
differences in the reactivity of dopaminergic nerve terminals in
mesocorticolimbic brain areas. This indicates a link between coping with a
stressful/anxiogenic situation and drug intake. Here, we aimed to determine the
molecular correlates of these differences by analyzing the reactivity of the
mesocorticolimbic brain areas (the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) nucleus
accumbens shell (NAS) and ventral tegmental area (VTA)) of HG and LG rats in
response to EPM exposure. We report by measuring levels of immediate early gene
(IEG) transcripts that EPM exposure-induced IEG expression was not significantly 
different between HG and LG rats. On the other hand, novel IEG expression
patterns upon stress (EPM exposure) were apparent in all three areas including
arc induction in the mPFC and NAS, CRH, BDNF, and Nr4a3 induction in the NAS, and
serum glucocorticoid-regulated kinase (sgk) induction in the VTA. It is concluded
that although the mPFC, NAS, and VTA play a role in modulating stress and
grooming behavior, the neuronal reactivity in these regions measured by the IEG
response is not related with behavioral extremities in stress coping style
displayed on the EPM.

PMID: 15950777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Neurogenetics. 2005 Sep;6(3):159-63. Epub 2005 Sep 28.

Two missense mutations of EGR2 R359W and GJB1 V136A in a Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease family.

Chung KW(1), Sunwoo IN, Kim SM, Park KD, Kim WK, Kim TS, Koo H, Cho M, Lee J,
Choi BO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Kongju National University, Kongju, South
Korea.

During mutational analysis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) causative genes, we
identified a CMT family with two missense mutations in different genes. A R359W
mutation in EGR2 was shared by the affected daughter (proband) and her father. In
addition, she had a V136A mutation in GJB1, which was determined to be a de novo 
mutation. The daughter with two different gene mutations showed more severe
clinical, electrophysiological and histopathological phenotypes than her father
who had only the EGR2 mutation. We suggest that these phenotypic differences
between the proband and her father may have been caused by an altered effect of
the genetic modifier in EGR2, or by the additive effect of the EGR2 and GJB1
mutations.

PMID: 15947997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Brain Res. 2005 Jun 7;1046(1-2):137-44.

Diurnal effects of enriched environment on immediate early gene expression in the
rat brain.

Rönnbäck A(1), Dahlqvist P, Bergström SA, Olsson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Medicine, Umeå University
Hospital, Sweden.

Rodents housed in an enriched environment (EE) show increased neuronal plasticity
with enhanced long-term potentiation and memory performance. We report an
EE-induced increase in NGFI-A and Krox-20 mRNA expression exclusively during the 
dark period of the day. In addition, EE-housed rats showed considerable diurnal
variation in NGFI-A, Krox-20, and NGFI-B mRNA expression which was absent in
single-housed rats. Thus, EE-induced molecular changes are more evident during
the dark phase when the rats have higher motor and exploratory activity. This is 
important to take into account in future studies of molecular mediators of
experience-dependent neuronal plasticity.

PMID: 15927552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Toxicol In Vitro. 2005 Sep;19(6):737-48.

Study on the common teratogenic pathway elicited by the fungicides
triazole-derivatives.

Menegola E(1), Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Massa V, Giavini E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Milan, via Celoria 26, 20133 Milan,
Italy. elena.menegola@unimi.it

Triazole-derivatives alter the pharyngeal apparatus morphogenesis of rodent
embryos cultured in vitro. The hindbrain segmentation and the rhombencephalic
neural crest cell (NCCs) migration are altered by Fluconazole exposure in vitro. 
The aim of the present work is to identify if a common pathogenic pathway is
detectable also for other molecules of this class of compounds. 9.5 days post
coitum (d.p.c.) old rat embryos were exposed in vitro to the teratogenic
concentrations of Flusilazole, Triadimefon and Triadimenol and cultured for 24,
48 or 60 h. The expression and localisation of Hox-b1 and Krox-20 proteins (used 
as markers for hindbrain segmentation) were evaluated after 24 h of culture. The 
localisation and distribution of NCC was evaluated after 24, 30 and 48 h of
culture. The morphology of the embryos was analysed after 48 h, while the
branchial nerve structures were evaluated after 60 h of culture. Hindbrain
segmentation and NCC migration alteration as well as pharyngeal arch and cranial 
nerve abnormalities were detected after exposure of the tested molecules. A
common severe teratogenic intrinsic property for the tested molecules of this
chemical class has been found, acting through alteration of the normal hindbrain 
developmental pattern.

PMID: 15913947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Neurosci Lett. 2005 Jun 24;381(3):354-7. Epub 2005 Mar 28.

The differential JunB responses to inhibition of succinate dehydrogenase in rat
hippocampus and liver.

Przybyla-Zawislak BD(1), Kim CS, Ali SF, Slikker W Jr, Binienda ZK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurotoxicology, FDA/National Center for Toxicological Research,
3900 NCTR Road, Jefferson, AR 72079-9502, USA. bzawislak@nctr.fda.gov

The inhibitor of mitochondrial enzyme succinate dehydrogenase, 3-nitropropionic
acid (3-NPA), induces cellular energy deficit followed by oxidative stress,
secondary excitotoxicity and neuronal degeneration. The fast activation of Jun
and Fos proteins and other proteins encoding inducible transcription factors
(ITFs) occurs in most tissues upon exposure to a variety of stressors including
exposure to mitochondrial inhibitors. However, the consequences of this
activation can differ dramatically in different organs. For example, while
activation of the same ITFs may lead to apoptosis and necrosis in neurons it may 
stimulate liver regeneration. Here, we report the alterations in mRNAs levels of 
c-Fos, JunB, and Krox20 proteins induced in the rat brain and liver by the acute 
exposure to 3-NPA at 30 mg/kg, s.c. While the increase of c-fos transcripts was
observed in both the hippocampus and liver, the junb transcript increased in the 
hippocampus but decreased in the liver. No changes were observed in krox-20 mRNA 
in the hippocampus. Interestingly, there was a large variation in krox-20 mRNA
levels in the liver among animals within the same experimental group. In
conclusion, out of the three ITFs transcripts examined here junb may activate
different pathways depending on the tissue as indicated by differential responses
to mitochondrial inhibition in the hippocampus and liver.

PMID: 15896499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Dev Neurosci. 2005 Jan-Feb;27(1):49-58.

Mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus development is dependent on Krox-20 expression.

De S(1), Nguyen AQ, Shuler CF, Turman JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, School of Dentistry, Los Angeles,
CA, USA.

Krox-20, a C2H2-type zinc-finger transcription factor, plays an important role in
rhombomere development. This study reveals that the Krox-20 null mutation impacts
the development of mesencephalic trigeminal (Me5) neurons, a cell group
traditionally thought to emerge from the mesencephalon. Based on cell counting
studies, we show that Krox-20 null mutants have twice as many Me5 neurons
relative to wildtypes at E15, but by birth have half the number of Me5 cells as
wildtypes. TUNEL studies reveal a period of increased apoptosis from E17-P0 in
mutants. The mutation does not result in differences in Me5 cell size,
morphology, gene expression or peripheral projection patterns between genotypes, 
as demonstrated by retrograde tracing and Brn3a immunohistochemistry. The data
suggest that Krox-20 regulates the period and extent of Me5 apoptosis, impacting 
the final number of Me5 neurons. The loss of Me5 in Krox-20-/- mice may highlight
species-specific differences in the origin of these cells.

Copyright 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 15886484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Neurosci. 2005 May 4;25(18):4463-72.

Schwann cell-specific ablation of laminin gamma1 causes apoptosis and prevents
proliferation.

Yu WM(1), Feltri ML, Wrabetz L, Strickland S, Chen ZL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurobiology and Genetics, The Rockefeller University, New York,
New York 10021, USA.

To investigate the function of laminin in peripheral nerve development, we
specifically disrupted the laminin gamma1 gene in Schwann cells. Disruption of
laminin gamma1 gene expression resulted in depletion of all other laminin chains 
known to be expressed in Schwann cells. Schwann cells lacking laminin do not
extend processes required for initiating axonal sorting and mediating
axon-Schwann cell interaction. They fail to downregulate Oct-6 and arrest at the 
premyelinating stage. The impaired axon-Schwann cell interaction prevents
phosphorylation of beta-neuregulin-1 receptors and results in decreased cell
proliferation. Postnatally, laminin-null Schwann cells exhibit reduced
phosphatidylinositol 3 (PI3)-kinase activity and activation of caspase cascades, 
leading to apoptosis. Injection of a laminin peptide into mutant sciatic nerves
partially restores PI3-kinase activity and reduces apoptotic signals. These
results demonstrate the following: (1) that laminin initiates axonal sorting and 
mediates axon-Schwann cell interactions required for Schwann cell proliferation
and differentiation, and (2) that laminin provides a PI3-kinase/Akt-mediated
Schwann cell survival signal.

PMCID: PMC1513628
PMID: 15872093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Neurochem. 2005 May;93(3):737-48.

Regulation of cholesterol/lipid biosynthetic genes by Egr2/Krox20 during
peripheral nerve myelination.

Leblanc SE(1), Srinivasan R, Ferri C, Mager GM, Gillian-Daniel AL, Wrabetz L,
Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Training Program, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Myelination of peripheral nerves by Schwann cells requires a large amount of
lipid and cholesterol biosynthesis. To understand the transcriptional
coordination of the myelination process, we have investigated the developmental
relationship between early growth response 2 (Egr2)/Krox20--a pivotal regulator
of peripheral nerve myelination--and the sterol regulatory element binding
protein (SREBP) pathway, which controls expression of cholesterol/lipid
biosynthetic genes. During myelination of sciatic nerve, there is a very
significant induction of SREBP1 and SREBP2, as well as their target genes,
suggesting that the SREBP transactivators are important regulators in the
myelination process. Egr2/Krox20 does not appear to directly regulate the levels 
of SREBP pathway components, but rather, we found that Egr2/Krox20 and SREBP
transactivators can synergistically activate promoters of several SREBP target
genes, indicating that direct induction of cholesterol/lipid biosynthetic genes
by Egr2/Krox20 is a part of the myelination program regulated by this
transactivator.

PMID: 15836632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Nat Immunol. 2005 May;6(5):472-80. Epub 2005 Apr 17.

Egr-2 and Egr-3 are negative regulators of T cell activation.

Safford M(1), Collins S, Lutz MA, Allen A, Huang CT, Kowalski J, Blackford A,
Horton MR, Drake C, Schwartz RH, Powell JD.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2005 Jul;6(7):737.

T cell receptor engagement in the absence of proper accessory signals leads to T 
cell anergy. E3 ligases are involved in maintaining the anergic state. However,
the specific molecules responsible for the induction of anergy have yet to be
elucidated. Using microarray analysis we have identified here early growth
response gene 2 (Egr-2) and Egr-3 as key negative regulators of T cell
activation. Overexpression of Egr2 and Egr3 was associated with an increase in
the E3 ubiquitin ligase Cbl-b and inhibition of T cell activation. Conversely, T 
cells from Egr3(-/-) mice had lower expression of Cbl-b and were resistant to in 
vivo peptide-induced tolerance. These data support the idea that Egr-2 and Egr-3 
are involved in promoting a T cell receptor-induced negative regulatory genetic
program.

PMID: 15834410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Eur J Neurosci. 2005 Mar;21(5):1169-80.

Neuronal and glial expression of the adhesion molecule TAG-1 is regulated after
peripheral nerve lesion or central neurodegeneration of adult nervous system.

Soares S(1), Traka M, von Boxberg Y, Bouquet C, Karagogeos D, Nothias F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie des Signaux Intercellulaires, UMR7101, CNRS-UPMC,
Case 02, Bat. A, 3étage, 7 Quai Saint Bernard, 75005 Paris, France.

Expression of the cell adhesion molecule TAG-1 is down-regulated in adult brain, 
with the exception of certain areas exhibiting structural plasticity. Here, we
present evidence that TAG-1 expression persists also in adult rat spinal cord and
dorsal root ganglia (DRG), and can be up-regulated after injury. On Western blots
of adult tissue, TAG-1 is detected as a 135-kDa band, with an additional specific
90-kDa band, not present in developing tissue. TAG-1 expression is found both in 
DRG neurons and in Schwann cells, particularly those associated with the
peripherally projecting DRG processes. Quantitative in situ hybridization
revealed that TAG-1 expression is significantly higher in small neurons that give
rise to unmyelinated fibers, than in large DRG neurons. The regulation of TAG-1
was then examined in two different lesion paradigms. After a sciatic nerve
lesion, TAG-1 expression is not up-regulated in DRG neurons, but decreases with
time. At the lesion site, reactive Schwann cells up-regulate TAG-1, as
demonstrated by both immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization. In a second 
paradigm, we injected kainic acid into the spinal cord that kills neurons but
spares glia and axons. TAG-1 is up-regulated in the spinal neuron-depleted area
as well as in the corresponding dorsal and ventral roots, associated with both
target-deprived afferent fibers and with the non-neuronal cells that invade the
lesion site. These results demonstrate a local up-regulation of TAG-1 in the
adult that is induced in response to injury, suggesting its involvement in axonal
re-modelling, neuron-glia interactions, and glial cell migration.

PMID: 15813926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2005 Apr;73(4):229-38.

Identification of early-responsive genes correlated to valproic acid-induced
neural tube defects in mice.

Okada A(1), Kushima K, Aoki Y, Bialer M, Fujiwara M.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Safety Research Laboratories, Astellas Pharma Inc., 2-1-6 Kashima,
Yodogawa-ku, Osaka 532-8514, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Valproic acid (VPA) causes the failure of neural tube closure in
newborn mice. However, the molecular mechanism of its teratogenesis is unknown.
This study was conducted to investigate the genomewide effects of VPA disruption 
of normal neural tube development in mice.
METHODS: Microarray analysis was performed on the head part of NMRI mouse embryos
treated for 1 hr with VPA on gestational day (GD) 8. Subsequently, we attempted
to isolate genes that changed in correlation with the teratogenic action of VPA
by employing reduced teratogenic VPA analogs, valpromide (VPD) and valnoctamide
(VCD), in a real-time PCR study.
RESULTS: Microarray results demonstrated that during neurulation, many genes,
some of whose functions are known and some unknown, were either increased or
decreased after VPA injection. Some genes were affected by VPD or VCD in the same
way as VPA, but others were not changed by the analogs. In this way, our system
identified 11 increased and 20 decreased genes. Annotation analysis revealed that
the increased genes included gadd45b, ier5, per1, phfl3, pou3f1, and sox4, and
the decreased genes included ccne2, ccnl, gas5, egr2, sirt1, and zfp105.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that expression changes in genes having
roles in the cell cycle and apoptosis pathways of neural tube cells were strongly
expected to relate to the teratogenic, but not antiepileptic, activity of VPA.
Our approach has allowed the expansion of the catalog of molecules immediately
affected by VPA in the developing neural tube.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15799026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Arthritis Rheum. 2005 Mar;52(3):929-39.

Glucocorticoids inhibit osteocalcin transcription in osteoblasts by suppressing
Egr2/Krox20-binding enhancer.

Leclerc N(1), Noh T, Khokhar A, Smith E, Frenkel B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles 90033, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: Glucocorticoids are widely used for the management of rheumatoid
arthritis. Osteoporosis is a major side effect of glucocorticoid therapy and is
attributable to inhibition of bone formation. We developed an osteoblast culture 
system in which glucocorticoids strongly inhibit development of the osteoblast
phenotype, including expression of the bone-specific osteocalcin (OC) gene. Using
this gene as a model, the goal of this study was to discover
glucocorticoid-sensitive transcriptional mechanisms in osteoblasts.
METHODS: Dexamethasone (DEX; 1 microM) was administered to murine MC3T3-E1
osteoblastic cultures under conditions that inhibit mineralized extracellular
matrix formation and OC messenger RNA levels by >10-fold. Because standard
(short-term) transient transfection assays with OC promoter-reporter constructs
did not recapitulate the strong DEX-mediated repression, mapping of OC negative
glucocorticoid response elements (GREs) was performed initially by stable
transfection and then with long-term transient transfection assays. Transcription
factor binding to the OC negative GRE was studied by electrophoretic mobility
shift assays.
RESULTS: Several-fold repression of OC-luciferase constructs was recapitulated in
stable and long-term transient transfection assays, in which the transfected
cells were allowed to progress to a sufficiently advanced developmental stage.
Analysis of a 5' promoter deletion series mapped an OC negative GRE to a 15-bp
G/C-rich motif (-161/-147) located just upstream of the binding site for the
osteoblast master transcription factor Runx2. Oligonucleotides encompassing this 
element and MC3T3-E1 cell extracts formed a protein-DNA complex that contained an
Egr/Krox family member(s). Complex formation was competed by either an
oligonucleotide containing 2 consensus Egr motifs or by anti-Egr2/Krox20
antibodies. Three copies of this Krox-binding element conferred 20-fold
transcriptional activation on the 147-bp basal OC promoter in osteoblasts, and
the enhancer activity was inhibited by DEX. Enhancer activity was not observed in
10T1/2 fibroblasts unless these cells were cotransfected with Runx2.
CONCLUSION: An Egr2/Krox20-binding site located immediately upstream of the Runx2
site of the mouse OC promoter was identified as an enhancer in osteoblasts, whose
activity is repressed by glucocorticoids. Sequence similarity suggests that such 
a mechanism is likely operative in both murine and human cells. Because
glucocorticoids inhibit Egr2/Krox20 expression in osteoblasts, and because
trabecular bone formation is arrested in Egr2/Krox20-knockout mice, the
inhibition of Egr2/Krox20 activity likely contributes to glucocorticoid-induced
osteoporosis.

PMID: 15751078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Mar;25(5):1821-9.

The class III POU domain protein Brn-1 can fully replace the related Oct-6 during
schwann cell development and myelination.

Friedrich RP(1), Schlierf B, Tamm ER, Bösl MR, Wegner M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität Erlangen, Fahrstrasse 17, 91054 Erlangen, 
Germany.

For differentiation, Schwann cells rely on the class III POU domain transcription
factor Oct-6, which is expressed transiently when Schwann cells have established 
a one-to-one relation with axons but have not yet started to myelinate. Loss of
Oct-6 leads to a transient arrest in this promyelinating stage and a delay in
myelination. Although the closely related POU domain protein Brn-2 is coexpressed
with Oct-6 in Schwann cells, its loss has only mild consequences. Combined loss
of both POU domain proteins, in contrast, dramatically increases the myelination 
delay, raising the question of how related POU domain proteins compare to each
other in their activities. Here, we have replaced Oct-6 expression in the mouse
with expression of the class III POU domain protein Brn-1. Although this protein 
is not normally expressed in Schwann cells, Brn-1 was capable of fully replacing 
Oct-6. Brn-1 efficiently induced Krox-20 expression as a prerequisite for
myelination. Onset and extent of myelination were also indistinguishable from
that of the wild type in mice that carried only Brn-1 instead of Oct-6 alleles.
Similar to Oct-6, Brn-1 down-regulated its own expression at later stages of
myelination. Thus, class III POU domain proteins can fully replace each other in 
Schwann cell development.

PMCID: PMC549364
PMID: 15713637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Brain Tumor Pathol. 2004;21(1):27-34.

Genetic analysis of human glioblastomas using a genomic microarray system.

Suzuki T(1), Maruno M, Wada K, Kagawa N, Fujimoto Y, Hashimoto N, Izumoto S,
Yoshimine T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Genomic microarray systems can simultaneously provide substantial genetic and
chromosomal information in a relatively short time. We have analyzed genomic DNA 
from frozen sections of 30 cases of primary glioblastomas by GenoSensor Array 300
in order to characterize gene amplifications, gene deletions, and chromosomal
information in the whole genome. Genes that were frequently amplified included
RFC2/CYLN2 (63.3%), EGFR (53.3%), IL6 (53.3%), ABCB1 (MDR1) (36.7%), and PDGFRA
(26.7%). Genes that were frequently deleted included (56.7%), FGFR2 (66.7%), MTAP
(60.0%), DMBT1 CDKN2A (p16)/MTAP (50.0%), PIK3CA (43.3%), and EGR2 (43.3%), but
deletion of RB1 or TP53 was rarely detected. Chromosomal gains were observed
frequently for 7q (33.3%), 7p (20.0%), and 17q (13.3%). Loss of the 10q was
frequently detected in 13 of 30 cases (46.7%). Loss of the entire chromosome 10
was seen in 9 of 30 cases (30.0%), and was often accompanied by EGFR
amplification (7 cases, 77.8%). The GenoSensor Array 300 proved to be useful for 
identification of genome-wide molecular changes in glioblastomas. The obtained
microarray profile can also yield valuable insight into the molecular events
underlying carcinogenesis of brain tumors and may provide clues about clinical
correlations, including response to treatment.

PMID: 15696966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Feb 15;102(7):2596-601. Epub 2005 Feb 3.

Analysis of congenital hypomyelinating Egr2Lo/Lo nerves identifies Sox2 as an
inhibitor of Schwann cell differentiation and myelination.

Le N(1), Nagarajan R, Wang JY, Araki T, Schmidt RE, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, Box 8118, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Egr2 is a transcription factor required for peripheral nerve myelination in
rodents, and mutations in Egr2 are associated with congenital hypomyelinating
neuropathy (CHN) in humans. To further study its role in myelination, we
generated mice harboring a hypomorphic Egr2 allele (Egr2Lo) that survive for up
to 3 weeks postnatally, a period of active myelination in rodents. These
Egr2Lo/Lo mice provided the opportunity to study the molecular effects of Egr2
deficiency on Schwann cell biology, an analysis that was not possible previously,
because of the perinatal lethality of Egr2-null mice. Egr2Lo/Lo mice phenocopy
CHN, as evidenced by the severe hypomyelination and increased numbers of
proliferating Schwann cells of the peripheral nerves. Comparison of sciatic nerve
gene expression profiles during development and after crush injury with those of 
Egr2Lo/Lo Schwann cells revealed that they are developmentally arrested, with
down-regulation of myelination-related genes and up-regulation of genes
associated with immature and promyelinating Schwann cells. One of the abnormally 
elevated genes in Egr2Lo/Lo Schwann cells, Sox2, encodes a transcription factor
that is crucial for maintenance of neural stem cell pluripotency. Wild-type
Schwann cells infected with Sox2 adenovirus or lentivirus inhibited expression of
myelination-associated genes (e.g., myelin protein zero; Mpz), and failed to
myelinate axons in vitro, but had an enhanced proliferative response to
beta-neuregulin. The characterization of a mouse model of CHN has provided
insight into Schwann cell differentiation and allowed the identification of Sox2 
as a negative regulator of myelination.

PMCID: PMC548989
PMID: 15695336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2004 Nov;44(11):991-4.

[Update on hereditary neuropathy].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakagawa M(1), Takashima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Gerontology, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine.

Hereditary neuropathies are classified into several subtypes according to
clinical, electrophysiologic and pathologic findings. Recent genetic studies have
revealed their phenotypic and genetic diversities. In the primary peripheral
demyelinating neuropathies (CMT1), at least 15 genes have been associated with
the disorders; altered dosage or point mutation of PMP22, GJB1, MPZ, EGR2, MTMR2,
NDRG1, PRX, SOX10, GDAP1 and MTMR13/SBF2. In the primary peripheral axonal
neuropathies (CMT2), at least 10 genes have been associated with these disorders;
NEFL, KIF1B, MFN2, GAN1, LMNA, RAB7, GARS, TDP1, APTX, and SETX. In addition,
some mutations in GJB1, MPZ, GDAP1 and NEFL also present with clinical and
electrophysiologic findings of CMT2. Patients with TDP1, APTX or SETX mutations
share common clinical findings; autosomal recessive inheritance, cerebellar
ataxia, and axonal neuropathy. These genes are suspected to be related to DNA/RNA
repair and induce cell death especially in neuronal cells. In addition to the
above diseases, we have reported a new type of NMSNP (MIM# * 604484)
characterized by proximal dominant neurogenic atrophy, obvious sensory nerve
involvement and the gene locus on 3q12.3. Here, we summarize the genetic bases of
hereditary neuropathies and attempt to highlight significant genotype-phenotype
correlations with a special interest in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway.

PMID: 15651351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2005 Jan;38(1):103-17. Epub 2004 Dec 8.

Molecular dynamics of the compensatory response to myocardial infarct.

LaFramboise WA(1), Bombach KL, Dhir RJ, Muha N, Cullen RF, Pogozelski AR, Turk D,
George JD, Guthrie RD, Magovern JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Allegheny General Hospital, Drexel
University School of Medicine, 320 East North Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15212, USA. 
laframboisewa@upmc.edu

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2005 Apr;38(4):547-50.

Myocardial infarct via occlusion of the left anterior descending coronary in rats
caused overriding depression in transcription, signal transduction, inflammation 
and extracellular matrix pathways in the infarct zone within 24 h. In contrast,
remote zone gene expression was reciprocally activated during the immediate
post-infarct period. Infarct zone signal transduction occurred primarily through 
TGFbeta1 induction while the remote zone exhibited elevated WNT, NOTCH, GPCR and 
transmembrane signaling. A minimal day 1 acute phase, inflammatory response was
detected in the infarct zone while interleukins (IL1alpha, IL1beta, IL6,
IL12alpha, IL18) and the TNFalpha superfamily were activated in the remote zone. 
Different cytochrome subsets were activated in each left ventricular region on
day 1 while anti-oxidant genes were elevated only in the remote zone. The infarct
zone exhibited mixed early transcription factor activation across all binding
domains with a balance favoring constitutive gene activation and differentiation 
pathways as opposed to cell proliferation. In contrast, the remote zone exhibited
activation of extensive developmental transcription factors involved in
specification of cell phenotype, tissue-specific interactions and
position-specific cell proliferation on day 1. The day 28 infarct zone response
mirrored the day 1 remote zone response including activation of genes associated 
with matrix remodeling (metallothionein and metalloproteinase 9, 12, 23), as well
as genes associated with cell proliferation and phenotype specification (MYC,
EGR2, ATF3, HOXA1) recapitulating developmental histogenesis programs.

PMID: 15623427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Immunol. 2004 Dec 15;173(12):7331-8.

Early growth response gene-2, a zinc-finger transcription factor, is required for
full induction of clonal anergy in CD4+ T cells.

Harris JE(1), Bishop KD, Phillips NE, Mordes JP, Greiner DL, Rossini AA, Czech
MP.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Ag-specific immune tolerance results from the induction of cellular mechanisms
that limit T cell responses to selective Ags. One of these mechanisms is
characterized by attenuated proliferation and decreased IL-2 production in fully 
stimulated CD4(+) Th cells and is denoted T cell anergy. We report the
identification of the early growth response gene (Egr-2; Krox-20), a zinc-finger 
transcription factor, as a key protein required for induction of anergy in
cultured T cells. Gene array screening revealed high Egr-2 expression distinctly 
persists in anergized but not proliferating murine A.E7 T cells. In contrast,
Egr-1, a related family member induced upon costimulation, displays little or no 
expression in the anergic state. IL-2-mediated abrogation of anergy causes rapid 
depletion of Egr-2 protein. Full stimulation of anergic A.E7 T cells fails to
enhance IL-2 and Egr-1 expression, whereas Egr-2 expression is greatly increased.
Silencing Egr-2 gene expression by small interfering RNA treatment of cultured
A.E7 T cells before incubation with anti-CD3 alone prevents full induction of
anergy. However, small interfering RNA-mediated depletion of Egr-2 5 days after
anergy induction does not appear to abrogate hyporesponsiveness to stimulation.
These data indicate that sustained Egr-2 expression is necessary to induce a full
anergic state through the actions of genes regulated by this transcription
factor.

PMID: 15585857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Neuro Oncol. 2004 Oct;6(4):281-9.

Detrended fluctuation analysis of genome-wide copy number profiles of
glioblastomas using array-based comparative genomic hybridization.

Nakahara Y(1), Shiraishi T, Okamoto H, Mineta T, Oishi T, Sasaki K, Tabuchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine, Saga University, Saga
849-850, Japan. nakahara@post.saga-med.ac.jp

We examined whole genomic aberrations of biopsied samples from 19 independent
glioblastomas by array-based comparative genomic hybridization analysis. The
highest frequencies of copy number gains were observed on RFC2 (73.3%), EGFR
(63.2%), and FGR, ELN, CDKN1C , FES, TOP2A, and ARSA (57.9% each). The highest
frequencies of copy number losses were detected on TBR1 (52.6%), BMI1 (52.6%),
EGR2 (47.4%), DMBT1 (47.4%), MTAP (42.1%), and FGFR2 (42.1%). The copy number
gains of CDKN1C and INS and the copy number losses of TBR1 were significantly
correlated with longer survival of patients. High-level amplifications were
identified on EGFR, SAS/CDK4, PDGFRA, MDM2, and ARSA. These genes are assumed to 
be involved in tumorigenesis or progression of glioblastomas. The first attempts 
to apply detrended fluctuation analysis to copy number profiles by considering
the reading direction as the time axis demonstrated that higher long-term fractal
scaling exponents (alpha2) correlated well with longer survival of glioblastoma
patients. The present study indicates that array-based comparative genomic
hybridization analysis has great potential for assessment of copy number changes 
and altered chromosomal regions of brain tumors. Furthermore, we show that
nonlinear analysis methods of whole genome copy number profiles may provide
prognostic information about glioblastoma patients.

PMCID: PMC1872007
PMID: 15494095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Ann Neurol. 2004 Nov;56(5):730-4.

Connexin 32 promoter P2 mutations: a mechanism of peripheral nerve dysfunction.

Houlden H(1), Girard M, Cockerell C, Ingram D, Wood NW, Goossens M, Walker RW,
Reilly MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurosciences, Institute of Neurology, Queen Square,
London, UK. h.houlden@ion.ucl.ac.uk

We identified a large Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease family with a novel mutation in
the Connexin 32 (Cx32) P2 promoter region at position -526bp. This mutation was
in a highly conserved SOX10 binding site. Functional studies were conducted on
the Cx32 promoter that showed that this mutation reduced the activity of the Cx32
promoter and the affinity for SOX10 binding. These data suggest that interaction 
between the Cx32 P2 promoter, SOX10, and EGR2 highlight a mechanism of peripheral
nerve dysfunction.

PMID: 15470753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Brain. 2004 Nov;127(Pt 11):2540-50. Epub 2004 Oct 6.

Clinicopathological and genetic study of early-onset demyelinating neuropathy.

Parman Y(1), Battaloglu E, Baris I, Bilir B, Poyraz M, Bissar-Tadmouri N,
Williams A, Ammar N, Nelis E, Timmerman V, De Jonghe P, Najafov A, Deymeer F,
Serdaroglu P, Brophy PJ, Said G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Millet
Cad., Capa, 34390 Istanbul, Turkey. parman@tnn.net

Erratum in
    Brain. 2007 Jul;130(7):1972. Necefov, Ayaz [corrected to Najafov, Ayaz].

Autosomal recessive demyelinating Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT4),
Dejerine-Sottas disease and congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy are variants of
hereditary demyelinating neuropathy of infancy, a genetically heterogeneous group
of disorders. To explore the spectrum of early-onset demyelinating neuropathies
further, we studied the clinicopathological and genetic aspects of 20 patients
born to unaffected parents. In 19 families out of 20, consanguinity between the
parents or presence of an affected sib suggested autosomal recessive
transmission. Screening of various genes known to be involved in CMT4 revealed
six mutations of which five are novel. Four of these novel mutations occurred in 
the homozygous state and include: one in GDAP1, one in MTMR2, one in PRX and one 
in KIAA1985. One patient was heterozygous for a novel MTMR2 mutation and still
another was homozygous for the founder mutation, R148X, in NDRG1. All patients
tested negative for mutations in EGR2. Histopathological examination of nerve
biopsy specimens showed a severe, chronic demyelinating neuropathy, with onion
bulb formation, extensive demyelination of isolated fibres and axon loss. We did 
not discern a specific pattern of histopathology that could be correlated to
mutations in a particular gene.

PMID: 15469949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Glia. 2004 Nov 1;48(2):132-44.

Novel method for studying myelination in vivo reveals that EDTA is a potent
inhibitor of myelin protein and mRNA expression during development of the rat
sciatic nerve.

Meintanis S(1), Thomaidou D, Jessen KR, Mirsky R, Matsas R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology,
Hellenic Pasteur Institute, 115 21 Athens, Greece.

To probe the effects of possible inhibitors or enhancers of in vivo myelination, 
we have modified a technique widely used in studies of the developing
neuromuscular system that involves incorporation of test compounds into a silicon
rubber solution, which solidifies on contact with air. U-shaped rubber implants
are inserted around the sciatic nerve of 1-day-old rats and left in place for
24-48 h. Sections from the region of the nerve lying within the implant, with or 
without the test compound, are then immunolabeled, examined with in situ
hybridization or electron microscopy. Application of EDTA (440 microg/implant) in
this way strongly suppressed the levels of the myelin-associated molecules
protein P0, myelin basic protein (MBP), and galactocerebroside (Galc). mRNA
levels for P0 and the myelin-related transcription factor Krox-20 were also
reduced, further supporting association of the EDTA-induced effect with the
myelinating Schwann cells. In contrast, no obvious differences were observed in
either neurofilament (NF) protein or glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)
expression, suggesting absence of influence on axons or nonmyelinating Schwann
cells. Despite the severely altered molecular composition of myelin in the
presence of EDTA, examination in the electron microscope did not reveal any
apparent ultrastructural changes in the myelin sheaths or nerve development. This
work introduces a novel method for studying nerve development and shows that
EDTA, which chelates divalent cations such as Ca(2+) and Mg(2+), strongly and
selectively reduces levels of molecules, which, on postnatal days 1-4, are
expressed in myelinating cells at much higher levels than in cells not engaged in
myelination.

PMID: 15378656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Nat Neurosci. 2004 Sep;7(9):930-8. Epub 2004 Aug 22.

Neural crest boundary cap cells constitute a source of neuronal and glial cells
of the PNS.

Maro GS(1), Vermeren M, Voiculescu O, Melton L, Cohen J, Charnay P, Topilko P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2004 Sep;7(9):900-2.

Boundary cap (BC) cells are neural crest derivatives that form clusters at the
surface of the neural tube, at entry and exit points of peripheral nerve roots.
Using various knock-in alleles of the mouse gene Egr2 (also known as Krox20), the
expression of which, in trunk regions, is initially restricted to BC cells, we
were able to trace BC cell progeny during development and analyze their fate.
Trunk BC-derived cells migrated along peripheral axons and colonized spinal nerve
roots and dorsal root ganglia (DRG). All Schwann cell precursors occupying the
dorsal roots were derived from BC cells. In the DRG, BC-derived cells were the
progenitors of both neurons, mainly nociceptive afferents, and satellite cells.
These data indicate that BC cells constitute a source of peripheral nervous
system (PNS) components that, after the major neural crest ventrolateral
migratory stream, feeds a secondary wave of migration to the PNS.

PMID: 15322547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Aug 17;101(33):12218-23. Epub 2004 Aug 9.

Neuregulin induces the expression of transcription factors and myosin heavy
chains typical of muscle spindles in cultured human muscle.

Jacobson C(1), Duggan D, Fischbach G.

Author information: 
(1)Microarray Unit, Genetics and Genomics Section, National Institute of
Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Neuregulin (NRG) (also known as ARIA, GGF, and other names) is a heparin sulfate 
proteoglycan secreted into the neuromuscular junction by innervating motor and
sensory neurons. An integral part of synapse formation, we have analyzed
NRG-induced changes in gene expression over 48 h in primary human myotubes. We
show that in addition to increasing the expression of acetylcholine receptors on 
the myotube surface, NRG treatment results in a transient increase of several
members of the early growth response (Egr) family of transcription factors. Three
Egrs, Egr1, -2, and -3, are induced within the first hour of NRG treatment, with 
Egr1 and -3 RNA levels showing the most significant increases of approximately 9-
and 16-fold, respectively. Also noted was a corresponding increase in protein
levels for both of these transcription factors. Previous literature indicates
that Egr3 expression is required for the formation of muscle spindle fibers,
sensory organs that are distinct from skeletal muscle contractile fibers. At the 
molecular level, muscle spindle fibers express a unique subset of myosin heavy
chains. Two isoforms of the myosin heavy chain, the slow development and
neonatal, were found to be increased in our myotube cultures after 48 h of
treatment with NRG. Taken together, these results indicate that not only can NRG 
induce the expression of a transcription factor key to spindle fiber development 
(Egr3), but that a portion of this developmental process can be replicated in
vitro.

PMCID: PMC514402
PMID: 15302938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Aug;33(1):175-93.

Gene expression profiling of glucocorticoid-inhibited osteoblasts.

Leclerc N(1), Luppen CA, Ho VV, Nagpal S, Hacia JG, Smith E, Frenkel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute for Genetic
Medicine, Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California, 2250 
Alcazar Street, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

Glucocorticoid (GC) treatment for the management of autoimmune and inflammatory
diseases is associated with decreased bone formation and increased risk for
fracture. In MC3T3-E1 cell cultures, 0.1-1 microM dexamethasone (DEX) arrests
development of the osteoblast phenotype when administration commences at a
commitment stage around the time of confluency. To gain new insights into
GC-induced osteoporosis, we performed microarray-based gene expression analysis
of GC-arrested MC3T3-E1 cultures, 2.5 days after the administration of DEX. Of
the >12 000 transcripts interrogated, 74 were up-regulated and 17 were
down-regulated by at least 2.5-fold (P < or = 0.05). Some of these genes, such as
Mmp13, Serum/GC-regulated kinase and Tieg, have previously been reported as
GC-responsive. Others are shown here for the first time to respond to GCs. DEX
strongly repressed Krox20/Egr2 at both the mRNA and the protein level. This is
especially significant because mice lacking this transcription factor develop
osteoporosis. The data also suggest that the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
pathway, which is involved in regulating bone mass, and other pathways that
influence BMP signaling, are abrogated by GCs: (i) DEX increased the mRNA levels 
of the BMP antagonists Follistatin and Dan; (ii) DEX increased the levels of p21 
Rasgap3 and Ptpn16/MKP-1 mRNAs, negative regulators of the MAP kinase pathway;
and (iii) DEX decreased Cox mRNA levels. DEX also increased thrombospondin mRNA
levels, which negatively regulate bone mass in vivo, as well as the adipocytic
marker Fkbp51. These and other observations disclose novel gene targets, whose
regulation by GCs in osteoblasts may shed light on and provide new therapeutic
approaches to osteoporosis.

PMID: 15291752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Dev Biol. 2004 Aug 15;272(2):470-82.

Cell autonomy of the mouse claw paw mutation.

Darbas A(1), Jaegle M, Walbeehm E, van den Burg H, Driegen S, Broos L, Uyl M,
Visser P, Grosveld F, Meijer D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, ErasmusMC, Erasmus University Medical
Center, 3000DR Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Mice homozygous for the autosomal recessive mutation claw paw (clp) are
characterized by limb posture abnormalities and congenital hypomyelination, with 
delayed onset of myelination of the peripheral nervous system but not the central
nervous system. Although this combination of limb and peripheral nerve
abnormalities in clp/clp mice might suggest a common neurogenic origin of the
syndrome, it is not clear whether the clp gene acts primarily in the neurone, the
Schwann cell or both. In the work described here, we address this question of
cell autonomy of the clp mutation through reciprocal nerve grafting experiments
between wild-type and clp/clp animals. Our results demonstrate that the clp
mutation affects the Schwann cell compartment and possibly also the neuronal
compartment. These data suggest that the clp gene product is expressed in Schwann
cells as well as neurones and is likely to be involved in direct axon--Schwann
cell interactions. Within the Schwann cell, clp affects a myelin-related
signaling pathway that regulates periaxin and Krox-20 expression, but not Oct-6.

PMID: 15282162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Hum Mutat. 2004 Aug;24(2):185-6.

Mutational analysis of PMP22, MPZ, GJB1, EGR2 and NEFL in Korean
Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy patients.

Choi BO(1), Lee MS, Shin SH, Hwang JH, Choi KG, Kim WK, Sunwoo IN, Kim NK, Chung 
KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Ewha Medical Research Center, Ewha Womans
University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-783, Korea.

Erratum in
    Hum Mutat. 2004 Oct;24(4):350.

We examined CMT1A duplication of 17p11.2-p12, mutations of PMP22, MPZ (P0), GJB1 
(Cx32), EGR2 and NEFL genes in 57 Korean families with patients diagnosed as
having Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease. The CMT1A duplication was present in
53.6% of 28 CMT type 1 patients. In the 42 CMT families without CMT1A
duplication, 10 pathogenic mutations were found in 9 families. The 10 mutations
were not detected in 105 healthy controls. Seven mutations (c.318delT
(p.Ala106fs) in PMP22, c.352G>A (p.Asp118Asn), c.449-1G>T (3'-splice site),
c.706A>G (p.Lys236Glu) in MPZ, c.407T>C (p.Val136Ala)[corrected], c.502T>C
(p.Cys168Arg) in GJB1, and c.1001T>C (p.Leu334Pro) in NEFL) were determined to be
novel. The mutation frequencies of PMP22 and MPZ were similar to those found in
several European populations, however, it appeared that mutations in GJB1 are
less frequent in East Asian CMT patients than in Eur opean patients. We described
the identified mutations and phenotype-genotype correlations based on nerve
conduction studies.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15241803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Neurology. 2004 Jun 8;62(11):2122-3.

A novel MPZ gene mutation in congenital neuropathy with hypomyelination.

Kochanski A(1), Drac H, Kabzinska D, Ryniewicz B, Rowinska-Marcinska K,
Nowakowski A, Hausmanowa-Petrusewicz I.

Author information: 
(1)Neuromuscular Unit, Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Warsaw, Poland. andko@cmdik.pan.pl

Congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy (CHN; MIM# 605253) is a severe neuropathy
with early infancy onset inherited as an autosomal dominant or recessive trait.
Sural nerve biopsy shows a characteristic picture of nonmyelinated and poorly
myelinated axons with basal lamina onion bulbs and lack of myelin breakdown
products. Several mutations in the MTMR2, PMP22, EGR2, and MPZ genes have been
found in patients with CHN. The authors describe the clinical and morphologic
features of a patient with CHN and the identification of a novel Thr124Lys
mutation in the MPZ gene.

PMID: 15184631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Zhongguo Wei Zhong Bing Ji Jiu Yi Xue. 2004 Jun;16(6):338-44.

[Analysis of the early and late gene expression of lipopolysaccharide activated
macrophages by cDNA microarray].

[Article in Chinese]

Li CH(1), Zhang AQ, Liu JC, Zang CB, Chen MY, Xu YX, Huang ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Institute of General Surgery, General
Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100853, China. lichh@301hospital.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To study the early and late changes in mRNA expression in macrophages 
in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) with a cDNA microarray approach using the
Clontech Atlas microarray.
METHODS: mRNA was isolated from unstimulated control and LPS stimulated murine
peritoneal macrophages at 2 hours and 24 hours poststimulation, converted to
(33)P radiolabeled cDNA, and hybridized to mouse array membranes.
RESULTS: In macrophages being stimulated for 2 hours, 69 out of 1 176 genes were 
found to differ by over 3-fold compared with the control. Among them 44 genes
were up-regulated and 25 genes were down-regulated. In macrophages stimulated for
24 hours, 11 genes were up-regulated and 26 genes were down-regulated compared
with the control. Only 8 genes were identified both at 2 hours and at 24 hours
poststimulation. The expressions of many genes encoding transcription factor,
cytokines, cell signaling modulators and apoptosis associated proteins were found
to have changed. Some genes that were not previously linked to this model, such
as bric-a-brac (BTB) and cap-n-collar(CNC) homology 1(BACH1), early growth
response protein 2 (EGR2), E47 interaction protein 1 (EIP1), Ngfi-A binding
protein 2 (NAB2), myeloblastosis oncogene-like protein (MYBL2), neurofibromatosis
1 (NF1), ciliarry neurotropic factor (CNTF) and semaphorin 4A (Sema4A).
CONCLUSION: This study has allowed us to identify genes that may potentially be
regulated by LPS at early and late phase in macrophages. These may contribute to 
better understanding of the mechanism underlying LPS or bacteria induced
inflammatory and immune response following infection and trauma.

PMID: 15182443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 27;279(35):36242-9. Epub 2004 Jun 1.

Hepatitis B virus X protein induces expression of Fas ligand gene through
enhancing transcriptional activity of early growth response factor.

Yoo YG(1), Lee MO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Sejong University, Seoul 143-747, 
Korea.

FasL expressed in tumor cells plays an important role in the escape from immune
surveillance by inducing apoptosis in T-cells bearing Fas. Since the Fas/FasL
signaling pathway requires transcriptional induction of the FasL gene,
elucidation of the precise mechanisms underlying regulation of FasL gene
expression may provide useful molecular insights on tumor progression. We and
others (Shin, E. C., Shin, J. S., Park, J. H., Kim, H., and Kim, S. J. (1999)
Int. J. Cancer 82, 587-591; Lee, M. O., Kang, H. J., Cho, H., Shin, E. C., Park, 
J. H., and Kim, S. J. (2001) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 288, 1162-1168) have 
previously reported that hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) plays a role in the
induction of FasL expression in hepatitis B virus-associated hepatoma. In the
present study, we analyzed the potential cis- and trans-acting factors that
regulate FasL promoter. We found that HBx induced activity of the reporter
containing FasL promoter through binding site for Egr but not through NFAT or
SP-1, which are known as strong activators of the FasL promoter in T-cells.
Transient expression of antisense Egr-2 and antisense Egr-3 abolished expression 
of FasL, which further confirmed the role of Egr in the HBx-mediated FasL
expression. Also we observed that HBx increased the transcriptional activity of
Egr-2 and Egr-3 by enhancing expression as well as the transactivation function
of these proteins. HBx interacted with Egr-2 and Egr-3 in vivo and enhanced
binding of Egr to the co-activator, cAMP-response element-binding protein-binding
protein, which may explain the molecular mechanism by which HBx induced the
transactivation function of Egr. Finally, we found that the carboxyl terminus of 
HBx was necessary and sufficient for FasL induction as well as activation of Egr.
Taken together, our results show a novel mechanism by which HBx induces FasL gene
expression that is mediated by enhancing transcriptional activity of Egr-2 and
Egr-3.

PMID: 15173177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Reprod Toxicol. 2004 Jan-Feb;18(1):121-30.

Relationship between hindbrain segmentation, neural crest cell migration and
branchial arch abnormalities in rat embryos exposed to fluconazole and retinoic
acid in vitro.

Menegola E(1), Broccia ML, Di Renzo F, Massa V, Giavini E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Milan, Via Celoria, 26-20133 Milan,
Italy.

Fluconazole (FLUCO) and retinoic acid (RA) can perturb morphogenesis of the
branchial apparatus in rodent embryos exposed in vitro. The aim of the present
study was to compare the effects induced by in vitro exposure to FLUCO or to RA
on rhombomere organisation, neural crest cell (NCC) migration and cranial nerve
differentiation using specific antibodies. For this purpose 9.5 d.p.c. rat
embryos were exposed to teratogenic concentrations of FLUCO or RA; another group 
was exposed to no-effect concentrations of both agents. Expression of Hox-b1 and 
Krox20 (markers of specific rhombomeres) was altered after FLUCO and RA exposure.
Furthermore, FLUCO and RA showed a synergistic effect. These results suggest that
the observed branchial abnormalities are due to anomalous NCC migration related
to incorrect organisation of specific rhombomeres.

PMID: 15013071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2004 Feb 5;121(1-2):1-11.

Profiling of genes associated with transcriptional responses in mouse hippocampus
after transient forebrain ischemia using high-density oligonucleotide DNA array.

Nagata T(1), Takahashi Y, Sugahara M, Murata A, Nishida Y, Ishikawa K, Asai S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Medicine, Nihon University, School of Medicine, 30-1
Oyaguchikami-cho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610, Japan. tnagata@med.nihon-u.ac.jp

Several cascades of changes in gene expression have been shown to be involved in 
the neuronal injury after transient cerebral ischemia; however, little is known
about the profile of genes showing alteration of expression in a mouse model of
transient forebrain ischemia. We analyzed the gene expression profile in the
mouse hippocampus during 24 h of reperfusion, after 20 min of transient forebrain
ischemia, using a high-density oligonucleotide DNA array. Using statistical
filtration (Welch's ANOVA and Welch's t-test), we identified 25 genes with a more
than 3.0-fold higher or lower level of expression on average, with statistical
significance set at p<0.05, in at least one ischemia-reperfusion group than in
the sham group. Using unsupervised clustering methods (hierarchical clustering
and k-means clustering algorithms), we identified four types of gene expression
pattern that may be associated with the response of cell populations in the
hippocampus to an ischemic insult in this mouse model. Functional classification 
of the 25 genes demonstrated alterations of expression of several kinds of
biological pathways, regulating transcription (Bhlhb2, Jun, c-fos, Egr1, Egr2,
Fosb, Junb, Ifrd1, Neurod6), the cell cycle (c-fos, Fosb, Jun, Junb, Dusp1),
stress response (Dusp1, Dnajb1, Dnaja4), chaperone activity (Dnajb1, Dnaja4) and 
cell death (Ptgs2, Gadd45g, Tdag51), in the mouse hippocampus by 24 h of
reperfusion. Using hierarchical clustering analysis, we also found that the same 
25 genes clearly discriminated between the sham group and the
ischemia-reperfusion groups. The alteration of expression of 25 genes identified 
in this study suggests the involvement of these genes in the transcriptional
response of cell populations in the mouse hippocampus after transient forebrain
ischemia.

PMID: 14969731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2004 Feb-Apr;84(2-3):89-106.

Developmental gene control of brainstem function: views from the embryo.

Borday C(1), Wrobel L, Fortin G, Champagnat J, Thaëron-Antôno C, Thoby-Brisson M.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2216 Neurobiologie Génétique et Intégrative, Institut de Neurobiologie
Alfred Fessard, CNRS, 1, av de la Terrasse, Gif-sur-Yvette 91198, France.

The respiratory rhythm is generated within the hindbrain reticular formation,
rostrally in the vicinity of the facial nucleus and caudally within the
vagal/glossopharyngeal domain. This is probably one of the best models to
understand how genes have been selected and conserved to control adaptive
behaviour in vertebrates. The para-facial region is well understood with respect 
to the transcription factors that underlie antero-posterior specification of
neural progenitors in the embryo. Hox paralogs and Hox-regulating genes kreisler 
and Krox-20 govern transient formation of developmental compartments, the
rhombomeres, in which rhythmic neuronal networks develop. Hox are master genes
selecting and coordinating the developmental fate of reticular and motor neurons 
thereby specifying patterns of motor activities operating throughout life.
Neuronal function and development are also tightly linked in the
vagal/glossopharyngeal domain. At this level, bdnf acts as a neurotrophin of
peripheral chemoafferent neural populations and as a neuromodulator of the
central rhythmogenic respiratory circuits. A general view is now emerging on the 
role of developmental transcription and trophic factors allowing the coordinated 
integration of different neuronal types to produce, and eventually refine,
respiratory rhythmic pattern in a use-dependent manner.

PMID: 14769431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Front Biosci. 2004 Jan 1;9:117-38.

Gene expression and regulation of hindbrain and spinal cord development.

Melton KR(1), Iulianella A, Trainor PA.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 E. 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

The formation of the central nervous system is one of the most fascinating
processes in biology. Motor coordination, sensory perception and memory all
depend on the complex cell connections that form with extraordinary precision
between distinct nerve cell types within the central nervous system. The
development of the central nervous system and its intricate connections occurs in
several steps. During the first step known as neural induction, the neural plate 
forms as a uniform sheet of neuronal progenitors. Neural induction is followed by
neurulation, the process in which the two halves of the neural plate are
transformed into a hollow tube. Neurulation is accompanied by regionalisation of 
the neural tube anterior-posteriorly into the brain and spinal cord and
dorso-ventrally into neural crest cells and numerous classes of sensory and motor
neurons. The proper development of the vertebrate central nervous system requires
the precise, finely balanced control of cell specification and proliferation,
which is achieved through the complex interplay of multiple signaling systems.
Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), retinoic acid (RA) fibroblast growth factors 
(FGFs), Wnt and Hedgehog proteins are a few key factors that interact to pattern 
the developing central nervous system. In this review, we detail our current
knowledge of the roles of these signaling factors in the development of the
vertebrate nervous system in terms of the mechanisms underlying the formation and
specification of the hindbrain and spinal cord.

PMID: 14766352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Cell Biol. 2004 Feb 2;164(3):385-94.

Krox-20 inhibits Jun-NH2-terminal kinase/c-Jun to control Schwann cell
proliferation and death.

Parkinson DB(1), Bhaskaran A, Droggiti A, Dickinson S, D'Antonio M, Mirsky R,
Jessen KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT UK. david.parkinson@ucl.ac.uk

The transcription factor Krox-20 controls Schwann cell myelination. Schwann cells
in Krox-20 null mice fail to myelinate, and unlike myelinating Schwann cells,
continue to proliferate and are susceptible to death. We find that enforced
Krox-20 expression in Schwann cells cell-autonomously inactivates the
proliferative response of Schwann cells to the major axonal mitogen
beta-neuregulin-1 and the death response to TGFbeta or serum deprivation. Even in
3T3 fibroblasts, Krox-20 not only blocks proliferation and death but also
activates the myelin genes periaxin and protein zero, showing properties in
common with master regulatory genes in other cell types. Significantly, a major
function of Krox-20 is to suppress the c-Jun NH2-terminal protein kinase
(JNK)-c-Jun pathway, activation of which is required for both proliferation and
death. Thus, Krox-20 can coordinately control suppression of mitogenic and death 
responses. Krox-20 also up-regulates the scaffold protein JNK-interacting protein
1 (JIP-1). We propose this as a possible component of the mechanism by which
Krox-20 regulates JNK activity during Schwann cell development.

Copyright The Rockefeller University Press

PMCID: PMC2172235
PMID: 14757751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Physiol Genomics. 2004 Apr 13;17(2):157-69.

DNA microarray analysis of gene expression in human optic nerve head astrocytes
in response to hydrostatic pressure.

Yang P(1), Agapova O, Parker A, Shannon W, Pecen P, Duncan J, Salvador-Silva M,
Hernandez MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

There is clinical and experimental evidence that elevated intraocular pressure
(IOP), a mechanical stress, is involved in the pathogenesis of glaucomatous optic
neuropathy. The mechanism by which astrocytes in the optic nerve head (ONH)
respond to changes in IOP is under study. Gene transcription by ONH astrocytes
exposed either to 60 mmHg hydrostatic pressure (HP) or control ambient pressure
(CP) for 6, 24, and 48 h was compared using Affymetrix GeneChip microarrays to
identify HP-responsive genes. Data were normalized across arrays within each
gene. A linear regression model applied to test effect of time and HP on changes 
in expression level identified 596 genes affected by HP over time. Using
GeneSpring analysis we selected genes whose average expression level increased or
decreased more than 1.5-fold at 6, 24, or 48 h. Expression of selected genes was 
confirmed by real-time RT-PCR; protein levels were detected by Western blot.
Among the genes highly responsive to HP were those involved in signal
transduction, such as Rho nucleotide exchange factors, Ras p21 protein activator,
tyrosine kinases and serine threonine kinases, and genes involved in
transcriptional regulation, such as c-Fos, Egr2, and Smad3. Other genes that
increased expression included ATP-binding cassettes, solute carriers, and genes
associated with lipid metabolism. Among the genes that decreased expression under
HP were genes encoding for dual activity phosphatases, transcription factors, and
enzymes involved in protein degradation. These HP-responsive genes may be
important in the establishment and maintenance of the ONH astrocyte phenotype
under conditions of elevated IOP in glaucoma.

PMID: 14747662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Dev Dyn. 2004 Feb;229(2):334-9.

Isolation and expression of the homeobox gene Gbx1 during mouse development.

Rhinn M(1), Lun K, Werner M, Simeone A, Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden,
Germany.

In zebrafish, gbx1 and otx2 are among the earliest genes expressed in the
neuroectoderm, dividing it into an anterior and a posterior domain with a common 
border that marks the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB) primordium. Here, we
describe the sequence and expression pattern of Gbx1 in mouse. The first
transcripts are found at embryonic day 7.75 in the hindbrain. Later on,
expression of Gbx1 is detectable in the hindbrain (rhombomeres 2 to 7), spinal
cord, optic vesicles, and in the ventral telencephalon. In mouse, Gbx1 expression
is not observed at the MHB as is the case during early zebrafish development. We 
suggest that an evolutionary switch occurred: in mouse Gbx2 is involved in the
early specification of the MHB primordium, whereas in zebrafish, gbx1 is required
instead of gbx2.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14745958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 5;279(10):9056-63. Epub 2003 Dec 29.

The Ddx20/DP103 dead box protein represses transcriptional activation by
Egr2/Krox-20.

Gillian AL(1), Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The early growth response 2 (Egr2/Krox-20) transcription factor is essential for 
myelination of the peripheral nervous system and segmentation of the vertebrate
hindbrain. To probe the mechanism by which Egr2 is regulated, we used a yeast
two-hybrid assay and identified an RNA helicase, Ddx20 (DP103/Gemin3), as an
Egr2-interacting protein. Mammalian two-hybrid assays indicated that Ddx20 can
interact with Egr1, Egr3, and Egr4, in addition to Egr2, making it the only known
cofactor that interacts with all four Egr family members. Using several Egr2
target promoters, we found that Ddx20 repressed Egr2-mediated transcriptional
activation with significant promoter specificity. In addition, Ddx20 repressed
Egr2-mediated activation of the endogenous insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2)
gene. Interestingly, the C-terminal segment of Ddx20, which lacks the DEAD box
helicase domain, was sufficient for its robust and specific repression. We also
examined possible interactions between Ddx20 and Nab proteins, the only other
known corepressors of the Egr family, and found that these two corepressors act
independently. Finally, transcriptional repression assays performed in the
presence of a histone deacetylase inhibitor (trichostatin A) indicate that
although repression of certain promoters by Ddx20 requires histone deacetylase
activity, another repression mechanism must also be involved. Because Egr2 is
critical for hindbrain development and peripheral nerve myelination, modulation
of Egr2 by Ddx20 may play an important role in maintaining the correct expression
level of Egr2 target genes.

PMID: 14699164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. FEBS Lett. 2003 Nov 6;554(1-2):67-72.

Methylation at CpG islands in intron 1 of EGR2 confers enhancer-like activity.

Unoki M(1), Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, 
Japan.

We previously demonstrated several lines of evidence indicating that early growth
response 2 (EGR2) functions as a tumor suppressor, partly on the basis that its
expression was often decreased in human tumors and cancer cell lines. Here we
report a possible molecular mechanism to account for down-regulation of EGR2 in
tumor cells. Although no genetic mutations in the gene or alterations in
methylation status of its promoter were detected, we found a high degree of
methylation at CpG islands in intron 1 of EGR2 in cell lines that were expressing
this gene at a high level. Moreover, reporter gene experiments revealed that
methylated intron 1 had somehow conferred enhancer-like activity. The data imply 
the existence of a previously unsuspected mechanism of gene expression
regulation.

PMID: 14596916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. EMBO J. 2003 Nov 3;22(21):5723-33.

E-cadherin controls adherens junctions in the epidermis and the renewal of hair
follicles.

Young P(1), Boussadia O, Halfter H, Grose R, Berger P, Leone DP, Robenek H,
Charnay P, Kemler R, Suter U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Department of Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology, ETH Hönggerberg, CH-8093 Zürich, Switzerland.

E-cadherin is thought to mediate intercellular adhesion in the mammalian
epidermis and in hair follicles as the adhesive component of adherens junctions. 
We have tested this role of E-cadherin directly by conditional gene ablation in
the mouse. We show that postnatal loss of E-cadherin in keratinocytes leads to a 
loss of adherens junctions and altered epidermal differentiation without
accompanying signs of inflammation. Overall tissue integrity and desmosomal
structures were maintained, but skin hair follicles were progressively lost.
Tumors were not observed and beta-catenin levels were not strongly altered in the
mutant skin. We conclude that E-cadherin is required for maintaining the adhesive
properties of adherens junctions in keratinocytes and proper skin
differentiation. Furthermore, continuous hair follicle cycling is dependent on
E-cadherin.

PMCID: PMC275417
PMID: 14592971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(21):7638-47.

Egr family members regulate nonlymphoid expression of Fas ligand, TRAIL, and
tumor necrosis factor during immune responses.

Droin NM(1), Pinkoski MJ, Dejardin E, Green DR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Immunology, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and
Immunology, San Diego, California 92121, USA.

The Fas ligand (FasL)/Fas pathway is crucial for homeostasis of the immune system
and peripheral tolerance. Peripheral lymphocyte deletion involves FasL/Fas in at 
least two ways: coexpression of both Fas and its ligand on T cells, leading to
activation-induced cell death, and expression of FasL by nonlymphoid cells, such 
as intestinal epithelial cells (IEC), that kill Fas-positive T cells. We
demonstrate here that superantigen Staphylococcus enterotoxin B (SEB) induced a
dramatic upregulation of FasL, TRAIL, and TNF mRNA expression and function in IEC
from BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice. Using adoptive transfer in which CD4(+) T cells
from OT-2 T-cell receptor transgenic mice were transferred into recipients, we
observed an induction in IEC of FasL, TRAIL, and TNF mRNA after administration of
antigen. Specific Egr-binding sites have been identified in the 5' promoter
region of the FasL gene, and Egr-1, Egr-2, and Egr-3 mRNA in IEC from mice
treated with SEB and from transgenic OT-2 mice after administration of antigen
was upregulated. Overexpression of Egr-2 and Egr-3 induced endogenous ligand
upregulation that was inhibited by overexpression of Egr-specific inhibitor Nab1.
These results support a role for Egr family members in nonlymphoid expression of 
FasL, TRAIL, and TNF.

PMCID: PMC207583
PMID: 14560009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Int J Mol Med. 2003 Nov;12(5):817-21.

Identification and characterization of TRIP8 gene in silico.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

TRIP1-TRIP15 genes encode thyroid hormone receptor beta (TR beta)-binding
proteins. TRIP10 gene encodes FNBP1 family protein with FCH, FBH, and SH3
domains. Among 15 TRIP genes, TRIP8 gene remained uncharacterized except TRIP8
partial cDNA (L40411). Here, we determined the complete coding sequence of TRIP8 
gene by using bio-informatics. Nucleotide sequence of full-length TRIP8 cDNA was 
determined in silico by assembling nucleotide sequences of FLJ14374 and
DKFZp761F0118 cDNAs. TRIP8 protein (2540 aa) was found to consist of two
bipartite nuclear localization signals (codon 352-368 and 2365-2381), TRI8H1
domain (codon 1697-1873), TRI8H2 domain (codon 2057-2351), and JMJC domain (codon
2387-2486). TRI8H1, TRI8H2 and JMJC domains were conserved among TRIP8, 5qNCA
(C5orf7) and TSGA proteins. TR beta-binding domain was overlapped with N-terminal
part of TRI8H2 domain, and C2HC4-type zinc finger-like motif was located within
C-terminal part of TRI8H1 domain. Because JMJC domain proteins are implicated in 
chromatin remodeling, TRIP8 was predicted to be a transcriptional regulator
associated with nuclear hormone receptors. Human TRIP8 gene, consisting of 26
exons, was about 300 kb in size. Intra-species comparative genomics revealed that
TRIP8-EGR2 locus at human chromosome 10q21.3 and 5qNCA-EGR1 locus at human
chromosome 5q31 are paralogous regions within human genome. Microsatellite marker
D10S1225, associated with Alzheimer's disease, non-syndromic congenital retinal
non-attachment (NCRNA) and non-syndromic autosomal recessive persistent
hyperplastic primary vitreous (arPHPV), was located within the TRIP8-EGR2 locus. 
This is the first report on comprehensive characterization of the TRIP8 gene.

PMID: 14533015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 19;278(51):51116-24. Epub 2003 Oct 6.

HCF-1 functions as a coactivator for the zinc finger protein Krox20.

Luciano RL(1), Wilson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and New York University Cancer Institute, New York 
University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

HCF-1 is a transcriptional cofactor required for activation of herpes simplex
virus immediate-early genes by VP16 as well as less clearly defined roles in cell
proliferation, cytokinesis, and spliceosome formation. It is expressed as a large
precursor that undergoes proteolysis to yield two subunits that remain stably
associated. VP16 uses a degenerate 4-amino acid sequence, known as the
HCF-binding motif, to bind to a six-bladed beta-propeller domain at the N
terminus of HCF-1. Functional HCF-binding motifs are also found in LZIP and
Zhangfei, two cellular bZIP transcription factors of unknown function. Here we
show that the HCF-binding motif occurs in a wide spectrum of DNA-binding proteins
and transcriptional cofactors. Three well characterized examples were further
analyzed for their ability to use HCF-1 as a coactivator. Krox20, a zinc finger
transcription factor required for Schwann cell differentiation, and E2F4, a cell 
cycle regulator, showed a strong requirement for functional HCF-1 to activate
transcription. In contrast, activation by estrogen receptor-alpha did not display
HCF dependence. In Krox20, the HCF-binding motif lies within the N-terminal
activation domain and mutation of this sequence diminishes both transactivation
and association with the HCF-1 beta-propeller. The activation domain in the
C-terminal subunit of HCF-1 contributes to activation by Krox20, possibly through
recruitment of p300. These results suggest that HCF-1 is recruited by many
different classes of cellular transcription factors and is therefore likely to be
required for a variety of cellular processes including cell cycle progression and
development.

PMCID: PMC4291123
PMID: 14532282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Endocrinology. 2003 Dec;144(12):5402-10. Epub 2003 Sep 11.

Insulin-regulated expression of Egr-1 and Krox20: dependence on ERK1/2 and
interaction with p38 and PI3-kinase pathways.

Keeton AB(1), Bortoff KD, Bennett WL, Franklin JL, Venable DY, Messina JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Molecular and Cellular Pathology, Volker 
Hall, G019, 1670 University Boulevard, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama 35294-0019. messina@path.uab.edu.

In addition to its ability to rapidly alter metabolism, insulin is also able to
regulate the expression of numerous genes via activation of the PI3-kinase
(PI3-K), MAPK kinase (MEK)-ERK, or p38 pathways. Using differential screening of 
H4IIE cells, we have identified two members of the Egr zinc-finger transcription 
factor family of early response genes, Egr-1 and Krox20, whose transcription is
induced by insulin treatment. Egr-1 may be involved in insulin's regulation of
hepatic gene expression. Krox20 regulation and expression have been primarily
studied in neural cells and tissues, but little has been previously reported on
the presence of Krox20 in cells of hepatic origin or its regulation by insulin.
In the present studies, insulin treatment rapidly increased transcription of both
Egr-1 and Krox20. In cells pretreated with a PI3-K inhibitor, there was no
reduction in the effect of insulin on Egr-1 and Krox20, but an increase in Egr-1 
transcription. The rapid induction of ERK1/2 phosphorylation was completely
blocked by pretreatment with a MEK1 inhibitor and was associated with a nearly
complete inhibition of insulin-stimulated induction of both Egr-1and Krox20,
indicating this pathway is necessary for insulin's effect on these genes.
Finally, inhibition of the p38 pathway, followed by insulin addition, caused an
additive induction of both Egr-1and Krox20. In conclusion, these genes are
induced by insulin via coordinated regulation of the MEK-ERK and p38 pathways
and, in the case of Egr-1, the PI3-K pathway.

PMID: 12970165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Neurosci Res. 2003 Sep 15;73(6):737-52.

Establishment of embryonic neuroepithelial cell lines exhibiting an epiplastic
expression pattern of region specific markers.

Nardelli J(1), Catala M, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U368, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.
nardelli@idf.ext.jussieu.fr

Neuroepithelial b2T cells were derived from the hindbrain and the spinal cord of 
mouse transgenic embryos, which expressed SV40 T antigen under the control of a
Hoxb2 enhancer. Strikingly, b2T cell lines of either origin exhibit a very
similar gene expression pattern, including markers of the hindbrain and the
spinal cord, such as Hox genes, but not of more anterior cephalic regions. In
addition, the broad expression pattern of b2T cells, probably linked to culture
conditions, appeared to be appropriately modulated when the cells were
reimplanted at different longitudinal levels into chick host embryos, suggesting 
that these cells are responsive to exogenous signalling mechanisms. Further
support for these allegations was obtained by culturing b2T cells in defined
medium and by assessing the expression of Krox20, an odd-numbered rhombomere
marker, which appeared to be modulated by a complex interplay between FGF,
retinoic acid (RA), and noggin. With respect to these as yet unique properties,
b2T cells constitute an original alternative tool to in vivo models for the
analysis of molecular pathways involved in the patterning of the neural tube.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12949900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Rinsho Byori. 2003 Jun;51(6):536-43.

[Molecular mechanisms of hereditary neuropathy: genotype-phenotype correlation].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakagawa M(1), Takashima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Research Institute for Neurological Diseases and
Geriatrics, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto 602-0841.

Hereditary neuropathies are classified into several subtypes according to
clinical, electrophysiologic and pathologic findings. Recent genetic studies have
revealed their phenotypic and genetic diversities. In the primary peripheral
demyelinating neuropathies(CMT1), at least 9 genes have been associated with the 
disorders; altered dosage of peripheral myelin protein 22(PMP22) or point
mutation of PMP22, the gap junction protein 1(GJB1), the myelin protein zero
gene(MPZ), the early growth response gene 2(EGR2), the myotubularin-related
protein 2 gene(MTMR2), the N-myc downstream-regulated gene 1 (NDRG1), the
L-periaxin gene(PRX), SRY-related HMG-BOX gene 10(SOX10) and the
ganglioside-induced differentiation-associated protein 1 gene(GDAP1). In the
primary peripheral axonal neuropathies(CMT2), at least 8 genes have been
associated with these disorders; the neurofilament light chain gene(NEFL), the
kinesin 1B gene(KIF1B), the gigaxonin gene(GAN1), Lamin A/C(LMNA) and tyrosyl-DNA
phosphodiesterase 1(TDP1). In addition, some mutations in GJB1, MPZ and GDAP1
also present with clinical and electrophysiologic findings of CMT2. Mutation of
NEFL or KIF1B cause dominantly inherited axonal neuropathies, whereas mutation of
GJB1 or MPZ can present as genocopies of dominant axonal neuropathies. In
addition to the above diseases, we have reported a new type of NMSNP(MIM #
*604484) characterized by proximal dominant neurogenic atrophy, obvious sensory
nerve involvement and the gene locus on 3q13. Here, we summarize the genetic
bases of hereditary neuropathies and attempt to highlight significant
genotype-phenotype correlations.

PMID: 12884740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2003 May;23(1):13-27.

Regulation of the myelin gene periaxin provides evidence for Krox-20-independent 
myelin-related signalling in Schwann cells.

Parkinson DB(1), Dickinson S, Bhaskaran A, Kinsella MT, Brophy PJ, Sherman DL,
Sharghi-Namini S, Duran Alonso MB, Mirsky R, Jessen KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, UK.

We investigated the role of Krox-20 (Egr2), a transcription factor that regulates
myelination, in controlling the myelin-associated protein periaxin. In developing
Schwann cells, periaxin immunoreactivity appeared at least 2 days before
Krox-20-immunopositive nuclei. Consistent with this, in Krox-20 null mice
periaxin was upregulated on schedule, albeit to a lower level. In culture Krox-20
and periaxin were upregulated by cAMP as expected for myelin genes. Only those
cells with the highest periaxin levels also expressed Krox-20, while other
periaxin-positive cells remained Krox-20-negative. Furthermore, cAMP elevated
periaxin even in Krox-20 null cells. We also found that in culture enforced
Krox-20 expression induced expression of periaxin mRNA and protein in the absence
of cAMP elevating agents, and that this induction was inhibited by the
co-repressor NAB2. These findings reveal a dual mechanism for periaxin regulation
and suggest that the role of Krox-20 is to amplify an earlier Krox-20-independent
activation of the periaxin gene. Thus the axonal signals responsible for
myelination are only partially transduced in Schwann cells by mechanisms that
depend on Krox-20.

PMID: 12799134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Dev Biol. 2003 Jun 15;258(2):419-31.

c-jun regulation and function in the developing hindbrain.

Mechta-Grigoriou F(1), Giudicelli F, Pujades C, Charnay P, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Expression génétique et maladies, CNRS URA 1644, Institut Pasteur 25,
rue du Docteur Roux, 75724 15, Paris Cedex, France. fmechta@pasteur.fr

Hindbrain development is a well-characterised segmentation process in
vertebrates. The bZip transcription factor MafB/kreisler is specifically
expressed in rhombomeres (r) 5 and 6 of the developing vertebrate hindbrain and
is required for proper caudal hindbrain segmentation. Here, we provide evidence
that the mouse protooncogene c-jun, which encodes a member of the bZip family, is
coexpressed with MafB in prospective r5 and r6. Analysis of mouse mutants
suggests that c-jun expression in these territories is dependent on MafB but
independent of the zinc-finger transcription factor Krox20, another essential
determinant of r5 development. Loss- and gain-of-function studies, performed in
mouse and chick embryos, respectively, demonstrate that c-Jun participates,
together with MafB and Krox20, in the transcriptional activation of the Hoxb3
gene in r5. The action of c-Jun is likely to be direct, since c-Jun homodimers
and c-Jun/MafB heterodimers can bind to essential regulatory elements within the 
transcriptional enhancer responsible for Hoxb3 expression in r5. These data
indicate that c-Jun acts both as a downstream effector and a cofactor of MafB and
belongs to the complex network of factors governing hindbrain patterning.

PMID: 12798298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Cells Tissues Organs. 2003;174(1-2):63-72.

Induction of early growth response gene Egr2 by basic calcium phosphate crystals 
through a calcium-dependent protein kinase C-independent p44/42 mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathway.

Zeng XR(1), Sun Y, Wenger L, Cheung HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami, Fl
33101, USA.

Using the reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction we examined the effect 
of basic calcium phosphate (BCP) crystals on the induction of the early growth
response gene Egr2 transcription and the signal transduction pathway involved.
The results showed that BCP crystals induced Egr2 transcription up to 8-fold,
peaking at 24 h after treatment. The induction of Egr2 was confirmed by transient
transfection assays using an Egr2 promoter/luciferase reporter construct and
could be inhibited by the p44/42 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-specific
inhibitor U0126, or by calcium chelator TMB-8, but not by the SAPK2/p38 MAPK
inhibitor SB202190 or by the protein kinase C inhibitor bisindolylmaleimide I
(Bis-I). Using the Mercury Pathway Profiling System (Clontech, Palo Alto, Calif.,
USA) we further showed that induced Egr2 could stimulate the activities of
several transcription factors that are associated with cell proliferation, such
as c-fos, SRF and c-myc.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12784042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Genes Dev. 2003 Jun 1;17(11):1380-91.

The POU proteins Brn-2 and Oct-6 share important functions in Schwann cell
development.

Jaegle M(1), Ghazvini M, Mandemakers W, Piirsoo M, Driegen S, Levavasseur F,
Raghoenath S, Grosveld F, Meijer D.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology and Genetics and Neurosciences, Erasmus University
Medical Center, 3000DR Rotterdam, Netherlands.

The genetic hierarchy that controls myelination of peripheral nerves by Schwann
cells includes the POU domain Oct-6/Scip/Tst-1and the zinc-finger Krox-20/Egr2
transcription factors. These pivotal transcription factors act to control the
onset of myelination during development and tissue regeneration in adults
following damage. In this report we demonstrate the involvement of a third
transcription factor, the POU domain factor Brn-2. We show that Schwann cells
express Brn-2 in a developmental profile similar to that of Oct-6 and that Brn-2 
gene activation does not depend on Oct-6. Overexpression of Brn-2 in
Oct-6-deficient Schwann cells, under control of the Oct-6 Schwann cell enhancer
(SCE), results in partial rescue of the developmental delay phenotype, whereas
compound disruption of both Brn-2 and Oct-6 results in a much more severe
phenotype. Together these data strongly indicate that Brn-2 function largely
overlaps with that of Oct-6 in driving the transition from promyelinating to
myelinating Schwann cells.

PMCID: PMC196070
PMID: 12782656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Neurol Sci. 2003 Jun 15;210(1-2):61-4.

Screening of the early growth response 2 gene in Japanese patients with
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1.

Numakura C(1), Shirahata E, Yamashita S, Kanai M, Kijima K, Matsuki T, Hayasaka
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Yamagata
990-9585, Japan.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1 (CMT1) is a heterogeneous disorder. Most CMT1 
patients are associated with a duplication of 17p11.2-p12 (CMT1A duplication),
but a small number of patients have mutations of peripheral myelin protein 22
(PMP22), myelin protein zero (MPZ), connexin 32 (Cx32) and early growth response 
2 (EGR2) genes. In our previous study, we identified the responsible mutations in
72 of 128 Japanese CMT1 patients as CMT1A duplication in 40, PMP22 mutation in 6,
MPZ mutation in 12 and Cx32 mutation in 14 patients. A total of 56 Japanese CMT1 
patients with no identified mutations were screened for EGR2 mutation by
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). We detected a heterozygous
Asp383Tyr mutation of EGR2 in one patient with severe CMT1, Dejerine-Sottas
syndrome. EGR2 mutation is rare cause of CMT1 in Japan as in other nations. We
were unable to identify the responsible mutation in 55 of 128 CMT1 patients and
need further analysis to identify their candidate genes.

PMID: 12736090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Chem Neuroanat. 2003 Mar;25(3):213-26.

The ontogeny of Krox-20 expression in brainstem and cerebellar neurons.

De S(1), Shuler CF, Turman JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

The central expression of Krox-20, a C(2)H(2)-type zinc-finger transcription
factor and immediate early gene, is primarily studied in the young embryo, where 
it contributes to rhombomere (r) r3 and r5 development. Data regarding the
cellular localization and developmental regulation of Krox-20 protein expression 
in brainstem neurons are lacking. Our interest in brainstem development, coupled 
with findings from our lab and others that demonstrate a profound impact of a
Krox-20 null mutation on brainstem-mediated behaviors, led us to investigate the 
spatiotemporal expression of Krox-20 protein in brainstem and cerebellar neurons 
to gain insight into potential cellular targets of the mutation. Understanding
the cellular localization of Krox-20 is important in light of studies showing the
impact of immediate early gene expression on neuronal function. Krox-20
immunohistochemistry experiments were conducted on animals at embryonic days (E) 
17.0 and 18.5 and postnatal days (P) 0-1, 3-4, 7, 14, 22, and adulthood. Krox-20 
expression is developmentally regulated in motoneurons, somatosensory-related
neurons, Purkinje cells, and components of auditory circuitry. Neurons in the
ventral cochlear nucleus and inferior colliculus show a sustained Krox-20
expression. Ultrastructural data demonstrate Krox-20 expression in somata and
dendrites of central neurons. Our identification of Krox-20 expressing neurons
provides us a better understanding of the behavioral consequences of the
mutation. Furthermore, our results suggest that Krox-20 protein has a role in the
maturation of particular brainstem and cerebellar neurons and fluctuations in
Krox-20 protein expression coincide with the development of circuitry underlying 
brainstem-mediated behaviors.

PMID: 12706208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Oncogene. 2003 Apr 10;22(14):2172-85.

EGR2 induces apoptosis in various cancer cell lines by direct transactivation of 
BNIP3L and BAK.

Unoki M(1), Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Japam.

EGR2 plays a key role in the PTEN-induced apoptotic pathway. Using
adenovirus-mediated gene transfer to 39 cancer cell lines, we found that EGR2
could induce apoptosis in a large proportion of these lines by altering the
permeability of mitochondrial membranes, releasing cytochrome c and activating
caspase-3, -8, and -9. Analysis by cDNA microarray and subsequent functional
studies revealed that EGR2 directly transactivates expression of BNIP3L and BAK. 
Our results helped to clarify the molecular mechanism of the apoptotic pathway
induced by PTEN-EGR2, and suggested that EGR2 may be an excellent target molecule
for gene therapy to treat a variety of cancers.

PMID: 12687019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 14;278(11):8960-8.

Activation of myelin genes during transdifferentiation from melanoma to glial
cell phenotype.

Slutsky SG(1), Kamaraju AK, Levy AM, Chebath J, Revel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Induction of myelin genes occurs around birth in the last stage of Schwann cells 
differentiation and is reactivated in case of nerve injury. Previous studies
showed that activation of the gp130 receptor system, using as ligand
interleukin-6 fused to its soluble receptor (IL6RIL6), causes induction of myelin
genes such as myelin basic protein (MBP) and myelin protein zero (Po) in
embryonic dorsal root ganglia Schwann cells. We also reported that in murine
melanoma B16/F10.9 cells, IL6RIL6 causes a shut-off of melanogenesis mediated by 
a down-regulation of the paired-homeodomain factor Pax3. The present work
demonstrates that these IL6RIL6-treated F10.9 cells undergo transdifferentiation 
to a myelinating glial phenotype characterized by induction of the
transcriptional activities of both Po and MBP promoters and accumulation of
myelin gene products. For both Po and MBP promoters, a repression by Pax3 and
stimulation by Sox10 can be demonstrated. Because after IL6RIL6-treatment, Pax3
disappears from the F10.9 cells (as it does in mature myelinating Schwann cells) 
whereas the level of Sox10 rather increases, we modulated the relative level of
these factors and show their involvement in the induction of myelin gene
expression by IL6RIL6. In addition, however, we show that a C/G-rich CACC box in 
the Po promoter is required for activation by IL6RIL6, as well as by ectopic
Sox10, and identify a Kruppel-type zinc finger factor acting through this CACC
box, which stimulates Po promoter activity.

PMID: 12643284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Neurobiol Dis. 2003 Feb;12(1):89-95.

Different consequences of EGR2 mutants on the transactivation of human Cx32
promoter.

Musso M(1), Balestra P, Taroni F, Bellone E, Mandich P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Ophthalmology, and Genetics, University of Genoa,
c/o DIMI Viale Benedetto XV, 6-16132 Genova, Italy. genetica.medica@unige.it

The early growth response 2 (EGR2) transcription factor plays a crucial role in
peripheral nerve myelination. Mutations of this gene are associated with a wide
variety of demyelinating neuropathies differing from each other in the severity
of nerve injury. Although the expression of EGR2 mutants inhibits the
transactivation of myelin gene promoters, the exact molecular mechanism by which 
these mutations cause the alteration of the myelination process is still unknown.
Recently, it was reported that EGR2 is directly involved in the transcriptional
regulation of Connexin 32, a myelin gene frequently mutated in peripheral
neuropathies. Here we describe the differential effect of two EGR2 mutants; while
mutant D355V partially induces Cx32 promoter, mutant R381H does not. Furthermore,
we show that a sequence located at -216, recognized by the wild-type and the
mutant D355V recombinant proteins, is relevant for promoter transactivation.

PMID: 12609493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Neurology. 2003 Feb 25;60(4):696-9.

CMT with pyramidal features. Charcot-Marie-Tooth.

Vucic S(1), Kennerson M, Zhu D, Miedema E, Kok C, Nicholson GA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Sydney, Neurobiology Laboratory, ANZAC Research Institute,
Concord Hospital, NSW, Australia.

To determine whether Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) with pyramidal features is
genetically distinct from other dominantly inherited axonal neuropathies, the
authors examined all chromosomal loci and genes for axonal CMT. Two families were
identified with an axonal CMT phenotype with distal wasting, weakness, pes cavus,
sensory loss, and mild pyramidal signs (including extensor plantar responses,
mild increase in tone, and preserved or increased reflexes but no spastic gait). 
Linkage studies excluded CMT2A, 2B, 2D, 2E, and 2F; ALS4; and HMN2. There were no
mutations in the PMP22, MPZ/Po, or EGR2 genes.

PMID: 12601114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Acta Neuropathol. 2003 Mar;105(3):203-8. Epub 2002 Dec 3.

Oct6, a transcription factor controlling myelination, is a marker for active
nerve regeneration in peripheral neuropathies.

Kawasaki T(1), Oka N, Tachibana H, Akiguchi I, Shibasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sakyo-ku, Japan.

Three transcription factors, Krox20 (EGR2), Oct6 (SCIP/Tst1) and Sox10, are
considered necessary for transition from the nonmyelinating to the myelinating
stage of Schwann cell development. We immunohistochemically studied Oct6
expression in peripheral nerve specimens from 25 patients with various diseases
including Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A (CMT1A). Oct6 was present in
cytoplasm of Schwann cells associated with normal-appearing myelinated nerve
fibers, but not in nuclei. Expression was seen in nuclei of Schwann cells in the 
early phase of acute axonal degeneration; nuclear expression peaked at the
regenerative stage. Schwann cells forming "onion bulbs" expressed Oct6 in chronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP), but showed minimal expression
in CMT1A, reflecting their proliferative activity in CIDP. Nerves showing chronic
axonal loss had no expression. Oct6, then, may be a marker for dedifferentiation 
of adult Schwann cells and active nerve regeneration.

PMID: 12557005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Development. 2003 Mar;130(5):941-53.

Neural crest patterning: autoregulatory and crest-specific elements co-operate
for Krox20 transcriptional control.

Ghislain J(1), Desmarquet-Trin-Dinh C, Gilardi-Hebenstreit P, Charnay P, Frain M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Neural crest patterning constitutes an important element in the control of the
morphogenesis of craniofacial structures. Krox20, a transcription factor gene
that plays a critical role in the development of the segmented hindbrain, is
expressed in rhombomeres (r) 3 and 5 and in a stream of neural crest cells
migrating from r5 toward the third branchial arch. We have investigated the basis
of the specific neural crest expression of Krox20 and identified a cis-acting
enhancer element (NCE) located 26 kb upstream of the gene that is conserved
between mouse, man and chick and can recapitulate the Krox20 neural crest pattern
in transgenic mice. Functional dissection of the enhancer revealed the presence
of two conserved Krox20 binding sites mediating direct Krox20 autoregulation in
the neural crest. In addition, the enhancer included another essential element
containing conserved binding sites for high mobility group (HMG) box proteins and
which responded to factors expressed throughout the neural crest. Consistent with
this the NCE was strongly activated in vitro by Sox10, a crest-specific HMG box
protein, in synergism with Krox20, and the inactivation of Sox10 prevented the
maintenance of Krox20 expression in the migrating neural crest. These results
suggest that the dependency of the enhancer on both crest- (Sox10) and r5-
(Krox20) specific factors limits its activity to the r5-derived neural crest.
This organisation also suggests a mechanism for the transfer and maintenance of
rhombomere-specific gene expression from the hindbrain neuroepithelium to the
emerging neural crest and may be of more general significance for neural crest
patterning.

PMID: 12538520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Med Genet. 2002 Dec;39(12):e81.

Frequency of mutations in the early growth response 2 gene associated with
peripheral demyelinating neuropathies.

Vandenberghe N(1), Upadhyaya M, Gatignol A, Boutrand L, Boucherat M, Chazot G,
Vandenberghe A, Latour P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Université Claude Bernard, Lyon 
1, France. vandenbe@rockefeller.univ-lyon1.fr

PMCID: PMC1757229
PMID: 12471219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Hum Mutat. 2002 Nov;20(5):392-8.

Molecular analysis in Japanese patients with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease: DGGE
analysis for PMP22, MPZ, and Cx32/GJB1 mutations.

Numakura C(1), Lin C, Ikegami T, Guldberg P, Hayasaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Yamagata,
Japan.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is a heterogeneous disorder and is
traditionally classified into two major types, CMT type 1 (CMT1) and CMT type 2
(CMT2). Most CMT1 patients are associated with the duplication of 17p11.2-p12
(CMT1A duplication) and small numbers of patients have mutations of the
peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22), myelin protein zero (MPZ), connexin 32
(Cx32/GJB1), and early growth response 2 (EGR2) genes. Some mutations of MPZ and 
Cx32 were also associated with the clinical CMT2 phenotype. We constructed
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis as a screening method for
PMP22, MPZ, and Cx32 mutations and studied 161 CMT patients without CMT1A
duplication. We detected 27 mutations of three genes including 15 novel
mutations; six of PMP22, three of MPZ, and six of Cx32. We finally identified 21 
causative mutations in 22 unrelated patients and five polymorphic mutations.
Eighteen of 22 patients carrying PMP22, MPZ, or Cx32 mutations presented with
CMT1 and four of them with MPZ or Cx32 mutations presented with the CMT2
phenotype. DGGE analysis was sensitive for screening for those gene mutations,
but causative gene mutation was not identified in many of the Japanese patients
with CMT, especially with CMT1. Other candidate genes should be studied to
elucidate the genetic basis of Japanese CMT patients.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12402337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Muscle Nerve. 2002 Nov;26(5):608-21.

Dejerine-Sottas disease and hereditary demyelinating polyneuropathy of infancy.

Plante-Bordeneuve V(1), Said G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Bicêtre, 78 rue
du Général Leclerc, 94275 Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France. vplante@free.fr

Comment in
    Muscle Nerve. 2003 Aug;28(2):251-2.

Dejerine-Sottas disease (DSD) was originally described as a hypertrophic
polyneuropathy characterized by onset in infancy or early childhood in patients
born to unaffected parents. The clinical features included distal sensory changes
with ataxia; pes cavus, at times with kyphoscoliosis; motor deficit and atrophy
predominating in the distal lower limbs and progressing toward the proximal limbs
following a length-dependent pattern; palpable nerve hypertrophy; and
Argyll-Robertson pupils. The morphological hallmark was the extensive nerve and
root hypertrophy associated with demyelination-remyelination of surviving,
originally myelinated axons and profuse Schwann-cell proliferation forming onion 
bulbs. Wide variations in clinical manifestations of chronic demyelinating
polyneuropathies of early onset in children born to unaffected parents have now
been reported, with only some of the characteristics required in the original
study, and at least seven genes encoding the myelin proteins P0, PMP22, the
transcriptional factor EGR2, and others have been implicated. Thus, DSD is now a 
component of the hereditary demyelinating polyneuropathies of infancy that also
include subsets of the recently individualized CMT4 neuropathies. The presumed
recessive transmission of patients with DSD should be confirmed by molecular
genetic analysis, which is still negative in a significant proportion of
patients. The nerve biopsy can be useful in patients in whom genealogical or DNA 
abnormalities in favor of a genetic disorder are missing, because in a few
patients with a progressive or relapsing course the diagnosis of early-onset
chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy must be considered.

Copyright 2002 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Muscle Nerve 26: 608-621, 2002

PMID: 12402282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Cell Sci. 2002 Nov 15;115(Pt 22):4275-84.

Conditional ablation of the Mat1 subunit of TFIIH in Schwann cells provides
evidence that Mat1 is not required for general transcription.

Korsisaari N(1), Rossi DJ, Paetau A, Charnay P, Henkemeyer M, Mäkelä TP.

Author information: 
(1)Haartman Institute and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Biomedicum
Helsinki, PO Box 63, Haartmaninkatu 8, 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland.

The mammalian Mat1 protein has been implicated in cell cycle regulation as part
of the Cdk activating kinase (CAK), and in regulation of transcription as a
subunit of transcription factor TFIIH. To address the role of Mat1 in vivo, we
have used a Cre/loxP system to conditionally ablate Mat1 in adult mitotic and
post-mitotic lineages. We found that the mitotic cells of the germ lineage died
rapidly upon disruption of Mat1 indicating an absolute requirement of Mat1 in
these cells. By contrast, post-mitotic myelinating Schwann cells were able to
attain a mature myelinated phenotype in the absence of Mat1. Moreover, mutant
animals did not show morphological or physiological signs of Schwann cell
dysfunction into early adulthood. Beyond 3 months of age, however, myelinated
Schwann cells in the sciatic nerves acquired a severe hypomyelinating morphology 
with alterations ranging from cells undergoing degeneration to completely denuded
axons. This phenotype was coupled to extensive proliferation and remyelination
that our evidence suggests was undertaken by the non-myelinated Schwann cell
pool. These results indicate that Mat1 is not essential for the transcriptional
program underlying the myelination of peripheral axons by Schwann cells and
suggest that the function of Mat1 in RNA polymerase II-mediated transcription in 
these cells is regulatory rather than essential.

PMID: 12376559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Rev Neurol. 2002 Aug 1-15;35(3):239-45.

[Clinical aspects and diagnostic and therapeutic approaches to motor and sensory 
hereditary neuropathies (NHMS)].

[Article in Spanish]

Colomer-Oferil J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Patología Neuromuscular. Servicio de Neurología. Hospital Sant Joan 
de Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat, Barcelona, España. colomer@hsjdbcn.org

INTRODUCTION: The classifications of peripheral neuropathies are continually
being revised in the light of advances in genetic and biochemical investigation.
OBJECTIVE: We establish a classification based on the pathology found in
different anatomical structures of nerves: the Schwann cell, myelin, axon and the
different genes involved in causing neuropathies. Diagnosis is based on data from
the clinical history, physical examination and electromyography and their
correlation with the type of inheritance in relation to the different genes
localized to (a) the Schwann cell: periaxin gene (PRX) encoding L and S periaxin.
Stabilisation of the myelin acting as a signal tranducer. NDRG1 down stream
regulated gene 1 and 2 acting as transcription factors in embryogenesis.
EGR2/Krox 20 has an important function in myelinization. (b) Myelin: P0 membrane 
protein zero (MPZ) stabilizes the myelin. P1 myelin basic protein (MBP), is
analogous to the myelin protein of the central nervous system (CNS) P2 found in
the cytoplasm. PMP22 (peripheral myelin protein) also stabilizes the protein. MAG
(myelin associated glycoprotein) has antigenic properties. (c). Axon. A
foundational mutation (892C Y) in the gene of the lamina (LMNA) of the light
neurofilaments (NF L). Mutations in the KIF1Bb gene which encodes the protein
kinesin. We also make an aetiological analysis of some classical syndromes,
especially the D jerine Sottas syndrome.
CONCLUSION: The systematization used, based on clinical and electrophysiological 
data in relation to the different genes involved in the various anatomical
structures constitutes a logical, diagnostic approach which is very useful.

PMID: 12235586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Immunology. 2002 Sep;107(1):86-92.

krox-20/egr-2 is up-regulated following non-specific and homophilic adhesion in
rat macrophages.

Hirano S(1), Anuradha CD, Kanno S.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Sciences Division and Research Center for Environmental
Risk, National Institute for Environmental Studies, Ibaraki, Japan.
seishiro@nies.go.jp

Macrophages are known to adhere to a plastic dish via beta2 integrin (CR3) and
scavenger receptors. Although their functions such as phagocytosis, endocytosis, 
and nitric oxide production have been investigated on adherent macrophages in
vitro, very little is known about intracellular signals triggered by adhesion to 
a plastic dish. Recently we reported that the mRNA level of krox-20/egr-2 was
significantly increased in rat alveolar macrophages following exposure to fibrous
titanium dioxide particles. In the present study we report that up-regulation of 
krox-20/egr-2 gene expression following adhesion to a plastic dish and homophilic
adhesion in rat alveolar macrophages and rat macrophage cell line, NR8383. The
mRNA level of krox-20/egr-2 increased with a peak 1 hr after adhesion to a
plastic dish in both cell types. Piceatannol inhibited tyrosine-phosphorylation
of Syk and decreased both adhesion and krox-20/egr-2 mRNA level. In contrast
staurosporine, a serine/threonine kinase inhibitor, increased adherence of
macrophages and yet prohibited the adhesion-dependent increase in krox-20/egr-2
gene expression. When NR8383 cells are cultured in suspension, the cells
aggregated naturally and produced cell clumps. The mRNA level of krox-20/egr-2
also increased in response to the homophilic intercellular adhesion. The
increased mRNA level of krox-20/egr-2 was not caused by inflammatory stimuli,
because lipopolysaccharide did not affect the aggregation-dependent up-regulation
of krox-20/egr-2 gene. The up-regulation of krox-20/egr-2 gene due to the
homophilic cell aggregation was also inhibited either by piceatannol or
staurosporine. Those results suggest that krox-20/egr-2 gene expression is
triggered by sensing non-specific and homophilic cellular adhesion and the
following phosphorylation of signal transducing proteins including Syk and
staurosporine-inhibitable kinases.

PMCID: PMC1782766
PMID: 12225366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. EMBO J. 2002 Sep 2;21(17):4612-20.

A cell type-specific allele of the POU gene Oct-6 reveals Schwann cell autonomous
function in nerve development and regeneration.

Ghazvini M(1), Mandemakers W, Jaegle M, Piirsoo M, Driegen S, Koutsourakis M,
Smit X, Grosveld F, Meijer D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus University Rotterdam, PO Box 
1738, 3000DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

While an important role for the POU domain transcription factor Oct-6 in the
developing peripheral nerve has been well established, studies into its exact
role in nerve development and regeneration have been hampered by the high
mortality rate of newborn Oct-6 mutant animals. In this study we have generated a
Schwann cell-specific Oct-6 allele through deletion of the Schwann cell-specific 
enhancer element (SCE) in the Oct-6 locus. Analysis of mice homozygous for this
allele (deltaSCE allele) reveals that rate-limiting levels of Oct-6 in Schwann
cells are dependent on the SCE and that this element does not contribute to Oct-6
regulation in other cell types. We demonstrate a Schwann cell autonomous function
for Oct-6 during nerve development as well as in regenerating nerve.
Additionally, we show that Krox-20, an important regulatory target of Oct-6 in
Schwann cells, is activated, with delayed kinetics, through an Oct-6-independent 
mechanism in these mice.

PMCID: PMC125415
PMID: 12198163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Crit Rev Oral Biol Med. 2002;13(3):229-37.

Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating
polypeptide (PACAP) as modulators of both innate and adaptive immunity.

Ganea D(1), Delgado M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102, USA. 
dganea@andromeda.rutgers.edu

The structurally related neuropeptides VIP and PACAP are released within the
lymphoid organs following antigenic stimulation, and modulate the function of
inflammatory cells through specific receptors. In activated macrophages, VIP and 
PACAP inhibit the production of pro-inflammatory agents (cytokines, chemokines,
and nitric oxide), and stimulate the production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine
IL-10. These events are mediated through the VIP/PACAP effects on de novo
expression or nuclear translocation of several transcription factors, i.e.,
NFkappaB, CREB, c-Jun, JunB, and IRF-1. The in vivo administration of VIP/PACAP
results in a similar pattern of cytokine and chemokine modulation, which
presumably mediates the protective effect of VIP/PACAP in septic shock. In
addition, VIP/PACAP reduce the expression of the co-stimulatory molecules
B7.1/B7.2, and the subsequent stimulatory activity of macrophages for T-helper
cells. In T-cells expressing specific VIP/PACAP receptors, VIP and PACAP inhibit 
the expression of FasL through effects on NFkappaB, NFAT, and Egr2/3. The
reduction of FasL expression has several biological consequences: inhibition of
antigen-induced cell death in CD4 T-cells, inhibition of the FasL-mediated
cytotoxicity of CD8 and CD4 effectors against direct and bystander targets, and
promotion of long-term memory Th2 cells, through a positive effect on the
survival of Th2, but not Th1, effectors. The various biological effects of VIP
and PACAP are discussed within the range of a general anti-inflammatory model.

PMID: 12090463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Anat. 2002 Apr;200(4):367-76.

Signals that determine Schwann cell identity.

Jessen KR(1), Mirsky R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
UK.

While the signals that direct neural crest cells to choose the glial lineage and 
generate Schwann cell precursors are still obscure, studies both in vivo and in
vitro indicate that the survival and differentiation of these cells to form
Schwann cells is regulated by at least two signals, neuregulin-1 and endothelin. 
We know little about the signals that cause some immature Schwann cells to choose
myelin differentiation, while other cells form non-myelinating cells. Three
transcription factors, Sox-10, Oct-6 and Krox-20, have been shown to play key
roles in the Schwann cell lineage. The transcription factor Krox-20 has been
identified as a major target of the signals that induce myelin differentiation.
Gene transfer experiments in vitro show that this protein has a remarkable
ability to promote a large number of phenotypic changes in immature Schwann cells
that characterize the transition of these cells to myelinating cells.
Furthermore, Krox-20 shows important functional interactions with neuregulin and 
transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta), two factors that have been implicated 
in the regulation of myelination in postnatal nerves. Another signal of
importance in developing peripheral nerves, Desert Hedgehog, secreted by Schwann 
cells directs formation of the peripheral nerve connective tissue sheaths.
Ongoing gene screening experiments are likely to reveal new genes of interest in 
this system.

PMCID: PMC1570691
PMID: 12090403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Med Genet. 2002 Jun;39(6):E30.

Mutation analysis in the candidate Möbius syndrome genes PGT and GATA2 on
chromosome 3 and EGR2 on chromosome 10.

Van Der Zwaag B, Verzijl HT, Beltran-Valero De Bernabe D, Schuster VL, Van
Bokhoven H, Kremer H, Van Reen M, Wichers GH, Brunner HG, Padberg GW.

PMCID: PMC1735152
PMID: 12070262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Neurogenetics. 2002 Mar;4(1):37-41.

Search for mutations in the EGR2 corepressor proteins, NAB1 and NAB2, in human
peripheral neuropathies.

Venken K(1), Di Maria E, Bellone E, Balestra P, Cassandrini D, Mandich P, De
Jonghe P, Timmerman V, Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Department, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for
Biotechnology (VIB), Born-Bunge Foundation (BBS), University of Antwerp (UIA),
Antwerpen, Belgium.

EGR2/Krox-20, a Cys2-His2 zinc finger transcription factor, plays an essential
role in the regulation of myelination in the peripheral nervous system. Dominant 
and recessive mutations in EGR2 are associated with peripheral myelinopathies,
such as Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1, Dejerine-Sottas syndrome, and
congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy. One recessive mutation (I268N) is known to
affect the inhibitory domain that binds the NAB transcriptional corepressors,
NAB1 and NAB2. This mutation abolishes the interaction of EGR2 with the NAB
corepressors and thereby increases transcriptional activity. Therefore, we
hypothesized that mutations in the EGR2-interacting domains of NAB1 and NAB2
might be associated with the pathogenesis of inherited peripheral neuropathies in
currently unexplained cases. However, screening 87 such cases failed to identify 
any disease-causing mutations within the EGR2-interacting domains of either NAB1 
or NAB2. A further mutation analysis of the complete coding regions of NAB1 and
NAB2 in these genomic DNA samples did not uncover any disease-causing mutation.
Therefore, our analysis indicates that mutations in the human NABI and NAB2 genes
are most likely not involved in the pathogenesis of peripheral neuropathies.

PMID: 12030330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Glia. 2002 Jun;38(4):363-70.

Immunohistochemistry study of human vestibular nerve schwannoma differentiation.

Hung G(1), Colton J, Fisher L, Oppenheimer M, Faudoa R, Slattery W, Linthicum F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, House Ear Institute, Los Angeles,
California. ghung@hei.org

Differentiation of primary human vestibular nerve schwannomas (VS) caused by
mutations of the NF2 gene was evaluated by examining the expression patterns of
genes that are specifically expressed in different stages of Schwann cell
lineage. In schwannoma cells that are not in contact with an axon, the expression
levels of the major myelin sheath proteins, such as protein zero glycoprotein
(P0), myelin basic protein (MBP), and peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22), were 
greatly reduced. However, high expression levels of nerve growth factor receptor 
(NGFR), neural cell adhesion molecule (N-CAM), and cell adhesion molecule L1 (L1)
were observed. In addition, expression of transcription factors Krox20, Krox24,
and SCIP/Oct6 was also detected in the tumor cells. These results suggest that
loss of the NF2 gene was responsible for the transformation of the Schwann cells 
into a neoplastic stage that has a similar genetic profile to the pro-myelinating
stage. Finally, the primary human vestibular schwannoma cells failed to be
regulated and redifferentiated by a regenerating axon, when the human tumors were
transplanted into sciatic nerve of nude rat. These results suggest that the NF2
gene might be involved in the differentiation of Schwann cells.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12007148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2002 May;26(5):634-42.

A single dose of lysergic acid diethylamide influences gene expression patterns
within the mammalian brain.

Nichols CD(1), Sanders-Bush E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Hallucinogenic drugs such as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) have profound
effects on humans including hallucinations and detachment from reality. These
remarkable behavioral effects have many similarities to the debilitating symptoms
of neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia. The effects of hallucinogens
are thought to be mediated by serotonin receptor activation; however, how these
drugs elicit the unusual behavioral effects remains largely a mystery, despite
much research. We have undertaken the first comprehensive analysis of gene
expression influenced by acute LSD administration in the mammalian brain. These
studies represent a novel approach to elucidate the mechanism of action of this
class of drugs. We have identified a number of genes that are predicted to be
involved in the processes of synaptic plasticity, glutamatergic signaling and
cytoskeletal architecture. Understanding these molecular events will lead to new 
insights into the etiology of disorders whose behavioral symptoms resemble the
temporary effects of hallucinogenic drugs, and also may ultimately result in new 
therapies.

PMID: 11927188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Development. 2002 Apr;129(7):1645-55.

spiel ohne grenzen/pou2 is required for zebrafish hindbrain segmentation.

Hauptmann G(1), Belting HG, Wolke U, Lunde K, Söll I, Abdelilah-Seyfried S,
Prince V, Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Institut für Biologie I, Hauptstrasse 1, 
D-79104 Freiburg i. Br., Germany.

Segmentation of the vertebrate hindbrain leads to the formation of a series of
rhombomeres with distinct identities. In mouse, Krox20 and kreisler play
important roles in specifying distinct rhombomeres and in controlling segmental
identity by directly regulating rhombomere-specific expression of Hox genes. We
show that spiel ohne grenzen (spg) zebrafish mutants develop rhombomeric
territories that are abnormal in both size and shape. Rhombomere boundaries are
malpositioned or absent and the segmental pattern of neuronal differentiation is 
perturbed. Segment-specific expression of hoxa2, hoxb2 and hoxb3 is severely
affected during initial stages of hindbrain development in spg mutants and the
establishment of krx20 (Krox20 ortholog) and valentino (val; kreisler ortholog)
expression is impaired. spg mutants carry loss-of-function mutations in the pou2 
gene. pou2 is expressed at high levels in the hindbrain primordium of wild-type
embryos prior to activation of krx20 and val. Widespread overexpression of Pou2
can rescue the segmental krx20 and val domains in spg mutants, but does not
induce ectopic expression of these genes. This suggests that spg/pou2 acts in a
permissive manner and is essential for normal expression of krx20 and val. We
propose that spg/pou2 is an essential component of the regulatory cascade
controlling hindbrain segmentation and acts before krx20 and val in the
establishment of rhombomere precursor territories.

PMID: 11923201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Dev Dyn. 2002 Apr;223(4):544-51.

Segment-specific expression of connexin31 in the embryonic hindbrain is regulated
by Krox20.

Jungbluth S(1), Willecke K, Champagnat J.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiologie Genetique et Integrative, Institut de Neurobiologie Alfred
Fessard, CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France. sjungbluth@cnio.es

Communication and interaction between cells has been shown to be important during
the embryonic development of the vertebrate hindbrain, which becomes transiently 
subdivided into segments called rhombomeres (r). One gene family allowing
intercellular communication and possibly being involved in the control of
hindbrain development is the connexin family encoding gap junction channels.
Here, we have characterized in detail the previously observed (Dahl et al., 1997)
expression of one particular connexin gene, connexin31 (Cx31), in the mouse
embryonic hindbrain and compared it with that of Cx43 and Cx36. We found
transient Cx31 expression from approximately embryonic day (E) E8-E11 in two
small lateral/dorsal subgroups of cells in the hindbrain. We could show that
these spots of expression corresponded to r3 and r5 and that Cx31 expression in
r3 and r5 was controlled by the transcription factor Krox20. In contrast,
expression of Cx43 and Cx36 started later (from E9.5 and E10.5, respectively) and
was confined to longitudinal stripes of expression. In addition, from
E10.5-E11.5, Cx31 was expressed by a column of cells in ventral r4, most likely
representing contralateral vestibulo-acoustic efferent neurons, immediately
anterior to a ventral column expressing Cx36 at the same stage. From E11.5
onward, another site of Cx31 expression was detected in the boundary cap cells in
the entry/exit points of all mixed sensory/motor and in the entry points of pure 
sensory nerves. This expression was not present in the boundary cap cells of the 
exit points of pure motor nerves. So far, our analysis of the hindbrain area of
Cx31-deficient embryos in terms of projections of sensory or motor neurons or in 
the generation or migration of neurons has not yet revealed any obvious defects.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11921342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 31;277(22):19482-7. Epub 2002 Mar 21.

HIV Tat binds Egr proteins and enhances Egr-dependent transactivation of the Fas 
ligand promoter.

Yang Y(1), Dong B, Mittelstadt PR, Xiao H, Ashwell JD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Biology, NCI, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

HIV Tat can enhance activation-induced up-regulation of Fas ligand (FasL), which 
may contribute to T cell apoptosis in human immune deficiency virus
(HIV)-infected individuals. We have assessed functional and physical interactions
between Tat and the Egr family of transcription factors (Egr-1, -2, and -3), the 
latter two of which are major participants in activation-induced FasL
up-regulation. Here we report that whereas Tat itself has no effect on the FasL
promoter, it binds to Egr-2 and -3 and synergizes with them to superinduce
expression of a FasL promoter-driven reporter. A Tat molecule containing a single
amino acid substitution that results in the loss of transactivation activity for 
the HIV long terminal repeat still binds Egr-3 but can no longer enhance
Egr-mediated transactivation of the FasL promoter. Furthermore, the mutated Tat
acts as a dominant negative inhibitor, blocking the superinduction of FasL caused
by wild type Tat. Because Tat is present in virus-infected cells and in the serum
of HIV-infected individuals, these results suggest that increased expression of
FasL in these circumstances may result from the cooperative activities of
activation-induced Egrs and Tat.

PMID: 11909874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Dev Dyn. 2002 Mar;223(3):371-8.

Immediate early genes krox-24 and krox-20 are rapidly up-regulated after wounding
in the embryonic and adult mouse.

Grose R(1), Harris BS, Cooper L, Topilko P, Martin P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, HPM D25, ETH Zürich, Hönggerberg, Zürich,
Switzerland.

Embryos show a remarkable capacity for perfect repair after injury. Wounding of
embryonic skin triggers rapid activation of epithelial sweeping and mesenchymal
contraction tissue movements that bear striking analogy to several naturally
occurring morphogenetic tissue movements, but very little is known about the
early molecular signals that might initiate such movements. Here, we describe the
rapid and transient up-regulation of two immediate early genes, krox-24 and
krox-20, after wounding of the embryonic mouse. Furthermore, we demonstrate that 
these signals are conserved, but of longer duration, in the neonate and adult
wound situation. To further test the roles of these transcription factors in
vivo, we performed wound healing studies on embryos lacking either Krox-24 or 20.
Despite the dramatic up-regulation of these genes in response to injury, our
studies reveal that neither of them on their own is essential for repair.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11891986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Eur J Neurosci. 2002 Feb;15(4):684-92.

Different respiratory control systems are affected in homozygous and heterozygous
kreisler mutant mice.

Chatonnet F(1), del Toro ED, Voiculescu O, Charnay P, Champagnat J.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiologie Génétique et Intégrative, UPR2216, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Institut de Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard UFR 2218, 91198 
Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France. Fabrice.Chatonnet@iaf.cnrs-gif.fr

During embryonic development, restricted expression of the regulatory genes
Krox20 and kreisler are involved in segmentation and antero-posterior patterning 
of the hindbrain neural tube. The analysis of transgenic mice in which specific
rhombomeres (r) are eliminated points to an important role of segmentation in the
generation of neuronal networks controlling vital rhythmic behaviours such as
respiration. Thus, elimination of r3 and r5 in Krox20-/- mice suppresses a
pontine antiapneic system (Jacquin et al., 1996). We now compare Krox20-/- to
kreisler heterozygous (+/kr) and homozygous (kr/kr) mutant neonates. In +/kr
mutant mice, we describe hyperactivity of the antiapneic system: analysis of
rhythm generation in vitro revealed a pontine modification in keeping with
abnormal cell specifications previously reported in r3 (Manzanares et al.,
1999b). In kr/kr mice, elimination of r5 abolished all +/kr respiratory traits,
suggesting that +/kr hyperactivity of the antiapneic system is mediated through
r5-derived territories. Furthermore, collateral chemosensory pathways that
normally mediate delayed responses to hypoxia and hyperoxia were not functional
in kr/kr mice. We conclude that the pontine antiapneic system originates from
r3r4, but not r5. A different rhythm-promoting system originates in r5 and
kreisler controls the development of antiapneic and chemosensory signal
transmission at this level.

PMID: 11886449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Genesis. 2002 Feb;32(2):112-3.

Conditional, floxed allele of the Krox20 gene.

Taillebourg E(1), Buart S, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.

PMID: 11857793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Ann Neurol. 2002 Feb;51(2):190-201.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and related neuropathies: mutation distribution and
genotype-phenotype correlation.

Boerkoel CF(1), Takashima H, Garcia CA, Olney RK, Johnson J, Berry K, Russo P,
Kennedy S, Teebi AS, Scavina M, Williams LL, Mancias P, Butler IJ, Krajewski K,
Shy M, Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder that
has been associated with alterations of several proteins: peripheral myelin
protein 22, myelin protein zero, connexin 32, early growth response factor 2,
periaxin, myotubularin related protein 2, N-myc downstream regulated gene 1
product, neurofilament light chain, and kinesin 1B. To determine the frequency of
mutations in these genes among patients with CMT or a related peripheral
neuropathy, we identified 153 unrelated patients who enrolled prior to the
availability of clinical testing, 79 had a 17p12 duplication (CMT1A duplication),
11 a connexin 32 mutation, 5 a myelin protein zero mutation, 5 a peripheral
myelin protein 22 mutation, 1 an early growth response factor 2 mutation, 1 a
periaxin mutation, 0 a myotubularin related protein 2 mutation, 1 a neurofilament
light chain mutation, and 50 had no identifiable mutation; the N-myc downstream
regulated gene 1 and the kinesin 1B gene were not screened for mutations. In the 
process of screening the above cohort of patients as well as other patients for
CMT-causative mutations, we identified several previously unreported mutant
alleles: two for connexin 32, three for myelin protein zero, and two for
peripheral myelin protein 22. The peripheral myelin protein 22 mutation W28R was 
associated with CMT1 and profound deafness. One patient with a CMT2 clinical
phenotype had three myelin protein zero mutations (I89N+V92M+I162M). Because
one-third of the mutations we report arose de novo and thereby caused chronic
sporadic neuropathy, we conclude that molecular diagnosis is a necessary adjunct 
for clinical diagnosis and management of inherited and sporadic neuropathy.

PMID: 11835375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Immunol. 2002 Feb 15;168(4):1649-58.

Early growth response transcription factors are required for development of
CD4(-)CD8(-) thymocytes to the CD4(+)CD8(+) stage.

Carleton M(1), Haks MC, Smeele SA, Jones A, Belkowski SM, Berger MA, Linsley P,
Kruisbeek AM, Wiest DL.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Working Group, Division of Basic Sciences, Fox Chase Cancer
Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Progression of immature CD4(-)CD8(-) thymocytes beyond the beta-selection
checkpoint to the CD4(+)CD8(+) stage requires activation of the pre-TCR complex; 
however, few of the DNA-binding proteins that serve as molecular effectors of
those pre-TCR signals have been identified. We demonstrate in this study that
members of the early growth response (Egr) family of transcription factors are
critical effectors of the signals that promote this developmental transition.
Specifically, the induction of three Egr family members (Egr1, 2, and 3)
correlates with pre-TCR activation and development of CD4(-)CD8(-) thymocytes
beyond the beta-selection checkpoint. Enforced expression of each of these Egr
factors is able to bypass the block in thymocyte development associated with
defective pre-TCR function. However, Egr family members may play somewhat
distinct roles in promoting thymocyte development, because there are differences 
in the genes modulated by enforced expression of particular Egr factors. Finally,
interfering with Egr function using dominant-negative proteins disrupts thymocyte
development from the CD4(-)CD8(-) to the CD4(+)CD8(+) stage. Taken together,
these data demonstrate that the Egr proteins play an essential role in executing 
the differentiation program initiated by pre-TCR signaling.

PMID: 11823493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. EMBO J. 2002 Feb 1;21(3):365-76.

Krox20 and kreisler co-operate in the transcriptional control of segmental
expression of Hoxb3 in the developing hindbrain.

Manzanares M(1), Nardelli J, Gilardi-Hebenstreit P, Marshall H, Giudicelli F,
Martínez-Pastor MT, Krumlauf R, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

In the segmented vertebrate hindbrain, the Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 genes are expressed at
high relative levels in the rhombomeres (r) 5 and 6, and 5, respectively. The
single enhancer elements responsible for these activities have been identified
previously and shown to constitute direct targets of the transcription factor
kreisler, which is expressed in r5 and r6. Here, we have analysed the
contribution of the transcription factor Krox20, present in r3 and r5. Genetic
analyses demonstrated that Krox20 is required for activity of the Hoxb3 r5
enhancer, but not of the Hoxa3 r5/6 enhancer. Mutational analysis of the Hoxb3 r5
enhancer, together with ectopic expression experiments, revealed that Krox20
binds to the enhancer and synergizes with kreisler to promote Hoxb3
transcription, restricting enhancer activity to their domain of overlap, r5.
These analyses also suggested contributions from an Ets-related factor and from
putative factors likely to heterodimerize with kreisler. The integration of
multiple independent inputs present in overlapping domains by a single enhancer
is likely to constitute a general mechanism for the patterning of subterritories 
during vertebrate development.

PMCID: PMC125344
PMID: 11823429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Trends Neurosci. 2002 Feb;25(2):61-4.

ArRAnging the hindbrain.

Gavalas A(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, 4th Floor,
New Hunt's House, Guy's Campus, SE1 1UL, London, UK. anthony.gavalas@kcl.ac.uk

The retinoic acid (RA)-dependent mechanisms that orchestrate the development of
the hindbrain have been the focus of intense studies over the last decade. A wide
range of model systems and experimental approaches have been used to provide
important insights into hindbrain patterning. A recent paper could help to unify 
seemingly disparate observations across species and experimental approaches.
Specification of the entire caudal hindbrain is fully dependent on retinoic acid,
and specification of individual rhombomeres (r) follows a strict rostrocaudal
sequence at precise developmental time windows. Progressively higher RA
signalling is necessary for assigning more posterior territories. Complete RA
deficiency results in the caudal hindbrain assuming an r4-like identity, which is
postulated to be the hindbrain ground state.

PMID: 11814548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Immunol. 2002 Feb 1;168(3):996-1000.

Cutting edge: STAT6 serves as a positive and negative regulator of gene
expression in IL-4-stimulated B lymphocytes.

Schroder AJ(1), Pavlidis P, Arimura A, Capece D, Rothman PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

STAT6 plays an important role in IL-4-mediated B cell activation and
differentiation. To identify primary and secondary target genes of STAT6, gene
expression profiles of IL-4-stimulated B cells from STAT6+/+ vs STAT6-/- mice
were compared. Statistical analysis revealed that 106 distinct probe sets
including 70 known genes were differentially expressed between the 2 genotypes.
These genes include transcription factors, kinases, and other enzymes, cell
surface receptors, and Ig H chains. Surprisingly, although 31 genes were
expressed at higher levels in STAT6+/+ B cells, 39 genes were expressed at higher
abundance in STAT6-/- B cells. This result implies both positive and negative
regulatory functions of STAT6 in IL-4-mediated gene expression. Furthermore, IL-4
induces expression of the transcription factor Krox20, which is required for
maximal IL-4-induced transcription.

PMID: 11801631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Development. 2002 Jan;129(1):155-66.

Characterisation of cis-acting sequences reveals a biphasic, axon-dependent
regulation of Krox20 during Schwann cell development.

Ghislain J(1), Desmarquet-Trin-Dinh C, Jaegle M, Meijer D, Charnay P, Frain M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

In Schwann cells (SC), myelination is controlled by the transcription factor gene
Krox20/Egr2. Analysis of cis-acting elements governing Krox20 expression in SC
revealed the existence of two separate elements. The first, designated immature
Schwann cell element (ISE), was active in immature but not myelinating SC,
whereas the second, designated myelinating Schwann cell element (MSE), was active
from the onset of myelination to adulthood in myelinating SC. In vivo sciatic
nerve regeneration experiments demonstrated that both elements were activated
during this process, in an axon-dependent manner. Together the activity of these 
elements reproduced the profile of Krox20 expression during development and
regeneration. Genetic studies showed that both elements were active in a Krox20
mutant background, while the activity of the MSE, but likely not of the ISE,
required the POU domain transcription factor Oct6 at the time of myelination. The
MSE was localised to a 1.3 kb fragment, 35 kb downstream of Krox20. The
identification of multiple Oct6 binding sites within this fragment suggested that
Oct6 directly controls Krox20 transcription. Taken together, these data indicate 
that, although Krox20 is expressed continuously from 15.5 dpc in SC, the
regulation of its expression is a biphasic, axon-dependent phenomenon involving
two cis-acting elements that act in succession during development. In addition,
they provide insight into the complexity of the transcription factor regulatory
network controlling myelination.

PMID: 11782409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2001 Dec 30;97(2):137-48.

Early activation of transcription factor expression in Schwann cells by
progesterone.

Mercier G(1), Turque N, Schumacher M.

Author information: 
(1)U 488 Inserm, 80 rue du Général Leclerc, 94276 Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
mercier@kb.inserm.fr

Progesterone (PROG) promotes the myelination of sciatic nerves during
regeneration after cryolesion. But, little is known about the molecular
mechanisms by which the hormone exerts its effects. This could be initiated by
the regulation of transcription factor expression in Schwann cells, which produce
the myelin sheaths in the peripheral nervous system. We investigated by RT-PCR
whether PROG activated expression of transcription factors: Egr-1 (Krox-24) Egr-2
(Krox-20), Egr-3, c-jun, jun B, jun D, c-Fos, Fos B, Fra-1, Fra-2, CREB, ATF 4,
SCIP and Sox-10 in cultured Schwann cells. PROG triggered a quick (visible as
soon as 15 min), strong (6 to 18-fold) and transient (1-2 h) stimulation of
Egr-1, Egr-2, Egr-3 and Fos B genes expression. Expression of other genes
remained unaffected by PROG treatment. The same expression pattern was obtained
in the MSC 80 line (mouse Schwann cells), but not in the NIH-3T3 and CHO lines.
Estradiol and testosterone induced different patterns of transcription factor
gene activation in Schwann cells. Serum stimulated all genes activated by PROG in
addition c-fos, fra-1 and fra-2. The PROG effects were blocked by Actinomycin D
and by RU 486. This suggests that the activation of these genes occurs at the
transcriptional level via the interaction of the hormone with its cognate
receptor. Thus, PROG can regulate Schwann cell functions and differentiation by
transiently activating specific transcription factors.

PMID: 11750070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Development. 2001 Dec;128(24):4967-78.

Hindbrain patterning: Krox20 couples segmentation and specification of regional
identity.

Voiculescu O(1), Taillebourg E, Pujades C, Kress C, Buart S, Charnay P,
Schneider-Maunoury S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire du Développement, INSERM U368, Ecole
Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

We have previously demonstrated that inactivation of the Krox20 gene led to the
disappearance of its segmental expression territories in the hindbrain, the
rhombomeres (r) 3 and 5. We now performed a detailed analysis of the fate of
prospective r3 and r5 cells in Krox20 mutant embryos. Genetic fate mapping
indicates that at least some of these cells persist in the absence of a
functional Krox20 protein and uncovers the requirement for autoregulatory
mechanisms in the expansion and maintenance of Krox20-expressing territories.
Analysis of even-numbered rhombomere molecular markers demonstrates that in
Krox20-null embryos, r3 cells acquire r2 or r4 identity, and r5 cells acquire r6 
identity. Finally, study of embryonic chimaeras between Krox20 homozygous mutant 
and wild-type cells shows that the mingling properties of r3/r5 mutant cells are 
changed towards those of even-numbered rhombomere cells. Together, these data
demonstrate that Krox20 is essential to the generation of alternating odd- and
even-numbered territories in the hindbrain and that it acts by coupling the
processes of segment formation, cell segregation and specification of regional
identity.

PMID: 11748134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Glia. 2001 Dec;36(3):342-53.

SCIP/Oct-6, Krox-20, and desert hedgehog mRNA expression during CNS remyelination
by transplanted olfactory ensheathing cells.

Smith PM(1), Sim FJ, Barnett SC, Franklin RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.

Olfactory ensheathing cells (OECs), although having a separate developmental
origin to Schwann cells, are able to generate myelin sheaths following
transplantation into areas of CNS demyelination that are remarkably similar to
those made by Schwann cells. The transcriptional control of Schwann cell
myelination has been well documented, in particular the role of SCIP/Oct-6 and
Krox-20. It is not known, however, whether these transcription factors are also
expressed when OECs assume a myelinating phenotype. In this study, we addressed
this question by using a transplantation approach to generate myelinating OECs
and then examined the expression of SCIP/Oct-6 and Krox-20 mRNA by in situ
hybridization using oligonucleotide probes. We also examined the expression of
desert hedgehog (Dhh), a Schwann cell-derived signaling molecule that is
responsible for regulating the development of the connective tissue elements in
peripheral nerve, which bear similarities to the morphologies adopted by
nonmyelinating transplanted cells. Our results indicate that both Krox-20 and Dhh
mRNA are strongly expressed by transplanted OECs, with SCIP mRNA present at much 
lower levels. The expression of Krox-20 relative to the expression of P0 mRNA by 
the transplanted OECs is consistent with its playing a similar role in OEC
myelination to that in Schwann cell myelination, while the expression of Dhh
suggests a possible mechanism for the diverse morphologies that cells adopt
following OEC transplantation into the damaged CNS. Taken together, our results
provide further evidence for the close similarity of OECs and Schwann cells and
suggest that, despite their separate origins, the manner in which they generate a
peripheral-type myelin sheath involves similar regulatory mechanisms.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11746771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Neuroscience. 2001;107(1):143-59.

Jun, Fos and Krox in the thalamus after C-fiber stimulation:
coincident-input-dependent expression, expression across somatotopic boundaries, 
and nucleolar translocation.

Pearse DD(1), Bushell G, Leah JD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Sciences, Griffith University, 4111,
Nathan, Australia.

Expression of the inducible transcription factors Jun, Fos and Krox is commonly
used to map neurons in the brain that are activated by sensory inputs. However,
some neurons known to be electrically excited by such inputs do not always
express these factors. In particular, stimulation of hindlimb sensory nerve
C-fibers induces expression of c-Fos in the medial thalamus (the mediodorsal,
intermediodorsal, centrolateral and centromedial), but not in the lateral
thalamus (the ventroposterolateral, ventroposteromedial and posterior group). We 
hypothesized that c-Fos expression might only occur in these lateral areas after 
more complex stimulation patterns, or that only other transcription factors can
be induced in these areas by such stimuli. Thus we examined the effects of
single, repeated and coincident C-fiber inputs on expression of six inducible
transcription factors in the medial, lateral and reticular thalamus of the rat. A
weak C-fiber input caused by noxious mechanical stimulation of the skin of one
hindpaw did not induce expression of c-Fos, FosB, Krox-20 or Krox-24; but it did 
reduce the basal expressions of c-Jun and JunD in both the medial and lateral
areas. An intense input produced by electrical stimulation of all the C-fibers in
one sciatic nerve also failed to induce expression of c-Fos, FosB, Krox-20 or
Krox-24 in the medial or lateral areas. However, in the medial thalamus it
increased c-Jun and reduced the basal expression of JunD, whereas in the lateral 
thalamus it had no effect on c-Jun but again reduced the basal expression of
JunD. With repeated stimulation, i.e. when the noxious stimulus was applied to
the contralateral hindpaw 6 h after the sciatic stimulation, there was again no
induction of c-Fos, FosB or Krox-20 in the medial thalamus; but there was an
increase in c-Jun and Krox-24, and a decrease in JunD levels. In the lateral
thalamus the repeated stimulation again failed to induce c-Fos, but the
expressions of FosB, c-Jun and Krox-24 were increased, and that of JunD was again
reduced. With coincident stimulation, i.e. when a stimulus was applied to each
hindpaw simultaneously, c-Fos and Krox-24 remained absent; but there was a marked
induction of FosB and Krox-20, a strong repression of c-Jun, and no effect or a
reduction of the basal levels of JunD. This coincident stimulation also caused
FosB to appear in the nucleolus of many thalamic neurons. MK-801, but not L-NAME,
blocked all these changes. In summary, noxious stimulation affects the expression
of all transcription factors in the medial, lateral and reticular thalamus in a
complex manner depending upon the inducible transcription factor considered, the 
thalamic nucleus, and the stimulation paradigm. The expression of some
transcription factors uniquely after simultaneous inputs suggests they act as
coincidence detectors at the gene level.

PMID: 11744254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Neurosci. 2001 Dec 15;21(24):9724-32.

Experience-dependent plasticity of mouse visual cortex in the absence of the
neuronal activity-dependent marker egr1/zif268.

Mataga N(1), Fujishima S, Condie BG, Hensch TK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Neuronal Circuit Development, Brain Science Institute, RIKEN,
351-0198 Japan.

Neuronal activity elicits a rapid increase in the expression of several immediate
early genes (IEGs). To clarify a role for IEG response in activity-dependent
development, we examined the contribution of the egr1/zif268 gene during visual
cortical processing and plasticity in mice. We first analyzed the expression of
egr1 mRNA in wild-type (WT) mice using Northern blot hybridization. In the visual
cortex, expression of egr1 mRNA increased dramatically after eye opening,
systemic injection of kainate, or 30 min of photostimulation after a brief (5 d) 
period of dark adaptation. Thus, the expression of egr1 is regulated by synaptic 
activity in the mouse visual cortex, as it is in other species (e.g., monkeys,
cats, and rats). To evaluate whether this transcription factor is directly
involved in activity-dependent plasticity, mice lacking Egr1 were deprived of the
use of one eye during the developmental critical period [postnatal day 24
(P24)-P34]. Extracellular in vivo single-unit recordings from the binocular zone 
of the visual cortex revealed that visual responses developed normally in egr1
knock-out (KO) mice. Moreover, a similarly significant shift of responsiveness in
favor of the open eye was produced in both KO and WT mice by either brief (4 d)
or long-term (>2 weeks) occlusion of one eye. There was no apparent compensation 
among egr2, egr3, or c-fos mRNA and protein expression in the visual cortex of
egr1 KO mice. Taken together, these results indicate that egr1 is a useful marker
of sensory input in mice but is not intrinsically necessary for the
experience-dependent plasticity of the visual cortex. Our findings underscore a
mechanistic distinction between sensory plasticity and long-lasting forms of
synaptic potentiation in the hippocampus, for which egr1/zif268 was recently
found to be essential.

PMID: 11739581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Nov 15;10(24):2783-95.

Human Connexin 32, a gap junction protein altered in the X-linked form of
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, is directly regulated by the transcription factor
SOX10.

Bondurand N(1), Girard M, Pingault V, Lemort N, Dubourg O, Goossens M.

Author information: 
(1)Génétique Moléculaire et Physiopathologie, INSERM U468, et Laboratoire de
Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, AP-HP, Hôpital Henri Mondor, 94010 Créteil
Cedex, France.

Mutations in SOX10, a transcription modulator crucial in the development of the
enteric nervous system (ENS), melanocytes and glial cells, are found in
Shah-Waardenburg syndrome (WS4), a neurocristopathy that associates intestinal
aganglionosis, pigmentation defects and sensorineural deafness. Expression of
MITF and RET, two genes that play important roles during melanocyte and ENS
development, respectively, are controlled by SOX10. The observation that some WS4
patients present with myelination defects of the central and peripheral nervous
systems correlates with the recent finding that P(0), a major component of the
peripheral myelin, is another transcriptional target of SOX10. These phenotypic
features suggest that SOX10 could regulate expression of other genes involved in 
the myelination process as well. Thus, we tested the ability of SOX10 to regulate
expression of MBP, PMP22 and Connexin 32, three major proteins of the peripheral 
myelin. Our study shows that this factor, in synergy with EGR2, strongly
activates Cx32 expression in vitro by directly binding to its promoter. In
agreement with this finding, SOX10 and EGR2 mutants identified in patients with
peripheral myelin defects fail to transactivate the Cx32 promoter. Moreover, we
show that a mutation of the Cx32 promoter previously described in a patient with 
the X-linked form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMTX) disease impairs SOX10 function.
In addition to providing new insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying
some of the peripheral myelin defects observed in CMTX disease, these results
further extend the spectrum of genes that are regulated by SOX10.

PMID: 11734543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Int J Dev Biol. 2001 Oct;45(7):817-26.

Isolation and characterization of a Xenopus gene (XMLP) encoding a MARCKS-like
protein.

Zhao H(1), Cao Y, Grunz H.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Zoophysiology, Essen University, Germany.

We have identified a cDNA coding for a Xenopus MARCKS-like protein (XMLP) from a 
cDNA library prepared from activin-treated ectoderm. Using whole-mount in situ
hybridization and RT-PCR, we found XMLP maternal transcripts during the cleavage 
stages. After MBT, the signals were restricted to the neural plate. Subsequently 
XMLP was expressed predominantly in the brain, somites and pronephros. Ectopic
expression of XMLP resulted in eye and axis defects and in a change of the
expression pattern of Krox 20, a neural marker for rhombomeres 3 and 5. Injected 
XMLP caused apoptosis. It was characterized by loss of intercellular adhesion
contacts, transient plasma membrane ruffling at gastrula, and epithelial
disruption attailbud stage. Overexpression of mutant XMLPs showed that this
phenotype was correlated with its putative PSD domain and glycine at position 2. 
The embryos injected with a morpholino oligo complementaryto XMLPmRNA showed
malformations of the anterior axis and eye defects. Extirpation experiments
indicated that the phenotypes might be correlated with disturbed morphorgenetic
movements rather than an inhibition of induction process. Overexpression of
XCYP26 resulted in a shift of the expression pattern of XMLP. In the early
tailbud stage (stage 20) the signal stripe in the XCYP26 injected half of the
embryo got diffuse or even disappeared. This observation suggests that retinoic
acid plays an important role in the regulation of XMLP. Our results suggest that 
XMLP might participate in pattern formation of the embryonic axis and the central
nervous system.

PMID: 11732841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Pediatrics. 2001 Nov;108(5):E95.

Congenital hypomyelination neuropathy in a newborn infant: unusual cause of
diaphragmatic and vocal cord paralyses.

Hahn JS(1), Henry M, Hudgins L, Madan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Lucile Packard Children's Hospital at Stanford, Stanford,
California, USA. jhahn@stanford.edu

We report a case of congenital hypomyelination neuropathy presenting at birth.
The infant had generalized hypotonia and weakness. There was decreased
respiratory effort along with a right phrenic nerve and left vocal cord
paralyses. Tongue fasciculations were present. Deep tendon reflexes were absent
in the upper extremities and hypoactive (1+) in the lower extremities. Magnetic
resonance imaging of the head revealed no intracranial abnormalities, including
normal cerebral myelination. Nerve conduction study showed absence of motor and
sensory action potentials in the hands when the nerves in the upper limbs were
stimulated. A motor response could be elicited only in the proximal leg muscles. 
Needle electromyography study was normal in the proximal limb muscles, but showed
active denervation in the distal muscles of the arm and leg. These findings were 
thought to be consistent with a length-dependent sensorimotor peripheral
polyneuropathy of axonal type with greater denervation of the distal muscles. A
biopsy of the quadriceps muscle showed mild variability in fiber diameter, but no
group typing or group atrophy. The muscle fibers showed no intrinsic
abnormalities. Biopsy of the sural nerve showed scattered axons with very thin
myelin sheaths. There was also a nearly complete loss of large diameter
myelinated fibers. No onion bulb formations were noted. These findings were
thought to be consistent with congenital hypomyelination neuropathy with a
component of axonopathy. DNA analysis for identification of previously
characterized mutations in the genes MPZ, PMP22, and EGR2 was negative. Several
attempts at extubation failed and the infant became increasingly
ventilator-dependent with increasing episodes of desaturation and hypercapnea. He
also developed increasing weakness and decreased movement of all extremities. He 
underwent surgery at 2 months of age for placement of a gastrostomy tube and a
tracheostomy. He was discharged from the hospital on a ventilator at 6 months of 
age. The infant was 13 months old at the time of submission of this report.
Although he appears cognitively normal, he remains profoundly hypotonic and is on
a home ventilator. There was no evidence of progressive weakness. Congenital
hypomyelination neuropathy is a rare form of neonatal neuropathy that should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of a newborn with profound hypotonia and
weakness. It appears to be a heterogeneous disorder with some of the cases being 
caused by specific genetic mutations.

PMID: 11694679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Neurol. 2001 Sep;248(9):795-803.

The range of chronic demyelinating neuropathy of infancy: a clinico-pathological 
and genetic study of 15 unrelated cases.

Planté-Bordeneuve V(1), Parman Y, Guiochon-Mantel A, Alj Y, Deymeer F, Serdaroglu
P, Eraksoy M, Said G.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Neurologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Bicêtre, Le Kremlin
Bicêtre, France. vplante@free.fr

The concept of Dejerine-Sottas disease, which corresponds to presumed recessive
demyelinating neuropathies with onset in infancy, remains controversial. To learn
more on the subject, we performed a clinico-pathological and molecular genetic
study in 15 unrelated patients with the Dejerine-Sottas phenotype seen over a 16 
year period. There were 12 females and 3 males, born to asymptomatic parents.
Study of the PMP22, P0 and Egr2 genes was performed in all cases and 14 underwent
a nerve biopsy. First manifestations of neuropathy occurred before 3 years of age
in all patients. An inherited disorder was suspected in 10 patients, because of
their family history and/or disclosure of a molecular genetic defect in 4 of
them. One patient had a recessively transmitted homozygous point mutation
(Arg157Trp) of the PMP22 gene. A heterozygous duplication of the 17p11.2-12
segment was detected in one offspring of a consanguineous marriage. One patient
carried a "de novo" heterozygous Ser72Leu substitution in the PMP22. A
heterozygous double mutation of the P0 gene including a "de novo" Val42 deletion 
and an Ala221Thr substitution, maternally inherited, were found in an apparently 
sporadic case. No mutation of the Egr2 gene was identified. A neuropathy with
focally folded myelin sheaths (CMT4B) was diagnosed in the nerve biopsy specimens
of two patients. In five patients, the clinico-pathological findings along with
the absence of an identified mutation suggested the diagnosis of chronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy of infantile onset. Our findings
illustrate the genetic heterogeneity of cases with identified mutations, the
scarcity of cases with "demonstrated" recessive transmission and the likelihood
of early acquired chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy in several
patients.

PMID: 11596785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Genet Med. 2001 Sep-Oct;3(5):335-42.

Screening for mutations in a genetically heterogeneous disorder: DHPLC versus DNA
sequence for mutation detection in multiple genes causing Charcot-Marie-Tooth
neuropathy.

Takashima H(1), Boerkoel CF, Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine the efficacy of denaturing high-performance liquid
chromatography (DHPLC) for mutation detection in genetically heterogeneous
diseases using Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy as a model.
METHODS: (1) Identification of the optimal conditions for mutation scanning by
DHPLC using 50 known variants of PMP22, MPZ, GJB1 and EGR2. (2) Comparison of
DHPLC with DNA sequencing for mutation detection in 168 patient DNA samples.
RESULTS: We established the optimal conditions for screening PMP22, MPZ, GJB1,
and EGR2 for mutations. Under optimized conditions, DHPLC was as sensitive as DNA
sequencing and detected two mutations that were not identified by automated DNA
sequence.
CONCLUSIONS: DHPLC increases the efficiency and sensitivity of mutation screening
in genetically heterogeneous diseases.

PMID: 11545686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Neurogenetics. 2001 Jul;3(3):153-7.

EGR2 mutation R359W causes a spectrum of Dejerine-Sottas neuropathy.

Boerkoel CF(1), Takashima H, Bacino CA, Daentl D, Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Heterozygous mutations in the early growth response gene 2 (EGR2), which encodes 
a zinc-finger transcription factor that regulates the late stages of myelination,
cause myelinopathies including congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy,
Dejerine-Sottas neuropathy (DSN), and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1. We
screened 170 unrelated neuropathy patients without mutations involving the
peripheral myelin protein 22 gene (PMP22), the myelin protein zero gene (MPZ), or
the gap junction protein beta1 gene (GJB1) and identified two DSN patients with
the heterozygous mutation R359W in the alpha-helix domain of the first
zinc-finger of EGR2. We now report that this mutation is a recurrent cause of
DSN, and that expressivity ranges from that typical for DSN to a more rapidly
progressive neuropathy that can cause death by age 6 years. Furthermore, in
contrast to patients with typical DSN, patients with the EGR2 R359W mutation have
more respiratory compromise and cranial nerve involvement.

PMID: 11523566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Alcohol. 2001 Jun;24(2):137-9.

Ethanol-related adaptive changes and physical dependence in rats after exposure
to ethanol.

Wilce PA(1), Depaz I, Hardy P, Davidson M, Jaquet V.

Author information: 
(1)Alcohol Research Unit, Department of Biochemistry, The University of
Queensland, St. Lucia, Queensland, Australia 4072. wilce@biosci.uq.edu.au

Adaptive changes that occur after chronic exposure to ethanol are an important
component in the development of physical dependence. We have focused our research
on ethanol-induced changes in the expression of several genes that may be
important in adaptation. In this article, we describe adaptive changes at the
level of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor, in the protein expression and
activity of the Egr transcription factors, and in the expression of a novel gene 
of unknown function.

PMID: 11522435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Dev Neurosci. 2001;23(2):113-21.

The Krox-20 null mutation differentially affects the development of masticatory
muscles.

Turman JE Jr(1), Chopiuk NB, Shuler CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biokinesiology and Physical Therapy, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, Calif. 90089, USA. turman@hsc.usc.edu

The Krox-20 null mutation results in a loss of rhombomeres 3 and 5, which give
rise to neurons that are essential to oral motor behaviors. Thus, the Krox-20
null mutant is an excellent model to investigate the development of oral motor
circuitry. Our morphological examination of embryonic and neonatal Krox-20 null
mutants revealed that a significant reduction of anterior digastric and mylohyoid
muscles, the primary jaw openers, occurs between embryonic days 15 and 19. There 
are no gross morphological alterations in other masticatory muscles. These
findings demonstrate that Krox-20 expression is critical for the normal
development of the primary jaw opener musculature and they help explain previous 
studies documenting a reduction in jaw opening in Krox-20 null mutants. Since jaw
opening is the power stroke of suckling behavior, our data help explain the
reduction of colostrum/milk ingestion in Krox-20 null mutant neonates.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11509834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Neurol. 2001 Jun;248(6):496-9.

The SOX10 transcription factor: evaluation as a candidate gene for central and
peripheral hereditary myelin disorders.

Pingault V(1), Bondurand N, Le Caignec C, Tardieu S, Lemort N, Dubourg O, Le
Guern E, Goossens M, Boespflug-Tanguy O; Clinical E.N.B.D.D. Clinical European
Network on Brain Dysmyelinating Disease.

Author information: 
(1)Génétique Moléculaire et Physiopathologie INSERM U468, Hjpital Henri Mondor,
France. pingault@im3.inserm.fr

The SOX10 transcription factor is involved in development of neural crest
derivatives and fate determination in glial cells. SOX10 mutations have been
found in patients with intestinal aganglionosis and depigmentation with deafness 
(Waardenburg-Hirschsprung). Associated neurological signs have been reported in
some cases, including a patient exhibiting a central and peripheral myelin
deficiency. Therefore, we screened for SOX10 mutations in a large cohort of
patients with peripheral and central myelin disorders. 56 were affected by
classical demyelinating Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease without identified mutations 
in the genes encoding PNS myelin proteins (PMP22, P0), connexin 32 and the
zinc-finger transcription factor, EGR2. 88 patients with undetermined
leukodystrophy were selected from a large European prospective study. Associated 
clinical, magnetic resonance imaging and electrophysiological signs were
consistent with a defect in CNS myelination in 83 and with an active degeneration
of the CNS myelin in 5. No abnormalities in the proteolipid protein gene (PLP)
were found. The absence of SOX100 mutation in this large cohort of patients
suggests that this gene is not frequently involved in peripheral or central
inherited myelin disorders.

PMID: 11499640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Oncogene. 2001 Jul 27;20(33):4457-65.

Growth-suppressive effects of BPOZ and EGR2, two genes involved in the PTEN
signaling pathway.

Unoki M(1), Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 108-8639,
Japan.

Defects in PTEN, a tumor suppressor, have been found in cancers arising in a
variety of human tissues. To elucidate the tumor-suppressive function of this
gene, we have been analysing expression profiles of cancer cells after
introduction of exogenous PTEN. Those experiments identified 99 candidate genes
that were transcriptionally transactivated. Among them, we report here the
further analyses of eight genes, EGR2/Krox-20, BPOZ, APS, HCLS1/HS1, DUSP1/MKP1, 
NDRG1/Drg1/RTP, NFIL3/E4BP4, and a novel gene (PINK1, PTEN-induced putative
kinase). Expression of six of them (PINK1, EGR2, HCLS1, DUSP1, BPOZ, and NFIL3)
was decreased in ovarian tumors compared with corresponding normal tissues.
Colony-formation assays using plasmid clones designed to express each gene
indicated that EGR2 and BPOZ were able to suppress growth of cancer cells
significantly; in particular, cancer-cell lines stably expressing BPOZ grew more 
slowly than control cells containing mock vector. Flow cytometry suggested that
over-expression of BPOZ inhibited progression of the cell cycle at the G(1)/S
transition. Anti-sense oligonucleotides for BPOZ or EGR2 effectively inhibited
their expression, and cell growth was accelerated. Therefore both genes appear to
be novel candidates as mediators of the PTEN growth-suppressive signaling
pathway.

PMID: 11494141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Development. 2001 Jun;128(11):2031-8.

Roles of retinoic acid receptors in early embryonic morphogenesis and hindbrain
patterning.

Wendling O(1), Ghyselinck NB, Chambon P, Mark M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC),
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, B.P. 163, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, C.U. de
Strasbourg, France.

Mutants mice carrying targeted inactivations of both retinoic acid receptor (RAR)
alpha and RAR gamma (A alpha/A gamma mutants) were analyzed at different
embryonic stages, in order to establish the timing of appearance of defects that 
we previously observed during the fetal period. We show that embryonic day (E)9.5
A alpha/A gamma embryos display severe malformations, similar to those already
described in retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2 null mutants. These malformations
reflect early roles of retinoic acid signaling in axial rotation, segmentation
and closure of the hindbrain; formation of otocysts, pharyngeal arches and
forelimb buds; and in the closure of the primitive gut. The hindbrain of E8.5 A
alpha/A gamma embryos shows a posterior expansion of rhombomere 3 and 4 (R3 and
R4) markers, but fails to express kreisler, a normal marker of R5 and R6. This
abnormal hindbrain phenotype is strikingly different from that of embryos lacking
RAR alpha and RAR beta (A alpha/A beta mutants), in which we have previously
shown that the territory corresponding to R5 and R6 is markedly enlarged.
Administration of a pan-RAR antagonist at E8.0 to wild-type embryos cultured in
vitro results in an A alpha/A beta-like hindbrain phenotype, whereas an earlier
treatment at E7.0 yields an A alpha/A gamma-like phenotype. Altogether, our data 
suggest that RAR alpha and/or RAR gamma transduce the RA signal that is required 
first to specify the prospective R5/R6 territory, whereas RAR beta is
subsequently involved in setting up the caudal boundary of this territory.

PMID: 11493525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Neurobiol Dis. 2001 Aug;8(4):700-6.

The D355V mutation decreases EGR2 binding to an element within the Cx32 promoter.

Musso M(1), Balestra P, Bellone E, Cassandrini D, Di Maria E, Doria LL, Grandis
M, Mancardi GL, Schenone A, Levi G, Ajmar F, Mandich P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences and Vision, University of Genova, Viale
Benedetto XV, 6-16132 Genova, Italy.

Mutations in the early growth response 2 (EGR2) gene are associated with some
forms of Charcot--Marie--Tooth disease (CMT) and other demyelinating
neuropathies. These mutations modify the EGR2 binding to specific DNA sequences
suggesting a role in the transcriptional control of myelination-specific genes.
Here we show that the D355V mutation, associated with a CMT case combining axonal
and demyelinating abnormalities, reduces three times the affinity of EGR2 to its 
consensus sequence and ten times its affinity to a sequence in the human Cx32
promoter. These findings could indicate that this EGR2 mutation leads to the
development of CMT1 through the transcriptional deregulation of Cx32 gene.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11493034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Neurology. 2001 Jul 10;57(1):101-5.

A somatic and germline mosaic mutation in MPZ/P(0) mimics recessive inheritance
of CMT1B.

Fabrizi GM(1), Ferrarini M, Cavallaro T, Jarre L, Polo A, Rizzuto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological and Visual Sciences, Section of Clinical Neurology,
University of Verona, Italy. fabrizi@borgoroma.univr.it

OBJECTIVE: To identify the molecular basis of a demyelinating Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease type 1 (CMT1) with presumed autosomal recessive inheritance.
BACKGROUND: CMT1, an inherited motor and sensory neuropathy with low nerve
conduction velocities, is caused by dominantly inherited mutations in the genes
of the peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22), myelin protein zero (MPZ/P(0)), and 
early growth response 2 transcription factor (EGR2/Krox-20).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Two young sisters born of clinically and
electrophysiologically healthy parents had a severe CMT1 neuropathy of presumed
autosomal recessive inheritance. The older sister underwent a nerve biopsy. The
authors analyzed PMP22, MPZ/P(0), and EGR2/Krox-20 by automated direct nucleotide
sequencing. For rapid mutation detection, they determined the
restriction-fragment-length polymorphisms for TaqI in the fluorescein-labeled
target DNA sequence amplified by PCR.
RESULTS: Nerve biopsy disclosed a demyelinating and remyelinating neuropathy with
onion bulb formations. Both sisters had a novel heterozygous G308-->A transition 
of MPZ/P(0) without any mutation of PMP22 or EGR2/Krox-20. The G308-->A
transition was a nonconservative mutation that changed a glycine into a glutamate
at the amino acid residue 74 in the extracellular domain of the mature MPZ/P(0). 
None of 50 healthy controls had the mutation. The healthy mother had a low amount
of the mutation in blood (congruent with 20%) as well as in skin, buccal
epithelium, and hairs (30%). Because the healthy mother carried clones of somatic
mutant cells and had transmitted the G308-->A transition to the affected
daughters, she also harbored germline mutant cells.
CONCLUSION: In hereditary demyelinating neuropathies, somatic and germline
mosaicism of dominant mutations in the myelin protein genes may mimic autosomal
recessive inheritance.

PMID: 11445635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Hum Mutat. 2001;18(1):32-41.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type I and related demyelinating neuropathies:
Mutation analysis in a large cohort of Italian families.

Mostacciuolo ML(1), Righetti E, Zortea M, Bosello V, Schiavon F, Vallo L, Merlini
L, Siciliano G, Fabrizi GM, Rizzuto N, Milani M, Baratta S, Taroni F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Genetica Umana, Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Padova,
Padova, Italy. mlsmst@civ.bio.unipd.it

Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 1 (CMT1), the most common hereditary
neurological disorder in humans, is characterized by clinical and genetic
heterogeneity. It is caused mainly by a 1.5 Mb duplication in 17p11.2, but also
by mutations in the myelin genes PMP22 (peripheral myelin protein 22), MPZ
(myelin protein zero), Cx32 (connexin 32; also called GJB1), and EGR2 (early
growth response 2). In this study, we have screened 172 index cases of Italian
families in which there was at least one subject with a CMT1 diagnosis for the
duplication on 17p11.2 and mutations in these genes. Among 170 informative
unrelated patients, the overall duplication frequency was 57.6%. A difference
could be observed between the duplication frequency in familial cases (71.6%) and
that observed in non-familial cases (36.8%). Among the non-duplicated patients,
12 were mutated in Cx32, four in MPZ, two in PMP22, and none in the EGR2. In the 
non-duplicated cases, the overall point mutation frequency for these genes was
25.0%. We describe the mutations identified, and consider possible
genotype-phenotype correlation.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11438991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Dev Biol. 2001 Apr 15;232(2):388-99.

The transcription factor Egr3 modulates sensory axon-myotube interactions during 
muscle spindle morphogenesis.

Tourtellotte WG(1), Keller-Peck C, Milbrandt J, Kucera J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University School of Medicine, Chicago, 
Illinois 60611, USA. warren@northwestern.edu

Erratum in
    Dev Biol 2002 Dec 15;252(2):324.

The Egr family of zinc-finger transcription factors, consisting of Egr1, Egr2,
Egr3, and Egr4, are involved in cellular growth and differentiation. Adult
Egr3-deficient mice are ataxic and lack muscle spindle proprioceptors that
normally develop at the sites of Ia afferent-myotube contacts during
embryogenesis. To resolve whether spindles form and then degenerate, or whether
they never form in the absence of Egr3, we examined the spatiotemporal expression
of Egr3 relative to spindle development. In wild type mice, Egr3 was expressed in
developing myotubes shortly after they were innervated by Ia afferents and its
expression was controlled by innervation because it dissipated following nerve
transection. In Egr3-deficient mice, myotubes received Ia afferent innervation
and assembled normally into spindles during embryogenesis. However, newborn
Egr3-deficient spindles had few internal myonuclei in intrafusal fibers and thin 
capsules. Moreover, slow-developmental myosin heavy chain was not induced in
embryonic Egr3-deficient spindles suggesting that impairments in differentiation 
were present before they could be detected morphologically. After birth, sensory 
and motor innervation withdrew from the Egr3-deficient spindles, and the spindles
disassembled. In spite of the spindle disassembly and retraction of afferents
from muscles, the cell bodies of proprioceptive neurons within dorsal root
ganglia were retained. We conclude that Egr3 has an essential role in regulating 
genes required for the transformation of undifferentiated myotubes into
intrafusal fibers, and hence for the phenotypic differentiation of spindles.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11401400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 3;276(31):29603-10. Epub 2001 Jun 7.

Inhibition of AP-1 by the glucocorticoid-inducible protein GILZ.

Mittelstadt PR(1), Ashwell JD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Biology, NCI, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The immunosuppressive effects of glucocorticoids arise largely by inhibition of
cytokine gene expression, which has been ascribed to interference between the
glucocorticoid receptor and transcription factors such as AP-1 and NF-kappa B as 
well as by competition for common coactivators. Here we show that
glucocorticoid-induced inhibition of interleukin-2 mRNA expression in activated
normal T cells required new protein synthesis, suggesting that this phenomenon is
secondary to expression of glucocorticoid-regulated genes. One of the most
prominent glucocorticoid-induced genes is glucocorticoid-induced leucine zipper
(GILZ), which has been reported to inhibit activation-induced up-regulation of
Fas ligand (FasL) mRNA. Indeed, transient expression of GILZ in Jurkat T cells
blocked induction of a reporter construct driven by the FasL promoter. This could
be accounted for by GILZ-mediated inhibition of Egr-2 and Egr-3,
NFAT/AP-1-inducible transcription factors that bind a regulatory element in the
FasL promoter and up-regulate FasL expression. GILZ also potently inhibited
AP-1-driven and IL-2 promoter-driven reporter constructs, and recombinant GILZ
specifically interacted with c-Fos and c-Jun in vitro and inhibited the binding
of active AP-1 to its target DNA. Whereas homodimerization of GILZ required the
presence of its leucine zipper, the interaction with c-Fos and c-Jun occurred
through the N-terminal 60-amino acid region of GILZ. Thus, GILZ represents a
glucocorticoid-induced gene product that can inhibit a variety of
activation-induced events, at least in part by direct interference with AP-1, and
is therefore a candidate for a mediator of glucocorticoid-induced
immunosuppression.

PMID: 11397794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Neuron. 2001 May;30(2):355-68.

EGR2 mutations in inherited neuropathies dominant-negatively inhibit myelin gene 
expression.

Nagarajan R(1), Svaren J, Le N, Araki T, Watson M, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South
Euclid Avenue, Box 8118, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The identification of EGR2 mutations in patients with neuropathies and the
phenotype Egr2/Krox20(-/-) have demonstrated that the Egr2 transcription factor
is critical for peripheral nerve myelination. However, the mechanism by which
these mutations cause disease remains unclear, as most patients present with
disease in the heterozygous state, whereas Egr2(+/-) mice are phenotypically
normal. To understand the effect of aberrant Egr2 activity on Schwann cell gene
expression, we performed microarray expression profiling to identify genes
regulated by Egr2 in Schwann cells. These include genes encoding myelin proteins 
and enzymes required for synthesis of normal myelin lipids. Using these newly
identified targets, we have shown that neuropathy-associated EGR2 mutants
dominant-negatively inhibit wild-type Egr2-mediated expression of essential
myelin genes to levels sufficiently low to result in the abnormal myelination
observed in these patients.

PMID: 11394999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2001 May 20;90(1):75-82.

Progesterone stimulates Krox-20 gene expression in Schwann cells.

Guennoun R(1), Benmessahel Y, Delespierre B, Gouézou M, Rajkowski KM, Baulieu EE,
Schumacher M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U488, 80, rue du Général Leclerc, 94276, Bicêtre, France.
guennoun@kb.inserm.fr

The gene of the zinc finger transcription factor Krox-20 (Egr-2) is expressed in 
Schwann cells and plays an important role in myelination of peripheral nerves. We
have shown that progesterone promotes myelination in the regenerating sciatic
nerve and in cocultures of Schwann cells and sensory neurones. To determine
whether progesterone regulates Krox-20 expression, we measured its effects on
Krox-20 mRNA levels in the MSC80 mouse Schwann cell line by semi-quantitative
RT-PCR. Although low levels of Krox-20 mRNA are detectable in MSC80 cells
cultured in defined medium, treatment with 10(-6) M progesterone induces a rapid 
(15 min) and transient increase in the levels of Krox-20 mRNA. Lower doses of
progesterone (10(-9), 10(-8) and 10(-7) M) are also effective in increasing
Krox-20 mRNA. Other steroids including testosterone, dexamethasone, and estradiol
are ineffective when added to the culture medium at 10(-6) M for 1 h. The
induction of Krox-20 mRNA was also observed with the selective progesterone
agonist Organon 2058 and was abolished by treating the MSC80 Schwann cells with
the progesterone antagonist RU486, indicating that progesterone induces Krox-20
mRNA expression by binding to its intracellular receptor. The induction of
Krox-20 by progesterone was also demonstrated in primary cultures of Schwann
cells isolated from neonatal rat sciatic nerves, at the mRNA level by RT-PCR and 
at the protein level by immunohistochemistry. As Krox-20 is a necessary step for 
the initiation of myelin formation in peripheral nerves, its stimulation by
progesterone suggests an important signalling function for this steroid in
myelination.

PMID: 11376858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Neurosci. 2001 Jun 1;21(11):3780-7.

A distal upstream enhancer from the myelin basic protein gene regulates
expression in myelin-forming schwann cells.

Forghani R(1), Garofalo L, Foran DR, Farhadi HF, Lepage P, Hudson TJ, Tretjakoff 
I, Valera P, Peterson A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery,
Molecular Oncology Group H-5, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, H3A
1A1.

In peripheral nerves, large caliber axons are ensheathed by myelin-elaborating
Schwann cells. Multiple lines of evidence demonstrate that expression of the
genes encoding myelin structural proteins occurs in Schwann cells in response to 
axonal instructions. To gain further insight into the mechanisms controlling
myelin gene expression, we used reporter constructs in transgenic mice to search 
for the DNA elements that regulate the myelin basic protein (MBP) gene. Through
this in vivo investigation, we provide evidence for the participation of
multiple, widely distributed, positive and negative elements in the overall
control of MBP expression. Notably, all constructs bearing a 0.6 kb far-upstream 
sequence, designated Schwann cell enhancer 1 (SCE1), expressed at high levels in 
myelin-forming Schwann cells. In addition, robust targeting activity conferred by
SCE1 was shown to be independent of other MBP 5' flanking sequence. These
observations suggest that SCE1 will make available a powerful tool to drive
transgene expression in myelinating Schwann cells and that a focused analysis of 
the SCE1 sequence will lead to the identification of transcription factor binding
sites that positively regulate MBP expression.

PMID: 11356866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Dev Biol. 2001 May 15;233(2):468-81.

Differences in Krox20-dependent regulation of Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 during hindbrain
development.

Maconochie MK(1), Nonchev S, Manzanares M, Marshall H, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

During hindbrain development, segmental regulation of the paralogous Hoxa2 and
Hoxb2 genes in rhombomeres (r) 3 and 5 involves Krox20-dependent enhancers that
have been conserved during the duplication of the vertebrate Hox clusters from a 
common ancestor. Examining these evolutionarily related control regions could
provide important insight into the degree to which the basic Krox20-dependent
mechanisms, cis-regulatory components, and their organization have been
conserved. Toward this goal we have performed a detailed functional analysis of a
mouse Hoxa2 enhancer capable of directing reporter expression in r3 and r5. The
combined activities of five separate cis-regions, in addition to the conserved
Krox20 binding sites, are involved in mediating enhancer function. A CTTT (BoxA) 
motif adjacent to the Krox20 binding sites is important for r3/r5 activity. The
BoxA motif is similar to one (Box1) found in the Hoxb2 enhancer and indicates
that the close proximity of these Box motifs to Krox20 sites is a common feature 
of Krox20 targets in vivo. Two other rhombomeric elements (RE1 and RE3) are
essential for r3/r5 activity and share common TCT motifs, indicating that they
interact with a similar cofactor(s). TCT motifs are also found in the Hoxb2
enhancer, suggesting that they may be another common feature of Krox20-dependent 
control regions. The two remaining Hoxa2 cis-elements, RE2 and RE4, are not
conserved in the Hoxb2 enhancer and define differences in some of components that
can contribute to the Krox20-dependent activities of these enhancers.
Furthermore, analysis of regulatory activities of these enhancers in a Krox20
mutant background has uncovered differences in their degree of dependence upon
Krox20 for segmental expression. Together, this work has revealed a surprising
degree of complexity in the number of cis-elements and regulatory components that
contribute to segmental expression mediated by Krox20 and sheds light on the
diversity and evolution of Krox20 target sites and Hox regulatory elements in
vertebrates.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11336508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. EXS. 2001;(91):1-10.

The one-to-four rule and paralogues of sex-determining genes.

Ohno S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 1450 East Duarte Road, Duarte,
California 91010-3000, USA.

Because of two successive rounds of tetraploidization at their inception, the
vertebrates contain four times more protein-coding genes in their genome than the
invertebrates: 60,000 vs. 15,000. Consequently, each invertebrate gene has been
amplified to the maximum of four paralogous genes in vertebrates: the one-to-four
rule. When this rule is applied to genes pertinent to gonadal development and
differentiation, the following emerged: (i) Two closely related zinc-finger
transcription factor genes in invertebrates have been amplified to two paralogous
groups in vertebrates. One consisted of EGR1, EGR2, EGR3 and EGR4, whereas the
only known paralogue of the other is WT1, which controls the developmental fate
of the entire nephric system, and therefore of gonads. Interestingly, EGR1 and
WT1 act as antagonists of each other in nephroblastic cells. (ii) SF-1, which
controls the fate of two steroid hormone-producing organs, adrenals and gonads,
is descended from the invertebrate Ftz-F1 gene, and its only known paralogue is
GCNF-1. (iii) The Y-linked SRY, the mammalian testis-determining gene, is a
paralogue neither of SOX3 (SRX) nor of SOX9. Its ancient origin suggests that SRY
once became extinct in earlier vertebrates, only to revive itself in the
mammalian ancestor. (iv) Inasmuch as four paralogues of one invertebrate nuclear 
receptor gene have differentiated to receptors of androgen, mineralocorticoid,
glucocorticoid and progesterone, there should at most be four paralogous
estrogen-receptor genes in the vertebrate genome. It is likely that one of them
plays a pivotal role in the estrogen-dependent sex-determining mechanism so
commonly found among reptiles, amphibians and fish.

PMID: 11301594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Immunol. 2001 Apr 1;166(7):4534-42.

Differential expression of Fas ligand in Th1 and Th2 cells is regulated by early 
growth response gene and NF-AT family members.

Dzialo-Hatton R(1), Milbrandt J, Hockett RD Jr, Weaver CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Inducible expression of Fas ligand (CD95 ligand) by activated T cells and the
resulting apoptosis of CD95-bearing cells is a critical component of peripheral T
cell homeostasis and cytotoxic effector mechanisms. Transcriptional control of
the expression of Fas ligand has been attributed to a number of factors,
including early growth response gene 2 (Egr2), Egr3, Sp1, and NF-AT, although a
direct contribution of NF-AT is controversial. The present study confirms a role 
for Egr factors and indicates that NF-AT is essential for optimal expression of
murine Fas ligand through a direct interaction with an NF-AT consensus element.
The role of these factors was further defined by studying the differential
expression of Fas ligand in Th1 and Th2 lines derived from DO11.10 TCR transgenic
mice. EMSA analyses of a composite Egr/NF-AT site showed recruitment of Sp1 to
this site in Th2 cells, but not in Th1 cells. Furthermore, gel-shift analyses
demonstrated the binding of Egr1, 2, and 3 in Th2 cells and Egr1 and 2, but not
Egr3 in Th1 cells at a known Egr site. Northern analysis corroborated the lack of
Egr3 in Th1 cells. Differential usage of these transcription factors by Th1 and
Th2 cells suggests a potential mechanism underlying the differential expression
of Fas ligand by distinct T cell lineages.

PMID: 11254710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Brain Res. 2001 Mar 16;894(2):193-208.

Jun, Fos and Krox in the hippocampus after noxious stimulation:
simultaneous-input-dependent expression and nuclear speckling.

Pearse D(1), Mirza A, Leah J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical and Biomolecular Sciences, Griffith University, Nathan,
Australia.

Stimulation of sensory C-fibres produces extensive expression of the Fos, Jun and
Krox families of inducible transcription factors (ITFs) in many nociceptive CNS
areas [28]. In the hippocampus, however, c-Fos is only weakly induced by such
stimulation, and expression of the other ITFs has not been studied. Here we
examine the effects of single, repeated and simultaneous C-fibre inputs on ITF
expressions in the rat hippocampus. A brief, strong electrical stimulation of
sciatic nerve C-fibres induced little or no expression of c-Fos or Krox-20. In
contrast, FosB was induced and continued to rise in all areas, whereas the basal 
expressions of c-Jun and Krox-24 were initially reduced but then returned during 
the subsequent 36 h. A weak noxious cutaneous stimulus applied to one hindpaw
induced only weak expressions of the ITFs. However, if the sciatic stimulation
was applied contralaterally and 6 h beforehand, this weak stimulus strongly
induced Krox-24, but not other ITFs, i.e. there was a potentiation of Krox-24
expression. When these two stimuli were applied simultaneously a few c-Fos
labelled cells did appear, and there was and an increased Krox-24 expression.
There was also a strong potentiation of FosB and a strong reduction in c-Jun
expression. This simultaneous stimulation was the only type of stimulation to
induce expression of Krox-20. Also after simultaneous stimulation the majority of
the nuclear labelling for FosB, but not of the other ITFs, had a speckled
appearance. MK-801 blocked these changes in ITF expressions, but it could also
cause the C-fibre stimulations to induce c-Fos and c-Jun in specific areas of the
hippocampus. Thus C-fibre stimulation does affect transcription factor activity
in the hippocampus; and the strong responses of some ITFs to simultaneous inputs 
points to their having a role as 'genetic coincidence detectors' in the
hippocampus.

PMID: 11251193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Neurol Sci. 2001 Mar 1;184(2):149-53.

A novel missense mutation in the early growth response 2 gene associated with
late-onset Charcot--Marie--Tooth disease type 1.

Yoshihara T(1), Kanda F, Yamamoto M, Ishihara H, Misu K, Hattori N, Chihara K,
Sobue G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Nagoya University School of Medicine, Nagoya 466,
Japan.

A novel mutation (Arg381Cys) in the second zinc-finger domain of early growth
response 2 (EGR2) was identified in a late-onset Charcot--Marie--Tooth disease
type 1 (CMT1) patient. This patient had initial symptoms of numbness and weakness
in the leg at age 59, and a median nerve motor conduction velocity of 27 m/s. A
sural nerve biopsy showed a severe loss of myelinated fibers with numerous onion 
bulbs. This is the first report of the EGR2 mutation presenting a late onset of
CMT1 phenotype. Its mutation was a different amino acid substitution at codon 381
(Arg381His) which demonstrated congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy or
early-onset CMT1. This report suggests that the EGR2 mutation represents
divergent phenotypes at codon 381, which may be a mutation hotspot.

PMID: 11239949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Genes Dev. 2001 Mar 1;15(5):567-80.

Krox-20 patterns the hindbrain through both cell-autonomous and non
cell-autonomous mechanisms.

Giudicelli F(1), Taillebourg E, Charnay P, Gilardi-Hebenstreit P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

The Krox-20 gene encodes a zinc finger transcription factor, which has been shown
previously, by targeted inactivation in the mouse, to be required for the
development of rhombomeres (r) 3 and 5 in the segmented embryonic hindbrain. In
the present work, Krox-20 was expressed ectopically in the developing chick
hindbrain by use of electroporation. We demonstrate that Krox-20 expression is
sufficient to confer odd-numbered rhombomere characteristics to r2, r4, and r6
cells, presumably in a cell-autonomous manner. Therefore, Krox-20, appears as the
major determinant of odd-numbered identity within the hindbrain. In addition, we 
provide evidence for the existence of a non cell-autonomous autoactivation
mechanism allowing recruitment of Krox-20-positive cells from even-numbered
territories by neighboring Krox-20-expressing cells. On the basis of these
observations, we propose that Krox-20 regulates multiple, intertwined steps in
segmental patterning: Initial activation of Krox-20 in a few cells leads to the
segregation, homogenization, and possibly expansion of territories to which
Krox-20 in addition confers an odd-numbered identity.

PMCID: PMC312642
PMID: 11238377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Dev Genes Evol. 2000 Oct;210(10):518-21.

An amphioxus Krox gene: insights into vertebrate hindbrain evolution.

Knight RD(1), Panopoulou GD, Holland PW, Shimeld SM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Animal and Microbial Sciences, University of Reading, Whiteknights, 
PO Box 228, Reading RG6 6AJ, UK.

The transcription factor Krox-20 has roles in the maintenance of segmentation and
specification of segment identity in the vertebrate hindbrain. Overt hindbrain
segmentation is a vertebrate novelty, and is not seen in invertebrate chordates
such as amphioxus and tunicates. To test if the roles of Krox-20 are also
derived, we cloned a Krox-20 related gene, AmphiKrox, from amphioxus. AmphiKrox
is related to a small family of vertebrate Krox genes and is expressed in the
most anterior region of the amphioxus brain and in the club shaped gland, a
secretory organ that develops in the anterior pharynx. Neither expression domain 
overlaps with the expression of AmphiHox-1, -2, -3 or -4, suggesting that the
roles of Krox-20 in hindbrain segmentation and in Hox gene regulation were
acquired concomitant with the duplication of Krox genes in vertebrate evolution.

PMID: 11180801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Immunity. 2000 Mar;12(3):293-300.

Sequential involvement of NFAT and Egr transcription factors in FasL regulation.

Rengarajan J(1), Mittelstadt PR, Mages HW, Gerth AJ, Kroczek RA, Ashwell JD,
Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The critical function of NFAT proteins in maintaining lymphoid homeostasis was
revealed in mice lacking both NFATp and NFAT4 (DKO). DKO mice exhibit increased
lymphoproliferation, decreased activation-induced cell death, and impaired
induction of FasL. The transcription factors Egr2 and Egr3 are potent activators 
of FasL expression. Here we find that Egr2 and Egr3 are NFAT target genes.
Activation of FasL occurs via the NFAT-dependent induction of Egr3, as
demonstrated by the ability of exogenously provided NFATp to restore
Egr-dependent FasL promoter activity in DKO lymph node cells. Further, Egr3
expression is enriched in Th1 cells, suggesting a molecular basis for the known
preferential expression of FasL in the Th1 versus Th2 subset.

PMID: 10755616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Dev Biol. 2000 Apr 15;220(2):263-84.

Vitamin A deficiency results in the dose-dependent acquisition of anterior
character and shortening of the caudal hindbrain of the rat embryo.

White JC(1), Highland M, Kaiser M, Clagett-Dame M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin at Madison, Madison, Wisconsin
53706-1544, USA.

The developing nervous system is particularly vulnerable to vitamin A deficiency.
Retinoid has been proposed to be a posteriorizing factor during hindbrain
development, although direct evidence in the mammalian embryo is lacking. In the 
present study, pregnant vitamin A-deficient (VAD) rats were fed purified diets
containing varying levels of all-trans-retinoic acid (atRA; 0, 0.5, 1.5, 6, 12,
25, 50, 125, or 250 microg/g diet) or were supplemented with retinol. Hindbrain
development was studied from embryonic day 10 to 12.5 ( approximately 6 to 40
somites). Normal morphogenesis was observed in all embryos from groups fed 250
microg atRA/g diet or retinol. The most caudal region of the hindbrain was the
most sensitive to retinoid insufficiency, as evidenced by a loss of the
hypoglossal nerve (cranial nerve XII) in embryos from the 125 microg atRA/g diet 
group. Further reduction of atRA to 50 microg/g diet led to the loss of cranial
nerves IX, X, XI, and XII and associated sensory ganglia IX and X in all embryos 
as well as the loss of hindbrain segmentation caudal to the rhombomere (r) 3/4
border in a subset of embryos. Dysmorphic orthotopic otic vesicles or immature
otic-like vesicles in both orthotopic and caudally ectopic locations were also
observed. As the level of atRA was reduced, a loss of caudal hindbrain
segmentation was observed in all embryos and the incidence of otic vesicle
abnormalities increased. Perturbations in hindbrain segmentation, cranial nerve
formation, and otic vesicle development were associated with abnormal patterning 
of the posterior hindbrain. Embryos from VAD dams fed between 0.5 and 50 microg
atRA/g diet exhibited Hoxb-1 protein expression along the entire neural tube
caudal to the r3/r4 border at a time when it should be restricted to r4. Krox-20 
protein expression was expanded in r3 but absent or reduced in presumptive r5.
Hoxd-4 mRNA expression was absent in the posterior hindbrain, and the rostral
limit of Hoxb-5 protein expression in the neural tube was anteriorized,
suggesting that the most posterior hindbrain region (r7/r8) had been deleted
and/or improperly patterned. Thus, when limiting amounts of atRA are provided to 
VAD dams, the caudal portion of the hindbrain is shortened and possesses
r4/r5-like characteristics, with this region finally exhibiting r4-like gene
expression when retinoid is restricted even more severely. Thus, regions of the
anterior hindbrain (i.e., r3 and r4) appear to be greatly expanded, whereas the
posterior hindbrain (r5-r8) is reduced or absent. This work shows that retinoid
plays a critical role in patterning, segmentation, and neurogenesis of the caudal
hindbrain and serves as an essential posteriorizing signal for this region of the
central nervous system in the mammal.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10753515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Immunol. 2001 Jan 15;166(2):1028-40.

Vasoactive intestinal peptide and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating
polypeptide inhibit expression of Fas ligand in activated T lymphocytes by
regulating c-Myc, NF-kappa B, NF-AT, and early growth factors 2/3.

Delgado M(1), Ganea D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102, USA.

Activation-induced cell death in T cells, a major mechanism for limiting an
ongoing immune response, is initiated by Ag reengagement and mediated through
Fas/Fas ligand interactions. Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and pituitary
adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP), two multifunctional
neuropeptides, modulate innate and adaptive immunity. We reported previously that
VIP/PACAP protect T cells from activation-induced cell death through
down-regulation of Fas ligand (FasL). In this study, we investigate the molecular
mechanisms involved in the protective effect of VIP and PACAP. VIP/PACAP reduce
in a dose-dependent manner anti-CD3-induced apoptosis in 2B4.11 T cell
hybridomas. The protective effect is mediated through the specific type 2 VIP
receptor, and the cAMP/protein kinase A pathway. A functional study demonstrates 
that VIP/PACAP inhibit activation-induced FasL expression. VIP/PACAP inhibit the 
expression and/or DNA-binding activity of several transcriptional factors
involved in FasL expression, i.e., c-myc, NF-kappaB, NF-ATp, and early growth
factors (Egr) 2/3. The inhibition of NF-kappaB binding is due to the
stabilization of I-kappaB (inhibitory protein that dissociates from NF-kappaB),
through the inhibition of I-kappaB kinase alpha activity. Subsequently, p65
nuclear translocation is significantly reduced. The inhibition in NF-ATp binding 
results from a calcineurin-independent reduction in NF-ATp nuclear translocation.
VIP/PACAP inhibit the expression of Egr2 and 3, but not of Egr1. The effects on
the transcriptional factors are mediated through type 2 VIP receptor with cAMP as
secondary messenger.

PMID: 11145682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Gene. 2000 Nov 27;258(1-2):63-9.

Modulation of early growth response (EGR) transcription factor-dependent gene
expression by using recombinant adenovirus.

Ehrengruber MU(1), Muhlebach SG, Söhrman S, Leutenegger CM, Lester HA, Davidson
N.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190,
CH-8057, Zurich, Switzerland. ehrengru@hifo.unizh.ch

Early growth response (EGR) transcription factors link initial cytoplasmic events
to long-term alterations of cellular gene expression and are induced by various
stimuli. To test their roles in cell physiology, we constructed adenoviral
recombinants encoding NGFI-A binding protein 2 (NAB2, a repressor of EGR1, EGR2, 
and EGR3), EGR1, NAB-insensitive EGR1(I293F) (EGR1*), EGR2, and the NAB-binding, 
repressive domain 1 (R1) of EGR1. These viruses regulated EGR-dependent
expression of GFP and luciferase reporter genes in heterologous expression
assays. Infection of a myoblast cell line with EGR1 and EGR1* adenovirus induced 
the endogenous gene for platelet-derived growth factor A chain (PDGF-A). In
addition, in neuroblastoma cells, the two novel EGR1 target genes EGR3 and NAB2
were identified by using adenoviral transfer of EGR1 and EGR1*. Our results
demonstrate that recombinant adenovirus is useful to regulate heterologous and
endogenous EGR target gene expression, and suggest that EGR transcription factors
can autoregulate themselves.

PMID: 11111043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Development. 2000 Dec;127(24):5297-307.

Control of the migratory pathway of facial branchiomotor neurones.

Garel S(1), Garcia-Dominguez M, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Facial branchiomotor (fbm) neurones undergo a complex migration in the segmented 
mouse hindbrain. They are born in the basal plate of rhombomere (r) 4, migrate
caudally through r5, and then dorsally and radially in r6. To study how migrating
cells adapt to their changing environment and control their pathway, we have
analysed this stereotyped migration in wild-type and mutant backgrounds. We show 
that during their migration, fbm neurones regulate the expression of genes
encoding the cell membrane proteins TAG-1, Ret and cadherin 8. Specific
combinations of these markers are associated with each migratory phase in r4, r5 
and r6. In Krox20 and kreisler mutant mouse embryos, both of which lack r5, fbm
neurones migrate dorsally into the anteriorly positioned r6 and adopt an
r6-specific expression pattern. In embryos deficient for Ebf1, a gene normally
expressed in fbm neurones, part of the fbm neurones migrate dorsally within r5.
Accordingly, fbm neurones prematurely express a combination of markers
characteristic of an r6 location. These data suggest that fbm neurones adapt to
their changing environment by switching on and off specific genes, and that Ebf1 
is involved in the control of these responses. In addition, they establish a
close correlation between the expression pattern of fbm neurones and their
migratory behaviour, suggesting that modifications in gene expression participate
in the selection of the local migratory pathway.

PMID: 11076752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Oct 14;277(1):124-7.

Altered gene expression upon BCR cross-linking in Burkitt's lymphoma B cell line.

Nakayama Y(1), Iwamoto Y, Maher SE, Tanaka Y, Bothwell AL.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, 06520, USA. yasuhiro.nakayama@yale.edu

Burkitt's lymphoma cell line, BL2 was stimulated by surface BCR cross-linking and
altered gene expression was analyzed by RDA methodology. Consistent with previous
reports, we detected up-regulated MDC, IL6R and adhesion molecule LFA1. We also
detected gene expression of SIRPalpha, anti-apoptotic A-20, signal regulatory
SLP76 and BCAR3, DNA binding proteins EGR2 and DEC1 in addition to some new
genes.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11027651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Brain Res. 2000 Sep 22;877(2):203-8.

Stress induces zinc finger immediate early genes in the rat adrenal gland.

Honkaniemi J(1), Zhang JS, Longo FM, Sharp FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation, University of Tampere, Box 607,
33521 Tampere, Finland. bljaho@uta.fi

The secretion of steroid hormones from the adrenal cortex as well as
cathecolamines from the adrenal medulla is stimulated by stress. In this study,
we studied the effect of capsaicin-induced stress on the expression of the
immediate-early genes (IEGs) NGFI-A, -B, -C, egr-2, -3 and Nurr1 in the rat
adrenal gland using in situ hybridization. All of these IEGs except egr-2 were
rapidly induced in the adrenal cortex and medulla. The temporal patterns of the
IEG induction in medulla varied significantly. NGFI-A was induced in medulla
within 15 min after stress, NGFI-B, egr-3 and Nurr1 were induced by 30 min,
whereas NGFI-C was induced by 2 h. Surprisingly, only NGFI-B and Nurr1 were
induced in the glucocorticoid secreting regions of zonae reticularis and
fasciculata of the cortex, starting 15 min after the stress. All of the inducible
IEGs were induced in the aldosterone secreting zona glomerulosa 15-30 min after
the capsaicin injection. NGFI-A, NGFI-B and Nurr1 expression persisted for 6 h.
Since the IEGs studied had major differences in their temporospatial induction
pattern, they are likely to be induced by distinct stress-elicited factors and
have separate target genes and roles in stress-induced glucocorticoid and
catecholamine secretion.

PMID: 10986333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Dev Biol. 2000 Sep 15;225(2):370-80.

Anterior neural induction by nodes from rabbits and mice.

Knoetgen H(1), Teichmann U, Wittler L, Viebahn C, Kessel M.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Molekulare Zellbiologie, Max-Planck-Institut für Biophysikalische
Chemie, Göttingen, D-37077, Germany.

The organizer of vertebrate embryos represents the major regulatory center for
the formation of the embryonic axis during gastrulation. The early blastopore lip
of amphibia and Hensen's node of the chick at the full-length primitive streak
stage possess both a head- and a trunk-inducing potential. In mice, a
head-inducing activity was identified in the extraembryonic, anterior visceral
endoderm (AVE) by tissue ablation and genetic experiments. Evidence for a similar
activity in the AVE from the rabbit was obtained by transplanting below the avian
epiblast. However, it was still unclear whether the AVE is the exclusive origin
of anterior neural induction or if this activity is recapitulated by the node
and/or its derivatives. We report here that nodes from both rabbit and mouse
embryos can induce a complete neural axis including forebrain structures upon
grafting to chick hosts. Thus, in rabbits and mice not only the AVE, but also the
node, possesses a potential for the induction of anterior neural tissue.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10985856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2000 Sep;23(3):313-9.

Transcription of krox-20/egr-2 is upregulated after exposure to fibrous particles
and adhesion in rat alveolar macrophages.

Hirano S(1), Anuradha CD, Kanno S.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Environment Division, National Institute for Environmental Studies,
Ibaraki, Japan. seishiro@nies.go.jp

Alveolar macrophages meet various types of particulate substances deposited deep 
in the lung. We report differences in biologic responses of alveolar macrophages 
between phagocytosis of fine spherical and fibrous particles. Although titanium
dioxide (TiO(2)) is thought to be biologically inert, the cytotoxicity of fibrous
TiO(2) (F-TiO(2)) was much higher than spherical TiO(2) (S-TiO(2)). Differential 
display and the subsequent Northern blot analysis indicated that transcription of
krox-20/egr-2 gene was slightly and greatly upregulated in S- and
F-TiO(2)-exposed alveolar macrophages, respectively. The messenger RNA (mRNA)
level of krox-20/egr-2 increased up to 8 h in F-TiO(2)-exposed alveolar
macrophages, whereas krox-20/egr-2 mRNA level was transiently increased in
response to adhesion to the culture dish. Stimulation with lipopolysaccharide
also increased krox-20/egr-2 mRNA level transiently, although the mRNA level
rebounded after 8 h. The analysis with 5' rapid amplification of complementary
DNA ends suggested that there is a heterogeneity in the upstream region of this
gene (krox-20/egr-2 and krox-20H1; accession numbers AB032420 and AB032419,
respectively). The polymerase chain reaction analysis with specific primers for
krox-20/egr-2 and krox-20H1 indicated that both genes were almost equally
upregulated after either adhesion to the plastic dish or phagocytosis of
F-TiO(2). These results suggest that both krox-20/egr-2 and krox-20H1 are
implicated in adhesion and phagocytosis, and that the expression of krox-20 may
reflect interaction with foreign substances and adhesion in alveolar macrophages.

PMID: 10970821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mech Dev. 2000 Sep;96(2):215-8.

Pattern of expression of the transcription factor Krox-20 in mouse hair follicle.

Gambardella L(1), Schneider-Maunoury S, Voiculescu O, Charnay P, Barrandon Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Différenciation Epithéliale, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46, Rue 
d'Ulm, 75230, Cedex 05, Paris, France.

We examined the pattern of expression in hair follicles of the transcription
factor gene Krox-20. During embryogenesis, Krox-20 is first expressed in the
upper portion of the hair bud, then in the hair canal, in the sebaceous glands
and in the outer root sheath. In the mature follicles, Krox-20, like Shh and
TGFbetaRII, is also expressed in a sub-population of matrix keratinocytes located
in a ring-like fashion in vibrissal follicles and clustered on one side of the
papilla in pelage follicles. This polarized pattern rotates around the papilla as
a result of sequential gene expression by individual groups of matrix cells. This
peculiar pattern is not linked to follicle angling.

PMID: 10960786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Sep;67(3):664-71. Epub 2000 Jul 27.

A novel locus for autosomal recessive peripheral neuropathy in the EGR2 region on
10q23.

Rogers T(1), Chandler D, Angelicheva D, Thomas PK, Youl B, Tournev I, Gergelcheva
V, Kalaydjieva L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Genetics, Edith Cowan University Joondalup Campus, Perth, WA 
6027, Australia.

During our studies of Romany (Gypsy) families with hereditary motor and sensory
neuropathy-Lom, we have identified a large kindred with two independently
segregating autosomal recessive neuropathies. The novel disorder, named
"hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy-Russe" (HMSNR), presented as a severe
disabling form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease with prominent sensory loss,
moderately reduced motor nerve conduction velocity, and a high threshold for
electrical nerve stimulation. A genome scan in two branches of the large kindred 
detected linkage to the 10q22-q23 region containing the early growth response 2
gene (EGR2), a transcription factor with a key role in peripheral nerve
myelination. The results of sequence analysis and the detection of an intragenic 
polymorphism allowed us to exclude EGR2 as the HMSNR gene. Further analysis done 
using linkage and recombination mapping refined the position of the HMSNR gene to
a small interval on 10q23.2, flanked by markers D10S581 and D10S1742, telomeric
to EGR2. In this interval, a conserved seven-marker haplotype is shared by all
disease chromosomes, suggesting a single founder mutation. The homozygosity
region is contained in bacterial-artificial-chromosome contig 1570 of the Sanger 
Centre physical map and has an estimated physical size of approximately 500 kb.

PMCID: PMC1287526
PMID: 10915613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Neurosci Res. 2000 Aug 1;61(3):244-50.

Animal models for inherited peripheral neuropathies: chances to find treatment
strategies?

Martini R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Section of Developmental Neurobiology, University of 
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. neuk176@rzkli.uni-wuerzburg.de

Mutations in four identified genes (peripheral myelin protein 22, P(0), connexin 
32, and the early growth response 2 zinc finger protein) are the cause for
several forms of inherited peripheral neuropathies that are still incurable
disorders. Some forms of these disorders are well mimicked by engineered or
spontaneous rodent mutants that might be instrumental for developing treatment
strategies. This review focusses on common pathways of pathogenesis of the
disorders and emphasizes strategies that might be suitable to ameliorate disease 
expression.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10900071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(14):5261-8.

Functional compensation by Egr4 in Egr1-dependent luteinizing hormone regulation 
and Leydig cell steroidogenesis.

Tourtellotte WG(1), Nagarajan R, Bartke A, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Neuroscience Institute, Northwestern University
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The Egr family of zinc finger transcription factors, whose members are encoded by
Egr1 (NGFI-A), Egr2 (Krox20), Egr3, and Egr4 (NGFI-C) regulate critical genetic
programs involved in cellular growth, differentiation, and function. Egr1
regulates luteinizing hormone beta subunit (LHbeta) gene expression in the
pituitary gland. Due to decreased levels of LHbeta, female Egr1-deficient mice
are anovulatory, have low levels of progesterone, and are infertile. By contrast,
male mutant mice show no identifiable defects in spermatogenesis, testosterone
synthesis, or fertility. Here, we have shown that serum LH levels in male
Egr1-deficient mice are adequate for maintenance of Leydig cell steroidogenesis
and fertility because of partial functional redundancy with the closely related
transcription factor Egr4. Egr4-Egr1 double mutant male mice had low steady-state
levels of serum LH, physiologically low serum levels of testosterone, and atrophy
of androgen-dependent organs that were not present in either Egr1- or
Egr4-deficient males. In double mutant male mice, atrophic androgen-dependent
organs and Leydig cell steroidogenesis were fully restored by administration of
exogenous testosterone or human chorionic gonadotropin (an LH receptor agonist), 
respectively. Moreover, a normal distribution of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone-containing neurons and normal innervation of the median eminence in the
hypothalamus, as well as decreased levels of LH gene expression in
Egr4-Egr1-relative to Egr1-deficient male mice, indicates a defect of LH
regulation in pituitary gonadotropes. These results elucidate a novel level of
redundancy between Egr4 and Egr1 in regulating LH production in male mice.

PMCID: PMC85975
PMID: 10866682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2000 May 5;77(2):258-66.

Sequential increase in Egr-1 and AP-1 DNA binding activity in the dentate gyrus
following the induction of long-term potentiation.

Williams JM(1), Beckmann AM, Mason-Parker SE, Abraham WC, Wilce PA, Tate WP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Centre for Gene Research, University of Otago, 
Dunedin, New Zealand. joanna.williams@stonebow.otago.ac.nz

Establishment of long-term potentiation (LTP) at perforant path synapses is
highly correlated with increased expression of Egr and AP-1 transcription factors
in rat dentate gyrus granule cells. We have investigated whether increased
transcription factor levels are reflected in increased transcription factor
activity by assessing Egr and AP-1 DNA binding activity using gel shift assays.
LTP produced an increase in binding to the Egr element, which was NMDA
receptor-dependent and correlated closely with our previously reported increase
in Egr-1 (zif/268) protein levels. Supershift analysis confirmed involvement of
Egr-1, but not Egr-2 in the DNA binding activity. AP-1 DNA binding was also
rapidly elevated in parallel with protein levels, however, the peak increase in
activity was delayed until 4 h, a time point when we have previously shown that
only jun-D protein was elevated. These data indicate that binding of Egr-1 and
AP-1 to their response elements is increased in two phases. This may result in
activation of distinct banks of target genes which contribute to the
establishment of persistent LTP.

PMID: 10837920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Neurology. 2000 Apr 25;54(8):1696-8.

Cranial nerve involvement in CMT disease type 1 due to early growth response 2
gene mutation.

Pareyson D(1), Taroni F, Botti S, Morbin M, Baratta S, Lauria G, Ciano C,
Sghirlanzoni A.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurology, "C. Besta" National Neurological Institute, Milan,
Italy. dpareys@tin.it

Mutations in the gene coding for the Schwann cell transcription factor early
growth response 2 (EGR2), which seems to regulate myelinogenesis and hindbrain
development, have been observed in few cases of inherited neuropathy. The authors
describe a unique combination of cranial nerve deficits in one member of a
Charcot-Marie-Tooth 1 family carrying an EGR2 mutation (Arg381His). This finding 
further supports the role of EGR2 in cranial nerve development.

PMID: 10762521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Rev Neurol. 2000 Jan 1-15;30(1):71-9.

[The genetics of type 1 Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, the hereditary focal
neuropathies and the hereditary distal motor neuropathies].

[Article in Spanish]

Sevilla T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, España.

INTRODUCTION: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTD) or hereditary motor and sensory 
neuropathy shows great genetic heterogeneity. The type 1 (CMT-1) or demyelinating
form and the type 2 (CMT-2) or neuronal form are two clinically and genetically
distinct forms.
DEVELOPMENT: Apart from the above mentioned motor and sensory forms, there is
another type of neuropathy in which the clinical and neurophysiological
involvement is exclusively motor and is known as distal spinal atrophy or
hereditary distal motor neuropathy (HDMN), which is a syndrome to be included
among the CMTD. The CMT-1 is the most prevalent form and the best understood from
the genetic point of view. At least four genes have been reported to be involved:
the gene for 22 kDa peripheral myelin protein (PMP-22), situated on the 17p11.2
chromosome (locus CMT-1A); the gene for myelin 0 protein situated on chromosome
1q23 (locus CMT-1B); the gene for conexine 32 (Cx32), found on chromosome Xq13
(locus CMT-X) and the gene EGR2 found on chromosome 10q21.1-q22.1. The genes
PMP-22 and PO are related to autosomal dominant forms, the gene Cx32 is
transmitted linked to chromosome X and transmission of gene EGR2 has been shown
in both autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive forms. In the demyelinating
forms with autosomal recessive inheritance, positive linkage has been found on
four different loci: 8q21.1 (CMT-4A), 11q23 (CMT-4B), 5q23-33 (CMT-4C) and 8q24
in a form related to deafness (CMT-Lom). Two loci have been identified for the
autosomal dominant forms of the HDMN. A large family initially and predominantly 
of the upper limbs is mapped on chromosome 7p (HDMN-V) and another with the
classical phenotype mapped on chromosome 12q24. In the familial neuropathy with
liability to pressure palsies in most families, deletion of the locus CMT-1A was 
found, and in rare cases mutation precisely of the PMP-22 gene. In familial
amyotrophic neuralgia, genetic molecular analysis has shown linkage with markers 
on the chromosome 17q24-25.

PMID: 10743001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 31;275(13):9749-57.

A novel activation function for NAB proteins in EGR-dependent transcription of
the luteinizing hormone beta gene.

Sevetson BR(1), Svaren J, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Internal Medicine, Division of Laboratory
Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110,
USA.

The EGR1/NGFI-A transcription factor directly activates the luteinizing hormone
beta (LHbeta) subunit promoter, and female mice lacking EGR1 are infertile due to
LHbeta deficiency. The NGFI-A-binding proteins NAB1 and NAB2 are corepressors of 
EGR1/NGFI-A and of the related proteins EGR2/Krox20 and EGR3. Here we report that
at certain promoters, including LHbeta, NAB proteins display a novel ability to
stimulate EGR-directed transcription. NAB coactivation requires the conserved
NCD2 protein domain, previously implicated in NAB corepression, is strictly
dependent upon EGR binding to the LHbeta proximal promoter and is independent of 
EGR activation domains. Furthermore, we report that NAB-activated promoters such 
as LHbeta contain EGR consensus sites that are fewer in number and lower in
binding affinity than those found at NAB-repressed promoters such as basic
fibroblast growth factor. Analysis of mutant and synthetic promoters confirms
that both the strength and multiplicity of EGR-binding sites influence the
transcriptional outcome of NAB recruitment. These results suggest a novel means
by which EGR target genes could be differentially regulated in cells where EGR
and NAB proteins are coexpressed.

PMID: 10734128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Genesis. 2000 Feb;26(2):123-6.

Expression pattern of a Krox-20/Cre knock-in allele in the developing hindbrain, 
bones, and peripheral nervous system.

Voiculescu O(1), Charnay P, Schneider-Maunoury S.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.

PMID: 10686605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Semin Neurol. 1999;19(4):353-62.

Inherited peripheral neuropathy.

Keller MP(1), Chance PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle
98195-6320, USA.

Hereditary disorders of the peripheral nerves constitute a group of frequently
encountered neurological diseases. Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 1 (CMT1)
is genetically heterogeneous and characterized by demyelination with moderately
to severely reduced nerve conduction velocities, absent muscle stretch reflexes
and onion bulb formation. Genetic loci for CMT1 map to chromosome 17 (CMT1A),
chromosome 1 (CMT1B), and another unknown autosome (CMT1C). CMT1A is most often
associated with a tandem 1.5-megabase (Mb) duplication in chromosome 17p11.2-12, 
or in rare patients may result from a point mutation in the peripheral myelin
protein-22 (PMP22) gene. CMT1 B result from point mutations in the myelin protein
zero (Po or MPZ) gene. The molecular defect in CMT1 C is unknown. Mutations in
the early growth response 2 gene (EGR2) are also associated with demyelinating
neuropathy. Other rare forms of demyelinating peripheral neuropathies map to
chromosome 8q, 10q, and 11q. X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy (CMTX),
which has clinical features similar to CMT1, is associated with mutations in the 
connexin32 gene. Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 2 (CMT2) is characterized by
normal or mildly reduced nerve conduction velocity with decreased amplitude and
axonal loss without hypertrophic features. One form of CMT2 maps to chromosome 1 
p36 (CMT2A), another to chromosome 3p (CMT2B) and another to 7p (CMT2D).
Dejerine-Sottas disease (DSD), also called hereditary motor and sensory
neuropathy type III (HMSNIII), is a severe, infantile-onset demyelinating
polyneuropathy that may be associated with point mutations in either the PMP22
gene or the Po gene and shares considerable clinical and pathological features
with CMT1. Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP) is an 
autosomal dominant disorder that results in a recurrent, episodic demyelinating
neuropathy. HNPP is associated with a 1.5-Mb deletion in chromosome 17p11.2-12
and results from reduced expression of the PMP22 gene. CMT1A and HNPP are
reciprocal duplication/deletion syndromes originating from unequal crossover
during germ cell meiosis.

PMID: 10716658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Immunol. 2000 Mar 15;164(6):3002-8.

Role of activator protein-1 in TCR-mediated regulation of the murine fasl
promoter.

Matsui K(1), Xiao S, Fine A, Ju ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Arthritis Center, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

The present study demonstrates that transcription factor interactions are
important in regulating the murine fasl promoter following TCR-mediated
activation. We used DNase I-footprinting, EMSAs, and transient transfection
assays to identify the minimal TCR signal-responsive region within the fasl
promoter. This region contains the previously identified binding sites for
NF-kappaB and Egr and the AP-1 site identified in this study. We found that TCR
signaling induces AP-1 binding to this site and regulates the fasl promoter
function in a fashion dependent on NF-kappaB binding. However, mutation in the
AP-1 site alone did not show a significant effect on the promoter function. The
data suggest that the minimal promoter required at least two transcription
factors to function.

PMID: 10706688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Cell Biol. 2000 Mar 6;148(5):1035-46.

A dual role of erbB2 in myelination and in expansion of the schwann cell
precursor pool.

Garratt AN(1), Voiculescu O, Topilko P, Charnay P, Birchmeier C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Centrum for Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany.

Neuregulin-1 provides an important axonally derived signal for the survival and
growth of developing Schwann cells, which is transmitted by the ErbB2/ErbB3
receptor tyrosine kinases. Null mutations of the neuregulin-1, erbB2, or erbB3
mouse genes cause severe deficits in early Schwann cell development. Here, we
employ Cre-loxP technology to introduce erbB2 mutations late in Schwann cell
development, using a Krox20-cre allele. Cre-mediated erbB2 ablation occurs
perinatally in peripheral nerves, but already at E11 within spinal roots. The
mutant mice exhibit a widespread peripheral neuropathy characterized by
abnormally thin myelin sheaths, containing fewer myelin wraps. In addition, in
spinal roots the Schwann cell precursor pool is not correctly established. Thus, 
the Neuregulin signaling system functions during multiple stages of Schwann cell 
development and is essential for correct myelination. The thickness of the myelin
sheath is determined by the axon diameter, and we suggest that trophic signals
provided by the nerve determine the number of times a Schwann cell wraps an axon.

PMCID: PMC2174554
PMID: 10704452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Development. 2000 Mar;127(5):933-44.

Roles of Hoxa1 and Hoxa2 in patterning the early hindbrain of the mouse.

Barrow JR(1), Stadler HS, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Early in its development, the vertebrate hindbrain is transiently subdivided into
a series of compartments called rhombomeres. Genes have been identified whose
expression patterns distinguish these cellular compartments. Two of these genes, 
Hoxa1 and Hoxa2, have been shown to be required for proper patterning of the
early mouse hindbrain and the associated neural crest. To determine the extent to
which these two genes function together to pattern the hindbrain, we generated
mice simultaneously mutant at both loci. The hindbrain patterning defects were
analyzed in embryos individually mutant for Hoxa1 and Hoxa2 in greater detail and
extended to embryos mutant for both genes. From these data a model is proposed to
describe how Hoxa1, Hoxa2, Hoxb1, Krox20 (Egr2) and kreisler function together to
pattern the early mouse hindbrain. Critical to the model is the demonstration
that Hoxa1 activity is required to set the anterior limit of Hoxb1 expression at 
the presumptive r3/4 rhombomere boundary. Failure to express Hoxb1 to this
boundary in Hoxa1 mutant embryos initiates a cascade of gene misexpressions that 
result in misspecification of the hindbrain compartments from r2 through r5.
Subsequent to misspecification of the hindbrain compartments, ectopic induction
of apoptosis appears to be used to regulate the aberrant size of the misspecified
rhombomeres.

PMID: 10662633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Development. 2000 Jan;127(1):119-28.

Nab proteins mediate a negative feedback loop controlling Krox-20 activity in the
developing hindbrain.

Mechta-Grigoriou F(1), Garel S, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris France.

The developing vertebrate hindbrain is transiently subdivided along the
anterior-posterior axis into metameric units, called rhombomeres (r). These
segments constitute units of lineage restriction and display specific gene
expression patterns. The transcription factor gene Krox-20 is restricted to r3
and r5, and is required for the development of these rhombomeres. We present
evidence that Krox-20 transcriptional activity is under the control of a negative
feedback mechanism in the hindbrain. This regulatory loop involves two closely
related proteins, Nabl and Nab2, previously identified as antagonists of Krox-20 
transcriptional activity in cultured cells. Here we show that in the mouse
hindbrain, Nab1 and Nab2 recapitulate the Krox-20 expression pattern and that
their expression is dependent on Krox-20 function. Furthermore, misexpression of 
Nab1 or Nab2 in zebrafish embryos leads to alterations in the expression patterns
of several hindbrain markers, consistent with an inhibition of Krox-20 activity. 
Taken together, these data indicate that Krox-20 positively regulates the
expression of its own antagonists and raise the possibility that this negative
feedback regulatory loop may play a role in the control of hindbrain development.

PMID: 10654606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Development. 2000 Jan;127(1):75-85.

Retinoic acid synthesis and hindbrain patterning in the mouse embryo.

Niederreither K(1), Vermot J, Schuhbaur B, Chambon P, Dollé P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, CU de Strasbourg.

Targeted disruption of the murine retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (Raldh2) gene
precludes embryonic retinoic acid (RA) synthesis, leading to midgestational
lethality (Niederreither, K., Subbarayan, V., Dolle, P. and Chambon, P. (1999).
Nature Genet. 21, 444-448). We describe here the effects of this RA deficiency on
the development of the hindbrain and associated neural crest. Morphological
segmentation is impaired throughout the hindbrain of Raldh2-/- embryos, but its
caudal portion becomes preferentially reduced in size during development.
Specification of the midbrain region and of the rostralmost rhombomeres is
apparently normal in the absence of RA synthesis. In contrast, marked alterations
are seen throughout the caudal hindbrain of mutant embryos. Instead of being
expressed in two alternate rhombomeres (r3 and r5), Krox20 is expressed in a
single broad domain, correlating with an abnormal expansion of the r2-r3 marker
Meis2. Instead of forming a defined r4, Hoxb1- and Wnt8A-expressing cells are
scattered throughout the caudal hindbrain, whereas r5/r8 markers such as kreisler
or group 3/4 Hox genes are undetectable or markedly downregulated. Lack of
alternate Eph receptor gene expression could explain the failure to establish
rhombomere boundaries. Increased apoptosis and altered migratory pathways of the 
posterior rhombencephalic neural crest cells are associated with impaired
branchial arch morphogenesis in mutant embryos. We conclude that RA produced by
the embryo is required to generate posterior cell fates in the developing mouse
hindbrain, its absence leading to an abnormal r3 (and, to a lesser extent, r4)
identity of the caudal hindbrain cells.

PMID: 10654602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1999 Sep 14;883:91-108.

Regulation of myelin-specific gene expression. Relevance to CMT1.

Kamholz J(1), Awatramani R, Menichella D, Jiang H, Xu W, Shy M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit,
Michigan 48201, USA. j_kamholz@wayne.edu

Schwann cells, the myelinating cells of the peripheral nervous system, are
derived from the neural crest. Once neural crest cells are committed to the
Schwann cell fate, they can take on one of two phenotypes to become myelinating
or nonmyelinating Schwann cells, a decision that is determined by interactions
with axons. The critical step in the differentiation of myelinating Schwann cells
is the establishment of a one-to-one relationship with axons, the so-called
"promyelinating" stage of Schwann cell development. The transition from the
promyelinating to the myelinating stage of development is then accompanied by a
number of significant changes in the pattern of gene expression, including the
activation of a set of genes encoding myelin structural proteins and lipid
biosynthetic enzymes, and the inactivation of a set of genes expressed only in
immature or nonmyelinating Schwann cells. These changes are regulated mainly at
the transcriptional level and also require continuous interaction between Schwann
cells and their axons. Two transcription factors, Krox 20 (EGR2) and Oct 6
(SCIP/Tst1), are necessary for the transition from the promyelinating to the
myelinating stage of Schwann cell development. Krox 20, expressed in myelinating 
but not promyelinating Schwann cells, is absolutely required for this transition,
and myelination cannot occur in its absence. Oct 6, expressed mainly in
promyelinating Schwann cells and then down-regulated before myelination, is
necessary for the correct timing of this transition, since myelination is delayed
in its absence. Neither Krox 20 nor Oct 6, however, is required for the initial
activation of myelin gene expression. Although the mechanisms of Krox 20 and Oct 
6 action during myelination are not known, mutation in Krox 20 has been shown to 
cause CMT1, further implicating this protein in the pathogenesis of this disease.
Identifying the molecular mechanisms of Krox 20 and Oct 6 action will thus be
important both for understanding myelination and for designing future treatments 
for CMT1. Point mutlations in the genes encoding the myelin proteins PMP22 and P0
cause CMT1A without a gene duplication and CMT1B, respectively. Although the
clinical and pathological phenotypes of CMT1A and CMT1B are similar, their
molecular pathogenesis is quite different. Point mutations in PMP22 alter the
trafficking of the protein, so that it accumulates in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) and intermediate compartment (IC). Mutant PMP22 also sequesters its normal
counterpart in the ER, further reducing the amount of PMP22 available for myelin 
synthesis at the membrane, and accounting, at least in part, for its severe
effect on myelination. Mutant PMP22 probably also activates an ER-to-nucleus
signal transduction pathway associated with misfolded proteins, which may account
for the decrease of myelin gene expression in Schwann cells in Trembler mutant
mice. In contrast, absence of expression of the homotypic adhesion molecule, P0, 
in mice in which the gene has been inactivated, produces a unique pattern of
Schwann cell gene expression, demonstrating that P0 plays a regulatory as well as
a structural role in myelination. Whether this role is direct, through a
P0-mediated adhesion pathway, or indirect, through adhesion pathways mediated by 
cadherins or integrins, however, remains to be determined. The molecular
mechanisms underlying dysmyelination in CMT1 are thus complex, with pleitropic
effects on Schwann cell physiology that are determined both by the type of
mutation and the protein mutated. Identifying these molecular mechanisms,
however, are important both for understanding myelination and for designing
future treatments for CMT1. Although demyelination is the hallmark of CMT1, the
clinical signs and symptoms of this disease are probably produced by axonal
degeneration, not demyelination. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED)

PMID: 10586235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Eur J Immunol. 1999 Nov;29(11):3456-65.

FasL promoter activation by IL-2 through SP1 and NFAT but not Egr-2 and Egr-3.

Xiao S(1), Matsui K, Fine A, Zhu B, Marshak-Rothstein A, Widom RL, Ju ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, USA.

Recently activated peripheral T cells treated with IL-2 for 4 days expressed Fas 
ligand (FasL)-mediated cytotoxicity. These IL-2-treated T cells had high nuclear 
expression of SP1 and NFAT, but lacked the Egr-2 and Egr-3 that could be induced 
by anti-CD3 stimulation and had been implicated in FasL gene activation. A
minimal promoter region that responded to IL-2 was identified by transient
transfection assays using deletion mutants. The data suggests that the GGGCGGAAA 
site present in the 5' end of the minimal FasL promoter is critical to
IL-2-induced FasL gene activation. The GGGCGGAAA sequence contains an overlapping
site used by two transcription factor families, one (GGGCGG) for the SP1 family
and the other (GGAAA) for the NFAT family. FasL promoter activity was partially
but statistically significantly reduced with constructs mutated at either site.
More activity was lost with a construct mutated at both sites. In contrast,
mutation at the Egr site had no effect on IL-2-induced FasL promoter activity.
Our study identified a new FasL promoter site responding to IL-2-induced SP1 and 
NFAT factors. Furthermore, the nuclei of IL-2-treated cells express SP1 and NFAT,
but not Egr-2 and Egr-3, for FasL gene activation.

PMID: 10556800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Development. 1999 Nov;126(22):5051-9.

Key roles of retinoic acid receptors alpha and beta in the patterning of the
caudal hindbrain, pharyngeal arches and otocyst in the mouse.

Dupé V(1), Ghyselinck NB, Wendling O, Chambon P, Mark M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC),
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/ Collège de France, B.P. 163, CU de STRASBOURG, France.
marek@igbmc.u-strasbg.fr.

Mouse fetuses carrying targeted inactivations of both the RAR(&agr;) and the
RARbeta genes display a variety of malformations in structures known to be
partially derived from the mesenchymal neural crest originating from post-otic
rhombomeres (e.g. thymus and great cephalic arteries) (Ghyselinck, N., Dupé, V., 
Dierich, A., Messaddeq, N., Garnier, J.M., Rochette-Egly, C., Chambon, P. and
Mark M. (1997). Int. J. Dev. Biol. 41, 425-447). In a search for neural crest
defects, we have analysed the rhombomeres, cranial nerves and pharyngeal arches
of these double null mutants at early embryonic stages. The mutant post-otic
cranial nerves are disorganized, indicating that RARs are involved in the
patterning of structures derived from neurogenic neural crest, even though the
lack of RARalpha and RARbeta has no detectable effect on the number and migration
path of neural crest cells. Interestingly, the double null mutation impairs early
developmental processes known to be independent of the neural crest e.g., the
initial formation of the 3rd and 4th branchial pouches and of the 3rd, 4th and
6th arch arteries. The double mutation also results in an enlargement of
rhombomere 5, which is likely to be responsible for the induction of
supernumerary otic vesicles, in a disappearance of the rhombomere 5/6 boundary,
and in profound alterations of rhombomere identities. In the mutant hindbrain,
the expression domain of kreisler is twice its normal size and the caudal stripe 
of Krox-20 extends into the presumptive rhombomeres 6 and 7 region. In this
region, Hoxb-1 is ectopically expressed, Hoxb-3 is ectopically up-regulated and
Hoxd-4 expression is abolished. These data, which indicate that retinoic acid
signaling through RARalpha and/or RARbeta is essential for the specification of
rhombomere identities and for the control of caudal hindbrain segmentation by
restricting the expression domains of kreisler and of Krox-20, also strongly
suggest that this signaling plays a crucial role in the posteriorization of the
hindbrain neurectoderm.

PMID: 10529422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Development. 1999 Nov;126(22):5027-40.

Mice mutant for both Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 show extensive remodeling of the hindbrain
and defects in craniofacial development.

Rossel M(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

The analysis of mice mutant for both Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 suggests that these two
genes function together to pattern the hindbrain. Separately, mutations in Hoxa1 
and Hoxb1 have profoundly different effects on hindbrain development. Hoxa1
mutations disrupt the rhombomeric organization of the hindbrain, whereas Hoxb1
mutations do not alter the rhombomeric pattern, but instead influence the fate of
cells originating in rhombomere 4. We suggest that these differences are not the 
consequences of different functional roles for these gene products, but rather
reflect differences in the kinetics of Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 gene expression. In strong
support of the idea that Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 have overlapping functions, Hoxa1/Hoxb1 
double mutant homozygotes exhibit a plethora of defects either not seen, or seen 
only in a very mild form, in mice mutant for only Hoxa1 or Hoxb1. Examples
include: the loss of both rhombomeres 4 and 5, the selective loss of the 2(nd)
branchial arch, and the loss of most, but not all, 2(nd) branchial arch-derived
tissues. We suggest that the early role for both of these genes in hindbrain
development is specification of rhombomere identities and that the aberrant
development of the hindbrain in Hoxa1/Hoxb1 double mutants proceeds through two
phases, the misspecification of rhombomeres within the hindbrain, followed
subsequently by size regulation of the misspecified hindbrain through induction
of apoptosis.

PMID: 10529420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mech Dev. 1999 Oct;88(1):55-66.

Essential role of CREB family proteins during Xenopus embryogenesis.

Lutz B(1), Schmid W, Niehrs C, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany. lutz@mpipsykl.mpg.de

The leucine zipper transcription factors cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB), cAMP response element modulatory protein (CREM) and activating
transcription factor 1 (ATF1) bind to the cAMP response element (CRE) with the
palindromic consensus sequence TGACGTCA. Their transcriptional activities are
dependent on serine phosphorylation induced by various extracellular signals such
as hormones, growth factors and neurotransmitters. Here we show that CREB is the 
predominant CRE-binding protein in Xenopus embryos and that it plays an essential
role during early development. The importance of CREB for morphogenetic processes
was assessed by injection of RNA encoding a dominant-negative form of CREB that
is fused to a truncated progesterone receptor ligand binding domain. In this
fusion protein, a dominant-negative function can be induced by application of the
synthetic steroid RU486 at given developmental stages. The inhibition of CREB at 
blastula and early gastrula stages leads to severe posterior defects of the
embryos reflected by strong spina bifida, whereas the inhibition of CREB at the
beginning of neurulation resulted in stunted embryos with microcephaly. In these 
embryos, initial induction of neural and mesodermal tissues is not dependent on
CREB function, as genes such as Otx2, Krox20, Shh and MyoD are still expressed in
injected embryos. But the expression domains of Otx2 and MyoD were found to be
distorted reflecting the abnormal development in both neural and somitic
derivatives. In summary, our data show that CREB is essential during several
developmental stages of Xenopus embryogenesis.

PMID: 10525188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Arch Neurol. 1999 Oct;56(10):1283-8.

A novel type of hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy characterized by a mild
phenotype.

De Jonghe P(1), Timmerman V, Nelis E, De Vriendt E, Löfgren A, Ceuterick C,
Martin JJ, Van Broeckhoven C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University Hospital Antwerp, Belgium.
dejonghe@uia.ua.ac.be

Comment in
    Arch Neurol. 1999 Oct;56(10):1195.

BACKGROUND: Three loci for autosomal dominant hereditary motor and sensory
neuropathy type I (HMSN I) or Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1 (CMT1) have been
identified on chromosomes 17p11.2 (CMT1A), 1q21-q23 (CMT1B), and 10q21.1-q22.1
(designated here as CMT1D). The genes involved are peripheral myelin protein 22
(PMP22), myelin protein zero (MPZ), and the early growth response element 2
(EGR2), respectively. Probably a fourth locus (CMT1C) exists since some autosomal
dominant HMSN I families have been excluded for linkage with the CMT1A and CMT1B 
loci. Four loci for autosomal dominant hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy
type II (HMSN II) or Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2 (CMT2) have been
localized on chromosomes 1p35-p36 (CMT2A), 3q13-q22 (CMT2B), 7p14 (CMT2D), and 3p
(HMSN-P).
OBJECTIVE: To describe the clinical, electrophysiologic, and neuropathological
features of a novel type of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We performed linkage studies with anonymous DNA markers
flanking the known CMT1 and CMT2 loci. Patients and their relatives underwent
clinical neurologic examination and electrophysiologic testing. In the proband, a
sural nerve biopsy specimen was examined.
RESULTS: Linkage studies excluded all known CMT1 and CMT2 loci. The clinical
phenotype is mild and almost all affected individuals remain asymptomatic.
Electrophysiologic and histopathological studies showed signs of a demyelinating 
neuropathy, but the phenotype is unusual for either autosomal dominant HMSN I or 
HMSN II.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that the HMSN in this family represents a novel
clinical and genetic entity.

PMID: 10520946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Muscle Nerve. 1999 Nov;22(11):1498-509.

Charcot-marie-tooth disease and related neuropathies: molecular basis for
distinction and diagnosis.

Pareyson D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Istituto Nazionale Neurologico "C.Besta," Via Celoria
11, 20133 Milan, Italy. dpareys@tin.it

Great advances have been made in understanding the molecular basis of
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) and related neuropathies, namely
Dejerine-Sottas disease (DSD), hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure
palsies (HNPP) and congenital hypomyelination (CH). The number of newly uncovered
mutations and identified genetic loci is rapidly increasing, and, as a
consequence, the classification of these disorders is becoming more complicated. 
Molecular genetics, animal models, and transfected cell studies are shedding
light on function and dysfunction of proteins involved in hereditary
myelinopathies-peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22), myelin protein zero (PO),
connexin 32 (Cx32), and early growth response 2 (EGR2). Gene dosage effect, loss 
of function, gain of toxic function, and dominant negative effect are possible
mechanisms whereby different gene mutations may exert their detrimental action on
peripheral nerves. A tentative rational approach to clinical and molecular
diagnosis based on genotype-phenotype correlation analysis is described.

Copyright 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 10514227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Hum Mutat. 1999 Oct;14(4):353-4.

A novel mutation (D305V) in the early growth response 2 gene is associated with
severe Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1 disease.

Bellone E(1), Di Maria E, Soriani S, Varese A, Doria LL, Ajmar F, Mandich P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Biology and Genetics, University of Genova, Genova;
Italy

Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies (HMSN) comprises a wide clinical
spectrum of related disorders with defects in peripheral nerve myelination.
Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1 (CMT1) is the most common form and is usually a mild
disease with onset in the first or second decade; however there is a
interfamilial and intrafamilial clinical variation, ranging from asymptomatic
expression to severe muscular weakness and atrophy. Recently point mutations in
the early growth response 2 gene (EGR2/Krox-20) have been associated with
hereditary myelinopathies. We investigated for mutations at the EGR2 gene a
patient with severe CMT1 phenotype. Direct sequencing of EGR2 gene showed a
heterozygous A T transversion at nucleotide 1064 that predicts an Asp305Val
substitution within the first zinc-finger domain. The finding of a novel EGR2
mutation associated with a different phenotype confirms that peripheral
neuropathies represent a continuum spectrum of related disorders due to an
underlying defect in myelination.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10502832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Development. 1999 Sep;126(18):4095-106.

Successive patterns of clonal cell dispersion in relation to neuromeric
subdivision in the mouse neuroepithelium.

Mathis L(1), Sieur J, Voiculescu O, Charnay P, Nicolas JF.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biologie moléculaire du Développement, Institut Pasteur, rue du
Docteur Roux, France.

We made use of the laacz procedure of single-cell labelling to visualize clones
labelled before neuromere formation, in 12.5-day mouse embryos. This allowed us
to deduce two successive phases of cell dispersion in the formation of the
rhombencephalon: an initial anterior-posterior (AP) cell dispersion, followed by 
an asymmetrical dorsoventral (DV) cell distribution during which AP cell
dispersion occurs in territories smaller than one rhombomere. We conclude that
the general arrest of AP cell dispersion precedes the onset of morphological
segmentation and is not imposed by the interface between adjacent rhombomeres.
This demonstrates a major change in the mode of epithelial growth that precedes
or accompanies the formation of neuromeres. We also deduced that the period of DV
cell dispersion in the neuroepithelium is followed by a coherent growth phase.
These results suggest a cell organization on a Cartesian grid, the coordinates of
which correspond to the AP and DV axis of the neural tube. A similar sequence of 
AP cell dispersion followed by an arrest of AP cell dispersion, a preferential DV
cell dispersion and then by a coherent neuroepithelial growth, is also observed
in the spinal cord and mesencephalon. This demonstrates that a similar cascade of
cell events occurs in these different domains of the CNS. In the prosencephalon, 
differences in spatial constraints may explain the variability in the orientation
of cell clusters. Genetic and clonal patterning in the AP and DV dimensions
follow the same spatial sequence. An interesting possibility is that these
successive patterns of cell growth facilitate the acquisition of positional
information.

PMID: 10457018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Kidney Int. 1999 Aug;56(2):452-60.

Coordinate augmentation in expression of genes encoding transcription factors and
liver secretory proteins in hypo-oncotic states.

Kang J(1), Holland M, Jones H, Kaysen GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Davis 95616,
USA.

BACKGROUND: In the nephrotic syndrome (NS) proteins of intermediate size (40 to
200 kD) are lost into the urine resulting in a decrease in plasma albumin
concentration and as a consequence a reduction in plasma colloid osmotic pressure
(pi). Plasma pi has also been reported to be reduced in the condition of
hereditary analbuminemia. The liver, in an apparent compensatory response,
increases synthesis of a group of secreted proteins defending plasma pi.
Regulation of several of these proteins, including both positive and negative
acute phase proteins, is at the transcriptional level. This is the only known
condition in which transcription of both positive and negative acute phase
proteins (APPs) are increased simultaneously. The specific transcription
factor(s) that might regulate this cascade is not defined.
METHODS: RNA was extracted from livers of 5 rats with hereditary analbuminemia
(the Nagase analbuminemic rat, NAR), 5 rats with NS induced by adriamycin
(Adria), 5 rats with NS caused by passive Heymann nephritis (NS) and 5 control
animals. The concentrations of mRNAs encoding four secreted proteins (albumin,
transferrin, fibrinogen, and apo A-1), five transcription factors, early growth
response factor 1 (EGRF-1), HNF-4, NGFI-C, EGR-3, and Krox20 relative to two
housekeeping genes, beta actin and GAPDH were determined simultaneously using
kinetic reverse transcriptase polymerase chain methodology (kRT-PCR).
RESULTS: The levels of all mRNAs encoding secreted proteins except for albumin
(which was reduced in NAR) were increased in NS and NAR and correlated
significantly with one another. mRNA encoding EGRF 1 was increased fivefold in NS
and NAR, and correlated significantly with mRNAs encoding Apo A-1, transferrin
and albumin in the two NS groups. HNF-4 mRNA was increased approximately twofold 
in both NS groups and correlated with albumin (R = 0.881, P < 0.001), transferrin
(R = 0.563, P = 0.012) and apo A-1 (R = 0.644, P = 0. 003). While fibrinogen mRNA
correlated with that of each of the other secreted proteins, it did not correlate
with either HNF-4 or EGRF-1 mRNA. Krox20, EGR3 and NGF1C were expressed at nearly
undetectable levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The hepatic response in conditions characterized by reduced plasma
pi include increased levels of mRNAs encoding a group of secreted proteins,
including the negative APPs albumin, transferrin and apo A-1, and the positive
APP fibrinogen. Levels of mRNAs encoding negative APPs and fibrinogen correlate
with one another, suggesting that they are coordinately controlled. Both EGRF-1
and HNF-4 may regulate the expression of the negative APPs, which have increased 
transcription in hypo-oncotic states.

PMID: 10432383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Dev Dyn. 1999 Aug;215(4):332-43.

Dynamics of placodal lineage development revealed by targeted transgene
expression.

Hatini V(1), Ye X, Balas G, Lai E.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Division, Cornell University Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Examination of the expression pattern of the winged-helix transcription factor
BF-1 outside of the neural tube in mouse embryos suggests that BF-1 is restricted
to a population of cells that gives rise to the ectodermal placodes and their
derivatives. Within the sensory cranial nerve ganglia, the expression of BF-1
distinguishes cells that arise from the placodes from those derived from the
neural crest. Expression of a lacZ transgene targeted to the BF-1 locus was used 
to follow the placodal lineage during mouse development. Analysis of placodal
development in mice with a targeted deletion of BF-1 reveals that, although BF-1 
is required for proliferation of the cells arising from the nasal placode, it is 
not required for the proliferation, survival, or both, of placode-derived cells
in the sensory cranial nerve ganglia. Dev Dyn 1999;215:332-343.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10417822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Cell Mol Life Sci. 1999 Jun;55(6-7):824-30.

The one-to-four rule and paralogues of sex-determining genes.

Ohno S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte, California 91010-3000,
USA.

Because of two successive rounds of tetraploidization at their inception, the
vertebrates contain four times more protein-coding genes in their genome than the
invertebrates: 60,000 versus 15,000. Consequently, each invertebrate gene has
been amplified to the maximum of four paralogous genes in vertebrates: the
one-to-four rule. When this rule is applied to genes pertinent to gonadal
development and differentiation, the following emerged: (i) Two closely related
zinc-finger transcription factor genes in invertebrates have been amplified to
two paralogous groups in vertebrates. One consisted of EGR1, EGR2, EGR3 and EGR4,
whereas the only known paralogue of the other is WT1, which controls the
developmental fate of the entire nephric system, and therefore of gonads.
Interestingly, EGR1 and WT1 act as antagonists of each other in nephroblastic
cells. (ii) SF-1, which controls the fate of two steroid hormone-producing
organs, adrenals and gonads, is descended from the invertebrate Ftz-F1 gene, and 
its only known paralogue is GCNF-1. (iii) The Y-linked SRY, the mammalian
testis-determining gene, is a paralogue neither of SOX3 (SRX) nor of SOX9. Its
ancient origin suggests that SRY once became extinct in earlier vertebrates, only
to revive itself in the mammalian ancestor. (iv) Inasmuch as four paralogues of
one invertebrate nuclear receptor gene have differentiated to receptors of
androgen, mineralocoticoid, glucocorticoid and progesterone, there should at most
be four paralogous estrogen-receptor genes in the vertebrate genome. It is likely
that one of them plays a pivotal role in the estrogen-dependent sex-determining
mechanism so commonly found among reptiles, amphibians and fish.

PMID: 10412365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Neurology. 1999 Jun 10;52(9):1827-32.

Novel missense mutation in the early growth response 2 gene associated with
Dejerine-Sottas syndrome phenotype.

Timmerman V(1), De Jonghe P, Ceuterick C, De Vriendt E, Löfgren A, Nelis E,
Warner LE, Lupski JR, Martin JJ, Van Broeckhoven C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for
Biotechnology and Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Born-Bunge Foundation, University 
of Antwerp, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the early growth response 2 (EGR2) gene have recently
been found in patients with congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy and
Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1 (CMT1) disease.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the frequency of EGR2 mutations in patients with a
diagnosis of CMT1, Dejerine-Sottas syndrome (DSS), or unspecified peripheral
neuropathies.
METHODS: Fifty patients and 70 normal control subjects were screened.
RESULTS: A de novo missense mutation (Arg359Trp) in the alpha-helix of the first 
zinc-finger domain of the EGR2 transcription factor was identified in a patient
diagnosed with a clinical phenotype consistent with DSS. This patient had a motor
median nerve conduction velocity of 8 m/s. A sural nerve biopsy showed a severe
loss of myelinated and unmyelinated fibers, evidence for demyelination, numerous 
classic onion bulbs, and focally folded myelin sheaths. DSS is a severe,
childhood-onset demyelinating peripheral neuropathy initially thought to be
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. However, several dominant heterozygous
mutations in the peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22) gene and dominant mutations
in the peripheral myelin protein zero (MPZ) gene, both in the heterozygous and
homozygous state, have been reported in patients with DSS.
CONCLUSIONS: Hereditary peripheral neuropathies represent a spectrum of disorders
due to underlying defects in myelin structure or formation.

PMID: 10371530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Jul;8(7):1245-51.

Functional consequences of mutations in the early growth response 2 gene (EGR2)
correlate with severity of human myelinopathies.

Warner LE(1), Svaren J, Milbrandt J, Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Hoston, TX 77030, USA.

The early growth response 2 gene ( EGR2 ) is a Cys2His2zinc finger transcription 
factor which is thought to play a role in the regulation of peripheral nervous
system myelination. This idea is based partly on the phenotype of homozygous
Krox20 ( Egr2 ) knockout mice, which display hypomyelination of the PNS and a
block of Schwann cells at an early stage of differentiation. Mutations in the
human EGR2 gene have recently been associated with the inherited peripheral
neuropathies Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1, Dejerine-Sottas syndrome and congenital 
hypomyelinating neuropathy. Three of the four EGR2 mutations are dominant and
occur within the zinc finger DNA-binding domain. The fourth mutation is recessive
and affects the inhibitory domain (R1) that binds the NAB transcriptional
co-repressors. A combination of DNA-binding assays and transcriptional analysis
was used to determine the functional consequences of these mutations. The zinc
finger mutations affect DNA binding and the amount of residual binding directly
correlates with disease severity. The R1 domain mutation prevents interaction of 
EGR2 with the NAB co-repressors and thereby increases transcriptional activity.
These data provide insight into the possible disease mechanisms underlying EGR2
mutations and the reason for varying severity and differences in inheritance
patterns.

PMID: 10369870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Trends Neurosci. 1999 Apr;22(4):167-73.

The EGR family of transcription-regulatory factors: progress at the interface of 
molecular and systems neuroscience.

O'Donovan KJ(1), Tourtellotte WG, Millbrandt J, Baraban JM.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD 21205, USA.

The EGR family of transcription regulatory factors, which is implicated in
orchestrating the changes in gene expression that underlie neuronal plasticity,
has attracted the attention of both molecular and systems neuroscientists. In
this article, the advances made in both these fields of research are reviewed.
Recent systems-based studies underscore the remarkable sensitivity and
specificity of the induction of the expression of genes encoding EGR-family
members in naturally occurring plasticity paradigms. However, they also challenge
conventional views of the role of this family in plasticity. Recent molecular
studies have identified the gonadotropin subunit, luteinizing hormone beta, as an
EGR1-regulated gene in vivo and uncovered an essential role for EGR3 in
muscle-spindle development. In addition, the discovery of novel proteins that are
capable of suppressing EGR-mediated transcription cast doubt over the prevalent
assumption that changes in EGR mRNA or protein levels provide an accurate measure
of EGR-driven transcriptional activity.

PMID: 10203854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Development. 1999 Apr;126(7):1397-406.

Krox-20 controls SCIP expression, cell cycle exit and susceptibility to apoptosis
in developing myelinating Schwann cells.

Zorick TS(1), Syroid DE, Brown A, Gridley T, Lemke G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA.

The transcription factors Krox-20 and SCIP each play important roles in the
differentiation of Schwann cells. However, the genes encoding these two proteins 
exhibit distinct time courses of expression and yield distinct cellular
phenotypes upon mutation. SCIP is expressed prior to the initial appearance of
Krox-20, and is transient in both the myelinating and non-myelinating Schwann
cell lineages; while in contrast, Krox-20 appears approximately 24 hours after
SCIP and then only within the myelinating lineage, where its expression is stably
maintained into adulthood. Similarly, differentiation of SCIP-/- Schwann cells
appears to transiently stall at the promyelinating stage that precedes
myelination, whereas Krox-20(-/-) cells are, by morphological criteria, arrested 
at this stage. These observations led us to examine SCIP regulation and Schwann
cell phenotype in Krox-20 mouse mutants. We find that in Krox-20(-/-) Schwann
cells, SCIP expression is converted from transient to sustained. We further
observe that both Schwann cell proliferation and apoptosis, which are normal
features of SCIP+ cells, are also markedly increased late in postnatal
development in Krox-20 mutants relative to wild type, and that the levels of cell
division and apoptosis are balanced to yield a stable number of Schwann cells
within peripheral nerves. These data demonstrate that the loss of Krox-20 in
myelinating Schwann cells arrests differentiation at the promyelinating stage, as
assessed by SCIP expression, mitotic activity and susceptibility to apoptosis.

PMID: 10068633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Bull Cancer. 1998 Dec;85(12):983-4.

[WT1 (Wilms Tumor 1). Tumor suppressor gene].

[Article in French]

[No authors listed]

PMID: 9988551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Eur J Neurosci. 1999 Jan;11(1):10-7.

Prolonged expression of zinc finger immediate-early gene mRNAs and decreased
protein synthesis following kainic acid induced seizures.

Honkaniemi J(1), Sharp FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California at San Francisco, USA.
bljaho@kielo.uta.fi

In the present study in situ hybridization was used to study the effect of kainic
acid induced seizures on the expression of the zinc finger immediate-early genes 
(IEGs) NGFI-A, NGFI-B, NGFI-C, egr-2; egr-3 and Nurr1. Kainic acid markedly
induced these IEGs especially in hippocampus, cortex and amygdala by 30 min. This
induction gradually decreased and returned to baseline by 24 h in most regions.
However, in the CA1 and CA3 subfields of hippocampus known to be damaged by
kainic acid the expression of all the IEGs except egr-2 remained elevated for 24 
h. NGFI-A, NGFI-B, NGFI-C and to a lesser extent, Nurr1, remained elevated also
in the subcortical region of the temporal lobe. By 24 h incorporation of
14C-leucine decreased in the piriform cortex, amygdala, and in the CA1 and CA3
subfields, but not in CA2 and dentate gyrus. These areas showing decreased
protein synthesis in the hippocampus by 24 h showed prolonged IEG induction,
whereas IEG expression returned to control levels in areas showing normal protein
synthesis. In the temporal lobe decreased protein synthesis coexisted with
decreased IEG expression, whereas areas in the vicinity of the region showing
decreased protein synthesis demonstrated elevated IEG expression. The decreased
protein synthesis was localized in areas where extensive neuronal death has
occurred. This prolonged IEG induction in the hippocampus, which has been linked 
with neuronal death, could solely represent a prolonged mRNA turnover caused by
disrupted protein synthesis. The prolonged IEG expression in the temporal lobe
appeared to be localized in regions where the cells are in stress, but still
viable. The sustained IEG expression might therefore either represent a stress
response by which the neurons are trying to protect themselves or, alternatively,
the IEG response may be an early sign indicating that these cells are initiating 
a pathway leading to programmed cell death.

PMID: 9987007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 29;274(5):3222-7.

Role of Egr-2 in up-regulation of Fas ligand in normal T cells and aberrant
double-negative lpr and gld T cells.

Mittelstadt PR(1), Ashwell JD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Biology, NCI, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1152, USA.

We previously identified a Fas ligand regulatory element (FLRE) in the Fas ligand
(fasL) promoter that binds Egr family proteins and demonstrated that Egr-3
(PILOT) but not Egr-1 (NGFI-A, Krox-24, Tis-8, and Zif-268) induces transcription
of fasL. The aberrant CD4(-)CD8(-) T cells from lpr/lpr and gld/gld mice, which
have mutations in the genes encoding Fas and FasL, respectively, have an
activated phenotype and constitutively express high levels of fasL mRNA,
prompting us to ask what role if any the FLRE and Egr family proteins have in
this aberrant expression of fasL. Unstimulated MRL-lpr/lpr and C3H-gld/gld
CD4(-)CD8(-) T cells constitutively contained high levels of two proteins that
bound to the FLRE. Supershift analysis revealed these proteins to be Egr-1 and
Egr-2 (Krox-20); Egr-3 was not detected. Activation of normal lymph node cells
resulted in increased expression of Egr-1, -2, and -3. As with egr-3, expression 
of egr-2 was blocked by cyclosporin A. Although overexpressed Egr-1 was
ineffective, overexpressed Egr-2 was as potent as Egr-3 in inducing fasL
promoter-dependent reporter constructs in T cell hybridomas and HeLa cells, and
both up-regulated endogenous fasL mRNA in HeLa cells. FasL-dependent reporter
constructs in MRL-lpr/lpr and C3H-gld/gld CD4(-)CD8(-) T cells were
constitutively active, and this activity was largely prevented by mutation of the
critical Egr family binding element. Thus, Egr-2, in addition to Egr-3, regulates
FasL expression in activated normal T cells, and Egr-2 is likely to play a direct
role in aberrant fasL up-regulation in lpr/lpr and gld/gld CD4(-)CD8(-) T cells.

PMID: 9915863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Hum Mutat. 1999;13(1):11-28.

Mutations in the peripheral myelin genes and associated genes in inherited
peripheral neuropathies.

Nelis E(1), Haites N, Van Broeckhoven C.

Author information: 
(1)Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), Born-Bunge
Foundation, University of Antwerp, Department of Biochemistry, Belgium.

The peripheral myelin protein 22 gene (PMP22), the myelin protein zero gene (MPZ,
P0), and the connexin 32 gene (Cx32, GJB1) code for membrane proteins expressed
in Schwann cells of the peripheral nervous system (PNS). The early growth
response 2 gene (EGR2) encodes a transcription factor that may control
myelination in the PNS. Mutations in the respective genes, located on human
chromosomes 17p11.2, 1q22-q23, Xq13.1, and 10q21.1-q22.1, are associated with
several inherited peripheral neuropathies. To date, a genetic defect in one of
these genes has been identified in over 1,000 unrelated patients manifesting a
wide range of phenotypes, i.e., Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1 (CMT1) and
type 2 (CMT2), Dejerine-Sottas syndrome (DSS), hereditary neuropathy with
liability to pressure palsies (HNPP), and congenital hypomyelination (CH). This
large number of genetically defined patients provides an exceptional opportunity 
to examine the correlation between phenotype and genotype.

PMID: 9888385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):194-204.

Transcriptional regulation of the AP-2alpha promoter by BTEB-1 and AP-2rep, a
novel wt-1/egr-related zinc finger repressor.

Imhof A(1), Schuierer M, Werner O, Moser M, Roth C, Bauer R, Buettner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, University of Regensburg Medical School, D-93042
Regensburg, Germany.

AP-2 transcription factors have been suggested to exert key regulatory functions 
in vertebrate embryonic development, in tumorigenicity of various cancer cell
types, and in controlling cell cycle and apoptotic effector genes. In this study,
we investigated transcriptional regulation of the AP-2alpha gene promoter
mediated by an autoregulatory element (referred to as A32) with a core consensus 
AP-2 binding site at position -336 relative to the mRNA initiation site. AP-2 and
multiple different nuclear proteins in HeLa and Neuro2A cell extracts form
specific bandshifts with the A32 element. By screening a mouse brain cDNA
expression library, we isolated two different cDNAs encoding the transcription
factor BTEB-1 and a novel zinc finger protein, AP-2rep. AP-2rep reveals a modular
structure with homology to transcription factors of the wt-1/egr-1-family.
AP-2rep, BTEB-1, and AP-2 interact in a mutually exclusive manner with
overlapping binding sites in the A32 element. Transfection studies revealed that 
BTEB-1 is a strong activator of AP-2alpha promoter activity, whereas
cotransfected AP-2alpha resulted in moderate autoactivation of promoter activity.
In contrast, AP-2rep confers strong transcriptional repression to the AP-2alpha
gene, and we observed an excellent correlation between induction of AP-2rep mRNA 
expression and downregulation of AP-2alpha mRNA during development of the kidney.
In summary, we have identified multiple transcription factors and cloned from an 
expression library a novel zinc finger silencing factor, AP-2rep, mediating
positive and negative regulation of AP-2alpha expression through a set of
overlapping cis-regulatory promoter elements.

PMCID: PMC83878
PMID: 9858544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 1998 Nov-Dec;20(6):591-9.

All-trans-retinoic acid upregulates the expression of COUP-TFI in early-somite
mouse embryos cultured in vitro.

Clotman F(1), Van Maele-Fabry G, Picard JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Transgene Technology and Gene Therapy, Flanders Interuniversity
Institute for Biotechnology, Leuven, Belgium.

Exposure of embryos to an excess of retinoic acid (RA) modifies the
spatio-temporal pattern of expression of developmental genes. RA regulates the
expression of target genes through binding of the retinoid nuclear receptors
(RARs and RXRs), as heterodimers, to regulatory cis-acting elements. COUP-TF
factors, which are able to dimerize with the RXRs and to compete with the
retinoid receptors for their DNA binding sites, are suspected to modulate the
retinoid signal transduction pathway. Therefore, COUP-TF factors may be involved 
in the regulation of the expression of developmental genes and/or in the
modifications induced by an excess of RA in the expression of these genes. The
aim of this work is to assess whether RA-induced modifications in the expression 
of Krox-20 and Hox genes correlate with alterations of the expression of COUP-TF 
genes. In addition to spatial modifications in the expression patterns of Krox-20
and Hox genes, we report here an upregulation of the expression level of COUP-TFI
after RA exposure. However, this abnormality did not spatially overlap with the
modifications observed in the expression of Krox-20 and Hox genes. These data
suggest an involvement of COUP-TFI in the generation of RA-induced abnormalities,
but do not support the hypothesis of an involvement of this factor in the
regulation of the expression of Hox or Krox-20 genes.

PMID: 9831119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Development. 1998 Dec;125(23):4739-48.

Hoxa1 and Krox-20 synergize to control the development of rhombomere 3.

Helmbacher F(1), Pujades C, Desmarquet C, Frain M, Rijli FM, Chambon P, Charnay
P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

The transcription factor genes Hoxa1 and Krox-20 have been shown to play
important roles in vertebrate hindbrain segmentation. In this report, we present 
evidence for novel functions of these genes which co-operate in specifying
cellular identity in rhombomere (r) 3. Although Hoxa1 has not been observed to be
expressed rostrally to the prospective r3/r4 boundary, its inactivation results
in (i) the appearance of patches of cells presenting an r2-like molecular
identity within r3, (ii) early neuronal differentiation in r3, normally
characteristic of even-numbered rhombomeres, and (iii) abnormal navigation of r3 
motor axons, similar to that observed in even-numbered rhombomeres. These
phenotypic manifestations become more severe in the context of the additional
inactivation of one allele of the Krox-20 gene, demonstrating that Hoxa1 and
Krox-20 synergize in a dosage-dependent manner to specify r3 identity and odd-
versus even-numbered rhombomere characters. In addition, these data suggest that 
the control of the development of r3 may not be autonomous but dependent on
interactions with Hoxa1-expressing cells.

PMID: 9806922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. EMBO J. 1998 Oct 15;17(20):6010-9.

Novel mutants of NAB corepressors enhance activation by Egr transactivators.

Svaren J(1), Sevetson BR, Golda T, Stanton JJ, Swirnoff AH, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratory Medicine, Departments of Pathology and Internal
Medicine, Campus Box 8118, 660 S. Euclid Ave., Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The NGFI-A binding corepressors NAB1 and NAB2 interact with a conserved domain
(R1 domain) within the Egr1/NGFI-A and Egr2/Krox20 transactivators, and repress
the transcription of Egr target promoters. Using a novel adaptation of the yeast 
two-hybrid screen, we have identified several point mutations in NAB corepressors
that interfere with their ability to bind to the Egr1 R1 domain. Surprisingly,
NAB proteins bearing some of these mutations increased Egr1 activity
dramatically. The mechanism underlying the unexpected behavior of these mutants
was elucidated by the discovery that NAB conserved domain 1 (NCD1) not only binds
to Egr proteins but also mediates multimerization of NAB molecules. The
activating mutants exert a dominant negative effect on NAB repression by
multimerizing with native NAB proteins and preventing binding of endogenous NAB
proteins with Egr transactivators. To examine NAB repression of a native Egr
target gene, we show that NAB2 represses Egr2/Krox20-mediated activation of the
bFGF/FGF-2 promoter, and that repression is reversed by coexpression of dominant 
negative NAB2. Because of their specific ability to alleviate NAB repression of
Egr target genes, the dominant negative NAB mutants will be useful in elucidating
the mechanism and function of NAB corepressors.

PMCID: PMC1170927
PMID: 9774344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mech Dev. 1998 Aug;76(1-2):185-90.

The winged helix transcription factor Hfh2 is expressed in neural crest and
spinal cord during mouse development.

Labosky PA(1), Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, 36th and Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA.

The embryonic neural crest is a unique group of cells that gives rise to the
peripheral nervous system as well as many other cell types. Most of the work
describing the behavior and specification of these cells has been done in the
avian system, a system amenable to experimental manipulations such as tissue
grafting, cell transplantation and lineage tracing. This work has been greatly
facilitated by the use of molecular markers of neural crest cells such as HNK-1
and slug, markers that are not yet available for the study of mouse neural crest.
Here we demonstrate that Hfh2 (HNF3 forkhead homologue 2), a member of the
'winged helix' or 'forkhead' transcription factor gene family, is expressed in
premigratory and migrating neural crest cells in the early mouse embryo and in
motorneuron progenitors in the developing spinal cord. Using linkage analysis we 
have localized the Hfh2 gene to chromosome 4 at 44.91 cM from the centromere.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 9767163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):87-91.

Sensory ataxia and muscle spindle agenesis in mice lacking the transcription
factor Egr3.

Tourtellotte WG(1), Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA.

Muscle spindles are skeletal muscle sensory organs that provide axial and limb
position information (proprioception) to the central nervous system. Spindles
consist of encapsulated muscle fibers (intrafusal fibers) that are innervated by 
specialized motor and sensory axons. Although the molecular mechanisms involved
in spindle ontogeny are poorly understood, the innervation of a subset of
developing myotubes (type I) by peripheral sensory afferents (group Ia) is a
critical event for inducing intrafusal fiber differentiation and subsequent
spindle formation. The Egr family of zinc-finger transcription factors, whose
members include Egr1 (NGFI-A), Egr2 (Krox-20), Egr3 and Egr4 (NGFI-C), are
thought to regulate critical genetic programs involved in cellular growth and
differentiation (refs 4-8, and W.G.T. et al., manuscript submitted). Mice
deficient in Egr3 were generated by gene targeting and had gait ataxia, increased
frequency of perinatal mortality, scoliosis, resting tremors and ptosis. Although
extrafusal skeletal muscle fibers appeared normal, Egr3-deficient animals lacked 
muscle spindles, a finding that is consistent with their profound gait ataxia.
Egr3 was highly expressed in developing muscle spindles, but not in Ia afferent
neurons or their terminals during developmental periods that coincided with the
induction of spindle morphogenesis by sensory afferent axons. These results
indicate that type I myotubes are dependent upon Egr3-mediated transcription for 
proper spindle development.

PMID: 9731539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Hybridoma. 1998 Apr;17(2):191-8.

Characterization of monoclonal antibodies directed to the amino-terminus of the
WT1, Wilms' tumor suppressor protein.

Rauscher FJ 3rd(1), Morris JF, Fredericks WJ, Lopez-Guisa J, Balakrishnan C, Jost
M, Herlyn M, Rodeck U.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

We have produced and characterized three monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) directed to
the amino terminus of the WT1 Wilms' tumor suppressor transcription factor and
compared their properties to rabbit polyclonal sera raised to the same immunogen.
A recombinant protein consisting of amino acids 1-181 of human WT1 was
overexpressed in E. coli, purified, and used as the immunogen. Three MAbs
designated 6F-H2, 6F-H7, and 6F-HC-17--all of the IgG1 subclass--were selected
and further characterized. Each recognized all isoforms of the full-length WT1
protein in Western blot assays and immunoprecipitated WT1 in both physiologic
buffers and under high detergent/high salt (RIPA) conditions. Preliminary epitope
mapping suggests that all three MAbs recognize a region in the amino terminal 84 
amino acids of WT1 and that the MAbs do not recognize the polyglycine or
polyproline regions of the protein. The WT1 antibodies do not recognize the
structurally and functionally related early growth response (EGR)1, EGR2, EGR3,
or EGR4 proteins. All WT1 MAbs recognize the murine WT1 protein and
immunohistochemical staining of murine embryonic and newborn kidney sections show
strong staining of condensing metanephric mesenchyme and primitive podocytes in
developing glomeruli. These WT1-specific MAbs should be useful in characterizing 
the biochemical and developmental roles of WT1 and in defining the emerging role 
of WT1 as a diagnostic and/or prognostic marker in mesothelioma, leukemias, and
breast cancer.

PMID: 9627060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Cancer Res. 1998 Jun 1;58(11):2461-8.

Expression of early growth response genes in human prostate cancer.

Eid MA(1), Kumar MV, Iczkowski KA, Bostwick DG, Tindall DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Early growth-response (EGR) genes are nuclear transcription factors that are
implicated in regulating cell proliferation. Because these genes show divergent
expression in various human tumors, we sought to determine their expression in
nonmalignant and malignant prostate tissues. Total RNA extracted from prostate
tissues was probed with EGR-1, EGR-2, and EGR-alpha cDNA for Northern blots and
digoxigenin-labeled cRNA for in situ hybridization. Both Northern blot and in
situ hybridization analyses demonstrated increased EGR-1, but not EGR-2 or
EGR-alpha expression, in malignant prostate tissue as compared with weak
expression in nonmalignant tissue. EGR-1 mRNA was quantified in 96 prostate
specimens (86 adenocarcinomas representing different Gleason scores and 10 benign
tissues showing no histological manifestation of benign prostatic hypertrophy)
using in situ hybridization with an 35S-labeled cRNA probe. EGR-1 mRNA was
expressed at significantly higher levels in cancer than in normal prostate (P <
0.001). In cancer with Gleason scores 8-10, the expression of EGR-1 was higher
compared with those of lower Gleason scores (P < 0.005). Immunohistochemical
staining showed predominately basal cell nuclear EGR-1 protein in prostatic
acini. Nuclear staining was weak in nonmalignant tissues, more intense in
moderately differentiated carcinoma, and most intense in poorly differentiated
carcinoma. These results show that EGR-1 is overexpressed in prostate cancer and 
suggest a role for EGR-1 in prostate cancer growth.

PMID: 9622090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Korean Med Sci. 1998 Apr;13(2):171-8.

Different protein-binding patterns in the P3 promoter region of the human
insulin-like growth factor II gene in the human liver cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma tissues.

Seo JH(1), Kim KW, Park BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Korea.

The P3 promoter of the human insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) is the major 
IGF-II promoter in fetal liver (FL) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, 
little information is available on the transcriptional factors (TFs) controlling 
IGF-II gene expression in human liver cirrhosis (LC) and HCC tissues. To evaluate
the protein-binding patterns in the P3 promoter region, we performed
electromobility shift assay (EMSA) and DNase I footprinting assay using nuclear
extracts from human FL, LC and HCC tissues. EMSA showed considerable differences 
in binding patterns of proteins to P3 promoter region according to different
nuclear extracts used in this study. By footprinting assay, eight footprints were
observed in extracts. In addition, LC extract showed two specific binding at L1
[-80:+30] and L2 [-126:-80] regions, and HCC showed two specific binding at H1
[-176:-120] and H2 [-210:-177] as well as two liver specific binding (L1 and L2).
Footprinting after immunoprecipitation indicates that Egr1, Egr2 and Sp1 could
bind to P3 promoter directly, while c-jun and c-fos could not bind to these
region directly. Further study is required to determine the function of these
proteins.

PMCID: PMC3054476
PMID: 9610618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Nat Genet. 1998 Apr;18(4):382-4.

Mutations in the early growth response 2 (EGR2) gene are associated with
hereditary myelinopathies.

Warner LE(1), Mancias P, Butler IJ, McDonald CM, Keppen L, Koob KG, Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The early growth response 2 gene (EGR2) is part of a multigene family encoding
Cys2His2 type zinc-finger proteins and may play a role in the regulation of
cellular proliferation. Egr2, (also known as Krox20) is the mouse orthologue of
human EGR2 and was first identified as an immediate-early response gene, encoding
a protein that binds DNA in a sequence-specific manner and acts as a
transcription factor. Stable expression of Egr2 is specifically associated with
the onset of myelination in the peripheral nervous system (PNS). Egr2(-/-) mice
display disrupted hindbrain segmentation and development, and a block of
Schwann-cell differentiation at an early stage. We hypothesized that Egr2 may be 
a transcription factor affecting late myelin genes and that human myelinopathies 
of the PNS may result from mutations in EGR2. In support of this hypothesis, we
have identified one recessive and two dominant missense mutations in EGR2 (within
regions encoding conserved functional domains) in patients with congenital
hypomyelinating neuropathy (CHN) and a family with Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1
(CMT1).

PMID: 9537424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Neurosci Lett. 1998 Jan 30;241(2-3):87-90.

Differential time course of angiotensin-induced AP-1 and Krox proteins in the rat
lamina terminalis and hypothalamus.

Blume A(1), Seifert K, Lebrun CJ, Möllenhoff E, Gass P, Unger T, Herdegen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Kiel, Germany.

We studied the time course of expression of the inducible transcription factors
(ITF) c-Fos, FosB, c-Jun, JunB, JunD, Krox-20 and Krox-24, induced by a single
intracerebroventricular injection of angiotensin II, in the subfornical organ
(SFO), median preoptic nucleus (MnPO) paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and
supraoptic nucleus (SON). c-Fos and Krox-24 were expressed rapidly in neurons of 
all four areas but completely disappeared after 4 h. FosB showed a delayed but
persistent expression between 4 h and 24 h in the MnPO and PVN. c-Jun was induced
in the MnPO, SFO and PVN after 1.5 h and in the SON after 4 h. JunB was
selectively expressed in the MnPO and SFO and the level of JunD did not change.
The expression of the pre-existing transcription factors SRF, CREB and ATF-2
which contribute to the transcriptional control of jun, fos and krox genes, was
not affected by Ang II. Thus, we could show for the first time that an acute
stimulation of AT receptors results in continual changes in ITF expression over
24 h.

PMID: 9507927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Dec 9;94(25):13713-8.

Regulation of dorsal fate in the neuraxis by Wnt-1 and Wnt-3a.

Saint-Jeannet JP(1), He X, Varmus HE, Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Members of the Wnt family of signaling molecules are expressed differentially
along the dorsal-ventral axis of the developing neural tube. Thus we asked
whether Wnt factors are involved in patterning of the nervous system along this
axis. We show that Wnt-1 and Wnt-3a, both of which are expressed in the dorsal
portion of the neural tube, could synergize with the neural inducers noggin and
chordin in Xenopus animal explants to generate the most dorsal neural structure, 
the neural crest, as determined by the expression of Krox-20, AP-2, and slug.
Overexpression of Wnt-1 or Wnt-3a in the neuroectoderm of whole embryos led to a 
dramatic increase of slug and Krox-20-expressing cells, but the hindbrain
expression of Krox-20 remained unaffected. Enlargement in the neural crest
population could occur even when cell proliferation was inhibited. Wnt-5A and
Wnt-8, neither of which is expressed in the dorsal neuroectoderm, failed to
induce neural crest markers. Overexpression of glycogen synthase kinase 3, known 
to antagonize Wnt signaling, blocked the neural-crest-inducing activity of Wnt-3a
in animal explants and inhibited neural crest formation in whole embryos. We
suggest that Wnt-1 and Wnt-3a have a role in patterning the neural tube along its
dorsoventral axis and function in the differentiation of the neural crest.

PMCID: PMC28371
PMID: 9391091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Immunobiology. 1997 Dec;198(1-3):179-91.

Coordinate expression and distinct DNA-binding characteristics of the four
EGR-zinc finger proteins in Jurkat T lymphocytes.

Skerka C(1), Decker EL, Zipfel PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical
Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.

The Early Growth Response Genes (EGR-1 to AT133/EGR-4) encode a family of
proteins that are composed of three homologous consecutive zinc fingers of the
Cys2-His2 type and different flanking sequence. Upon growth stimulation of
resting cells the four EGR-genes are simultaneously transcribed. We have analyzed
the expression of the four EGR-proteins in Jurkat T cells and show by Western
blot analysis that the four EGR-proteins are coordinately induced upon treatment 
with a combination of PHA and PMA. As the individual proteins are reported to
bind to identical target sequences, we have analyzed the DNA-binding of the
native proteins. Using nuclear extract in which we have demonstrated expression
of all four EGR-proteins, only EGR-1, but no other member of this protein family 
is found to bind to the EGR-consensus site (GCG GGG GCG). In addition,
DNA-binding of both native EGR-1 and of recombinant EGR-1 and AT133/EGR-4
proteins expressed in insect cells was analyzed. This comparison revealed
distinct binding properties of recombinant EGR-1 and AT133/EGR-4 to
oligonucleotides that include the EGR-consensus sites. The distinct binding
affinities suggest that in vivo EGR-proteins bind to different target sequences
and that each EGR-protein regulates distinct target genes. This is underlined by 
demonstrating that EGR-1 but not AT133/EGR-4 binds to a related G-rich promoter
element with the sequence GGG GTG GGG. This G-rich sequence serves as an
overlapping binding site for the two zinc finger proteins EGR-1 and Sp1. As
similar overlapping binding sites for EGR-1 and Sp1 have been identified in
several human and mouse gene promoters, we raise the question whether the Sp1
binding sites described in a large number of eukaryotic gene promoters also
represent binding sites for EGR-1.

PMID: 9442390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Development. 1998 Feb;125(3):443-52.

Segmental expression of the EphA4 (Sek-1) receptor tyrosine kinase in the
hindbrain is under direct transcriptional control of Krox-20.

Theil T(1), Frain M, Gilardi-Hebenstreit P, Flenniken A, Charnay P, Wilkinson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, London, UK.

Segmentation of the vertebrate hindbrain leads to the formation of a series of
rhombomeres (r) with distinct identities. Recent studies have uncovered
regulatory links between transcription factors governing this process, but little
is known of how these relate to molecules mediating cell-cell signalling. The Eph
receptor tyrosine kinase gene EphA4 (Sek-1) is expressed in r3 and r5, and
function-blocking experiments suggest that it is involved in restricting
intermingling of cells between odd- and even-numbered rhombomeres. We have
analysed the cis-acting regulatory sequences of the EphA4 gene in transgenic mice
and identified a 470 bp enhancer element that drives specific expression in r3
and r5. Within this element, we have identified eight binding sites for the
Krox-20 transcription factor that is also expressed in r3 and r5. Mutation of
these binding sites abolishes r3/r5 enhancer activity and ectopic expression of
Krox-20 leads to ectopic activation of the enhancer. These data indicate that
Krox-20 is a direct transcriptional activator of EphA4. Together with evidence
that Krox-20 regulates Hox gene expression, our findings reveal a mechanism by
which the identity and movement of cells are coupled such that sharply restricted
segmental domains are generated.

PMID: 9425139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Neurosci Res. 1997 Dec 1;50(5):702-12.

Differential regulation of the zinc finger genes Krox-20 and Krox-24 (Egr-1)
suggests antagonistic roles in Schwann cells.

Topilko P(1), Levi G, Merlo G, Mantero S, Desmarquet C, Mancardi G, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.

Krox-20 and Krox-24 (Egr-1) encode closely related zinc finger transcription
factors, which interact with the same DNA target sequences. Krox-20 is required
for myelination in the peripheral nervous system. Using lacZ knock-in mutant
mouse lines as well as immunohistochemical analyses, we have studied the
expression of Krox-20 and Krox-24 in the Schwann cell lineage during normal
development and following nerve lesion in the mouse and in human neuropathies.
During embryogenesis, the two genes are expressed in a successive and mutually
exclusive manner, Krox-24 being restricted to Schwann cell precursors and Krox-20
to mature Schwann cells. At birth, Krox-24 is reactivated and the two genes are
coexpressed. In the adult, Krox-20 is expressed in myelinating cells, while
Krox-24 is restricted to nonmyelinating cells. Following nerve lesion, Krox-24 is
strongly induced in Schwann cells, reinforcing the link between its expression
and the nonmyelinating and/or proliferative state, whereas Krox-20 is
downregulated. These data are consistent with Krox-20 and Krox-24 playing
antagonistic roles during the development of the Schwann cell lineage. In
particular, their balance of expression might participate in the choice between
myelinating and nonmyelinating pathways.

PMID: 9418958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1997 Oct 3;49(1-2):165-74.

Transcriptional activation of human choline acetyltransferase by AP2- and
NGF-induced factors.

Quirin-Stricker C(1), Mauvais C, Schmitt M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Chimie Biologique, U184/INSERM, LGME/CNRS, Faculté de Médecine,
Strasbourg, France.

ChAT (choline acetyltransferase) is the enzyme responsible for acetylcholine
synthesis and is specifically expressed in cholinergic neurons. To further
characterize the transcriptional regulation of the hCHAT (human ChAT) gene by
NGF, we examined the effects upon ChAT promoter activity of a family of
transcription factors which are activated by NGF and several extracellular
stimuli and encoded by immediate-early genes. These include NGFI-A (Egr1,
zif268), NGFI-C (Egr2), Krox-20 and NGFI-B (Nurr77). Two fragments of the hChAT
gene were used for functional analysis carrying 944 bp (P1) and 4000 bp (P1 + P2)
of the 5' flanking region in front of the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT)
reporter gene. They were transiently co-transfected with NGFI-A, NGFI-C, Krox-20 
and NGFI-B expression vectors in NG108-15, SN6 and COS-1 cells. CAT activity
after transfection of the p4000 ChAT-CAT reporter into both neuronal cell lines
(NG108-15 and SN6 cells) was increased up to 5-fold in the presence of
co-transfected NGFI-A and up to 5- and 12-fold after co-transfection of NGFI-C
expression vector in NG108-15 and SN6 cells, respectively. In NG108-15 cells,
dbcAMP excerted a strong enhancing activity on the transactivation properties of 
NGFI-C while this was not observed when cells were transfected with NGFI-A. These
trans-activation effects were specific for neuronal cells. When NG108-15 cells
were treated with dbcAMP in the presence of H89, a specific PKA inhibitor, the
increase of transcriptional activity of NGFI-C was abolished, indicating that a
signalling transduction mechanism through PKA plays a role in NGFI-C-induced
trans-activation. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays showed that the sequence 
GCCCGGGGAG (NGFRE) located 1205 bp upstream of the first coding ATG (E1) can bind
NGFI-A but not NGFI-C. Several possibilities explaining the observed results are 
discussed. Finally, transfections of ChAT-CAT reporters including the P1 + P2
region or a minimal ChAT enhancer present in the P2 region in front of a
heterologous promoter indicated the presence of a regulatory element which
conferred AP2-dependent trans-activation with homologous as well as with
heterologous promoter constructs.

PMID: 9387876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Exp Neurol. 1997 Oct;147(2):316-32.

Expression of Fos, Jun, and Krox family proteins in Alzheimer's disease.

MacGibbon GA(1), Lawlor PA, Walton M, Sirimanne E, Faull RL, Synek B, Mee E,
Connor B, Dragunow M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology, School of Medicine, The 
University of Auckland, New Zealand.

Apoptosis is an active process of cell death characterized by distinct
morphological features and is often the end result of a genetic program of
events, i.e., programmed cell death (PCD). There is growing evidence supporting a
role for apoptosis and/or PCD in Alzheimer's disease (AD), based on DNA
fragmentation studies and recent findings of increased levels of inducible
transcription factors (ITFs) such as c-Jun in AD brains. We have characterized
the expression of a large range of ITFs (c-Fos, Fos B, Fos-related antigens,
c-Jun, Jun B, Jun D, Krox20, and Krox24) using multiple antisera in AD postmortem
hippocampi and compared this with human control hippocampi as well as
Huntington's disease hippocampi and human epilepsy biopsy tissue. We found little
evidence of nuclear expression of any ITF except c-Jun in the human postmortem
tissue, compared with nuclear staining in biopsy tissue. We found some evidence
for increased levels of c-Jun and Krox24 protein and krox24 mRNA in the CA1
region of AD hippocampi, suggesting that PCD may be involved in the pathogenesis 
of AD. In general, staining characteristics of ITFs varied with different
antisera directed against the same protein, indicating the need for caution when 
interpreting results.

PMID: 9344557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Neuroscience. 1997 Dec;81(3):627-39.

Effect of global system for mobile communication microwave exposure on the
genomic response of the rat brain.

Fritze K(1), Wiessner C, Kuster N, Sommer C, Gass P, Hermann DM, Kiessling M,
Hossmann KA.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Neurological Research, Department of Experimental
Neurology, Cologne, Germany.

The acute effect of global system for mobile communication (GSM) microwave
exposure on the genomic response of the central nervous system was studied in
rats by measuring changes in the messenger RNAs of hsp70, the transcription
factor genes c-fos and c-jun and the glial structural gene GFAP using in situ
hybridization histochemistry. Protein products of transcription factors, stress
proteins and marker proteins of astroglial and microglial activation were
assessed by immunocytochemistry. Cell proliferation was evaluated by
bromodeoxyuridine incorporation. A special GSM radiofrequency test set, connected
to a commercial cellular phone operating in the discontinuous transmission mode, 
was used to simulate GSM exposure. The study was conducted at time averaged and
brain averaged specific absorption rates of 0.3 W/kg (GSM exposure), 1.5 W/kg
(GSM exposure) and 7.5 W/kg (continuous wave exposure), respectively. Immediately
after exposure, in situ hybridization revealed slight induction of hsp70
messenger RNA in the cerebellum and hippocampus after 7.5 W/kg exposure, but not 
at lower intensities. A slightly increased expression of c-fos messenger RNA was 
observed in the cerebellum, neocortex and piriform cortex of all groups subjected
to immobilization, but no differences were found amongst different exposure
conditions. C-jun and GFAP messenger RNAs did not increase in any of the
experimental groups. 24 h after exposure, immunocytochemical analysis of FOS and 
JUN proteins (c-FOS, FOS B, c-JUN JUN B, JUN D), of HSP70 or of KROX-20 and -24
did not reveal any alterations. Seven days after exposure, neither increased cell
proliferation nor altered expression of astroglial and microglial marker proteins
were observed. In conclusion, acute high intensity microwave exposure of
immobilized rats may induce some minor stress response but does not result in
lasting adaptive or reactive changes of the brain.

PMID: 9316016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mech Dev. 1997 Jul;65(1-2):31-42.

Krox-20 is a key regulator of rhombomere-specific gene expression in the
developing hindbrain.

Seitanidou T(1), Schneider-Maunoury S, Desmarquet C, Wilkinson DG, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Biologie Moléculaire du Développement, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.

The morphogenesis of the vertebrate hindbrain involves a transient segmentation
process leading to the formation of reiterated organisation units called
rhombomeres (r). A number of regulatory genes expressed with a
rhombomere-specific pattern have been identified, including the gene encoding the
transcription factor Krox-20, which is restricted to r3 and r5. We have
previously demonstrated that in r3 and r5 Krox-20 directly controls the
transcription of Hoxa-2 and Hoxb-2. In the present study, we provide evidence
that Krox-20 is required for the expression of another Hox gene, Hoxb-3, in r5
specifically. Furthermore, the regulatory role of Krox-20 is not restricted to
the control of Hox gene expression, since it is also involved in the activation
of a receptor tyrosine kinase gene, Sek-1, in r3 and r5 and in the repression of 
the follistatin gene in r3 but not in r5. In conclusion, at least five regulatory
genes belonging to different families are under the direct or indirect control of
Krox-20 in r3 and/or r5 and this transcription factor therefore appears as a key 
regulator of gene expression in the developing hindbrain.

PMID: 9256343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1997 Jun;17(6):636-46.

Expression of zinc finger immediate early genes in rat brain after permanent
middle cerebral artery occlusion.

Honkaniemi J(1), States BA, Weinstein PR, Espinoza J, Sharp FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California at San Francisco, USA.

The prolonged expression of the leucine zipper fos/jun immediate early genes
(IEG) has been correlated with neuronal death after cerebral ischemia. In this
study, the expression of six zinc finger IEG was examined using in situ
hybridization in adult rats after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) with
the suture model. NGFI-A, NGFI-B, NGFI-C, egr-2, egr-3, and Nurr1 mRNA were all
induced throughout the ipsilateral cortex at 1 hour to 12 hours after MCAO. The
cortical induction for most of the genes was greatest in the anterior cingulate
and the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) and middle cerebral artery (MCA)
transition zone. All of the zinc finger IEG were induced at 1 hour in all regions
of hippocampus. NGFI-A and NGFI-B were induced in ipsilateral thalamus. Within
areas of infarction, the basal IEG mRNA expression, and expression of the
housekeeping gene cyclophilin A mRNA, decreased below control levels by 12 hours 
after the ischemia. Immediate early gene expression outside areas of infarction
returned to control levels in most brain regions by 24 hours except for egr-3,
which continued to be induced in the MCA/ ACA transition zone for 24 hours, and
NGFI-A, which continued to be expressed in specific regions of the thalamus for
72 hours. The induction of these IEG in the cortex is likely caused by
ischemia-induced cortical spreading depression, with the hippocampal and thalamic
IEG induction being caused by activation of efferent cortical pathways to these
regions. The prominent induction of NGFI-B, NGFI-C, egr-2, and egr-3 in the
anterior cingulate cortex, the ACA/MCA transition zone, and medial striatum could
reflect the ischemic regions around MCA infarcts. The prolonged NGFI-A expression
observed in thalamus in this study, and in CA1 of hippocampus after global
ischemia in the gerbil in a previous study, suggests that the prolonged NGFI-A,
expression could be the result of or the cause of the delayed cell death.
Prolonged NGFI-A expression, like c-fos and c-jun, seems to provide a marker for 
slowly dying neurons.

PMID: 9236720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Neurochem. 1997 May;68(5):1911-9.

Expression of Krox proteins during differentiation of the O-2A progenitor cell
line CG-4.

Sock E(1), Leger H, Kuhlbrodt K, Schreiber J, Enderich J, Richter-Landsberg C,
Wegner M.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Neurobiologie, Universität Hamburg, Germany.

Krox proteins are important regulators of development and terminal
differentiation. Using the rat glial progenitor cell line CG-4 as a model system 
for oligodendrocyte differentiation, we show that on the RNA level Krox-24 is the
predominant member of the Krox family in these cells. Similar results were also
obtained on the protein level as the major Krox protein from CG-4 cell extracts
reacted specifically with an antibody against Krox-24. Whereas Krox-24 RNA and
protein were abundant in undifferentiated CG-4 cells, a dramatic decrease in
expression was detected after a 3-5-day period of differentiation during which we
observed a reciprocal increase in the levels of myelin basic protein expression. 
Importantly, regulation of Krox-24 expression was very similar in CG-4 cells and 
primary oligodendrocyte cultures. When expression of Krox-24 in differentiating
CG-4 cells was followed on a closer time scale, we observed a sharp and transient
increase in Krox-24 RNA, protein, and DNA binding activity immediately after the 
onset of differentiation followed by an equally rapid decrease. This expression
pattern implicates Krox-24 both in maintenance of the undifferentiated state and 
in the immediate early phase of differentiation of CG-4 cells and possibly
oligodendrocytes.

PMID: 9109517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Int J Dev Biol. 1997 Apr;41(2):213-22.

Prorhombomeric subdivision of the mammalian embryonic hindbrain: is it
functionally meaningful?

Ruberte E(1), Wood HB, Morriss-Kay GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Oxford University, United Kingdom.

The technique of whole embryo culture has made significant contributions to
understanding the mechanisms of morphogenesis in mammalian embryos, especially
with respect to cranial neurulation and neural crest cell migration. This study
traces the fate of two specifically mammalian structures, the preotic and otic
sulci. Their formation at the 1/2- and 3-somite stages respectively, divides the 
hindbrain neuroepithelium into prorhombomeres A, B and C. The preotic sulcus is a
deeply recessed structure that forms the rostral boundary of expression of both
Hoxb-2 and the first domain of Krox-20. The otic sulcus is a shallow concavity in
which the second Krox-20 domain is expressed. DiI labeling followed by whole
embryo culture confirmed that the later fate of the preotic sulcus is the
rhombomere 2/3 boundary, and the fate of the otic sulcus is the cranial part of
rhombomere 5. Structurally, the preotic and otic sulci show no specialization
with respect to actin, tubulin or proteoglycans, but their maintenance depends on
contact with the subjacent mesenchyme. Their formation is inhibited by exposure
of embryos to retinoic acid prior to the onset of somitic segmentation,
indicating that the molecular events governing prorhombomeric subdivision of the 
hindbrain are retinoic acid-sensitive. The preotic sulcus may be essential for
neuroepithelial cell movement towards and into the rapidly enlarging forebrain;
the otic sulcus may simply delineate the caudal boundary of prorhombomere B, an
area with a discrete neural crest cell population discontinuous with those
rostral and caudal to it. Understanding the positional relationships of the
preotic and otic sulci to later rhombomeric segments makes them useful landmarks 
for experimental purposes, but there is no evidence that prorhombomeres are
functionally significant as the precursors of rhombomeric segments.

PMID: 9184328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mech Dev. 1997 Mar;62(2):227-37.

Expression of the helix-loop-helix factor, Hes3, during embryo development
suggests a role in early midbrain-hindbrain patterning.

Lobe CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, LSB 425, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON,
Canada. lobe@mcmail.cis.mcmaster.ca

The Hes gene family members are mammalian homologues of the Drosophila hairy and 
Enhancer of split genes. hairy and Enhancer of split function in both
segmentation and in the Notch neurogenic pathway during Drosophila embryo
development. Previous expression data suggested a conserved role for the Hes
genes in the Notch signalling pathway, but not in segmentation. Here, Hes3
expression during mouse embryogenesis is described. During early development of
the central nervous system, Hes3 is expressed specifically in the region of the
midbrain/hindbrain boundary, and in rhombomeres 2, 4, 6 and 7. This pattern
suggests that Hes3 may have a conserved role as a segmentation gene. Later in
development, Hes3 is co-expressed with other neurogenic gene homologues in the
developing central nervous system and epithelial cells undergoing mesenchyme
induction.

PMID: 9152013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Development. 1997 Mar;124(6):1215-26.

Segmental and neuronal architecture of the hindbrain of Krox-20 mouse mutants.

Schneider-Maunoury S(1), Seitanidou T, Charnay P, Lumsden A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Biologie Moléculaire du Developpement, Ecole Normale Superieure, Paris, France.

The vertebrate hindbrain is transiently segmented during its early development
with the formation of reiterated bulges, the rhombomeres (r). The Krox-20 gene,
which encodes a zinc finger transcription factor, has been shown previously to be
implicated in the maintenance of r3 and r5 (Schneider-Maunoury, S., Topilko, P., 
Seitanidou, T., Levi, G., Cohen-Tannoudji, M., Pournin, S., Babinet, C. and
Charnay, P. (1993) Cell 75, 1199-1214; Swiatek, P. J. and Gridley, T. (1993)
Genes Dev. 7, 2071-2084. However, it was not clear from these analyses how
extensive the deletion of r3 and r5 was and whether the overall segmentation and 
internal architecture of the hindbrain was affected. We have now reinvestigated
these issues by analysis of rhombomere boundaries, using both morphological and
molecular markers, and of the fate of specific motor neuron populations, using
retrograde and anterograde carbocyanine dye tracing. We conclude that r3 and r5
and their derivatives are completely eliminated in Krox-20(-/-) embryos while
overall hindbrain segmentation is maintained. In addition, we show that the
disappearance of these territories has important consequences for even-numbered
rhombomeres as well, in particular on axonal navigation: (i) a population of r6
motoneurons, presumably normally fated to join the glossopharyngeal nerve, has
its axons misrouted toward the facial exit point in r4; (ii) the trigeminal motor
axons are also misrouted, presumably because of the proximity of the trigeminal
and facial exit points. They fasciculate with facial axons outside the neural
tube and enter the second branchial arch instead of the first arch. This
navigational error could explain the disappearance, at around 17.5 dpc, of the
trigeminal motor nucleus in Krox-20(-/-) embryos by inadequate supply of
essential, possibly arch-specific survival factors.

PMID: 9102308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mech Dev. 1996 Dec;60(2):139-50.

A Krox binding site regulates protease nexin-1 promoter activity in embryonic
heart, cartilage and parts of the nervous system.

Ernø H(1), Küry P, Botteri FM, Monard D.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher-Institut, Basel, Switzerland.

The rat protease nexin-1 (PN-1) promoter contains a GCGGGGGCG binding site for
the transcription factors Krox-24, Krox-20 and NGFI-C. Mutations of this site
abolished binding of Krox-24 in vitro. The wildtype protease nexin-1 promoter
expressed beta-galactosidase similarity to the expression of protease nexin-1
mRNA. When the function of this Krox site was tested in vivo using transgenic F0 
embryos, mutation had two opposite effects. beta-Galactosidase expression
increased in cartilage and heart at both stages E11.5 and E13.5, but was
abolished in nerves of the central and peripheral nervous system at stage E13.5. 
These results suggest that Krox factors are among the important transcription
factors regulating protease nexin-1 expression and thereby intracellular
proteolytic activity in embryonic heart, cartilage and parts of the nervous
system.

PMID: 9025067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Neurosci Res. 1996 Dec 1;46(5):630-40.

Oct-6 (SCIP/Tst-1) is expressed in Schwann cell precursors, embryonic Schwann
cells, and postnatal myelinating Schwann cells: comparison with Oct-1, Krox-20,
and Pax-3.

Blanchard AD(1), Sinanan A, Parmantier E, Zwart R, Broos L, Meijer D, Meier C,
Jessen KR, Mirsky R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
England.

The POU domain transcription factor Oct-6 (SCIP/Tst-1) is likely to control
important stages of Schwann cell development, including the initiation of
myelination around birth. Here, we use immunocytochemical and reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction techniques to examine Oct-6 earlier in
nerve development, to test the idea that Oct-6 has an additional role in Schwann 
cell precursors or early embryonic Schwann cells, a possibility raised by
previous studies on transgenic mice. Consistent with this, we find low but
unambiguous levels of Oct-6 mRNA and protein in Schwann cell precursors of mouse 
and rat (nerves from 12- and 14-day-old embryos, respectively), with expression
levels gradually increasing during early Schwann cell development and towards
birth. Unexpectedly, Oct-6 immunoreactivity is clearly present in nuclei of most 
myelinating cells at least as late as postnatal day 12. Furthermore, many
nonmyelinating Schwann cells express Oct-6 in adult life. A comparison of Oct-6
mRNA with other Schwann cell transcription factors-namely, Oct-1, Krox-20, and
Pax-3-reveals that each factor exhibits strong developmental regulation and a
unique expression pattern in embryonic nerves. Therefore, they are likely to play
distinct regulatory roles in early development of the Schwann cell lineage.

PMID: 8951674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. EMBO J. 1996 Oct 1;15(19):5383-96.

Hoxb-2 transcriptional activation in rhombomeres 3 and 5 requires an
evolutionarily conserved cis-acting element in addition to the Krox-20 binding
site.

Vesque C(1), Maconochie M, Nonchev S, Ariza-McNaughton L, Kuroiwa A, Charnay P,
Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.

Erratum in
    EMBO J 1996 Dec 16;15(24):7188.

Segmentation is a key feature of the development of the vertebrate hindbrain
where it involves the generation of repetitive morphological units termed
rhombomeres (r). Hox genes are likely to play an essential role in the
specification of segmental identity and we have been investigating their
regulation. We show here that the mouse and chicken Hoxb-2 genes are dependent
for their expression in r3 and r5 on homologous enhancer elements and on binding 
to this enhancer of the r3/r5-specific transcriptional activator Krox-20. Among
the three Krox-20 binding sites of the mouse Hoxb-2 enhancer, only the
high-affinity site is absolutely necessary for activity. In contrast, we have
identified an additional cis-acting element, Box1, essential for r3/r5 enhancer
activity. It is conserved both in sequence and in position respective to the
high-affinity Krox-20 binding site within the mouse and chicken enhancers.
Furthermore, a short 44 bp sequence spanning the Box1 and Krox-20 sites can act
as an r3/r5 enhancer when oligomerized. Box1 may therefore constitute a
recognition sequence for another factor cooperating with Krox-20. Taken together,
these data demonstrate the conservation of Hox gene regulation and of Krox-20
function during vertebrate evolution.

PMCID: PMC452281
PMID: 8895582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Neuron. 1996 Oct;17(4):747-58.

Reorganization of pontine rhythmogenic neuronal networks in Krox-20 knockout
mice.

Jacquin TD(1), Borday V, Schneider-Maunoury S, Topilko P, Ghilini G, Kato F,
Charnay P, Champagnat J.

Author information: 
(1)Biologie Fonctionnelle du Neurone, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

We have shown previously that the inactivation of the zinc finger gene Krox-20
affects hindbrain segmentation, resulting in the elimination of rhombomeres 3 and
5. We demonstrate here that Krox-20 homozygous mutant mice exhibit abnormally
slow respiratory and jaw opening rhythms, indicating that a modification of
hindbrain segmentation influences the function of neuronal networks after birth. 
Central neuronal networks that control respiratory frequency are made
predominantly depressant by the elimination of a previously undescribed
rhythm-promoting system. Recordings of rhythmic activity from the isolated
hindbrain following progressive tissue transections indicate that the
reorganization takes place in the caudal pontine reticular formation. The newborn
(PO) Krox-20-/- mice, in which apneas are ten times longer than in wild-type
animals, may be a valuable model for the study of life-threatening apneas during 
early infancy.

PMID: 8893031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Sep 3;93(18):9339-45.

The conserved role of Krox-20 in directing Hox gene expression during vertebrate 
hindbrain segmentation.

Nonchev S(1), Maconochie M, Vesque C, Aparicio S, Ariza-McNaughton L, Manzanares 
M, Maruthainar K, Kuroiwa A, Brenner S, Charnay P, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medicial
Research, Mill Hill, London.

Transient segmentation in the hindbrain is a fundamental morphogenetic phenomenon
in the vertebrate embryo, and the restricted expression of subsets of Hox genes
in the developing rhombomeric units and their derivatives is linked with regional
specification. Here we show that patterning of the vertebrate hindbrain involves 
the direct upregulation of the chicken and pufferfish group 2 paralogous genes,
Hoxb-2 and Hoxa-2, in rhombomeres 3 and 5 (r3 and r5) by the zinc finger gene
Krox-20. We identified evolutionarily conserved r3/r5 enhancers that contain high
affinity Krox-20. binding sites capable of mediating transactivation by Krox-20. 
In addition to conservation of binding sites critical for Krox-20 activity in the
chicken Hoxa-2 and pufferfish Hoxb-2 genes, the r3/r5 enhancers are also
characterized by the presence of a number of identical motifs likely to be
involved in cooperative interactions with Krox-20 during the process of hindbrain
patterning in vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC38429
PMID: 8790331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Development. 1996 Sep;122(9):2847-57.

The regulation of Krox-20 expression reveals important steps in the control of
peripheral glial cell development.

Murphy P(1), Topilko P, Schneider-Maunoury S, Seitanidou T, Baron-Van Evercooren 
A, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.

The zinc finger transcription factor gene Krox-20 is expressed in Schwann cells
and is required for the myelination of peripheral nerves. We show that the
regulation of Krox-20 expression in peripheral glial cells reveals three
important steps in the development and differentiation of these cells. (i)
Expression of Krox-20 in Schwann cells requires continuous neuronal signalling
via direct axonal contact. Therefore Krox-20 appears to be a key component of the
transduction cascade linking axonal signalling to myelination. (ii) Krox-20
inducibility is acquired by Schwann cells at the time that they are formed from
their precursors. Diffusible factor(s) synthesised by the neural tube can mediate
this transition and can be mimicked by NDFbeta or a combination of CNTF and bFGF.
Furthermore, the neural tube activity is blocked by a hybrid protein containing
the NDF-binding domain of the ErbB4 receptor, strongly implicating NDF in the
physiological transition. (iii) In sensory ganglia, the microenvironment is
capable of negatively regulating Krox-20, presumably by preventing the conversion
of satellite glial cells toward a Schwann cell-like phenotype.

PMID: 8787758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jul;16(7):3545-53.

NAB2, a corepressor of NGFI-A (Egr-1) and Krox20, is induced by proliferative and
differentiative stimuli.

Svaren J(1), Sevetson BR, Apel ED, Zimonjic DB, Popescu NC, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA.

Previous work had identified a corepressor, NAB1, which represses transcriptional
activation mediated by NGFI-A (also known as Egr-1, zif268, and Krox24) and
Krox20. These zinc finger transcription factors are encoded by immediate-early
genes and have been implicated in a wide variety of proliferative and
differentiative processes. We have isolated and characterized another
corepressor, NAB2, which is highly related to NAB1 within two discrete domains.
The first conserved domain of NAB2 mediates an interaction with the R1 domain of 
NGFI-A. NAB2 represses the activity of both NGFI-A and Krox20, and its expression
is regulated by some of the same stimuli that induce NGFI-A expression, including
serum stimulation of fibroblasts and nerve growth factor stimulation of PC12
cells. The human NAB2 gene has been localized to chromosome 12ql3.3-14.1, a
region that is rearranged in several solid tumors, lipomas, uterine leiomyomata, 
and liposarcomas. Sequencing of the Caenorhabditis elegans genome has identified 
a gene that bears high homology to both NAB1 and NAB2, suggesting that NAB
molecules fulfill an evolutionarily conserved role.

PMCID: PMC231349
PMID: 8668170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1996 Jun 8;785:288-91.

Role of Krox-20 in endochondral bone formation.

Levi G(1), Topilko P, Schneider-Maunoury S, Lasagna M, Mantero S, Pesce B, Ghersi
G, Cancedda R, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l' Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale
Ecole Normale Supérieure Paris, France.

PMID: 8702157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 May;16(5):2283-94.

Role of EGR1 in regulation of stimulus-dependent CD44 transcription in B
lymphocytes.

Maltzman JS(1), Carman JA, Monroe JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

The immediate-early gene egr-1 encodes a transcription factor (EGR1) that links
B-cell antigen receptor (BCR) signals to downstream activation events through the
regulation of previously unidentified target genes. Here we identify the gene
encoding the lymphocyte homing and migration protein CD44 as a target of EGR1
regulation in B cells. BCR-induced increases in CD44 mRNA expression and
transcription levels are shown to occur in EGR1-expressing but not in
nonexpressing subclones of the B-cell line WEHI-231. Kinetics of egr-1
transcription and the appearance of nuclear EGR1 protein precede CD44 induction
and occur within 30 min after stimulation in the EGR1-expressing subclone. A
single EGR1 binding motif is demonstrated at bp -301 of the human CD44 promoter. 
Cotransfection of a CD44 promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter
construct with an egr-1 expression vector resulted in a 6.5- to 8.5-fold
induction of transcriptional activity relative to an empty expression vector. The
EGR1 binding motif was shown to be necessary for stimulus-induced expression of a
CD44 promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter construct in
nontransformed B lymphocytes and was required for transactivation by an EGR1
expression vector in a B-cell line. These studies identify EGR1 as an
intermediary linking BCR-derived signals to the induction of CD44. The relevance 
of these molecular events to BCR signal transduction and antigen-stimulated
B-cell-mediated immune responses is discussed.

PMCID: PMC231216
PMID: 8628295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Apr 16;221(2):430-6.

mRNA differential display reveals Krox-20 as a neural plasticity-regulated gene
in the rat hippocampus.

Inokuchi K(1), Murayama A, Ozawa F.

Author information: 
(1)Mitsubishi Kasei Insitute of Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.

The prolonged maintenance of hippocampal long-term potentiation depends on de
novo protein and RNA synthesis, indicating an involvement of altered gene
expression in long-lasting plastic changes in synaptic efficacy. We have used an 
mRNA differential display technique to identify a set of genes that are induced
by neural activity in the rat hippocampus. Sixteen independent cDNAs were
isolated whose mRNA level was markedly modulated by convulsive seizure. One of
these encodes Krox-20, a zinc finger DNA binding protein. High frequency tetanic 
stimulation of perforant pathway, which elicited a persistent long-term
potentiation (>10 h), rapidly induced expression of krox-20 mRNA in the
hippocampus of urethane-anesthetized rat. The increase in krox-20 mRNA was
transient and NMDA receptor-dependent. These results suggest a role for krox-20
in the maintenance of long-term potentiation.

PMID: 8619872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Eur J Immunol. 1996 Apr;26(4):811-6.

B cell early response gene expression coupled to B cell receptor, CD40 and
interleukin-4 receptor co-stimulation: evidence for a role of the egr-2/krox 20
transcription factor in B cell proliferation.

Newton JS(1), Li J, Ning ZQ, Schoendorf DE, Norton JD, Murphy JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Sciences, King's College London, GB.

B lymphocytes are activated following antigen stimulation of the B cell receptor 
but require co-stimulation with accessory molecules provided by interleukin
(IL)-4/CD40 ligand for cell cycle progression and proliferation. By analyzing a
panel of 11 early response genes induced by cross-linking of surface
immunoglobulin, we show that CD40 signaling alone induces only 2 genes, c-myc
together with an anonymous gene, 3L3, and that these are distinct from the set of
genes induced in response to IL-4. Co-stimulation with the proliferative
combination of anti-mu, IL-4 + CD40 signaling led to a fourfold enhancement of
egr-2/krox 20 expression over that seen with anti-mu alone. Egr-2
expression/activity was selectively inhibited by the immunosuppressive drug
cyclosporin A, and antisense oligonucleotide blockade of Egr-2 activity elicited 
a dose-dependent inhibition of B cell proliferation. Taken together, these
observations show that the early gene regulatory programs coupled to different
surface receptors on B cells are largely distinct from each other, but that
certain genes, exemplified by egr-2, may represent a point of convergence in the 
integration of different signaling pathways into the B cell proliferative
response.

PMID: 8625972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Trends Genet. 1996 Mar;12(3):84-6.

Making of a Schwann.

Kioussi C(1), Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA. pgruss/gwdg.de

PMID: 8868344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Development. 1996 Feb;122(2):543-54.

Segmental expression of Hoxa-2 in the hindbrain is directly regulated by Krox-20.

Nonchev S(1), Vesque C, Maconochie M, Seitanidou T, Ariza-McNaughton L, Frain M, 
Marshall H, Sham MH, Krumlauf R, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, London, UK.

The hindbrain is a segmented structure divided into repeating metameric units
termed rhombomeres (r). The Hox family, vertebrate homologs of the Drosophila
HOM-C homeotic selector genes, are expressed in rhombomere-restricted patterns
and are believed to participate in regulating segmental identities. Krox-20, a
zinc finger gene, has a highly conserved pattern of expression in r3 and r5 and
is functionally required for their maintenance in mouse embryos. Krox-20 has been
shown to directly regulate the Hoxb-2 gene and we wanted to determine if it was
involved in regulating multiple Hox genes as a part of its functional role.
Hoxa-2 is the only known paralog of Hoxb-2, and we examined the patterns of
expression of the mouse Hoxa-2 gene with particular focus on r3 and r5 in wild
type and Krox-20-/- mutant embryos. There was a clear loss of expression in r3,
which indicated that Hoxa-2 was downstream of Krox-20. Using transgenic analysis 
with E. coli lacZ reporter genes we have identified and mapped an r3/r5 enhancer 
in the 5' flanking region of the Hoxa-2 gene. Deletion analysis narrowed this
region to an 809 bp Bg/II fragment, and in vitro binding and competition assays
with bacterially expressed Krox-20 protein identified two sites within the
enhancer. Mutation of these Krox-20 sites in the regulatory region specifically
abolished r3/r5 activity, but did not affect neural crest and mesodermal
components. This indicated that the two Krox-20 sites are required in vivo for
enhancer function. Furthermore, ectopic expression of Krox-20 in r4 was able to
transactivate the Hoxa 2/lacZ reporter in this rhombomere. Together our findings 
suggest that Krox-20 directly participates in the transcriptional regulation of
Hoxa-2 during hindbrain segmentation, and is responsible for the upregulation of 
the r3 and r5 domains of expression of both vertebrate group 2 Hox paralogs.
Therefore, the segmental phenotypes in the Krox-20 mutants are likely to reflect 
the role of Krox-20 in directly regulating multiple Hox genes.

PMID: 8625806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Development. 1996 Feb;122(2):473-80.

Interactions between rhombomeres modulate Krox-20 and follistatin expression in
the chick embryo hindbrain.

Graham A(1), Lumsden A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Brain Development Programme, Division of Anatomy and Cell Biology, UMDS,
Guys Hospital, London, UK.

The rhombomeres of the embryonic hindbrain display compartment properties,
including cell lineage restriction, genetic definition and modular anatomical
phenotype. Consistent with the idea that rhombomeres are autonomous developmental
units, previous studies have shown that certain aspects of rhombomere phenotype
are determined early, at the time of rhombomere formation. By contrast, the
apoptotic depletion of neural crest from rhombomeres 3 and 5 is due to an
interaction with their neighbouring rhombomeres, involving the signalling
molecule Bmp4. In this paper, we have examined whether inter-rhombomere
interactions control further aspects of rhombomere phenotype. We find that the
expression of Krox-20 and the repression of follistatin in r3 is dependent upon
neighbour interaction, whereas these genes are expressed autonomously in r5. We
further demonstrate that modulation of Krox-20 and follistatin expression is not 
dependent on Bmp4, indicating the existence of multiple pathways of interaction
between adjacent rhombomeres. We also show that, although some phenotypic aspects
of r3 are controlled by neighbour interactions, the axial identity of the segment
is intrinsically determined.

PMID: 8625798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Dev Biol. 1996 Jan 10;173(1):26-38.

Progressive spatial restriction of Sek-1 and Krox-20 gene expression during
hindbrain segmentation.

Irving C(1), Nieto MA, DasGupta R, Charnay P, Wilkinson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London, United Kingdom.

After segmentation of the vertebrate hindbrain, expression of the zinc-finger
gene Krox-20 and the receptor tyrosine kinase gene Sek-1 is precisely restricted 
to rhombomeres (r) 3 and 5. This precise segmental expression is likely to
reflect a critical requirement for these rhombomeres to acquire a distinct and
homogeneous identity and raises the question as to how this relates to the
intermingling and restriction of cell movement during segmentation. We have
analysed Krox-20 and Sek-1 expression in the mouse and chick hindbrain at
single-cell resolution using whole-mount in situ hybridisation and
immunocytochemistry. We find that, in the mouse, the presumptive r3 and r5
expression domains each arise as narrow stripes that then broaden, suggestive of 
a recruitment of cells to an r3/r5 identity and/or a segmental regulation of cell
proliferation. In addition, we find that expression of these genes initially
occurs in fuzzy domains, and that these are progressively restricted to segmental
domains, although occasional "violating" cells are observed even after
segmentation. We propose that the establishment and maintenance of these
segmental domains may involve both a dynamic regulation of r3/r5 identity and the
restriction of cell movement across rhombomere boundaries.

PMID: 8575627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Biol Chem Hoppe Seyler. 1996 Jan;377(1):47-56.

Differential sensitivity of zinc finger transcription factors MTF-1, Sp1 and
Krox-20 to CpG methylation of their binding sites.

Radtke F(1), Hug M, Georgiev O, Matsuo K, Schaffner W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut fur Molekularbiologie II der Universitat Zurich, Switzerland.

Cytosine methylation at CpG sites is often negatively correlated with mammalian
gene activity. Many transcription factors whose DNA binding site contains one or 
more CpG dinucleotides are no longer able to efficiently bind DNA when the site
is methylated. A notable exception is the zinc finger factor Sp1 which binds DNA 
and activates transcription even when its binding site is methylated. Here we
show that two other zinc finger factors, MTF-1 and Krox-20, can also bind to CpG 
methylated sites. MTF-1 regulates metallothionein gene transcription by binding
to a number of metal responsive elements (MREs), and Krox-20 regulates Hox genes 
during hindbrain segmentation. However, a refined analysis of MTF-1/MRE binding
shows that methylation is not tolerated at every binding site: the highest
affinity site in the mouse metallothionein I gene, MREd, is unaffected by
methylation, while two other MRE sites with CpGs at different positions are
rendered partially or completely nonfunctional by methylation. Both methylation
sensitive and insensitive factors/binding sites are likely to determine the
developmental expression pattern of a gene.

PMID: 8929813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1996;8(2-3):129-45.

The transcription factors SCIP and Krox-20 mark distinct stages and cell fates in
Schwann cell differentiation.

Zorick TS(1), Syroid DE, Arroyo E, Scherer SS, Lemke G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

We have studied the transcription factors SCIP and Krox-20 in differentiating
Schwann cells-during normal development, in experimentally induced degenerating
and regenerating peripheral nerves, and in cell culture-and have compared the
expression of these regulators to a battery of genes that mark distinct stages in
Schwann cell differentiation. In the myelinating Schwann cell lineage, we find
that SCIP is initially induced by contact with axons and first appears near the
last round of cell division in immature cells. This expression is transient--it
is maximal in "promyelinating" cells and is then extinguished as Schwann cells
overtly differentiate and myelinate axons. In contrast, Krox-20 appears in cells 
24-36 h after they become SCIP+ and continues to be expressed in mature
myelinating cells. These differences in regulation are seen in normal
development, in regenerating nerves following nerve crush, and in cultured
Schwann cells stimulated to adopt a myelination phenotype by elevation of
intracellular cyclic AMP. Importantly, transient SCIP expression is also observed
in the nonmyelinating Schwann cell lineage, but Krox-20 expression is not.
Together with the myelination phenotypes exhibited by SCIP and Krox-20 mutant
mice, these results suggest that SCIP preferentially acts during the
predifferentiated phases of Schwann cell development, while in contrast, Krox-20 
is associated with the later commitment to myelination and may therefore function
as a direct transactivator of myelination genes.

PMID: 8918830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Mol Neurosci. 1996 Summer;7(2):135-46.

Molecular dissection of corticosteroid action in the rat hippocampus. Application
of the differential display techniques.

Vreugdenhil E(1), de Jong J, Schaaf MJ, Meijer OC, Busscher J, Vuijst C, de Kloet
ER.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden/Amsterdam Center for Drug Research, University of Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Both adrenal steroids and glutamate are crucial for hippocampal cell viability.
In order to identify adrenal steroid- and glutamate-responsive genes controlling 
hippocampal cell viability, we have used the PCR-based differential display
method. We have described the characteristics of this technique and how it can be
automated. Using differential display, we have identified a number of rat
hippocampal genes of which the expression is affected by a combination of the
glutamate analog kainic acid and adrenalectomy. Administration of kainic acid or 
removal of the adrenals alone gave a limited number of differentially displayed
genes. Therefore, our results indicate that the main mode of corticosteroid
receptor-controlled gene expression in the hippocampus is interaction with other 
transcription factors (e.g., CREB, AP-1) and not by binding to hormone-responsive
elements of corticosterone-specific genes. Characterization by multiplex PCR
experiments of a differentially displayed fragment of which the expression is
increased by the combination of kainic acid and adrenalectomy confirmed our
differential display results. Further characterization by DNA sequence analysis
of the corresponding full-length cDNA clone revealed a gene product with 91.4%
sequence identity with the mouse transcription factor KROX-20, suggesting that we
have cloned the rat homolog. This finding suggests a role of KROX-20 in
corticosteroid- and kainic acid-controlled hippocampal plasticity.

PMID: 8873897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Development. 1996 Jan;122(1):113-20.

Defective bone formation in Krox-20 mutant mice.

Levi G(1), Topilko P, Schneider-Maunoury S, Lasagna M, Mantero S, Cancedda R,
Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.

Endochondral ossification is the prevalent mode of vertebrate skeleton formation;
it starts during embryogenesis when cartilage models of long bones develop
central regions of hypertrophy which are replaced by bony trabeculae and bone
marrow. Although several transcription factors have been implicated in pattern
formation in the limbs and axial skeleton, little is known about the
transcriptional regulations involved in bone formation. We have created a null
allele in the mouse Krox-20 gene, which encodes a zinc finger transcription
factor, by in frame insertion of the E. coli lacZ gene and shown that hindbrain
segmentation and peripheral nerve myelination are affected in Krox-20-/- embryos.
We report here that Krox-20 is also activated in a subpopulation of growth plate 
hypertrophic chondrocytes and in differentiating osteoblasts and that its
disruption severely affects endochondral ossification. Krox-20-/- mice develop
skeletal abnormalities including a reduced length and thickness of newly formed
bones, a drastic reduction of calcified trabeculae and severe porosity. The
periosteal component to bone formation and calcification does not appear to be
affected in the homozygous mutant suggesting that the major role for Krox-20 is
to be found in the control of the hypertrophic chondrocyte-osteoblast
interactions leading to endosteal bone formation.

PMID: 8565822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1995 Nov;15(6):989-1001.

Hypoglycemia-elicited immediate early gene expression in neurons and glia of the 
hippocampus: novel patterns of FOS, JUN, and KROX expression following
excitotoxic injury.

Gass P(1), Katsura K, Zuschratter W, Siesjö B, Kiessling M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

In the hippocampus there is a graded vulnerability of neuronal subpopulations to 
hypoglycemia-induced degeneration, most likely due to excitotoxic activation of
glutamate receptors. The present study was conducted to investigate whether the
induction of transcription factors of the immediate early gene (IEG) family after
hypoglycemia reflects these different grades of neuronal vulnerability. We
studied the expression profile of seven IEG-coded proteins in the rat hippocampus
following severe insulin-induced hypoglycemia with 30 min of EEG isoelectricity
and various survival periods for up to 42 h after glucose replenishment.
Immunocytochemistry was performed on vibratome sections with specific polyclonal 
antisera directed against c-FOS, FOS B, c-JUN, JUN B, JUN D, KROX-24, and
KROX-20. To unequivocally define the type of glial cells showing IEG induction,
we investigated coexpression of c-FOS and glial marker proteins (glial fibrillary
acid protein [GFAP], OX-42) by confocal laser scanning microscopy. Up to 3 h
after glucose replenishment, differential temporospatial induction of IEG-coded
transcription factors of the FOS, JUN and KROX families were observed in
moderately injured neuronal subpopulations, including the majority of dentate
granule cells and CA3 neurons. At later time points, however, a delayed and
persistent c-JUN expression was found in severely, but reversibly, injured CA1
neurons and in neurons in the immediate vicinity of irreversibly damaged neurons 
in the crest of the dentate gyrus. Similar to the results with experimental
models of central and peripheral axotomy, selective c-JUN induction in these
neurons may represent an initial event in the regeneration process of sublethally
injured neurons. In contrast to other models of excitotoxic injury such as
ischemia and epilepsy, marked glial c-FOS expression was restricted to
astrocytes, as assessed by confocal laser scanning microscopy.

PMID: 7593360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jul 18;92(15):6873-7.

Identification of NAB1, a repressor of NGFI-A- and Krox20-mediated transcription.

Russo MW(1), Sevetson BR, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO 63110, USA.

NGFI-A (also called Egr1, Zif268, or Krox24) and the closely related proteins
Krox20, NGFI-C, and Egr3 are zinc-finger transcription factors encoded by
immediate-early genes which are induced by a wide variety of extracellular
stimuli. NGFI-A has been implicated in cell proliferation, macrophage
differentiation, synaptic activation, and long-term potentiation, whereas Krox20 
is critical for proper hindbrain segmentation and peripheral nerve myelination.
In previous work, a structure/function analysis of NGFI-A revealed a 34-aa
inhibitory domain that was hypothesized to be the target of a cellular factor
that represses NGFI-A transcriptional activity. Using the yeast two-hybrid
system, we have isolated a cDNA clone which encodes a protein that interacts with
this inhibitory domain and inhibits the ability of NGFI-A to activate
transcription. This NGFI-A-binding protein, NAB1, is a 570-aa nuclear protein
that bears no obvious sequence homology to known proteins. NAB1 also represses
Krox20 activity, but it does not influence Egr3 or NGFI-G, thus providing a
mechanism for the differential regulation of this family of immediate-early
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC41432
PMID: 7624335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Perspect Dev Neurobiol. 1995;3(1):29-38.

Genetic control of segmentation in the vertebrate hindbrain.

Wilkinson DG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, United Kingdom.

Studies of cell commitment and gene expression suggest that the subdivision of
the hindbrain into segments and the specification of their anteroposterior
identity emerges from a prepattern in the early neural plate. This prepattern
imposes a regional specification, but not a commitment of individual cells to
specific segments, and may involve the spatial expression of the Krox-20 and Hox 
genes. The generation of null mutants has shown that the Krox-20 gene is required
for the formation of definitive r3 and r5, and the Hoxa-1 gene is required for r4
and r5 development. A mouse mutant, kreisler, has disrupted hindbrain
segmentation, with r5 and r6 failing to form. Studies of gene expression in these
mutants suggest that the kreisler gene has an early role, whereas the Krox-20 and
Hoxa-1 genes have later roles in the formation of definitive segments. I propose 
that a community effect of cell-cell signaling may underlie the commitment of
cells to specific segments and discuss the implications of this for the phenotype
of segmentation mutants. The receptor tyrosine kinases encoded by the Sek-1,
Sek-2, Sek-3, and Sek-4 genes are segmentally expressed and could mediate
cell-cell interactions that regulate cell commitment and hindbrain segmentation.

PMID: 8542253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Nature. 1994 Oct 27;371(6500):796-9.

Krox-20 controls myelination in the peripheral nervous system.

Topilko P(1), Schneider-Maunoury S, Levi G, Baron-Van Evercooren A, Chennoufi AB,
Seitanidou T, Babinet C, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.

The molecular mechanisms controlling the process of myelination by Schwann cells 
remain elusive, despite recent progress in the identification and
characterization of genes encoding myelin components (reviewed in ref. 1). We
have created a null allele in the mouse Krox-20 gene, which encodes a zinc-finger
transcription factor, by in-frame insertion of the Escherichia coli lacZ gene,
and have shown that hindbrain segmentation is affected in Krox-20-/- embryos. We 
demonstrate here that Krox-20 is also activated in Schwann cells before the onset
of myelination and that its disruption blocks Schwann cells at an early stage in 
their differentiation, thus preventing myelination in the peripheral nervous
system. In Krox-20-/- mice, Schwann cells wrap their cytoplasmic processes only
one and a half turns around the axon, and although they express the early myelin 
marker, myelin-associated glycoprotein, late myelin gene products are absent,
including those for protein zero and myelin basic protein. Therefore Krox-20 is
likely to control a set of genes required for completion of myelination in the
peripheral nervous system.

PMID: 7935840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Lipid Mediat Cell Signal. 1994 Sep;10(3):269-81.

Role for Ca2+ in expression of cell cycle regulated genes in PAF-stimulated
cells.

Mazer BD(1), Domenico J, Szepesi A, Lucas JJ, Gelfand EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Center for Immunology and
Respiratory Medicine, Denver, CO.

Platelet-activating factor (PAF) is a powerful stimulator of a wide variety of
cells. In transformed human B-lymphoblastoid cell lines, PAF increases
intracellular Ca2+ concentrations ([Ca2+]i) and induces the expression of the
proto-oncogenes c-fos and early growth response gene-2 (EGR2). Here, we present
data that evaluates the role of Ca2+ in the PAF-dependent induction of these
cell-cycle activated genes. PAF (10(-7) M) increased c-fos and EGR2 mRNA levels
in cells suspended in Ca(2+)-containing medium by 6-10-fold. In PAF-stimulated
cells suspended in medium depleted of Ca2+, eliminating Ca2+ influx but not
intracellular store release of Ca2+, the induction of gene expression was reduced
by approx. 50%. In contrast, buffering of Ca2+ released from intracellular stores
but maintaining transmembrane Ca2+ uptake had little effect on gene expression.
When both sources of Ca2+ were eliminated, PAF-stimulated expression of these
genes was completely prevented. This was not due to any toxicity to the cells
since the response to phorbol ester under identical conditions was unaffected.
The regulation of c-fos mRNA expression was paralleled by changes in levels of
FOS protein. These data indicate that changes in [Ca2+]i, primarily from
stimulated entry across the plasma membrane and to a lesser extent release of
Ca2+ from sequestered intracellular stores, play an essential role in
PAF-dependent triggering of c-fos and EGR2 mRNA expression.

PMID: 7812677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Aug;14(8):5099-107.

Molecular cloning of a novel human cDNA encoding a zinc finger protein that binds
to the interleukin-3 promoter.

Koyano-Nakagawa N(1), Nishida J, Baldwin D, Arai K, Yokota T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Development Biology, Institute of Medical Science,
University of Tokyo, Japan.

The CT/GC-rich region (-76 to -47) is one transcriptional regulatory region of
the interleukin-3 (IL-3) gene which confers basic transcriptional activity and
responds to trans-activation by human T-cell leukemia virus type I-encoded Tax.
We isolated three types of cDNAs encoding Cys2/His2-type zinc finger proteins
that bind to this region. Two were identical to known transcription factors, EGR1
and EGR2, and the other clone, named DB1, encoded a novel protein of 516 amino
acids with six zinc finger motifs. DB1 mRNA was present in human tissues,
ubiquitously. Two constitutive transcripts of 4.0 and 4.8 kb in length were
present in Jurkat cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay, with specific
antibodies, showed that DB1 constitutively binds to this region whereas EGR1
binds in a T-cell activation-dependent manner. Overexpression of DB1 in Jurkat
cells had no detectable effect on the transcription activity of the IL-3
promoter, in a transient-transfection assay. EGR1 and EGR2 increased IL-3
promoter activity when the transfected cells were stimulated with
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate and A23187. When DB1 was cotransfected with a Tax
expression vector, transcription activity of the IL-3 promoter induced by Tax was
significantly increased, while EGR1 and EGR2 were without effect. These results
suggest that EGR1 has a role in inducible transcription of the IL-3 gene, while
DB1 sustains basal transcriptional activity and also cooperates with Tax to
activate the IL-3 promoter.

PMCID: PMC359028
PMID: 8035792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1994 Jul;24(1-4):166-78.

Activation of pirenzepine-sensitive muscarinic receptors induces a specific
pattern of immediate-early gene expression in rat brain neurons.

Hughes P(1), Dragunow M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology, School of Medicine,
University of Auckland, New Zealand.

Accumulating evidence suggests that immediate-early gene transcription factors
such as c-Fos, form part of an intracellular signalling pathway linking the
activation of neuronal receptors by neurotransmitters to changes in neuronal gene
expression. Recently it has been demonstrated that the centrally active
muscarinic receptor agonist pilocarpine induces both c-fos mRNA and protein in
rat brain. In this report using immunocytochemical and in situ hybridization
techniques we demonstrate for the first time that in addition to c-fos,
pilocarpine administration increases the neuronal expression of jun-B, krox-20
and krox-24 (zif-268) but not related c-jun and jun-D genes in rat cortex and
hippocampus. Pretreatment of animals with atropine or pirenzepine significantly
reduced induction of c-fos, jun-B, krox-20 and krox-24 genes in both hippocampus 
and cortex. These results show that activation of pirenzepine-sensitive
muscarinic receptors results in a specific pattern of immediate-early gene
expression in rat brain neurons. We suggest that the combinatorial complexity of 
immediate-early gene induction may allow receptor-specific control of gene
expression in vivo.

PMID: 7968354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1994 Jun;23(4):292-8.

High induction threshold for transcription factor KROX-20 in the rat brain:
partial co-expression with heat shock protein 70 following limbic seizures.

Gass P(1), Herdegen T, Bravo R, Kiessling M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, University of Heidelberg, FRG.

The transcription factor KROX-20, unlike many other immediate early genes, is not
expressed in the rat hippocampus after bicuculline induced generalized seizures. 
Since limbic seizures are a more injurious stimulus, the KROX-20 expression
profile was investigated in adult rats subjected to kainic acid induced limbic
epilepsy at postictal intervals up to 48 h. Immunocytochemistry was performed
using a specific polyclonal antiserum. In the hippocampus a sequential induction 
was observed with peak levels attained in dentate gyrus at 3 h, in CA1 at 8 h and
in CA3 between 8 and 24 h, respectively. In contrast, no KROX-20 induction was
found in hilus neurons. Prominent neuronal KROX-20 induction was also detected in
other areas of the limbic system, in particular in amygdala and piriform cortex, 
as well as non-limbic regions such as neocortex and striatum. As is the case with
KROX-20, heat shock protein (HSP) 70, a reliable marker for reversible neuronal
injury, has a high induction threshold. Though not inducible in the hippocampus
by generalized seizures, it is expressed after limbic epilepsy. Therefore,
co-expression of KROX-20 and HSP70 was studied by a double labeling technique
using a monoclonal antibody directed against the inducible form of HSP70.
Neuronal subpopulations with perfect co-expression such as hippocampal CA1
neurons contrasted with others demonstrating partial co-induction (cortical
neurons) or lack of co-expression (hilus cells), indicating that different
stimuli trigger the activation of these two inducible genes.

PMID: 8090069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Immunol. 1994 Mar 1;152(5):2115-22.

Fc gamma RII cross-linking inhibits anti-Ig-induced erg-1 and erg-2 expression in
BCL1.

Gottschalk AR(1), Joseph LJ, Quintáns J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, IL 60637.

Activation of B cells through their Ag receptor is known to be negatively
regulated by Fc gamma RII engagement. To explore the molecular and biochemical
mechanisms of Fc gamma RII-mediated inhibition, we investigated the effect of Fc 
gamma RII engagement on the expression of two immediate-early genes, egr-1 and
egr-2, and tyrosine phosphorylation events following the activation of the murine
B cell line, BCL1. Egr-1 and egr-2 were expressed in BCL1 after slg
cross-linking. The induction of egr-1 and egr-2 expression was prevented when the
Fc gamma RII was co-cross-linked with slg in BCL1, but not in WEHI-231. The
inhibitory effects of Fc gamma RII engagement on egr-1 and egr-2 expression
occurred when the Fc gamma RII was cross-linked with either slgM or slgD.
Treatment with cyclosporin A prevented the expression of egr-2 induced by slg
cross-linking, but did not inhibit egr-1 expression. In addition, cyclosporin A
did not prevent the negative-regulatory effects of Fc gamma RII engagement on
egr-1 expression, suggesting that the Fc gamma RII works upstream from the site
of action of cyclosporin A. To investigate activation signals more proximal to
the plasma membrane, we compared tyrosine phosphorylation patterns of several
effector molecules known to play a role in B cell activation. Cross-linking of
slg induced tyrosine phosphorylation of the p62 GAP-associated protein. The p62
protein became hyperphosphorylated in response to co-cross-linking of slg with Fc
gamma RII. Our results identify egr-1 and egr-2 as targets of Fc gamma
RII-mediated inhibition of anti-Ig-induced B cell activation. In addition, they
show that negative regulation by Fc gamma RII is effective in both cyclosporin
A-sensitive and insensitive pathways. Further, we suggest a possible Fc gamma RII
signaling pathway leading to the inhibition of egr-1 and egr-2 expression.

PMID: 8133028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Neurosci. 1994 Jan;14(1):124-33.

Molecular plasticity of adult Bergmann fibers is associated with radial migration
of grafted Purkinje cells.

Sotelo C(1), Alvarado-Mallart RM, Frain M, Vernet M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U. 106, Hôpital de la Salpétrière, Paris, France.

Embryonic Purkinje cells (PCs) from cerebellar primordia grafted in adult pcd
mutant cerebellum replace missing PCs of the host, and become synaptically
integrated into the defective cerebellar circuit. This process of neuronal
replacement starts with the invasion of grafted PCs into the host cerebellum, and
their radial migration through its molecular layer. The present study is aimed at
determining whether the glial axes for this migration are embryonic radial glial 
cells that comigrate with the grafted PCs, or adult Bergmann fibers of the host, 
transiently reexpressing the molecular cues needed for their guidance of the
migration. Transplants from a transgenic mouse line (Krox-20/lacZ14) in which
Bergmann fibers could be identified by lacZ expression reveal that, despite the
presence of X-gal-stained Bergmann fibers in the graft remnants and of grafted
PCs in the host molecular layer, all Bergmann fibers in the host cerebellum lack 
of beta-galactosidase activity. Thus, these migratory axes belong to the host,
not to the donor. Transplants from normal isogenic mouse embryos show that during
the radial migration of grafted PCs (7 d after grafting) the involved host
Bergmann fibers reexpress nestin (identified with monoclonal antibody Rat-401
immunostaining), normally expressed only by immature Bergmann fibers. Five days
later, when grafted PCs have arrested their migration, host Bergmann fibers again
become Rat-401 negative. These results indicate that embryonic PCs can trigger in
adult cerebellum the molecular changes necessary for their own migration and
ultimate synaptic integration in the host cortical circuitry.

PMID: 8283229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cell. 1993 Dec 17;75(6):1199-214.

Disruption of Krox-20 results in alteration of rhombomeres 3 and 5 in the
developing hindbrain.

Schneider-Maunoury S(1), Topilko P, Seitandou T, Levi G, Cohen-Tannoudji M,
Pournin S, Babinet C, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Biologie Moléculaire du Développement, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.

The zinc finger gene Krox-20 is transcribed in two alternate segments
(rhombomeres) of the developing hindbrain. To investigate its function, we have
used homologous recombination to generate mice carrying an in-frame insertion of 
the E. coli lacZ gene within Krox-20. Analysis of the beta-galactosidase pattern 
in heterozygous embryos confirmed the known profile with expression restricted to
rhombomeres (r) 3 and 5. Mice homozygous for the mutation die during the first
two weeks after birth. Anatomical analysis of the hindbrain and of the cranial
nerves during embryogenesis, combined with the determination of the expression
patterns of rhombomere-specific genes, demonstrated that Krox-20 inactivation
results in a marked reduction or elimination of r3 and r5. We conclude that
Krox-20, although not required for the initial delimitation of r3 and r5, plays
an important role in the process of segmentation governing hindbrain development.

PMID: 7903221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Neuroscience. 1993 Nov;57(1):41-52.

The KROX-20 transcription factor in the rat central and peripheral nervous
systems: novel expression pattern of an immediate early gene-encoded protein.

Herdegen T(1), Kiessling M, Bele S, Bravo R, Zimmermann M, Gass P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

The KROX-20 protein (also termed EGR-2) is encoded by an immediate early gene
cloned by cross-hybridization to the Drosophila melanogaster Krüppel gene. It
belongs to a class of transcription factors with zinc finger motifs and binding
activity to a transcriptional regulatory DNA element termed the early growth
response consensus sequence. In the present study the temporospatial expression
of KROX-20 was investigated in the central and peripheral nervous systems of
normal rats and after various stimuli known to induce immediate early genes,
including epileptic seizures, axotomy, pharmacological treatment with glutamate
and alpha-adrenergic receptor antagonists, and peripheral noxious stimulation.
Immunocytochemistry was performed with a specific polyclonal antiserum generated 
against a fusion protein containing KROX-20 sequences. In the central nervous
system, KROX-20 protein demonstrated distinct constitutive nuclear expression in 
specific neuronal subpopulations of the cortex, septum, amygdala, olfactory bulb 
and hypothalamus. In addition, distinct cytoplasmic immunoreactivity was present 
in spinal and medullary motoneurons, dorsal root ganglion neurons and a few
neuronal cell populations of midbrain and forebrain. In the CNS, KROX-20 was only
induced by bicuculline-induced epileptic seizures. Topographically, the postictal
increase of KROX-20 levels was restricted to areas with constitutive expression, 
such as cerebral cortex, fornix and amygdala. Induction of KROX-20 peaked at 4-8 
h after onset of seizure activity. No increase in immunoreactivity was observed
in the hippocampus, the brain region most severely affected by
bicuculline-induced seizures. Transection of central and peripheral nerve fibers 
did not result in KROX-20 induction in axotomized neurons. However, KROX-20 was
induced in Schwann-like cells after transection of the sciatic nerve. In contrast
to KROX-20, KROX-24, a related transcription factor of the zinc finger family,
was markedly induced in hippocampal and spinal neurons following seizures and
peripheral noxious stimulation, respectively, as well as in CNS neurons following
axotomy. Our data indicate that KROX-20 represents an immediately early gene
product with basal expression in selected neuronal populations of the nervous
system and a restricted inducibility after intentional stimuli.

PMID: 8278058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Genes Dev. 1993 Nov;7(11):2071-84.

Perinatal lethality and defects in hindbrain development in mice homozygous for a
targeted mutation of the zinc finger gene Krox20.

Swiatek PJ(1), Gridley T.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Institute of Molecular Biology, Roche Research Center, Nutley, New
Jersey 07110.

Krox20 is a zinc finger gene expressed in rhombomeres 3 and 5 during hindbrain
development in vertebrates. Mice homozygous for a targeted mutation that deletes 
the majority of the Krox20 genes, including the zinc finger DNA-binding domain,
died shortly after birth. The primary phenotype of the homozygous mutant animals 
was the loss of rhombomeres 3 and 5. This resulted in fusions of the trigeminal
ganglion with the facial and vestibular ganglia, and of the superior ganglia of
the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves. These fusions resulted in a
disorganization of the nerve roots of these ganglia as they entered the brain
stem. These data demonstrate that Krox20 plays an essential role during
development of the hindbrain and associated cranial sensory ganglia in mice.

PMID: 8224839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Neurosci. 1993 Oct;13(10):4130-45.

Long-lasting expression of JUN and KROX transcription factors and nitric oxide
synthase in intrinsic neurons of the rat brain following axotomy.

Herdegen T(1), Brecht S, Mayer B, Leah J, Kummer W, Bravo R, Zimmermann M.

Author information: 
(1)II. Physiologisches Institut, Universität Heidelberg, Germany.

In adult rats, the medial forebrain bundle (MFB) and mammillothalamic tract (MT) 
were unilaterally transected, resulting in axotomy of neurons in numerous areas
such as the substantia nigra (SN), ventral tegmental area (VTA), nucleus (ncl.)
mammillaris (MnM), and ncl. parafascicularis of the thalamus (PF). In these
areas, expression of the transcription factor proteins c-JUN, JUN B, JUN D,
c-FOS, FOS B, KROX-20, KROX-24, and CREB was investigated by immunocytochemistry 
up to 150 d. In parallel, the expression of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) was
investigated both immunocytochemically and by the NADPH-diaphorase reaction
(NDP), and the antibody against NOS was further characterized. The colocalization
of c-JUN with NDP or NOS was also studied in the axotomized neurons. c-JUN and
JUN D became visible in nuclei of many neurons of the ipsilateral MnM, PF, VTA,
and SN (predominantly in the pars compacta and those double labeled by tyrosine
hydroxylase, TH) after 36 hr, not after 24 hr, following transection of MFB and
MT. In MnM, c-JUN and JUN D persisted at a nearly maximal level for up to 150 d. 
In PF, these proteins returned to control levels after 75 d. Expression of c-JUN 
and JUN D declined in the VTA after 30 d, but in the SN, it already declined
after only 10 d. KROX-24 had a later onset of expression, being visible after 3 d
in all investigated areas, and its pattern was similar to that of JUN proteins,
although labeling was visible in fewer nuclei and declined earlier. JUN B, c-FOS,
FOS B, and KROX-20 were not expressed in these areas, and substantial alterations
of CREB immunoreactivity (CREB-IR) could not be detected. A subset of SN neurons 
(predominantly in the pars reticularis and negative for TH) presented an early
and transient expression of all studied JUN, FOS, and KROX-24 proteins within 3
hr of transection that declined between 24 hr and 48 hr to basal levels. This
expression pattern is typical of that caused by transynaptic stimulation
(probably due to excitation of descending striatal neurons running within the
MFB) and was clearly distinct from that evoked by c-JUN, JUN D, and KROX-24 IRs
after 36 hr (predominantly in the pars compacta). An ipsilateral increase in NOS 
and NDP became visible in many neurons of the MnM after 10 d, but not after 5 d, 
and this persisted up to 150 d. The temporospatial pattern of NDP was similar to 
the pattern of NOS-IR.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 7692008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Hum Mol Genet. 1993 Apr;2(4):367-72.

Genomic organization, chromosomal localization and promoter function of the human
zinc-finger gene pAT133.

Holst C(1), Skerka C, Lichter P, Bialonski A, Zipfel PF.

Author information: 
(1)Bernhard Nocht Institut für Tropenmedizin, Hamburg, Germany.

We report the genomic structure and chromosomal localization of the human
zinc-finger gene pAT133. This gene belongs to a family of four human
immediate-early genes (pAT133, pAT225/EGR1, pAT591/EGR2 and EGR3), which have
almost identical zinc-finger domains, but distinct flanking regions. The human
pAT133 gene is organized in two exons, and has been mapped to human chromosome
2p13. We determined the transcription start site by primer extension analysis and
identified several regulatory elements in the upstream regulatory sequence. The
pAT133-promoter functions as an inducible promoter in human T cells and in
fibroblasts, as constructs containing the bacterial chloramphenicol acetyl
transferase (CAT) gene driven by a 943 bp pAT133-promoter fragment were induced
in these cells by stimulation with PHA/PMA or by serum, respectively. The serum
inducible pAT133-promoter lacks consensus serum response elements. However, we
could demonstrate that two CArG-like motifs with a single base exchange confer
serum inducibility to a reporter construct. Due to their serum responsiveness,
these elements may serve as a high affinity binding sites for the recently
described human serum response factor-related proteins.

PMID: 8504297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Int J Dev Neurosci. 1993 Apr;11(2):249-55.

Differential expression of immediate-early proteins in non-nerve cells after
focal brain injury.

Dragunow M(1), Hughes P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Auckland, New
Zealand.

We investigated the expression of the immediate-early proteins (IEPs, Fos, Fos B,
Jun, Jun B, Jun D, Krox 20 and Krox 24) in non-nerve cells in rat brain after
mechanical brain injury. Injury produced by infusion of 5 microliters of saline
into the hippocampus produced a time-dependent expression of Fos, Jun and Krox
24, but not Fos B, Krox 20 or in non-nerve cells around the wound margin, in
cells lining the lateral and third ventricles and in cells in the pial surfaces
of the brain. Jun B and D were weakly induced in non-nerve cells 1-4 hr after
brain injury. This differential expression of IEPs in non-nerve cells contrasted 
with neurons which expressed all IEPs measured. Thus, brain injury is associated 
with a differential expression of IEPs in non-nerve cells around the wound. The
functional implications of this IEP expression after brain injury are presently
unclear, but may be related to cellular proliferation after brain injury.

PMID: 8328305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Mar 11;21(5):1087-95.

Cloning of the zebrafish krox-20 gene (krx-20) and its expression during
hindbrain development.

Oxtoby E(1), Jowett T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Medical School, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

To begin to examine the function of genes that control early development in the
hindbrain, we have screened an embryonic zebrafish cDNA library with a murine
krox-20 gene probe that contained the conserved zinc finger regions. We have
isolated two overlapping cDNAs, zf187 and zf201 which are homologues of the
murine krox-20 gene. The N-terminal of the longest cDNA (zf201) contains two
acidic regions identical to those of the murine krox-20. This indicates that the 
functional organisation of these proteins is probably conserved. Northern Blot
analysis identified a single transcript of 2.0 kb. Wholemount in situ
hybridisation established that expression of the zebrafish gene (krx-20) first
appears at 100% epiboly as a single anterior domain of the prospective
neuroepithelium, followed very soon after by a second more posterior domain. The 
alternating pattern of expression of this gene in rhombomeres(r) r3 and r5 is
apparent by 12 hr post-fertilisation, that is prior to the morphological
appearance of the rhombomeres. Around 14 hr neural crest migration begins from
the dorsal surface of r5, moving caudally into r6 and then ventrally towards the 
pharyngeal arches. Crest migration is not apparent at or after 16 hr. No neural
crest migration was observed from r3. Expression of krx-20 is down regulated
firstly in r3 around 26 hr and later in r5 around 30 hr.

PMCID: PMC309267
PMID: 8464695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cell. 1993 Jan 29;72(2):183-96.

The zinc finger gene Krox20 regulates HoxB2 (Hox2.8) during hindbrain
segmentation.

Sham MH(1), Vesque C, Nonchev S, Marshall H, Frain M, Gupta RD, Whiting J,
Wilkinson D, Charnay P, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, National Institute for
Medical Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London.

The zinc finger gene Krox20 and many Hox homeobox genes are expressed in
segment-restricted domains in the hindbrain. The restricted expression patterns
appear before morphological segmentation, suggesting that these transcription
factors may play an early role in the establishment and identity of rhombomeric
segments. In this paper, we show that the HoxB2 (Hox2.8) gene is normally
upregulated in rhombomeres (r) 3, 4, and 5, and we identify an enhancer region
upstream of the gene that imposes r3/r5 expression in transgenic mice. This
enhancer contains three Krox20-binding sites required in vitro for complex
formation with Krox20 protein and in vivo for rhombomere-restricted expression.
In transgenic mice, Krox20 expressed in ectopic domains can transactivate a
reporter construct containing the HoxB2 r3/r5 enhancer. These data demonstrate
that Krox20 is a part of the upstream transcriptional cascade that directly
regulates HoxB2 expression during hindbrain segmentation.

PMID: 8093858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1993;63(2):102-6.

Deleted and normal chromosome 10 homologs from a patient with Hirschsprung
disease isolated in two cell hybrids through enrichment by immunomagnetic
selection.

Puliti A(1), Covone AE, Bicocchi MP, Bolino A, Lerone M, Martucciello G, Jasonni 
V, Romeo G.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Genetica Molecolare, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.

A cytogenetically detectable deletion, del(10) (q11.2-->q21.2), was observed in a
patient with total colonic aganglionosis with small bowel involvement (TCSA), a
variant of Hirschsprung disease (HSCR). A similar deletion is present in another 
TCSA patient (S.M. Huson, personal communication). To reveal cytogenetically
undetectable deletions of chromosome 10 in further patients, we developed a
strategy for mapping chromosome 10 DNA markers with respect to the observed
deletions. To this end, the two chromosome 10 homologs (deleted and normal) were 
segregated in two distinct somatic cell hybrids obtained after fusion of the
patient's fibroblasts with a Chinese hamster ovary cell line (YH21). Hybrid cells
containing chromosome 10 were selected for the expression of the gene coding for 
the beta subunit of the fibronectin receptor (FNRB), which maps to 10p11.2, using
a monoclonal antibody against FNRB. Hybrid 185.O contains the deleted chromosome,
whereas hybrid 179.Q contains the nondeleted one. Southern blot and PCR analysis 
of DNA from these two hybrids mapped the markers RBP3H4, RET, D10S15, D10S5,
D10S22, and D10S88 inside the deletion and D10S170, CDC2, EGR2, and D10S19
outside the deletion. MEN2A and MEN2B have recently been mapped within the
centromeric region closely linked to RBP3 and D10S15 (which are located inside
the deletion) and cosegregate with HSCR in at least two different pedigrees.
Since HSCR, MEN2A, and MEN2B represent defects of neural crest cell development, 
we hypothesize that they originate from mutations in different genes clustered in
the centromeric region of 10q.

PMID: 8467706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Int Immunol. 1993 Jan;5(1):63-70.

Expression of PILOT, a putative transcription factor, requires two signals and is
cyclosporin A sensitive in T cells.

Mages HW(1), Stamminger T, Rilke O, Bravo R, Kroczek RA.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Society Research Unit for Immunology/Rheumatology, Erlangen
University, Germany.

Few known genes (IL-2, members of the IL-8 family, interferon-gamma) are induced 
in T cells only through the combined effect of phorbol myristic acetate (PMA) and
a Ca(2+)-ionophore, and expression of only these genes can be fully suppressed by
Cyclosporin A (CyA). We have identified a putative transcription factor,
designated PILOT, with an identical dual signal requirement for expression.
Induction of the PILOT gene is detectable in human T cells 20 min following
activation in the presence of cycloheximide and is fully suppressed by CyA. The
PILOT protein has a calculated M(r) of 42.6 kDa and contains three zinc fingers
of the C2H2-type at the carboxyl-terminus which are highly homologous to the zinc
finger regions of the transcription factors EGR1, EGR2, and pAT 133. In contrast 
to T cells, in fibroblasts PILOT gene expression requires only one signal (PMA)
and is not affected by CyA. This observation directly demonstrates the existence 
of a Ca2+ signal-dependent regulatory element obligatory for expression of some
genes in T cells but not in fibroblasts. This differential expression model will 
be valuable in the dissection of the dual signal pathway in T cells and the
effects of CyA upon it.

PMID: 8443122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Methods Enzymol. 1993;225:361-73.

Detection of messenger RNA by in situ hybridization to tissue sections and whole 
mounts.

Wilkinson DG(1), Nieto MA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, National Institute for
Medical Research, London, England.

PMID: 8231863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1993;343:63-71.

Transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of the human IGF-II gene
expression.

Sussenbach JS(1), Rodenburg RJ, Scheper W, Holthuizen P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

The human insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) gene consists of nine exons and 
has four promoters (P1-4). The promoters exhibit a tissue-specific and
developmental stage-dependent expression pattern. In fetal liver promoters P2-4
are expressed, but after birth these promoters are shut off and another promoter,
P1, is activated. We have investigated some properties of the human promoters P1 
and P3 and identified a number of sequence elements, that are recognized by
transcription factors. Promoter P1 is stimulated by the liver-enriched
transcription factors C/EBP and LAP, whereas in the proximal region of P3 we have
identified several elements that are recognized by transcription factors,
including krox20/egr2 and krox24/erg1. Besides transcriptional regulation of
expression also regulation at the post-transcriptional level occurs. We have
found that the IGF-II mRNAs are subjected to site-specific endonucleolytic
cleavage yielding a labile 5' specific fragment and a stable polyadenylated 3'
specific cleavage product of 1.8 kb. Two widely separated sequence elements
within the last exon were identified that are able to interact and yield a
double-stranded stem structure. It is likely that this structure is essential for
post-transcriptional cleavage of IGF-II mRNAs.

PMID: 8184744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Nature. 1992 Dec 24-31;360(6406):737-41.

Retinoic acid alters hindbrain Hox code and induces transformation of rhombomeres
2/3 into a 4/5 identity.

Marshall H(1), Nonchev S, Sham MH, Muchamore I, Lumsden A, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, National Institute for
Medical Research, Mill Hill, London, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 1992 Dec 24-31;360(6406):708.

It has been suggested that Hox genes play an important part in the patterning of 
limbs, vertebrae and craniofacial structures by providing an ordered molecular
system of positional values, termed the Hox code. Little is known about the
nature of the signals that govern the establishment and regulation of Hox genes, 
but retinoic acid can affect the expression of these genes in cell lines and in
embryonic tissues. On the basis of experimental and clinical evidence, the
hindbrain and branchial region of the head are particularly sensitive to the
effects of retinoic acid but the phenotypes are complex and hard to interpret,
and how and if they relate to Hox expression has not been clear. Here we follow
the changes induced by retinoic acid to hindbrain segmentation and the branchial 
arches using transgenic mice which contain lacZ reporter genes that reveal the
endogenous segment-restricted expression of the Hox-B1 (Hox-2.9), Hox-B2(Hox-2.8)
and Krox-20 genes. Our results show that these genes rapidly respond to exposure 
to retinoic acid at preheadfold stages and undergo a progressive series of
changes in segmental expression that are associated with specific phenotypes in
hindbrain of first branchial arch. Together the molecular and anatomical
alterations indicate that retinoic acid has induced changes in the hindbrain Hox 
code which result in the homeotic transformation of rhombomeres (r) 2/3 to an
r4/5 identity. A main feature of this rhombomeric phenotype is that the
trigeminal motor nerve is transformed to a facial identity. Furthermore, in
support of this change in rhombomeric identity, neural crest cells derived from
r2/3 also express posterior Hox markers suggesting that the retinoic acid-induced
transformation extends to multiple components of the first branchial arch.

PMID: 1361214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Genes Dev. 1992 Nov;6(11):2066-76.

Interaction of HTLV-1 Tax1 with p67SRF causes the aberrant induction of cellular 
immediate early genes through CArG boxes.

Fujii M(1), Tsuchiya H, Chuhjo T, Akizawa T, Seiki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Oncology, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, 
Japan.

Tax1 of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is a transcriptional
activator for viral gene expression and is also a transforming protein through
inducing the expression of several cellular genes under the control of mitogenic 
signals. We identified the CArG boxes as a Tax1-responsive cis-acting element for
the cellular immediate early genes c-fos, egr-1, and egr-2. Using a chimeric
protein consisting of the CArG-binding factor p67SRF and the heterologous
DNA-binding domain of a yeast transcription factor GAL4, we demonstrated that
Tax1 activates the transcriptional activity of p67SRF through the GAL4-binding
site. The carboxy-terminal half of p67SRF, which lacks domains for DNA-binding,
dimerization, and ternary complex formation with p62TCF, was sufficient for the
activation by Tax1. Tax1 produced in Escherichia coli bound p67SRF in vitro. The 
complex formation in vivo was also indicated by the finding that the acidic
activation domain of VP16, by fusion to p67SRF, can complement the
transcriptional activation function of a mutant Tax1 in trans. Thus, Tax1
activates CArG-mediated transcription without mitogenic signals through
interaction with a CArG-binding factor, p67SRF. This must be one of the primary
steps by which Tax1 causes aberration in growth control of the infected cells.

PMID: 1427072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Pharmacol. 1992 Oct;42(4):584-9.

Modulation of platelet-derived growth factor B mRNA abundance in macrophages by
colchicine and dibutyryl-cAMP.

Wangoo A(1), Haynes AR, Sutcliffe SP, Sorooshian M, Shaw RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, St. Mary's Hospital Medical School,
London, UK.

Macrophage production of growth factors for fibroblasts, in particular
platelet-derived growth factor B [PDGF(B)] and transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta), is thought to be central to the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis.
In a search for anti-inflammatory agents that might prevent this process, we
asked whether colchicine might modulate the abundance of PDGF(B) and TGF-beta
mRNA, as well as the mRNA of early growth response gene 2 (EGR2), in human
macrophages. Colchicine caused a dose- and time-dependent increase in PDGF(B),
but not TGF-beta or EGR2, mRNA in human macrophages derived from culture of
peripheral blood monocytes. Similarly, colchicine caused an increase in PDGF(B)
mRNA in human alveolar macrophages obtained from normal volunteers. Colchicine
also caused an increase in PDGF(B) protein production by macrophages, as
determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Interferon-gamma further
increased the PDGF(B) mRNA abundance in human alveolar but not monocyte-derived
macrophages. The effect of coincubation with dibutyryl-cAMP (dBcAMP) was assessed
in an attempt to prevent the colchicine-induced increase in PDGF(B) mRNA. dBcAMP 
alone resulted in no increase in PDGF(B) mRNA or alteration in TGF-beta mRNA but 
resulted in a reduction in EGR2 mRNA. When added with colchicine, dBcAMP
completely abrogated the colchicine-induced increase in PDGF(B) mRNA but had
little effect on TGF-beta mRNA. These data, showing that colchicine increased
macrophage PDGF(B) mRNA in human macrophages and that this was prevented by
coincubation with dBcAMP, lead us to speculate that colchicine may not be helpful
in preventing the contribution of macrophage PDGF(B) gene activation to the
pathogenesis of lung fibrosis. However, this effect of colchicine may be
prevented by increasing intracellular cAMP in macrophages.

PMID: 1331750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1992 Aug;7(2):198-206.

Dexamethasone-induced increase in platelet-derived growth factor (B) mRNA in
human alveolar macrophages and myelomonocytic HL60 macrophage-like cells.

Haynes AR(1), Shaw RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, St. Mary's Hospital Medical School,
London, United Kingdom.

Platelet-derived growth factor (B) (PDGF(B)) from alveolar macrophages is thought
to play a central role in orchestrating the fibrotic response. Because
corticosteroids are widely used in the treatment of patients with lung fibrosis, 
we asked whether corticosteroids modulated PDGF(B) gene activation in
macrophages. PDGF(B) mRNA in alveolar macrophages obtained from smokers was
increased after culture in the presence of dexamethasone (P less than 0.05),
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) (P less than 0.05), or both in combination (P less
than 0.05). Dexamethasone did not alter the abundance of mRNA encoding
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), but did decrease the mRNA of early
growth response gene 2 (EGR2). These initial experiments required large numbers
of cells and thus were performed on macrophages from smokers. The results were
reproduced when PDGF(B) mRNA abundance in macrophages from healthy nonsmoking
volunteers was measured by the reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). There was an increase in PDGF(B) mRNA in macrophages from nonsmokers
after stimulation with dexamethasone alone (P less than 0.05) or in combination
with IFN-gamma (P less than 0.05). To provide adequate cell numbers for kinetic
and dose-response studies, the in vitro model of phorbol ester (TPA)-induced
differentiation of HL60 cells to macrophage-like cells was used. In these cells, 
dexamethasone caused a 20-fold increase in the abundance of PDGF(B) mRNA, which
was concentration and time dependent but not associated with changes in TGF-beta 
or EGR2 mRNA. This study suggests that in addition to their anti-inflammatory
effects, corticosteroids may also increase the abundance of PDGF(B) mRNA.

PMID: 1497907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1992 Jun;14(1-2):117-23.

krox 20 messenger RNA and protein expression in the adult central nervous system.

Mack KJ(1), Cortner J, Mack P, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53705.

krox 20 is an inducible immediate early response gene. To determine if krox 20
has a physiological role in the adult central nervous system (CNS), this study
sought to demonstrate the presence of krox 20 in adult rat brain. RNA analysis
showed the presence of krox 20 transcripts in the CNS, including the cortex.
Polyclonal antibodies to a Krox 20 fusion protein demonstrated 79 and 55 kDa
antigens in nuclear CNS homogenates. Neither RNA nor protein analysis was able to
demonstrate an induction of krox 20 by a seizure at times when other immediate
early response genes are known to be induced. Immunohistochemical analysis
revealed staining at several levels throughout the nervous system. This staining 
was predominantly nuclear, consistent with the role of krox 20 as a transcription
factor. These data show that krox 20 is present in the adult CNS, yet differs in 
response to stimuli as compared to other related transcription factors with a
zinc finger motif, such as NGFI-A and NGFI-C.

PMID: 1323008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 May 15;89(10):4739-43.

Neural-specific expression, genomic structure, and chromosomal localization of
the gene encoding the zinc-finger transcription factor NGFI-C.

Crosby SD(1), Veile RA, Donis-Keller H, Baraban JM, Bhat RV, Simburger KS,
Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO 63110.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Jul 15;89(14):6663.

The nerve growth factor-induced clone C (NGFI-C) gene encodes a zinc-finger
transcription factor that is rapidly induced by nerve growth factor in rat
pheochromocytoma PC12 cells and by seizure in brain. NGFI-C is closely related to
the previously described early response genes, nerve growth factor-induced clone 
A (NGFI-A or EGR1), EGR2, and EGR3. These four early response (immediate early)
proteins all contain very similar zinc-finger DNA binding domains; in addition,
analysis of the non-zinc-finger region revealed that they share an additional
five highly homologous subdomains, four of which are within the amino terminus.
The 5' flanking region of NGFI-C contains several cAMP response elements but does
not contain any serum-response elements or CArG boxes [CC(A/T)6GG], cis-acting
elements commonly involved in early response gene regulation. NGFI-C mRNA was
detected in neural tissues of postnatal animals, but no expression was found in
rat embryos. In situ hybridization demonstrated that NGFI-C is rapidly induced in
the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus after seizure, but in contrast to NGFI-A,
increases in NGFI-C mRNA were not detected in the overlying cortex. By using
fluorescence in situ hybridization, NGFI-C was localized to human chromosome
2p13. This region contains a constitutive fragile site that is associated with
chromosomal breakpoints and translocations characteristic of some chronic
lymphocytic leukemias.

PMCID: PMC49159
PMID: 1584812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1992 Apr;13(3):263-6.

Activation of the zinc finger encoding gene krox-20 in adult rat brain:
comparison with zif268.

Bhat RV(1), Worley PF, Cole AJ, Baraban JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205.

Zif268 and krox-20 are transcription regulatory factors that contain highly
homologous zinc finger DNA-binding domains. Recent studies have demonstrated that
zif268 expression is rapidly regulated in brain by neuronal stimulation. We now
report that, like zif268, krox-20 is rapidly and transiently activated by
electroconvulsive shock treatment (ECT), D1 dopamine receptor activation, and
opiate withdrawal. These studies indicate that, as found for the leucine zipper
family of transcription factors, multiple members of the zinc finger family of
transcription factors are induced by neuronal stimulation.

PMID: 1317498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1992 Feb 28;183(1):265-72.

TSH is able to induce cell cycle-related gene expression in rat thyroid cell.

Colletta G(1), Cirafici AM.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Patologia Umana e Medicina Sociale, Facoltà di Medicina e
Chirurgia, Chieti, Italy.

Rat thyroid cells in culture (FRTL-5 strain) require thyrotropic hormone (TSH)
for growth. TSH alone in serum free medium is able to induce DNA synthesis of
FRTL-5 cells. DNA synthesis occurs 18-20 hours following TSH stimulation of
quiescent cells. Here we demonstrate that two sets of genes, related to the entry
of cells in the S phase, are induced by TSH: 1) immediate early genes, such as
c-jun and a gene coding for a zinc-finger protein Xrox 20/Egr2, both having a
pattern of expression similar to the c-fos oncogene; 2) early delayed genes such 
as ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), 2F-1, a gene that shows a strong similarity in 
aminoacid sequence to a mitochondrial ADP/ATP carrier, and the asparagine
synthetase gene (TS11). Furthermore, an increased expression of the histone H3
gene, a typical marker of S phase, has been observed in TSH-treated FRTL-5 cells.

PMID: 1543496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. DNA Seq. 1992;2(5):325-7.

Difference in the genomic organizations of the related transcription factors Sp1 
and Krox-20; possible evolutionary significance.

Chestier A(1), Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1302, Ecole Normale Supérieure,
Paris, France.

We report here part of the genomic sequence of the mouse homolog of the human
gene encoding the transcription factor Sp1. This gene belongs to a subfamily of
zinc finger proteins, which includes another transcription factor, Krox-20. The
analysis of the mouse Sp1 nucleotide sequence revealed that (i) the C-terminal
part of the protein is conserved between man and mouse, consistent with a
possible role in transcriptional activation; (ii) while the there Krox-20 zinc
fingers are encoded by a unique exon, an intron separates the regions encoding
fingers 2 and 3 of Sp1. On the basis of this latter observation, we propose a
model for the evolution of the Sp1/Krox-20 gene family which might shed some
light on the role of introns in the evolution of modular proteins.

PMID: 1633330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Nov 15;88(22):10079-83.

Clone pAT 133 identifies a gene that encodes another human member of a class of
growth factor-induced genes with almost identical zinc-finger domains.

Müller HJ(1), Skerka C, Bialonski A, Zipfel PF.

Author information: 
(1)Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, Federal Republic of
Germany.

We report the structure and regulation of a gene represented by clone pAT 133,
which is induced upon transition from a resting state (G0) through the early
phase of the cell cycle (G1). The pAT 133 gene is immediately induced, with
FOS-like kinetics, in human T cells and in fibroblasts. Primary structure
analysis showed that the encoded protein contains three tandem zinc-finger
sequences of the type Cys2-Xaa12-His2. This zinc-finger region, which is thought 
to bind DNA in a sequence-specific manner, is similar (greater than 80% on the
amino acid level) to two previously described transcription factors pAT 225/EGR1 
and pAT 591/EGR2. Except for the conserved zinc-finger domains, the amino acid
sequences of the three proteins are distinct. This structural similarity suggests
that the pAT 133 gene encodes a transcription factor with a specific biological
function. Comparing the regulation of these related zinc-finger-encoding genes
showed coordinate induction upon mitogenic stimulation of resting T lymphocytes
and of resting fibroblasts. However, upon transition from a proliferating (G1) to
a resting state of the cell cycle the three genes were differently regulated. In 
human histiocytic U937 cells mRNA of clone pAT 133 was constitutively expressed, 
whereas mRNA of pAT 225/EGR1 was induced upon induction of terminal
differentiation. In contrast mRNA representing pAT 591/EGR2 was not expressed in 
these cells. This difference in gene regulation suggests distinct biological
roles in the control of cell proliferation for the respective proteins.

PMCID: PMC52871
PMID: 1658795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Nov;11(11):5701-9.

Analysis of the creA gene, a regulator of carbon catabolite repression in
Aspergillus nidulans.

Dowzer CE(1), Kelly JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Adelaide, Australia.

The complete nucleotide sequence derived from a genomic clone and two cDNA clones
of the creA gene of Aspergillus nidulans is presented. The gene contains no
introns. The derived polypeptide of 415 amino acids contains two zinc fingers of 
the C2H2 class, frequent S(T)PXX motifs, and an alanine-rich region indicative of
a DNA-binding repressor protein. The amino acid sequence of the zinc finger
region has 84% similarity to the zinc finger region of Mig1, a protein involved
in carbon catabolite repression in yeast cells, and it is related both to the
mammalian Egr1 and Egr2 proteins and to the Wilms' tumor protein. A deletion
removing the creA gene was obtained, by using in vitro techniques, in both a
heterokaryon and a diploid strain but was unobtainable in a pure haploid
condition. Evidence is presented suggesting that the phenotype of such a
deletion, when not complemented by another creA allele, is leaky lethality
allowing limited germination of the spore but not colony formation. This
phenotype is far more extreme than that of any of the in vivo-generated
mutations, and thus either the gene product may have an activator activity as
well as a repressor function or some residual repressor function may be required 
for full viability.

PMCID: PMC361941
PMID: 1922072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. EMBO J. 1991 Oct;10(10):2985-95.

Effects of retinoic acid excess on expression of Hox-2.9 and Krox-20 and on
morphological segmentation in the hindbrain of mouse embryos.

Morriss-Kay GM(1), Murphy P, Hill RE, Davidson DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Oxford, UK.

Mouse embryos were exposed to maternally administered RA on day 8.0 or day 7 3/4 
of development, i.e. at or just before the differentiation of the cranial neural 
plate, and before the start of segmentation. On day 9.0, the RA-treated embryos
had a shorter preotic hindbrain than the controls and clear rhombomeric
segmentation was absent. These morphological effects were correlated with
alterations in the spatiotemporal distribution patterns of two genes, Hox-2.9 and
Krox-20, which are expressed in the otic and preotic hindbrain and in specific
neural crest cell populations. Hox-2.9 was expressed throughout the preotic
hindbrain region, instead of being confined to rhombomere 4. Krox-20 was not
expressed rostral to the Hox-2.9 domain, i.e. its normal rhombomere 3 domain was 
absent. The Hox-2.9/Krox-20 boundary was ill-defined, with patches of alternating
expression of the two genes. In migrating neural crest cells, Hox-2.9 expression 
was both abnormally extensive and abnormally prolonged. Neural crest cells
expressing Krox-20 remained close to the neural tube. Embryos exposed to RA on
day 8 1/4 appeared to be morphologically normal. We suggest that early events
leading to rhombomeric segmentation and rhombomere-specific gene expression are
specifically vulnerable to raised RA levels, and may require RA levels lower than
those in the region of somitic segmentation.

PMCID: PMC453013
PMID: 1915273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Oncogene. 1991 Oct;6(10):1851-7.

Transactivation of Krox-20 and Krox-24 promoters by the HTLV-1 Tax protein
through common regulatory elements.

Alexandre C(1), Charnay P, Verrier B.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Mixte 103 CNRS-BioMérieux, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, France.

The HTLV-1 Tax protein has been shown to induce the expression of host cellular
genes, some of which play crucial roles in cell proliferation and
differentiation. We have examined the effect of Tax on the expression of two
immediate-early genes, Krox-20 and Krox-24, which encode transcription factors.
Several HTLV-1-infected T-cell lines and a HeLa cell line that constitutively
expresses the Tax protein have a high level of expression of the Krox-20 and
Krox-24 genes. In addition, Tax transactivates the promoters of both Krox-20 and 
Knox-24 in a co-transfection assay. Tax-responsive elements in Krox-20 and
Krox-24 include the serum response elements (SREs) and the putative
cAMP-responsive element (CRE). A correlation exists between the ability of these 
elements to mediate Tax transactivation and their affinity for their cognate
factors, the serum response factor (SRF) or the CRE-binding protein (CREB)
respectively. Since Tax is also able to transactivate the human c-fos promoter
through the SRE and the CRE-60, our findings support the idea that the HTLV-1 Tax
protein uses common mechanisms for transactivation of these three immediate-early
genes. Deregulation of their expression may contribute to malignant
transformation associated with HTLV-1 infection.

PMID: 1833716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Oncogene. 1991 Sep;6(9):1531-7.

Imbalanced expression of cellular nuclear oncogenes caused by v-sis/PDGF-2.

Sonobe MH(1), Bravo R, Armelin MS.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil.

Two murine cell lines that overexpress v-sis/PDGF-2 were used to study the
mechanism of cell transformation by SSV (simian sarcoma virus). In contrast to
the parental cells that are phenotypically normal and serum-dependent for growth,
v-sis-overexpressing cells grow in PDGF-free plasma medium, are unable to enter
the G0 state and are highly tumorigenic. Analysis of the expression of some
growth factor-induced early response genes in v-sis-overexpressing cells
revealed: (a) high and constitutive c-myc mRNA levels in SSV-NRK cells; (b)
unaltered levels of fra-1, fos B, jun B and krox 20 transcripts; (c) high and
constitutive FOS staining due to c-FOS and FOS-related protein(s); (d)
constitutive c-JUN and higher JUN D expression. These results are compatible with
a model in which endogenous production of v-sis/PDGF-2 leads to deregulated
expression of key cellular transregulators that, in turn, alter the cells'
transcriptional program leading to the transformed state and malignancy.

PMID: 1923519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cell Growth Differ. 1991 Sep;2(9):465-73.

Cell cycle analysis of Krox-20, c-fos, and JE expression in proliferating NIH3T3 
fibroblasts.

Cortner J(1), Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison
53706.

We have shown that early growth response genes which were identified on the basis
of their expression during the G0 to G1 transition can also be induced in
proliferating fibroblasts. The expression of Krox-20 and c-fos mRNAs increased
dramatically upon stimulation of cell populations of increasing density and
correlated with the percentage of cells in the G0-G1 stages of the cell cycle.
However, fractionation of serum-stimulated cultures into cell cycle
stage-specific subpopulations using fluorescence-activated cell sorting revealed 
that the levels of Krox-20 and c-fos mRNAs were equal in all stages of the cell
cycle. This result was corroborated by serum and cycloheximide stimulation of
stage-specific fractions separated by centrifugal elutriation. Expression of the 
immediate-early gene JE was also induced in all stages of the cell cycle in the
elutriated fractions. Thus, although the amount of induced Krox-20, c-fos, and JE
mRNA correlated with the number of quiescent cells in a proliferating population,
expression of all three genes occurred to the same extent in all stages of the
cell cycle at a given culture density. Possible explanations for the
density-associated increase in induced expression are discussed. We have
demonstrated that there are both transcriptional and posttranscriptional
components to the stimulated expression of the Krox-20 and c-fos genes in
proliferating fibroblasts. Since the increased expression of these genes has the 
same steady-state and transcription rate kinetics as serum response
factor-mediated induction, we are currently investigating the role of serum
response factor in serum-induced expression in proliferating cells.

PMID: 1721529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Oncogene. 1991 Jun;6(6):917-28.

EGR3, a novel member of the Egr family of genes encoding immediate-early
transcription factors.

Patwardhan S(1), Gashler A, Siegel MG, Chang LC, Joseph LJ, Shows TB, Le Beau MM,
Sukhatme VP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637.

We have previously described two cellular immediate-early genes, Egr-1 (mouse)
and EGR2 (human) that encode zinc finger proteins. Here we report the
characterization of a new member of the Egr family referred to as EGR3 (human).
This cDNA clone was isolated using low stringency hybridization with the zinc
finger domain of Egr-1. The EGR3 cDNA sequence predicts a 387 amino acid (a.a.)
protein containing three Cys2-His2 zinc fingers nearly identical to those of
Egr-1 and EGR2. This similarity has a functional consequence: EGR3 can activate
transcription of a CAT gene linked to the sequence CGCCCCCGC, a cis element which
is a target for Egr-1 and EGR2. We show that EGR3 is an immediate-early growth
response gene induced by mitogenic stimulation of rodent and human fibroblasts
and a monkey kidney epithelial cell line. The EGR3 gene has a single intron and
maps to chromosome 8 at bands p21-23.

PMID: 1906159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Immunol. 1991 Mar 15;146(6):1914-20.

Platelet-activating factor induces an increase in intracellular calcium and
expression of regulatory genes in human B lymphoblastoid cells.

Mazer B(1), Domenico J, Sawami H, Gelfand EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Center for Immunology and
Respiratory Medicine, Denver, CO 80206.

Platelet-activating factor (PAF) has recently been demonstrated to be metabolized
by B lymphocytes and to cause enhancement of Ig synthesis by Ig-secreting B
lymphoblastoid cell lines. We have now examined some of the early activation
events triggered by PAF binding to three Ig-secreting B cell lines, LA350 (IgM
secreting), HSCE- (IgG secreting), and U266 (IgE secreting). After addition of
10(-7) to 10(-11) M PAF, but not equimolar concentrations of the inactive
metabolite lyso-PAF, all three cell lines demonstrated rapid dose-dependent
increases in free cytosolic Ca2+ concentrations ([Ca2+]i). The increases in
[Ca2+]i resulted from both the release of Ca2+ from internal stores as well as
transmembrane Ca2+ uptake. Addition of PAF triggered the rapid hydrolysis of
phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate and accumulation of inositol phosphates. PAF
also increased expression of the cell cycle-active genes c-fos and EGR2 in a
dose-dependent fashion. The stimulated increases in [Ca2+]i and
phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate hydrolysis and the increases in gene expression
were all inhibited by the specific PAF receptor antagonist Web 2086. The LA350
cell line (which expresses surface IgM) was also shown to increase [Ca2+]i after 
addition of anti-IgM antibodies. Sequential addition of PAF or anti-IgM antibody 
in either order failed to reveal any evidence for heterologous desensitization.
Furthermore, the PAF receptor antagonist did not affect anti-IgM induced changes 
in [Ca2+]i. These data provide evidence for the presence of functional PAF
receptors on B lymphoblastoid cells and indicate a potential role for PAF in the 
regulation of B cell activation.

PMID: 1848574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cytotechnology. 1991 Feb;5(Suppl 1):59-60. doi: 10.1007/BF00736810.

Characterization of a subfamily of zinc finger genes expressed in human
hematopoietic cell lines.

Munaro M(1), Petroni D, Di Fazio M, Comi P, Ottolenghi S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e Biologia dei Microrganismi, CNR, Milano, Italy.

We isolated by low strigency screening of a human erythroleukemia cDNA library
(K562) 45 indipendent clones hybridizing to a Kruppel-like (HF.10) zinc finger
cDNA. The expression of 15 such cDNAs in human hematopoietic cell lines was
investigated. Preliminary sequence analysis of the zinc finger motifs in these
cDNAs indicate that they belong to a subclass of the Cys-Cys/His-His motif,
showing the highest homology to the Wilm's tumor and EGR1, EGR2 cDNAs.

PMID: 22358956  [PubMed]


134. Oncogene Res. 1991;6(1):1-12.

Interleukin-3 and phorbol esters induce different patterns of immediate-early
gene expression in an interleukin-3 dependent cell line.

McCubrey JA(1), Steelman LS, McKearn JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, East Carolina University School of
Medicine, Greenville, North Carolina 27858.

The myeloid interleukin-3 (IL-3) dependent cell line, FDC-P1, enters the G0 stage
of the cell cycle after IL-3 deprivation for 24 hr. The expression of 13
protooncogenes and immediate-early genes was compared with 4 "control" genes
after the addition of either IL-3 or phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) to
IL-3-deprived cells. mRNA transcripts encoding c-myc and the T-cell receptor
c-gamma gene were induced to high levels only after IL-3 addition, whereas c-fos,
fos-B, c-jun, jun-B, Krox-20, and Krox-24 were induced transiently only after PMA
addition. The remaining genes (fra-1, p53, jun-D, c-Ha-ras, c-Ki-ras, c-raf,
beta-actin, ornithine decarboxylase, and histone 2B) were detected after culture 
with either IL-3 or PMA. When cells were serum- and IL-3-deprived, c-fos, fos-B, 
c-jun, jun-B, Krox-20, and Krox-24 were detected after exposure to either serum
or PMA. Moreover, culture with cycloheximide and PMA resulted in superinduction
of these genes, whereas cycloheximide and IL-3 addition did not. mRNAs encoding
these genes had half-lives of 10-20 min after PMA treatment, whereas that of
beta-actin was longer (greater than 2 hr), suggesting that short mRNA half-lives 
contributed to the transient nature of these genes. Although c-fos, fos-B, c-jun,
jun-B, Krox-20, and Krox-24 expression can be detected in IL-3-dependent cells
after exposure to either PMA or serum, these genes were not detected after IL-3
addition, which allows cell-cycle progression. These results document the
existence of IL-3 and PMA-responsive genes and demonstrate that IL-3 and protein 
kinase C agonists can induce distinct patterns of gene expression.

PMID: 1705318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Biochimie. 1991 Jan;73(1):85-91.

Krox-20: a candidate gene for the regulation of pattern formation in the
hindbrain.

Gilardi P(1), Schneider-Maunoury S, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CNRS D 1302, Ecole Normale Supérieure,
Paris, France.

The mouse gene Krox-20 was isolated on the basis of cross-hybridization with
Krüppel, a Drosophila segmentation gene. During recent years, an accumulation of 
structural, biochemical and expression data has indicated that Krox-20 encodes a 
transcription factor which may play a key role within a regulatory network
involved in pattern formation in the developing hindbrain. The DNA-binding domain
of Krox-20 consists of 3 zinc fingers and the protein recognizes a specific
GC-rich nucleotide sequence. It can activate the transcription of genes located
in the vicinity of this sequence. Krox-20 transcription itself is modulated by
growth factors. During formation of the vertebrate central nervous system (CNS), 
the hindbrain is organized into segmental units, called rhombomeres. Prior to the
appearance of morphological segmentation, Krox-20 is expressed in 2 stripes
within the hindbrain. Later on, the Krox-20 expression domains match with 2
alternate rhombomeres. These data suggest that Krox-20 may regulate aspects of
the segmentation process. The observation of segment-specific expression
boundaries for homeobox containing genes in the hindbrain suggests that these
genes may also be part of the regulatory network governing pattern formation in
this region of the CNS. The possible interactions between Krox-20 and homeobox
containing genes as well as the search for other members of the network will be
discussed.

PMID: 1674431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cytotechnology. 1991;5 Suppl 1:59-60.

Characterization of a subfamily of zinc finger genes expressed in human
hematopoietic cell lines.

Munaro M(1), Petroni D, Di Fazio M, Comi P, Ottolenghi S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e Biologia dei Microrganismi, CNR, Milano.

We isolated by low stringency screening of a human erythroleukemia cDNA library
(K562) 45 independent clones hybridizing to a Krüppel-like (HF.10) zinc finger
cDNA. The expression of 15 such cDNAs in human hematopoietic cell lines was
investigated. Preliminary sequence analysis of the zinc finger motifs in these
cDNAs indicate that they belong to a subclass of the Cys-Cys/His-His motif,
showing the highest homology to the Wilm's tumor and EGR1, EGR2 cDNAs.

PMID: 1367123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Cell Biol. 1990 Nov;111(5 Pt 1):2139-48.

Adherence-dependent increase in human monocyte PDGF(B) mRNA is associated with
increases in c-fos, c-jun, and EGR2 mRNA.

Shaw RJ(1), Doherty DE, Ritter AG, Benedict SH, Clark RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Center for Immunology and Respiratory 
Medicine, Denver, Colorado 80206.

Adherence is an important initial step in the transition of a circulating
monocyte to a tissue macrophage. This differentiation is accompanied by an
augmented capacity to generate growth factors. We hypothesized that adherence
itself might be an important trigger for a sequence of gene activation
culminating in cells with increased mRNA encoding profibrotic growth factors such
as platelet-derived growth factor B subunit (PDGF[B]) and transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-beta). After in vitro adherence, human monocytes had a biphasic 
increase in PDGF(B) mRNA with peaks at 6 h and 13 d. No increase in TGF-beta mRNA
was observed. The 6-h increase in PDGF(B) mRNA was adherence dependent, and in
addition, was abrogated when the cytoskeletal integrity was compromised by
cytochalasin D. The 6-h increase in PDGF(B) mRNA was unaltered by adherence in
the presence of the monocyte stimulus lipopolysaccharide. Adherence to either
fibronectin or collagen-coated plastic had little consistent effect on PDGF(B)
mRNA accumulation. The increased PDGF(B) mRNA observed in adherent monocytes was 
accompanied by increases in mRNAs of the early growth response genes c-fos
(maximal at 20 min), c-jun, and EGR2 (maximal at 6-24 h). The increase in c-jun
and EGR2, but not c-fos, mRNA was also abrogated by cytochalasin D. These
observations suggest that adherence results in increases of c-fos, c-jun, EGR2,
and PDGF(B) mRNA. In addition, the increases in c-jun, EGR2, and PDGF(B) may
depend on cytoskeletal rearrangement. Modulation of these events at the time of
adherence offers a mechanism by which differential priming of the cells may be
accomplished.

PMCID: PMC2116315
PMID: 2121746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Jul;10(7):3788-91.

Identification of the serum-responsive transcription initiation site of the zinc 
finger gene Krox-20.

Cortner J(1), Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison
53706.

The Krox-20 gene is rapidly and transiently induced when quiescent 3T3 cells are 
stimulated to reenter the proliferative cycle. We identified the major
serum-responsive transcription initiation site and found that it differs from the
initiation sites previously identified for the Krox-20 gene. Transcripts from the
major serum-responsive initiation site increased at least 40-fold in
serum-stimulated cells compared with logarithmically growing cells.

PMCID: PMC360834
PMID: 2113176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 May 11;18(9):2749-57.

The serum and TPA responsive promoter and intron-exon structure of EGR2, a human 
early growth response gene encoding a zinc finger protein.

Rangnekar VM(1), Aplin AC, Sukhatme VP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Chicago, IL 60637.

EGR2 is a human zinc finger encoding gene whose expression is induced with
fos-like kinetics by diverse mitogens in several cell types. Since its cDNA
sequence predicts a protein which contains zinc finger motifs, EGR2 may play a
transcriptional regulatory role in cellular proliferation. The present study was 
undertaken to: 1) examine the genomic organization and 5' flanking sequence of
EGR2 so as to identify upstream regulatory elements; 2) test whether these
elements are functional in gel shift assays and by transient expression; and 3)
examine whether pathways other than protein kinase C lead to serum induction of
EGR2, and if they do, ask whether the different pathways converge on a serum
response element. The EGR2 gene spans 4.3 kb and has one intron. The translation 
initiation site is located within the first exon. The transcription start site of
EGR2 was determined by S1 nuclease and primer extension analysis and a TATA box
was identified 28 bp upstream. Two putative serum response elements, designated
CArG-1 and CArG-2 were identified in the 5' flanking sequence. By deletion
analyses and mutagenesis, serum and PMA responsiveness of the cloned EGR2
promoter region was traced to the CArG-1 region in transient CAT assays performed
in NIH 3T3 cells. Both protein kinase C dependent and independent pathways were
found to converge on the CArG-1 box to induce the expression of EGR2.

PMCID: PMC330760
PMID: 2111009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Cell. 1990 Feb 9;60(3):509-20.

Isolation and characterization of a zinc finger polypeptide gene at the human
chromosome 11 Wilms' tumor locus.

Call KM(1), Glaser T, Ito CY, Buckler AJ, Pelletier J, Haber DA, Rose EA, Kral A,
Yeger H, Lewis WH, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
02139.

We have isolated a series of genomic and cDNA clones mapping within the
boundaries of constitutional and tumor deletions that define the Wilms' tumor
locus on human chromosome 11 (band p13). The transcription unit corresponding to 
these clones spans approximately 50 kb and encodes an mRNA approximately 3 kb
long. This mRNA is expressed in a limited range of cell types, predominantly in
the kidney and a subset of hematopoietic cells. The polypeptide encoded by this
locus has a number of features suggesting a potential role in transcriptional
regulation. These include the presence of four zinc finger domains and a region
rich in proline and glutamine. The amino acid sequence of the predicted
polypeptide shows significant homology to two growth regulated mammalian
polypeptides, EGR1 and EGR2. The genetic localization of this gene, its
tissue-specific expression, and the function predicted from its sequence lead us 
to suggest that it represents the 11p13 Wilms' tumor gene.

PMID: 2154335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Gene. 1989 Aug 15;80(2):325-36.

Structure, chromosome mapping and regulation of the mouse zinc-finger gene
Krox-24; evidence for a common regulatory pathway for immediate-early
serum-response genes.

Janssen-Timmen U(1), Lemaire P, Mattéi MG, Revelant O, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Differentiation Programme, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, 
F.R.G.

The structure of Krox-24, a mouse zinc-finger-encoding gene that is transiently
activated during G0/G1 transition, has been established. Krox-24 is located on
mouse chromosome 18, bands C-D. The gene product, as anticipated for a putative
DNA-binding protein, is localized within the cell nucleus. The Krox-24
5'-flanking region contains a series of serum response elements (SREs) similar to
the SRE observed upstream of the c-fos proto-oncogene. These elements can
substitute for the c-fos SRE, their effect is cumulative and they bind the same
cellular factor, the serum response factor (SRF), as the c-fos SRE. This suggests
that the SRE and its cognate protein are likely to be involved in the regulation 
of Krox-24 and presumably of other immediate-early serum response genes. SRE and 
SRF therefore constitute key components in the regulatory pathway leading from
mitogenic stimulation to cellular proliferation.

PMID: 2511075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988 Dec 23;16(24):11855.

A HindIII polymorphism identified by the human early growth response gene 2
(EGR2) on chromosome 10.

Wu J(1), Joseph L, Sukhatme VP, Kidd KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT 06520.

PMCID: PMC339153
PMID: 2905450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Oct;85(19):7164-8.

Molecular cloning, sequencing, and mapping of EGR2, a human early growth response
gene encoding a protein with "zinc-binding finger" structure.

Joseph LJ(1), Le Beau MM, Jamieson GA Jr, Acharya S, Shows TB, Rowley JD,
Sukhatme VP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chicago, IL.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989 Jan;86(2):515.

Early growth response gene-1 (Egr-1) is a mouse gene displaying fos-like
induction kinetics in diverse cell types following mitogenic stimulation. Egr-1
encodes a protein with "zinc-binding finger" structure. Zinc fingers are a
protein structural motif that serve as DNA-binding domains in several
transcriptional regulatory proteins. Using low-stringency hybridization with an
Egr-1 cDNA probe, we identified a distinct human cDNA (designated EGR2 for early 
growth response gene-2), which is coregulated with EGR1 by fibroblast and
lymphocyte mitogens; however, several stimuli that induce Egr-1 mRNA in PC12 (rat
pheochromocytoma) cells do not induce Egr-2 mRNA. The cDNA sequence predicts a
protein of 406 amino acids, including three tandem zinc fingers of the Cys2-His2 
class. Strikingly, the deduced amino acid sequences of human EGR2 and mouse Egr-1
are 92% identical in the zinc finger region but show no similarity elsewhere.
EGR2 maps to human chromosome 10 at bands q21-22. Structure-function analysis of 
EGR2 and EGR1 proteins should provide insight into the mechanisms linking signal 
transduction and transcriptional regulation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC282144
PMID: 3140236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Jul;85(13):4691-5.

Two mouse genes encoding potential transcription factors with identical
DNA-binding domains are activated by growth factors in cultured cells.

Lemaire P(1), Revelant O, Bravo R, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Differentiation Programme, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, 
Federal Republic of Germany.

We previously reported the identification of a mouse gene, Krox-20, encoding a
protein with three "zinc fingers" (DNA-binding domains with coordinated zinc
ions) whose expression is regulated during G0/G1 transition (cell-cycle reentry).
We now have isolated cDNAs corresponding to a related gene, Krox-24. Krox-24
encodes a protein with zinc fingers nearly identical to those encoded by Krox-20 
and similar to those of transcription factor Sp1. Similarity between Krox-20 and 
Krox-24 proteins also extends to several blocks of amino acid sequence located
upstream of the finger region. Like Krox-20, Krox-24 is transiently activated in 
quiescent cells after treatment with fetal bovine serum or purified growth
factors. The kinetics of activation are similar to those of the protooncogene
c-fos. The induction does not require de novo protein synthesis, and
cycloheximide treatment of the cells leads to superinduction due, at least in
part, to mRNA stabilization. In the mouse, the two genes are expressed in a
tissue-specific manner, with slightly different patterns. These properties
suggest that Krox-20 and Krox-24 may encode transcription factors with identical 
DNA target sequences and that these factors may be involved in the modulation of 
cell proliferation and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC280501
PMID: 3133658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. EMBO J. 1988 Jan;7(1):29-35.

A gene encoding a protein with zinc fingers is activated during G0/G1 transition 
in cultured cells.

Chavrier P(1), Zerial M, Lemaire P, Almendral J, Bravo R, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Differentiation Programme, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, 
FRG.

Zinc fingers are DNA-binding domains present in several eukaryotic regulatory
proteins. We have identified a mouse gene, Krox-20, encoding a protein with three
zinc fingers and whose expression is activated during G0/G1 transition in
cultured cells. Serum stimulation of quiescent cells leads to rapid and transient
accumulation of Krox-20 mRNA, with kinetics similar to those of the c-fos
proto-oncogene. The induction does not require de-novo protein synthesis. In the 
mouse, Krox-20 is expressed at low levels in tissues which contain rapidly
dividing cells. These properties suggest that Krox-20 encodes a transcription
control factor, possibly involved in the modulation of cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC454212
PMID: 3129290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


