
1. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 29;10(12):e0145801. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145801.
eCollection 2015.

Brain Transcriptomic Response to Social Eavesdropping in Zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Lopes JS(1,)(2), Abril-de-Abreu R(1,)(2,)(3), Oliveira RF(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal. (2)ISPA-Instituto
Universitário, Lisboa, Portugal. (3)Champalimaud Neuroscience Programme,
Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown, Lisboa, Portugal.

Public information is widely available at low cost to animals living in social
groups. For instance, bystanders may eavesdrop on signaling interactions between 
conspecifics and use it to adapt their subsequent behavior towards the observed
individuals. This social eavesdropping ability is expected to require specialized
mechanisms such as social attention, which selects social information available
for learning. To begin exploring the genetic basis of social eavesdropping, we
used a previously established attention paradigm in the lab to study the brain
gene expression profile of male zebrafish (Danio rerio) in relation to the
attention they paid towards conspecifics involved or not involved in agonistic
interactions. Microarray gene chips were used to characterize their brain
transcriptomes based on differential expression of single genes and gene sets.
These analyses were complemented by promoter region-based techniques. Using data 
from both approaches, we further drafted protein interaction networks. Our
results suggest that attentiveness towards conspecifics, whether interacting or
not, activates pathways linked to neuronal plasticity and memory formation. The
network analyses suggested that fos and jun are key players on this response, and
that npas4a, nr4a1 and egr4 may also play an important role. Furthermore,
specifically observing fighting interactions further triggered pathways
associated to a change in the alertness status (dnajb5) and to other genes
related to memory formation (btg2, npas4b), which suggests that the acquisition
of eavesdropped information about social relationships activates specific
processes on top of those already activated just by observing conspecifics.

PMCID: PMC4700982
PMID: 26713440  [PubMed - in process]


2. Sex Dev. 2015;9(5):269-78. doi: 10.1159/000442059. Epub 2015 Dec 8.

Molecular Pathology of Cryptorchidism-Induced Infertility.

Docampo MJ(1), Hadziselimovic F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cryptorchidism Research, Kindermedizinisches Zentrum, Liestal,
Switzerland.

Cryptorchidism is the most common cause of non-obstructive azoospermia in man. In
contrast to the general belief that temperature-dependent effects on the
undescended gonad damage cryptorchid testes before sexual maturation is complete,
molecular pathology strongly supports the theory that impaired mini-puberty is
responsible for azoospermia and infertility in cryptorchidism. Molecular
biological observations favor LH deficiency, with EGR4 as a master regulatory
gene in Leydig cell dysgenesis, as the reason for impaired mini-puberty, and
recent evidence supports the idea that infertility in cryptorchidism is a
consequence of alterations in the Piwi pathway.

© 2015 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26642196  [PubMed - in process]


3. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 1;5:17383. doi: 10.1038/srep17383.

RBFOX3/NeuN is Required for Hippocampal Circuit Balance and Function.

Wang HY(1), Hsieh PF(1), Huang DF(1), Chin PS(1), Chou CH(1), Tung CC(1), Chen
SY(2), Lee LJ(1,)(2), Gau SS(1,)(3,)(4,)(5), Huang HS(1,)(6,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Brain and Mind Sciences, College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, 10051, Taiwan. (2)Graduate Institute of Anatomy and
Cell Biology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 10051,
Taiwan. (3)Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, 10051, Taiwan. (4)Clinical Center for Neuroscience and
Behavior, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 10002, Taiwan.
(5)Neurobiology and Cognitive Science Center, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
10617, Taiwan. (6)Ph.D. of Translational Medicine Program, National Taiwan
University and Academia Sinica, Taipei, 10617, Taiwan.

RBFOX3 mutations are linked to epilepsy and cognitive impairments, but the
underlying pathophysiology of these disorders is poorly understood. Here we
report replication of human symptoms in a mouse model with disrupted Rbfox3.
Rbfox3 knockout mice displayed increased seizure susceptibility and decreased
anxiety-related behaviors. Focusing on hippocampal phenotypes, we found Rbfox3
knockout mice showed increased expression of plasticity genes Egr4 and Arc, and
the synaptic transmission and plasticity were defective in the mutant perforant
pathway. The mutant dentate granules cells exhibited an increased frequency, but 
normal amplitude, of excitatory synaptic events, and this change was associated
with an increase in the neurotransmitter release probability and dendritic spine 
density. Together, our results demonstrate anatomical and functional abnormality 
in Rbfox3 knockout mice, and may provide mechanistic insights for RBFOX3-related 
human brain disorders.

PMCID: PMC4664964
PMID: 26619789  [PubMed - in process]


4. Addict Biol. 2015 Nov 24. doi: 10.1111/adb.12330. [Epub ahead of print]

Stable immediate early gene expression patterns in medial prefrontal cortex and
striatum after long-term cocaine self-administration.

Gao P(1), Limpens JH(2), Spijker S(3), Vanderschuren LJ(2,)(4), Voorn P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurosciences, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (2)Brain Center Rudolf
Magnus, Department of Translational Neuroscience, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Neuroscience
Campus Amsterdam, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Animals in Science and Society, Division of Behavioural
Neuroscience, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the
Netherlands.

The transition from casual to compulsive drug use is thought to occur as a
consequence of repeated drug taking leading to neuroadaptive changes in brain
circuitry involved in emotion and cognition. At the basis of such
neuroadaptations lie changes in the expression of immediate early genes (IEGs)
implicated in transcriptional regulation, synaptic plasticity and intracellular
signalling. However, little is known about how IEG expression patterns change
during long-term drug self-administration. The present study, therefore, compares
the effects of 10 and 60-day self-administration of cocaine and sucrose on the
expression of 17 IEGs in brain regions implicated in addictive behaviour, i.e.
dorsal striatum, ventral striatum and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). Increased 
expression after cocaine self-administration was found for 6 IEGs in dorsal and
ventral striatum (c-fos, Mkp1, Fosb/<U+0394>Fosb, Egr2, Egr4, and Arc) and 10 IEGs in
mPFC (same 6 IEGs as in striatum, plus Bdnf, Homer1, Sgk1 and Rgs2). Five of
these 10 IEGs (Egr2, Fosb/<U+0394>Fosb, Bdnf, Homer1 and Jun) and Trkb in mPFC were
responsive to long-term sucrose self-administration. Importantly, no major
differences were found between IEG expression patterns after 10 or 60<U+2009>days of
cocaine self-administration, except Fosb/<U+0394>Fosb in dorsal striatum and Egr2 in
mPFC, whereas the amount of cocaine obtained per session was comparable for
short-term and long-term self-administration. These steady changes in IEG
expression are, therefore, associated with stable self-administration behaviour
rather than the total amount of cocaine consumed. Thus, sustained impulses to IEG
regulation during prolonged cocaine self-administration may evoke neuroplastic
changes underlying compulsive drug use.

© 2015 Society for the Study of Addiction.

PMID: 26598422  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 14;10(8):e0135720. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135720.
eCollection 2015.

Transcriptome Profiles of Human Lung Epithelial Cells A549 Interacting with
Aspergillus fumigatus by RNA-Seq.

Chen F(1), Zhang C(1), Jia X(1), Wang S(1), Wang J(1), Chen Y(1), Zhao J(1), Tian
S(1), Han X(1), Han L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department for Hospital Infection Control & Research, Institute of Disease
Control & Prevention of PLA, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing,
China.

Lung epithelial cells constitute the first defense line of host against the
inhaled Aspergillus fumigatus; however, the transcriptional response of human
alveolar type II epithelial cells was still unclear. Here we used RNA-Seq
technology to assess the transcriptome profiles of A549 cells following direct
interaction with conidia of A. fumigatus. The total number of identified genes
was 19118. Compared with uninfected A549 cells, 459 genes were differentially
expressed in cells co-incubated with conidia for 8 h, including 302 up-regulated 
genes and 157 down-regulated genes. GO and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis
showed that most of the up-regulated genes were related to immune response,
chemotaxis and inflammatory response and enriched in cytokine-cytokine receptor
interaction, JAK-STAT and MAPK signaling pathways. The down-regulated genes were 
mainly enriched for terms associated with development, hemopoiesis and ion
transport. Among them, EGR4 and HIST1H4J gene had the maximum of fold change in
up-regulated and down-regulated genes, respectively. Fourteen up-regulated genes 
and three down-regulated genes were further validated and significant increase on
expression of IL-6, IL-8 and TNF-a in A549 cells were confirmed by qRT-PCR during
the interaction of A549 cells with A. fumigatus. Besides, western blot showed
that expression of two proteins (ARC, EGR1) significantly increased in A549 cells
during interaction with A. fumigatus conidia for 8h. Interference of endogenous
expression of ARC or EGR1 protein in A549 cells reduced the internalization of A.
fumigatus. These results provided important insights into dynamic changes of gene
expression in lung epithelial cells, especially its strong immunological response
against A. fumigatus infection.

PMCID: PMC4537115
PMID: 26273834  [PubMed - in process]


6. Neurotox Res. 2015 Aug;28(2):108-21. doi: 10.1007/s12640-015-9529-9. Epub 2015
Apr 25.

Salidroside-Mediated Neuroprotection is Associated with Induction of Early Growth
Response Genes (Egrs) Across a Wide Therapeutic Window.

Lai W(1), Zheng Z, Zhang X, Wei Y, Chu K, Brown J, Hong G, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Biomedical Research & Development, Fujian University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, No. 1 Huatou Road, Minhou Shangjie, Fuzhou, China.

Salidroside exhibits anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidative, and anti-apoptotic
properties. To identify whether salidroside might be a candidate for treating
ischemic stroke, we investigated the effects of salidroside or vehicle, given
daily for 6 days, after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) for 2 h and
reperfusion for either 1 or 48 h in rats. Salidroside reduced cerebral infarct
volume and significantly improved neurological scores whether started after 1 or 
48 h of reperfusion. Microarray analysis showed that 20 % (133/678) of the genes 
down-regulated by ischemia and 1 h of reperfusion were up-regulated by
salidroside, whereas 13 % (105/829) of the genes induced by ischemia-reperfusion 
were inhibited by salidroside, suggesting that salidroside can reverse effects of
ischemia-reperfusion on gene expression. The main enriched functional categories 
induced by salidroside were genes related to synaptic plasticity, whereas
salidroside inhibited genes related to inflammation. Induction of Egr1, Egr2,
Egr4, and Arc by salidroside was confirmed by qRT-PCR and western blotting in
ischemic brains treated after either 1 or 48 h of reperfusion. The potential
protective role of Egr4 in salidroside-mediated neuroprotection was subsequently 
investigated in CoCl2-treated PC12 cells. Egr4 was dose-dependently induced by
salidroside in PC12 cells, and depleting Egr4 with target-specific siRNA
increased caspase-3 activity and Bax, but decreased Bcl-xl, which were reversed
by salidroside. Finally, we confirmed that salidroside inhibited the
Bax/Bcl-xl-related apoptosis after MCAO with reperfusion. In conclusion,
salidroside is highly neuroprotective with a wide therapeutic time window after
ischemia-reperfusion injury in the rat, and this partially involves induction of 
Egrs, leading to inhibition of Bax/Bcl-xl-related apoptosis.

PMID: 25911293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Sci Rep. 2015 Jan 13;5:7750. doi: 10.1038/srep07750.

A novel function for Egr4 in posterior hindbrain development.

Bae CJ(1), Jeong J(2), Saint-Jeannet JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Basic Science &Craniofacial Biology, College of Dentistry,
New York University, New York, USA [2] Permanent address: Ministry of Food and
Drug Safety, 187 Osongsaengmyeong2(i)-ro, Osong-eup, Cheongwon-gun,
Chungcheongbuk-do 363-700, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Basic Science
&Craniofacial Biology, College of Dentistry, New York University, New York, USA.

Segmentation of the vertebrate hindbrain is an evolutionarily conserved process. 
Here, we identify the transcription factor early growth response 4 (egr4) as a
novel regulator of posterior hindbrain development in Xenopus. egr4 is
specifically and transiently expressed in rhombomeres 5 and 6 (r5/r6), and Egr4
knockdown causes a loss of mafb/kreisler and krox20/egr2 expression in r5/r6 and 
r5, respectively. This phenotype can be fully rescued by injection of frog or
mouse Egr4 mRNA. Moreover Egr4-depleted embryos exhibit a specific loss of the
neural crest stream adjacent to r5, and have inner ear defects. While the
homeodomain protein vHnf1/Hnf1b directly activates Mafb and Krox20 expression in 
the mouse hindbrain to specify r5, we show that in Xenopus this process is
indirect through the activation of Egr4. We provide evidence that rearrangements 
in the regulatory sequences around egr4 and mafb genes may account for this
difference.

PMCID: PMC4291570
PMID: 25583070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 20;9(11):e113606. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113606.
eCollection 2014.

Early growth response 4 is involved in cell proliferation of small cell lung
cancer through transcriptional activation of its downstream genes.

Matsuo T(1), Dat le T(2), Komatsu M(1), Yoshimaru T(1), Daizumoto K(1), Sone
S(3), Nishioka Y(3), Katagiri T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genome Medicine, Institute for Genome Research, The University of 
Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan. (2)Division of Genome Medicine, Institute for Genome
Research, The University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan; Department of Medical
Oncology, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of Tokushima,
Tokushima, Japan. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Institute of Health
Biosciences, The University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan.

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is aggressive, with rapid growth and frequent bone 
metastasis; however, its detailed molecular mechanism remains poorly understood. 
Here, we report the critical role of early growth factor 4 (EGR4), a DNA-binding,
zinc-finger transcription factor, in cell proliferation of SCLC. EGR4
overexpression in HEK293T cells conferred significant upregulation of specific
splice variants of the parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) gene,
resulting in enhancement of the secretion of PTHrP protein, a known mediator of
osteolytic bone metastasis. More importantly, depletion of EGR4 expression by
siRNA significantly suppressed growth of the SCLC cell lines, SBC-5, SBC-3 and
NCI-H1048. On the other hand, introduction of EGR4 into NIH3T3 cells
significantly enhanced cell growth. We identified four EGR4 target genes, SAMD5, 
RAB15, SYNPO and DLX5, which were the most significantly downregulated genes upon
depletion of EGR4 expression in all of the SCLC cells examined, and demonstrated 
the direct recruitment of EGR4 to their promoters by ChIP and luciferase reporter
analysis. Notably, knockdown of the expression of these genes by siRNA remarkably
suppressed the growth of all the SCLC cells. Taken together, our findings suggest
that EGR4 likely regulates the bone metastasis and proliferation of SCLC cells
via transcriptional regulation of several target genes, and may therefore be a
promising target for the development of anticancer drugs for SCLC patients.

PMCID: PMC4239076
PMID: 25411851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Syndromol. 2014 Feb;5(2):76-80. doi: 10.1159/000357931. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Decreased expression of genes associated with memory and x-linked mental
retardation in boys with non-syndromic cryptorchidism and high infertility risk.

Hadziselimovic F(1), Hadziselimovic NO(2), Demougin P(3), Oakeley EJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Andrology, Liestal, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Andrology, Liestal, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland ;
Division of Molecular Neuroscience, Department of Psychology, University of
Basel, Basel, Switzerland. (3)Department of Molecular Biology, Biozentrum,
Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland. (4)Department of
Molecular Biology, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel,
Switzerland.

An elevated odds ratio for low IQ has been found for cryptorchid boys.
Furthermore, poor school performance has been observed in cryptorchid boys with
impaired mini-puberty. Gene expression analysis, qPCR and immunohistology were
performed on testicular biopsies from 7 boys who underwent orchiopexy and had
testicular histology typical of a high risk of infertility (HIR). The results
were compared with 12 biopsies from cryptorchid boys with a low risk for
developing infertility. The following genes associated with mental retardation
were identically expressed: GDI1, OPHN1, PAK3, ARHGEF6, IL1RAPL, ACSL4, MECP2,
RPS6KA3, ARX, and ATRX. However, boys in the HIR group had low or no expression
of EGR4, FMR2 (AFF2) and VCX3A. In conclusion, impaired expression of genes known
to encode proteins involved in signaling pathways that regulate cytoskeletal
organization, synaptic vesicle transport and the establishment of connections
between neuronal cells may contribute to reduced intellectual and cognitive
functioning in infertile cryptorchid males.

PMCID: PMC3977316
PMID: 24715854  [PubMed]


10. Eur J Cell Biol. 2013 Dec;92(12):363-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2013.10.013. Epub
2013 Nov 14.

Effective myofibroblast dedifferentiation by concomitant inhibition of TGF-ß
signaling and perturbation of MAPK signaling.

Kosla J(1), Dvorakova M(2), Dvorak M(3), Cermak V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of 
Sciences of the Czech Republic, Videnska 1083, CZ-14220 Prague 4, Czech Republic.
Electronic address: kosla@img.cas.cz. (2)Laboratory of Molecular Virology,
Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Videnska 1083, CZ-14220 Prague 4, Czech Republic. Electronic address:
marta@img.cas.cz. (3)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, Institute of Molecular
Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Videnska 1083, CZ-14220
Prague 4, Czech Republic. Electronic address: mdvorak@img.cas.cz. (4)Laboratory
of Molecular Virology, Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of
the Czech Republic, Videnska 1083, CZ-14220 Prague 4, Czech Republic. Electronic 
address: cermak@img.cas.cz.

Fibrotic diseases are a group of pathologies with high incidence and mortality.
Despite extensive research efforts, effective therapies are still not available. 
Understanding the molecular mechanisms driving the onset, progression and
possible resolution of fibrosis is a prerequisite to the development of
successful therapies. The central role of the TGF-ß pathway and myofibroblasts in
the pathogenesis of fibrosis is now generally accepted. The possible mechanisms
of myofibroblast elimination or dedifferentiation, on the other hand, are still
almost uncharted territory. Here we show that sustained expression of some
components of MAPK signaling pathway (PDGFB, Ha-Ras(G12V) or the transcription
factor EGR4) in primary chicken embryo dermal myofibroblasts results in a loss of
autocrine TGF-ß signaling and suppression of the myofibroblastic phenotype,
characterized by the loss of alpha smooth muscle actin fibers and a substantial
reduction in the production of extracellular matrix. Detailed analysis of the
possible molecular mechanisms employed by EGR4 revealed FOXG1, BAMBI, NAB1, NAB2 
and DUSP5 genes forming an EGR4 regulated network counteracting autocrine TGF-ß
signaling. We have also found that a combination of chemical inhibition of TGF-ß 
signaling and perturbation of MAPK signaling with phorbol ester mimics the
anti-fibrotic effects of PDGFB, Ha-Ras(G12V) and EGR4.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24315689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2014;26(4):587-98. doi: 10.1071/RD12380.

The novel porcine gene early growth response 4 (Egr4) is differentially expressed
in the ovaries of Erhualian and Pietrain pigs.

Wang J(1), Zhao Y(1), Gu K(1), Yu P(1), Zhang B(1), Wang W(1), Yang J(1), Xu
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Nanjing 210095, China.

The early growth response 4 (Egr4) gene plays a critical role in human and mouse 
fertility. In the present study, Affymetrix microarray gene chips were used to
evaluate differential gene expression in the ovaries between Erhualian and
Pietrain pigs. In all, 487 and 573 transcripts were identified with significantly
higher and lower expression, respectively, in Erhualian compared with Pietrain
sows. The Egr4 gene, one of the differentially expressed genes, was cloned and
its genomic structure was analysed. Egr4 expression is increased 120-fold in
ovaries from Erhualian sows. The full-length cDNA of porcine Egr4 was obtained by
in silico cloning and 5' rapid amplification of cDNA ends. The gene consists of
two exons and its predicted protein contains a Cys2His2 zinc finger structure.
The porcine transcript is alternatively spliced by exon sequence deletion,
producing two different mRNAs differing at the 5' end of Exon 2. Egr4 transcripts
were detected in the central nervous system, including the cerebrum, cerebellum, 
hypothalamus and pituitary gland, and were highly expressed in the ovary. The
Egr4 gene was evaluated as a candidate gene for porcine reproductivity. To
investigate the role of Egr4 in the ovary, Egr4 was knocked down using short
interference (si) RNA in porcine granulosa cells. Knockdown of Egr4 using siRNA
effectively inhibited Egr4 mRNA and protein expression and knockdown
significantly affected the expression of Bax, P450arom, P450scc, Egr1, Egr2, and 
Egr3. In conclusion, these observations establish an important role for Egr4 in
the porcine ovary.

PMID: 23719176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Feb;138(1):193-203. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2413-5.
Epub 2013 Jan 22.

Involvement of early growth response factors in TNFa-induced aromatase expression
in breast adipose.

To SQ(1), Simpson ER, Knower KC, Clyne CD.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Drug Discovery Laboratory, Prince Henry's Institute of Medical
Research, PO BOX 5152, Clayton, VIC 3168, Australia.

Expression of the oestrogen producing enzyme, aromatase, is regulated in a
tissue-specific manner by its encoding gene CYP19A1. In post-menopausal women,
the major site for oestrogen production in the breast is the adipose, where
CYP19A1 transcription is driven by the distal promoter I.4 (PI.4). Transcripts
via this promoter are also elevated in breast adipose fibroblasts (BAFs) adjacent
to a tumour. PI.4 expression is stimulated by a number of cytokines, and TNFa is 
one such factor. The transcriptional mechanisms induced by TNFa to stimulate PI.4
are poorly characterised. We show that the early growth response (Egr)
transcription factors play an important role in the TNFa-induced signalling
pathway resulting in elevated PI.4 transcription. TNFa treatment of BAFs
increases mRNA levels of all four Egr family members, with EGR2 being the most
highly expressed. Overexpression of EGR2 causes an increase in endogenous CYP19A1
expression in preadipocyte Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome cells, driven by
increases in PI.4-specific transcripts. PI.4 luciferase reporter activity is
increased in a dose-dependent manner by EGR2, EGR3 and EGR4, with EGR2 showing
the most potent activation of promoter activity. Deletion analysis indicates that
this promoter activity is being indirectly mediated by a short region of the
promoter not containing any previously characterised binding sites, and we
further show that EGR2 does not bind directly or indirectly to this promoter
region. However, siRNA knockdown of the Egrs reduces the total and PI.4-derived
CYP19A1 transcription in BAFs. These studies unveil a novel component of the
aromatase gene regulatory network and further enhance the complexity of oestrogen
production in the breast.

PMID: 23338760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Oct 1;39(1):149-55. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2012.06.004. Epub 2012 Jun 9.

Genetic and functional analyses of early growth response (EGR) family genes in
schizophrenia.

Cheng MC(1), Chuang YA, Lu CL, Chen YJ, Luu SU, Li JM, Hsu SH, Chen CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yuli Mental Health Research Center, Yuli Veterans
Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: Early growth response genes (EGR1, 2, 3, and 4) encode a family of
nuclear proteins that function as transcriptional regulators. They are involved
in the regulation of synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory, and are
implicated in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia.
METHODS: We conducted a genetic association analysis of 14 SNPs selected from the
EGR1, 2, 3, and 4 genes of 564 patients with schizophrenia and 564 control
subjects. We also conducted Western blot analysis and promoter activity assay to 
characterize the EGR genes associated with schizophrenia
RESULTS: We did not detect a true genetic association of these 14 SNPs with
schizophrenia in this sample. However, we observed a nominal over-representation 
of C/C genotype of rs9990 of EGR2 in female schizophrenia as compared to female
control subjects (p=0.012, uncorrected for multiple testing). Further study
showed that the average mRNA level of the EGR2 gene in the lymphoblastoid cell
lines of female schizophrenia patients was significantly higher than that in
female control subjects (p=0.002). We also detected a nominal association of 4
SNPs (rs6747506, rs6718289, rs2229294, and rs3813226) of the EGR4 gene that form 
strong linkage disequilibrium with schizophrenia in males. Reporter gene assay
showed that the haplotype T-A derived from rs6747506 and rs6718289 at the
promoter region had significantly reduced promoter activity compared with the
haplotype A-G.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest a tendency of gender-specific association of EGR2
and EGR4 in schizophrenia, with an elevated expression of EGR2 in lympoblastoid
cell lines of female schizophrenia patients and a reduced EGR4 gene expression in
male schizophrenia patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22691714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 12;109(24):9617-22. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1200554109. Epub 2012 May 29.

Erythropoietin-induced changes in brain gene expression reveal induction of
synaptic plasticity genes in experimental stroke.

Mengozzi M(1), Cervellini I, Villa P, Erbayraktar Z, Gökmen N, Yilmaz O,
Erbayraktar S, Manohasandra M, Van Hummelen P, Vandenabeele P, Chernajovsky Y,
Annenkov A, Ghezzi P.

Author information: 
(1)Brighton and Sussex Medical School, Falmer BN19RY, United Kingdom.

Erythropoietin (EPO) is a neuroprotective cytokine in models of ischemic and
nervous system injury, where it reduces neuronal apoptosis and inflammatory
cytokines and increases neurogenesis and angiogenesis. EPO also improves
cognition in healthy volunteers and schizophrenic patients. We studied the effect
of EPO administration on the gene-expression profile in the ischemic cortex of
rats after cerebral ischemia at early time points (2 and 6 h). EPO treatment
up-regulated genes already increased by ischemia. Hierarchical clustering and
analysis of overrepresented functional categories identified genes implicated in 
synaptic plasticity-Arc, BDNF, Egr1, and Egr2, of which Egr2 was the most
significantly regulated. Up-regulation of Arc, BDNF, Dusp5, Egr1, Egr2, Egr4, and
Nr4a3 was confirmed by quantitative PCR. We investigated the up-regulation of
Egr2/Krox20 further because of its role in neuronal plasticity. Its elevation by 
EPO was confirmed in an independent in vivo experiment of cerebral ischemia in
rats. Using the rat neuroblastoma B104, we found that wild-type cells that do not
express EPO receptor (EPOR) do not respond to EPO by inducing Egr2. However,
EPOR-expressing B104 cells induce Egr2 early upon incubation with EPO, indicating
that Egr2 induction is a direct effect of EPO and that EPOR mediates this effect.
Because these changes occur in vivo before decreased inflammatory cytokines or
neuronal apoptosis is evident, these findings provide a molecular mechanism for
the neuroreparative effects of cytokines and suggest a mechanism of
neuroprotection by which promotion of a plastic phenotype results in decreased
inflammation and neuronal death.

PMCID: PMC3386063
PMID: 22645329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Affect Disord. 2012 May;138(3):387-96. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2012.01.011. Epub
2012 Feb 25.

Family-based association study of early growth response gene 3 with child bipolar
I disorder.

Gallitano AL(1), Tillman R, Dinu V, Geller B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Arizona College of
Medicine-Phoenix, 425 N. 5th St., Phoenix, AZ 85004, USA.
amelia@email.arizona.edu

BACKGROUND: The risk for relapse of child bipolar I disorder (BP-I) is highly
correlated with environmental factors. Immediate early genes of the early growth 
response (EGR) gene family are activated at high levels in the brain in response 
to environmental events, including stress, and mediate numerous neurobiological
processes that have been associated with mental illness risk. The objective of
this study is to evaluate whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in EGR
genes are associated with the risk to develop child bipolar I disorder.
METHODS: To investigate whether EGR genes may influence susceptibility to child
bipolar I disorder (BP-I), we used Family Based Association Tests to examine
whether SNPs in each of the EGR genes were associated with illness in 49
families.
RESULTS: Two SNPs in EGR3 displayed nominally significant associations with child
BP-I (p=0.027 and p=0.028); though neither was statistically significant
following correction for multiple comparisons. Haplotype association analysis
indicated that these SNPs are in linkage disequilibrium (LD). None of the SNPs
tested in EGR1, EGR2, or EGR4 was associated with child BP-I.
LIMITATIONS: This study was limited by small sample size, which resulted in it
being underpowered to detect a significant association after correction for
multiple comparisons.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study revealed a preliminary finding suggesting that EGR3, a
gene that translates environmental stimuli into long-term changes in the brain,
warrants further investigation for association with risk for child BP-I disorder 
in a larger sample. Such studies may help reveal mechanisms by which environment 
can interact with genetic predisposition to influence this severe mental illness.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3349283
PMID: 22370066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. BJU Int. 2012 May;109(10):1552-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2011.10705.x. Epub
2012 Feb 2.

Whole genome microarray of the major pelvic ganglion after cavernous nerve
injury: new insights into molecular profile changes after nerve injury.

Calenda G(1), Strong TD, Pavlovich CP, Schaeffer EM, Burnett AL, Yu W, Davies KP,
Bivalacqua TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.

What's known on the subject? and What does the study add? With the present study,
we aimed to provide a global picture of the molecular processes that are
activated by CN injury. The present study used genomic expression profiling to
identify candidate genes that might be useful targets in the CN recovery process 
and, thus, the ultimate preservation of penile erection. Regeneration of the CN
and axonal outgrowth clearly involve changes in multiple biochemical pathways
that have never been investigated by microarray analysis. We analyzed global gene
expression in the major pelvic ganglion at early stages (48 h and 14 days) after 
CN injury and focused on the detection of changes in genes related to nervous
tissue repair and proliferation. The findings of the present study provide
important insight into the molecular systems affected by CN injury and identify
candidate genes that may be utilized for novel molecular-based therapies for the 
preservation and protection of the CN during RP.OBJECTIVES: To to examine the
complexity of the many molecular systems involved in supporting cavernous nerve
(CN) repair and regeneration in a rat model of bilateral crush injury utilizing a
microarray analysis approach. Erectile dysfunction (ED) is a common clinical
complication after prostate cancer treatment by radical prostatectomy, and
recovery of erectile function can take as long as 2 years. There are gaps in our 
understanding of the autonomic pelvic innervation of the penis that still need to
be addressed for the development of an adequate treatment strategy for
post-prostatectomy ED. The molecular mechanisms of the intrinsic ability of CN to
regenerate after an injury have not been elucidated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed global gene expression in the major pelvic
ganglion 48 h and 14 days after CN injury. Overall, a comparative analysis showed
that 325 genes changed at the 48-h time point and 114 genes changed at 14 days.
There were 60 changed genes in common with both time points. Using the Ingenuity 
Pathway Analysis® system (Ingenuity Systems, Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA), we
were able to analyze the significantly changed genes that were unique and common 
to each time point by biological function. We focused on the detection of changes
related to nervous tissue repair and proliferation, molecular networks of
neurotrophic factors, stem cell regulation and synaptic transmission.
RESULTS: There was strong evidence of the early mobilization of genes involved in
repair and neuroprotection mechanisms (SERPINF1, IGF1, PLAU/PLAUR, ARG1). Genes
related to nervous system development (ATF3 GJA1, PLAU, SERPINE1), nerve
regeneration (SERPINE2, IGF1, ATF3, ARG1) and synaptic transmission (GJC1, GAL)
were changed. Several genes related to proliferation as well as apoptosis (A2M,
ATF3, C3, EGR4, FN1, GJA1, GAL) were also changed, possibly as part of a
protective mechanism or the initiation of remodelling.
CONCLUSIONS: The results obtained show that multiple biological processes are
associated with injury and repair of the CN and provide a systematic genome-wide 
screen for neurotrophic and/or inhibitory pathways of nerve regeneration. These
data identify the candidate genes that may be utilized in novel molecular-based
therapies for the preservation and protection of the CN during radical
prostatectomy.

© 2012 THE AUTHORS. BJU INTERNATIONAL © 2012 BJU INTERNATIONAL.

PMID: 22300381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Neuroscience. 2011 Dec 1;197:121-31. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.08.031.
Epub 2011 Sep 10.

Microarray analysis of gene expression changes in the brains of NR2B-induced
memory-enhanced mice.

Li C(1), Dong S, Wang H, Hu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Brain Functional Genomics, MOE & STCSM, Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China.

Glutamate N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors play a pivotal role in different 
forms of memory. The dysfunction of NMDA receptors contributes to the pathology
of central nervous system (CNS) disorders. To further investigate the role of the
NMDA receptors in brain processes, we analyzed and compared the gene expression
profiles in the hippocampus of NR2B overexpression-induced memory-enhanced mice
(Tg mice) with those of their wild-type littermates. Results reveal that 249
genes, which are mainly involved in neurotransmission, signal transduction,
cytoskeletal structure, hormone activity, and transcription, were significantly
affected in Tg mice. Interestingly, the intracellular calcium channel proteins
ryanodine receptor (RyR) 1 and 3, as well as functionally related proteins such
as the histidine-rich calcium-binding protein and triadin 2, were upregulated.
The Homer-1c protein was also increased in Tg mice and formed a complex with the 
RyR protein in the mouse brain, suggesting that Homer-1c is an important
modulator in both intracellular calcium signaling and overall neuronal signaling 
by simultaneously interacting with the NMDA receptors and RyR. Western blot and
real-time PCR results show that the expression of phospho-CREB, c-fos, and the
immediate-early genes Egr2 and Egr4 were also upregulated in Tg mice. The current
study demonstrates that a chronic increase in the activation of NMDA receptors
affected the expression of a large number of genes and may provide important
clues for a better understanding of the molecular mechanism of NMDA
receptor-modulated learning and memory, as well as of CNS disorders.

Copyright Â© 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21925573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Neural Plast. 2011;2011:1-8. doi: 10.1155/2011/641248. Epub 2011 Jul 4.

Neurturin evokes MAPK-dependent upregulation of Egr4 and KCC2 in developing
neurons.

Ludwig A(1), Uvarov P, Pellegrino C, Thomas-Crusells J, Schuchmann S, Saarma M,
Airaksinen MS, Rivera C.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Center, University of Helsinki, Viikinkaari 4, 00014 Helsinki,
Finland.

The K-Cl cotransporter KCC2 plays a crucial role in the functional development of
GABA(A)-mediated responses rendering GABA hyperpolarizing in adult neurons. We
have previously shown that BDNF upregulates KCC2 in immature neurons through the 
transcription factor Egr4. The effect of BDNF on Egr4 and KCC2 was shown to be
dependent on the activation of ERK1/2. Here we demonstrate that the trophic
factor neurturin can also trigger Egr4 expression and upregulate KCC2 in an
ERK1/2-dependent manner. These results show that Egr4 is an important component
in the mechanism for trophic factor-mediated upregulation of KCC2 in immature
neurons involving the activation of specific intracellular pathways common to
BDNF and Neurturin.

PMCID: PMC3151499
PMID: 21837281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Neurosci. 2011 Jan 12;31(2):644-9. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2006-10.2011.

Early growth response 4 mediates BDNF induction of potassium chloride
cotransporter 2 transcription.

Ludwig A(1), Uvarov P, Soni S, Thomas-Crusells J, Airaksinen MS, Rivera C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Viikki Biocenter,
Viikinkaari 9, FIN-00014, Helsinki, Finland.

A major event in the maturation of CNS GABAergic transmission is the qualitative 
change in GABA(A)-mediated responses from depolarizing to hyperpolarizing. In
cortical regions, this is attributed to the increased expression of potassium
chloride cotransporter 2b (KCC2b), the main isoform of the neuron-specific K-Cl
cotransporter KCC2. We have previously shown that transcription factor early
growth response 4 (Egr4) can activate the KCC2b promoter. Here we demonstrate
that in immature hippocampal neurons BDNF robustly induces ERK1/2 (extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase 1/2)-dependent Egr4 expression and rapid Egr4-dependent
activation of the KCC2b promoter. The subsequent increase in KCC2b mRNA
contributes to the expression of total KCC2 protein levels. These results
indicate that Egr4 is an important component in the mechanism of BDNF-dependent
KCC2 gene regulation via the ERK1/2 pathway in immature neurons.

PMID: 21228173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Dev Dyn. 2010 Nov;239(11):3106-14. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22442.

EGR4 displays both a cell- and intracellular-specific localization pattern in the
developing murine testis.

Hogarth CA(1), Mitchell D, Small C, Griswold M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences and Centre for Reproductive Biology,
Washington State University, Pullman, Washington 99164, USA.

Spermatogenesis is an intricately regulated process of cellular differentiation
transforming spermatogonial stem cells to spermatozoa. Elimination of the
transcription factor EGR4 generates subfertile male mice yet the expression and
function of EGR4 in the mammalian testis has yet to be fully investigated. We
performed in situ hybridization and immunofluorescence to identify Egr4
transcript and protein localization in the developing murine testis. EGR4 was
detected in both germ and somatic cells in the neonatal testis but was specific
to germ cells inside the seminiferous epithelium from juvenile development
onward. EGR4 also displayed distinct intracellular localization patterns within
specific cell populations of the testis. In addition, Egr4-deficient testis
tubules regress from relatively normal to Sertoli cell and undifferentiated
spermatogonia only over time. Taken together, these data suggest that Egr4 may
regulate spermatogenesis at multiple steps, with roles in the dividing Sertoli
cells, peritubular myoid cells, and the meiotic and elongating haploid germ cell 
populations.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3218559
PMID: 20925118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2010 Oct 5;153B(7):1355-60. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.31115.

EGR3 as a potential susceptibility gene for schizophrenia in Korea.

Kim SH(1), Song JY, Joo EJ, Lee KY, Ahn YM, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Early growth response (EGR) genes play critical roles in signal transduction in
the brain, which is involved in neuronal activation, brain development, and
synaptic plasticity. EGR genes, including EGR2, EGR3, and EGR4, showed
significant association with schizophrenia in Japanese schizophrenic pedigrees.
In particular, EGR3, which resides at the chromosomal location 8p21.3, was
suggested to be a potential susceptibility gene in schizophrenia based on a study
of Japanese cases. However, this requires further replication with an independent
sample set. We investigated the association of the EGR3 and EGR2 genes, which
were suggested as potential susceptibility genes for schizophrenia supported by
both genetic association and postmortem brain expression studies, with
schizophrenia in Korean patients. Along with 350 healthy individuals, 244
schizophrenic patients were analyzed. Among the four examined single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of EGR3 (rs1008949, rs7009708, rs35201266, and rs3750192),
SNP rs35201266 in intron 1 of the EGR3 gene showed a significant association with
schizophrenia (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0008, <U+03C7>(2)<U+2009>=<U+2009>11.156, OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.493), which withstands multiple 
testing correction. In addition, the "T-G-C-G" haplotype of EGR3 was
under-represented in the patients with schizophrenia (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0073, <U+03C7>(2)<U+2009>=<U+2009>7.188,
OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.697). However, an association between the SNPs of EGR2 (rs2295814 and
rs2297488) and schizophrenia was not found. These findings are consistent with
the previous genetic association of the EGR3 gene in Japanese cohorts, which is
the first replication concerning the association of EGR3 with schizophrenia in an
independent cohort. Taken together, EGR3 could be suggested as a compelling
susceptibility gene in schizophrenia.

PMID: 20687139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2010 Apr 16;34(3):506-9. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.02.005. Epub 2010 Feb 6.

No association between EGR gene family polymorphisms and schizophrenia in the
Chinese population.

Liu BC(1), Zhang J, Wang L, Li XW, Wang Y, Ji J, Yang FP, Wan CL, Gao LH, Xu YF, 
Feng GY, He L, Zhao XZ, He G.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Center, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200030, PR China.

Early growth response (EGR) genes are thought to have a role in the pathogenesis 
of schizophrenia because of their conserved DNA binding domain and biologically
activity in neuronal plasticity. This zinc-finger motif could influence gene
post-translational modification and expression. The multigenetic association
model, using markers in genes of similar or antagonistic biological effects
within a signal pathway or gene family, might be more appropriate to this aspect 
of the schizophrenia hypothesis than the single gene strategy. In this study we
investigated the role of EGR1, EGR2, EGR3 and EGR4 within the EGR family. Taqman 
technology was used to examine 12 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) covering
these four genes in 2044 Chinese Han subjects. Case-control analyses were
performed to detect association of these 4 genes with schizophrenia and
multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) analysis was employed to examine their
potential gene-gene interaction in schizophrenia. Neither allelic nor genotypic
single-locus tests revealed any significant association between EGR1-4 and the
risk of schizophrenia nor was any such association found with regard to
interaction within EGR1-4 (p(min)=0.623, CV Consistency=10/10). We concluded that
although multiple candidate genes are involved in schizophrenogenic development, 
the EGR family may not play a major role in schizophrenia susceptibility in the
Chinese Han population.

Crown Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20144677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. BMC Genomics. 2009 Nov 20;10:545. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-545.

Ligand-specific sequential regulation of transcription factors for
differentiation of MCF-7 cells.

Saeki Y(1), Endo T, Ide K, Nagashima T, Yumoto N, Toyoda T, Suzuki H, Hayashizaki
Y, Sakaki Y, Okada-Hatakeyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Systems Modeling Team, Computational Systems Biology Research Group, 
Advanced Computational Sciences Department, RIKEN Advanced Science Institute,
1-7-22 Suehiro-cho Tsurumi-ku Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Sharing a common ErbB/HER receptor signaling pathway, heregulin (HRG)
induces differentiation of MCF-7 human breast cancer cells while epidermal growth
factor (EGF) elicits proliferation. Although cell fates resulting from action of 
the aforementioned ligands completely different, the respective gene expression
profiles in early transcription are qualitatively similar, suggesting that gene
expression during late transcription, but not early transcription, may reflect
ligand specificity. In this study, based on both the data from time-course
quantitative real-time PCR on over 2,000 human transcription factors and
microarray of all human genes, we identified a series of transcription factors
which may control HRG-specific late transcription in MCF-7 cells.
RESULTS: We predicted that four transcription factors including EGR4, FRA-1,
FHL2, and DIPA should have responsibility of regulation in MCF-7 cell
differentiation. Validation analysis suggested that one member of the activator
protein 1 (AP-1) family, FOSL-1 (FRA-1 gene), appeared immediately following
c-FOS expression, might be responsible for expression of transcription factor
FHL2 through activation of the AP-1 complex. Furthermore, RNAi gene silencing of 
FOSL-1 and FHL2 resulted in increase of extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) phosphorylation of which duration was sustained by HRG stimulation.
CONCLUSION: Our analysis indicated that a time-dependent transcriptional
regulatory network including c-FOS, FRA-1, and FHL2 is vital in controlling the
ERK signaling pathway through a negative feedback loop for MCF-7 cell
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2785842
PMID: 19925682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Sex Dev. 2009;3(5):253-63. doi: 10.1159/000249147. Epub 2009 Oct 14.

EGR4 is a master gene responsible for fertility in cryptorchidism.

Hadziselimovic F(1), Hadziselimovic NO, Demougin P, Krey G, Hoecht B, Oakeley EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Day Care Clinic Liestal, Liestal, Switzerland.
praxis@kindertagesklinik.ch

The purpose of early medical or surgical treatment of boys with undescended
testes is to prevent the development of infertility. However, early and
successful surgery cannot prevent infertility in cryptorchid boys who lack type A
dark (Ad) spermatogonia. The aim of this study was to compare the gene expression
pattern of patients with completed transformation of gonocytes into Ad
spermatogonia, associated with low infertility risk, with patients that had
failed to undergo this process and had a high infertility risk. Genes expressed
in the 16 cryptorchid testes were estimated using Affymetrix whole-genome
microarray and compared to the expression profiles from four contralateral gonads
of boys with unilateral testicular agenesis. Whole-genome expression profiling
showed that boys in the high infertility risk group according to testicular
histology, showed decreased or lack of expression of most of the genes essential 
for hypothalamo-pituitary-testicular axis function relative to low or
intermediate risk group as well as controls. In particular, EGR4, which is
involved in regulating the secretion of luteinizing hormone, was virtually not
expressed. Thus, we found multiple differences in gene expression between the
high and low infertility risk groups, confirming the importance of an intact
hypothalamo-pituitary testicular axis and EGR4 in fertility development.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19828938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Int J Radiat Biol. 2009 May;85(5):403-12. doi: 10.1080/09553000902838541.

Effect of (211)At alpha-particle irradiation on expression of selected radiation 
responsive genes in human lymphocytes.

Turtoi A(1), Schneeweiss FH.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre Julich, Department of Safety and Radiation Protection,
Laboratory of Radiation Biology, Germany. a.turtoi@ulg.ac.be

PURPOSE: Analysis of the relative expression of radiation responsive genes
(previously shown to respond to gamma-radiations) after exposure of human
lymphocytes to (211)At alpha-particles and the suitability of these genes as
potential markers for alpha-biodosimetry.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Lymphocytes isolated from the peripheral blood of two
healthy human donors were exposed in triplicate for 30 min to different
concentrations of Na(211)At at 37 degrees C (absorbed doses: 0.05-1.6 Gy).
Following an incubation period (2 h), the total RNA was isolated from the
irradiated lymphocytes and the relative expression of the following 18 genes was 
tested for change using TaqMan probes based upon the real-time quantitative
polymerase chain reaction.
METHOD: BBC3 (B-cell lymphoma 2 binding component 3), CD69 (cluster of
differentiation 69), CDKN1A (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A), DUSP8 (dual
specificity phosphatase 8) EGR1 (early growth response 1), EGR4 (early growth
response 4), GADD45A (growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible, alpha), GRAP
(growth factor receptor-bound protein 2-related adaptor protein), LAP1B
(TOR1AIP1; torsin A interacting protein 1), IFNG (interferon gamma), ISG20L1
(interferon-stimulated exonuclease gene 20kDa - like 1), c-JUN (jun oncogene),
MDM2 (mouse double minute 2), PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear antigen), PLK2
(polo-like kinase 2), RND1 (rho family GTPase 1), TNFSF9 (tumour necrosis factor 
superfamily member 9) and TRAF4 (tumour necrosis factor receptor-associated
factor 4).
RESULTS: The expressions of the 18 genes, except GRAP, were up-regulated
following exposure to alpha-radiation. A comparison of the results of two
individuals tested here showed great variability. Dependence of gene expression
upon alpha-dose was observed in certain dose intervals for BBC3 (R(2) = 0.61
[individual 1] / 0.81 [individual 2], significance 0.2-1.6 Gy [1] / 0.05-0.1 Gy
[2]) and MDM2 (R(2) = 0.78/0.54; 0.8-1.6 Gy [1], 0.05-0.1 Gy [2]) genes in both
individuals. Additionally, for individual 1 the dose dependence was found for the
following genes: ISG20L1 (R(2) = 0.69, 0.05-0.1 Gy), PCNA (R(2) = 0.59, 0.8-1.6
Gy) and IFNG (R(2) = 0.74 up to 0.4 Gy, 0.05-0.1 Gy).
CONCLUSION: Candidate genes for a possible role in future early-phase (2 h)
alpha-biodosimetry are BBC3, ISG20L1, MDM2, PCNA and IFNG.

PMID: 19382019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 5;283(49):34101-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804951200. Epub 2008
Sep 23.

Kinase networks integrate profiles of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-mediated gene
expression in hippocampus.

Coba MP(1), Valor LM, Kopanitsa MV, Afinowi NO, Grant SG.

Author information: 
(1)Genes to Cognition, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10
1SA, United Kingdom.

The postsynaptic N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor activates multiple kinases 
and changes the phosphorylation of many postsynaptic proteins organized in
signaling networks. Because the NMDA receptor is known to regulate gene
expression, it is important to examine whether networks of kinases control
signaling to gene expression. We examined the requirement of multiple kinases and
NMDA receptor-interacting proteins for gene expression in mouse hippocampal
slices. Protocols that induce long-term depression (LTD) and long-term
potentiation (LTP) activated common kinases and overlapping gene expression
profiles. Combinations of kinases were required for induction of each gene.
Distinct combinations of kinases were required to up-regulate Arc, Npas4, Egr2,
and Egr4 following either LTP or LTD protocols. Consistent with the combinatorial
data, a mouse mutant model of the human cognition disease gene SAP102, which
couples ERK kinase to the NMDA receptor, showed deregulated expression of
specific genes. These data support a network model of postsynaptic integration
where kinase signaling networks are recruited by differential synaptic activity
and control both local synaptic events and activity-dependent gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2662229
PMID: 18815127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Hum Reprod. 2008 Sep;14(9):547-54. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gan046. Epub 2008 Aug 
16.

Specific tumour-associated methylation in normal human term placenta and
first-trimester cytotrophoblasts.

Novakovic B(1), Rakyan V, Ng HK, Manuelpillai U, Dewi C, Wong NC, Morley R, Down 
T, Beck S, Craig JM, Saffery R.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Epigenetics Research, Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Royal Children's Hospital, VIC 3052, Australia.

Human placentation displays many similarities with tumourigenesis, including
rapid cell division, migration and invasion, overlapping gene expression profiles
and escape from immune detection. Recent data have identified promoter
methylation in the Ras association factor and adenomatous polyposis coli tumour
suppressor genes as part of this process. However, the extent of
tumour-associated methylation in the placenta remains unclear. Using whole genome
methylation data as a starting point, we have examined this phenomenon in
placental tissue. We found no evidence for methylation of the majority of common 
tumour suppressor genes in term placentas, but identified methylation in several 
genes previously described in some human tumours. Notably, promoter methylation
of four independent negative regulators of Wnt signalling has now been identified
in human placental tissue and purified trophoblasts. Methylation is present in
baboon, but not in mouse placentas. This supports a role for elevated Wnt
signalling in primate trophoblast invasiveness and placentation. Examination of
invasive choriocarcinoma cell lines revealed altered methylation patterns
consistent with a role of methylation change in gestational trophoblastic
disease. This distinct pattern of tumour-associated methylation implicates a
coordinated series of epigenetic silencing events, similar to those associated
with some tumours, in the distinct features of normal human placental invasion
and function.

PMID: 18708652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Int J Radiat Biol. 2008 May;84(5):375-87. doi: 10.1080/09553000802029886.

Early gene expression in human lymphocytes after gamma-irradiation-a genetic
pattern with potential for biodosimetry.

Turtoi A(1), Brown I, Oskamp D, Schneeweiss FH.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre Jülich, Department of Safety and Radiation Protection,
Laboratory of Radiation Biology, Germany. turtoia@hotmail.com

PURPOSE: Identification of early radiation response genes (ERG) in human
lymphocytes after gamma-irradiation by using the whole-human-genome
DNA-microarrays and the evaluation of their possible role in rapid radiation
biodosimetry by applying real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(RT-qPCR) methodology for validation in a small group of human individuals.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Whole blood from a healthy human donor was exposed at 37
degrees C to 137Cs gamma-radiations (absorbed dose: 1-4 Gy). Fifteen minutes
following irradiation the lymphocytes were isolated from the blood (for 2 h at 20
degrees C) and their gene expression was investigated using the DNA-microarrays. 
Subsequently, 14 genes were selected and validated using the TaqMan probes based 
upon the RT-qPCR assay within a group of 6 human donors.
RESULTS: A dose-related relative change in quantitative gene expression using the
DNA-microarray assay was demonstrated in 24 of 102 genes. Up-regulation of
expression was observed in 15 genes: CD69 (CD69 molecule), CDKN1A
(cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A), EGR1 (early growth response 1), EGR4
(early growth response 4), FLJ35725 (chromosome 4 ORF 23), hCG2041177 (hCG -
human Celera Genome), hCG1643466.2, IFN-gamma (interferon-gamma), ISG20L
(interferon stimulated exonuclease gene 20 kDa - like 1), c-JUN (jun oncogene),
MDM2 (mouse double minute 2), MUC5B (mucine), PLK2 (polo-like kinase 2), RND1
(rho-family GTPase 1) and TNFSF9 (tumour necrosis factor superfamily member 9).
Down-regulation of expression was found in the remaining nine genes: GRIK3
(glutamate receptor ionotropic kainate 3), hCG1985174, hCG1998530, hCG2038519,
OCLN (occludin), RPL10A (ribosomal protein L10a), SERHL2 (serine hydrolase-like
2), SGK3 (serum/glucocorticoid regulated kinase 3) and STARD13 (START domain
containing 13).
CONCLUSION: A significant correlation between absorbed radiation dose and change 
in relative gene expression was particularly evident for EGR1, EGR4, IFN-gamma,
c-JUN and TNFSF9 (p < or = 0.05). Results warrant the further investigation of
these ERG as potential biodosimetric markers.

PMID: 18464067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Apr 15;103(6):1938-51.

Opposing effects of glucocorticoids and Wnt signaling on Krox20 and mineral
deposition in osteoblast cultures.

Leclerc N(1), Noh T, Cogan J, Samarawickrama DB, Smith E, Frenkel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Institute for Genetic
Medicine, Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California 90033, USA.

Krox20 is expressed in osteoblasts and chondrocytes, and is required for
trabecular bone formation during embryogenesis. Here we show by RT-qPCR and
Western blot analysis that Krox20 is up-regulated during late stages of
osteoblast differentiation in culture. Glucocorticoids (GCs) rapidly inhibit the 
expression of Krox20 as well its co-activator, HCF-1, resulting in inhibition of 
the Osteocalcin Krox20-binding Enhancer (OKE). GCs also inhibit expression of
EGR1, EGR3, and EGR4. OKE activity, which is dependent on the presence of Runx2, 
was independent of the osteocalcin promoter Runx2 binding site. In contrast to
GCs, activation of the Wnt, but not the BMP or the PTH signaling pathways,
stimulated Krox20 expression as well as activity of the OKE. GC-mediated
suppression of Krox20 expression was compromised, albeit not completely, in the
presence of DKK1, suggesting that the inhibition occurs in both Wnt-dependent and
Wnt-independent manners. Furthermore, Wnt3A partially rescued Krox20 expression
in GC-arrested osteoblast cultures and this was accompanied by rescue of
mineralization. These findings are consistent with a role for Krox20 in
osteoblast function and suggest that this transcription factor may contribute to 
the opposing effects of GCs and Wnt signaling on bone formation.

PMID: 17973254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2008 Mar;11(2):207-16. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

Chronic treatment with aripiprazole induces differential gene expression in the
rat frontal cortex.

Cheng MC(1), Liao DL, Hsiung CA, Chen CY, Liao YC, Chen CH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, Tzu-Chi University, Hualien City, Taiwan.

Chronic treatment of antipsychotic drugs can modulate gene expression in the
brain, which may underscore their clinical efficacy. Aripiprazole is the first
approved antipsychotic drug of the class of dopamine D2 receptor partial agonist,
which has been shown to have similar efficacy and favourable side-effects profile
compared to other antipsychotic drugs. This study aimed to identify differential 
gene expression induced by chronic treatment of aripiprazole. We used
microarray-based gene expression profiling technology, real-time quantitative PCR
and Western blot analysis to identify differentially expressed genes in the
frontal cortex of rats under 4 wk treatment of aripiprazole (10 mg/kg). We were
able to detect ten up-regulated genes, including early growth response gene 1, 2,
4 (Egr1, Egr2, Egr4), chromobox homolog 7 (Cbx7), cannabinoid receptor (Cnr1),
catechol-O-methyltransferase (Comt), protein phosphatase 2c, magnesium dependent 
(Ppm2c), tachykinin receptor 3 (Tacr3), Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome-like gene (Wasl)
and DNA methyltransferase 3a (Dnmt3a). Our data indicate that chronic
administration of aripiprazole can induce differential expression of genes
involved in transcriptional regulation and chromatin remodelling and genes
implicated in the pathogenesis of psychosis.

PMID: 17868501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Onkologie. 2007 Sep;30(8-9):421-6. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Identification of consensus genes and key regulatory elements in 5-fluorouracil
resistance in gastric and colon cancer.

Szöke D(1), Györffy A, Surowiak P, Tulassay Z, Dietel M, Györffy B.

Author information: 
(1)Semmelweis University Budapest, 1st Dept. of Pediatrics, Budapest, Hungary.

BACKGROUND: 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) is widely used in the treatment of gastric and 
colorectal cancer. Recent microrarray studies associated different gene lists
with 5-FU resistance. A major challenge in the genomic era is to find the most
validated genes, and to decipher the regulatory networks responsible for the
expression changes in a set of co-regulated transcripts. Our aim was to find
genes repeatedly associated with 5-FU resistance, and to identify transcription
factors (TFs) having overrepresented binding sites (TFBSs) in the promoter
regions of genes associated with 5-FU resistance.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The analyzed data originated from 5 different publications
describing genome-wide gene expression patterns associated with 5- FU resistance 
in gastric and colorectal cancer. First, a data warehouse containing all genes
associated with resistance was set up. 39 genes were identified which were
repeatedly associated with resistance. Of these, using the EZ-Retrieve web
service, proximal promoter sequences were available for 33 genes. The
MotifScanner software was used to detect TFBSs in this set of sequences.
RESULTS: A total of 200 different TFBSs were identified. Using the statistics
tool of the Java program TOUCAN, 4 binding sites were found to be significantly
overrepresented: NFKappaB50 (p = 0.01), EGR2 (p = 0.027), EGR3 (p = 0.007), and
NGFIC (or EGR4) (p = 0.001). These genes intercept apoptotic pathways at multiple
locations in the tumor cells.
CONCLUSION: We identified a consensus gene list associated with 5-FU resistance, 
performed an in silico comparative promoter analysis, and highlighted the
potential implication of some TFs in the development of chemoresistance.

PMID: 17848813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Vis. 2007 Jul 19;13:1226-33.

Gene profiling in murine corneas challenged with Aspergillus fumigatus.

Wang Y(1), Liu T, Gong H, Zhou Q, Wang Y, Sun S, Xie L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab Cultivation Base, Shandong Provincial Key Lab of Ophthalmology, 
Shandong Eye Institute, Qingdao, China.

PURPOSE: Fungal keratitis (FK) is a blinding infection of the corneas and
accounts for a significant portion of all keratitis in the world but little is
known about the pathogenesis of FK, especially at the level of molecular biology.
This study tried to determine the genes that are modulated in the process and
thus deserve further investigation for understanding the pathogenesis of FK.
METHODS: Agilent Mouse Oligo Microarray was used to compare the gene profiles in 
control corneas and in corneas challenged with heat-inactivated Aspergillus
fumigatus spores. Semiquantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry were used to confirm the changes of
interested genes.
RESULTS: In the 18,335 genes detected by array, 61 showed an increase of more
than one-fold in RNA expression and 48 showed a decrease of over 50%. Among the
regulated genes some are known to be related to host defense such as IL3, mannose
binding lectin A (MBL-A), and prostaglandin D2 synthase (Psgd) while others like 
Dopachrome tautomerase (Dct) have never been correlated to ocular or host
defense. The other 33 changed genes either have unknown functions or encode
hypothetical proteins. The changes in the expression of early growth response 4
(Egr4), Dct, Psgd, MBL-A, and hemoglobin alpha adult chain 1 were confirmed by
using RT-PCR. MBL-A expression regulation was further confirmed by using
immunohistochemistry in both in vitro and in vivo challenged murine corneas.
CONCLUSIONS: MBL-A is among the primary responding genes during the onset of
fungal keratitis. Also it was found that the microarray is a useful tool in
elucidating the pathogenesis of FK.

PMID: 17679939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mol Vis. 2007 Jun 28;13:1020-30.

Global gene expression profiling of ischemic preconditioning in the rat retina.

Kamphuis W(1), Dijk F, van Soest S, Bergen AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmogenetics, Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. w.kamphuis@nin.knaw.nl

PURPOSE: To obtain and analyze the gene expression changes after ischemic
preconditioning (IPC) in the rat retina.
METHODS: Ischemic damage to the inner retina can be prevented by a short,
non-deleterious, ischemic insult of 5 min applied 24 h preceding a full ischemic 
insult of 60 min; a phenomenon termed tolerance or IPC. The time course of
changes in gene expression after induction of IPC was assessed by 22K
oligonucleotide microarrays, followed by real-time quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction (qPCR) validation. Functional pathways of interest were identified by
Gene Ontology-term analysis.
RESULTS: Histology confirmed that IPC induction by 5 min of retinal ischemia
results in a complete protection against the neurodegenerative effects of a 60
min ischemic period applied 24 or 48 h later. The microarray analysis revealed
differential expression of 104 known genes at one or more time points between 1 h
and 7 days after IPC. The group of altered genes contained a significant
overrepresentation of genes involved in aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase activity (Iars,
Lars, Cars, Yars, Gars, Tars), amino acid transport (Slc3a2, Slc6a6, Slc7a1,
Slc38a2), regulation of transcription (including Egr1, Egr4, Nr4a1, Nr4a3,
c-fos), and cell death (including Anxa1, Trib3). qPCR assays on cDNA of
individual animals confirmed the microarray results.
CONCLUSIONS: Endogenous neuroprotection, provoked by ischemic preconditioning is 
associated with changes in transcript levels of several functionally-related
groups of genes. During the time window of effective protection, transcript
levels of genes encoding for aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases and for amino acid
transport are reduced. These changes suggest that a reduction of translational
activity may play a significant role in preconditioning-mediated neuroprotection.

PMCID: PMC2776543
PMID: 17653046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Feb 20;104(8):2815-20. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Genetic analysis of the calcineurin pathway identifies members of the EGR gene
family, specifically EGR3, as potential susceptibility candidates in
schizophrenia.

Yamada K(1), Gerber DJ, Iwayama Y, Ohnishi T, Ohba H, Toyota T, Aruga J, Minabe
Y, Tonegawa S, Yoshikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories for Molecular Psychiatry, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama 
351-0198, Japan.

The calcineurin cascade is central to neuronal signal transduction, and genes in 
this network are intriguing candidate schizophrenia susceptibility genes. To
replicate and extend our previously reported association between the PPP3CC gene,
encoding the calcineurin catalytic gamma-subunit, and schizophrenia, we examined 
84 SNPs from 14 calcineurin-related candidate genes for genetic association by
using 124 Japanese schizophrenic pedigrees. Four of these genes (PPP3CC, EGR2,
EGR3, and EGR4) showed nominally significant association with schizophrenia. In a
postmortem brain study, EGR1, EGR2, and EGR3 transcripts were shown to be
down-regulated in the prefrontal cortex of schizophrenic, but not bipolar,
patients. These findings raise a potentially important role for EGR genes in
schizophrenia pathogenesis. Because EGR3 is an attractive candidate gene based on
its chromosomal location close to PPP3CC within 8p21.3 and its functional link to
dopamine, glutamate, and neuregulin signaling, we extended our analysis by
resequencing the entire EGR3 genomic interval and detected 15 SNPs. One of these,
IVS1 + 607A-->G SNP, displayed the strongest evidence for disease association,
which was confirmed in 1,140 independent case-control samples. An in vitro
promoter assay detected a possible expression-regulatory effect of this SNP.
These findings support the previous genetic association of altered calcineurin
signaling with schizophrenia pathogenesis and identify EGR3 as a compelling
susceptibility gene.

PMCID: PMC1815264
PMID: 17360599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Immunol. 2007 Mar 1;178(5):3038-47.

Early growth response transcriptional regulators are dispensable for macrophage
differentiation.

Carter JH(1), Tourtellotte WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University, 330 E. Chicago Avenue,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Early growth response (Egr) proteins comprise a family of transcriptional
regulators (Egr1-4) that modulate gene expression involved in the growth and
differentiation of many cell types. In particular, Egr1 is widely believed to
have an essential role in regulating monocyte/macrophage differentiation.
However, Egr1-deficient mice have normal numbers of functional macrophages, an
observation that has led to the hypothesis that other Egr proteins may compensate
for Egr1 function in vivo. We examined whether other Egr transcription factors
have a functionally redundant role in monocyte/macrophage differentiation. Egr1
and Egr3 expression was found to be induced in myeloid cells when they were
differentiated into macrophages by treatment with M-CSF, whereas Egr2 was
minimally induced and Egr4 was not detected. In either Egr1/Egr3 or Egr1/Egr2
double homozygous mutant mice, macrophage differentiation and function remained
unimpaired. Additionally, the expression of molecules that broadly inhibit Egr
function failed to block commitment to the monocytic lineage or inhibit the
maturation of monocyte precursors. Finally, several hemopoietic growth factors
were found to induce Egr gene expression, indicating that Egr gene expression is 
not cell lineage specific. Taken together, these results demonstrate that Egr
transcription factors are neither essential for nor specific to
monocyte/macrophage differentiation.

PMID: 17312150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Neurosci. 2006 Dec 27;26(52):13463-73.

Upregulation of the neuron-specific K+/Cl- cotransporter expression by
transcription factor early growth response 4.

Uvarov P(1), Ludwig A, Markkanen M, Rivera C, Airaksinen MS.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Center, University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.

The expression of the neuron-specific K+/Cl- cotransporter (KCC2) is restricted
to the CNS and is strongly upregulated during neuronal maturation, yielding a low
intracellular chloride concentration that is required for fast synaptic
inhibition in adult neurons. To elucidate the mechanisms of KCC2 gene regulation,
we analyzed the KCC2 (alias Slc12a5) promoter and proximal intron-1 regions and
revealed 10 candidate transcription factor binding sites that are highly
conserved in mammalian KCC2 genes. Here we focus on one of these factors, early
growth response 4 (Egr4), which shows a similar developmental upregulation in CNS
neurons as KCC2. KCC2 luciferase reporter constructs containing the Egr4 site
(Egr4(KCC2)) were strongly induced by Egr4 overexpression in neuro-2a
neuroblastoma cells and in cultured neurons. Egr4-mediated induction was
decreased significantly by point-mutating the Egr4(KCC2). Insertion of Egr4(KCC2)
into the KCC2 basal promoter in the endogenous reverse, but not in the opposite, 
orientation reestablished Egr4-mediated induction. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assay confirmed specific Egr4 binding to Egr4(KCC2). Interference RNA-mediated
knock-down of Egr4 and a dominant-negative isoform of Egr4 significantly
inhibited KCC2 reporter induction and endogenous KCC2 expression in cultured
neurons. Together, the results indicate an important role for Egr4 in the
developmental upregulation of KCC2 gene expression.

PMID: 17192429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Dec;25(23):10286-300.

The neuroplasticity-associated arc gene is a direct transcriptional target of
early growth response (Egr) transcription factors.

Li L(1), Carter J, Gao X, Whitehead J, Tourtellotte WG.

Author information: 
(1)Ward 7-110, Department of Pathology, W127, Northwestern University, 393 E.
Chicago Ave., Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Early growth response (Egr) transcription factors (Egr1 to Egr4) are synaptic
activity-inducible immediate early genes (IEGs) that regulate some aspects of
synaptic plasticity-related to learning and memory, yet the target genes
regulated by them are unknown. In particular, Egr1 is essential for persistence
of late-phase long-term potentiation (L-LTP), for hippocampus-dependent long-term
memory formation, and for reconsolidation of previously established memories.
Here, we show that Egr1 and Egr3 directly regulate the plasticity-associated
activity-regulated cytoskeletal-related (Arc) gene, a synaptic activity-induced
effector molecule which is also required for L-LTP and hippocampus-dependent
learning and memory processing. Moreover, Egr1-deficient and Egr3-deficient mice 
lack Arc protein in a subpopulation of neurons, while mice lacking both Egr1 and 
Egr3 lack Arc in all neurons. Thus, Egr1 and Egr3 can indirectly modulate
synaptic plasticity by directly regulating Arc and the plasticity mechanisms it
mediates in recently activated synapses.

PMCID: PMC1291244
PMID: 16287845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Cell Sci. 2005 Jul 15;118(Pt 14):3203-12.

Early growth response proteins EGR-4 and EGR-3 interact with immune inflammatory 
mediators NF-kappaB p50 and p65.

Wieland GD(1), Nehmann N, Müller D, Eibel H, Siebenlist U, Sühnel J, Zipfel PF,
Skerka C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Leibniz-Institute for Natural Products,
Research and Infection Biology, Hans-Knoell-Institute, Butenbergstrasse 11a,
07745 Jena, Germany.

Here, we characterize the basis for the T-cell-specific activity of the human
zinc-finger protein early growth response factor 4 (EGR-4). A yeast two-hybrid
screen showed interaction of EGR-4 with NF-kappaB p50. Using recombinant
proteins, stable physical complex formation was confirmed for EGR-4 and EGR-3
with p50 and with p65 using glutathione-S-transferase pull-down assays and
surface-plasmon-resonance and peptide-spot analyses. In vivo interaction of EGR-4
and EGR-3 with NF-kappaB p65 was demonstrated by immunoprecipitation experiments 
and fluorescence-resonance-energy transfer (FRET) analysis showing interaction in
the nucleus of transfected Jurkat T cells. In transfection assays, EGR-p50
complexes were transcriptionally inactive and EGR-p65 complexes strongly
activated transcription of the promoters of the human genes encoding the
cytokines interleukin 2, tissue necrosis factor alpha and ICAM-1. The EGR-p65
complexes increased reporter-gene activity about 100-fold and thus exceeded the
transcriptional activities of the p65 homodimer and the p65/p50 heterodimers. The
major interaction domain for p65 was localized within the third zinc finger of
EGR-4 using deletion mutants for pull-down assays and peptide-spot assays. By
computer modeling, this interaction domain was localized to an alpha-helical
region and shown to have the central amino acids surface exposed and thus
accessible for interaction. In summary, in T cells, the two zinc-finger proteins 
EGR-4 and EGR-3 interact with the specific nuclear mediator NF-kappaB and control
transcription of genes encoding inflammatory cytokines.

PMID: 16014385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Ann Hematol. 2005 Apr;84(4):236-44. Epub 2004 Nov 6.

Distinction of acute lymphoblastic leukemia from acute myeloid leukemia through
microarray-based DNA methylation analysis.

Scholz C(1), Nimmrich I, Burger M, Becker E, Dörken B, Ludwig WD, Maier S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charité
Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany. christian.scholz@charite.de

Patterns of DNA methylation are substantially altered in malignancies compared to
normal tissue, with both genome-wide hypomethylation and regional increase of
cytosine methylation at dinucleotides of cytosine and guanine, i.e., CpG
dinucleotides. While genome-wide hypomethylation renders chromosomes instable,
hypermethylation of CpGs in promoter regions is generally associated with
transcriptional silencing, e.g., of tumor suppressor genes. To investigate
whether disease-specific methylation profiles exist for different entities of
acute leukemia, a microarray-based DNA methylation analysis simultaneously
assessing 249 CpG dinucleotides originating from 57 genes was employed. Hereby,
samples from precursor B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) could be
distinguished from cases of acute myeloid leukemia by virtue of N33, EGR4, CDC2, 
CCND2, or MOS hypermethylation in ALL.

PMID: 15538567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Oncogene. 2004 Nov 11;23(53):8705-10.

Identification of 27 5' CpG islands aberrantly methylated and 13 genes silenced
in human pancreatic cancers.

Hagihara A(1), Miyamoto K, Furuta J, Hiraoka N, Wakazono K, Seki S, Fukushima S, 
Tsao MS, Sugimura T, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Tsukiji 5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Aberrantly methylated DNA fragments were searched for in human pancreatic
cancers, using the genome scanning technique:
methylation-sensitive-representational difference analysis (MS-RDA). MS-RDA
isolated 111 DNA fragments derived from CpG islands (CGIs), and 35 of them were
from CGIs in the 5' regions of known genes. Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) of the
CGIs in seven pancreatic cancer cell lines and two pancreatic ductal epithelial
cell lines showed that 27 CGIs in the 5' regions were aberrantly methylated in at
least one of the cancer cell lines. Quantitative reverse-transcription-PCR
analysis showed that downstream genes of all the CGIs were either not expressed
or only very weakly expressed in cancer cell lines with the aberrant methylation.
In the pancreatic ductal epithelial cell lines, 18 genes were expressed at
various levels, and nine genes were not expressed at all. Treatment of a cancer
cell line with a demethylating agent, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, restored the
expression of 13 genes, RASGRF2, ADAM23, NEF3, NKX2-8, HAND1, EGR4, PRG2, FBN2,
CDH2, TLL1, NPTX1, NTSR1 and THBD, showing their silencing by methylation of
their 5' CGIs. MSP of 24 primary pancreatic cancers showed that all these genes, 
except for THBD, were methylated in at least one cancer. Some of those were
suggested to be potentially involved in pancreatic cancer development and
progression.

PMID: 15467763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 5;279(10):9056-63. Epub 2003 Dec 29.

The Ddx20/DP103 dead box protein represses transcriptional activation by
Egr2/Krox-20.

Gillian AL(1), Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The early growth response 2 (Egr2/Krox-20) transcription factor is essential for 
myelination of the peripheral nervous system and segmentation of the vertebrate
hindbrain. To probe the mechanism by which Egr2 is regulated, we used a yeast
two-hybrid assay and identified an RNA helicase, Ddx20 (DP103/Gemin3), as an
Egr2-interacting protein. Mammalian two-hybrid assays indicated that Ddx20 can
interact with Egr1, Egr3, and Egr4, in addition to Egr2, making it the only known
cofactor that interacts with all four Egr family members. Using several Egr2
target promoters, we found that Ddx20 repressed Egr2-mediated transcriptional
activation with significant promoter specificity. In addition, Ddx20 repressed
Egr2-mediated activation of the endogenous insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2)
gene. Interestingly, the C-terminal segment of Ddx20, which lacks the DEAD box
helicase domain, was sufficient for its robust and specific repression. We also
examined possible interactions between Ddx20 and Nab proteins, the only other
known corepressors of the Egr family, and found that these two corepressors act
independently. Finally, transcriptional repression assays performed in the
presence of a histone deacetylase inhibitor (trichostatin A) indicate that
although repression of certain promoters by Ddx20 requires histone deacetylase
activity, another repression mechanism must also be involved. Because Egr2 is
critical for hindbrain development and peripheral nerve myelination, modulation
of Egr2 by Ddx20 may play an important role in maintaining the correct expression
level of Egr2 target genes.

PMID: 14699164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Anim Genet. 2003 Apr;34(2):124-31.

Cloning and characterization of the bovine EGR4 gene and evaluation as candidate 
gene for bovine spinal dysmyelination.

Nissen PH(1), Thomsen B, Offenberg H, Thomsen PD, Bendixen C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Danish Institute of Agricultural
Sciences, DK-8830 Tjele, Denmark. sci08phn@aas.auh.dk

Genes of the early growth response (EGR) family encode transcription factors with
a highly conserved DNA binding zinc finger domain, which regulate a variety of
genes, e.g. late myelin genes. Here, the cloning, genomic structure and
expression of the bovine orthologue of the EGR4 gene are reported. The gene
consists of two exons and encodes a 482 amino acid protein with a Cys2His2 zinc
finger structure. The predicted protein shares between 80 and 87% identity to
mouse, rat and human EGR4 proteins and all four species share almost complete
identity in the DNA-binding domain. The bovine transcript is alternatively
spliced by retaining intronic sequence, giving rise to two different mRNAs
differing in three nucleotides and resulting in an extra alanine residue in the
longer variant of the predicted protein. The gene was mapped by radiation hybrid 
(RH) mapping to markers on bovine chromosome 11. EGR4 transcripts were detected
by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in the frontal cortex
and cerebellum, and a low expression level was also detected in the liver. The
EGR4 gene was evaluated as a candidate gene for bovine spinal dysmyelination
(BSD). Sequencing of the gene from a homozygous affected animal and a
heterozygous carrier revealed a single base mutation that leads to an amino acid 
substitution at residue 322 in EGR4. Genotype analysis of this polymorphism in a 
pedigree segregating for BSD, as well as in a panel of different cattle breeds,
and sequence analysis of the entire coding region suggested that the EGR4 is not 
the gene responsible for BSD. Furthermore, 87 animals of different cattle breeds 
were screened for single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) resulting in the
identification of two SNPs in EGR4.

PMID: 12648095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Feb 1;31(3):911-21.

Early growth response proteins (EGR) and nuclear factors of activated T cells
(NFAT) form heterodimers and regulate proinflammatory cytokine gene expression.

Decker EL(1), Nehmann N, Kampen E, Eibel H, Zipfel PF, Skerka C.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group of Biomolecular Medicine, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical
Medicine, 20359 Hamburg, Bernhard-Nocht Strasse 74, Germany.

Activation of transcription factors by receptor mediated signaling is an
essential step for T lymphocyte effector function. Following antigenic
stimulation of T cells the two central cytokines IL-2 and TNFalpha are
co-expressed and co-regulated. Two important transcription factors, i.e., early
growth response (EGR) protein EGR-1 and nuclear factors of activated T cells
(NFAT) protein NFATc, regulate transcription of the human IL-2 cytokine and the
same combination of EGR and NFAT proteins seems relevant for coordinated cytokine
expression. Here we demonstrate that the zinc finger protein EGR-1 and two
members of the NFAT protein family bind simultaneously to adjacent elements
position -168 to -150 within the TNFalpha promoter. Both promoter sites are
important for TNFalpha gene transcription as shown by transfection assays having 
the IL-2 and TNFalpha promoters linked to a luciferase reporter. The use of
promoter deletion constructs with the zinc finger protein (ZIP), the NFAT binding
element or a combination of both deleted show a functional cooperation of these
elements and of their binding factors. These experiments demonstrate that EGR-1
as well as EGR-4 functionally cooperate with NFAT proteins and induce expression 
of both cytokine genes. Using tagged NFATc and NFATp in glutathione S-transferase
pull down assays showed interaction and physical complex formation of each NFAT
protein with recombinant, as well as native, EGR-1 and EGR-4 proteins. Thus
EGR-NFAT interaction and complex formation seems essential for human cytokine
expression as adjacent ZIP and NFAT elements are conserved in the IL-2 and
TNFalpha gene promoters. Binding of regulatory EGR and NFAT factors to these
sites and the functional interaction and formation of stable heterodimeric
complexes indicate an important role of these factors for gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC149206
PMID: 12560487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2002 Oct 15;106(1-2):124-35.

Synergistic activation of the human choline acetyltransferase gene by c-Myb and
C/EBPbeta.

Robert I(1), Sutter A, Quirin-Stricker C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes, CNRS/INSERM U 184,
Faculté de Médecine, 11 rue Humann, 67085 Strasbourg, France.

To elucidate regulatory mechanisms at the transcriptional level of the human
choline acetyltransferase gene (hChAT) we performed cotransfections assays in
NG108-15 and SN56 cells using ChAT-CAT reporter plasmids with c-Myb and C/EBPbeta
expression plasmids. The hChAT gene has several promoters, one of which (promoter
P2 or M-type) is both c-Myb and C/EBPbeta inducible as 3-4-fold trans-activation 
was obtained in both cell lines when using either c-Myb or C/EBPbeta expression
vectors alone. The simultaneous expression of c-Myb and C/EBPbeta in the absence 
or presence of NGFI-C (egr4) leads respectively to a 15-fold and 32-fold
synergistic transcriptional activation of promoter P2. In the region upstream of 
exon M (P2) we identified a functional composite element including a c-Myb next
to a C/EBP binding site. An oligonucleotide containing the composite element
confers c-Myb and C/EBPbeta responsiveness to a heterologous promoter which is
reduced after mutation of the c-Myb binding site. We also show that the
coactivators CBP/p300 are required for c-Myb and C/EBPbeta trans-activation
function and that RARalpha, RXRalpha and T3R have an inhibitory action on the
synergistic transcriptional activity of c-Myb and C/EBPbeta and propose a model
to explain the phenomena. Taken together, the results suggest that the
synergistic effect of c-Myb and C/EBPbeta, previously observed in the
hematopoietic system, functions equally in the neuronal system.

PMID: 12393272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Eur J Hum Genet. 2001 Sep;9(9):659-66.

Refinement of the PARK3 locus on chromosome 2p13 and the analysis of 14 candidate
genes.

West AB(1), Zimprich A, Lockhart PJ, Farrer M, Singleton A, Holtom B, Lincoln S, 
Hofer A, Hill L, Müller-Myhsok B, Wszolek ZK, Hardy J, Gasser T.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, Florida, FL
32224, USA.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder with clinical
features of bradykinesia, rigidity, resting tremor and postural instability
resulting from the deficiency of dopamine in the nigrostriatal system. Previously
we mapped a susceptibility gene for an autosomal dominant form of PD to a 10.6 cM
region of chromosome 2p (PARK3; OMIM 602404). A common haplotype shared by two
North American kindreds (Families B and C) genealogically traced to Southern
Denmark and Northern Germany suggested a founder effect. Here we report progress 
in the refinement of the PARK3 locus and sequence analysis of candidate genes
within the region. Members of families B and C were genotyped using polymorphic
markers, reducing the minimum common haplotype to eight markers spanning a
physical distance of 2.5 Mb. Analysis of 14 genes within the region did not
reveal any potentially pathogenic mutations segregating with the disease,
implying that none of these genes are likely candidates for PARK3.

PMID: 11571553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Dev Biol. 2001 Apr 15;232(2):388-99.

The transcription factor Egr3 modulates sensory axon-myotube interactions during 
muscle spindle morphogenesis.

Tourtellotte WG(1), Keller-Peck C, Milbrandt J, Kucera J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University School of Medicine, Chicago, 
Illinois 60611, USA. warren@northwestern.edu

Erratum in
    Dev Biol 2002 Dec 15;252(2):324.

The Egr family of zinc-finger transcription factors, consisting of Egr1, Egr2,
Egr3, and Egr4, are involved in cellular growth and differentiation. Adult
Egr3-deficient mice are ataxic and lack muscle spindle proprioceptors that
normally develop at the sites of Ia afferent-myotube contacts during
embryogenesis. To resolve whether spindles form and then degenerate, or whether
they never form in the absence of Egr3, we examined the spatiotemporal expression
of Egr3 relative to spindle development. In wild type mice, Egr3 was expressed in
developing myotubes shortly after they were innervated by Ia afferents and its
expression was controlled by innervation because it dissipated following nerve
transection. In Egr3-deficient mice, myotubes received Ia afferent innervation
and assembled normally into spindles during embryogenesis. However, newborn
Egr3-deficient spindles had few internal myonuclei in intrafusal fibers and thin 
capsules. Moreover, slow-developmental myosin heavy chain was not induced in
embryonic Egr3-deficient spindles suggesting that impairments in differentiation 
were present before they could be detected morphologically. After birth, sensory 
and motor innervation withdrew from the Egr3-deficient spindles, and the spindles
disassembled. In spite of the spindle disassembly and retraction of afferents
from muscles, the cell bodies of proprioceptive neurons within dorsal root
ganglia were retained. We conclude that Egr3 has an essential role in regulating 
genes required for the transformation of undifferentiated myotubes into
intrafusal fibers, and hence for the phenotypic differentiation of spindles.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11401400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. EXS. 2001;(91):1-10.

The one-to-four rule and paralogues of sex-determining genes.

Ohno S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 1450 East Duarte Road, Duarte,
California 91010-3000, USA.

Because of two successive rounds of tetraploidization at their inception, the
vertebrates contain four times more protein-coding genes in their genome than the
invertebrates: 60,000 vs. 15,000. Consequently, each invertebrate gene has been
amplified to the maximum of four paralogous genes in vertebrates: the one-to-four
rule. When this rule is applied to genes pertinent to gonadal development and
differentiation, the following emerged: (i) Two closely related zinc-finger
transcription factor genes in invertebrates have been amplified to two paralogous
groups in vertebrates. One consisted of EGR1, EGR2, EGR3 and EGR4, whereas the
only known paralogue of the other is WT1, which controls the developmental fate
of the entire nephric system, and therefore of gonads. Interestingly, EGR1 and
WT1 act as antagonists of each other in nephroblastic cells. (ii) SF-1, which
controls the fate of two steroid hormone-producing organs, adrenals and gonads,
is descended from the invertebrate Ftz-F1 gene, and its only known paralogue is
GCNF-1. (iii) The Y-linked SRY, the mammalian testis-determining gene, is a
paralogue neither of SOX3 (SRX) nor of SOX9. Its ancient origin suggests that SRY
once became extinct in earlier vertebrates, only to revive itself in the
mammalian ancestor. (iv) Inasmuch as four paralogues of one invertebrate nuclear 
receptor gene have differentiated to receptors of androgen, mineralocorticoid,
glucocorticoid and progesterone, there should at most be four paralogous
estrogen-receptor genes in the vertebrate genome. It is likely that one of them
plays a pivotal role in the estrogen-dependent sex-determining mechanism so
commonly found among reptiles, amphibians and fish.

PMID: 11301594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Neurosci. 2001 Jan 1;21(1):45-52.

Blockade of NGF-induced neurite outgrowth by a dominant-negative inhibitor of the
egr family of transcription regulatory factors.

Levkovitz Y(1), O'Donovan KJ, Baraban JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience, Psychiatry, and Behavioral Sciences, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Although it is well established that members of the Egr family of transcription
regulatory factors are induced in many neuronal plasticity paradigms, it is still
unclear what role, if any, they play in this process. Because NGF stimulation of 
pheochromocytoma 12 cells elicits a robust induction of Egr family members, we
have investigated their role in mediating long-term effects elicited by NGF in
these cells by using the Egr zinc finger DNA-binding domain as a selective
antagonist of Egr family-mediated transcription. We report that expression of
this Egr inhibitor construct suppresses neurite outgrowth elicited by NGF but not
by dibutyryl cAMP. To check that this Egr inhibitor construct does not act by
blocking the MEK/ERK pathway, which is known to mediate NGF-induced neurite
outgrowth, we confirmed that the Egr inhibitor construct does not block NGF
activation of Elk1-mediated transcription, a response that is dependent on this
pathway. Conversely, inhibition of MEK does not impair Egr family-mediated
transcription. Thus, we conclude (1) that induction of Egr family members and
activation of the MEK/ERK pathway by NGF are mediated by separate signaling
pathways and (2) that both are required to trigger neurite outgrowth induced by
NGF.

PMID: 11150318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(14):5261-8.

Functional compensation by Egr4 in Egr1-dependent luteinizing hormone regulation 
and Leydig cell steroidogenesis.

Tourtellotte WG(1), Nagarajan R, Bartke A, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Neuroscience Institute, Northwestern University
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The Egr family of zinc finger transcription factors, whose members are encoded by
Egr1 (NGFI-A), Egr2 (Krox20), Egr3, and Egr4 (NGFI-C) regulate critical genetic
programs involved in cellular growth, differentiation, and function. Egr1
regulates luteinizing hormone beta subunit (LHbeta) gene expression in the
pituitary gland. Due to decreased levels of LHbeta, female Egr1-deficient mice
are anovulatory, have low levels of progesterone, and are infertile. By contrast,
male mutant mice show no identifiable defects in spermatogenesis, testosterone
synthesis, or fertility. Here, we have shown that serum LH levels in male
Egr1-deficient mice are adequate for maintenance of Leydig cell steroidogenesis
and fertility because of partial functional redundancy with the closely related
transcription factor Egr4. Egr4-Egr1 double mutant male mice had low steady-state
levels of serum LH, physiologically low serum levels of testosterone, and atrophy
of androgen-dependent organs that were not present in either Egr1- or
Egr4-deficient males. In double mutant male mice, atrophic androgen-dependent
organs and Leydig cell steroidogenesis were fully restored by administration of
exogenous testosterone or human chorionic gonadotropin (an LH receptor agonist), 
respectively. Moreover, a normal distribution of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone-containing neurons and normal innervation of the median eminence in the
hypothalamus, as well as decreased levels of LH gene expression in
Egr4-Egr1-relative to Egr1-deficient male mice, indicates a defect of LH
regulation in pituitary gonadotropes. These results elucidate a novel level of
redundancy between Egr4 and Egr1 in regulating LH production in male mice.

PMCID: PMC85975
PMID: 10866682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Development. 1999 Nov;126(22):5061-71.

Infertility associated with incomplete spermatogenic arrest and oligozoospermia
in Egr4-deficient mice.

Tourtellotte WG(1), Nagarajan R, Auyeung A, Mueller C, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pathology and Divisions of Neuropathology and Laboratory
Medicine, and Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Male fertility is complex and depends upon endocrine/paracrine regulatory
mechanisms and morphogenetic processes occurring during testicular development,
spermatogenesis (mitosis and meiosis) and spermiogenesis (spermatid maturation). 
Egr4 (NGFI-C, pAT133), a member of the Egr family of zinc-finger transcription
factors, is thought to be involved in cellular growth and differentiation, but
its specific function has been previously unknown. We derived Egr4 null mice
through targeted mutagenesis and found that they were phenotypically normal with 
the exception that males, but not females, were infertile. Egr4 is expressed at
low levels within male germ cells during meiosis and is critical for germ cell
maturation during the early-mid pachytene stage. While most Egr4 null male germ
cells undergo apoptosis during early-mid pachytene, some are capable of maturing 
beyond an apparent Egr4-dependent developmental restriction point. Consequently, 
a limited degree of spermiogenesis occurs but this is accompanied by markedly
abnormal spermatozoon morphology and severe oligozoospermia. Egr4 appears to
regulate critical genes involved in early stages of meiosis and has a singularly 
important role in male murine fertility. These data raise the possibility that
Egr4 may contribute to some forms of human idiopathic male infertility.

PMID: 10529423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Cell Mol Life Sci. 1999 Jun;55(6-7):824-30.

The one-to-four rule and paralogues of sex-determining genes.

Ohno S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte, California 91010-3000,
USA.

Because of two successive rounds of tetraploidization at their inception, the
vertebrates contain four times more protein-coding genes in their genome than the
invertebrates: 60,000 versus 15,000. Consequently, each invertebrate gene has
been amplified to the maximum of four paralogous genes in vertebrates: the
one-to-four rule. When this rule is applied to genes pertinent to gonadal
development and differentiation, the following emerged: (i) Two closely related
zinc-finger transcription factor genes in invertebrates have been amplified to
two paralogous groups in vertebrates. One consisted of EGR1, EGR2, EGR3 and EGR4,
whereas the only known paralogue of the other is WT1, which controls the
developmental fate of the entire nephric system, and therefore of gonads.
Interestingly, EGR1 and WT1 act as antagonists of each other in nephroblastic
cells. (ii) SF-1, which controls the fate of two steroid hormone-producing
organs, adrenals and gonads, is descended from the invertebrate Ftz-F1 gene, and 
its only known paralogue is GCNF-1. (iii) The Y-linked SRY, the mammalian
testis-determining gene, is a paralogue neither of SOX3 (SRX) nor of SOX9. Its
ancient origin suggests that SRY once became extinct in earlier vertebrates, only
to revive itself in the mammalian ancestor. (iv) Inasmuch as four paralogues of
one invertebrate nuclear receptor gene have differentiated to receptors of
androgen, mineralocoticoid, glucocorticoid and progesterone, there should at most
be four paralogous estrogen-receptor genes in the vertebrate genome. It is likely
that one of them plays a pivotal role in the estrogen-dependent sex-determining
mechanism so commonly found among reptiles, amphibians and fish.

PMID: 10412365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Trends Neurosci. 1999 Apr;22(4):167-73.

The EGR family of transcription-regulatory factors: progress at the interface of 
molecular and systems neuroscience.

O'Donovan KJ(1), Tourtellotte WG, Millbrandt J, Baraban JM.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD 21205, USA.

The EGR family of transcription regulatory factors, which is implicated in
orchestrating the changes in gene expression that underlie neuronal plasticity,
has attracted the attention of both molecular and systems neuroscientists. In
this article, the advances made in both these fields of research are reviewed.
Recent systems-based studies underscore the remarkable sensitivity and
specificity of the induction of the expression of genes encoding EGR-family
members in naturally occurring plasticity paradigms. However, they also challenge
conventional views of the role of this family in plasticity. Recent molecular
studies have identified the gonadotropin subunit, luteinizing hormone beta, as an
EGR1-regulated gene in vivo and uncovered an essential role for EGR3 in
muscle-spindle development. In addition, the discovery of novel proteins that are
capable of suppressing EGR-mediated transcription cast doubt over the prevalent
assumption that changes in EGR mRNA or protein levels provide an accurate measure
of EGR-driven transcriptional activity.

PMID: 10203854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):87-91.

Sensory ataxia and muscle spindle agenesis in mice lacking the transcription
factor Egr3.

Tourtellotte WG(1), Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA.

Muscle spindles are skeletal muscle sensory organs that provide axial and limb
position information (proprioception) to the central nervous system. Spindles
consist of encapsulated muscle fibers (intrafusal fibers) that are innervated by 
specialized motor and sensory axons. Although the molecular mechanisms involved
in spindle ontogeny are poorly understood, the innervation of a subset of
developing myotubes (type I) by peripheral sensory afferents (group Ia) is a
critical event for inducing intrafusal fiber differentiation and subsequent
spindle formation. The Egr family of zinc-finger transcription factors, whose
members include Egr1 (NGFI-A), Egr2 (Krox-20), Egr3 and Egr4 (NGFI-C), are
thought to regulate critical genetic programs involved in cellular growth and
differentiation (refs 4-8, and W.G.T. et al., manuscript submitted). Mice
deficient in Egr3 were generated by gene targeting and had gait ataxia, increased
frequency of perinatal mortality, scoliosis, resting tremors and ptosis. Although
extrafusal skeletal muscle fibers appeared normal, Egr3-deficient animals lacked 
muscle spindles, a finding that is consistent with their profound gait ataxia.
Egr3 was highly expressed in developing muscle spindles, but not in Ia afferent
neurons or their terminals during developmental periods that coincided with the
induction of spindle morphogenesis by sensory afferent axons. These results
indicate that type I myotubes are dependent upon Egr3-mediated transcription for 
proper spindle development.

PMID: 9731539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Hybridoma. 1998 Apr;17(2):191-8.

Characterization of monoclonal antibodies directed to the amino-terminus of the
WT1, Wilms' tumor suppressor protein.

Rauscher FJ 3rd(1), Morris JF, Fredericks WJ, Lopez-Guisa J, Balakrishnan C, Jost
M, Herlyn M, Rodeck U.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

We have produced and characterized three monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) directed to
the amino terminus of the WT1 Wilms' tumor suppressor transcription factor and
compared their properties to rabbit polyclonal sera raised to the same immunogen.
A recombinant protein consisting of amino acids 1-181 of human WT1 was
overexpressed in E. coli, purified, and used as the immunogen. Three MAbs
designated 6F-H2, 6F-H7, and 6F-HC-17--all of the IgG1 subclass--were selected
and further characterized. Each recognized all isoforms of the full-length WT1
protein in Western blot assays and immunoprecipitated WT1 in both physiologic
buffers and under high detergent/high salt (RIPA) conditions. Preliminary epitope
mapping suggests that all three MAbs recognize a region in the amino terminal 84 
amino acids of WT1 and that the MAbs do not recognize the polyglycine or
polyproline regions of the protein. The WT1 antibodies do not recognize the
structurally and functionally related early growth response (EGR)1, EGR2, EGR3,
or EGR4 proteins. All WT1 MAbs recognize the murine WT1 protein and
immunohistochemical staining of murine embryonic and newborn kidney sections show
strong staining of condensing metanephric mesenchyme and primitive podocytes in
developing glomeruli. These WT1-specific MAbs should be useful in characterizing 
the biochemical and developmental roles of WT1 and in defining the emerging role 
of WT1 as a diagnostic and/or prognostic marker in mesothelioma, leukemias, and
breast cancer.

PMID: 9627060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Immunobiology. 1997 Dec;198(1-3):179-91.

Coordinate expression and distinct DNA-binding characteristics of the four
EGR-zinc finger proteins in Jurkat T lymphocytes.

Skerka C(1), Decker EL, Zipfel PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical
Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.

The Early Growth Response Genes (EGR-1 to AT133/EGR-4) encode a family of
proteins that are composed of three homologous consecutive zinc fingers of the
Cys2-His2 type and different flanking sequence. Upon growth stimulation of
resting cells the four EGR-genes are simultaneously transcribed. We have analyzed
the expression of the four EGR-proteins in Jurkat T cells and show by Western
blot analysis that the four EGR-proteins are coordinately induced upon treatment 
with a combination of PHA and PMA. As the individual proteins are reported to
bind to identical target sequences, we have analyzed the DNA-binding of the
native proteins. Using nuclear extract in which we have demonstrated expression
of all four EGR-proteins, only EGR-1, but no other member of this protein family 
is found to bind to the EGR-consensus site (GCG GGG GCG). In addition,
DNA-binding of both native EGR-1 and of recombinant EGR-1 and AT133/EGR-4
proteins expressed in insect cells was analyzed. This comparison revealed
distinct binding properties of recombinant EGR-1 and AT133/EGR-4 to
oligonucleotides that include the EGR-consensus sites. The distinct binding
affinities suggest that in vivo EGR-proteins bind to different target sequences
and that each EGR-protein regulates distinct target genes. This is underlined by 
demonstrating that EGR-1 but not AT133/EGR-4 binds to a related G-rich promoter
element with the sequence GGG GTG GGG. This G-rich sequence serves as an
overlapping binding site for the two zinc finger proteins EGR-1 and Sp1. As
similar overlapping binding sites for EGR-1 and Sp1 have been identified in
several human and mouse gene promoters, we raise the question whether the Sp1
binding sites described in a large number of eukaryotic gene promoters also
represent binding sites for EGR-1.

PMID: 9442390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997 Nov 1;1354(2):134-44.

The human zinc finger protein EGR-4 acts as autoregulatory transcriptional
repressor.

Zipfel PF(1), Decker EL, Holst C, Skerka C.

Author information: 
(1)Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Department for Molecular
Biology, Hamburg, Germany.

The human EGR-4 (AT133) gene represents one member of a family of four related
zinc finger proteins, that are simultaneously and coordinately induced in resting
cells upon growth stimulation. In order to characterise the function of the EGR-4
zinc finger protein, we have expressed the protein in the eukaryotic baculovirus 
system. The recombinant EGR-4 protein has a molecular mass of 78 kDa, as
demonstrated by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. DNA binding studies revealed that 
the EGR-4 protein binds to the EGR consensus motif GCGTGGGCG, but not to the
G-rich regulatory ZIP-element of the human IL-2 gene, that is a binding site for 
EGR-1. EGR-4 functions as transcriptional repressor. Overexpression of EGR-4
mediates repression of a minimal c-fos promoter through a threefold EGR consensus
site. Furthermore the EGR-4 protein displays autoregulatory activities. This
protein downregulates expression of its own gene promoter in a dose dependent
manner. A G-rich region in the EGR-4 promoter, located at position -106 to -82,
could be identified as binding site for the recombinant EGR-4 protein. A
comparison of the two related zinc finger proteins EGR-4 and EGR-1 revealed for
each protein distinct and specific DNA binding- and transcriptional regulatory
activities.

PMID: 9396630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Genomics. 1994 Jan 15;19(2):388-90.

Conserved linkage of early growth response 4, annexin 4, and transforming growth 
factor alpha on mouse chromosome 6.

Barrow LL(1), Simin K, Jones JM, Lee DC, Meisler MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-0618.

The mouse genes encoding early growth response 4 (Egr4), annexin IV (Anx4), and
transforming growth factor alpha (Tgfa) have been mapped to a linkage group on
mouse chromosome 6 that is conserved on human chromosome 2p11-p13. The genes are 
closely linked, with 0/215 recombinants between Anx4 and Tgfa and 1/215
recombinants between these genes and Egr4. The genes are located approximately 2 
cM distal to mnd2, a mouse mutation causing neuromuscular disease. The results
demonstrate that mnd2 is located at an internal position within this conserved
linkage group.

PMID: 8188273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


