
1. Epidemiol Infect. 2016 May;144(7):1463-72. doi: 10.1017/S0950268815002939.

Testing the accuracy ratio of the Spatio-Temporal Epidemiological Modeler (STEM) 
through Ebola haemorrhagic fever outbreaks.

Baldassi F(1), D'Amico F(1), Carestia M(1), Cenciarelli O(1), Mancinelli S(1),
Gilardi F(1), Malizia A(1), DI Giovanni D(1), Soave PM(1), Bellecci C(1), Gaudio 
P(1), Palombi L(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Master Courses in Protection Against CBRNe events,Department of 
Industrial Engineering and School of Medicine and Surgery,University of Rome Tor 
Vergata,Italy.

Mathematical modelling is an important tool for understanding the dynamics of the
spread of infectious diseases, which could be the result of a natural outbreak or
of the intentional release of pathogenic biological agents. Decision makers and
policymakers responsible for strategies to contain disease, prevent epidemics and
fight possible bioterrorism attacks, need accurate computational tools, based on 
mathematical modelling, for preventing or even managing these complex situations.
In this article, we tested the validity, and demonstrate the reliability, of an
open-source software, the Spatio-Temporal Epidemiological Modeler (STEM),
designed to help scientists and public health officials to evaluate and create
models of emerging infectious diseases, analysing three real cases of Ebola
haemorrhagic fever (EHF) outbreaks: Uganda (2000), Gabon (2001) and Guinea
(2014). We discuss the cases analysed through the simulation results obtained
with STEM in order to demonstrate the capability of this software in helping
decision makers plan interventions in case of biological emergencies.

PMID: 27029910  [PubMed - in process]


2. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2016 Mar 17;169(1):62-68. [Epub ahead of print]

Practice of the Treatment of Milk Allergy in the UK: A National Audit.

Luyt D(1), Krishnan MT, Huber P, Clark A.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust, Leicester, UK.

BACKGROUND: The management of cow's milk allergy (CMA) includes initial dairy
exclusion with suitable dietary substitution, diagnostic challenges where
indicated, and supervised re-introduction as the condition resolves. Information 
on clinician practice is limited. We audited the current practice of clinicians
in the UK to evaluate adherence to international guidelines.
METHODS: An online questionnaire was sent to all clinicians whose practice
included children identified on the national allergy society website. One hundred
and sixty questionnaires were sent and 116 (73%) responded.
RESULTS: Skin prick tests were more commonly used than serum-specific IgE as
diagnostic tests. Respective proportions selecting amino acid formulas (AAF) or
extensively hydrolysed formulas (EHF) in severe versus mild/moderate
presentations were 78 and 40% versus 20 and 88%; soya formula was the first
choice in 8.6 and 24%. The criteria for selection of AAF as the first choice were
predominantly severe IgE-mediated and non-IgE-mediated reactions, failure to
thrive and if infants refused EHF. Oral challenges might be used to diagnose CMA 
in 69%, whereas nearly 90% performed challenges to assess tolerance. Most of
these were open challenges, more commonly with fresh milk (90%) than baked milk
(60%). Home baked milk challenges were frequently considered (70%), although only
after consideration of the clinical scenario. Practice did not vary with
experience.
CONCLUSIONS: Current practice amongst UK clinicians of the management of CMA is
broadly in line with current guidance, particularly the positioning of
hypoallergenic milks as substitute milk choices. A notable deviation was the use 
of home baked milk challenges or re-introduction.

© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26982575  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Toxicol In Vitro. 2016 Feb 24;33:29-34. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2016.02.018. [Epub
ahead of print]

Intra- and inter-laboratory validation of an innovative huFceRIa-RBL-2H3
degranulation assay for in vitro allergenicity assessment of whey hydrolysates.

Knipping K(1), van Roest M(2), Kruijssen L(2), Smits M(3), Teunis M(3), Cox L(4),
de Jong N(4), Simons PJ(4), Boon L(4), Teshima R(5), Gros M(6), Kegler D(7),
Garssen J(8), Knippels LM(8), Pieters R(9).

Author information: 
(1)Nutricia Research, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Utrecht Institute for
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: karen.knipping@danone.com. (2)Institute for Risk
Assessment Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (3)Utrecht
University of Applied Sciences, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (4)Bioceros Holding BV,
The Netherlands. (5)National Institute of Health Sciences, Division of Foods,
Tokyo, Japan. (6)FrieslandCampina Domo, Wageningen, The Netherlands. (7)Nutricia 
Research, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (8)Nutricia Research, Utrecht, The
Netherlands; Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Science,
Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (9)Institute for Risk Assessment
Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Utrecht University of
Applied Sciences, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Cow's milk-derived whey hydrolysates are milk substitutes for cow's milk allergic
infants. Safety assessment of these hydrolysates is crucial. Currently,
huFceRIa-RBL-2H3 cells, sensitized with serum IgE from cow's milk allergic
patients, are used to assess in vitro residual allergenicity. However, limited
availability and high inter-lot variation of sera impede the standardization of
safety testing. Recently, we generated an oligoclonal pool of chimeric human
(chu)IgE antibodies against bovine ß-lactoglobulin (BLG) as an alternative for
human serum. These antibodies demonstrated increased sensitivity, specificity and
reproducibility. An inter-laboratory ring trial using our new degranulation assay
with different whey-based hydrolysates was performed at four independent
laboratories to investigate the robustness and reproducibility. RBL-2H3 cells
expressing huFceRIa were sensitized with our oligoclonal pool of anti-BLG chuIgE 
antibodies. The cells were subsequently incubated with an amino-acid based
formula (AAF), two extensively hydrolyzed formulas (eHF) and three partially
hydrolyzed formulas (pHF) to assess the degranulation upon challenge. Results
demonstrated a very strong inter-laboratory correlation and the intra- and
inter-laboratory variations were acceptable. The AAF and both eHFs showed no
degranulation, whereas all pHFs demonstrated degranulation. The study showed that
this degranulation assay is robust and reproducible within and between
laboratories. This new in vitro degranulation assay seems predictive for
allergenicity outcome and might therefore be considered as a relevant substitute 
for animal models.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26921666  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Mycoses. 2016 Feb 11. doi: 10.1111/myc.12473. [Epub ahead of print]

Application of cosmetic nail varnish does not affect the antifungal efficacy of
amorolfine 5% nail lacquer in the treatment of distal subungual toenail
onychomycosis: results of a randomised active-controlled study and in vitro
assays.

Sigurgeirsson B(1), Ghannoum MA(2), Osman-Ponchet H(3), Kerrouche N(3), Sidou
F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cutis Ehf Dermatology Center, Kópvogur, Iceland. (2)Center for Medical
Mycology, University Hospitals of Cleveland/Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH, USA. (3)Galderma R & D SNC, Sophia Antipolis, France.

As onychomycosis is unsightly, this study clinically evaluated whether the
antifungal efficacy of amorolfine 5% nail lacquer (NL) was affected by a masking,
natural-coloured, cosmetic nail varnish applied 24 h later; in vitro
investigations were also performed. Subjects with mild-to-moderate distal
subungual toenail onychomycosis were randomised to receive amorolfine 5% NL once 
weekly with or without cosmetic nail varnish applied 24 h later. After 12-week
treatment, antifungal activity of affected toenail clippings was assessed by
measurement of zones of inhibition (ZOIs) on Trichophyton mentagrophytes seeded
agar plates. Mean diameters were 53.5 mm for the amorolfine 5% NL-alone group (n 
= 23) and 53.6 mm for amorolfine 5% NL plus cosmetic nail varnish group (n = 25).
Also, mycological cultures of subungual debris at week 12 were negative for all
subjects in both groups. Most subjects (88%) reported that cosmetic nail varnish 
masked their infected toenails. Additionally, cadaver human nails coated in vitro
with or without cosmetic nail varnish 10 min or 24 h post amorolfine NL
application all gave ZOIs on Trichophyton rubrum agar plates representing potent 
antifungal activity. In conclusion, cosmetic nail varnish applied post amorolfine
had no effect on the subungual antifungal activity of amorolfine 5% NL or its
penetration through toenails.

© 2016 The Authors Mycoses published by Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 26867498  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. J Headache Pain. 2015 Dec;17(1):5. doi: 10.1186/s10194-016-0596-y. Epub 2016 Feb 
9.

European headache federation consensus on technical investigation for primary
headache disorders.

Mitsikostas DD(1), Ashina M(2), Craven A(3), Diener HC(4), Goadsby PJ(5), Ferrari
MD(6), Lampl C(7), Paemeleire K(8), Pascual J(9), Siva A(10), Olesen J(11),
Osipova V(12), Martelletti P(13); EHF committee.

Author information: 
(1)Neurology Department, Athens Naval Hospital, Athens, Greece.
dimosmitsikostas@me.com. (2)Danish Headache Center, Rigshospitalet Glostrup,
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark. ashina@dadlnet.dk. (3)European Headache Alliance, President, Dublin,
Ireland. audreycraven@migraine.ie. (4)Department of Neurology, University
Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
hans.diener@uk-essen.de. (5)Basic and Clinical Neurosciences, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, and King's Clinical Research Facility,
Kings College London, Wellcome Foundation Building, King's College Hospital,
London, SE5 9PJ, UK. peter.goadsby@kcl.ac.uk. (6)Center for Proteomics and
Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA, Leiden, 
The Netherlands. M.D.Ferrari@lumc.nl. (7)Medical Headache Center, Hospital
Sisters of Mercy, Seilerstaette Linz, Linz, 4020, Austria.
christian.lampl@bhs.at. (8)Department of Neurology, Ghent University Hospital,
Ghent, Belgium. Koen.Paemeleire@uzgent.be. (9)University Hospital Marqués de
Valdecilla and IDIVAL, 39011, Santander, Spain. juliopascual@telefonica.net.
(10)Department of Neurology, Cerrahpasa School of Medicine, Istanbul University, 
Millet Cad, 34390, Capa/Istanbul, Turkey. akselsiva@gmail.com. (11)Danish
Headache Centre and Department of Neurology, Rigshospitalet, Glostrup, Faculty of
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
jes.olesen@regionh.dk. (12)Department of Neurology, First Moscow State Medical
University, Moscow, Russia. osipova_v@mail.ru. (13)Department of Clinical and
Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
paolo.martelletti@uniroma1.it.

The diagnosis of primary headache disorders is clinical and based on the
diagnostic criteria of the International Headache Society (ICHD-3-beta). However 
several brain conditions may mimic primary headache disorders and laboratory
investigation may be needed. This necessity occurs when the treating physician
doubts for the primary origin of headache. Features that represent a warning for 
a possible underlying disorder causing the headache are new onset headache,
change in previously stable headache pattern, headache that abruptly reaches the 
peak level, headache that changes with posture, headache awakening the patient,
or precipitated by physical activity or Valsalva manoeuvre, first onset of
headache =50 years of age, neurological symptoms or signs, trauma, fever,
seizures, history of malignancy, history of HIV or active infections, and prior
history of stroke or intracranial bleeding. All national headache societies and
the European Headache Alliance invited to review and comment the consensus before
the final draft. The consensus recommends brain MRI for the case of migraine with
aura that persists on one side or in brainstem aura. Persistent aura without
infarction and migrainous infarction require brain MRI, MRA and MRV. Brain MRI
with detailed study of the pituitary area and cavernous sinus, is recommended for
all TACs. For primary cough headache, exercise headache, headache associated with
sexual activity, thunderclap headache and hypnic headache apart from brain MRI
additional tests may be required. Because there is little and no good evidence
the committee constructed a consensus based on the opinion of experts, and should
be treated as imperfect.

PMCID: PMC4747925
PMID: 26857820  [PubMed - in process]


6. Joint Bone Spine. 2016 Jan 29. pii: S1297-319X(15)00281-X. doi:
10.1016/j.jbspin.2015.09.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of upstream regulators for synovial expression signature genes in 
osteoarthritis.

Fei Q(1), Lin J(1), Meng H(1), Wang B(1), Yang Y(1), Wang Q(1), Su N(1), Li J(1),
Li D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical
University, 95, Yong'an Road, Beijing 100050, China. (2)Department of
Orthopaedics, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University, 95,
Yong'an Road, Beijing 100050, China. Electronic address: spinefei@163.com.

OBJECTIVES: The detection of transcription factors (TFs) for OA signature genes
provides better clues to the underlying regulatory mechanisms and therapeutic
applications.
METHODS: We searched GEO database for synovial expression profiling from
different OA microarray studies to perform a systematic analysis. Functional
annotation of DEGs was conducted, including gene ontology (GO) enrichment
analysis and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment
analysis. Based on motif databases and the results from integrated analysis of
current gene expression data, a global transcriptional regulatory network was
constructed, and the upstream TFs were identified for OA signature genes.
RESULTS: Six GEO datasets were obtained. Totally, 805 genes across the studies
were consistently differentially expressed in OA (469 up-regulated and 336
down-regulated genes) with FDR=0.01. Supporting an involvement of ECM in the
development of OA, we showed that ECM-receptor interaction was the most
significant pathway in our KEGG analysis (P=5.92E-12). Sixty-one differentially
expressed TFs were identified with FDR=0.05. The constructed OA-specific
regulatory networks consisted of 648 TF-target interactions between 51 TFs and
429 DEGs in the context of OA. The top 10 TFs covering the most downstream DEGs
were identified as crucial TFs involved in the development of OA, including
ARID3A, NFIC, ZNF354C, NR4A2, BRCA1, EHF, FOXL1, FOXC1, EGR1, and HOXA5.
CONCLUSION: This integrated analysis has identified the OA signature, providing
clues to pathogenesis of OA at the molecular level, which may be also used as
diagnostic markers for OA. Some crucial upstream regulators, such as NR4A2, EHF, 
and EGR1 may be considered as potential new therapeutic targets for OA.

Copyright © 2015 Société française de rhumatologie. Published by Elsevier SAS.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 26832188  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Oct;49(10):888-91.

[Western area surge for controlling Ebola hemorrhagic fever outbreak in Sierra
Leone and evaluation of its effect].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen Y(1), Wu D, Zhang W, Chen Z, Chang G, Tian S, Yang R, Liu C(2).

Author information: 
(1)China Mobile Laboratory Response Team for Ebola in Sierra Leone, Freetown
999127, Sierra Leone. (2)Email: liuchao9588@sina.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the Western Area Surge (WAS) program in the Ebola
outbreak of Sierra Leone, and to analyze its implementing effect.
METHODS: The subject of this study was 3,813 laboratory confirmed Ebola
hemorrhagic fever (EHF) cases reported in Sierra Leone from November 19, 2014
through January 27, 2015, a period before and after the implementation of the WAS
program. To analyze and make conclusions according to the working experience of
China Mobile Laboratory Reponses Team in the fight of Ebola outbreak, using WHO
published EHF case definition to make diagnosis and compare the number of bed
numbers, confirmed EHF cases, samples tested, and positive rates before and after
implementation of WAS program.
RESULTS: From the implementation of WAS program on 17th December 2014 to half a
month later, the total numbers of Ebola holding and treatment centers increased
from 640 to 960, six additional laboratories were established. On January, 2015, 
another two laboratories from America and The Netherlands were established. The
numbers of samples tested one month before and after WAS program were 7,891 and
9,783, respectively, with an increase of 24.0 percent, while the positive rate of
Ebola virus decreased from 22.2% (1,752/7,891) to 11.0% (1,077/9,783). The
positive rate of blood samples decreased from 39.6% (248/626) in the month before
WAS program to 27.4% (131/478) (<U+03C7>2=17.93, P<0.001) in the mother after WAS
program, the positive rate of blood samples 22.7% (103/454) to 10% (62/609)
(<U+03C7>2=31.03, P<0.001), accordingly. After 3 weeks of WAS program, in addition to
Western Area, another four hotspots in Sierra Leone had also reported a
significant decrease of the numbers of confirmed EVD cases. Forty-two days after 
implementation of WAS program, the daily number of laboratory confirmed EHF cases
decreased from 63 to 10.
CONCLUSION: WAS program played a vital role in controlling the EHF outbreak
rapidly in Sierra Leone. It could also provide guidance for the control similar
large infectious diseases outbreak in the future.

PMID: 26813721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2016 Jan 1;21:479-86.

A 6 gene signature identifies the risk of developing cirrhosis in patients with
chronic hepatitis B.

Xu MY(1), Qu Y(1), Li Z(1), Li F(1), Xiao CY(1), Lu LG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai First People's Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200080, China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology,
Shanghai First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
200080, China, lulg19652012@163.com.

Clinical factors and liver biopsy cannot accurately predict the risk of
developing cirrhosis in chronic hepatitis B (CHB).This study was to develop a
predictive gene signature for cirrhosis in CHB patients. A total of 183 untreated
CHB patients were enrolled. GeneChip, significant analysis of microarray (SAM)
and prediction analysis of microarray (PAM) were used to select predictor genes
(PGs) in liver tissues. The Cirrhosis Risk Score (CRS) was calculated based on 6 
PG variables and the predictive value of CRS was evaluated. Firstly
differentially expressed genes were filtered from a genome scan and SAM, and 87
significant genes were selected for the signature building. Secondly a signature 
consisting of 6 PGs (CD24, CXCL6, EHF, ITGBL1, LUM and SOX9) most predictive for 
cirrhosis risk in CHB patients was developed in the selection set (n=40) by use
of PAM and PCR approach. Finally the CRS was calculated to estimate the risk of
developing cirrhosis and then tested in validation cohort (n=143). The area under
the ROC curves (AUROC) of the CRS was 0.944 and exceeded to 6 PGs and clinical
factors. A low CRS cutoff of 6.43 to identify low-risk patients would misclassify
only 8.16% of high-risk patients, while a high cutoff of 8.32 to identify
high-risk patients would misclassify 0% of low-risk patients. So CRS is a better 
predictor than clinical factors in differentiating high-risk versus low-risk for 
cirrhosis and application of CRS in clinical practice could help to reduce the
rate of liver biopsy in patients with CHB.

PMID: 26709788  [PubMed - in process]


9. Ecohealth. 2015 Dec 22. [Epub ahead of print]

Can the Excess Heat Factor Indicate Heatwave-Related Morbidity? A Case Study in
Adelaide, South Australia.

Hatvani-Kovacs G(1), Belusko M(2), Pockett J(2), Boland J(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Information Technology and Mathematical Sciences, University of
South Australia, Mawson Lakes, SA, 5095, Australia.
gertrud.hatvani-kovacs@mymail.unisa.edu.au. (2)Barbara Hardy Institute,
University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes, SA, Australia. (3)Centre for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics, University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes, 
SA, Australia.

Although heatwave-related excess mortality and morbidity have been widely
studied, results are not comparable spatially and often longitudinally because of
different heatwave definitions applied. The excess heat factor (EHF) quantifies
heatwave intensity relative to the local climate, enabling cross-regional
comparisons. Previous studies have shown a strong relationship between EHFs and
daily mortality during severe heatwaves. An extensive study about the
relationship between EHFs and daily morbidity compared to the currently applied
heatwave thresholds in Adelaide has not yet been undertaken. This paper analyzes 
the association of EHFs with daily morbidity between 2008 and 2014 in the
Adelaide metropolitan region, South Australia, and probes three different
approaches to calculate the EHF. The EHF is found to differentiate days with
heatwave-related excess morbidity significantly better than other widely used
weather parameters, resulting in fewer days per year with heatwave alerts than
using previously proposed methods. The volume of excess morbidity can be
predicted by the EHF more reliably with a model proposed for the SA Ambulance
Service to support their heatwave preparation plan.

PMID: 26695616  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. J Chem Theory Comput. 2015 Jul 14;11(7):3096-103. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00333.

Spin Symmetry and Size Consistency of Strongly Orthogonal Geminals.

Jeszenszki P(1), Surján PR(1), Szabados Á(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Theoretical Chemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Loránd Eötvös
University , 1518 Budapest, POB 32, Hungary.

An overview of geminal-based wavefunctions is given, allowing for singlet-triplet
mixing within the two-electron units. Spin contamination of the total
wavefunction (obtained as an antisymmetrized product) is restored by spin
projection. Full variation after projection is examined for two models. One is
the long known spin-projected, extended Hartree-Fock (EHF). The other is a yet
unexplored function, termed spin-projected, extended antisymmetrized product of
strongly orthogonal geminals (EAPSG). Studies on size consistency are presented
for both models. Numerical evaluation of EHF and EAPSG is performed for small
test systems (H4 and H8).

PMID: 26575746  [PubMed]


11. IEEE Trans Cybern. 2015 Nov 9. [Epub ahead of print]

Semi-Supervised SVM With Extended Hidden Features.

Dong A, Chung FL, Deng Z, Wang S.

Many traditional semi-supervised learning algorithms not only train on the
labeled samples but also incorporate the unlabeled samples in the training sets
through an automated labeling process such as manifold preserving. If some
labeled samples are falsely labeled, the automated labeling process will
generally propagate negative impact on the classifier in quite a serious manner. 
In order to avoid such an error propagating effect, the unlabeled samples should 
not be directly incorporated into the training sets during the automated labeling
strategy. In this paper, a new semi-supervised support vector machine with
extended hidden features (SSVM-EHF) is presented to address this issue. According
to the maximum margin principle and the minimum integrated squared error between 
the probability distributions of the labeled and unlabeled samples, the
dimensionality of the labeled and unlabeled samples is extended through an
orthonormal transformation to generate the corresponding hidden features shared
by the labeled and unlabeled samples. After doing so, the last step in the
process of training of SSVM-EHF is done only on the labeled samples with their
original and hidden features, and the unlabeled samples are no longer explicitly 
used. Experimental results confirm the effectiveness of the proposed method.

PMID: 26571545  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Rev Med Virol. 2015 Nov 12. doi: 10.1002/rmv.1863. [Epub ahead of print]

Ebola virus: an introduction and its pathology.

Singh G(1), Kumar A(1), Singh K(1), Kaur J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Panjab University, Chandigarh, India.

The Ebola viruses are causative agent of a severe Ebola virus disease (EVD) or
Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) in human and other primates. Transmission of EVD
occurs through the contact of body fluids from infected persons or animals,
making it one of the most epidemic diseases worldwide. Underestimating the Ebola 
virus has cost loss of precious human lives in recent years. Ebola virus outbreak
in year 2014 created a history, affecting a larger population in a wide
geographical region of African sub-continent. EVD outbreaks have a case fatality 
rate of up to 70%. Ebola viruses are endemic in regions of Africa. Ebola viruses 
mainly target the hepatocytes, endothelial, and macrophage-rich lymphoid tissues 
and are characterized by immune suppression and a systemic inflammatory response 
that causes impairment of the vascular, coagulation, and immune systems. This
impairment leads to multifocal necrosis and multi organ failure, and thus, in
some ways, resembling septic shock. Currently, neither a specific treatment nor a
vaccine licensed for use in humans is available. This review is focused on
general characteristic of Ebola viruses, its pathogenesis, immunological response
of host, and recent approaches for vaccine development against EVD. Copyright ©
2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26558534  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Emerg (Tehran). 2015 Winter;3(1):3-7.

Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern; a 
Review Article.

Safari S(1), Baratloo A(1), Rouhipour A(2), Ghelichkhani P(3), Yousefifard M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Shohadaye Tajrish Hospital, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
Valeeasr Hospital, Ghazvin University of Medical Sciences, Abyek, Iran.
(3)Department of Intensive Care Nursing, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (4)Department of Physiology, School
of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) was first reported in 1976 with two concurrent
outbreaks of acute viral hemorrhagic fever centered in Yambuku (near the Ebola
river), Democratic Republic of Congo, and in Nzara, Sudan. The current outbreak
of the Ebola virus was started by reporting the first case in March 2014 in the
forest regions of southeastern Guinea. Due to infection rates raising over
13,000% within a 6-month period, Ebola is now considered as a global public
health emergency and on August 8(th), 2014 the World Health Organization (WHO)
declared the epidemic to be a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.
With more than 5000 involved cases and nearly 3000 deaths, this event has turned 
into the largest and most dangerous Ebola virus outbreak in the world. Based on
the above-mentioned, the present article aimed to review the virologic
characteristics, transmission, clinical manifestation, diagnosis, treatment, and 
prevention of Ebola virus disease.

PMCID: PMC4614609
PMID: 26512362  [PubMed]


14. Amino Acids. 2016 Mar;48(3):697-705. doi: 10.1007/s00726-015-2118-7. Epub 2015
Oct 26.

Effects of cow milk versus extensive protein hydrolysate formulas on infant
cognitive development.

Mennella JA(1), Trabulsi JC(2), Papas MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Monell Chemical Senses Center, 3500 Market Street, Philadelphia, PA,
19104-3308, USA. mennella@monell.org. (2)Department of Behavioral Health and
Nutrition, University of Delaware, 015 Carpenter Sports Building, 26 North
College Avenue, Newark, DE, 19716, USA.

Little research has focused on infant developmental effects, other than growth,
of formulas that differ substantially in the form of protein. To examine
development of infants fed formulas differing in free amino acid content, we
randomized 0.5-month-old infants (n = 79) to either a control group who fed only 
cow milk formula (CMF) during the first 8 months (CMF8), or to one of two
experimental groups: one experimental group fed extensively protein hydrolyzed
formula (EHF) for 1-3 months during first 4.5 months (EHF1-3) of life, and the
other fed EHF for 8 months (EHF8). The Mullen Scales of Early Learning were
administered monthly from 1.5 to 8.5 months to assess fine (FM) and gross (GM)
motor control, receptive (RL) and expressive (EL) language, visual reception
(VR), and an early learning composite (ELC). Across the 5.5-8.5-month time
period, when compared to CMF8 infants, GM scores in EHF1-3 infants averaged 1.5
points higher (95 % CI 0.1, 3.0) and in EHF8 infants 2.2 points higher (95 % CI
0.3, 4.0). Similarly, VR scores averaged 1.9 points higher (95 % CI 0.1, 3.8) in 
EHF1-3 infants and 2.2 points higher (95 % CI -0.2, 4.5) in EHF8 infants. EHF8
infants' RL scores averaged 1.8 points lower (95 % CI 0.1, 3.6) than CMF8
infants. These data suggest that the form of protein in infant formula may impact
cognitive development and that the higher free amino acid content in breast milk 
may be a contributing factor to the differential cognitive development between
breastfed and CMF-fed infants.CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov
NCT00994747.

PMCID: PMC4754137 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26497857  [PubMed - in process]


15. Allergy. 2016 Feb;71(2):210-9. doi: 10.1111/all.12790. Epub 2015 Nov 23.

Allergic manifestation 15 years after early intervention with hydrolyzed formulas
- the GINI Study.

von Berg A(1), Filipiak-Pittroff B(1), Schulz H(2,)(3), Hoffmann U(2,)(4), Link
E(5), Sußmann M(2), Schnappinger M(2), Brüske I(2), Standl M(2), Krämer U(5),
Hoffmann B(5,)(6), Heinrich J(2,)(3), Bauer CP(4,)(7), Koletzko S(8), Berdel
D(1); GINIplus study group.

Collaborators: Thiering E, Tiesler C, Flexeder C, Zeller C, Werkstetter K,
Klümper C, Sugiri D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Marien-Hospital Wesel, Research Institute, Wesel,
Germany. (2)Institute of Epidemiology I, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, German
Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH), Neuherberg, Germany.
(3)Comprehensive Pneumology Center Munich (CPC-M), Munich, Germany. (4)Department
of Pediatrics, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. (5)IUF - Leibniz 
Research Institute for Environmental Medicine at the Heinrich-Heine-University,
Düsseldorf, Germany. (6)Medical Faculty, Deanery of Medicine, Heinrich-Heine
University, Düsseldorf, Germany. (7)LVA Oberbayern, Munich, Germany. (8)Dr von
Hauner Children's Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, University of Munich
Medical Center, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Data on the long-term impact of hydrolyzed formulas on allergies are 
scarce.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the association between early intervention with hydrolyzed
formulas in high-risk children and allergic outcomes in adolescence.
METHODS: GINI trial participants (n = 2252) received one of four formulas in the 
first four months of life as breastmilk substitute if necessary: partial or
extensive whey hydrolyzate (pHF-W, eHF-W), extensive casein hydrolyzate (eHF-C)
or standard cow's milk formula (CMF) as reference. Associations between these
formulas and the cumulative incidence and prevalence of parent-reported
physician-diagnosed asthma, allergic rhinitis (AR) and eczema, as well as
spirometric indices and sensitization, were examined using generalized linear
models.
RESULTS: Between 11 and 15 years, the prevalence of asthma was reduced in the
eHF-C group compared to CMF (odds ratio (OR) 0.49, 95% confidence interval (CI)
0.26-0.89), which is consistent with the spirometric results. The cumulative
incidence of AR was lower in eHF-C (risk ratio (RR) 0.77, 95% CI 0.59-0.99]) and 
the AR prevalence in pHF-W (OR 0.67, 95% CI 0.47-0.95) and eHF-C (OR 0.59, 95% CI
0.41-0.84). The cumulative incidence of eczema was reduced in pHF-W (RR 0.75, 95%
CI 0.59-0.96) and eHF-C (RR 0.60, 95% CI 0.46-0.77), as was the eczema prevalence
between 11 and 15 years in eHF-C (OR 0.42, 95% CI 0.23-0.79). No significant
effects were found in the eHF-W group on any manifestation,nor was there an
effect on sensitization with any formula.
CONCLUSION: In high-risk children, early intervention using different hydrolyzed 
formulas has variable preventative effects on asthma, allergic rhinitis and
eczema up to adolescence.

© 2015 The Authors. Allergy Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4738469
PMID: 26465137  [PubMed - in process]


16. Nat Commun. 2015 Sep 29;6:8382. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9382.

Genome-wide association meta-analysis identifies five modifier loci of lung
disease severity in cystic fibrosis.

Corvol H(1,)(2), Blackman SM(3), Boëlle PY(2,)(4), Gallins PJ(5), Pace RG(6),
Stonebraker JR(6), Accurso FJ(7,)(8,)(9), Clement A(1,)(2), Collaco JM(10), Dang 
H(6), Dang AT(6), Franca A(11), Gong J(12), Guillot L(1), Keenan K(13), Li W(12),
Lin F(12), Patrone MV(6), Raraigh KS(11), Sun L(14,)(15), Zhou YH(16), O'Neal
WK(6), Sontag MK(7,)(8,)(9), Levy H(17), Durie PR(13,)(18), Rommens JM(12,)(19), 
Drumm ML(20), Wright FA(21,)(22), Strug LJ(12,)(15), Cutting GR(11,)(23), Knowles
MR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Hôpital Trousseau, Pediatric
Pulmonary Department; Institut National de la Santé et la Recherche Médicale
(INSERM) U938, Paris 75012, France. (2)Sorbonne Universités, Université Pierre et
Marie Curie (UPMC) Paris 06, Paris 75005, France. (3)Division of Pediatric
Endocrinology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
21287, USA. (4)AP-HP, Hôpital St Antoine, Biostatistics Department; Inserm U1136,
Paris 75012, France. (5)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA. (6)Marsico Lung
Institute/UNC CF Research Center, School of Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA. (7)Department of
Epidemiology, Colorado School of Public Health, University of Colorado Denver,
Anschutz Medical Center, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA. (8)Children's Hospital
Colorado, Anschutz Medical Center, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA. (9)Department of 
Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Anschutz Medical Center, Aurora, Colorado 80045, 
USA. (10)Division of Pediatric Pulmonology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA. (11)McKusick-Nathans Institute of
Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21287, USA. (12)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for
Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 0A4. (13)Program in Physiology and
Experimental Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
M5G 0A4. (14)Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada M5S 3G3. (15)Division of Biostatistics, Dalla Lana School of
Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5T 3M7.
(16)Bioinformatics Research Center and Department of Biological Sciences, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, USA. (17)Division of
Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Stanley Manne Research Institute,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Ann and Robert Lurie
Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. (18)Department of
Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.
(19)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M5S 1A8. (20)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA. (21)Bioinformatics Research
Center and Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh,
North Carolina 27695, USA. (22)Department of Biological Sciences, North Carolina 
State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, USA. (23)Department of
Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
21287, USA.

The identification of small molecules that target specific CFTR variants has
ushered in a new era of treatment for cystic fibrosis (CF), yet optimal,
individualized treatment of CF will require identification and targeting of
disease modifiers. Here we use genome-wide association analysis to identify
genetic modifiers of CF lung disease, the primary cause of mortality.
Meta-analysis of 6,365 CF patients identifies five loci that display significant 
association with variation in lung disease. Regions on chr3q29 (MUC4/MUC20; P=3.3
× 10(-11)), chr5p15.3 (SLC9A3; P=6.8 × 10(-12)), chr6p21.3 (HLA Class II; P=1.2 ×
10(-8)) and chrXq22-q23 (AGTR2/SLC6A14; P=1.8 × 10(-9)) contain genes of high
biological relevance to CF pathophysiology. The fifth locus, on chr11p12-p13
(EHF/APIP; P=1.9 × 10(-10)), was previously shown to be associated with lung
disease. These results provide new insights into potential targets for modulating
lung disease severity in CF.

PMCID: PMC4589222
PMID: 26417704  [PubMed - in process]


17. Adv Gerontol. 2015;28(1):68-71.

[INFLUENCE OF MILLIMETER-WAVE ELECTROMAGNETIC EMISSION ON NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHESIS 
DURING VESSEL ENDOTHELIUM AGING IN VITRO].

[Article in Russian]

Molodtsova ID, Medvedev DS, Poliakova VO, Lin'kova NS, Gurko GI.

The applying of millimeter-wave electromagnetic emission (EHF-therapy) is an
effective method for various age-related pathologies treatment, among other
cardio-vascular diseases. During the EHF-emission of aging human endothelial cell
cultures it was obtained changing of NO-synthase (eNOS), endothelin-1,
angiotensin-2 and vasopressin expression dependence of irradiation exposition.
These data have shown that EHF-emission has activated endothelium functional
activity, which can play the important role to search for approaches to treatment
of arterial hypertension and atherosclerosis.

PMID: 26390613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Br J Ophthalmol. 2015 Sep 16. pii: bjophthalmol-2015-307341. doi:
10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307341. [Epub ahead of print]

Individualised risk assessment for diabetic retinopathy and optimisation of
screening intervals: a scientific approach to reducing healthcare costs.

Lund SH(1), Aspelund T(2), Kirby P(3), Russell G(3), Einarsson S(4), Palsson
O(4), Stefánsson E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland. (2)Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland Risk ehf, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(3)Health Intelligence plc, Cambridge, UK. (4)Risk ehf, Reykjavik, Iceland.

OBJECTIVE: To validate a mathematical algorithm that calculates risk of diabetic 
retinopathy progression in a diabetic population with UK staging (R0-3; M1) of
diabetic retinopathy. To establish the utility of the algorithm to reduce
screening frequency in this cohort, while maintaining safety standards.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The cohort of 9690 diabetic individuals in England, 
followed for 2 years. The algorithms calculated individual risk for development
of preproliferative retinopathy (R2), active proliferative retinopathy (R3A) and 
diabetic maculopathy (M1) based on clinical data. Screening intervals were
determined such that the increase in risk of developing certain stages of
retinopathy between screenings was the same for all patients and identical to
mean risk in fixed annual screening. Receiver operating characteristic curves
were drawn and area under the curve calculated to estimate the prediction
capability.
RESULTS: The algorithm predicts the occurrence of the given diabetic retinopathy 
stages with area under the curve =80% for patients with type II diabetes (CI 0.78
to 0.81). Of the cohort 64% is at less than 5% risk of progression to R2, R3A or 
M1 within 2 years. By applying a 2 year ceiling to the screening interval,
patients with type II diabetes are screened on average every 20 months, which is 
a 40% reduction in frequency compared with annual screening.
CONCLUSIONS: The algorithm reliably identifies patients at high risk of
developing advanced stages of diabetic retinopathy, including preproliferative
R2, active proliferative R3A and maculopathy M1. Majority of patients have less
than 5% risk of progression between stages within a year and a small high-risk
group is identified. Screening visit frequency and presumably costs in a diabetic
retinopathy screening system can be reduced by 40% by using a 2 year ceiling.
Individualised risk assessment with 2 year ceiling on screening intervals may be 
a pragmatic next step in diabetic retinopathy screening in UK, in that safety is 
maximised and cost reduced by about 40%.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 26377413  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 16;10(9):e0137374. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137374.
eCollection 2015.

Biochemical Characterization and Validation of a Catalytic Site of a Highly
Thermostable Ts2631 Endolysin from the Thermus scotoductus Phage vB_Tsc2631.

Plotka M(1), Kaczorowska AK(2), Morzywolek A(1), Makowska J(3), Kozlowski LP(4), 
Thorisdottir A(5), Skírnisdottir S(6), Hjörleifsdottir S(7), Fridjonsson OH(6),
Hreggvidsson GO(8), Kristjansson JK(9), Dabrowski S(10), Bujnicki JM(11),
Kaczorowski T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.
(2)Collection of Plasmids and Microorganisms, University of Gdansk, Gdansk,
Poland. (3)Faculty of Chemistry, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.
(4)Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Protein Engineering, International Institute 
of Molecular and Cell Biology, Warsaw, Poland. (5)VESO Vikan, Namsos, Norway.
(6)Matis, Reykjavik, Iceland. (7)ORF genetics, Kopavogur, Iceland. (8)Matis,
Reykjavik, Iceland; Faculty of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of
Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland. (9)Prokazyme ehf, Reykjavik, Iceland. (10)A&A
Biotechnology, Gdynia, Poland. (11)Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Protein
Engineering, International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Warsaw,
Poland; Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Institute of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan, Poland.

Phage vB_Tsc2631 infects the extremophilic bacterium Thermus scotoductus MAT2631 
and uses the Ts2631 endolysin for the release of its progeny. The Ts2631
endolysin is the first endolysin from thermophilic bacteriophage with an
experimentally validated catalytic site. In silico analysis and computational
modelling of the Ts2631 endolysin structure revealed a conserved Zn2+ binding
site (His30, Tyr58, His131 and Cys139) similar to Zn2+ binding site of eukaryotic
peptidoglycan recognition proteins (PGRPs). We have shown that the Ts2631
endolysin lytic activity is dependent on divalent metal ions (Zn2+ and Ca2+). The
Ts2631 endolysin substitution variants H30N, Y58F, H131N and C139S dramatically
lost their antimicrobial activity, providing evidence for the role of the
aforementioned residues in the lytic activity of the enzyme. The enzyme has
proven to be not only thermoresistant, retaining 64.8% of its initial activity
after 2 h at 95°C, but also highly thermodynamically stable (Tm = 99.82°C, <U+0394>Hcal 
= 4.58 × 10(4) cal mol(-1)). Substitutions of histidine residues (H30N and H131N)
and a cysteine residue (C139S) resulted in variants aggregating at temperatures
=75°C, indicating a significant role of these residues in enzyme thermostability.
The substrate spectrum of the Ts2631 endolysin included extremophiles of the
genus Thermus but also Gram-negative mesophiles, such as Escherichia coli,
Salmonella panama, Pseudomonas fluorescens and Serratia marcescens. The broad
substrate spectrum and high thermostability of this endolysin makes it a good
candidate for use as an antimicrobial agent to combat Gram-negative pathogens.

PMCID: PMC4573324
PMID: 26375388  [PubMed - in process]


20. BMC Genomics. 2015 Sep 15;16(1):691. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1883-8.

Transcriptome analysis of complex I-deficient patients reveals distinct
expression programs for subunits and assembly factors of the oxidative
phosphorylation system.

van der Lee R(1), Szklarczyk R(2,)(3), Smeitink J(4), Smeets HJ(5), Huynen MA(6),
Vogel R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Robin.vanderLee@radboudumc.nl. (2)Centre for Molecular
and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. radek.szklarczyk@maastrichtuniversity.nl. (3)Department of Clinical 
Genetics, Unit Clinical Genomics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, 6200 MD, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands. radek.szklarczyk@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(4)Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Radboud
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 
9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. jan.smeitink@radboudumc.nl. (5)Unit
Clinical Genomics, Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, School for Growth and
Development and for Cardiovascular Research, Maastricht University Medical
Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands. bert.smeets@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(6)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Martijn.Huijnen@radboudumc.nl. (7)Nijmegen Center for 
Mitochondrial Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. rutger.vogel@radboudumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Transcriptional control of mitochondrial metabolism is essential for 
cellular function. A better understanding of this process will aid the
elucidation of mitochondrial disorders, in particular of the many genetically
unsolved cases of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) deficiency. Yet, to date
only few studies have investigated nuclear gene regulation in the context of
OXPHOS deficiency. In this study we performed RNA sequencing of two control and
two complex I-deficient patient cell lines cultured in the presence of compounds 
that perturb mitochondrial metabolism: chloramphenicol, AICAR, or resveratrol. We
combined this with a comprehensive analysis of mitochondrial and nuclear gene
expression patterns, co-expression calculations and transcription factor binding 
sites.
RESULTS: Our analyses show that subsets of mitochondrial OXPHOS genes respond
opposingly to chloramphenicol and AICAR, whereas the response of nuclear OXPHOS
genes is less consistent between cell lines and treatments. Across all samples
nuclear OXPHOS genes have a significantly higher co-expression with each other
than with other genes, including those encoding mitochondrial proteins. We found 
no evidence for complex-specific mRNA expression regulation: subunits of
different OXPHOS complexes are similarly (co-)expressed and regulated by a common
set of transcription factors. However, we did observe significant differences
between the expression of nuclear genes for OXPHOS subunits versus assembly
factors, suggesting divergent transcription programs. Furthermore, complex I
co-expression calculations identified 684 genes with a likely role in OXPHOS
biogenesis and function. Analysis of evolutionarily conserved transcription
factor binding sites in the promoters of these genes revealed almost all known
OXPHOS regulators (including GABP, NRF1/2, SP1, YY1, E-box factors) and a set of 
novel candidates (ELK1, KLF7, SP4, EHF, ZNF143, and TEL2).
CONCLUSIONS: OXPHOS genes share an expression program distinct from other genes
encoding mitochondrial proteins, indicative of targeted nuclear regulation of a
mitochondrial sub-process. Within the subset of OXPHOS genes we established a
difference in expression between mitochondrial and nuclear genes, and between
nuclear genes encoding subunits and assembly factors. Most transcription
regulators of genes that co-express with complex I are well-established factors
for OXPHOS biogenesis. For the remaining six factors we here suggest for the
first time a link with transcription regulation in OXPHOS deficiency.

PMCID: PMC4570683
PMID: 26369791  [PubMed - in process]


21. J Opt Soc Am A Opt Image Sci Vis. 2015 Jul 1;32(7):1357-65. doi:
10.1364/JOSAA.32.001357.

Extended Huygens-Fresnel principle and optical waves propagation in turbulence:
discussion.

Charnotskii M.

Extended Huygens-Fresnel principle (EHF) currently is the most common technique
used in theoretical studies of the optical propagation in turbulence. A recent
review paper [J. Opt. Soc. Am. A31, 2038
(2014)JOAOD60740-323210.1364/JOSAA.31.002038] cites several dozens of papers that
are exclusively based on the EHF principle. We revisit the foundations of the
EHF, and show that it is burdened by very restrictive assumptions that make it
valid only under weak scintillation conditions. We compare the EHF to the
less-restrictive Markov approximation and show that both theories deliver
identical results for the second moment of the field, rendering the EHF
essentially worthless. For the fourth moment of the field, the EHF principle is
accurate under weak scintillation conditions, but is known to provide erroneous
results for strong scintillation conditions. In addition, since the EHF does not 
obey the energy conservation principle, its results cannot be accurate for
scintillations of partially coherent beam waves.

PMID: 26367166  [PubMed]


22. Springerplus. 2015 Aug 28;4:457. doi: 10.1186/s40064-015-1251-9. eCollection
2015.

YouTube videos as a source of medical information during the Ebola hemorrhagic
fever epidemic.

Nagpal SJ(1), Karimianpour A(1), Mukhija D(1), Mohan D(2), Brateanu A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Ave,
NA-10, Cleveland, OH 44195 USA. (2)Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD USA.

The content and quality of medical information available on video sharing
websites such as YouTube is not known. We analyzed the source and quality of
medical information about Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) disseminated on YouTube
and the video characteristics that influence viewer behavior. An inquiry for the 
search term 'Ebola' was made on YouTube. The first 100 results were arranged in
decreasing order of "relevance" using the default YouTube algorithm. Videos 1-50 
and 51-100 were allocated to a high relevance (HR), and a low relevance (LR)
video group, respectively. Multivariable logistic regression models were used to 
assess the predictors of a video being included in the HR vs. LR groups. Fourteen
videos were excluded because they were parodies, songs or stand-up comedies
(n = 11), not in English (n = 2) or a remaining part of a previous video (n = 1).
Two scales, the video information and quality and index and the medical
information and content index (MICI) assessed the overall quality, and the
medical content of the videos, respectively. There were no videos from hospitals 
or academic medical centers. Videos in the HR group had a higher median number of
views (186,705 vs. 43,796, p < 0.001), more 'likes' (1119 vs. 224, p < 0.001),
channel subscriptions (208 vs. 32, p < 0.001), and 'shares' (519 vs. 98,
p < 0.001). Multivariable logistic regression showed that only the 'clinical
symptoms' component of the MICI scale was associated with a higher likelihood of 
a video being included in the HR vs. LR group.(OR 1.86, 95 % CI 1.06-3.28,
p = 0.03). YouTube videos presenting clinical symptoms of infectious diseases
during epidemics are more likely to be included in the HR group and influence
viewers behavior.

PMCID: PMC4550615
PMID: 26322263  [PubMed]


23. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2015 Jul-Aug;49(4):541-54. doi: 10.7868/S0026898415040072.

[Ebola hemorrhagic fever: Properties of the pathogen and development of vaccines 
and chemotherapeutic agents].

[Article in Russian]

Kiselev OI(1), Vasin AV(1,)(2,)(3), Shevyryova MP(4), Deeva EG(1), Sivak KV(1),
Egorov VV(1), Tsvetkov VB(1,)(5), Egorov AY(1), Romanovskaya-Romanko EA(1),
Stepanova LA(1), Komissarov AB(1), Tsybalova LM(1), Ignatjev GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Influenza, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, St.
Petersburg, 197376 Russia. (2)St. Petersburg State Polytechnic University, St.
Petersburg, 195251 Russia. (3)vasin@influenza.spb.ru. (4)Ministry of Health of
the Russian Federation, Moscow, 127994 Russia. (5)Topchiev Institute of
Petrochemical Synthesis, Moscow, 119991 Russia.

Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) epidemic currently ongoing in West Africa is not
the first among numerous epidemics in the continent. Yet it seems to be the worst
EHF epidemic outbreak caused by Ebola virus Zaire since 1976 as regards its
extremely large scale and rapid spread in the population. Experiments to study
the agent have continued for more than 20 years. The EHF virus has a relatively
simple genome with seven genes and additional reading frame resulting from RNA
editing. While being of a relatively low genetic capacity, the virus can be
ranked as a standard for pathogenicity with the ability to evade the host immune 
response in uttermost perfection. The EHF virus has similarities with
retroviruses, but belongs to (-)RNA viruses of a nonretroviral origin. Genetic
elements of the virus, NIRV, were detected in animal and human genomes. EHF virus
glycoprotein (GP) is a class I fusion protein and shows more similarities than
distinctions in tertiary structure with SIV and HIV gp41 proteins and even
influenza virus hemagglutinin. EHF is an unusual infectious disease, and studying
the molecular basis of its pathogenesis may contribute to new findings in therapy
of severe conditions leading to a fatal outcome.

PMID: 26299853  [PubMed - in process]


24. J Immunol. 2015 Oct 1;195(7):3427-35. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402856. Epub 2015
Aug 21.

The Transcription Factor Ehf Is Involved in TGF-ß-Induced Suppression of FceRI
and c-Kit Expression and FceRI-Mediated Activation in Mast Cells.

Yamazaki S(1), Nakano N(2), Honjo A(1), Hara M(3), Maeda K(3), Nishiyama C(4),
Kitaura J(3), Ohtsuka Y(5), Okumura K(3), Ogawa H(3), Shimizu T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan; Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent
Medicine, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan;
and. (2)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan; nbnakano@juntendo.ac.jp. (3)Atopy (Allergy)
Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421,
Japan; (4)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan; Department of Biological Science and Technology,
Faculty of Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, Tokyo 
125-8585, Japan. (5)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Juntendo
University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan; and.

FceRI, which is composed of a, ß, and <U+03B3> subunits, plays an important role in
IgE-mediated allergic responses. TGF-ß1 has been reported to suppress FceRI and
stem cell factor receptor c-Kit expression on mast cell surfaces and to suppress 
mast cell activation induced by cross-linking of FceRI. However, the molecular
mechanism by which these expressions and activation are suppressed by TGF-ß1
remains unclear. In this study, we found that the expression of Ets homologous
factor (Ehf), a member of the Ets family transcriptional factors, is upregulated 
by TGF-ß/Smad signaling in mouse bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs). Forced
expression of Ehf in BMMCs repressed the transcription of genes encoding FceRIa, 
FceRIß, and c-Kit, resulting in a reduction in cell surface FceRI and c-Kit
expression. Additionally, forced expression of Ehf suppressed FceRI-mediated
degranulation and cytokine production. Ehf inhibited the promoter activity of
genes encoding FceRIa, FceRIß, and c-Kit by binding to these gene promoters.
Furthermore, the mRNA levels of Gata1, Gata2, and Stat5b were lower in BMMCs
stably expressing Ehf compared with control cells. Because GATA-1 and GATA-2 are 
positive regulators of FceRI and c-Kit expression, decreased expression of GATAs 
may be also involved in the reduction of FceRI and c-Kit expression. Decreased
expression of Stat5 may contribute to the suppression of cytokine production by
BMMCs. In part, mast cell response to TGF-ß1 was mimicked by forced expression of
Ehf, suggesting that TGF-ß1 suppresses FceRI and c-Kit expression and suppresses 
FceRI-mediated activation through upregulation of Ehf.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26297757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Aust N Z J Public Health. 2015 Dec;39(6):582-7. doi: 10.1111/1753-6405.12421.
Epub 2015 Aug 10.

Responding to heatwave intensity: Excess Heat Factor is a superior predictor of
health service utilisation and a trigger for heatwave plans.

Scalley BD(1,)(2), Spicer T(1), Jian L(1,)(3), Xiao J(1), Nairn J(4), Robertson
A(1), Weeramanthri T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Division, Department of Health, Government of Western Australia.
(2)Western Australian Centre for Rural Health, University of Western Australia.
(3)School of Public Health, Curtin University, Western Australia. (4)Australian
Bureau of Meteorology, South Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To determine which measures of heatwave have the greatest predictive
power for increases in health service utilisation in Perth, Western Australia.
METHODS: Three heatwave formulas were compared, using Poisson or zero-inflated
Poisson regression, against the number of presentations to emergency departments 
from all causes, and the number of inpatient admissions from heat-related causes.
The period from July 2006 to June 2013 was included. A series of standardised
thresholds were calculated to allow comparison between formulas, in the absence
of a gold standard definition of heatwaves.
RESULTS: Of the three heatwave formulas, Excess Heat Factor (EHF) produced the
most clear dose-response relationship with Emergency Department presentations.
The EHF generally predicted periods that resulted in a similar or higher rate of 
health service utilisation, as compared to the two other formulas, for the
thresholds examined.
CONCLUSIONS: The EHF formula, which considers a period of acclimatisation as well
as the maximum and minimum temperature, best predicted periods of greatest health
service demand. The strength of the dose-response relationship reinforces the
validity of the measure as a predictor of hazardous heatwave intensity.
IMPLICATIONS: The findings suggest that the EHF formula is well suited for use as
a means of activating heatwave plans and identifies the required level of
response to extreme heatwave events as well as moderate heatwave events that
produce excess health service demand.

© 2015 Public Health Association of Australia.

PMID: 26260877  [PubMed - in process]


26. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Aug 10. doi: 10.1002/mc.22349. [Epub ahead of print]

Knockdown of EHF inhibited the proliferation, invasion and tumorigenesis of
ovarian cancer cells.

Cheng Z(1,)(2), Guo J(1,)(2), Chen L(1,)(2), Luo N(1,)(2), Yang W(1,)(2), Qu
X(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology & Obstetrics, Yangpu Hospital, School of Medicine,
Tongji University, Shanghai, China. (2)Institute of Gynecological Minimally
Invasive Medicine, School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.

Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy worldwide. ETS
homologous factor (EHF), a member of E26 transformation specific (ETS)
transcription factors, has been reported overexpressed in ovarian cancer.
However, the molecular mechanism underlying the biological function of EHF in
ovarian cancer is still unclear. Here, we found that EHF was elevated in ovarian 
cancer tissues compared with non-tumorous tissues. Moreover, high EHF expression 
level was correlated with short survival time of patients with ovarian cancer.
Knockdown of EHF in ovarian cancer cells, SKOV3 and OVCAR3, significantly
inhibited cell proliferation and increased cells population in G1 phase. The
proteins promoting cell cycles (Cyclin B1, Cyclin D1, and PCNA) were
down-regulated and the protein negatively regulating cell cycle progression (P21)
was up-regulated after EHF knockdown. Moreover, inhibition of EHF in ovarian
cancer cells dramatically induced cell apoptosis, but impaired cell adhesion and 
cell invasion. Furthermore, phosphorylation levels of ERK and AKT were notably
reduced in EHF knockdown cells. Finally, in vivo data showed that knockdown of
EHF inhibited tumor growth in nude mice. Our data indicates that EHF could be a
potential prognosis marker for ovarian cancer and work as an oncogene by
targeting ERK and AKT signaling, which can serve as a new target for ovarian
cancer treatment. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26258986  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. Acta Ophthalmol. 2015 Nov;93(7):610-5. doi: 10.1111/aos.12803. Epub 2015 Jul 23.

Topical dexamethasone <U+03B3>-cyclodextrin nanoparticle eye drops increase visual
acuity and decrease macular thickness in diabetic macular oedema.

Ohira A(1), Hara K(1), Jóhannesson G(2), Tanito M(1), Ásgrímsdóttir GM(3), Lund
SH(4), Loftsson T(5), Stefánsson E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine, Izumo,
Shimane, Japan. (2)Department of Clinical Science, Ophthalmology, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden. (3)Oculis ehf., Reykjavik, Iceland. (4)Centre of Public
Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland. 
(5)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, National University
Hospital, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.

PURPOSE: To compare in a randomized, controlled trial topical 1.5% dexamethasone 
<U+03B3>-cyclodextrin nanoparticle eye drops (DexNP) with posterior subtenon injection
of triamcinolone acetonide in diabetic macular oedema (DME).
METHODS: In this prospective, randomized, controlled trial, 22 eyes of 22
consecutive patients with DME were randomized to (i) topical treatment with DexNP
×3/day (4 weeks), ×2/day (4 weeks) and ×1/day (4 weeks) or (ii) one posterior
subtenon injection of 20 mg triamcinolone acetonide. Study visits were at
baseline and 4, 8, 12 and 16 weeks.
RESULTS: The logMAR (Snellen) visual acuity (mean ± SD) improved significantly
with DexNP from 0.41 ± 0.3 (Snellen 0.39) to 0.32 ± 0.25 (0.48) and 0.30 ± 0.26
(0.50) at 4 and 8 weeks, respectively. One-third of the DexNP group improved more
than 0.3 logMAR units. For triamcinolone, logMAR changed significantly from 0.42 
± 0.28 (0.38) at baseline to 0.32 ± 0.29 (0.48) at 4w and 0.33 ± 0.37 (0.47) at
12w. The central macular thickness (CMT) decreased significantly with DexNP from 
483 ± 141 µm to 384 ± 142 µm at 4w and 342 ± 114 µm at 8w. For triamcinolone, CMT
decreased significantly at all time-points: 494 ± 94 µm, 388 ± 120, 388 ± 145,
390 ± 136 and 411 ± 104 µm at 0, 4, 8, 12 and 16 weeks, respectively. There was a
modest increase in intraocular pressure (IOP) at all time-points with DexNP while
no increase was seen with triamcinolone. Serum cortisol was affected by both
treatments.
CONCLUSION: Topical DexNP significantly improve visual acuity and decrease
macular thickness in patients with DME. The effect is similar to that from
subtenon triamcinolone. A modest increase in IOP was seen with the nanoparticle
eye drops, but IOP normalized after the discontinuation of treatment.

© 2015 Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica Foundation. Published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26201996  [PubMed - in process]


28. Mol Biosyst. 2015 Sep;11(9):2511-9. doi: 10.1039/c5mb00309a.

Exploring the associations of host genes for viral infection revealed by
genome-wide RNAi and virus-host protein interactions.

Xie D(1), Han L, Luo Y, Liu Y, He S, Bai H, Wang S, Bo X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing,
China. boxc@bmi.ac.cn huibai13@hotmail.com sqwang@bmi.ac.cn.

Genome-wide RNA interference screens have greatly facilitated the identification 
of essential host factors (EHFs) for viral infections, whose knockdown effects
significantly influence virus replication but not host cell viability. However,
little has been done to link EHFs with another important host factor type, i.e., 
virus targeting proteins (VTPs) that viruses directly interact with for
intracellular survival, hampering the integrative understanding of virus-host
interactions. Using EHFs and VTPs for human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
and influenza A virus (IAV) infections, we found in general that despite limited 
overlap, EHFs and VTPs are both among the most differentially dysregulated genes 
in host transcriptional response to HIV and IAV infections, and notably they show
consistency in regulation orientation. In the human protein-protein interaction
network, both EHFs and VTPs hold topologically important positions at the global 
center, and importantly their direct interactions are statistically significant. 
We also identified BRCA1 and TP53 (or SMAD3 and PIK3R1) being the most extensive 
VTP-interacting EHFs (or EHF-interacting VTPs) for HIV-1 and IAV, which hold
great potential in deciphering specific infection features and discovery of host 
directed antivirals. Further, most EHFs are the upstream regulators of VTPs when 
mapped in the same signaling pathways, some of which present intensive cross
links. Collectively, these results provide insights into functional associations 
of the identified host gene factors for viral infections and highlight the
regulatory significance of EHFs, and the necessity of their selective
exploitation in confrontation to viral infections.

PMID: 26166390  [PubMed - in process]


29. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(17):2785-97. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1068472. Epub 2015
Jul 9.

Predictive and comparative analysis of Ebolavirus proteins.

Cong Q(1), Pei J, Grishin NV.

Author information: 
(1)a Departments of Biophysics and Biochemistry ; University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas ; Dallas , TX USA.

Ebolavirus is the pathogen for Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever (EHF). This disease
exhibits a high fatality rate and has recently reached a historically epidemic
proportion in West Africa. Out of the 5 known Ebolavirus species, only Reston
ebolavirus has lost human pathogenicity, while retaining the ability to cause EHF
in long-tailed macaque. Significant efforts have been spent to determine the
three-dimensional (3D) structures of Ebolavirus proteins, to study their
interaction with host proteins, and to identify the functional motifs in these
viral proteins. Here, in light of these experimental results, we apply
computational analysis to predict the 3D structures and functional sites for
Ebolavirus protein domains with unknown structure, including a zinc-finger domain
of VP30, the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase catalytic domain and a
methyltransferase domain of protein L. In addition, we compare sequences of
proteins that interact with Ebolavirus proteins from RESTV-resistant primates
with those from RESTV-susceptible monkeys. The host proteins that interact with
GP and VP35 show an elevated level of sequence divergence between the
RESTV-resistant and RESTV-susceptible species, suggesting that they may be
responsible for host specificity. Meanwhile, we detect variable positions in
protein sequences that are likely associated with the loss of human pathogenicity
in RESTV, map them onto the 3D structures and compare their positions to known
functional sites. VP35 and VP30 are significantly enriched in these potential
pathogenicity determinants and the clustering of such positions on the surfaces
of VP35 and GP suggests possible uncharacterized interaction sites with host
proteins that contribute to the virulence of Ebolavirus.

PMCID: PMC4615121 [Available on 2016-07-09]
PMID: 26158395  [PubMed - in process]


30. Gig Sanit. 2015 Mar-Apr;94(2):76-9.

[TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE APPLICATION OF NATURAL HEALING FACTORS (THERAPEUTIC MUDS,
MINERAL WATER) IN CHILDREN WITH THE PATHOLOGY OF HEPATOBILIARY SYSTEM RESIDING IN
UNFAVORAUBLE ECOLOGICAL CONDITIONS].

[Article in Russian]

Kochergin IuV, Oranskii LE.

Health of children residing in the regions with polluted environment is
significantly worse than the health of children not exposed to the emissions of
industrial enterprises and motor vehicles. The gastrointestinal tract diseases
occupy first places. There is elaborated the comprehensive treatment of the
children with hepatobiliary diseases residing in unfavorable ecological
conditions. There treatment includes factors possessing sanogenetic (mineral
water therapeutic muds) and informative effects (EHF therapy).

PMID: 26155653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Ital J Pediatr. 2015 Jun 3;41:42. doi: 10.1186/s13052-015-0141-7.

Flavor, relative palatability and components of cow's milk hydrolysed formulas
and amino acid-based formula.

Miraglia Del Giudice M(1), D'Auria E(2), Peroni D(3), Palazzo S(4), Radaelli
G(5), Comberiati P(6), Galdo F(7), Maiello N(8), Riva E(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, II University of Naples, via De Crecchio 4, 80138,
Napoli, Italy. michele.miraglia@unina2.it. (2)Department of Pediatrics, San Paolo
Hospital-University of Milan, Via A di Rudinì 8, I-20142, Milan, Italy.
dauria.e@email.it. (3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Verona, Policlinico
Borgo, Roma, Verona, Italy. perodiego@gmail.com. (4)Department of Pediatrics, San
Paolo Hospital-University of Milan, Via A di Rudinì 8, I-20142, Milan, Italy.
samuele.palazzo@fastwebnet.it. (5)Department of Pediatrics, San Paolo
Hospital-University of Milan, Via A di Rudinì 8, I-20142, Milan, Italy.
giovanni.radaelli@unimi.it. (6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Verona,
Policlinico Borgo, Roma, Verona, Italy. pasquale.comberiati@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, II University of Naples, via De Crecchio 4, 80138,
Napoli, Italy. galdofrancesca@gmail.com. (8)Department of Pediatrics, II
University of Naples, via De Crecchio 4, 80138, Napoli, Italy.
nunziamaiello@libero.it. (9)Department of Pediatrics, San Paolo
Hospital-University of Milan, Via A di Rudinì 8, I-20142, Milan, Italy.
enrica.riva@unimi.it.

BACKGROUND: Both extensively hydrolysed formulas (eHF) and amino acid-based
formula (AAFs) have been demonstrated effective for the treatment of CMA.
However, in clinical practice, parents complain that hydrolysates are rejected by
children due to their bad taste. Flavor of hydrolysed formulas has been poorly
investigated although it affects the acceptance of milk over all the other
attributes. The aim of the present study was to understand the factors underlying
the unpleasant flavor of hydrolysed 25 formulas and amino acid-based formula.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: One hundred and fifty trained panelists performed a
randomized-double-blind test with different milks. The smell, texture, taste and 
aftertaste of each formula were evaluated on a scale ranging from -2 (worst) to 2
(best).
RESULTS: Formulas showed significant difference, as compared to cow's milk, in
smell, texture, taste and aftertaste. Overall, whey eHFs were judged of better
palatability than casein eHF and the AAFs (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Whey eHF showed significant
differences among them for sensory attributes, especially for taste and
aftertaste.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that a broad range of flavor exists among the 
hydrolysed formulas. Further studies, adequately designed to investigate the
relationship between milks' flavor and nutrient profile of hydrolysed formulas
are warranted.

PMCID: PMC4474460
PMID: 26036257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2015 Jul;10(7):685-702. doi:
10.1517/17460441.2015.1035252. Epub 2015 May 25.

Animal models for ebolavirus countermeasures discovery: what defines a useful
model?

Shurtleff AC(1), Bavari S.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Fort Detrick,
Division of Molecular and Translational Sciences , 1425 Porter Street, Frederick,
MD 21702 , USA +1 301 619 4246 ; +1 541 754 3545 ; sina.bavari@us.army.mil.

INTRODUCTION: Ebolaviruses are highly pathogenic filoviruses, which cause disease
in humans and nonhuman primates (NHP) in Africa. The Zaire ebolavirus outbreak in
2014, which continues to greatly affect Western Africa and other countries to
which the hemorrhagic fever was exported due to travel of unsymptomatic yet
infected individuals, was complicated by the lack of available licensed vaccines 
or therapeutics to combat infection. After almost a year of research at an
increased pace to find and test vaccines and therapeutics, there is now a deeper 
understanding of the available disease models for ebolavirus infection.
Demonstration of vaccine or therapeutic efficacy in NHP models of ebolavirus
infection is crucial to the development and eventual licensure of ebolavirus
medical countermeasures, so that safe and effective countermeasures can be
accelerated into human clinical trials.
AREAS COVERED: The authors describe ebolavirus hemorrhagic fever (EHF) disease in
various animal species: mice, guinea pigs, hamsters, pigs and NHP, to include
baboons, marmosets, rhesus and cynomolgus macaques, as well as African green
monkeys. Because the NHP models are supremely useful for therapeutics and vaccine
testing, emphasis is placed on comparison of these models, and their use as
gold-standard models of EHF.
EXPERT OPINION: Animal models of EHF varying from rodents to NHP species are
currently under evaluation for their reproducibility and utility for modeling
infection in humans. Complete development and licensure of therapeutic agents and
vaccines will require demonstration that mechanisms conferring protection in NHP 
models of infection are predictive of protective responses in humans, for a given
countermeasure.

PMID: 26004783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS One. 2015 May 1;10(5):e0125816. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125816.
eCollection 2015.

Acute heat stress induces differential gene expressions in the testes of a
broiler-type strain of Taiwan country chickens.

Wang SH(1), Cheng CY(1), Tang PC(2), Chen CF(2), Chen HH(3), Lee YP(1), Huang
SY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung,
40227, Taiwan. (2)Department of Animal Science, National Chung Hsing University, 
Taichung, 40227, Taiwan; Agricultural Biotechnology Center, National Chung Hsing 
University, Taichung, 40227, Taiwan; Center for the Integrative and Evolutionary 
Galliformes Genomics, iEGG Center, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung,
40227, Taiwan. (3)Department of Veterinary Medicine, National Chung Hsing
University, Taichung, 40227, Taiwan. (4)Department of Animal Science, National
Chung Hsing University, Taichung, 40227, Taiwan; Agricultural Biotechnology
Center, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, 40227, Taiwan; Center for the 
Integrative and Evolutionary Galliformes Genomics, iEGG Center, National Chung
Hsing University, Taichung, 40227, Taiwan; Center of Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, 40227, Taiwan.

The expression of testicular genes following acute heat stress has been reported 
in layer-type roosters, but few similar studies have been conducted on broilers. 
This study investigated the effect of acute heat stress on the gene expression in
the testes of a broiler-type strain of Taiwan country chickens. Roosters were
subjected to acute heat stress (38°C) for 4 h, and then exposed to 25°C, with
testes collected 0, 2, and 6 h after the cessation of heat stress, using
non-heat-stressed roosters as controls (n = 3 roosters per group). The body
temperature and respiratory rate increased significantly (p<0.05) during the heat
stress. The numbers of apoptotic cells increased 2 h after the acute heat stress 
(79 ± 7 vs. 322 ± 192, control vs. heat stress; p<0.05), which was earlier than
the time of increase in layer-type roosters. Based on a chicken 44 K oligo
microarray, 163 genes were found to be expressed significantly different in the
testes of the heat-stressed chickens from those of the controls, including genes 
involved in the response to stimulus, protein metabolism, signal transduction,
cell adhesion, transcription, and apoptosis. The mRNA expressions of upregulated 
genes, including HSP25, HSP90AA1, HSPA2, and LPAR2, and of downregulated genes,
including CDH5, CTNNA3, EHF, CIRBP, SLA, and NTF3, were confirmed through
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Moreover, numerous
transcripts in the testes exhibited distinct expressions between the
heat-stressed broiler-type and layer-type chickens. We concluded that the
transcriptional responses of testes to acute heat stress may differ between the
broiler-type and layer-type roosters. Whether the differential expression
patterns associate with the heat-tolerance in the strains require a further
exploration.

PMCID: PMC4416790
PMID: 25932638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Clin Transl Med. 2015 Mar 19;4:13. doi: 10.1186/s40169-015-0054-5. eCollection
2015.

Psoriasis drug development and GWAS interpretation through in silico analysis of 
transcription factor binding sites.

Swindell WR(1), Sarkar MK(1), Stuart PE(1), Voorhees JJ(1), Elder JT(1), Johnston
A(1), Gudjonsson JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-2200 USA.

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is a cytokine-mediated skin disease that can be treated
effectively with immunosuppressive biologic agents. These medications, however,
are not equally effective in all patients and are poorly suited for treating mild
psoriasis. To develop more targeted therapies, interfering with transcription
factor (TF) activity is a promising strategy.
METHODS: Meta-analysis was used to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs)
in the lesional skin from psoriasis patients (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>237). We compiled a dictionary 
of 2935 binding sites representing empirically-determined binding affinities of
TFs and unconventional DNA-binding proteins (uDBPs). This dictionary was screened
to identify "psoriasis response elements" (PREs) overrepresented in sequences
upstream of psoriasis DEGs.
RESULTS: PREs are recognized by IRF1, ISGF3, NF-kappaB and multiple TFs with
helix-turn-helix (homeo) or other all-alpha-helical (high-mobility group)
DNA-binding domains. We identified a limited set of DEGs that encode proteins
interacting with PRE motifs, including TFs (GATA3, EHF, FOXM1, SOX5) and uDBPs
(AVEN, RBM8A, GPAM, WISP2). PREs were prominent within enhancer regions near
cytokine-encoding DEGs (IL17A, IL19 and IL1B), suggesting that PREs might be
incorporated into complex decoy oligonucleotides (cdODNs). To illustrate this
idea, we designed a cdODN to concomitantly target psoriasis-activated TFs (i.e., 
FOXM1, ISGF3, IRF1 and NF-kappaB). Finally, we screened psoriasis-associated SNPs
to identify risk alleles that disrupt or engender PRE motifs. This identified
possible sites of allele-specific TF/uDBP binding and showed that PREs are
disproportionately disrupted by psoriasis risk alleles.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified new TF/uDBP candidates and developed an approach that 
(i) connects transcriptome informatics to cdODN drug development and (ii)
enhances our ability to interpret GWAS findings. Disruption of PRE motifs by
psoriasis risk alleles may contribute to disease susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC4392043
PMID: 25883770  [PubMed]


35. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2015 Jan-Feb;92(1):8-13.

[The relationship between the effectiveness and specific features of the early
postoperative rehabilitation of the patients presenting with cholelithiasis].

[Article in Russian]

Poddubnaia OA, Marsheva SI.

The objective of the early postoperative rehabilitation of the patients
presenting with cholelithiasis is to prevent the further progression of the
disease and reduce the risk of development of post-cholecystectomy disorders. The
combined treatment including the use of low-mineralized mineral waters, magnetic,
laser, and EHF-therapy makes it possible to significantly improve the parameters 
of interest due to the marked improve mentor normalization of the clinical and
laboratory characteristics, the increase of adaptive capabilities, and the
correction of the psycho-emotional and vegetative status of the patients. Taken
together, the peculiarities of the combined rehabilitative treatment of the
patients with cholelithiasis during the early postoperative period account for
its high clinical effectiveness amounting to 94.7%. The results of the study give
reason to recommend the application of the proposed technology for the
rehabilitative treatment of the patients presenting with cholelithiasis.

PMID: 25876427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2015 Oct;61(4):456-63. doi:
10.1097/MPG.0000000000000803.

Safety of a New Amino Acid Formula in Infants Allergic to Cow's Milk and
Intolerant to Hydrolysates.

Dupont C(1), Kalach N, Soulaines P, Bradatan E, Lachaux A, Payot F, De Blay F,
Guénard-Bilbault L, Hatahet R, Mulier S, Kapel N, Waligora-Dupriet AJ, Butel MJ.

Author information: 
(1)*Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition Department, Necker
Children's Hospital, Paris, France Saint Antoine Clinics of Pediatrics, Saint
Vincent de Paul Hospital, Groupement des Hôpitaux de l'Institut Catholique,
Lille, France Department of Pediatrics, Regional Hospital, Namur, Belgium
§Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition Unit, University and Pediatric
Hospital of Lyon, Lyon, France ||Pulmonology and Allergology Department, Regional
University Hospital, Strasbourg, France ¶private allergy medical practice,
Illkirch-Graffenstaden #private allergy medical practice, Forbach, France
**Allergology Department, Queen Fabiola Children's University Hospital, Brussels,
Belgium Intestinal Ecosystem, Probiotics, Antibiotics (EA4065), Sorbonne Paris 
Cité, DHU Risks in Pregnancy, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France.

Comment in
    J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2015 Oct;61(4):381.

OBJECTIVES: Amino acid-based formulas (AAFs) are recommended for children with
cow's-milk allergy (CMA) failing to respond to extensively hydrolysed formulas
(eHFs). We evaluated the effects of a new thickened AAF (TAAF, Novalac),
containing a pectin-based thickener, and a reference AAF (RAAF, Neocate) on
allergy symptoms and safety, through blood biochemistry analysis and growth.
METHODS: Infants (ages < 18 months) with CMA symptoms failing to respond to eHFs 
were randomised in a double-blind manner to receive TAAF or RAAF for 3 months.
All of the infants were then fed TAAF for 3 additional months. Paediatric visits 
occurred at 1, 3, and 6 months. Blood samples were collected at inclusion and 3
months.
RESULTS: Results at 1 month were previously described. The 75 infants with proven
CMA and eHF intolerance tolerated their allocated formula. At 3 months, the
dominant allergic symptom had disappeared in 76.2% of the infants with TAAF and
in 51.5% of the infants with RAAF (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.026). The Scoring Atopic Dermatitis
Index significantly improved more with TAAF than with RAAF (-27.3<U+200A>±<U+200A>2.3 vs
-20.8<U+200A>±<U+200A>2.2, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.048). Of the infants, 92.9% had normal stools (soft or formed 
consistency) with TAAF vs 75.8% with RAAF (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.051). More infants in TAAF group
had better quality of nighttime sleep (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.036) and low frequency of
irritability signs (P<U+200A><<U+200A>0.001). With both formulas, all of the biochemical
parameters were within normal ranges. There were no differences between the 2
groups in any of the anthropometric z scores.
CONCLUSIONS: The new TAAF was tolerated by all of the infants with CMA and
intolerance to eHFs. Anthropometric and clinical data showed that both formulas
were safe.

PMID: 25844709  [PubMed - in process]


37. Klin Khir. 2015 Jan;(1):58-60.

[Impact of abdominal cavity open EHF irradiation on activity of adhesive process 
in peritonitis].

[Article in Russian]

Boiko VV, Ivanova IuV, Gamidov AN, Andreeshchev SA.

In experiment on 45 rats a purulent peritonitis was simulated. There was
established, that on background of a standard therapy for peritonitis application
of abdominal cavity open irradiation of extreme high frequency (EHF) have
promoted rapid stabilization of the lipid metabolism indices and the blood
coagulation system, the reduction of intensity of lipids peroxidal oxidation
processes and severity of systemic inflammatory reaction. Under the influence of 
complex treatment the severity of adhesive process was reduced in 5.4 times,
comparing with such in animals, to whom a standard treatment was conducted only. 
The revealed pathogenetic aspects of the adhesions formation witnesses the
expediency to add EHF irradiation to complex therapy of peritonitis.

PMID: 25842685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2015 Mar;158(5):688-91. doi: 10.1007/s10517-015-2836-6. Epub
2015 Mar 17.

Effects of acoustic and EHF impulses on multipotent stromal cells during
formation of bone marrow containing heterotopic organs in tissue engineered
constructions.

Chaikhalyan RK(1), Yusupov VI, Gorskaya YF, Kuralesova AI, Gerasimov YV, Sviridov
AP, Tambiev AKh, Vorob'eva NN, Shishkova AG, Moskvina IL, Bagratashvili VN.

Author information: 
(1)N. F. Gamaleya Research Institute of Epidemiology and Microbiology, Ministry
of Health of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia, rubenchail@yandex.ru.

We studied the effects of physical factors (acoustic impulses of laser-induced
hydrodynamics, AILIH, and EHF-radiation) on the formation of heterotopic bone
marrow organs. Suspension of precipitated mouse bone marrow cells was exposed to 
AILIH and EHF or their combinations (AILIH+EHF, EHF+AILIH). The developed tissue 
engineering constructions (gelatin sponges containing 107 nucleated bone marrow
cells exposed to physical factors) were transplanted under the renal capsule of
syngeneic mice. Analysis of newly formed hemopoietic organs was performed after 3
and 5 months. The total amount of hemopoietic cells, number of multipotent
stromal cells, efficiency of colony formation from these cells, and weight of
bone capsule of the transplants were measured. Microscopic study showed that
5-month transplants were significantly larger than 3-month transplants and
contained 3-fold more hemopoietic cells (20-fold in the AILIH+EHF group). The
number of multipotent stromal cells was maximum in EHF+AILIH group (by 2.2 times 
higher than in the control) and minimum in AILIH+EHF group. Exposure to EHF+AILIH
had most pronounced effect on the formation of the bone marrow transplants. The
weight of bone capsules more rapidly increased in gelatin sponges of 3-month
transplants of EHF+AILIH and AILIH groups. These data suggest that the studied
physical factors can be used for acceleration of rehabilitation process.

PMID: 25778661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Kardiologiia. 2014;54(9):52-6.

[Extracellular matrix remodeling myocardium of the left ventricle rats with
experimental heart failure after perindopril and melatonin administration].

[Article in Russian]

Liskova IuV, Salikova SP, Stadnikov AA.

The aim of the study was to examine the reorganization of extracellular matrix
left ventricular myocardium (LVM) rats (n = 38) with experimental heart failure
(EHF) as affected by perindopril and melatonin administration. Rats LVM was
studied using the methods of light microscopy, immunocytochemistry and
morphometry. At day 14 of EHF, marked mosaic staining cardiomyocytes acid dyes,
manifest hemodynamic disturbances: venous and capillary congestion, lymphostasis,
perivascular and interstitial edema, there was a increase the volume density (OD)
stroma, high activity of MMP-1 and TIMP-1. After modeling the EHF to 28 days in
LVM, a further increase of hemodynamic met, cardiosclerosis areas and
perivascular sclerosis, a significant increase OD stroma, observed decrease in
the expression of MMP-1 and TIMP-1. In rats given perindopril and melatonin for
14 days, there was a regression of pathological changes in the balance was
maintained MMP-1/TIMP-1 ratio close to the group of intact rats. Cardioprotective
effects of perindopril and melatonin on extracellular matrix LVM of rats with EHF
is discussed.

PMID: 25702403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Folia Med Cracov. 2014;54(3):67-77.

Pharmacotherapy of Ebola hemorrhagic fever: a brief review of current status and 
future perspectives.

Olszanecki R(1), Gawlik G.

Author information: 
(1)Chair of Pharmacology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow,
Poland. mfolszan@cyf-kr.edu.pl.

The 2014 outbreak clearly showed that Ebola viruses (EBOV) remain a substantial
threat for public health. The mainstay of management of patients with Ebola
disease is isolation of patients and use of strict barrier nursing procedures;
the present treatment strategies are mainly symptomatic and supportive (fluid
resuscitation, antypyretics, antidiarrheal drugs). Currently, there is no
approved therapy for Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF), however several advanced
treatment options were tested in animal models (on non-human primates or
rodents). They include use of both symptomatic (e.g. use of tissue factor
inhibitors - rhNAPc2, rhAPC - to abolish coagulopathy) and specific antiviral
approaches: e.g. monoclonal anti EBOV antibodies (ZMapp, MB-003),
phosphorodiamidate morpholino oligomers (PMOs), liposomes containing siRNA
(LNP-siRNA:TKM-Ebola) and small molecule inhibitors (e.g. BCX4430, favipiravir). 
The scope of this article is to briefly review the most promising therapeutics
for EHF, based on the data coming from rare clinical reports, studies on animals 
and results from in vitro models.

PMID: 25694097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Microbiol Immunol Infect. 2014 Dec 11. pii: S1684-1182(14)00247-3. doi:
10.1016/j.jmii.2014.11.016. [Epub ahead of print]

Polymorphisms of EHF-ELF5 genomic region and its association with pediatric
asthma in the Taiwanese population.

Wang JY(1), Shyur SD(2), Lam FW(3), Wu LS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of
Medicine, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Division of Research
Development, Vita Genomics Inc., Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Medical
Sciences, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan. Electronic address:
lshwu@mail.tcu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: The EHF and ELF5 genes, located on chromosome 11p and linked to
asthma phenotypes, are high-potential candidate genes conferring asthma
susceptibility. The purpose of this study was to investigate the genetic
association among single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of EHF and ELF5, and
their relationship with asthma in the Taiwanese population.
METHODS: We selected and performed genotyping on 16 SNPs that encompass the
genomic region of EHF and ELF5 in Taiwanese children with or without asthma. A
total of 1983 children, 523 in the test group and 619 and 842 in two validation
groups, were recruited for this study.
RESULTS: The SNP rs3910901, located in the 5' upstream region of ELF5, was found 
to have a weak association (p = 0.043) with asthma in the odds ratio analysis.
The genotype distribution was similar in all comparison groups, but the CC
genotype was more frequent in asthma patients. Logistic regression adjusted
allergy comorbidity showed obviously diluted association.
CONCLUSION: The results indicated that SNP rs3910901 may have a minor impact on
pediatric asthma in the Taiwanese population.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25648666  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


42. Pediatr Surg Int. 2015 Mar;31(3):271-6. doi: 10.1007/s00383-015-3664-5. Epub 2015
Jan 28.

Do infants with gastroschisis may have a high incidence of non-IgE-mediated cow's
milk protein allergy?

Burge D(1), Drewett M, Hall N.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Southampton and University of Southampton, Southampton,
UK, david.burge@uhs.nhs.uk.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: To determine the frequency and characteristics of suspected
cow's milk protein allergy (CMPA) in infants with gastroschisis and response to
change in milk.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study of 111 consecutive infants with
gastroschisis.
RESULTS: 64 episodes suggesting non-IgE-mediated CMPA occurred in 50 infants (45 
%) at a median age of 44 days (9-186) and during the primary admission in 38 %.
At the time of the episode the infant feed was breast milk (BM, n = 24), term
formula (TF, n = 20) or extensively hydrolysed formula (EHF, n = 6). The feed was
changed to EHF (34), amino acid formula (AAF) (14) or BM with maternal CMP-free
diet (2). Partial or complete resolution of symptoms occurred in all. There was
histological evidence of an allergic reaction to CMP in all four infants in whom 
tissue was available. Recurrent episodes occurred in 13/50 infants (26 %), 10 of 
whom were receiving EHF. There were no recurrent episodes in infants being fed
with AAF.
CONCLUSION: Features suggesting non-IgE-mediated CMPA appear common in infants
with gastroschisis.

PMID: 25627700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Osong Public Health Res Perspect. 2014 Dec;5(6):378-82. doi:
10.1016/j.phrp.2014.09.006. Epub 2014 Nov 1.

Ebola hemorrhagic Fever and the current state of vaccine development.

Hong JE(1), Hong KJ(2), Choi WY(3), Lee WJ(3), Choi YH(1), Jeong CH(1), Cho
KI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bioterrorism Preparedness and Response, Korea Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Cheongju, Korea. (2)Division of High-risk Pathogen
Research, Center for Infectious Diseases, Korea National Institute of Health,
Cheongju, Korea. (3)Division of Arboviruses, Center for Immunology and Pathology,
Korea National Institute of Health, Cheongju, Korea.

Current Ebola virus outbreak in West Africa already reached the total number of
1,323 including 729 deaths by July 31st. the fatality is around 55% in the
southeastern area of Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Nigeria. The number of
patients with Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever (EHF) was continuously increasing even
though the any effective therapeutics or vaccines has not been developed yet. The
Ebola virus in Guinea showed 98% homology with Zaire Ebola Virus. Study of the
pathogenesis of Ebola virus infection and assess of the various candidates of
vaccine have been tried for a long time, especially in United States and some
European countries. Even though the attenuated live vaccine and DNA vaccine
containing Ebola viral genes were tested and showed efficacy in chimpanzees,
those candidates still need clinical tests requiring much longer time than the
preclinical development to be approved for the practical treatment. It can be
expected to eradicate Ebola virus by a safe and efficient vaccine development
similar to the case of smallpox virus which was extinguished from the world by
the variola vaccine.

PMCID: PMC4281581
PMID: 25562048  [PubMed]


44. Anticancer Res. 2015 Jan;35(1):283-93.

Anticancer effects of brominated indole alkaloid Eudistomin H from marine
ascidian Eudistoma viride against cervical cancer cells (HeLa).

Rajesh RP(1), Annappan M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
jeshran@gmail.com. (2)Marine Ecology and Conservation Lab, P.G. & Research Dept. 
of Zoology, V.O. Chidambaram College, Tuticorin, India.

Marine invertebrates called ascidians are prolific producers of bioactive
substances. The ascidian Eudistoma viride, distributed along the Southeast coast 
of India, was investigated for its in vitro cytotoxic activity against human
cervical carcinoma (HeLa) cells by the MTT assay. The crude methanolic extract of
E. viride, with an IC50 of 53 µg/ml, was dose-dependently cytotoxic. It was more 
potent at 100 µg/ml than cyclohexamide (1 µg/ml), reducing cell viability to
9.2%. Among nine fractions separated by chromatography, ECF-8 exhibited prominent
cytoxic activity at 10 µg/ml. The HPLC fraction EHF-21 of ECF-8 was remarkably
dose- and time-dependently cytotoxic, with 39.8% viable cells at 1 µg/ml compared
to 51% in cyclohexamide-treated cells at the same concentration; the IC50 was
0.49 µg/ml. Hoechst staining of HeLa cells treated with EHF-21 at 0.5 µg/ml
revealed apoptotic events such an cell shrinkage, membrane blebbing, chromatin
condensation and formation of apoptotic bodies. Cell size and granularity study
showed changes in light scatter, indicating the characteristic feature of cells
dying by apoptosis. The cell-cycle analysis of HeLa cells treated with fraction
EHF-21 at 1 µg/ml showed the marked arrest of cells in G0/G1, S and G2/M phases
and an increase in the sub G0/G1 population indicated an increase in the
apoptotic cell population. The statistical analysis of the sub-G1 region showed a
dose-dependent induction of apoptosis. DNA fragmentation was also observed in
HeLa cells treated with EHF-21. The active EHF-21 fraction, a brominated indole
alkaloid Eudistomin H, led to apoptotic death of HeLa cells.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25550562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2014 Dec 23;12(1):227-53. doi:
10.3390/ijerph120100227.

The excess heat factor: a metric for heatwave intensity and its use in
classifying heatwave severity.

Nairn JR(1), Fawcett RJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)South Australian Regional Office, Bureau of Meteorology, Adelaide, South
Australia 5067, Australia. j.nairn@bom.gov.au. (2)Bureau of Meteorology,
Melbourne, Victoria 3008, Australia. r.fawcett@bom.gov.au.

Heatwaves represent a significant natural hazard in Australia, arguably more
hazardous to human life than bushfires, tropical cyclones and floods. In the
2008/2009 summer, for example, many more lives were lost to heatwaves than to
that summer's bushfires which were among the worst in the history of the
Australian nation. For many years, these other forms of natural disaster have
received much greater public attention than heatwaves, although there are some
signs of change. We propose a new index, called the excess heat factor (EHF) for 
use in Australian heatwave monitoring and forecasting. The index is based on a
three-day-averaged daily mean temperature (DMT), and is intended to capture
heatwave intensity as it applies to human health outcomes, although its
usefulness is likely to be much broader and with potential for international
applicability. The index is described and placed in a climatological context in
order to derive heatwave severity. Heatwave severity, as characterised by the
climatological distribution of heatwave intensity, has been used to normalise the
climatological variation in heatwave intensity range across Australia. This
methodology was used to introduce a pilot national heatwave forecasting service
for Australia during the 2013/2014 summer. Some results on the performance of the
service are presented.

PMCID: PMC4306859
PMID: 25546282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2015;39(3-4):132-42. doi: 10.1159/000367889. Epub
2014 Nov 27.

The acetylcholine index: an electroencephalographic marker of cholinergic
activity in the living human brain applied to Alzheimer's disease and other
dementias.

Johannsson M(1), Snaedal J, Johannesson GH, Gudmundsson TE, Johnsen K.

Author information: 
(1)MentisCura ehf., National University Hospital, Reykjavík, Iceland.

BACKGROUND: The cholinergic hypothesis is well established and has led to the
development of pharmacological treatments for Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, 
there has previously been no physiological means of monitoring cholinergic
activity in vivo.
METHODS: An electroencephalography (EEG)-based acetylcholine (Ach) index
reflecting the cholinergic activity in the brain was developed using data from a 
scopolamine challenge study. The applicability of the Ach index was examined in
an elderly population of healthy controls and patients suffering from various
causes of cognitive decline.
RESULTS: The Ach index showed a strong reduction in the severe stages of AD
dementia. A high correlation was demonstrated between the Ach index and cognitive
function. The index was reduced in patients with mild cognitive impairment and
prodromal AD, indicating a decreased cholinergic activity. When considering the
distribution of the Ach index in a population of healthy elderly subjects, an
age-related threshold was revealed, beyond which there is a general decline in
cholinergic activity.
CONCLUSIONS: The EEG-based Ach index provides, for the first time, a
physiological means of monitoring the cholinergic activity in the human brain in 
vivo. This has great potential for aiding diagnosis and patient stratification as
well as for monitoring disease progression and treatment response.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25471612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Paediatr Drugs. 2014 Dec;16(6):513-22. doi: 10.1007/s40272-014-0097-x.

A thickened amino-acid formula in infants with cow's milk allergy failing to
respond to protein hydrolysate formulas: a randomized double-blind trial.

Dupont C(1), Kalach N, Soulaines P, Bradatan E, Lachaux A, Payot F, de Blay F,
Guénard-Bilbault L, Hatahet R, Mulier S.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition Department, Necker
Children's Hospital, 149, rue de Sèvres, 75015, Paris, France,
christophe.dupont@nck.aphp.fr.

INTRODUCTION: Amino-acid-based formulas (AAFs) are recommended for children with 
cow's milk protein allergy (CMPA) failing to respond to extensively hydrolyzed
formulas (eHFs).
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to assess the tolerance/hypoallergenicity and
efficacy of a thickened AAF (TAAF) in these infants.
METHODS: This multicenter, double-blind, randomized controlled trial
(NCT01940068) compared 3-month feeding with a pectin-based TAAF (Novalac(®),
United Pharmaceuticals, Paris, France) and a commercially available "reference"
AAF (RAAF; Neocate(®), Nutricia, Germany) in infants aged <18 months with CMPA
and persistent allergy symptoms with eHF feeding. Reported here are the results
of an interim analysis after 1 month of feeding.
RESULTS: Of the 86 infants randomized, CMPA with eHF intolerance was confirmed in
75 infants; all of them tolerated the allocated AAFs. The major allergic symptom 
disappeared within 1 month in 61.9 and 51.5 % and regurgitations disappeared in
66.7 and 42.3 % of infants who received TAAF and RAAF, respectively. Infants had 
significantly more normal stools (soft or formed consistency) with the TAAF (90.5
vs. 66.7 %; p = 0.011). From baseline, daily family life significantly improved
with both AAFs: crying time decreased by 97.3 (p < 0.001) and 28.6 min (p =
0.014) and sleeping time increased by 64.6 (p = 0.009) and 29.0 min with TAAF and
RAAF, respectively. At day 30, weight and body mass index z-score gains were 0.1 
and 0.2 with TAAF and 0.2 and 0.0 with RAAF.
CONCLUSION: Both AAFs were well tolerated by infants with CMPA and eHF
intolerance and ensured appropriate growth, with the TAAF providing additional
comfort.

PMID: 25446768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Headache Pain. 2014 Nov 24;15:77. doi: 10.1186/1129-2377-15-77.

Comment on: Martelletti et al. Refractory chronic migraine: a consensus statement
on clinical definition from the European Headache Federation.

Wöber C(1), Wessely P; Austrian Consensus Group on Refractory Chronic Migraine.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20,
1090 Vienna, Austria. christian.woeber@meduniwien.ac.at.

Comment in
    J Headache Pain. 2014;15:75.

Comment on
    J Headache Pain. 2014;15:47.

In this letter, we present the Austrian proposal for diagnostic criteria of
refractory chronic migraine and we discuss the consensensus statement of the
European Headache Feaderation. We focus in particular on the definition of
adequate prophylactic treatment, the management of medication overuse and the
requirement for CSF analyses in patients with refractory chronic migraine. In our
proposal, the criteria for adequate treatment and recommendations for dealing
with medication overuse are more explicit than in the EHF proposal, whereas the
requirements for CSF analyses and measurement of CSF pressure are not as strict.

PMCID: PMC4266543
PMID: 25418797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Eur J Pediatr. 2015 Jun;174(6):759-65. doi: 10.1007/s00431-014-2456-6. Epub 2014 
Nov 22.

Remaining symptoms in half the children treated for milk allergy.

Petrus NC(1), Schoemaker AF, van Hoek MW, Jansen L, Jansen-van der Weide MC, van 
Aalderen WM, Sprikkelman AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, Emma Children's
Hospital AMC, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
n.c.petrus@amc.nl.

The aim of this study was to investigate the cumulative incidence and predictive 
variables of treatment failure with a whey-based extensively hydrolyzed formula
(w-eHF) in children with cow's milk allergy (CMA). All children were diagnosed
with CMA, using double-blind placebo-controlled food challenge (DBPCFC) with
amino acid-based formula as placebo, and receive w-eHF treatment after diagnosis.
Forty-nine children with CMA were included. w-eHF treatment failure was defined
as incomplete resolution of original CMA symptoms upon w-eHF treatment and
disappearance of these symptoms upon replacement of w-eHF with amino acid-based
formula. A multiple logistic regression model was used to investigate which
variables could predict treatment failure. Twenty-five (51%; 95% confidence
interval (CI) 38-64%) of the children with CMA failed on w-eHF. Only
"gastrointestinal discomfort" was found to contribute independently to the
probability of failing w-eHF, odds ratio (95% CI) 8.994
(1.007-79.457).CONCLUSIONS: In half of the children with proven CMA, there is
incomplete resolution of symptoms upon w-eHF treatment. This study needs to be
repeated including DBPCFC with w-eHF to provide more definitive diagnosis,
especially since gastrointestinal discomfort seems to be the sole predictive
variable for treatment failure. In the meantime, a change in formula should be
considered in children with incomplete symptom resolution upon w-eHF treatment.

PMID: 25416174  [PubMed - in process]


50. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(Database issue):D946-55. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1086.
Epub 2014 Nov 20.

EHFPI: a database and analysis resource of essential host factors for pathogenic 
infection.

Liu Y(1), Xie D(1), Han L(1), Bai H(2), Li F(3), Wang S(1), Bo X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 
100850, P.R.China. (2)Department of Biotechnology, Beijing Institute of Radiation
Medicine, Beijing 100850, P.R.China No. 451 Hospital of Chinese People's
Liberation Army, Xi'an 710054, China huibai13@hotmail.com. (3)Department of
Biotechnology, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, P.R.China
lifei@bmi.ac.cn. (4)Department of Biotechnology, Beijing Institute of Radiation
Medicine, Beijing 100850, P.R.China boxc@bmi.ac.cn.

High-throughput screening and computational technology has greatly changed the
face of microbiology in better understanding pathogen-host interactions.
Genome-wide RNA interference (RNAi) screens have given rise to a new class of
host genes designated as Essential Host Factors (EHFs), whose knockdown effects
significantly influence pathogenic infections. Therefore, we present the first
release of a manually-curated bioinformatics database and analysis resource EHFPI
(Essential Host Factors for Pathogenic Infection,
http://biotech.bmi.ac.cn/ehfpi). EHFPI captures detailed article, screen,
pathogen and phenotype annotation information for a total of 4634 EHF genes of 25
clinically important pathogenic species. Notably, EHFPI also provides six
powerful and data-integrative analysis tools, i.e. EHF Overlap Analysis,
EHF-pathogen Network Analysis, Gene Enrichment Analysis, Pathogen Interacting
Proteins (PIPs) Analysis, Drug Target Analysis and GWAS Candidate Gene Analysis, 
which advance the comprehensive understanding of the biological roles of EHF
genes, as in diverse perspectives of protein-protein interaction network, drug
targets and diseases/traits. The EHFPI web interface provides appropriate tools
that allow efficient query of EHF data and visualization of custom-made analysis 
results. EHFPI data and tools shall keep available without charge and serve the
microbiology, biomedicine and pharmaceutics research communities, to finally
facilitate the development of diagnostics, prophylactics and therapeutics for
human pathogens.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4383917
PMID: 25414353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Dec 16;42(22):13588-98. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1146. Epub
2014 Nov 20.

Ets homologous factor regulates pathways controlling response to injury in airway
epithelial cells.

Fossum SL(1), Mutolo MJ(2), Yang R(1), Dang H(3), O'Neal WK(3), Knowles MR(3),
Leir SH(1), Harris A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center, Chicago,
IL 60614, USA Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School
of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (2)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie
Children's Research Center, Chicago, IL 60614, USA. (3)Marsico Lung Institute,
University of North Carolina Cystic Fibrosis Center, University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. (4)Human Molecular Genetics Program, 
Lurie Children's Research Center, Chicago, IL 60614, USA Department of
Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL
60611, USA Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA ann-harris@northwestern.edu.

Ets homologous factor (EHF) is an Ets family transcription factor expressed in
many epithelial cell types including those lining the respiratory system.
Disruption of the airway epithelium is central to many lung diseases, and a
network of transcription factors coordinates its normal function. EHF can act as 
a transcriptional activator or a repressor, though its targets in lung epithelial
cells are largely uncharacterized. Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by deep
sequencing (ChIP-seq), showed that the majority of EHF binding sites in lung
epithelial cells are intergenic or intronic and coincide with putative enhancers,
marked by specific histone modifications. EHF occupies many genomic sites that
are close to genes involved in intercellular and cell-matrix adhesion. RNA-seq
after EHF depletion or overexpression showed significant alterations in the
expression of genes involved in response to wounding. EHF knockdown also targeted
genes in pathways of epithelial development and differentiation and locomotory
behavior. These changes in gene expression coincided with alterations in cellular
phenotype including slowed wound closure and increased transepithelial
resistance. Our data suggest that EHF regulates gene pathways critical for
epithelial response to injury, including those involved in maintenance of barrier
function, inflammation and efficient wound repair.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4267623
PMID: 25414352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Chem Phys. 2014 Oct 28;141(16):164117. doi: 10.1063/1.4898804.

Extended Møller-Plesset perturbation theory for dynamical and static
correlations.

Tsuchimochi T(1), Van Voorhis T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77
Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

We present a novel method that appropriately handles both dynamical and static
electron correlations in a balanced manner, using a perturbation theory on a
spin-extended Hartree-Fock (EHF) wave function reference. While EHF is a suitable
candidate for degenerate systems where static correlation is ubiquitous, it is
known that most of dynamical correlation is neglected in EHF. In this work, we
derive a perturbative correction to a fully spin-projected self-consistent wave
function based on second-order Møller-Plesset perturbation theory (MP2). The
proposed method efficiently captures the ability of EHF to describe static
correlation in degeneracy, combined with MP2's ability to treat dynamical
correlation effects. We demonstrate drastic improvements on molecular ground
state and excited state potential energy curves and singlet-triplet splitting
energies over both EHF and MP2 with similar computational effort to the latter.

PMID: 25362282  [PubMed]


53. Int J Radiat Biol. 2015 Mar;91(3):277-85. doi: 10.3109/09553002.2014.980467. Epub
2015 Jan 30.

Modifying effects of low-intensity extremely high-frequency electromagnetic
radiation on content and composition of fatty acids in thymus of mice exposed to 
X-rays.

Gapeyev AB(1), Aripovsky AV, Kulagina TP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences , Pushchino, Moscow 
Region , Russia.

PURPOSE: The effects of extremely high-frequency electromagnetic radiation (EHF
EMR) on thymus weight and its fatty acids (FA) content and FA composition in
X-irradiated mice were studied to test the involvement of FA in possible
protective effects of EHF EMR against ionizing radiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mice were exposed to low-intensity pulse-modulated EHF EMR
(42.2 GHz, 0.1 mW/cm(2), 20 min exposure, 1 Hz modulation) and/or X-rays at a
dose of 4 Gy with different sequences of the treatments. In 4-5 hours, 10, 30,
and 40 days after the last exposure, the thymuses were weighed; total FA content 
and FA composition of the thymuses were determined on days 1, 10, and 30 using a 
gas chromatography.
RESULTS: It was shown that after X-irradiation of mice the total FA content per
mg of thymic tissue was significantly increased in 4-5 h and decreased in 10 and 
30 days after the treatment. On days 30 and 40 after X-irradiation, the thymus
weight remained significantly reduced. The first and tenth days after X-rays
injury independently of the presence and sequence of EHF EMR exposure were
characterized by an increased content of polyunsaturated FA (PUFA) and a
decreased content of monounsaturated FA (MUFA) with unchanged content of
saturated FA (SFA). Exposure of mice to EHF EMR before or after X-irradiation
prevented changes in the total FA content in thymic tissue, returned the summary 
content of PUFA and MUFA to the control level and decreased the summary content
of SFA on the 30th day after the treatments, and promoted the restoration of the 
thymus weight of X-irradiated mice to the 40th day of the observations.
CONCLUSIONS: Changes in the content and composition of PUFA in the early period
after treatments as well as at the restoration of the thymus weight under the
combined action of EHF EMR and X-rays indicate to an active participation of FA
in the acceleration of post-radiation recovery of the thymus by EHF EMR exposure.

PMID: 25347148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Korean J Audiol. 2014 Sep;18(2):58-68. doi: 10.7874/kja.2014.18.2.58. Epub 2014
Sep 16.

Comparison of the effectiveness of monitoring Cisplatin-induced ototoxicity with 
extended high-frequency pure-tone audiometry or distortion-product otoacoustic
emission.

Yu KK(1), Choi CH(1), An YH(1), Kwak MY(1), Gong SJ(2), Yoon SW(1), Shim HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Eulji Medical Center, Eulji University School of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Eulji Medical Center,
Eulji University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: To compare the effectiveness of monitoring
cisplatin-induced ototoxicity in adult patients using extended high-frequency
pure-tone audiometry (EHF-PTA) or distortion-product otoacoustic emission
(DP-OAE) and to evaluate the concurrence of ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity in
cisplatin-treated patients.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: EHF-PTA was measured at frequencies of 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 
4, 6, 8, 9, 11.2, 12.5, 14, 16, 18, and 20 kHz and DP-OAE at frequencies of 0.5, 
0.75, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 8 kHz in cisplatin-treated patients (n=10).
Baseline evaluations were made immediately before chemotherapy and additional
tests were performed before each of six cycles of cisplatin treatment. Laboratory
tests to monitor nephrotoxicity were included before every cycle of chemotherapy.
RESULTS: Four of 10 patients showed threshold changes on EHF-PTA. Five of 10
patients showed reductions in DP-OAE, but one was a false-positive result. The
results of EHF-PTA and DP-OAE were consistent in two patients. Only one patient
displayed nephrotoxicity on laboratory tests after the third cycle.
CONCLUSIONS: In our study, the incidence rate of cisplatin-induced ototoxicity
was 40% with EHF-PTA or DP-OAE. Although both EHF-PTA and DP-OAE showed the same 
sensitivity in detecting ototoxicity, they did not produce the same results in
all patients. These two hearing tests could be used to complement one another.
Clinicians should use both tests simultaneously in every cycle of chemotherapy to
ensure the detection of ototoxicity.

PMCID: PMC4181054
PMID: 25279227  [PubMed]


55. Br J Ophthalmol. 2015 Mar;99(3):318-22. doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2014-305718.
Epub 2014 Sep 24.

Reproducibility of retinal oxygen saturation in normal and treated glaucomatous
eyes.

Goharian I(1), Iverson SM(1), Ruiz RC(1), Kishor K(1), Greenfield DS(1), Sehi
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Palm Beach Gardens, Florida, USA.

AIM: To measure the reproducibility of retinal oxygen saturation (SaO2) levels
among treated glaucomatous eyes and normal controls in a prospective
non-randomised study.
METHODS: Patients with perimetric glaucoma (PG) and normal controls were
included. Exclusion criteria for both groups included visual acuity <20/30,
unreliable visual fields, thyroidopathies, hemoglobinopathies, cardiovascular and
pulmonary diseases. Retinal oximetry was performed twice consecutively on one
randomly selected eye of PG and normal controls using spectrophotometric retinal 
oximeter (SRO; Oxymap ehf., Iceland). Four main retinal vessel pairs were
analysed separately. Coefficients of variability (CoV), coefficients of
repeatability (CoR) and intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) in arteries
(a.SaO2) and veins (v.SaO2) were calculated.
RESULTS: 23 PG (mean age 68.3±10.8 years) and 22 normal subjects (mean age
61.5±18.2 years; p=0.14) were included. The intraocular pressure and mean ocular 
perfusion pressure in glaucoma (14.4±4.2 mm Hg; 45.8±5.8 mm Hg) and controls
(14.3±3.3 mm Hg; 45.8±6.1 mm Hg) were similar (p >0.05). In the PG group, the
a.SaO2 had a CoV of 1.6%, a CoR of 4.7 and an ICC of 0.97; the v.SaO2 had a CoV
of 5.9%, a CoR of 8.7 and an ICC of 0.96. In normals, the a.SaO2 had a CoV of
0.98%, a CoR of 3.3 and an ICC of 0.97; the v.SaO2 had a CoV of 4.8%, a CoR of
7.7 and an ICC of 0.93.
CONCLUSIONS: Retinal oximetry measurements using SRO are highly reproducible in
both treated glaucomatous and normal eyes.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25253765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2015 Feb;53(3):507-13. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2013-0927.

Predictive value for death and rehospitalization of 30-day postdischarge B-type
natriuretic peptide (BNP) in elderly patients with heart failure. Sub-analysis of
Italian RED Study.

Di Somma S, Marino R, Zampini G, Magrini L, Ferri E, Shah K, Clopton P, Maisel
AS.

BACKGROUND: Our aim was to determine if, in elderly heart failure (eHF) patients,
serial B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) assessments obtained during follow-up
after hospital discharge could have prognostic utility for death and
rehospitalizations. In eHF patients, BNP assessment at hospital discharge has
been demonstrated to have a high prognostic value; however, its predictive role
for future cardiovascular events in eHF patients, when assessed in the period
after discharge, both for the correct timing and cut-off levels, has not been
completely elucidated.
METHODS: This study is a monocentric subanalysis of the Italian RED (Rapid
Emergency Department) study. We studied 180 consecutive patients admitted for
acute HF through serial BNP assessments: at hospital arrival; at discharge; and
at 30, 90, and 180 days follow-up outpatient visit.
RESULTS: Both a BNP >400 pg/mL at 30 days after discharge and the percentage
variation of BNP from discharge to 30 days (<U+0394>%BNP), compared with a BNP at
discharge >400 pg/mL, showed a higher area under the curve (AUC) and odds ratio
(OR) in predicting events [AUC=0.842, p<0.0001; OR 7.9 (3.3-19.0), p<0.001 for 30
days BNP and AUC=0.851, p<0.0001; OR 9.5 (4.065-22.572), p<0.0001 for <U+0394>%BNP
compared with AUC=0.638, p<0.002; OR 2.4 (1.1-5.3), p=0.032 for BNP at
discharge].
CONCLUSIONS: In patients at a high risk for future events, BNP levels assessed 30
days after hospital discharge in the absence of signs and symptoms could be
predictive of subsequent hospitalization and death. These patients should be
considered for closer monitoring and treatment adjustment.

PMID: 25252752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Cyst Fibros. 2015 Mar;14(2):248-54. doi: 10.1016/j.jcf.2014.07.009. Epub 2014
Aug 13.

High-frequency audiometry reveals high prevalence of aminoglycoside ototoxicity
in children with cystic fibrosis.

Al-Malky G(1), Dawson SJ(2), Sirimanna T(3), Bagkeris E(4), Suri R(5).

Author information: 
(1)University College London Ear Institute, 332 Gray's Inn Road, London WC1X 8EE,
UK. Electronic address: g.al-malky@ucl.ac.uk. (2)University College London Ear
Institute, 332 Gray's Inn Road, London WC1X 8EE, UK. (3)Department of Audiology &
Audiological Medicine, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London WC1N 3JH, UK. (4)MRC 
Centre of Epidemiology for Child Health, UCL Institute of Child Health,
University College London, London WC1N 1EH, UK. (5)Department of Paediatric
Respiratory Medicine, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London WC1N 3JH, UK.

BACKGROUND: Intravenous aminoglycoside (IV AG) antibiotics, widely used in
patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), are known to have ototoxic complications.
Despite this, audiological monitoring is not commonly performed and if performed,
uses only standard pure-tone audiometry (PTA). The aim of this study was to
investigate ototoxicity in CF children, to determine the most appropriate
audiological tests and to identify possible risk factors.
METHODS: Auditory assessment was performed in CF children using standard pure
tone audiometry (PTA), extended high-frequency (EHF) audiometry and
distortion-product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAE).
RESULTS: 70 CF children, mean (SD) age 10.7 (3.5) years, were recruited. Of the
63 children who received IV AG, 15 (24%) children had ototoxicity detected by EHF
audiometry and DPOAE. Standard PTA only detected ototoxicity in 13 children.
Eleven of these children had received at least 10 courses of IV AG courses. A 25 
to 85 dBHL hearing loss (mean±SD: 57.5±25.7 dBHL) across all EHF frequencies and 
a significant drop in DPOAE amplitudes at frequencies 4 to 8 kHz were detected.
However, standard PTA detected a significant hearing loss (>20 dBHL) only at 8
kHz in 5 of these 15 children and none in 2 subjects who had significantly
elevated EHF thresholds. The number of courses of IV AG received, age and lower
lung function were shown to be risk factors for ototoxicity.
CONCLUSIONS: CF children who had received at least 10 courses of IV AG had a
higher risk of ototoxicity. EHF audiometry identified 2 more children with
ototoxicity than standard PTA and depending on facilities available, should be
the test of choice for detecting ototoxicity in children with CF receiving IV AG.

Copyright © 2014 European Cystic Fibrosis Society. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 25127922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Cancer Res. 2014 Nov 15;74(22):6486-98. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0061. Epub 
2014 Aug 12.

BRG1/SMARCA4 inactivation promotes non-small cell lung cancer aggressiveness by
altering chromatin organization.

Orvis T(1), Hepperla A(2), Walter V(1), Song S(3), Simon J(4), Parker J(5),
Wilkerson MD(5), Desai N(1), Major MB(6), Hayes DN(7), Davis IJ(8), Weissman
B(9).

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (2)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (3)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
Cancer Center, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, P.R. China. (4)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. Curriculum in
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (5)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina. (6)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. Department of Cell Biology 
and Physiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(7)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. Department of Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (8)Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina. Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina. Department of Pediatrics and Carolina Center for
Genome Sciences, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina. weissman@med.unc.edu ian_davis@med.unc.edu. (9)Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina. Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. weissman@med.unc.edu
ian_davis@med.unc.edu.

SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes regulate critical cellular processes,
including cell-cycle control, programmed cell death, differentiation, genomic
instability, and DNA repair. Inactivation of this class of chromatin remodeling
complex has been associated with a variety of malignancies, including lung,
ovarian, renal, liver, and pediatric cancers. In particular, approximately 10% of
primary human lung non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) display attenuations in
the BRG1 ATPase, a core factor in SWI/SNF complexes. To evaluate the role of BRG1
attenuation in NSCLC development, we examined the effect of BRG1 silencing in
primary and established human NSCLC cells. BRG1 loss altered cellular morphology 
and increased tumorigenic potential. Gene expression analyses showed reduced
expression of genes known to be associated with progression of human NSCLC. We
demonstrated that BRG1 losses in NSCLC cells were associated with variations in
chromatin structure, including differences in nucleosome positioning and
occupancy surrounding transcriptional start sites of disease-relevant genes. Our 
results offer direct evidence that BRG1 attenuation contributes to NSCLC
aggressiveness by altering nucleosome positioning at a wide range of genes,
including key cancer-associated genes.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4233181
PMID: 25115300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Food Chem. 2015 Jan 1;166:479-85. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2014.06.055. Epub 2014 
Jun 17.

Characterization of gold kiwifruit pectin from fruit of different maturities and 
extraction methods.

Yuliarti O(1), Matia-Merino L(2), Goh KK(2), Mawson J(3), Williams MA(4), Brennan
C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food Nutrition and Human Health, Massey University, Palmerston
North, New Zealand. Electronic address: oniyuliarti@yahoo.co.nz. (2)Institute of 
Food Nutrition and Human Health, Massey University, Palmerston North, New
Zealand. (3)Institute of Food Nutrition and Human Health, Massey University,
Palmerston North, New Zealand; School of Agricultural and Wine Sciences, Charles 
Sturt University, Australia. (4)Institute of Fundamental Sciences, Massey
University, Palmerston North, New Zealand. (5)Institute of Food Nutrition and
Human Health, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand; Faculty of
Agriculture and Life Sciences, Lincoln University, New Zealand.

Studies on gold kiwifruit pectins are limited. In this work, the characterization
of pectin isolated from two different stages of maturity of gold kiwifruit,
namely early harvested fruit (EHF) and main harvested fruit (MHF) isolated by
three methods (acid, water, enzymatic) was carried out. Pectins isolated from MHF
were higher in galacturonic acid content (52-59% w/w) and weight-average
molecular weights (Mw, 1.7-3.8 × 10(6)g/mol) compared with EHF pectins (29-49%
w/w and 0.2-1.7 × 10(6)g/mol respectively). Enzymatic treatment gave the highest 
yield but lowest in Mw, viscosity and mechanical spectra for both maturities. The
pectin of both maturities was classified as high-methoxyl pectin with the degree 
of esterification ranged from 82% to 90%. Water-extracted MHF pectin molecules
had the highest RMS radius (182.7 nm) and Mw (3.75 × 10(6)g/mol). The water
extraction method appeared to retain the native state of pectin molecules
compared with acid and enzymatic extraction methods based on the Mw and viscosity
data.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25053083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Jul;16(7):684-90.

[Effects of extensively hydrolyzed protein formula on feeding and growth in
preterm infants: a multicenter controlled clinical study].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu MX(1), Zhuang SQ, Wang DH, Zhou XY, Liu XH, Shi LP, Yue SJ, Qian JH, Sun JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou 510080, China. suesq@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of extensively hydrolyzed protein formula (eHF)
on the feeding and growth in preterm infants through a multicenter controlled
clinical study.
METHODS: Preterm infants admitted to eight upper first-class hospitals in China
between February 2012 and December 2013 were randomly selected. They were divided
into two observation groups and two control groups. The first observation group
consisted of preterm infants with a gestational age of <32 weeks, who were fed
with eHF for 10-14 days after birth and then with standard preterm formula (SPF) 
until discharge. The second observation group consisted of preterm infants with a
gestational age of 32-34 weeks, who were fed with SPF after birth, but were
switched to eHF (7-14 days) if suffering feeding intolerance at 6-8 days after
birth. The two control groups with corresponding gestational ages kept to be fed 
with SPF after birth. Clinical data were recorded to compare feeding condition,
physical growth, blood biochemical indices, and major complications between
different groups.
RESULTS: A total of 328 preterm infants were enrolled. Preterm infants with a
gestational age of <32 weeks in the observation group had a significantly shorter
meconium evacuation time than in the corresponding control group (P<0.05). They
also had significantly lower levels of serum total bilirubin at weeks 1 and 2
after birth compared with the control group (P<0.05). The observation group
needed more time in reaching enteral nutrition (EN) basic energy uptake of 50
kcal/(kg·d), partial parenteral nutrition (PPN), hospitalization, and corrected
gestational age at discharge compared with the controlled infants (P<0.05). There
was no difference in the incidence of extrauterine growth retardation (EUGR) at
discharge between the two groups (P>0.05). Preterm infants with a gestational age
of 32-34 weeks in the observation group had significantly lower serum total
bilirubin levels at 2 weeks after birth compared with the corresponding control
group (P<0.05). They required more time in achieving EN basic energy and PPN than
in the control group (P<0.05). There was no difference in the incidence of EUGR
at discharge between the two groups (P>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: For preterm infants, eHF can improve gastrointestinal motility,
accelerate bilirubin metabolism and excretion and does not increase the incidence
of EUGR.

PMID: 25008873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 18;9(6):e99269. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099269. eCollection
2014.

Gene expression correlations in human cancer cell lines define molecular
interaction networks for epithelial phenotype.

Kohn KW(1), Zeeberg BM(1), Reinhold WC(1), Pommier Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Using gene expression data to enhance our knowledge of control networks relevant 
to cancer biology and therapy is a challenging but urgent task. Based on the
premise that genes that are expressed together in a variety of cell types are
likely to functions together, we derived mutually correlated genes that function 
together in various processes in epithelial-like tumor cells.
Expression-correlated genes were derived from data for the NCI-60 human tumor
cell lines, as well as data from the Broad Institute's CCLE cell lines. NCI-60
cell lines that selectively expressed a mutually correlated subset of tight
junction genes served as a signature for epithelial-like cancer cells. Those
signature cell lines served as a seed to derive other correlated genes, many of
which had various other epithelial-related functions. Literature survey yielded
molecular interaction and function information about those genes, from which
molecular interaction maps were assembled. Many of the genes had epithelial
functions unrelated to tight junctions, demonstrating that new function
categories were elicited. The most highly correlated genes were implicated in the
following epithelial functions: interactions at tight junctions (CLDN7, CLDN4,
CLDN3, MARVELD3, MARVELD2, TJP3, CGN, CRB3, LLGL2, EPCAM, LNX1); interactions at 
adherens junctions (CDH1, ADAP1, CAMSAP3); interactions at desmosomes (PPL, PKP3,
JUP); transcription regulation of cell-cell junction complexes (GRHL1 and 2);
epithelial RNA splicing regulators (ESRP1 and 2); epithelial vesicle traffic
(RAB25, EPN3, GRHL2, EHF, ADAP1, MYO5B); epithelial Ca(+2) signaling (ATP2C2,
S100A14, BSPRY); terminal differentiation of epithelial cells (OVOL1 and 2, ST14,
PRSS8, SPINT1 and 2); maintenance of apico-basal polarity (RAB25, LLGL2, EPN3).
The findings provide a foundation for future studies to elucidate the functions
of regulatory networks specific to epithelial-like cancer cells and to probe for 
anti-cancer drug targets.

PMCID: PMC4062414
PMID: 24940735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Arch Dis Child. 2014 Oct;99(10):933-6. doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2013-304727.
Epub 2014 Jun 9.

An extensively hydrolysed rice protein-based formula in the management of infants
with cow's milk protein allergy: preliminary results after 1 month.

Vandenplas Y(1), De Greef E(1), Hauser B(1); Paradice Study Group; Paradice Study
Group.

Collaborators: Halut C, Robberecht M, Balduck N, l'Homme A, Mohring M, Carvelli
T, Hauser B, Defontaine E, Questiau J, Christens J, Henckens F, Lemmens R,
Vercammen L, De Greef E.

Author information: 
(1)Universitair KinderZiekenhuis Brussel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels,
Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Guidelines recommend extensively hydrolysed cow's milk protein
formulas (eHF) in the treatment of infants diagnosed with cow's milk protein
allergy (CMPA). Extensively hydrolysed rice protein infant formulas (eRHFs) have 
recently become available, and could offer a valid alternative.
METHODS: A prospective trial was performed to evaluate the clinical tolerance of 
a new eRHF in infants with a confirmed CMPA. Patients were followed for 1 month. 
Clinical tolerance of the eRHF was evaluated with a symptom-based score (SBS) and
growth (weight and length) was monitored.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine infants (mean age 3.4 months, range 0.5-6 months) diagnosed 
with CMPA were enrolled. All infants tolerated the eRHF and experienced a normal 
growth.
CONCLUSIONS: In accordance with current guidelines, this eRHF is tolerated by
more than 90% of children with proven CMPA with a 95% CI, and is an adequate
alternative to cow's milk-based eHF.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01998074.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4173818
PMID: 24914098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Genes Immun. 2014 Sep;15(6):347-54. doi: 10.1038/gene.2014.23. Epub 2014 May 29.

GWAS identifies novel SLE susceptibility genes and explains the association of
the HLA region.

Armstrong DL(1), Zidovetzki R(1), Alarcón-Riquelme ME(2), Tsao BP(3), Criswell
LA(4), Kimberly RP(5), Harley JB(6), Sivils KL(7), Vyse TJ(8), Gaffney PM(7),
Langefeld CD(9), Jacob CO(10).

Author information: 
(1)1] The Lupus Genetic Group, Department of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA [2] Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of
California at Riverside, Riverside, CA, USA. (2)1] Arthritis and Clinical
Immunology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, USA 
[2] Centro de Genómica e Investigación Oncológica (GENYO), Pfizer-Universidad de 
Granada-Junta de Andalucia, Granada, Spain. (3)Division of Rheumatology,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (4)Rosalind Russell
Medical Research Center for Arthritis, Department of Medicine, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (5)Department of Medicine,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. (6)1] Division of
Rheumatology and The Center for Autoimmune Genomics and Etiology, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA [2] U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA. (7)Arthritis and Clinical
Immunology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
(8)Divisions of Genetics and Molecular Medicine and Immunology, King's College
London, London, UK. (9)Department of Biostatistical Sciences, Wake Forest
University Health Sciences, Wake Forest, NC, USA. (10)The Lupus Genetic Group,
Department of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

In a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of individuals of European ancestry
afflicted with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) the extensive utilization of
imputation, step-wise multiple regression, lasso regularization and increasing
study power by utilizing false discovery rate instead of a Bonferroni multiple
test correction enabled us to identify 13 novel non-human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
genes and confirmed the association of four genes previously reported to be
associated. Novel genes associated with SLE susceptibility included two
transcription factors (EHF and MED1), two components of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway (RASSF2
and RNF114), one gene involved in adhesion and endothelial migration (CNTN6) and 
two genes involved in antigen presentation (BIN1 and SEC61G). In addition, the
strongly significant association of multiple single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in the HLA region was assigned to HLA alleles and serotypes and
deconvoluted into four primary signals. The novel SLE-associated genes point to
new directions for both the diagnosis and treatment of this debilitating
autoimmune disease.

PMCID: PMC4156543
PMID: 24871463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Chem Phys. 2014 May 14;140(18):18A514. doi: 10.1063/1.4866998.

Ensemble density variational methods with self- and ghost-interaction-corrected
functionals.

Pastorczak E(1), Pernal K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Radiation Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, Lodz
University of Technology, ul. Wroblewskiego 15, 93-590 Lodz, Poland. (2)Institute
of Physics, Lodz University of Technology, ul. Wolczanska 219, 90-924 Lodz,
Poland.

Ensemble density functional theory (DFT) offers a way of predicting
excited-states energies of atomic and molecular systems without referring to a
density response function. Despite a significant theoretical work, practical
applications of the proposed approximations have been scarce and they do not
allow for a fair judgement of the potential usefulness of ensemble DFT with
available functionals. In the paper, we investigate two forms of ensemble density
functionals formulated within ensemble DFT framework: the Gross, Oliveira, and
Kohn (GOK) functional proposed by Gross et al. [Phys. Rev. A 37, 2809 (1988)]
alongside the orbital-dependent eDFT form of the functional introduced by Nagy
[J. Phys. B 34, 2363 (2001)] (the acronym eDFT proposed in analogy to
eHF--ensemble Hartree-Fock method). Local and semi-local ground-state density
functionals are employed in both approaches. Approximate ensemble density
functionals contain not only spurious self-interaction but also the so-called
ghost-interaction which has no counterpart in the ground-state DFT. We propose
how to correct the GOK functional for both kinds of interactions in
approximations that go beyond the exact-exchange functional. Numerical
applications lead to a conclusion that functionals free of the ghost-interaction 
by construction, i.e., eDFT, yield much more reliable results than approximate
self- and ghost-interaction-corrected GOK functional. Additionally, local density
functional corrected for self-interaction employed in the eDFT framework yields
excitations energies of the accuracy comparable to that of the uncorrected
semi-local eDFT functional.

PMID: 24832322  [PubMed]


65. Int J Audiol. 2014 Sep;53(9):595-603. doi: 10.3109/14992027.2014.903339. Epub
2014 May 5.

Earphones in extended high-frequency audiometry and ISO 389-5.

Rodríguez Valiente A(1), García Berrocal JR, Roldán Fidalgo A, Trinidad A,
Ramírez Camacho R.

Author information: 
(1)Ear Research Group, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Hospital Universitario 
Puerta de Hierro, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid , Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To determine common reference equivalent threshold sound pressure
levels (RETSPL) for the earphones used in the extended high-frequency (EHF)
range, as different earphones are commercially available, but there are not
RETSPLs for each model.
DESIGN: Hearing threshold sound pressure levels were measured up to 20 kHz for
the Sennheiser HDA 200 audiometric earphone, and were compared to the ISO 389-5
(2006) norm and other investigations using that earphone and different ones.
STUDY SAMPLE: A total of 223 otologically-normal subjects (aged 5-25 years old)
participated in the hearing determination.
RESULTS: The results are in good agreement with previous studies of hearing
thresholds using the same and other earphones.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present investigation are relevant for the
international standard for the calibration of audiometric equipment in the 8 to
16 kHz frequency range, ISO 389-5. The data may be used for a future update of
the RETSPL for circumaural and insert audiometric earphones.

PMID: 24793886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Biotechnol. 2014 Jul 20;182-183:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2014.04.015. Epub 
2014 Apr 28.

Discovery and characterization of RecA protein of thermophilic bacterium Thermus 
thermophilus MAT72 phage Tt72 that increases specificity of a PCR-based DNA
amplification.

Stefanska A(1), Kaczorowska AK(2), Plotka M(3), Fridjonsson OH(4), Hreggvidsson
GO(5), Hjorleifsdottir S(6), Kristjansson JK(7), Dabrowski S(8), Kaczorowski
T(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Gdansk, Wita Stwosza 59, 80-308
Gdansk, Poland. Electronic address: stefanska@aabiot.com. (2)Collection of
Plasmids and Microorganisms, University of Gdansk, Wita Stwosza 59, 80-308
Gdansk, Poland. Electronic address: szuster@biotech.ug.gda.pl. (3)Department of
Microbiology, University of Gdansk, Wita Stwosza 59, 80-308 Gdansk, Poland.
Electronic address: magdalena.plotka@biol.ug.edu.pl. (4)Matis ohf, Vinlandsleid
12, Reykjavik 113, Iceland. Electronic address: olafur@matis.is. (5)Matis ohf,
Vinlandsleid 12, Reykjavik 113, Iceland; Faculty of Life and Environmental
Sciences, University of Iceland, Sæmundargötu 2, Reykjavik 101, Iceland.
Electronic address: gudmundo@matis.is. (6)Prokazyme ehf, Vinlandsleid 14,
Reykjavik 113, Iceland. Electronic address:
sigridur.hjorleifsdottir@orfgenetics.com. (7)Prokazyme ehf, Vinlandsleid 14,
Reykjavik 113, Iceland. Electronic address: jakob@arkea.is. (8)A&A Biotechnology,
Aleja Zwyciestwa 96/98, 81-451 Gdynia, Poland. Electronic address: sd@aabiot.com.
(9)Department of Microbiology, University of Gdansk, Wita Stwosza 59, 80-308
Gdansk, Poland. Electronic address: tadeusz.kaczorowski@biol.ug.edu.pl.

The recA gene of newly discovered Thermus thermophilus MAT72 phage Tt72
(Myoviridae) was cloned and overexpressed in Escherichia coli. The 1020-bp gene
codes for a 339-amino-acid polypeptide with an Mr of 38,155 which shows 38.7%
positional identity to the E. coli RecA protein. When expressed in E. coli, the
Tt72 recA gene did not confer the ability to complement the ultraviolet light
(254nm) sensitivity of an E. coli recA mutant. Tt72 RecA protein has been
purified with good yield to catalytic and electrophoretic homogeneity using a
three-step chromatography procedure. Biochemical characterization indicated that 
the protein can pair and promote ATP-dependent strand exchange reaction resulting
in formation of a heteroduplex DNA at 60°C under conditions otherwise optimal for
E. coli RecA. When the Tt72 RecA protein was included in a standard PCR-based DNA
amplification reaction, the specificity of the PCR assays was significantly
improved by eliminating non-specific products.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24786823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Acta Ophthalmol. 2014 Aug;92(5):449-53. doi: 10.1111/aos.12359. Epub 2014 Apr 27.

Retinal vessel oxygen saturation and vessel diameter in retinitis pigmentosa.

Eysteinsson T(1), Hardarson SH, Bragason D, Stefánsson E.

Author information: 
(1)Physiology, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland; Ophthalmology,
University of Iceland/Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland.

PURPOSE: To assess retinal vessel oxygen saturation and retinal vessel diameter
in retinitis pigmentosa.
METHODS: A retinal oximeter (Oxymap ehf., Reykjavik, Iceland) was used to measure
retinal vessel oxygen saturation and vessel diameter in ten patients with
retinitis pigmentosa (RP) (mean age 49 years, range 23-71 years). Results were
compared with age- and gender-matched healthy individuals. All patients had
advanced stage of the disease with visual fields restricted to the macular
region.
RESULTS: Oxygen saturation in retinal venules was 58.0 ± 6.2% in patients with RP
and 53.4 ± 4.8% in healthy subjects (p = 0.017). Oxygen saturation in retinal
arterioles was not significantly different between groups (p = 0.65). The mean
diameter of retinal arterioles was 8.9 ± 1.6 pixels in patients with RP and 11.4 
± 1.2 in healthy controls (p < 0.0001). The corresponding diameters for venules
were 10.1 ± 1.2 (RP) and 15.3 ± 1.7 (healthy, p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Increased venous saturation and decreased retinal vessel diameter
suggest decreased oxygen delivery from the retinal circulation in retinitis
pigmentosa. This is probably secondary to tissue atrophy and reduced oxygen
consumption.

© 2014 Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica Foundation. Published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24767302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Apr 15;55(5):3120-6. doi: 10.1167/iovs.13-13255.

Retinal oximetry with a scanning laser ophthalmoscope.

Kristjansdottir JV(1), Hardarson SH(1), Halldorsson GH(2), Karlsson RA(2),
Eliasdottir TS(1), Stefánsson E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik,
Iceland University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland. (2)Oxymap ehf., Reykjavik,
Iceland.

PURPOSE: The purpose of the study was to assess if a scanning laser
ophthalmoscope (SLO), Optomap 200Tx, could be used for measurements of hemoglobin
oxygen saturation in retinal blood vessels.
METHODS: Optomap 200Tx uses two lasers for image acquisition, 532 and 633 nm.
Retinal images of healthy individuals and patients with retinal vein occlusion
were analyzed with modified Oxymap Analyzer software, which tracks retinal
vessels and calculates relative hemoglobin oxygen saturation.
RESULTS: Oxygen saturation in healthy individuals was measured as 92% ± 13% for
arterioles and 57% ± 12% for venules (mean ± SD, n = 11, P = 0.0001). Standard
deviation for repeated measurements of the same eye was 3.5% for arterioles and
4.4% for venules. In patients with confirmed venular hypoxia, central retinal
vein occlusion (CRVO) or hemivein occlusion, the average venular oxygen
saturation was measured as 23% ± 3% in the affected eyes and 59% ± 3% in the
fellow eyes (n = 4, P = 0.0009).
CONCLUSIONS: Technically, it is possible to derive information on retinal oxygen 
saturation from an SLO with a 2-wavelength oximetry algorithm. The system
produced both sensitive and repeatable results. The remaining challenges include 
decreasing variability between vessels of the same eye and variability between
individuals. Given the advantages that SLO imaging has over conventional fundus
camera optics in retinal oximetry, further development of SLO oximetry may
provide the optimal approach to retinal oximetry.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMID: 24736055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Eur J Pediatr. 2014 Sep;173(9):1209-16. doi: 10.1007/s00431-014-2308-4. Epub 2014
Apr 12.

Safety and tolerance of a new extensively hydrolyzed rice protein-based formula
in the management of infants with cow's milk protein allergy.

Vandenplas Y(1), De Greef E, Hauser B; Paradice Study Group.

Collaborators: Halut C, Robberecht MN, Balduck N, l'Homme A, Mohring MP, Carvelli
T, Defontaine E, Questiau JF, Christens J, Henckens F, Lemmens R, Vercammen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, UZ Brussel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels,
Belgium, yvan.vandenplas@uzbrussel.be.

Guidelines recommend the use of extensively hydrolyzed cow's milk protein-based
formulas (eHF) in the treatment of infants with cow's milk protein allergy
(CMPA). Extensively hydrolyzed rice protein infant formula (eRHF) has recently
become available and could offer a valid alternative. A prospective trial was
performed to evaluate the hypo-allergenicity and safety of a new eRHF in infants 
with a confirmed CMPA. Patients were fed the study formula for 6 months. Clinical
tolerance of the eRHF was evaluated with a symptom-based score (SBS) and growth
(weight and length) was monitored. Forty infants (mean age, 3.4 months; range,
1-6 months) with CMPA confirmed by a food challenge were enrolled. All infants
tolerated the eRHF and the SBS significantly decreased as of the first month of
intervention. Moreover, the eRHF allowed a catch-up to normal weight gain as of
the first month as well as a normalization of the weight-for-age, weight-for
length, and BMI z-scores within the 6-month study period.CONCLUSION: In
accordance with current guidelines, this eRHF was tolerated by more than 90 % of 
children with proven CMPA with a 95 % confidence interval. This eRHF is an
adequate and safe alternative to cow milk-based eHF.

PMCID: PMC4134482
PMID: 24723091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Schmerz. 2014 Apr;28(2):128-34. doi: 10.1007/s00482-014-1417-3.

[Consensus paper of the German Migraine and Headache Society on the structure of 
headache care facilities in Germany].

[Article in German]

Marziniak M(1), Malzacher V, Förderreuther S, Jürgens T, Kropp P, May A, Straube 
A; Deutsche Migräne- und Kopfschmerzgesellschaft e. V.

Author information: 
(1)Neurologische Klinik, Isar-Amper-Klinikum München-Ost, Haar, Deutschland.

This consensus paper introduces a classification of headache care facilities on
behalf of the German Migraine and Headache Society. This classification is based 
on the recommendations of the International Association for the Study of Pain
(IASP) and the European Headache Federation (EHF) and was adapted to reflect the 
specific situation of headache care in Germany. It defines three levels of
headache care: headache practitioner (level 1), headache outpatient clinic (level
2) and headache centers (level 3). The objective of the publication is to define 
and establish reliable criteria in the field of headache care in Germany.

PMID: 24718744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Clin Exp Allergy. 2014 Jun;44(6):858-66. doi: 10.1111/cea.12310.

Exercise-induced bronchospasm related to different phenotypes of rhinitis without
asthma in primary schoolchildren: the French Six Cities Study.

Caillaud D(1), Horo K, Baiz N, Banerjee S, Charpin D, Lavaud F, de Blay F,
Raherison C, Annesi-Maesano I.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumologie, CHU Gabriel Montpied, Université d'Auvergne,
Clermont-Ferrand, France.

BACKGROUND: Exercise-induced bronchospasm (EIB) is frequent among asthmatic
children. However, opinions differ on the relation between EIB and rhinitis in
the absence of asthma.
OBJECTIVES: We assessed the relationship between EIB and various phenotypes of
rhinitis according to asthmatic status at the general population level in the Six
Cities Study.
METHODS: Of 7781 schoolchildren with a mean age of 10 years underwent an EIB test
and skin prick test to assess allergic sensitization. Their parents completed a
standardized questionnaire recording asthma-like symptoms and past-year
rhinoconjunctivitis, ever hay fever (EHF), and a score for allergic rhinitis
(SFAR) =7 as a marker of 'past-year allergic rhinitis'. Exercise-induced
bronchospasm was defined as a fall in peak expiratory flow rate =15% after
exercise.
RESULTS: Of the 6813 schoolchildren retained for analysis, 227 (3.33%)
experienced EIB after exercise. Odds ratios [95% confidence intervals] between
EIB and allergic rhinitis phenotypes in the absence of asthma were 1.56
[0.92-2.63] for EHF, 1.97 [1.16-3.35] for past-year rhinoconjunctivitis, and 1.84
[1.16-2.91] for a SFAR =7. Results were unchanged after adjustment for
confounders. Multiple correspondence analysis showed that EIB, although related
to asthma, constitutes a separate entity. Exercise-induced bronchospasm was not
significantly related to familial history of asthma.
CONCLUSION: In our large population-based sample of children, different
phenotypes of atopic rhinitis were associated with EIB, independently of asthma. 
Exercise-induced bronchospasm, although related to asthma, seems to constitute a 
separate entity.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: In this large (6813) sample of 10-year children drawn from
the general population, EIB is associated with rhinitis phenotypes in the absence
of asthma. Furthermore, it constitutes an entity independent from asthma and is
not related to a familial history of asthma. Thus, investigating these symptoms
could be important in this disease, as a specific nasal treatment might improve
EIB in these children.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24666547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Infect Dis. 2014 Aug 15;210(4):558-66. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu088. Epub 2014
Feb 12.

Ebola hemorrhagic Fever: novel biomarker correlates of clinical outcome.

McElroy AK(1), Erickson BR(2), Flietstra TD(2), Rollin PE(2), Nichol ST(2),
Towner JS(2), Spiropoulou CF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Division of Pediatric Infectious Disease, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, Georgia. (2)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention.

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 2015 Feb 15;211(4):661-2.
    J Infect Dis. 2015 Feb 15;211(4):662-3.

BACKGROUND: Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) outbreaks occur sporadically in Africa 
and result in high rates of death. The 2000-2001 outbreak of Sudan
virus-associated EHF in the Gulu district of Uganda led to 425 cases, of which
216 were laboratory confirmed, making it the largest EHF outbreak on record.
Serum specimens from this outbreak had been preserved in liquid nitrogen from the
time of collection and were available for analysis.
METHODS: Available samples were tested using a series of multiplex assays to
measure the concentrations of 55 biomarkers. The data were analyzed to identify
statistically significant associations between the tested biomarkers and
hemorrhagic manifestations, viremia, and/or death.
RESULTS: Death, hemorrhage, and viremia were independently associated with
elevated levels of several chemokines and cytokines. Death and hemorrhage were
associated with elevated thrombomodulin and ferritin levels. Hemorrhage was also 
associated with elevated levels of soluble intracellular adhesion molecule.
Viremia was independently associated with elevated levels of tissue factor and
tissue plasminogen activator. Finally, samples from nonfatal cases had higher
levels of sCD40L.
CONCLUSIONS: These novel associations provide a better understanding of EHF
pathophysiology and a starting point for researching new potential targets for
therapeutic interventions.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Infectious Diseases Society
of America 2014. This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in 
the public domain in the US.

PMCID: PMC4172044
PMID: 24526742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Opt Express. 2013 Dec 2;21(24):29145-56. doi: 10.1364/OE.21.029145.

Dependent and multiple scattering in transmission and backscattering optical
coherence tomography.

Nguyen VD, Faber DJ, van der Pol E, van Leeuwen TG, Kalkman J.

We use transmission and backscattering optical coherence tomography (OCT) to
distinguish and quantify dependent and multiple scattering effects in turbid
media. With transmission OCT the dependent scattering coefficients for a range of
monodisperse silica particle suspensions are determined. An excellent agreement
is observed between the measured dependent scattering coefficients and
calculations based on Mie calculations, the Percus-Yevick radial distribution
function, and coherent light scattering theory. Backscattering OCT measurements
are fitted using the extended Huygens-Fresnel (EHF) model with the dependent
scattering coefficients obtained from the transmission OCT measurements as input 
parameters. Good agreement between the EHF model and the backscattering OCT
measurements is observed. For large particles, the rms scattering angle <U+03B8>rms
obtained from the EHF fit is in fair agreement with <U+03B8>rms calculated from the
transmission OCT data.

PMID: 24514466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Apr;12(4):560-70. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0427. Epub
2014 Jan 20.

Gene silencing associated with SWI/SNF complex loss during NSCLC development.

Song S(1), Walter V, Karaca M, Li Y, Bartlett CS, Smiraglia DJ, Serber D, Sproul 
CD, Plass C, Zhang J, Hayes DN, Zheng Y, Weissman BE.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Cancer Center, Room 32-048, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599-7295. weissman@med.unc.edu.

The SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex regulates gene expression and alters
chromatin structures in an ATP-dependent manner. Recent sequencing efforts have
shown mutations in BRG1 (SMARCA4), one of two mutually exclusive ATPase subunits 
in the complex, in a significant number of human lung tumor cell lines and
primary non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) clinical specimens. To determine
how BRG1 loss fuels tumor progression in NSCLC, molecular profiling was performed
after restoration of BRG1 expression or treatment with a histone deacetylase
inhibitor or a DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor in a BRG1-deficient NSCLC
cells. Importantly, validation studies from multiple cell lines revealed that
BRG1 reexpression led to substantial changes in the expression of CDH1, CDH3,
EHF, and RRAD that commonly undergo silencing by other epigenetic mechanisms
during NSCLC development. Furthermore, treatment with DNMT inhibitors did not
restore expression of these transcripts, indicating that this common mechanism of
gene silencing did not account for their loss of expression. Collectively, BRG1
loss is an important mechanism for the epigenetic silencing of target genes
during NSCLC development.IMPLICATIONS: Inactivation of the SWI/SNF complex
provides a novel mechanism to induce gene silencing during NSCLC development.

Mol Cancer Res; 12(4); 560-70. ©2014 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3989415
PMID: 24445599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Adv Gerontol. 2014;27(4):657-61.

[Molecular mechanisms of combined extremely radiofrequency and infrared therapy
in various age patients with chronic parodontitis].

[Article in Russian]

Ianova OA, Medvedev DS, Lin'kova NS, Trifonov NI, D'iakonov MM.

The influence of extreme radiofrequency millimeter microwave (EHF) and infrared
(IR) electromagnetic emanation on the molecular markers of cell renovation (Ki67,
p53) and proinflammatory cytokine TNF-a expression in the buccal cells of various
age patients with chronic parodontitis was investigated. The results show that
EHF- and IR-electromagnetic emanation increased Ki67 proliferative marker
expression and decreased expression of proapoptosis protein p53 and
proinflammatory cytokine TNF-a in the buccal epithelium of young, middle-aged and
elderly people with chronic parodontitis. The data obtained open the new ability 
for patogenetic treatment of various age patients with chronic parodontitis using
the EHF- and IR-electromagnetic emanation method.

PMID: 25946839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2013 Jan;1(1):29-36. doi:
10.1016/j.jaip.2012.09.003. Epub 2012 Nov 22.

Primary prevention of allergic disease through nutritional interventions.

Fleischer DM(1), Spergel JM, Assa'ad AH, Pongracic JA.

Author information: 
(1)National Jewish Health, University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine,
Denver, Colo. Electronic address: fleischerd@njhealth.org.

With the rising prevalence of atopic disease, primary prevention may play a role 
in reducing its burden, especially in high-risk infants. With this in mind, the
Adverse Reactions to Foods Committee of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma &
Immunology was charged with the task of developing recommendations for primary
care physicians and specialists about the primary prevention of allergic disease 
through nutritional interventions according to current available literature and
expert opinion. Recommendations that are supported by data are as follows.
Avoidance diets during pregnancy and lactation are not recommended at this time, 
but more research is necessary for peanut. Exclusive breast-feeding for at least 
4 and up to 6 months is endorsed. For high-risk infants who cannot be exclusively
breast-fed, hydrolyzed formula appears to offer advantages to prevent allergic
disease and cow's milk allergy. Complementary foods can be introduced between 4
and 6 months of age. Because no formal recommendations have been previously
provided about how and when to introduce the main allergenic foods (cow's milk,
egg, soy, wheat, peanut, tree nuts, fish, shellfish), these are now provided, and
reasons to consider allergy consultation for development of a personalized plan
for food introduction are also presented.

Copyright © 2012 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24229819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Scand J Immunol. 2014 Jan;79(1):20-6. doi: 10.1111/sji.12126.

Activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma leads to
upregulation of ESE-3 expression in human monocyte-derived dendritic cells.

Sprater F(1), Azeem W, Appel S.

Author information: 
(1)Broegelmann Research Laboratory, Department of Clinical Science, University of
Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

The transcription factor ESE-3 has been suggested to be involved in regulating
the immunogenicity of human monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDCs). While ESE-3
is not expressed in monocytes, it is upregulated during the differentiation of
monocytes into dendritic cells (DCs) and highly expressed in immunogenic DCs
while downregulated in tolerogenic DCs. Activation of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-<U+03B3>) during DC development has been
shown to result in a rather tolerogenic cell population. In this study, we
identified eight PPAR-<U+03B3> binding sites upstream of the ESE-3 gene. Activation of
the PPAR-<U+03B3> pathway with synthetic PPAR-<U+03B3> ligands during moDC generation resulted 
in upregulation of ESE-3b expression on mRNA and protein level, phenotypic
alterations and reduced capacity of the cells to stimulate allogeneic T cells.
This could be inhibited by blocking the PPAR-<U+03B3> pathway with specific antagonists.
Our results suggest PPAR-<U+03B3> to be involved in the regulation of ESE-3b expression 
during moDC development and that ESE-3 expression is not correlated with the
immunogenicity of DCs.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24219556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 29;288(48):34304-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.504399. Epub
2013 Oct 18.

The Ets transcription factor EHF as a regulator of cornea epithelial cell
identity.

Stephens DN(1), Klein RH, Salmans ML, Gordon W, Ho H, Andersen B.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Biological Chemistry and.

The cornea is the clear, outermost portion of the eye composed of three layers:
an epithelium that provides a protective barrier while allowing transmission of
light into the eye, a collagen-rich stroma, and an endothelium monolayer. How
cornea development and aging is controlled is poorly understood. Here we
characterize the mouse cornea transcriptome from early embryogenesis through
aging and compare it with transcriptomes of other epithelial tissues, identifying
cornea-enriched genes, pathways, and transcriptional regulators. Additionally, we
profiled cornea epithelium and stroma, defining genes enriched in these layers.
Over 10,000 genes are differentially regulated in the mouse cornea across the
time course, showing dynamic expression during development and modest expression 
changes in fewer genes during aging. A striking transition time point for gene
expression between postnatal days 14 and 28 corresponds with completion of cornea
development at the transcriptional level. Clustering classifies co-expressed, and
potentially co-regulated, genes into biologically informative categories,
including groups that exhibit epithelial or stromal enriched expression. Based on
these findings, and through loss of function studies and ChIP-seq, we show that
the Ets transcription factor EHF promotes cornea epithelial fate through
complementary gene activating and repressing activities. Furthermore, we identify
potential interactions between EHF, KLF4, and KLF5 in promoting cornea epithelial
differentiation. These data provide insights into the mechanisms underlying
epithelial development and aging, identifying EHF as a regulator of cornea
epithelial identity and pointing to interactions between Ets and KLF factors in
promoting epithelial fate. Furthermore, this comprehensive gene expression data
set for the cornea is a powerful tool for discovery of novel cornea regulators
and pathways.

PMCID: PMC3843046
PMID: 24142692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Am Acad Audiol. 2013 Sep;24(8):725-39. doi: 10.3766/jaaa.24.8.9.

Extended high-frequency thresholds in college students: effects of music player
use and other recreational noise.

Le Prell CG(1), Spankovich C, Lobariñas E, Griffiths SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL.

BACKGROUND: Human hearing is sensitive to sounds from as low as 20 Hz to as high 
as 20,000 Hz in normal ears. However, clinical tests of human hearing rarely
include extended high-frequency (EHF) threshold assessments, at frequencies
extending beyond 8000 Hz. EHF thresholds have been suggested for use monitoring
the earliest effects of noise on the inner ear, although the clinical usefulness 
of EHF threshold testing is not well established for this purpose.
PURPOSE: The primary objective of this study was to determine if EHF thresholds
in healthy, young adult college students vary as a function of recreational noise
exposure.
RESEARCH DESIGN: A retrospective analysis of a laboratory database was conducted;
all participants with both EHF threshold testing and noise history data were
included. The potential for "preclinical" EHF deficits was assessed based on the 
measured thresholds, with the noise surveys used to estimate recreational noise
exposure.
STUDY SAMPLE: EHF thresholds measured during participation in other ongoing
studies were available from 87 participants (34 male and 53 female); all
participants had hearing within normal clinical limits (=25 HL) at conventional
frequencies (0.25-8 kHz).
RESULTS: EHF thresholds closely matched standard reference thresholds [ANSI S3.6 
(1996) Annex C]. There were statistically reliable threshold differences in
participants who used music players, with 3-6 dB worse thresholds at the highest 
test frequencies (10-16 kHz) in participants who reported long-term use of music 
player devices (>5 yr), or higher listening levels during music player use.
CONCLUSIONS: It should be possible to detect small changes in high-frequency
hearing for patients or participants who undergo repeated testing at periodic
intervals. However, the increased population-level variability in thresholds at
the highest frequencies will make it difficult to identify the presence of small 
but potentially important deficits in otherwise normal-hearing individuals who do
not have previously established baseline data.

American Academy of Audiology.

PMCID: PMC4111237
PMID: 24131608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 May;22(5):660-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.209. Epub 2013 Oct 
9.

The CF-modifying gene EHF promotes p.Phe508del-CFTR residual function by altering
protein glycosylation and trafficking in epithelial cells.

Stanke F(1), van Barneveld A(1), Hedtfeld S(1), Wölfl S(2), Becker T(3), Tümmler 
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pediatrics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany [2]
Biomedical Research in Endstage and Obstructive Lung Disease Hannover (BREATH),
Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Hannover, Germany. (2)Institute
for Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology, Ruperto-Carola University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (3)1] German Center for Neurodegenerative
Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany [2] Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics and
Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

The three-base-pair deletion c.1521_1523delCTT (p.Phe508del, F508del) in the
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is the most frequent
disease-causing lesion in cystic fibrosis (CF). The CFTR gene encodes a chloride 
and bicarbonate channel at the apical membrane of epithelial cells. Altered ion
transport of CFTR-expressing epithelia can be used to differentiate
manifestations of the so-called CF basic defect. Recently, an 11p13 region has
been described as a CF modifier by the North American CF Genetic Modifier Study
Consortium. Selecting the epithelial-specific transcription factor EHF (ets
homologous factor) as the likely candidate gene on 11p13, we have genotyped two
intragenic microsatellites in EHF to replicate the 11p13 finding in the patient
cohort of the European CF Twin and Sibling Study. We could observe an association
of rare EHF haplotypes among homozygotes for c.1521_1523delCTT in CFTR, which
exhibit a CF-untypical manifestation of the CF basic defect such as CFTR-mediated
residual chloride secretion and low response to amiloride. We have reviewed
transcriptome data obtained from intestinal epithelial samples of homozygotes for
c.1521_1523delCTT in CFTR, which were stratified for their EHF genetic
background. Transcripts that were upregulated among homozygotes for
c.1521_1523delCTT in CFTR, who carry two rare EHF alleles, were enriched for
genes that alter protein glycosylation and trafficking, both mechanisms being
pivotal for the effective targeting of fully functional p.Phe508del-CFTR to the
apical membrane of epithelial cells. We conclude that EHF modifies the CF
phenotype by altering capabilities of the epithelial cell to correctly process
the folding and trafficking of mutant p.Phe508del-CFTR.

PMCID: PMC3992571
PMID: 24105369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Front Microbiol. 2013 Sep 5;4:267. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2013.00267.

Animal models for Ebola and Marburg virus infections.

Nakayama E(1), Saijo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology 1, National Institute of Infectious Diseases Tokyo,
Japan.

Ebola and Marburg hemorrhagic fevers (EHF and MHF) are caused by the Filoviridae 
family, Ebolavirus and Marburgvirus (ebolavirus and marburgvirus), respectively. 
These severe diseases have high mortality rates in humans. Although EHF and MHF
are endemic to sub-Saharan Africa. A novel filovirus, Lloviu virus, which is
genetically distinct from ebolavirus and marburgvirus, was recently discovered in
Spain where filoviral hemorrhagic fever had never been reported. The virulence of
this virus has not been determined. Ebolavirus and marburgvirus are classified as
biosafety level-4 (BSL-4) pathogens and Category A agents, for which the US
government requires preparedness in case of bioterrorism. Therefore, preventive
measures against these viral hemorrhagic fevers should be prepared, not only in
disease-endemic regions, but also in disease-free countries. Diagnostics,
vaccines, and therapeutics need to be developed, and therefore the establishment 
of animal models for EHF and MHF is invaluable. Several animal models have been
developed for EHF and MHF using non-human primates (NHPs) and rodents, which are 
crucial to understand pathophysiology and to develop diagnostics, vaccines, and
therapeutics. Rhesus and cynomolgus macaques are representative models of
filovirus infection as they exhibit remarkably similar symptoms to those observed
in humans. However, the NHP models have practical and ethical problems that limit
their experimental use. Furthermore, there are no inbred and genetically
manipulated strains of NHP. Rodent models such as mouse, guinea pig, and hamster,
have also been developed. However, these rodent models require adaptation of the 
virus to produce lethal disease and do not mirror all symptoms of human filovirus
infection. This review article provides an outline of the clinical features of
EHF and MHF in animals, including humans, and discusses how the animal models
have been developed to study pathophysiology, vaccines, and therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3763195
PMID: 24046765  [PubMed]


82. J Cutan Aesthet Surg. 2013 Apr;6(2):121-5. doi: 10.4103/0974-2077.112679.

Extracted hair follicle outer root sheath cell suspension for pigment cell
restoration in vitiligo.

Kumar A(1), Mohanty S, Sahni K, Kumar R, Gupta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Facility, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.

Vitiligo surgery has come up a long way from punch skin grafts to epidermal cell 
suspension and latest to the extracted hair follicle outer root sheath cell
suspension (EHF-ORS-CS) transplantation. The progressive development from one
technique to the other is always in a quest for the best. In the latest
development- EHF-ORS-CS, which is an enriched source of follicular inactive
melanocyte (melanocyte stem cells), seems to be a good addition to the prevailing
cell-based therapies for vitiligo; however, need to be explored further in
larger, and preferably randomized blinded studies. This review discusses the
principle, technical details, and stem cell composition of hair follicular outer 
root sheath cell suspension.

PMCID: PMC3764761
PMID: 24023440  [PubMed]


83. J Pediatr. 2013 Dec;163(6):1747-53. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2013.06.073. Epub 2013
Aug 15.

Patterns of clinical management of atopic dermatitis in infants and toddlers: a
survey of three physician specialties in the United States.

Saavedra JM(1), Boguniewicz M, Chamlin S, Lake A, Nedorost S, Czerkies LA, Patel 
V, Botteman MF, Horodniceanu EG.

Author information: 
(1)Nestle Nutrition, Florham Park, NJ; Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.
Electronic address: jose.saavedra@us.nestle.com.

Comment in
    J Pediatr. 2013 Dec;163(6):1547-8.

OBJECTIVE: To describe atopic dermatitis (AD) management patterns in children =36
months old as reported by pediatricians, dermatologists, and allergists in the
US.
STUDY DESIGN: A nationally-representative survey was administered to
pediatricians (n = 101), dermatologists (n = 26), and allergists (n = 26). Main
outcomes included referrals to health care professionals, suggested/ordered
laboratory tests, management approach (dietary, pharmacologic, or combination of 
both) by age, AD location, and severity.
RESULTS: Significant differences were observed in referrals to healthcare
professionals (P < .001). Pediatricians more frequently referred to
dermatologists than allergists in mild (52.4% vs 32.0%) and moderate/severe
(60.6% vs 38.1%) cases. Dermatologists referred to allergists less frequently for
mild (9.1%) than moderate/severe (40.7%) AD cases. Pediatricians (59%),
allergists (61.5%), and dermatologists (26.9%) reported treating at least some of
their patients with AD with dietary management (infant formula change) alone
(with or without emollients). Soy-based formulas were often used. For mild AD,
the most commonly reported first-line pharmacologic treatments included topical
emollients, topical corticosteroids, and barrier repair topical therapy/medical
devices. Over 80% of physicians used a dietary and pharmacologic combination
approach. Dermatologists were most likely to manage AD symptoms with a
pharmacologic-only approach. AD lesion location influenced pharmacologic
treatment in >80% of physicians.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant and distinct differences in AD treatment approach exist 
among physicians surveyed. Most pediatricians and allergists use formula change
as a management strategy in some patients, whereas dermatologists favor a
pharmacologic approach. This diversity may result from inadequate evidence for a 
standard approach. Consistent methods for managing AD are needed.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23953725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Allergy. 2013 Aug;68(8):1065-72. doi: 10.1111/all.12200. Epub 2013 Jul 30.

Tolerance of a cow's milk-based hydrolyzed formula in patients with eosinophilic 
esophagitis triggered by milk.

Lucendo AJ(1), Arias Á, González-Cervera J, Mota-Huertas T, Yagüe-Compadre JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital General de Tomelloso, Ciudad Real,
Spain. alucendo@vodafone.es

BACKGROUND: Cow's milk protein, a major food trigger for EoE in both children and
adults, should be continuously avoided once identified as such. This study
evaluates tolerance of a cow's milk-based extensively hydrolyzed formula (eHF)
with regard to disease remission maintenance in adult patients with
milk-triggered EoE.
METHODS: Seventeen adult patients in whom cow's milk was consecutively
demonstrated to trigger EoE after an empiric six-food elimination diet-based
study protocol and who subsequently maintained disease remission were
prospectively recruited. They were given 400 ml of a cow's milk-based eHF daily
for 8 weeks. Intraepithelial peak eosinophil and blood eosinophil counts,
esophageal-related symptoms, serum total and specific IgE to major milk proteins,
and eosinophil cationic protein were monitored before and after eHF intake.
RESULTS: Thirteen male and four female patients aged 17-56 completed the study
protocol. 15 patients (88.24%) achieved and maintained EoE remission, while an
infiltration of =15 eosinophils/hpf reappeared in the remaining two patients. No 
differences in age, gender, symptoms, and endoscopic appearance at baseline
conditions or personal/family allergic background were observed between those
patients who tolerated the eHF and those who did not. Symptom scores did not
significantly change after eHF intake and were significantly lower than those
documented at baseline conditions or after cow's milk challenge. No differences
were documented in blood eosinophil counts or serum markers after eHF intake.
CONCLUSION: Most adult patients with EoE triggered by cow's milk tolerate a cow's
milk-based eHF, thus providing them with a safe, economical alternative to cow's 
milk.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23906026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Acta Paediatr. 2013 Oct;102(10):990-8. doi: 10.1111/apa.12349. Epub 2013 Aug 5.

Treating cow's milk protein allergy: a double-blind randomized trial comparing
two extensively hydrolysed formulas with probiotics.

Vandenplas Y(1), Steenhout P, Planoudis Y, Grathwohl D; Althera Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Universitair KinderZiekenhuis Brussel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels,
Belgium. yvan.vandenplas@uzbrussel.be

AIM: The treatment for cow's milk protein allergy (CMPA) is a diet with an
extensive hydrolysate. This study aimed to determine whether a whey (eWH) or
casein hydrolysate (eCH) is the best option.
METHODS: Infants with suspected CMPA were treated with an eWH or eCH, and
efficacy was assessed with a symptom-based score developed by the authors.
Diagnosis of CMPA was based on a positive challenge. If positive, the same
eHF/eCH was continued. If negative, a standard starter and follow-up formula were
given up to the age of 12 months.
RESULTS: An open challenge was performed on 85/116 (73%) infants suspected of
CMPA on clinical grounds and was positive in 59/85 (69%). After 1 month, the
symptom-based scores in both groups showed significant statistical and clinical
reductions, and total and specific IgE and skin prick test results were similar. 
Both hydrolysates were enriched with probiotics, which were recovered in the
gastrointestinal flora. The eWH-Standard Formula sequence led to better growth at
the age of 1 year than the other three feeding regimens tested.
CONCLUSION: The eWH and eCH are equally effective. The symptom-based score is a
useful tool to evaluate the efficacy of dietary treatment in infants with CMPA.

©2013 Foundation Acta Paediatrica. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23837862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Alcohol. 2013 Sep;47(6):467-72. doi: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2013.05.006. Epub 2013 Jul
2.

Amelioration of ethanol-induced liver injury in rats by nanogold flakes.

Chen YL(1), Peng HC, Tan SW, Tsai CY, Huang YH, Wu HY, Yang SC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nutrition and Health Sciences, College of Public Health & Nutrition,
Taipei Medical University, 250 Wu-Hsing Street, Taipei 110, Taiwan.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the protective effects of nanogold
flakes against alcoholic liver disease. Six-week-old male Wistar rats were
divided into 6 groups: C (control liquid diet), CLF (control liquid diet with
gold flakes at 1.03 mg/kg body weight [BW]/day), CHF (control liquid diet with
gold flakes at 5.15 mg/kg BW/day), E (ethanol liquid diet), ELF (ethanol liquid
diet with gold flakes at 1.03 mg/kg BW/day), and EHF (ethanol liquid diet with
gold flakes at 5.15 mg/kg BW/day). The liquid diets were prepared daily. Gold
flakes were added to the ethanol 1 h before preparing the ethanol liquid diets,
as an aging process. After 10 weeks, rats in group E showed significantly higher 
plasma aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine transaminase (ALT) activities
than those in group C. A significantly increased concentration of hepatic
triglyceride (TG) was found in group E. Furthermore, higher hepatic glutathione
reductase (GRD), superoxide dismutase (SOD), and catalase (CAT) activities
together with higher tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a concentration and higher
hepatic cytochrome (CYP2E1) protein expression were also observed in group E. In 
contrast, the hepatic TG concentration in group EHF was significantly lower than 
that of group E. In addition, hepatic glutathione peroxidase (GPX), SOD, and CAT 
activities together with TNF-a concentration and hepatic CYP2E1 protein
expression in group EHF were significantly lower than those in group E. We
concluded that nanogold flakes might ameliorate alcohol-induced liver injury by
maintaining the hepatic antioxidative status. In addition, nanogold flakes may
reduce fat accumulation caused by chronic ethanol feeding via decreasing hepatic 
TNF-a.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23830375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Radiats Biol Radioecol. 2013 Mar-Apr;53(2):191-8.

[Ecological and biological characteristics of Drosophila melanogaster features
depending on the dose of electromagnetic radiation of various types].

[Article in Russian]

Babkina VV, Chernova GV, Allenova EA, Endebera OP, Naumkina EN.

Biological effects of exposure to red light (lambda = 660 +/- 10 nm) on the
viability and morphophysiological characteristics of Drosophila melanogaster have
been studied. The ability of this physical agent to modify these features is
shown. The degree of expression and impact of biological effects depend on the
dose, functional and genetic status of the organism. The study of the life
expectancy of the exposed to EHF and white light D. melanogaster has revealed
that expression of the features depends on the radiation doses, genotype, sex,
the nature of the position of wings and lighting conditions. It has been found
that the dark mode (24 h-night) is more favorable than the artificial lighting.
Individuals with the left wing at the top are more sensitive to the external
factors.

PMID: 23786033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Forensic Leg Med. 2013 Jul;20(5):408-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jflm.2012.12.005. Epub 
2013 Jan 18.

Using the Excess Heat Factor (EHF) to predict the risk of heat related deaths.

Langlois N(1), Herbst J, Mason K, Nairn J, Byard RW.

Author information: 
(1)Forensic Science South Australia, Adelaide, Australia. Neil.Langlois@sa.gov.au

Extremes of climate are not uncommon in Australia and heatwaves are not
infrequent. Periods of high ambient temperature may result in clusters of heat
related deaths, which may place strain on forensic facilities. This paper
describes the formulation of the Excess Heat Factor using meteorological data to 
provide a means of predicting death resulting from periods of extreme heat
stress. The 2009 South Australian heatwave had the highest ranked Excess Heat
Factor in Adelaide's records. There were 58 heat related deaths, with the bulk of
the heat related deaths following the peak Excess Heat Factor value (144 °C(2)). 
The 2008 heatwave had a lower peak Excess Heat Factor value (36 °C(2)); there was
only one heat related death, which followed the peak in the Excess Heat Factor.
It is proposed that calculation of the Excess Heat Factor from meteorological
data could provide a means to predict and identify heat related deaths resulting 
from extreme weather conditions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd and Faculty of Forensic and Legal Medicine. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 23756508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Indian J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2012 Jun;64(2):145-9. doi:
10.1007/s12070-012-0478-9. Epub 2012 Jan 15.

Extended high frequency audiometry in secretory otitis media.

Sharma D(1), Munjal SK, Panda NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department Of Otolaryngology, Room No. 441, Speech and Hearing Unit,
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), A Block, 4th
Floor, New OPD, PGIMER, Sec 12, Chandigarh, India.

The objective of the present study was to determine the status of extended high
frequencies in subjects with secretory otitis media. The study evaluated 30 ears 
of 20 subjects with secretory otitis media in the age group of 15-30 years. This 
data was compared with 20 ears of 10 volunteers of the same age group with
clinically normal hearing. Pure tone air conduction thresholds were analyzed in
three frequency groups: low frequency (LF: 0.25, 0.5, and 1 kHz), high frequency 
(HF: 2, 4, and 8 kHz) and extended high frequency (EHF: 10, 12, and 16 kHz). The 
results showed elevated extended high frequency thresholds (EHFG) as compared to 
control group and comparatively better thresholds at high frequencies(HFG)s as
compared to low (LFG)and extended high frequencies(EHFG) in the study group. This
validates the importance of including an extended high frequency audiometry in
the test battery of patients with secretory otitis media.

PMCID: PMC3392341
PMID: 23730575  [PubMed]


90. Ital J Pediatr. 2013 May 14;39:31. doi: 10.1186/1824-7288-39-31.

Food protein induced enterocolitis syndrome caused by rice beverage.

Caminiti L(1), Salzano G, Crisafulli G, Porcaro F, Pajno GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.

Food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES) is an uncommon and
potentially severe non IgE-mediated gastrointestinal food allergy. It is usually 
caused by cow's milk or soy proteins, but may also be triggered by ingestion of
solid foods. The diagnosis is made on the basis of clinical history and symptoms.
Management of acute phase requires fluid resuscitation and intravenous steroids
administration, but avoidance of offending foods is the only effective
therapeutic option.Infant with FPIES presented to our emergency department with
vomiting, watery stools, hypothension and metabolic acidosis after ingestion of
rice beverage. Intravenous fluids and steroids were administered with good
clinical response. Subsequently, a double blind placebo control food challenge
(DBPCFC) was performed using rice beverage and hydrolyzed formula (eHF) as
placebo. The "rice based formula" induced emesis, diarrhoea and lethargy.
Laboratory investigations reveal an increase of absolute count of neutrophils and
the presence of faecal eosinophils. The patient was treated with both intravenous
hydration and steroids. According to Powell criteria, oral food challenge was
considered positive and diagnosis of FPIES induced by rice beverage was made.
Patient was discharged at home with the indication to avoid rice and any rice
beverage as well as to reintroduce hydrolyzed formula. A case of FPIES induced by
rice beverage has never been reported. The present case clearly shows that also
beverage containing rice proteins can be responsible of FPIES. For this reason,
the use of rice beverage as cow's milk substitute for the treatment of non
IgE-mediated food allergy should be avoided.

PMCID: PMC3667091
PMID: 23672828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(1):557-63.

Gene expression profiling of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.

Subrungruanga I(1), Thawornkunob C, Chawalitchewinkoon-Petmitrc P, Pairojkul C,
Wongkham S, Petmitrb S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Nutrition and Food Science, Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) is ranked as one of the top five causes of 
cancer-related deaths. ICC in Thai patients is associated with infection with the
liver fluke, Opisthorchis viverrini, but the molecular basis for development
remains unclear. The present study employed a microarray approach to compare gene
expression profiles of ICCs and normal liver tissues from the same patients
residing in Northeast Thailand, a region with a high prevalence of liver fluke
infection. In ICC samples, 2,821 and 1,361 genes were found to be significantly
up- and down-regulated respectively (unpaired t-test, p<0.05; fold-change>2.0).
For validation of the microarray results, 7 up-regulated genes (FXYD3, GPRC5A,
CEACAM5, MUC13, EPCAM, TMC5, and EHF) and 3 down- regulated genes (CPS1, TAT, and
ITIH1) were selected for confirmation using quantitative RT-PCR, resulting in
100% agreement. The metallothionine heavy metal pathway contains the highest
percentage of genes with statistically significant changes in expression. This
study provides exon-level expression profiles in ICC that should be fruitful in
identifying novel genetic markers for classifying and possibly early diagnosis of
this highly fatal type of cholangiocarcinoma.

PMID: 23534794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Jun;131(6):1565-73. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2013.01.006.
Epub 2013 Mar 16.

Allergies in high-risk schoolchildren after early intervention with cow's milk
protein hydrolysates: 10-year results from the German Infant Nutritional
Intervention (GINI) study.

von Berg A(1), Filipiak-Pittroff B, Krämer U, Hoffmann B, Link E, Beckmann C,
Hoffmann U, Reinhardt D, Grübl A, Heinrich J, Wichmann HE, Bauer CP, Koletzko S, 
Berdel D; GINIplus study group.

Collaborators: Wichmann H, Heinrich J, Sausenthaler S, Zutavern A, Chen CM,
Schnappinger M, Rzehak P, Berdel D, von Berg A, Filipiak-Pittroff B, Beckmann C, 
Groß I, Koletzko S, Reinhard D, Krauss-Etschmann S, Bauer C, Brockow I, Grübl A, 
Hoffmann U, Krämer U, Link E, Cramer C, Behrendt H.

Author information: 
(1)Marien-Hospital Wesel, Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Wesel,
Germany. andrea.vonberg@prohomine.de

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Jun;131(6):1574-5.

BACKGROUND: The long-term effect of nutritional intervention with hydrolysate
infant formulas on allergic manifestations in high-risk children is uncertain.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to investigate the effect of hydrolysate infant formulas on 
allergic phenotypes in children with family history of allergies at school age.
METHODS: We analyzed data from participants of the prospective German Infant
Nutritional Intervention study after 10 years of follow-up. At birth, children
were randomly assigned to receive, for the first 4 months, one of 4 blinded
formulas as breast milk substitute, if necessary: partially hydrolyzed whey
formula (pHF-W), extensively hydrolyzed whey formula (eHF-W), extensively
hydrolyzed casein formula (eHF-C), or standard cow's milk formula. Outcomes were 
parent-reported, physician-diagnosed allergic diseases. Log-binomial regression
models were used for statistical analysis.
RESULTS: The relative risk for the cumulative incidence of any allergic disease
in the intention-to-treat analysis (n = 2252) was 0.87 (95% CI, 0.77-0.99) for
pHF-W, 0.94 (95% CI, 0.83-1.07) for eHF-W, and 0.83 (95% CI, 0.72-0.95) for eHF-C
compared with standard cow's milk formula. The corresponding figures for atopic
eczema/dermatits (AD) were 0.82 (95% CI, 0.68-1.00), 0.91 (95% CI, 0.76-1.10),
and 0.72 (95% CI, 0.58-0.88), respectively. In the per-protocol analysis (n =
988) effects were stronger. The period prevalence of AD at 7 to 10 years was
significantly reduced with eHF-C in this analysis, but there was no preventive
effect on asthma or allergic rhinitis.
CONCLUSION: The significant preventive effect on the cumulative incidence of
allergic diseases, particularly AD, with pHF-W and eHF-C persisted until 10 years
without rebound, whereas eHF-W showed no significant risk reduction. There is
insufficient evidence of ongoing preventive activity at 7 to 10 years of age.

Copyright © 2013 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23506844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Int J Radiat Biol. 2013 Aug;89(8):602-10. doi: 10.3109/09553002.2013.784426. Epub
2013 Apr 16.

Exposure of tumor-bearing mice to extremely high-frequency electromagnetic
radiation modifies the composition of fatty acids in thymocytes and tumor tissue.

Gapeyev AB(1), Kulagina TP, Aripovsky AV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow
Region, Russia. a_b_g@mail.ru

PURPOSE: To test the participation of fatty acids (FA) in antitumor effects of
extremely high-frequency electromagnetic radiation (EHF EMR), the changes in the 
FA composition in the thymus, liver, blood plasma, muscle tissue, and tumor
tissue in mice with Ehrlich solid carcinoma exposed to EHF EMR were studied.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Normal and tumor-bearing mice were exposed to EHF EMR with
effective parameters (42.2 GHz, 0.1 mW/cm2, 20 min daily during five consecutive 
days beginning the first day after the inoculation of tumor cells). Fatty acid
composition of various organs and tissues of mice were determined using a gas
chromatography.
RESULTS: It was shown that the exposure of normal mice to EHF EMR or tumor growth
significantly increased the content of monounsaturated FA (MUFA) and decreased
the content of polyunsaturated FA (PUFA) in all tissues examined. Exposure of
tumor-bearing mice to EHF EMR led to the recovery of FA composition in thymocytes
to the state that is typical for normal animals. In other tissues of
tumor-bearing mice, the exposure to EHF EMR did not induce considerable changes
that would be significantly distinguished between disturbances caused by EHF EMR 
exposure or tumor growth separately. In tumor tissue which is characterized by
elevated level of MUFA, the exposure to EHF EMR significantly decreased the
summary content of MUFA and increased the summary content of PUFA.
CONCLUSIONS: The recovery of the FA composition in thymocytes and the
modification of the FA composition in the tumor under the influence of EHF EMR on
tumor-bearing animals may have crucial importance for elucidating the mechanisms 
of antitumor effects of the electromagnetic radiation.

PMID: 23484905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Acta Ophthalmol. 2013 Mar;91 Thesis 2:1-47. doi: 10.1111/aos.12086.

Retinal oximetry.

Hardarson SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, University of Iceland, Iceland. sveinnha@hi.is

ABSTRACT.:PURPOSE: Malfunction of retinal blood flow or oxygenation is believed
to be involved in various diseases. Among them are retinal vessel occlusions,
diabetic retinopathy and glaucoma. Reliable, non-invasive technology for retinal 
oxygen measurements has been scarce and most of the knowledge on retinal
oxygenation comes from animal studies. This thesis describes human retinal
oximetry, performed with novel retinal oximetry technology. The thesis describes 
studies on retinal vessel oxygen saturation in (1) light and dark in healthy
volunteers, (2) central retinal vein occlusion, (3) branch retinal vein
occlusion, (4) central retinal artery occlusion, (5) diabetic retinopathy, (6)
patients undergoing glaucoma surgery and (7) patients taking glaucoma medication.
METHODS: The retinal oximeter (Oxymap ehf., Reykjavik, Iceland) is based on a
fundus camera. An attached image splitter allows the simultaneous capture of four
images of the same area of the fundus. Two images are used for further analysis, 
one acquired with 586 nm light and one with 605 nm light. Light absorbance of
retinal vessels is sensitive to oxygen saturation at 605 nm but not at 586 nm.
Measurement of reflected light at these wavelengths allows estimation of oxygen
saturation in the main retinal vessels. This is performed with custom-made
analysis software.
RESULTS: LIGHT AND DARK: After 30 min in the dark, oxygen saturation in retinal
arterioles of healthy volunteers was 92 ± 4% (mean ± SD, n = 15). After 5 min in 
80 cd/m(2) light, the arteriolar saturation was 89 ± 5%. The decrease was
statistically significant (p = 0.008). The corresponding values for retinal
venules were 60 ± 5% in the dark and 55 ± 10% in the light (p = 0.020). Similar
results were found after alternating 5 min periods of darkness and light. In a
second experiment (n = 19), a significant decrease in retinal vessel oxygen
saturation was found in 100 cd/m(2) light compared with darkness but 1 and
10 cd/m(2) light had no significant effect. CENTRAL RETINAL VEIN OCCLUSION: In
patients with central retinal vein occlusion, the mean saturation in affected
retinal venules was 49 ± 12%, while the mean value for venules in the fellow eye 
was 65 ± 6% (mean ± SD, p = 0.003, n = 8). The retinal arteriolar saturation was 
the same in affected (99 ± 3%) and the unaffected (99 ± 6%) eyes. The venous
oxygen saturation showed much variation between affected eyes. BRANCH RETINAL
VEIN OCCLUSION: Median oxygen saturation in venules affected by branch retinal
vein occlusion was 59% (range, 12-93%, n = 22), while it was 63% (23-80%) in
unaffected venules in the affected eye and 55% (39-80%) in venules in the fellow 
eye. The difference was not statistically significant (p > 0.05). There was a
significant difference between affected arterioles (median 101%; range, 89-115%) 
and unaffected arterioles (95%, 85-104%) in the affected eye (p < 0.05, n = 18). 
CENTRAL RETINAL ARTERY OCCLUSION: In a patient with a day's history of central
retinal artery occlusion due to temporal arteritis, the mean arteriolar
saturation was 71 ± 9% and 63 ± 9% in the venules. One month later, after
treatment with prednisolone, the mean arteriolar saturation was 100 ± 4% and the 
venous saturation 54 ± 5%. DIABETIC RETINOPATHY: When compared with healthy
volunteers (n = 31), patients with all categories of diabetic retinopathy had on 
average 7-10 percentage points higher saturation in retinal arterioles (p < 0.05 
for all categories, n = 6-8 in each category). In venules, the saturation was
8-12 percentage points higher (p < 0.05 for all categories). GLAUCOMA SURGERY:
Oxygen saturation in retinal arterioles increased by 2 percentage points on
average (p = 0.046, n = 19) with surgery, which lowered intraocular pressure from
23 ± 7 mmHg (mean ± SD) to 10 ± 4 mmHg (p < 0.0001). No other significant changes
were found (p = 0.35). DORZOLAMIDE: A significant reduction of 3 percentage
points was found in arterioles (p < 0.01) and venules (p < 0.05) when patients
with glaucoma or ocular hypertension changed from dorzolamide-timolol combination
eye drops to timolol alone (n = 6). No change was found in patients, who started 
on timolol and switched to the combination therapy (p > 0.05, n = 7).
CONCLUSIONS: Dual wavelength oximetry can be used to non-invasively measure
retinal vessel oxygen saturation in health and disease. The results indicate that
retinal vessel oxygen saturation is (1) increased in the dark, (2) lower in
venules affected by central retinal vein occlusions, (3) variable in branch
retinal vein occlusion, (4) lower in retinal arterioles in central retinal artery
occlusion, (5) increased in diabetic retinopathy, (6-7) mildly affected by
glaucoma surgery or dorzolamide.

© 2013 The Author. Acta Ophthalmologica © 2013 Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica 
Foundation.

PMID: 23470088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 12;288(15):10395-405. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.437475. Epub
2013 Feb 25.

The SRC family tyrosine kinase HCK and the ETS family transcription factors SPIB 
and EHF regulate transcytosis across a human follicle-associated epithelium
model.

Asai T(1), Morrison SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, UCLA, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA. neaki.asai@ucla.edu

A critical step in the induction of adaptive mucosal immunity is antigen
transcytosis, in which luminal antigens are transported to organized lymphoid
tissues across the follicle-associated epithelium (FAE) of Peyer's patches.
However, virtually nothing is known about intracellular signaling proteins and
transcription factors that regulate apical-to-basolateral transcytosis. The FAE
can transcytose a variety of luminal contents, including inert particles, in the 
absence of specific opsonins. Furthermore, it expresses receptors for secretory
immunoglobulin A (SIgA), the main antibody in mucosal secretions, and uses them
to efficiently transcytose SIgA-opsonized particles present in the lumen. Using a
human FAE model, we show that the tyrosine kinase HCK regulates
apical-to-basolateral transcytosis of non-opsonized and SIgA-opsonized particles.
We also show that, in cultured intestinal epithelial cells, ectopic expression of
the transcription factor SPIB or EHF is sufficient to activate HCK-dependent
apical-to-basolateral transcytosis of these particles. Our results provide the
first molecular insights into the intracellular regulation of antigen sampling at
mucosal surfaces.

PMCID: PMC3624422
PMID: 23439650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Rev Saude Publica. 2012 Dec;46(6):969-77. Epub 2013 Jan 28.

[Leprosy-related disabilities after release from multidrug treatment: prevalence 
and spatial distribution].

[Article in Portuguese]

Nardi SM(1), Paschoal Vdel A, Chiaravalloti-Neto F, Zanetta DM.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Laboratório Regional, Instituto Adolfo Lutz, São José do Rio Preto, 
São Paulo, Brasil. snardi@ial.sp.gov.br

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the frequency of people with leprosy-related physical
disabilities after release from multidrug treatment and to analyze their spatial 
distribution.
METHODS: Descriptive cross-sectional study with 232 leprosy patients treated
between 1998 and 2006. Physical disabilities were assessed using the World Health
Organization disability grading and the eye-hand-foot (EHF) sum score. The
residential address of patients and rehabilitation centers were geocoded. It was 
estimated the overall frequency of physical disability and frequency by
disability grade (grade 0, grade 1, and grade 2) according to the WHO disability 
grading taking into consideration clinical and sociodemographic variables in the 
descriptive analysis. Student's t-test, chi-square test (<U+03C7>2), and Fisher's test
were used as appropriate at a 5% significance level.
RESULTS: Of the patients studied, 51.6% were female, mean age 54 years old (SD
15.7), 30.5% had less than 2 years of formal education, 43.5% were employed, and 
26.9% were retired. Borderline leprosy was the most prevalent form of leprosy
(39.9%). A total of 32% of these patients had disabilities according to the WHO
disability grading and the EHF score. Disabilities increased with age (p =
0.029), they were more common in patients with multibacillary leprosy (p = 0.005)
and poor self-rated physical health (p < 0.001). Those who required
prevention/rehabilitation care traveled on average 5.5 km to the rehabilitation
center. People with physical disabilities lived scattered across the city but
they were mostly concentrated in the most densely populated and socioeconomically
deprived area.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a high frequency of people with leprosy-related
disabilities after release from multidrug therapy. Prevention and rehabilitation 
actions should target uneducated and older patients, those who had multibacillary
forms of leprosy and poor self-rated physical health. The travel distance to
rehabilitation centers calls for reorganization of local care networks.

PMID: 23358621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Onderstepoort J Vet Res. 2012 Jun 20;79(2):451. doi: 10.4102/ojvr.v79i2.451.

Ebola virus outbreaks in Africa: past and present.

Muyembe-Tamfum JJ(1), Mulangu S, Masumu J, Kayembe JM, Kemp A, Paweska JT.

Author information: 
(1)Institut national de Recherche Biomédicale, Kinshasa I.
justin.masumu@sacids.org.

Ebola haemorrhagic fever (EHF) is a zoonosis affecting both human and non-human
primates (NHP). Outbreaks in Africa occur mainly in the Congo and Nile basins.
The first outbreaks of EHF occurred nearly simultaneously in 1976 in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC, former Zaire) and Sudan with very high
case fatality rates of 88% and 53%, respectively. The two outbreaks were caused
by two distinct species of Ebola virus named Zaire ebolavirus (ZEBOV) and Sudan
ebolavirus (SEBOV). The source of transmission remains unknown. After a long
period of silence (1980-1993), EHF outbreaks in Africa caused by the two species 
erupted with increased frequency and new species were discovered, namely Côte
d'Ivoire ebolavirus (CIEBOV) in 1994 in the Ivory Coast and Bundibugyo ebolavirus
(BEBOV) in 2007 in Uganda. The re-emergence of EHF outbreaks in Gabon and
Republic of the Congo were concomitant with an increase in mortality amongst
gorillas and chimpanzees infected with ZEBOV. The human outbreaks were related to
multiple, unrelated index cases who had contact with dead gorillas or
chimpanzees. However, in areas where NHP were rare or absent, as in Kikwit (DRC) 
in 1995, Mweka (DRC) in 2007, Gulu (Uganda) in 2000 and Yambio (Sudan) in 2004,
the hunting and eating of fruit bats may have resulted in the primary
transmission of Ebola virus to humans. Human-to-human transmission is associated 
with direct contact with body fluids or tissues from an infected subject or
contaminated objects. Despite several, often heroic field studies, the
epidemiology and ecology of Ebola virus, including identification of its natural 
reservoir hosts, remains a formidable challenge for public health and scientific 
communities.

PMID: 23327370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Acta Ophthalmol. 2014 Mar;92(2):105-10. doi: 10.1111/aos.12011. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Oximetry in glaucoma: correlation of metabolic change with structural and
functional damage.

Vandewalle E(1), Abegão Pinto L, Olafsdottir OB, De Clerck E, Stalmans P, Van
Calster J, Zeyen T, Stefánsson E, Stalmans I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Ophthalmology, KULeuven, Leuven, BelgiumDepartment of
Ophthalmology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, BelgiumDepartment of
Pharmacology and Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine, Lisbon University, Lisbon,
PortugalDepartment of Ophthalmology, Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Central, Lisbon,
PortugalDepartment of Ophthalmology, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.

PURPOSE: To determine whether retinal vessel oxygen saturation in patients with
glaucoma is associated with structural optic disc and retinal nerve fibre layer
(RNFL) changes and visual field (VF) defects.
METHODS: Fifty-nine patients with confirmed glaucoma were recruited at University
Hospitals Leuven. Retinal oxygen saturation in patients with glaucoma was
measured with a noninvasive spectrophotometric retinal oximeter (Oxymap ehf,
Reykjavik, Iceland). VF and Heidelberg retinal tomographies (HRTs) were performed
on the same day. Statistical analysis was performed using Student's t-test and
Pearson's or Spearman correlation coefficient.
RESULTS: The mean oxygen saturation in venules was higher in patients with severe
VF defects compared to those patients with mild VF defects (69 ± 3% versus 65 ±
6% respectively; p = 0.0003; n = 59). Accordingly, the arteriovenous (AV)
difference in oxygen saturation was lower in patients with worse VF compared to
those with better VF (29 ± 3% versus 33 ± 6% respectively; p = 0.002). The oxygen
saturation in venules correlated with the VF mean defects (r = -0.42; p = 0.001; 
n = 59) as well as with the structural HRT parameters rim area and RNFL thickness
(r = -0.39; p = 0.008 and r = -0.26; p = 0.05 respectively; n = 53). The AV
difference decreased significantly as the VF defect worsened (r = 0.38; p =
0.003), as the rim area diminished (r = 0.29; p = 0.03) and as the RNFL thickness
decreased (r = 0.27; p = 0.05). No correlation was found between the oxygen
saturation in retinal arterioles and either of these parameters.
CONCLUSION: Severe glaucomatous damage is associated with increased oxygen
saturation in retinal venules and decreased AV difference in oxygen saturation.
These data suggest that in eyes with severe glaucomatous damage, reduced retinal 
oxygen consumption is consistent with tissue loss.

© 2013 The Authors. Acta Ophthalmologica © 2013 Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica
Foundation.

PMID: 23323611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52986. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052986. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Clinical manifestations and case management of Ebola haemorrhagic fever caused by
a newly identified virus strain, Bundibugyo, Uganda, 2007-2008.

Roddy P(1), Howard N, Van Kerkhove MD, Lutwama J, Wamala J, Yoti Z, Colebunders
R, Palma PP, Sterk E, Jeffs B, Van Herp M, Borchert M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Departments of Médecins Sans Frontières, Barcelona, Spain.
roddypd@gmail.com

A confirmed Ebola haemorrhagic fever (EHF) outbreak in Bundibugyo, Uganda,
November 2007-February 2008, was caused by a putative new species (Bundibugyo
ebolavirus). It included 93 putative cases, 56 laboratory-confirmed cases, and 37
deaths (CFR<U+200A>=<U+200A>25%). Study objectives are to describe clinical manifestations and 
case management for 26 hospitalised laboratory-confirmed EHF patients. Clinical
findings are congruous with previously reported EHF infections. The most
frequently experienced symptoms were non-bloody diarrhoea (81%), severe headache 
(81%), and asthenia (77%). Seven patients reported or were observed with
haemorrhagic symptoms, six of whom died. Ebola care remains difficult due to the 
resource-poor setting of outbreaks and the infection-control procedures required.
However, quality data collection is essential to evaluate case definitions and
therapeutic interventions, and needs improvement in future epidemics.
Organizations usually involved in EHF case management have a particular
responsibility in this respect.

PMCID: PMC3532309
PMID: 23285243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Morfologiia. 2013;144(5):25-9.

[Structural reorganization of the myocardium in ovariectomized rats with
experimental heart failure after melatonin administration].

[Article in Russian]

Liskova IuV, Salikova SP, Stadnikov AA.

The aim of the study was to examine the reorganization of left ventricular
myocardium (LVM) in ovariectomized rats with experimental heart failure (EHF) as 
affected by melatonin administration. Rat LVM was studied using the methods of
light microscopy, immunocytochemistry and morphometry. At day 14 of EHF, marked
heteromorphism of contractile cardiomyocytes (CMC), signs of dystrophy,
overcontraction and damage of muscle fibers, karyopyknosis, paranuclear edema,
local sarcoplasm destruction were detected together with CMC showing signs of
apoptosis. At day 28 after EHF modeling, a further increase in the number of CMC 
with significant changes in the morphological and tinctorial properties was found
as well as the cells with signs of apoptosis. In rats given melatonin for 14
days, there was a regression of pathological changes, with the decrease in the
hypertrophy of CMC and their nuclei, reduction of the number of CMC with the
signs of apoptosis. Cardioprotective effect of melatonin on LVM of ovariectomized
rats with EHF is discussed.

PMID: 24592713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Med Sci Monit. 2012 Dec;18(12):CR765-70.

The relationship between distortion product otoacoustic emissions and extended
high-frequency audiometry in tinnitus patients. Part 1: normally hearing patients
with unilateral tinnitus.

Fabijanska A(1), Smurzynski J, Hatzopoulos S, Kochanek K, Bartnik G, Raj-Koziak
D, Mazzoli M, Skarzynski PH, Jedrzejczak WW, Szkielkowska A, Skarzynski H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to evaluate distortion product otoacoustic 
emissions (DPOAEs) and extended high-frequency (EHF) thresholds in a control
group and in patients with normal hearing sensitivity in the conventional
frequency range and reporting unilateral tinnitus.
MATERIAL/METHODS: Seventy patients were enrolled in the study: 47 patients with
tinnitus in the left ear (Group 1) and 23 patients with tinnitus in the right ear
(Group 2). The control group included 60 otologically normal subjects with no
history of pathological tinnitus. Pure-tone thresholds were measured at all
standard frequencies from 0.25 to 8 kHz, and at 10, 12.5, 14, and 16 kHz. The
DPOAEs were measured in the frequency range from approximately 0.5 to 9 kHz using
the primary tones presented at 65/55 dB SPL.
RESULTS: The left ears of patients in Group 1 had higher median hearing
thresholds than those in the control subjects at all 4 EHFs, and lower mean DPOAE
levels than those in the controls for almost all primary frequencies, but
significantly lower only in the 2-kHz region. Median hearing thresholds in the
right ears of patients in Group 2 were higher than those in the right ears of the
control subjects in the EHF range at 12.5, 14, and 16 kHz. The mean DPOAE levels 
in the right ears were lower in patients from Group 2 than those in the controls 
for the majority of primary frequencies, but only reached statistical
significance in the 8-kHz region.
CONCLUSIONS: Hearing thresholds in tinnitus ears with normal hearing sensitivity 
in the conventional range were higher in the EHF region than those in
non-tinnitus control subjects, implying that cochlear damage in the basal region 
may result in the perception of tinnitus. In general, DPOAE levels in tinnitus
ears were lower than those in ears of non-tinnitus subjects, suggesting that
subclinical cochlear impairment in limited areas, which can be revealed by DPOAEs
but not by conventional audiometry, may exist in tinnitus ears. For patients with
tinnitus, DPOAE measures combined with behavioral EHF hearing thresholds may
provide additional clinical information about the status of the peripheral
hearing.

PMCID: PMC3560797
PMID: 23197241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49577. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049577. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

Expression of ESE-3 isoforms in immunogenic and tolerogenic human
monocyte-derived dendritic cells.

Sprater F(1), Hovden AO, Appel S.

Author information: 
(1)Broegelmann Research Laboratory, The Gade Institute, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway.

Dendritic cells (DC) are the only hematopoietic cells expressing the epithelial
specific Ets transcription factor ESE-3. Here we analyzed presence and quantity
of isoforms ESE-3a, ESE-3b and ESE-3j in various immunogenic and tolerogenic
human monocyte-derived DC (moDC) and blood DC populations using quantitative real
time PCR and immunoblot analyses. ESE-3a and ESE-3b were detectable in all moDC
populations with ESE-3b being the main transcript. ESE-3b expression was
upregulated in immunogenic moDC and downregulated in tolerogenic moDC compared to
immature moDC. ESE-3a had similar transcript levels in immature and immunogenic
moDC and had very low levels in tolerogenic moDC. In blood DC populations only
splice variant ESE-3b was detectable. ESE-3j was not detectable in any of the DC 
populations. These findings suggest that ESE-3b is the functionally most
important ESE-3 isoform in DC.

PMCID: PMC3501485
PMID: 23185370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Infect Dis. 2013 Jan 15;207(2):306-18. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jis626. Epub 2012
Oct 8.

A Syrian golden hamster model recapitulating ebola hemorrhagic fever.

Ebihara H(1), Zivcec M, Gardner D, Falzarano D, LaCasse R, Rosenke R, Long D,
Haddock E, Fischer E, Kawaoka Y, Feldmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NID),
Rocky Mountain Laboratories (RML), Hamilton, Montana 59840, USA.
ebiharah@niaid.nih.gov

Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) is a severe viral infection for which no effective 
treatment or vaccine is currently available. While the nonhuman primate (NHP)
model is used for final evaluation of experimental vaccines and therapeutic
efficacy, rodent models have been widely used in ebolavirus research because of
their convenience. However, the validity of rodent models has been questioned
given their low predictive value for efficacy testing of vaccines and
therapeutics, a result of the inconsistent manifestation of coagulopathy seen in 
EHF. Here, we describe a lethal Syrian hamster model of EHF using mouse-adapted
Ebola virus. Infected hamsters displayed most clinical hallmarks of EHF,
including severe coagulopathy and uncontrolled host immune responses. Thus, the
hamster seems to be superior to the existing rodent models, offering a better
tool for understanding the critical processes in pathogenesis and providing a new
model for evaluating prophylactic and postexposure interventions prior to testing
in NHPs.

PMCID: PMC3532827
PMID: 23045629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Acta Ophthalmol. 2013 Dec;91(8):733-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-3768.2012.02545.x.
Epub 2012 Sep 23.

Phenylephrine 5% added to tropicamide 0.5% eye drops does not influence retinal
oxygen saturation values or retinal vessel diameter in glaucoma patients.

Vandewalle E(1), Abegão Pinto L, Olafsdottir OB, Stalmans I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Ophthalmology, KU Leuven, Leuven, BelgiumDepartment of
Ophthalmology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, BelgiumDepartment of
Ophthalmology, Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Central, Lisbon, PortugalDepartment of
Ophthalmology, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.

PURPOSE: To test whether adding topical phenylephrine 5% to tropicamide 0.5% eye 
drops in the protocol for pupil dilation affects the retinal vessel oximeter
measurements in patients with glaucoma. To test whether phenylephrine 5% has an
influence as a vasoconstrictor on the retinal vessel width and can improve the
proportion of high-quality retinal images in patients with glaucoma.
METHODS: Retinal images of 66 patients with chronic open-angle glaucoma were
obtained before and after the administration of phenylephrine 5% eye drops to
patients already dilated with tropicamide 0.5% with the Oxymap Retinal Oximeter
(Oxymap ehf, Reykjavik, Iceland). Specialized software, Oxymap Analyzer, analysed
the images and measured the oxygen saturation and vessel diameter. Oxygen
saturation was measured in first- and second-degree vessels. A Mann-Whitney
U-test was used to compare both groups. Quality of the images was assessed, and a
Fisher's exact test was used to compare the proportion of high- and poor-quality 
images.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference in arterial and venous oxygen
saturation in patients with glaucoma whether dilated by tropicamide alone or a
combination of tropicamide and phenylephrine (97 ± 6% versus 96 ± 5%, p = 0.88
for arterial saturation and 66 ± 6% versus 67 ± 6%, p = 0.78 for venous
saturation, n = 27). There was no significant difference in vessel diameter
between both conditions for the different vessels (p = 0.61 for arterial
saturation and p = 0.51 for venous saturation, n = 27). The proportion of
high-quality images was significantly higher after the combination regimen
compared with tropicamide only (p = 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: The addition of topical phenylephrine 5% after tropicamide 0.5%
improved the proportion of high-quality retinal oximetry images without
influencing the retinal oxygen saturation values or the retinal vessel diameter
in patients with glaucoma.

© 2012 The Authors. Acta Ophthalmologica © 2012 Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica
Foundation.

PMID: 22998076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Anticancer Res. 2012 Sep;32(9):3629-41.

Whole-transcriptome analysis reveals established and novel associations with
TMPRSS2:ERG fusion in prostate cancer.

Chow A(1), Amemiya Y, Sugar L, Nam R, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, ON,
Canada.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Shortcomings of current methods of prostate cancer detection call
for improved biomarkers. The transmembrane protease, serine 2:ets-related gene
(TMPRSS2:ERG) gene fusion leads to the overexpression of ERG, an E-twenty six
(ETS) family transcription factor, and is the most prevalent genetic lesion in
prostate cancer, but its clinical utility remains unclear.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two radical prostatectomy samples were analysed by
next-generation whole-transcriptome sequencing. The chosen samples differed in
fusion gene status, as previously determined by reverse transcription polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Next-generation sequencing identified the involvement of novel and
previously reported prostate cancer-related transcripts, the WNT signalling
pathway, evasion of p53-mediated anti-proliferation and several ETS-regulated
pathways in the prostate cancer cases examined. Overexpression of Rho
GDP-dissociation inhibitor (RhoGDIB), a gene associated with fusion-positive
prostate cancer, was found to elicit spindle-shaped morphology, faster cell
migration and increased cell proliferation, phenotypic changes suggestive of
cancer progression.
CONCLUSION: The present findings confirm the value of comprehensive sequencing
for biomarker development and provide potential avenues of future study.

PMID: 22993300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2012 Jun;6(6):e1546. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001546. Epub 
2012 Jun 26.

Ebola and Marburg hemorrhagic fevers: neglected tropical diseases?

MacNeil A(1), Rollin PE.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA. aho3@cdc.gov

Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) and Marburg hemorrhagic fever (MHF) are rare viral 
diseases, endemic to central Africa. The overall burden of EHF and MHF is small
in comparison to the more common protozoan, helminth, and bacterial diseases
typically referred to as neglected tropical diseases (NTDs). However, EHF and MHF
outbreaks typically occur in resource-limited settings, and many aspects of these
outbreaks are a direct consequence of impoverished conditions. We will discuss
aspects of EHF and MHF disease, in comparison to the "classic" NTDs, and examine 
potential ways forward in the prevention and control of EHF and MHF in
sub-Saharan Africa, as well as examine the potential for application of novel
vaccines or antiviral drugs for prevention or control of EHF and MHF among
populations at highest risk for disease.

PMCID: PMC3385614
PMID: 22761967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Nano Lett. 2012 Aug 8;12(8):4140-5. doi: 10.1021/nl301699k. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

Self-aligned, extremely high frequency III-V metal-oxide-semiconductor
field-effect transistors on rigid and flexible substrates.

Wang C(1), Chien JC, Fang H, Takei K, Nah J, Plis E, Krishna S, Niknejad AM,
Javey A.

Author information: 
(1)Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California,
Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

This paper reports the radio frequency (RF) performance of InAs nanomembrane
transistors on both mechanically rigid and flexible substrates. We have employed 
a self-aligned device architecture by using a T-shaped gate structure to
fabricate high performance InAs metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect
transistors (MOSFETs) with channel lengths down to 75 nm. RF measurements reveal 
that the InAs devices made on a silicon substrate exhibit a cutoff frequency
(f(t)) of ~165 GHz, which is one of the best results achieved in III-V MOSFETs on
silicon. Similarly, the devices fabricated on a bendable polyimide substrate
provide a f(t) of ~105 GHz, representing the best performance achieved for
transistors fabricated directly on mechanically flexible substrates. The results 
demonstrate the potential of III-V-on-insulator platform for extremely
high-frequency (EHF) electronics on both conventional silicon and flexible
substrates.

PMID: 22746202  [PubMed]


108. Oncogene. 2013 May 2;32(18):2315-24, 2324.e1-4. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.245. Epub
2012 Jun 25.

Aberrant expression of the neuronal-specific protein DCDC2 promotes malignant
phenotypes and is associated with prostate cancer progression.

Longoni N(1), Kunderfranco P, Pellini S, Albino D, Mello-Grand M, Pinton S,
D'Ambrosio G, Sarti M, Sessa F, Chiorino G, Catapano CV, Carbone GM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oncology Research (IOR) and Oncology Institute of Southern
Switzerland (IOSI), Bellinzona, Switzerland.

By integrating gene profiling and immunohistochemical data with functional
experiments in cell lines in this study we show for the first time that
doublecortin (DCX) domain containing 2 (DCDC2), a protein belonging to the DCX
family and involved in neuronal cell migration, is aberrantly expressed in
prostate tumors whereas absent in normal prostate. Furthermore, in patients
treated with radical prostatectomy, high levels of DCDC2 RNA were significantly
associated with increased biochemical relapse (LogRank Mantel-Cox=0.012).
Mechanistically, we found that the ETS transcription factor ESE3/EHF, which is
expressed in normal prostate and frequently lost in prostate tumors, maintained
DCDC2 repressed by binding to a novel identified ETS binding site in the gene
promoter. Consistently, in prostate tumors and in cellular models of gain and
loss of ESE3/EHF, the expression of DCDC2 and ESE3/EHF were inversely correlated.
In prostate cancer cells, DCDC2 colocalized with microtubules and promoted cell
migration and resistance to the microtubule-targeting drug taxol. Collectively,
this study establishes DCDC2 as a novel ESE3/EHF oncogenic target in prostate
cancer. These findings may be relevant for the clinical management of prostate
cancer as DCDC2 may signal tumors more prone to relapse and resistant to taxol
treatment.

PMID: 22733135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Med Econ. 2012;15(6):1064-77. doi: 10.3111/13696998.2012.697085. Epub 2012 Jun 
12.

Cost-effectiveness of partially-hydrolyzed formula for prevention of atopic
dermatitis in Australia.

Su J(1), Prescott S, Sinn J, Tang M, Smith P, Heine RG, Spieldenner J, Iskedjian 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Royal Children's Hospital, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia; Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.

Erratum in
    J Med Econ. 2012;15(6):1077.

OBJECTIVE: To perform an economic evaluation of a specific brand of partially
hydrolyzed infant formula (PHF-W) in the prevention of atopic dermatitis (AD)
among Australian infants.
METHODS: A cost-effectiveness analysis was undertaken from the perspectives of
the Department of Health and Aging (DHA), of the family of the affected subject
and of society as a whole in Australia, based on a decision-analytic model
following a hypothetical representative cohort of Australian newborns who are not
exclusively breastfed and who have a familial history of allergic disease (i.e., 
are deemed 'at risk'). Costs, consequences, and incremental cost-effectiveness
ratios (ICER) were calculated for PHF-W vs standard cow's milk based infant
formula (SF), and, in a secondary analysis, vs extensively hydrolyzed infant
formula (EHF-Whey), when the latter was used for the prevention of AD.
RESULTS: From a representative starting cohort of 87,724 'at risk' newborns in
Australia in 2009, the expected ICERs for PHF-W vs SF were AU$496 from the
perspective of the DHA and savings of AUD1739 and AU$1243 from the family and
societal perspectives, respectively. When compared to EHF-Whey, PHF-W was
associated with savings for the cohort of AU$5,183,474 and AU$6,736,513 from the 
DHA and societal perspectives.
LIMITATIONS: The generalizability and transferability of results to other
settings, populations, or brands of infant formula should be made with caution.
Whenever possible, a conservative approach directing bias against PHF-W rather
than its comparators was applied in the base case analysis. Assumptions were
verified in one-way and probabilistic sensitivity analyses, which confirmed the
robustness of the model.
CONCLUSIONS: PHF-W appears to be cost-effective when compared to SF from the DHA 
perspective, dominant over SF from the other perspectives, and dominant over
EHF-Whey from all perspectives, in the prevention of AD in 'at risk' infants not 
exclusively breastfed, in Australia.

PMID: 22630113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e36192. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036192. Epub 2012 Apr 27.

Protective efficacy of neutralizing monoclonal antibodies in a nonhuman primate
model of Ebola hemorrhagic fever.

Marzi A(1), Yoshida R, Miyamoto H, Ishijima M, Suzuki Y, Higuchi M, Matsuyama Y, 
Igarashi M, Nakayama E, Kuroda M, Saijo M, Feldmann F, Brining D, Feldmann H,
Takada A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, Division of Intramural
Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Hamilton, Montana, USA.

Ebola virus (EBOV) is the causative agent of severe hemorrhagic fever in
primates, with human case fatality rates up to 90%. Today, there is neither a
licensed vaccine nor a treatment available for Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF).
Single monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) specific for Zaire ebolavirus (ZEBOV) have
been successfully used in passive immunization experiments in rodent models, but 
have failed to protect nonhuman primates from lethal disease. In this study, we
used two clones of human-mouse chimeric MAbs (ch133 and ch226) with strong
neutralizing activity against ZEBOV and evaluated their protective potential in a
rhesus macaque model of EHF. Reduced viral loads and partial protection were
observed in animals given MAbs ch133 and ch226 combined intravenously at 24 hours
before and 24 and 72 hours after challenge. MAbs circulated in the blood of a
surviving animal until virus-induced IgG responses were detected. In contrast,
serum MAb concentrations decreased to undetectable levels at terminal stages of
disease in animals that succumbed to infection, indicating substantial
consumption of these antibodies due to virus replication. Accordingly, the rapid 
decrease of serum MAbs was clearly associated with increased viremia in
non-survivors. Our results indicate that EBOV neutralizing antibodies,
particularly in combination with other therapeutic strategies, might be
beneficial in reducing viral loads and prolonging disease progression during EHF.

PMCID: PMC3338609
PMID: 22558378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Emerg Health Threats J. 2012;5. doi: 10.3402/ehtj.v5i0.9134. Epub 2012 Apr 30.

Dead or alive: animal sampling during Ebola hemorrhagic fever outbreaks in
humans.

Olson SH(1), Reed P, Cameron KN, Ssebide BJ, Johnson CK, Morse SS, Karesh WB,
Mazet JA, Joly DO.

Author information: 
(1)Wildlife Health Program, Wildlife Conservation Society, Nanaimo, BC, Canada.

There are currently no widely accepted animal surveillance guidelines for human
Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) outbreak investigations to identify potential
sources of Ebolavirus (EBOV) spillover into humans and other animals. Animal
field surveillance during and following an outbreak has several purposes, from
helping identify the specific animal source of a human case to guiding control
activities by describing the spatial and temporal distribution of wild
circulating EBOV, informing public health efforts, and contributing to broader
EHF research questions. Since 1976, researchers have sampled over 10,000
individual vertebrates from areas associated with human EHF outbreaks and tested 
for EBOV or antibodies. Using field surveillance data associated with EHF
outbreaks, this review provides guidance on animal sampling for resource-limited 
outbreak situations, target species, and in some cases which diagnostics should
be prioritized to rapidly assess the presence of EBOV in animal reservoirs. In
brief, EBOV detection was 32.7% (18/55) for carcasses (animals found dead) and
0.2% (13/5309) for live captured animals. Our review indicates that for the
purposes of identifying potential sources of transmission from animals to humans 
and isolating suspected virus in an animal in outbreak situations, (1)
surveillance of free-ranging non-human primate mortality and morbidity should be 
a priority, (2) any wildlife morbidity or mortality events should be investigated
and may hold the most promise for locating virus or viral genome sequences, (3)
surveillance of some bat species is worthwhile to isolate and detect evidence of 
exposure, and (4) morbidity, mortality, and serology studies of domestic animals 
should prioritize dogs and pigs and include testing for virus and previous
exposure.

PMCID: PMC3342678
PMID: 22558004  [PubMed]


112. Cancer Res. 2012 Jun 1;72(11):2889-900. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0212. Epub 
2012 Apr 13.

ESE3/EHF controls epithelial cell differentiation and its loss leads to prostate 
tumors with mesenchymal and stem-like features.

Albino D(1), Longoni N, Curti L, Mello-Grand M, Pinton S, Civenni G, Thalmann G, 
D'Ambrosio G, Sarti M, Sessa F, Chiorino G, Catapano CV, Carbone GM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oncology Research and Oncology Institute of Southern Switzerland,
Bellinzona, Switzerland.

Cancer stem cells (CSC) play a significant role in tumor progression, disease
recurrence, and treatment failure. Here, we show that the endogenously expressed 
ETS transcription factor ESE3/EHF controls prostate epithelial cell
differentiation and stem-like potential. We found that loss of ESE3/EHF induced
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), stem-like features, and
tumor-initiating and metastatic properties in prostate epithelial cells, and
reexpression of ESE3/EHF inhibited the stem-like properties and tumorigenic
potential of prostate cancer cells. Mechanistically, ESE3/EHF repressed the
expression of key EMT and CSC genes, including TWIST1, ZEB2, BMI1, and POU5F1.
Analysis of human tissue microarrays showed that reduced ESE3/EHF expression is
an early event in tumorigenesis, frequently occurring independently of other ETS 
gene alterations. Additional analyses linked loss of ESE3/EHF expression to a
distinct group of prostate tumors with distinctive molecular and biologic
characteristics, including increased expression of EMT and CSC genes. Low
ESE3/EHF expression was also associated with increased biochemical recurrence of 
prostate cancer and reduced overall survival after prostatectomy. Collectively,
our findings define a key role for ESE3/EHF in the development of a subset of
prostate tumors and highlight the clinical importance of identifying molecularly 
defined tumor subgroups.

©2012 AACR

PMID: 22505649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. AIDS Res Ther. 2012 Mar 9;9(1):6. doi: 10.1186/1742-6405-9-6.

Assessment of HBV flare in a randomized clinical trial in HIV/HBV coinfected
subjects initiating HBV-active antiretroviral therapy in Thailand.

Avihingsanon A(1), Matthews GV, Lewin SR, Marks P, Sasadeusz J, Cooper DA, Bowden
S, Locarnini S, Dore GJ, Ruxrungtham K.

Author information: 
(1)The Kirby Institute for infection and immunity in society, University of New
South Wales, Sydney, Australia. gmatthews@kirby.unsw.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Hepatic Flare (HF) after initiation of highly active antiretroviral
therapy (HAART) in HIV-HBV coinfected individuals is well recognized but
prospective data on predictors and subsequent outcome are limited.
METHODS: The Tenofovir in HIV-HBV coinfection study was a randomized clinical
trial of HBV-active HAART including lamivudine and/or tenofovir in antiretroviral
naïve HIV-HBV individuals in Thailand.
RESULTS: Early HF (EHF) was defined as ALT > 5 × ULN during the first 12 weeks.
EHF was observed in 8 (22%) of individuals at a median of 56 days. 6/8 EHF cases 
were asymptomatic and resolved with HAART continuation, however one subject with 
underlying cirrhosis died following rapid hepatic decompensation. EHF was
significantly associated with higher baseline ALT (79 IU/L vs 36 IU/L non-EHF, p 
= 0.008) and HBV DNA (9.9 log10 c/ml vs 8.4 log10 c/ml non EHF, p = 0.009), and
subsequent serological change. HBeAg loss occurred in 75% of EHF cases versus 22%
in non-EHF (p = 0.04), and HBsAg loss in 25% of EHF cases versus 4% of non-EHF (p
= 0.053).
CONCLUSION: EHF after HBV active HAART initiation was frequently observed in this
population. Timing of EHF, association with elevated ALT and HBV DNA and high
rate of seroconversion are all consistent with immune restoration as the likely
underlying process.
CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: NCT00192595.

PMCID: PMC3324378
PMID: 22405335  [PubMed]


114. BMJ Open. 2012 Mar 5;2(2):e000637. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2011-000637. Print 2012.

Extensively hydrolysed casein formula supplemented with Lactobacillus rhamnosus
GG maintains hypoallergenic status: randomised double-blind, placebo-controlled
crossover trial.

Muraro A(1), Hoekstra MO, Meijer Y, Lifschitz C, Wampler JL, Harris C, Scalabrin 
DM.

Author information: 
(1)The Food Allergy Referral Centre, Department of Pediatrics, Veneto Region,
Università degli Studi di Padova, Padova, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the hypoallergenicity of an extensively hydrolysed (EH)
casein formula supplemented with Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG).
DESIGN: A prospective, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover
trial.
SETTING: Two study sites in Italy and The Netherlands.
STUDY PARTICIPANTS: Children with documented cow's milk allergy were eligible for
inclusion in this trial.
INTERVENTIONS: After a 7-day period of strict avoidance of cow's milk protein and
other suspected food allergens, participants were tested with an EH casein
formula with demonstrated hypoallergenicity (control, EHF) and a formula of the
same composition with LGG added at 10(8) colony-forming units per gram powder
(EHF-LGG) in randomised order in a double-blind placebo-controlled food challenge
(DBPCFC). After absence of adverse reactions in the DBPCFC, an open challenge was
performed with EHF-LGG, followed by a 7-day home feeding period with the same
formula.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Clinical assessment of any adverse reactions to ingestion
of study formulae during the DBPCFC.
RESULTS: For all participants with confirmed cow's milk allergy (n=31), the
DBPCFC and open challenge were classified as negative.
CONCLUSION: The EH casein formula supplemented with LGG is hypoallergenic and can
be recommended for infants and children allergic to cow's milk who require an
alternative to formulae containing intact cow's milk protein.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: http://ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01181297.

PMCID: PMC3298831
PMID: 22396223  [PubMed]


115. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2012 May;23(3):240-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-3038.2011.01262.x. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Cost-effectiveness of using an extensively hydrolysed formula compared to an
amino acid formula as first-line treatment for cow milk allergy in the UK.

Taylor RR(1), Sladkevicius E, Panca M, Lack G, Guest JF.

Author information: 
(1)Catalyst Health Economics Consultants, 34b High Street, Northwood, Middlesex, 
UK.

Comment in
    Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2012 Nov;23(7):686; author reply 687.

OBJECTIVE:   To estimate the cost-effectiveness of using an extensively
hydrolysed formula (eHF; Nutramigen) compared with an amino acid formula (AAF;
Neocate) as first-line treatment for cow milk allergy (CMA) in the UK, from the
perspective of the National Health Service (NHS).
METHOD:   A decision model was constructed depicting the treatment paths and
associated resource use attributable to first-line management of CMA with the two
formulae. The model was based on the case records of 145 AAF-treated infants and 
150 matched eHF-treated patients from The Health Improvement Network (THIN)
database [a nationally representative database of patients registered with
general practitioners (GPs) in the UK]. The model estimated the costs and
consequences of patient management over 12 months following their initial GP
visit for CMA.
RESULTS:   Patients presenting with a combination of gastrointestinal symptoms
and eczema accounted for 44% of all patients in both groups. Those with
gastrointestinal symptoms alone and eczema alone accounted for up to a further
39% and 13%, respectively. Those with urticaria and faltering growth accounted
for <5% and =6% of all patients, respectively. Patients' age and weight at
presentation was a mean 2.6-2.8 months and 4.4 kg, respectively. It took a mean
2.2 months to start a formula after initially seeing a GP. Time to symptom
resolution following the start of treatment was 1.2 months in both groups; hence,
the mean number of symptom-free months during the 12 months following the initial
GP visit was estimated to be 8.6 months in both groups. Patients treated with an 
eHF had a mean 13.1 GP visits over the 12 months compared to 17.5 visits made by 
AAF-treated patients (p < 0.001). The NHS cost of managing a CMA infant over the 
first 12 months following initial presentation to a GP was estimated to be £1853 
and £3161 for an eHF-treated and AAF-treated patient, respectively.
CONCLUSION:   Starting treatment for CMA with an eHF was the cost-effective
option, as there were no significant differences in clinical outcomes between the
two groups. A prospective, randomized controlled trial would allow a definitive
confirmation of these findings.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22360663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Audiol Res. 2012 Feb 17;2(1):e8. doi: 10.4081/audiores.2011.e8. eCollection 2012.

A report of extended high frequency audiometry thresholds in school-age children 
with no hearing complaints.

Anastasio AR(1), Radael RD(1), Cavalcante JM(1), Hatzopoulos S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery,
School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Brazil;
(2)Department of Audiology, Center of Bioacoustics, University of Ferrara, Italy.

The aim of the study was to establish the extended high frequency thresholds
(EHF) of school-age children with no hearing complaints. The study was conducted 
on 50 children aged 8 to 12 years with pure tone thresholds (0.5, 1 and 2 kHz) of
15 dB HL or less, with normal speech discrimination and tympanometry and with the
presence of contralateral acoustic reflexes of 0.5, 1, 2 and 4 kHz. The children 
were tested for EHF at frequencies of 9, 10, 11.2, 12.5, 14 and 16 kHz. No
significant differences were found between the right and left ear for female and 
male groups. The results allowed us to group the children into a single sample
with mean thresholds (dB) of 8.6 (9 kHz), 6.2 (10 kHz), 8.2 (11.2 kHz), 7.1 (12.5
kHz), 0.4 (14 kHz), and -3.6 (16 kHz). We conclude that, for school-age children,
the extended EHF below 15 dBHL could be used as an indication of normal hearing
sensitivity.

PMCID: PMC4630943
PMID: 26557337  [PubMed]


117. Ann Nutr Metab. 2011;59 Suppl 1:44-52. doi: 10.1159/000334232. Epub 2011 Dec 21.

Partially hydrolysed 100% whey-based infant formula and the prevention of atopic 
dermatitis: comparative pharmacoeconomic analyses.

Spieldenner J(1), Belli D, Dupont C, Haschke F, Iskedjian M, Nevot Falcó S,
Szajewska H, von Berg A.

Author information: 
(1)Nestlé Nutrition Institute, Avenue Reller 22, Vevey, Switzerland.
joerg.spieldenner@nestle.com

Clinical trials have demonstrated that the risk of developing atopic dermatitis
is reduced when using hydrolysed formulas to feed infants with a documented risk 
of atopy (i.e. an affected parent and/or sibling)when breastfeeding is not
practised. However, little is known about the cost-effectiveness of using
hydrolysed formulas. Consequently, economic analyses in 5 European countries
(Denmark, France, Germany, Spain and Switzerland) have evaluated the costs and
cost-effectiveness of a specific brand of 100% whey-based partially hydrolysed
infant formula, NAN-HA® (PHF-W) compared with a cow's milk standard formula (SF) 
in the prevention of atopic dermatitis in at-risk children. This review
synthesises the findings of these studies. Cost-effectiveness analyses (CEA) used
a decision-analytic model to determine treatment pathways, resource utilisation
and costs associated with the management of atopic dermatitis in healthy at-risk 
newborns who were not exclusively breastfed. The model had a 12-month horizon and
applied reimbursement rates of 60-100% depending on the country. Outcomes were
considered from the perspective of the public healthcare system (e.g. the
Ministry of Health; MOH), family and society. The final outcome was the
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio per avoided case of atopic dermatitis (ICER)
for PHF-W versus SF. A cost-minimisation analysis was also performed to compare
PHF-W with extensively hydrolysed formulas (EHF). The base-case CEA produced
ICERs per avoided case for PHF-W versus SF of EUR 982-1,343 (MOH perspective),
EUR -2,202 to -624 (family perspective) indicating savings, and EUR -1,220 to 719
from the societal perspective. The main costs related to formula (MOH and
society) and time loss (family). In the cost-minimisation analysis, PHF-W yielded
savings of between EUR 4.3 and 120 million compared with EHF-whey when the latter
was used in prevention. In conclusion, PHF-W was cost-effective versus SF in the 
prevention of atopic dermatitis and cost saving compared with EHF when used in
prevention.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22189255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. BMC Infect Dis. 2011 Dec 28;11:357. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-11-357.

Ebola haemorrhagic fever outbreak in Masindi District, Uganda: outbreak
description and lessons learned.

Borchert M(1), Mutyaba I, Van Kerkhove MD, Lutwama J, Luwaga H, Bisoborwa G,
Turyagaruka J, Pirard P, Ndayimirije N, Roddy P, Van Der Stuyft P.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Epidemiology and Disease Control, Institute of Tropical Medicine,
Antwerp, Belgium. matthias.borchert@charite.de

BACKGROUND: Ebola haemorrhagic fever (EHF) is infamous for its high case-fatality
proportion (CFP) and the ease with which it spreads among contacts of the
diseased. We describe the course of the EHF outbreak in Masindi, Uganda, in the
year 2000, and report on response activities.
METHODS: We analysed surveillance records, hospital statistics, and our own
observations during response activities. We used Fisher's exact tests for
differences in proportions, t-tests for differences in means, and logistic
regression for multivariable analysis.
RESULTS: The response to the outbreak consisted of surveillance, case management,
logistics and public mobilisation. Twenty-six EHF cases (24 laboratory confirmed,
two probable) occurred between October 21st and December 22nd, 2000. CFP was 69% 
(18/26). Nosocomial transmission to the index case occurred in Lacor hospital in 
Gulu, outside the Ebola ward. After returning home to Masindi district the index 
case became the origin of a transmission chain within her own extended family (18
further cases), from index family members to health care workers (HCWs, 6 cases),
and from HCWs to their household contacts (1 case). Five out of six occupational 
cases of EHF in HCWs occurred after the introduction of barrier nursing, probably
due to breaches of barrier nursing principles. CFP was initially very high (76%) 
but decreased (20%) due to better case management after reinforcing the response 
team. The mobilisation of the community for the response efforts was challenging 
at the beginning, when fear, panic and mistrust had to be countered by the
response team.
CONCLUSIONS: Large scale transmission in the community beyond the index family
was prevented by early case identification and isolation as well as quarantine
imposed by the community. The high number of occupational EHF after implementing 
barrier nursing points at the need to strengthen training and supervision of
local HCWs. The difference in CFP before and after reinforcing the response team 
together with observations on the ward suggest a critical role for intensive
supportive treatment. Collecting high quality clinical data is a priority for
future outbreaks in order to identify the best possible FHF treatment regime
under field conditions.

PMCID: PMC3276451
PMID: 22204600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Med Econ. 2012;15(2):394-408. doi: 10.3111/13696998.2011.650528. Epub 2012 Jan 
17.

Economic evaluation of a 100% whey-based partially hydrolyzed infant formula in
the prevention of atopic dermatitis among Danish children.

Iskedjian M(1), Haschke F, Farah B, van Odijk J, Berbari J, Spieldenner J.

Author information: 
(1)PharmIdeas Research and Consulting Inc., Oakville, ON, Canada, PharmIdeas
Europe SAS, Lyon, France, and Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.
miskedjian@pharmideas.com

OBJECTIVE: A pharmacoeconomic analysis was undertaken to determine costs,
consequences, and cost-effectiveness of a brand of partially hydrolyzed 100%-whey
formula manufactured by Nestlé (PHF-W), in the prevention of atopic dermatitis
(AD) in 'at risk' Danish children compared to extensively hydrolyzed formula
(EHF-Whey or Casein).
METHODS: Given the non-significant differences between PHF-W and EHF, the base
case analytic approach amounted to a cost-minimization analysis (CMA) reporting
the difference in formula acquisition costs over the period of formula
consumption for the population of interest. However, sensitivity analyses (SAs)
were undertaken to explore applying the nominal efficacy of PHF-W and EHF, thus
leading to a cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA). Hence, an economic model based on
a 12-month time horizon was developed synthesizing treatment pathways, resource
utilization, and costs associated with the treatment of AD in the population of
interest. The final economic outcome of the SAs was the incremental cost per
avoided case (ICER) defined as the expected cost per avoided case of AD for PHF-W
vs EHF, determined from three perspectives: the Ministry of Health (MOH), the
family of the subject, and society (SOC).
RESULTS: In the base case CMA, savings of DKK 9<U+2009>M, DKK 20<U+2009>M, and DKK 29<U+2009>M were
generated for PHF-W vs EHF from the MOH, family, and SOC perspectives. In the
sensitivity CEA, PHF-W was dominant over EHF-Whey from all perspectives, while
EHF-Casein displayed against PHF-W unattractive ICERs of DKK 315,930, DKK
408,407, and DKK 724,337 from the MOH, family, and SOC perspectives.
Probabilistic SAs indicated that PHF-W was 86% likely to be dominant over
EHF-Whey, whereas EHF-Casein had no likelihood of dominating PHF-W.
CONCLUSION: Under a range of assumptions, this analysis demonstrated the
attractiveness of PHF-W vs both types of EHF in the prevention of AD among 'at
risk' Danish infants who are not or cannot be exclusively breastfed.

PMID: 22171936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Med Econ. 2012;15(2):378-93. doi: 10.3111/13696998.2011.650521. Epub 2012 Jan
17.

Economic evaluation of a 100% whey-based partially hydrolyzed infant formula in
the prevention of atopic dermatitis among Swiss children.

Iskedjian M(1), Belli D, Farah B, Navarro V, Detzel P.

Author information: 
(1)PharmIdeas Research and Consulting Inc., Oakville, ON, Canada, PharmIdeas
Europe SAS, Lyon, France, and Université de Montréal , Montréal, QC, Canada.
miskedjian@pharmideas.com

OBJECTIVE: A pharmacoeconomic analysis was undertaken to determine costs,
consequences, and cost-effectiveness of a partially hydrolyzed 100% whey-based
infant formula, NAN-HA®, manufactured by Nestlé S.A, Switzerland (PHF-W), branded
under BEBA HA® in Switzerland, in the prevention of atopic dermatitis (AD) in 'at
risk' Swiss children when compared to standard cow's milk formula (SF).
METHODS: Based on a 12-month time horizon including 6 months of formula
consumption, an economic model was developed synthesizing treatment pathways,
resource utilization, and costs associated with the treatment of AD in healthy
'at risk' Swiss newborns who could not be exclusively breastfed. Model inputs
were retrieved from the literature, official formularies, and expert opinion. The
treatment pathways considered a medical treatment approach, supplemented in some 
instances by a change of formula. The final outcome was the expected cost per
avoided case of AD, yielding an incremental cost effectiveness ratio (ICER) for
PHF-W vs SF. Outcomes were presented from three perspectives: the Swiss public
healthcare system (MOH), the subject's family, and society (SOC). A secondary
analysis compared PHF-W to whey-based extensively hydrolyzed formula (EHF) in
prevention.
RESULTS: The model yielded 1653 avoided AD cases by selecting PHF-W over SF in a 
birth cohort of 22,933 'at risk' infants. The base case analyses generated an
expected ICER of CHF 982 from the MOH perspective as well as savings of CHF 2202 
and CHF 1220 from the family and SOC perspectives, respectively. PHF-W yielded
CHF 11.4M savings against EHF when the latter was assumed to be used in
prevention. One-way and probabilistic sensitivity analyses confirmed the
robustness of the model.
CONCLUSION: Under a range of assumptions, this analysis has established the
dominance from the family and societal perspectives and cost-effectiveness from
the MOH perspective of PHF-W vs SF in the prevention of AD among 'at risk' Swiss 
infants.

PMID: 22171935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Int J Med Sci. 2011;8(8):640-2. Epub 2011 Oct 15.

Subarachnoid hemorrhage associated with epidemic hemorrhagic fever: a rare case
report.

Xu Z(1), Xu P, Lei X, Xu Z, Wu Q, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical College, Guizhou
563003, China.

Nervous system injuries associated with epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) are not 
rarely seen. However, cerebrovascular disease arising from EHF is rarely reported
in the literature. A 50-year-old male patient suffered from subarachnoid
hemorrhage (SAH). No abnormal condition was found in intracranial vascular
digital subtraction angiography (DSA). But, this patient presented with positive 
hantavirus-IgM and IgG, with typical clinical process, which lead to the
diagnosis of EHF followed by SAH. To our knowledge, SAH associated with EHF has
not been previously reported. A meticulous assessment of EHF patients with a
serious condition had one or more central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities,
such as sudden headache, vomiting, confusion, meningismus, and convulsions, which
is necessary for diagnosing and giving timely treatment to improve the prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3204431
PMID: 22135608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Br J Nutr. 2012 Feb;107(3):325-38. doi: 10.1017/S0007114511004831. Epub 2011 Nov 
25.

Dietary treatment of cows' milk protein allergy in childhood: a commentary by the
Committee on Nutrition of the French Society of Paediatrics.

Dupont C(1), Chouraqui JP, de Boissieu D, Bocquet A, Bresson JL, Briend A,
Darmaun D, Frelut ML, Ghisolfi J, Girardet JP, Goulet O, Hankard R, Rieu D,
Vidailhet M, Turck D; French Society of Paediatrics.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Explorations Fonctionnelles Digestives Pédiatriques, Hôpital
Necker-Enfants Malades, Université Paris Descartes, 149 rue de Sèvres, Paris,
France. christophe.dupont@nck.aphp.fr

The diagnosis of cows' milk protein allergy (CMPA) requires first the suspicion
of diagnosis based on symptoms described in the medical history, and, second, the
elimination of cows' milk proteins (CMP) from the infant's diet. Without such
rigorous analysis, the elimination of CMP is unjustified, and sometimes harmful. 
The elimination diet should be strictly followed, at least until 9-12 months of
age. If the child is not breast fed or the mother cannot or no longer wishes to
breast feed, the first choice is an extensively hydrolysed formula (eHF) of CMP, 
the efficacy of which has been demonstrated by scientifically sound studies. If
it is not tolerated, an amino acid-based formula is warranted. A rice
protein-based eHF can be an alternative to a CMP-based eHF. Soya protein-based
infant formulae are also a suitable alternative for infants >6 months, after
establishing tolerance to soya protein by clinical challenge. CMPA usually
resolves during the first 2-3 years. However, the age of recovery varies
depending on the child and the type of CMPA, especially whether it is
IgE-mediated or not, with the former being more persistent. Once the child
reaches the age of 9-12 months, an oral food challenge is carried out in the
hospital ward to assess the development of tolerance and, if possible, to allow
for the continued reintroduction of CMP at home. Some children with CMPA will
tolerate only a limited daily amount of CMP. The current therapeutic options are 
designed to accelerate the acquisition of tolerance thereof, which seems to be
facilitated by repeated exposure to CMP.

PMID: 22115523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Clin Cardiol. 2011 Nov;34(11):714-20. doi: 10.1002/clc.20965.

Clinical impact of off-label cardiac resynchronization therapy in end-stage heart
failure patients on continuous intravenous inotrope.

Hara M(1), Mizuno H, Mizote I, Nakatani D, Asano Y, Sakata Y, Nanto S, Komuro I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita, Osaka.

BACKGROUND: Potential benefits of off-label cardiac resynchronization therapy
(CRT) in end-stage heart failure (EHF) patients have not been fully investigated.
HYPOTHESIS: Some EHF patients who are dependent on intravenous inotropes can
benefit from CRT.
METHODS: We retrospectively enrolled 14 EHF patients who were dependent on
intravenous inotropes at the time of CRT implantation. Mean duration of inotropic
support was 51 ± 47 days before CRT device implantation. To identify the efficacy
of CRT, we assessed the successful withdrawal rate from inotropic support and
survival estimates after device implantation. We also tried to identify possible 
predictors for withdrawal by comparing patient demographics between successful
withdrawal (SW) and nonwithdrawal (NW) groups.
RESULTS: Successful withdrawal was achieved in 9 (64%) of 14 patients 46 ± 33
days after CRT device implantation. Event-free survival was longer in the SW
group than in the NW group (810 ± 169 days vs 114 ± 34 days; P = 0.007). In
addition, patients in the SW group showed a higher previous surgery rate (89% vs 
20%; P = 0.010) and a lower grade of mitral regurgitation (median, 0 vs 2; P =
0.010) than those in the NW group.
CONCLUSIONS: Our retrospective data showed potential benefits of CRT among
EHFpatients. Treatment of mitral regurgitation might be an essential
qualification for managing EHF patients with CRT.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22095659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Infect Dis. 2011 Nov;204 Suppl 3:S991-9. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir336.

Host response dynamics following lethal infection of rhesus macaques with Zaire
ebolavirus.

Ebihara H(1), Rockx B, Marzi A, Feldmann F, Haddock E, Brining D, LaCasse RA,
Gardner D, Feldmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Rocky Mountain Veterinary Branch, Division of
Intramural Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, Hamilton, Montana
59840, USA. ebiharah@niaid.nih.gov

To gain further insight into the interdependent pathogenic processes in Ebola
hemorrhagic fever (EHF), we have examined the dynamics of host responses in
individual rhesus macaques infected with Zaire ebolavirus over the entire disease
course. Examination of coagulation parameters revealed that decreased coagulation
inhibitor activity triggered severe coagulopathy as indicated by prolonged
coagulation times and decreased fibrinogen levels. This has been proposed as one 
of the significant mechanisms underlying disseminated intravascular coagulation
in EHF patients. Furthermore, monitoring of expression levels for
cytokines/chemokines suggested a mixed anti-inflammatory response syndrome
(MARS), which indicates that a catastrophic uncontrolled immunological status
contributes to the development of fatal hemorrhagic fever. These results
highlight the pathological analogies between EHF and severe sepsis and not only
contribute to our understanding of the pathogenic process, but will also help to 
establish novel postexposure treatment modalities.

PMCID: PMC3189992
PMID: 21987781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Infect Dis. 2011 Nov;204 Suppl 3:S761-7. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir294.

Filovirus outbreak detection and surveillance: lessons from Bundibugyo.

MacNeil A(1), Farnon EC, Morgan OW, Gould P, Boehmer TK, Blaney DD, Wiersma P,
Tappero JW, Nichol ST, Ksiazek TG, Rollin PE.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA. aho3@cdc.gov

The first outbreak of Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) due to Bundibugyo ebolavirus 
occurred in Uganda from August to December 2007. During outbreak response and
assessment, we identified 131 EHF cases (44 suspect, 31 probable, and 56
confirmed). Consistent with previous large filovirus outbreaks, a long temporal
lag (approximately 3 months) occurred between initial EHF cases and the
subsequent identification of Ebola virus and outbreak response, which allowed for
prolonged person-to-person transmission of the virus. Although effective control 
measures for filovirus outbreaks, such as patient isolation and contact tracing, 
are well established, our observations from the Bundibugyo EHF outbreak
demonstrate the need for improved filovirus surveillance, reporting, and
diagnostics, in endemic locations in Africa.

PMID: 21987748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Wien Med Wochenschr. 2011 Aug;161(15-16):387-93. doi: 10.1007/s10354-011-0018-3.

Pre-competition cardiac screening in professional handball players - setting up
at the EHF European Handball Championship 2010 in Austria.

Geyer R(1), Predel HG, Wolber T, Mellwig KP, Schmied C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Kantonsspital St.
Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland.

In many sports, regular cardiac screening for exercise-associated sudden cardiac 
death is still not provided. To set up the current situation in top-skilled
handball players qualified for the 2010 European Handball Championship in
Austria, a standardised questionnaire was sent to every team. The fact that only 
42.7% of the players returned the questionnaire may lead to the conclusion that
the awareness of the problem is quite low. However, 82% of these players have
been screened according to current recommendations. Half of the teams were
screened inhomogeneously: 5 players (4.1%) have not been screened within the last
years, 1 athlete (0.8%) was screened without an ECG. While 69% of the athletes
got their first screening only after the age of 18, 16 players (13.1%) never went
through a specific screening ever. We identified 17 athletes (13.9%) with a
highly suspicious history, 2 of them (1.6%) never underwent a medical screening
at all.

PMID: 21953430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Rev Sci Instrum. 2011 Aug;82(8):083701. doi: 10.1063/1.3622519.

Compact device for cleaning scanner-mounted scanning tunneling microscope tips
using electron bombardment.

Hellmann D(1), Worbes L, Kittel A.

Author information: 
(1)EHF, Faculty 5, Department of Physics, C v O University of Oldenburg,
Oldenburg, Germany.

Most scanning probe techniques rely on the assumption that both sample and tip
are free from adsorbates, residues, and oxide not deposited intentionally.
Getting a clean sample surface can be readily accomplished by applying ion
sputtering and subsequent annealing, whereas finding an adequate treatment for
tips is much more complicated. The method of choice would effectively desorb
undesired compounds without reducing the sharpness or the general geometry of the
tip. Several devices which employ accelerated electrons to achieve this are
described in the literature. To minimize both the effort to implement this
technique in a UHV chamber and the overall duration of the cleaning procedure, we
constructed a compact electron source fitted into a sample holder, which can be
operated in a standard Omicron variable-temperature (VT)-STM while the tip stays 
in place. This way a maximum of compatibility with existing systems is achieved
and short turnaround times are possible for tip cleaning.

PMID: 21895245  [PubMed]


128. Oper Dent. 2011 Sep-Oct;36(5):545-53. doi: 10.2341/10-312-L. Epub 2011 Aug 22.

Adhesion of resin composite to hydrofluoric acid-exposed enamel and dentin in
repair protocols.

Saracoglu A(1), Ozcan M, Kumbuloglu O, Turkun M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, University of Ege, Izmir, Turkey.

Intraoral repairs of ceramic fixed-dental-prostheses (FDP) often include cervical
recessions that require pretreatment of the exposed tooth surfaces either before 
or after the ceramic is conditioned with hydrofluoric (HF) acid gel. The sequence
of repair protocol may cross-contaminate the exposed etched enamel or dentin
surfaces during the application or rinsing process and thereby affect the
adhesion. This study evaluated the influence of HF acid gel with two
concentrations on bond strengths of composite to enamel and dentin. Human third
molars (N=100, n=10 per group) with similar sizes were selected and randomly
divided into 10 groups. Flat surfaces of enamel and dentin were created by wet
ground finishing. Before or after the enamel (E) or dentin (D) was conditioned
with phosphoric acid (P), substrate surfaces were conditioned with either 9.5% HF
(HF(9.5)) or 5% HF (HF(5)). Subsequently, a bonding agent (B) was applied. The
experimental groups by conditioning sequence were as follows where the first
letter of the group abbreviation represents the substrate (E or D) followed by
the acid type and concentration: group 1 (EPHF(9.5)), group 2 (EPHF(5)), group 3 
(EHF(9.5)P), group 4 (EHF(5)P), group 5 (DPHF(9.5)), group 6 (DPHF(5)), group 7
(DHF(9.5)P), and group 8 (DHF(5)P). Group 9 (EPB) and group 10 (DPB) acted as the
control groups. Repair resin was adhered incrementally onto the conditioned
enamel and dentin in polyethylene molds. Each layer was photo-polymerized for 40 
seconds. All specimens were thermocycled (×1000, 5°-55°C) and subjected to shear 
test (universal testing machine, 1 mm/min). Specimens that debonded during
thermocycling were considered as 0 MPa. The bond strength data were analyzed
using Kruskal-Wallis test and failure types using the chi-square test (a=0.05).
Overall, the bond results (MPa) were lower on dentin than on enamel (p<0.01). EPB
(25.6 ± 6.6) and DPB (20.2 ± 4.9) control groups showed significantly higher
results than those of other groups (p<0.05). While higher mean bond strengths
were obtained in group 1 (EPHF(9.5)) (11.5 ± 2.1) and group 2 (EPHF(5)) (7.3 ±
0.6), lower results were obtained when HF acid gels were applied prior to
phosphoric acid (EHF(9.5)P: 5.0 ± 1.1, EHF(5)P: 3.6 ± 0.1) (p<0.05). On dentin,
the results were the lowest in group 8 (DHF(5)P: 1.5 ± 1.6), being significantly 
lower than those of group 5 (DPHF(9.5)) (p<0.05). Scanning electron microscope
(SEM) images revealed predominantly mixed failures with less than half of the
composite left on both enamel and dentin surfaces (64 out of 80) (p<0.05),
indicating that in general, adhesion was not ideal. Contamination of the enamel
or dentin surfaces with HF acid gel impairs the bond strength of composites.
Considering both the bond strength results and failure types, when dental tissues
are to be repaired next to ceramic, application of phosphoric acid before HF acid
gel application can be recommended. HF acid gel concentration did not influence
the results except on enamel.

PMID: 21859315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Hum Pathol. 2012 Apr;43(4):496-505. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.05.023. Epub 2011
Aug 19.

Expression of the Ets transcription factor EHF in serous ovarian carcinoma
effusions is a marker of poor survival.

Brenne K(1), Nymoen DA, Hetland TE, Trope' CG, Davidson B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital,
N-0424 Oslo, Norway.

The EHF (Ets homologous factor) gene was previously shown to be overexpressed in 
ovarian/primary peritoneal serous carcinoma compared to malignant mesothelioma
using gene expression arrays. The objective of this study was to validate this
finding at the mRNA level in a larger series. We analyzed the diagnostic role of 
EHF in 98 ovarian serous carcinoma effusions, 23 malignant mesothelioma specimens
(20 effusions, 3 surgical specimens), and 28 primary ovarian serous carcinomas
using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. Expression levels of EHF 
in ovarian carcinoma were additionally investigated for association with
clinicopathologic parameters and survival. Quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction analysis showed significantly higher expression of EHF mRNA in
ovarian carcinoma effusions and in primary ovarian carcinoma compared to
malignant mesothelioma effusions (P < .001 for both). EHF mRNA expression was
additionally higher in primary ovarian carcinomas compared to effusions of this
cancer (P < .001). In univariate analysis for all patients with effusions, higher
EHF mRNA levels were associated with a trend for shorter progression-free
survival (P = .066), which became significant in analysis of 45 patients with
primary diagnosis pre-chemotherapy effusions (P = .01). In Cox multivariate
analysis, EHF mRNA expression was an independent predictor of poor
progression-free survival for all patients and patients with primary diagnosis
pre-chemotherapy effusions (P = .033 and P = .009, respectively). EHF mRNA levels
differentiate ovarian carcinoma from malignant mesothelioma and may thus be of
diagnostic value in this setting. EHF may be a novel prognostic marker in ovarian
carcinoma.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21855111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Am J Clin Nutr. 2011 Dec;94(6 Suppl):1803S-1807S. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.110.000679.
Epub 2011 Aug 17.

Long-term effects of hydrolyzed protein infant formulas on growth--extended
follow-up to 10 y of age: results from the German Infant Nutritional Intervention
(GINI) study.

Rzehak P(1), Sausenthaler S, Koletzko S, Reinhardt D, von Berg A, Krämer U,
Berdel D, Bollrath C, Grübl A, Bauer CP, Wichmann HE, Heinrich J; GINI-plus Study
Group.

Collaborators: Wichmann HE, Heinrich J, Schoetzau A, Popescu M, Mosetter M,
Schindler J, Franke K, Laubereau B, Sausenthaler S, Thaqi A, Zirngibl A, Zutavern
A, Filipiak B, Gehring U, Berdel D, von Berg A, Albrecht B, Baumgart A, Bollrath 
C, Büttner S, Diekamp S, Gross I, Jakob T, Klemke K, Kurpiun S, Möllemann M,
Neusüss J, Varhelyi A, Zorn C, Koletzko S, Reinhard D, Weigand H, Antonie I,
Bäumler-Merl B, Tasch C, Göhlert R, Sönnichsen C, Bauer CP, Grübl A, Bartels P,
Brockow I, Hoffmann U, Lötzbeyer F, Mayrl R, Negele K, Schill EM, Wolf B, Krämer 
U, Link E, Sugiri D, Ranft U.

Author information: 
(1)From Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental
Health, Institute of Epidemiology, Neuherberg, Germany,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Previous analysis in a prospective, population-based cohort reported 
reduced weight gain in children fed extensively hydrolyzed casein (eHF-C) formula
during the first year of life but showed no effect on growth between 1 and 6 y of
life. No studies have been conducted in children up to the age of 10 y.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to investigate potential differences in body mass
index (BMI) over the first 10 y of life between infants fed within the
intervention period of the first 16 wk of life with partially hydrolyzed whey
(pHF-W), extensively hydrolyzed whey (eHF-W), eHF-C, or cow-milk formula (CMF)
and infants exclusively breastfed (BF) within the intervention period.
DESIGN: This was a prospective, randomized, double-blind trial in full-term
neonates with atopic heredity in the German birth cohort German Infant
Nutritional Intervention (GINI) followed through the first 10 y of life. Analyses
of absolute and World Health Organization (WHO)-standardized BMI trajectories for
1840 infants [pHF-W (n = 253), eHF-W (n = 265), eHF-C (n = 250), CMF (n = 276),
and BF (n = 796)] were conducted according to intention-to-treat principles.
RESULTS: Except for the previously reported slower BMI gain in infants fed with
eHF-C formula within the first year of life, no significant differences in
absolute or WHO-standardized BMI trajectories were shown between the pHF-W,
eHF-W, eHF-C, CMF, and BF groups thereafter up to the age of 10 y.
CONCLUSIONS: Extension of the follow-up period from 6 to 10 y for this randomized
controlled trial showed no long-term consequences on BMI for the 4 infant
formulas considered. These data need to be confirmed in future studies.

PMID: 21849601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Langmuir. 2011 Sep 6;27(17):11052-61. doi: 10.1021/la201829y. Epub 2011 Aug 2.

Colloidal synthesis and structural control of PtSn bimetallic nanoparticles.

Wang X(1), Stöver J, Zielasek V, Altmann L, Thiel K, Al-Shamery K, Bäumer M,
Borchert H, Parisi J, Kolny-Olesiak J.

Author information: 
(1)EHF Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Oldenburg,
Carl-von-Ossietzky-Strasse 9-11, 26129 Oldenburg, Germany. wxd781210@yahoo.com.cn

PtSn bimetallic nanoparticles with different particle sizes (1-9 nm), metal
compositions (Sn content of 10-80 mol %), and organic capping agents (e.g.,
amine, thiol, carboxylic acid and polymer) were synthesized by colloidal
chemistry methods. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements show that,
depending on the particle size, the as-prepared bimetallic nanocrystals have
quasi-spherical or faceted shapes. Energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analyses
indicate that for all samples the signals of both Pt and Sn can be detected from 
single nanoparticles, confirming that the products are actually bimetallic but
not only a physical mixture of pure Pt and Sn metal nanoparticles. X-ray
diffraction (XRD) measurements were also conducted on the bimetallic particle
systems. When compared with the diffraction patterns of monometallic Pt
nanoparticles, the bimetallic samples show distinct shifts of the Bragg
reflections to lower degrees, which gives clear proof of the alloying of Pt with 
Sn. However, a quantitative analysis of the lattice parameter shifts indicates
that only part of the Sn atoms are incorporated into the alloy nanocrystals. This
is consistent with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements that
reveal the segregation of Sn at the surfaces of the nanocrystals. Moreover, short
PtSn bimetallic nanowires were synthesized by a seed-mediated growth method with 
amine-capped bimetallic particles as precursors. The resulting nanowires have an 
average width of 2.3 nm and lengths ranging from 5 to 20 nm.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

PMID: 21761930  [PubMed]


132. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2011 Jun;5(6):e1175. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001175. Epub 
2011 Jun 7.

Serologic cross-reactivity of human IgM and IgG antibodies to five species of
Ebola virus.

Macneil A(1), Reed Z, Rollin PE.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. aho3@cdc.gov

Five species of Ebola virus (EBOV) have been identified, with nucleotide
differences of 30-45% between species. Four of these species have been shown to
cause Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) in humans and a fifth species (Reston
ebolavirus) is capable of causing a similar disease in non-human primates. While 
examining potential serologic cross-reactivity between EBOV species is important 
for diagnostic assays as well as putative vaccines, the nature of cross-reactive 
antibodies following EBOV infection has not been thoroughly characterized. In
order to examine cross-reactivity of human serologic responses to EBOV, we
developed antigen preparations for all five EBOV species, and compared serologic 
responses by IgM capture and IgG enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in
groups of convalescent diagnostic sera from outbreaks in Kikwit, Democratic
Republic of Congo (n=24), Gulu, Uganda (n=20), Bundibugyo, Uganda (n=33), and the
Philippines (n=18), which represent outbreaks due to four different EBOV species.
For groups of samples from Kikwit, Gulu, and Bundibugyo, some limited IgM
cross-reactivity was noted between heterologous sera-antigen pairs, however, IgM 
responses were largely stronger against autologous antigen. In some instances IgG
responses were higher to autologous antigen than heterologous antigen, however,
in contrast to IgM responses, we observed strong cross-reactive IgG antibody
responses to heterologous antigens among all sets of samples. Finally, we
examined autologous IgM and IgG antibody levels, relative to time following EHF
onset, and observed early peaking and declining IgM antibody levels (by 80 days) 
and early development and persistence of IgG antibodies among all samples,
implying a consistent pattern of antibody kinetics, regardless of EBOV species.
Our findings demonstrate limited cross-reactivity of IgM antibodies to EBOV,
however, the stronger tendency for cross-reactive IgG antibody responses can
largely circumvent limitations in the utility of heterologous antigen for
diagnostic assays and may assist in the development of antibody-mediated vaccines
to EBOV.

PMCID: PMC3110169
PMID: 21666792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Lepr Rev. 2011 Mar;82(1):55-64.

Social participation of people affected by leprosy after discontinuation of
multidrug therapy.

Nardi SM(1), Paschoal VD, Zanetta DM.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Lauro de Souza Lima, PO Box 62, Bauru - SP, 17010 Brazil.
snardi@ial.sp.gov.br

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate social participation of individuals completing treatment 
for leprosy and to describe the relationship with physical sequelae and
sociodemographic characteristics.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional, descriptive study was performed involving all leprosy 
affected people who were treated between 1998 and 2006 in São José do Rio Preto, 
Brazil. General and clinical data were collected and the subjects were assessed
using the degree of physical disability of the WHO (DPD-WHO), the Eye-hand-foot
(EHF) score, and the participation scale (PS), which measures social
participation of individuals with stigmatising problems.
RESULTS: Of the 335 people treated in the period, 223 (66.6%) were interviewed.
Of these, 51.6% were women, the mean age was 54 years (+/- 15.7 years), 66.4% had
up to 6 years of formal education, 42.6% worked and 26.9% were retired. There was
a predominance of dimorphous (borderline) leprosy (39.9%). Participants' physical
and mental health was considered good in the month preceding the interview in
50.2% and 59.2%, respectively. Disabilities according to the DPD-WHO and EHF
scores affected 32% of the participants and restrictions in social participation 
occurred in 35.4%. Multivariate analysis demonstrated a significant association
between restrictions in social participation and family income of less than three
minimum salaries (US$ 160.50), associated diseases, hospitalisation within the
previous year and physical disability.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of restrictions in social participation is high, even 
after completing treatment for leprosy. Physical disability, associated diseases,
recent hospitalisation and low family incomes influence the social participation 
of these individuals.

PMID: 21644472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Opt Express. 2011 Apr 25;19(9):8610-5. doi: 10.1364/OE.19.008610.

Gain-assisted transformation optics.

Han T(1), Qiu CW, Hao J, Tang X, Zouhdi S.

Author information: 
(1)EHF Key Laboratory of Fundamental Science, School of Electronic Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan,
China.

Loss severely degrades the cloaking effect of the device designed by traditional 
transformation. In this letter, we propose gain-assisted transformation optics to
overcome the loss problem by introducing gain media into a spherical cloak. The
gain media, which can amplify the electromagnetic fields, is controlled precisely
to compensate the inherent loss in experimental realization of cloaks. We discuss
the significance of controlling embedded gain materials in the context of the
inverse design mechanism, which allows us to wisely select realizable materials
with constant gain and loss along the radius. For practical realizations,
isotropic spherical gain-assisted cloak is designed. Full-wave simulations
validate the proposed design concept, which can be utilized to alleviate the
inevitable loss problem in transformational optical devices.

PMID: 21643112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. EMBO Rep. 2011 Jul 1;12(7):682-9. doi: 10.1038/embor.2011.81.

A member of the ETS family, EHF, and the ATPase RUVBL1 inhibit p53-mediated
apoptosis.

Taniue K(1), Oda T, Hayashi T, Okuno M, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-0032, Japan.

Tumour cells are known to be dependent on, or 'addicted to', not only oncogenes, 
but also some non-oncogenes. However, the mechanisms by which tumour cells are
addicted to these genes have not been fully explained. Here, we show that
overexpression of a member of the ETS family, EHF, is required for the survival
of colon tumour cells that contain wild-type p53. We found that EHF directly
activates the transcription of RUVBL1, an ATPase associated with
chromatin-remodelling complexes. RUVBL1 blocks p53-mediated apoptosis by
repressing the expression of p53 and its target genes. Moreover, we found that
RUVBL1 represses p53 transcription by binding to the p53 promoter, interfering
with RNF20/hBRE1-mediated histone H2B monoubiquitination and promoting
PAF1-mediated histone H3K9 trimethylation. These results indicate that
EHF-mediated RUVBL1 expression allows colon tumour cells to avoid p53-mediated
apoptosis. Thus, EHF and RUVBL1 might be promising molecular targets for the
treatment of colon tumours.

PMCID: PMC3128968
PMID: 21617703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Nat Genet. 2011 Jun;43(6):539-46. doi: 10.1038/ng.838. Epub 2011 May 22.

Genome-wide association and linkage identify modifier loci of lung disease
severity in cystic fibrosis at 11p13 and 20q13.2.

Wright FA(1), Strug LJ, Doshi VK, Commander CW, Blackman SM, Sun L, Berthiaume Y,
Cutler D, Cojocaru A, Collaco JM, Corey M, Dorfman R, Goddard K, Green D, Kent JW
Jr, Lange EM, Lee S, Li W, Luo J, Mayhew GM, Naughton KM, Pace RG, Paré P,
Rommens JM, Sandford A, Stonebraker JR, Sun W, Taylor C, Vanscoy LL, Zou F,
Blangero J, Zielenski J, O'Neal WK, Drumm ML, Durie PR, Knowles MR, Cutting GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2011 Jun;43(6):508-9.

A combined genome-wide association and linkage study was used to identify loci
causing variation in cystic fibrosis lung disease severity. We identified a
significant association (P = 3.34 × 10(-8)) near EHF and APIP (chr11p13) in
p.Phe508del homozygotes (n = 1,978). The association replicated in p.Phe508del
homozygotes (P = 0.006) from a separate family based study (n = 557), with P =
1.49 × 10(-9) for the three-study joint meta-analysis. Linkage analysis of 486
sibling pairs from the family based study identified a significant quantitative
trait locus on chromosome 20q13.2 (log(10) odds = 5.03). Our findings provide
insight into the causes of variation in lung disease severity in cystic fibrosis 
and suggest new therapeutic targets for this life-limiting disorder.

PMCID: PMC3296486
PMID: 21602797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Opt Lett. 2011 May 15;36(10):1755-7. doi: 10.1364/OL.36.001755.

Generation of a vectorial Mathieu-like hollow beam with a periodically rotated
polarization property.

Li H(1), Yin J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Precise Spectroscopy, Department of Physics, East
China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China.

We propose a promising and practical scheme to generate a vectorial Mathieu-like 
hollow beam (vMHB) by using an axicon optical system including a dual-mode
elliptic hollow fiber (EHF), and calculate the intensity and polarization
distributions of the beam and its fractional orbital angular momentum (OAM). We
also fit its intensity profile and obtain suitable theoretical expressions to
describe three-dimensional (3D) propagation characteristics of such a
Mathieu-like hollow beam. Our study shows that the generated beam is a vMHB
within the propagation distance 1.2-2.2 m, which has an unchanged
(diffraction-free) intensity profile and periodically rotated polarization
properties as well as an unchanged fractional OAM within 1.2-2.2 m.

© 2011 Optical Society of America

PMID: 21593880  [PubMed]


138. Eksp Klin Gastroenterol. 2011;(1):31-7.

[EHF-therapy in children the treatment with erosive and ulcerative lesions of the
upper gastrointestinal tract].

[Article in Russian]

Al'tman NS, Cherednichenko AM.

The objective of the research is to show the efficacy of physiopuncture applied
in patients with erosive ulcer damage of the upper gastro intestinal
chambers.MATERIALS AND METHODS: case and family histories of 198 patients at the 
age of 7-10 (15.6%) and 11-15 (78.9%) with chronic gastroduodenitis CEG (128) and
ulcer UD (70) were studied. Ineffectiveness of previous medical therapy was
established. Gastroduodenoscopy was conducted with the biopsy of antral stomach
chamber mucosa coating. H. pylori was assessed using hystobacterioscopic Gimza
method. Intraventricular pH measurements using REG, Gastroscan-24 and ultra sound
were administered. The electrodermal resistance in the biologically active points
(BAP) of meridians: stomach (e-36), pericardium (MC-6), triple (Tr-5), frontal
medium (VS-12) was analyzed. The electrodermal resistance analysis in BAP showed 
the majority of BAP in patients with CEG and UD (98.4% and 100% respectively) was
unprepared for the short wave frequency (SWF) therapy and required adjusting
using SCANER. Eradicative triplex or quadric therapy based on intraatrium pH
measurements and the following SWF therapy were administered to all patients. In 
6-8 weeks all patients were discharged from the hospital with clinical endoscopic
remission and normal pH ratio. The 1-1,5 year follow-up of 95 patients with CEG
and 45 patients with UD showed clinical endoscopic remission, normal pH ration
and H. pylori absence. The majority of BAP had normal electrodermal resistance
indexes. SWF monotherapy was administered to children with morphological features
of superficial gastritis. It is reasonable to administer SWF therapy during
patients' rehabilitation to reduce drug load in long-term patients with CEG and
UD.

PMID: 21563342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Jun 29;133(25):9741-50. doi: 10.1021/ja202011u. Epub 2011 Jun
6.

Gd2@C79N: isolation, characterization, and monoadduct formation of a very stable 
heterofullerene with a magnetic spin state of S = 15/2.

Fu W(1), Zhang J, Fuhrer T, Champion H, Furukawa K, Kato T, Mahaney JE, Burke BG,
Williams KA, Walker K, Dixon C, Ge J, Shu C, Harich K, Dorn HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 
Blacksburg, Virginia 24061, USA.

The dimetallic endohedral heterofullerene (EHF), Gd(2)@C(79)N, was prepared and
isolated in a relatively high yield when compared with the earlier reported
heterofullerene, Y(2)@C(79)N. Computational (DFT), chemical reactivity, Raman,
and electrochemical studies all suggest that the purified Gd(2)@C(79)N, with the 
heterofullerene cage, (C(79)N)(5-) has comparable stability with other better
known isoelectronic metallofullerene (C(80))(6-) cage species (e.g.,
Gd(3)N@C(80)). These results describe an exceptionally stable paramagnetic
molecule with low chemical reactivity with the unpaired electron spin density
localized on the internal diatomic gadolinium cluster and not on the
heterofullerene cage. EPR studies confirm that the spin state of Gd(2)@C(79)N is 
characterized by a half-integer spin quantum number of S = 15/2. The spin (S = ½)
on the N atom of the fullerene cage and two octet spins (S = 7/2) of two
encapsulated gadoliniums are coupled with each other in a ferromagnetic manner
with a small zero-field splitting parameter D. Because the central line of
Gd(2)@C(79)N is due to the Kramer's doublet with a half-integer spin quantum
number of S = 15/2, this relatively sharp line is prominent and the anisotropic
nature of the line is weak. Interestingly, in contrast with most Gd(3+) ion
environments, the central EPR line (g = 1.978) is observable even at room
temperature in a toluene solution. Finally, we report the first EHF derivative, a
diethyl bromomalonate monoadduct of Gd(2)@C(79)N, which was prepared and isolated
via a modified Bingel-Hirsch reaction.

PMCID: PMC3132079
PMID: 21548647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Anat Histol Embryol. 2011 Oct;40(5):379-88. doi:
10.1111/j.1439-0264.2011.01082.x. Epub 2011 May 6.

Morphological characteristics of pelves of estonian holstein and estonian native 
breed cows from the perspective of calving.

Nahkur E(1), Ernits E, Jalakas M, Järv E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology, Institute of Veterinary Medicine and Animal
Sciences, Estonian University of Life Sciences, Kreutzwaldi, Tartu, Estonia.
 esta.nahkur@emu.ee

Dystocia is more common in Holstein-Friesian (HF) breed cows than in other dairy 
breeds. This is often caused by a disproportion between the birth canal of a
female animal and the fetus. It is thought that the main determiners of
unsuitability are the birth mass of the calf and the shape of the female pelvis. 
From the perspective of calving the cranial and caudal pelvic apertures are of
great significance. This study focuses on pluriparous pelves of the Estonian
Native Breed (EN) and the Estonian Holstein Breed (EHF). The longest measurement 
of the cranial pelvic aperture of an EHF cow is the conjugate diameter. The
cranial pelvic aperture narrows slightly ventrally, being shaped like a trapezium
with rounded angles. The longest measurement of the caudal aperture is its caudal
transverse measurement. The aperture is flattened dorsoventrally. The cranial
pelvic aperture of an EN cow is dorsally angular, but more oval ventrally, and is
on the whole narrower and higher. By comparison with the EHF cow, the pelvic
cavity of the EN cow widens caudally, and the height of the pelvic apertures
contributes to ease of calving. It appears that the configuration of the pelvis
of an EN cow is similar to the pelvis of the elk (Alces alces). The pelvis of the
EHF cow has become unsuitable for easy calving, especially with regard to the
caudal aperture.

© 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 21545644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Jun 6;339(1-2):159-64. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.04.006. 
Epub 2011 Apr 22.

Post-exercise changes in myostatin and actRIIB expression in obese
insulin-resistant rats.

Bueno PG(1), Bassi D, Contrera DG, Carnielli HM, Silva RN, Nonaka KO,
Selistre-de-Araújo HS, Leal AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of São Carlos, São Carlos, SP, Brazil.

We evaluated the expression of MSTN and ActRIIB mRNA in muscle and adipose tissue
in diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance in rats subjected to exercise.
There was no difference in the expression of MSTN between exercised and sedentary
high-fat fed rats in muscle after swimming training. The expression of ActRIIB
mRNA in muscle was not significantly different among the groups. In BAT, MSTN
mRNA expression was higher in exercised high-fat fed group (EHF) compared with
sedentary high-fat fed group (SHF). ActRIIB mRNA expression in BAT was higher in 
EHF compared with SHF. In mesenteric fat, MSTN mRNA was lower in EHF compared
with SHF and ActRIIB mRNA was lower in EHF compared with SHF. In conclusion, the 
results demonstrate that the expression of MSTN and ActRIIB mRNA changes in both 
adipose tissue and skeletal muscle in diet-induced obese and exercised rats and
suggest the participation of MSTN in energy homeostasis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21539891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo. 2011 Mar-Apr;53(2):77-81.

Assessment of physical impairments in leprosy patients: a comparison between the 
world health organization (who) disability grade and the Eye-Hand-Foot score.

Raposo MT(1), Caminha AV, Heukelbach J, Sánchez-González MÁ, de Medeiros JL,
Nemes MI.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Saúde, Universidade Estadual do Sudoeste da Bahia, Jequié, BA,
Brasil. tulio.raposo@hotmail.com

This cross-sectional study assessed the grade of physical impairments in 61
individuals with leprosy receiving multidrug therapy (MDT) under the Brazilian
Unified Health System (SUS), and residing in Campina Grande, Paraíba State,
Brazil. Impairments were assessed using the disability grade (DG) standardized by
the WHO, and the EHF score (Eye-Hand-Foot sum of impairment scores). Impairments 
were detected in 25 (41%) of the subjects. A total of 14 (23%) patients scored DG
1, while 11 (18%) were assigned DG 2. The EHF score ranged from 1 to 10 points in
the group of patients with physical impairments, with a mean score of 3.6 points.
The majority of individuals with impairments were affected in at least two sites.
We conclude that the EHF score showed overlapping impairments in the segments
examined and may be more appropriate than the DG classification system for
describing the degree of physical impairment of leprosy patients.

PMID: 21537754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2011 Sep;249(9):1311-7. doi:
10.1007/s00417-011-1680-2. Epub 2011 Apr 16.

Reliability of vessel diameter measurements with a retinal oximeter.

Blondal R(1), Sturludottir MK, Hardarson SH, Halldorsson GH, Stefánsson E.

Author information: 
(1)Oxymap ehf., Reykjavík, Iceland.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to test the reliability of vessel
diameter measurements with a newly developed retinal oximeter.
METHODS: Twelve healthy individuals participated in the study. Retinal images
were taken with the Oxymap Retinal Oximeter. Diameters of retinal vessels were
measured automatically with the Oxymap Analyzer software. Repeated measurements
on the same vessel segments were compared. The automatic measurements were also
compared with semi-automatic measurements with a plug-in for the ImageJ software.
RESULTS: Variance coefficient (standard deviation/mean) from the repeatability
test was 2.8 and 4.0% for first- and second-degree venules and 3.5 and 5.4% for
first- and second-degree arterioles, respectively. ImageJ measured larger mean
diameters than Oxymap Analyzer in all cases. Means of differences were 5.1<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.2,
2.9<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.3, and 2.7<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.6 pixels for first-, second-, and third-degree venules and
3.1<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.2, 2.7<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.9, and 2.9<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.4 pixels for first-, second-, and third-degree 
arterioles.
CONCLUSIONS: Vessel diameter measurements with the oximeter are repeatable and
comparison with an established method demonstrates a relatively stable offset
where the standard deviation of the difference is rather small. Different
definitions of vessel borders may be the cause of this difference.

PMID: 21499769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Int J Mol Med. 2011 Jul;28(1):89-93. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.672. Epub 2011 Apr
13.

Differential expression of ETS family members in prostate cancer tissues and
androgen-sensitive and insensitive prostate cancer cell lines.

Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Lindstrot A, Langer B, Buettner R, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, D-53127 Bonn, Germany.

The ETS family of transcription factors plays important roles in both normal and 
neoplastic cells for different biological processes such as proliferation,
differentiation, development, transformation, apoptosis, migration, invasion and 
angiogenesis. The 27 ETS factors are probably a part of complex regulatory
networks including interactions among family members. In human prostate cancer,
rearrangements have been found in several genes of the ETS family resulting in
chimeric oncoproteins. In a previous study we found that the ETS family
prototype, Ets-1 affects biological properties of PC3 prostate cancer cells. In a
first effort to understand the cooperative interactions between different ETS
factors in prostate cancer, in the present study we examined the expression
pattern of all 27 ETS members using quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) in the
androgen-sensitive VCaP and LNCaP, and the androgen-insensitive PC3 and DU-145
prostate cancer cell lines as well as in human prostate cancer tissue samples. We
further investigated whether the ETS family prototype, Ets-1, regulates other ETS
family members by examining the effect of Ets-1 blockade in PC3 cells on their
expression. We found an expression specificity of various ETS family members in
the prostate cancer cell lines which might reflect their different biological
properties. In human prostate samples only 3 among the 27 ETS family members
(Ehf, Elk-4 and Ets-2) showed significant expression differences between normal
and cancerous prostate glands. We finally demonstrate that the family prototype, 
Ets-1, regulates the family members Elf-1, Elf-2, Elk-1, Etv-5 and Spi-1 in PC3
prostate cancer cells. Chimeric oncoproteins containing ETS family members
arising due to frequent translocations in prostate cancer are probably part of a 
regulatory network involving other ETS family members as well.

PMID: 21491078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2011 Jan-Feb;(1):46-50.

[EHF therapy in the combined resort-based treatment of patients after surgery for
the early cancer of the gastrointestinal tract. Medical technology].

[Article in Russian]

Efimenko NV, Osipov IuS, Kaisinova AS, Fedorova TE, Kim NK.

PMID: 21465781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2011 Mar;6(3):233-50. doi: 10.1517/17460441.2011.554815.

Nonhuman primates as models for the discovery and development of ebolavirus
therapeutics.

Shurtleff AC(1), Warren TK, Bavari S.

Author information: 
(1)US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Integrated
Toxicology Division, 1425 Porter Street, Fort Detrick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA
+1 301 619 4246 ; +1 541 754 3545 ; sina.bavari@us.army.mil.

INTRODUCTION: Ebolaviruses are human pathogenic Category A priority pathogens for
which no vaccines or therapeutics are currently licensed; however, several
therapeutic agents have shown promising efficacy in nonhuman primate models of
infection and are potential candidates for use in humans. Demonstration of
efficacy in nonhuman primate models of ebolavirus infection will probably be
central to the development and eventual licensure of ebolavirus medical
countermeasures given the ethical and feasibility constraints of human efficacy
assessments.
AREAS COVERED: The authors describe ebolavirus hemorrhagic fever (EHF), with an
emphasis on comparing human and nonhuman primate pathophysiology. Published data 
examining human and animal clinical disease parameters, histopathological
findings, and immune responses in fatal and nonfatal cases are synthesized and
evaluated. Importantly, the authors also introduce and describe the FDA Animal
Efficacy Rule as well as recent advances in antiviral drug development strategies
for the treatment of EHF.
EXPERT OPINION: Well-characterized models of ebolavirus infection are currently
under development and scrutiny as to their accuracy and utility for modeling
fatal infection in humans. The advanced development and eventual licensure of
therapeutic agents will require demonstration that mechanisms conferring
protection in nonhuman primate models of infection are predictive of protective
responses in humans.

PMID: 22647202  [PubMed]


147. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2010 Sep-Oct;(5):17-21.

[Extremely high frequency therapy for the prevention of acute respiratory
diseases in children with chronic ENT and allergic diseases].

[Article in Russian]

Povazhnaia EL, Mambetalieva AS.

Extremely high frequency (EHF) therapy (42.19 +/- 0.10 GHz; 5.6 mm) is an
efficacious method for the prevention of acute respiratory diseases (ARD) in
frequently ill children presenting with chronic ENT diseases (chronic
tonsillitis, chronic sinusitis) and allergic reactions (allergic rhinitis, atopic
dermatitis). It helped to reduce ARD morbidity, duration of a single ARD episode,
and frequency of bacterial complications per one child during the 6 and 12
month-long observation periods in comparison with the patients of the placebo
group. It is believed that prophylactic effect of EHF therapy in frequently ill
children is due to positive effect of extremely high frequency electromagnetic
radiation on the adaptive capacity of the organism, improvement of both cellular 
and humoral immunity, correction of the initial vegetative tone and vegetative
dysfunction.

PMID: 21332086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Bioelectromagnetics. 2011 Jul;32(5):388-95. doi: 10.1002/bem.20645. Epub 2011 Feb
1.

The role of fatty acids in anti-inflammatory effects of low-intensity extremely
high-frequency electromagnetic radiation.

Gapeyev AB(1), Kulagina TP, Aripovsky AV, Chemeris NK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow
Region, Russia. a_b_g@mail.ru

The effects of low-intensity extremely high-frequency electromagnetic radiation
(EHF EMR; 42.2<U+2009>GHz, 0.1<U+2009>mW/cm(2) , exposure duration 20<U+2009>min) on the fatty acid
(FA) composition of thymic cells and blood plasma in normal mice and in mice with
peritoneal inflammation were studied. It was found that the exposure of normal
mice to EHF EMR increased the content of polyunsaturated FAs (PUFAs)
(eicosapentaenoic and docosapentaenoic) in thymic cells. Using a model of
zymosan-induced peritoneal inflammation, it was shown that the exposure of mice
to EHF EMR significantly increased the content of PUFAs (dihomo-<U+03B3>-linolenic,
arachidonic, eicosapentaenoic, docosapentaenoic, and docosahexaenoic) and reduced
the content of monounsaturated FAs (MUFAs) (palmitoleic and oleic) in thymic
cells. Changes in the FA composition in the blood plasma were less pronounced and
manifested themselves as an increase in the level of saturated FAs during the
inflammation. The data obtained support the notion that MUFAs are replaced by
PUFAs that can enter into the thymic cells from the external media. Taking into
account the fact that the metabolites of PUFAs are lipid messengers actively
involved in inflammatory and immune reactions, we assume that the increase in the
content of n-3 and n-6 PUFAs in phospholipids of cellular membranes facilitates
the realization of anti-inflammatory effects of EHF EMR.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21287568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Opt Lett. 2011 Jan 15;36(2):181-3. doi: 10.1364/OL.36.000181.

Adaptive waveguide bends with homogeneous, nonmagnetic, and isotropic materials.

Han T(1), Qiu CW, Tang X.

Author information: 
(1)EHF Key Laboratory of Fundamental Science, School of Electronic Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan
611731, China.

We propose a method for adaptive waveguide bends using homogeneous, nonmagnetic, 
and isotropic materials, which simplifies the parameters of the bends to the
utmost extent. The proposed bend has an adaptive and compact shape because of all
the flat boundaries. The nonmagnetic property is realized by selecting OB'/OC =
0.5. Only two nonmagnetic isotropic dielectrics are needed throughout, and the
transmission is not sensitive to nonmagnetic isotropic dielectrics. Results
validate and illustrate these functionalities, which make the bend much easier to
fabricate and apply, owing to its simple parameters, compact shape, and
versatility in connecting different waveguides.

PMID: 21263493  [PubMed]


150. Emerg Infect Dis. 2010 Dec;16(12):1969-72. doi: 10.3201/eid1612.100627.

Proportion of deaths and clinical features in Bundibugyo Ebola virus infection,
Uganda.

MacNeil A(1), Farnon EC, Wamala J, Okware S, Cannon DL, Reed Z, Towner JS,
Tappero JW, Lutwama J, Downing R, Nichol ST, Ksiazek TG, Rollin PE.

Author information: 
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA.
aho3@cdc.gov

The first known Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) outbreak caused by Bundibugyo Ebola
virus occurred in Bundibugyo District, Uganda, in 2007. Fifty-six cases of EHF
were laboratory confirmed. Although signs and symptoms were largely nonspecific
and similar to those of EHF outbreaks caused by Zaire and Sudan Ebola viruses,
proportion of deaths among those infected was lower (40%).

PMCID: PMC3294552
PMID: 21122234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Arch Pediatr. 2011 Jan;18(1):79-94. doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2010.08.029. Epub 2010 
Nov 5.

[Dietetic treatment of cow's milk protein allergy].

[Article in French]

Dupont C(1), Chouraqui JP, de Boissieu D, Bocquet A, Bresson JL, Briend A,
Darmaun D, Frelut ML, Ghisolfi J, Girardet JP, Goulet O, Hankard R, Rieu D, Rigo 
J, Vidailhet M, Turck D; Comité de nutrition de la Société française de
pédiatrie.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Saint-Vincent-de-Paul, université Paris Descartes, 82 avenue
Denfert-Rochereau, Paris cedex 14, France. christophe.dupont@nck.aphp.fr

New data on food allergy has recently changed the management of children with
cow's milk protein allergy (CMPA). The diagnosis of CMPA first requires the
elimination of cow's milk proteins and then an oral provocation test following a 
standard diagnostic procedure for food allergy, without which the elimination
diet is unjustified and sometimes harmful. Once the diagnosis is made, the
elimination diet is strict, at least until the age of 9-12 months. If the child
is not breastfed or the mother cannot or no longer wishes to breastfeed, the
first choice is a formula based on extensive hydrolyzate of cow's milk (eHF),
provided that its effectiveness has been demonstrated. When eHF fails, a formula 
based on amino acids is warranted. eHF based on rice protein hydrolysates is an
alternative to cow's milk eHF. Infant formulas based on soy protein can be used
after the age of 6 months, after verification of good clinical tolerance to soy. 
Most commonly, CMPA disappears within 2 or 3 years of life. However, the age of
recovery varies depending on the child and the type of CMPA, and whether or not
it is IgE-mediated, the first being more sustainable. When the child grows, a
hospital oral provocation test evaluates the development of tolerance and, if
possible, authorizes continuing the reintroduction of milk proteins at home. Some
children with CMPA will tolerate only a limited daily amount of cow's milk
proteins. The current therapeutic options are designed to accelerate the
acquisition of tolerance, which seems facilitated by regular exposure to cow's
milk proteins.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier SAS.

PMID: 21115329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2011 Feb;36(3):616-26. doi: 10.1038/npp.2010.193. Epub
2010 Nov 24.

Genome-wide pharmacogenomic study of neurocognition as an indicator of
antipsychotic treatment response in schizophrenia.

McClay JL(1), Adkins DE, Aberg K, Bukszár J, Khachane AN, Keefe RS, Perkins DO,
McEvoy JP, Stroup TS, Vann RE, Beardsley PM, Lieberman JA, Sullivan PF, van den
Oord EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomarker Research and Personalized Medicine, School of Pharmacy,
Medical College of Virginia Campus, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond,
VA 23298-0533, USA. jlmcclay@vcu.edu

Neurocognitive deficits are a core feature of schizophrenia and, therefore,
represent potentially critical outcome variables for assessing antipsychotic
treatment response. We performed genome-wide association studies (GWAS) with 492K
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a sample of 738 patients with
schizophrenia from the Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention
Effectiveness study. Outcome variables consisted of a neurocognitive battery
administered at multiple time points over an 18-month period, measuring
processing speed, verbal memory, vigilance, reasoning, and working memory
domains. Genetic mediation of improvements in each of these five domains plus a
composite neurocognitive measure was assessed for each of five antipsychotics
(olanzapine, perphenazine, quetiapine, risperidone, and ziprasidone). Six SNPs
achieved genome-wide significance using a pre-specified threshold that ensures,
on average, only 1 in 10 findings is a false discovery. These six SNPs were
located within, or in close proximity to, genes EHF, SLC26A9, DRD2, GPR137B,
CHST8, and IL1A. The more robust findings, that is those significant across
multiple neurocognitive domains and having adjacent SNPs showing evidence for
association, were rs286913 at the EHF gene (p-value 6.99 × 10(-8), q-value 0.034,
mediating the effects of ziprasidone on vigilance), rs11240594 at SLC26A9
(p-value 1.4 × 10(-7), q-value 0.068, mediating the effects of olanzapine on
processing speed), and rs11677416 at IL1A (p-value 6.67 × 10(-7), q-value 0.081, 
mediating the effects of olanzapine on working memory). This study has generated 
several novel candidate genes for antipsychotic response. However, our findings
will require replication and functional validation. To facilitate replication
efforts, we provide all GWAS p-values for download.

PMCID: PMC3055694
PMID: 21107309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2010;2010:6162-5. doi:
10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5627769.

SeyeS - support system for preventing the development of ocular disabilities in
leprosy.

Girardi DR(1), Moro CM, Bulegon H.

Author information: 
(1)Pontifical Catholic University of Paraná (PUCPR), Brazil.
dennys.girardi@gmail.com

Leprosy is an infectious disease caused by Mycobacterium Leprae, and generally
compromises neural fibers, leading to the development of disabilities. These
limit daily activities or social life. In leprosy, the study of disability
considered functional (physical) and activity limitations; and social
participation. These are measured respectively by EHF and SALSA scales; by and
PARTICIPATION SCALE: The objective of this work was to propose a support system, 
SeyeS, to eyes disabilities development and progression identification, applying 
Bayesians network - BN's. It is expected that the proposed system be applied in
monitoring the patient during treatment and after therapeutic cure of leprosy.
SeyeS presented specificity 1 and sensitivity 0.6 in the identification of ocular
disabilities development. With Seyes was discovered that the presence of
trichiasis and lagophthalmos, tend to increase the probability of developing more
disabilities. Otherwise, characteristics as cataracts tend to decrease
development of other disabilities, considering that medical interventions could
reduce it. The more import of this system is to indicate what should be
monitored, and which elements needs interventions to not increasing patient's
ocular disabilities.

PMID: 21097149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Altern Complement Med. 2010 Nov;16(11):1211-6. doi: 10.1089/acm.2009.0208. Epub
2010 Oct 25.

Extremely high-frequency therapy in oncology.

Teppone M(1), Avakyan R.

Author information: 
(1)Acutech International Inc., 1057 Steeles Avenue, West Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. mikhail.teppone@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: This article represents a review of the literature, mainly from
Russian sources, dealing with the therapeutic application of low-intensity
electromagnetic radiation in the millimeter band applied to experimental and
clinical oncology.
METHOD: At the early stage of these studies, efficacy and safety of millimeter
electromagnetic radiation (extremely high frequency [EHF]) was proved for various
types of malignant tumors. The majority of the further studies demonstrated the
high efficacy and safety of millimeter wave radiation in treating patients
suffering from both benign and malignant tumors.
RESULTS: Developments led to treatment on skin melanoma, cancer of the
ear-nose-throat, bowel and breast cancer, cancer of the uterus, lung, and
stomach, solid tumors, as well as lymphoma. The main indications for this therapy
are (1) preparation prior to radical treatment; (2) prevention and treatment of
side-effects and complications from chemotherapy and radiotherapy; (3) prevention
of metastases, relapses, and dissemination of the tumor; (4) treatment of the
paraneoplastic syndrome; and (5) palliative therapy of incurable patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In spite of the fact that not all mechanisms underlying effects of
EHF therapy are known as yet, this therapeutic modality has been shown to have
great potential in clinical oncology from studies performed in Eastern Europe and
Russia.

PMID: 20973733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Acoust Soc Am. 2010 Oct;128(4):EL157-62. doi: 10.1121/1.3484232.

Unwanted sounds generated with test tone presentation can spoil extended
high-frequency audiometry.

Kurakata K, Mizunami T, Matsushita K, Shiraishi K.

Unwanted sounds from a commercially available audiometer were evaluated in terms 
of their effects on extended high-frequency (EHF) audiometry. Although the
manufacturer reported that the audiometer conformed to relevant International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) standards, the audiograms obtained using the
audiometer were erroneous because the subjects had responded falsely to noise
generated with the test tone presentation before detecting the test tone.
Analyses of acoustic and electric output signals revealed that the audiometer
generated most of the unwanted sounds, not the earphones that were used. Based on
the measurement results, clinical implications of the measurement results are
discussed for conducting more reliable EHF audiometry.

PMID: 20968319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Opt Express. 2010 Oct 11;18(21):21725-31. doi: 10.1364/OE.18.021725.

A novel broadband coaxial probe to parallel plate dielectric waveguide transition
at THz frequency.

Ye L(1), Xu R, Wang Z, Lin W.

Author information: 
(1)EHF Key Laboratory of Fundamental Science, University of Electronic Science
and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China. yelongfang@163.com

In this paper, transmission characteristics of the fundamental mode (TE(10(12))) 
of Parallel-Plate Dielectric Waveguide (PPDW) at 0.4-1.0 THz (1 THz = 10(12) Hz) 
are studied. The investigation results show PPDW with virtually low attenuation
and remarkable simple structure is a promising candidate as THz transmission
medium. Then, a novel broadband coaxial probe to PPDW transition is designed.
Although coaxial probe excitation has been used in microstrip lines and
rectangular waveguides in microwave, millimeter-wave frequency domain, the
present study shows that it is also an effective method to excite the PPDW at THz
frequency. As the investigation results show, the return loss of coax-PPDW
transition is better than 20 dB from 0.45 THz to 0.75 THz, and the insertion loss
is as low as 0.18 dB, which will have wide potential application in the terahertz
regime.

PMID: 20941072  [PubMed]


157. Curr Med Res Opin. 2010 Nov;26(11):2607-26. doi: 10.1185/03007995.2010.525472.
Epub 2010 Oct 6.

Economic evaluation of a 100% whey-based, partially hydrolysed formula in the
prevention of atopic dermatitis among French children.

Iskedjian M(1), Dupont C, Spieldenner J, Kanny G, Raynaud F, Farah B, Haschke F.

Author information: 
(1)PharmIdeas Research and Consulting Inc., Oakville, ON, Canada.
miskedjian@pharmideas.com

OBJECTIVE: A pharmacoeconomic analysis was performed to determine costs,
consequences and cost effectiveness of a partially hydrolysed 100% whey-based
infant formula, NAN HA, manufactured by Nestlé S.A, Switzerland (PHF-W) and
branded under Nidal Excel HA in France, in the prevention of atopic dermatitis
(AD) in 'at risk' children when compared to standard cows' milk formula (SF) in
France.
METHODS: A decision-analytic economic model depicting AD treatment pathways, as
well as resource utilisation and costs associated with the treatment of AD in
healthy yet 'at risk' French newborns who cannot be exclusively breastfed was
constructed for a 12-month time horizon, including an initial 6 months of
intervention with formula consumption. Model inputs were based on the literature,
official formularies and expert opinion. The modelled treatment pathways included
a dietary management approach (formula change), a medical treatment approach and 
a combination thereof. The final outcome was the expected cost per avoided case
of AD, yielding an incremental cost per avoided case (ICER) of AD when comparing 
subjects who used PHF-W versus SF. Outcomes were presented from three
perspectives: the French Ministry of Health (MOH), the subjects' family and
society as a whole. A secondary analysis also compared PHF-W to extensively
hydrolysed formula (EHF) in prevention.
RESULTS: The number of avoided AD cases by selecting PHF-W over SF was 13,356
cases in a birth cohort of 185,298 'at risk' infants. The base case analysis, at 
65% reimbursement, yielded expected ICERs of 1343,  -624 (savings) and 719
from the MOH, family and societal perspectives, respectively. From all three
perspectives, the highest cost was attributable to formula. In case of a 35%
reimbursement rate for PHF-W, the ICER was 615 from the MOH perspective, while
the use of PHF-W was cost neutral at 10% reimbursement. PHF-W was cost-saving
against EHF (98-116 million savings depending on type of EHF), when this latter
was used in prevention. One-way and probabilistic sensitivity analyses confirmed 
the robustness of the model.
CONCLUSION: Under a certain range of assumptions, this analysis based on
predictive modelling has established the cost effectiveness of PHF-W in the
prevention of AD in infants.

PMID: 20925454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Curr Med Res Opin. 2010 Nov;26(11):2599-606. doi: 10.1185/03007995.2010.525475.
Epub 2010 Oct 6.

Meta-analysis of a partially hydrolysed 100%-whey infant formula vs. extensively 
hydrolysed infant formulas in the prevention of atopic dermatitis.

Iskedjian M(1), Szajewska H, Spieldenner J, Farah B, Berbari J.

Author information: 
(1)PharmIdeas Research and Consulting Inc., Oakville, ON, Canada.
miskedjian@pharmideas.com

OBJECTIVES: This study presents previously unpublished point and cumulative
incidence rates and relative risks (RRs) for comparing a partially hydrolysed
100% whey-based infant formula, NAN-HA * (PHF-W) to extensively hydrolysed whey- 
(EHF-Whey) or casein-based (EHF-Casein) infant formulas in the prevention of
atopic dermatitis (AD) in infants who cannot be breastfed exclusively. It also
outlines methods to convert the above-mentioned data as well as data comparing
PHF-W to cows' milk formula (SF) into inputs to be applied to a pharmacoeconomic 
model. * NAN-HA is a registered trade name of Nestlé SA, Switzerland.
METHODS: The incidence rates and RRs were obtained from a meta-analysis which
analysed efficacy for PHF-W vs. EHF but did not present those. It took into
consideration any relevant randomized controlled trial which compared the use of 
PHF-W with SF or EHF for the prevention of allergies. The primary outcomes of
interest were the incidence, cumulative incidence and period prevalence of
allergic manifestations and of AD in particular. Fifteen studies had been
included for analysis of which six studies explored PHF-W vs. EHF. These results 
and PHF-W vs. SF data were adapted for inputs into a pharmacoeconomic model which
used a spreadsheet decision-analytic economic model based on 3-month cycles to
explore the cost-effectiveness of PHF-W vs. SF and EHF. Weights were applied to
the incidence rates and RRs for each reported time period which were then adapted
into 3-month indicators.
RESULTS: This meta-analysis for PHF-W (557 patients) vs. EHF-Whey (559 patients) 
yielded RR of 0.75 (0.54, 1.05) and 0.80 (0.63, 1.02) at 0-12 months and at 0-36 
months, respectively. Corresponding RRs for PHF-W vs. EHF-Casein (580 patients)
were 1.06 (0.74, 1.53) at 0-12 months and 1.13 (0.87, 1.47) at 0-36 months.
CONCLUSION: It appears that the efficacy of PHF-W falls within the range of that 
of both EHF formulas (whey and casein) and allows the application of these
results in a pharmacoeconomic model.

PMID: 20925453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Opt Lett. 2010 Aug 1;35(15):2642-4. doi: 10.1364/OL.35.002642.

Distributed external cloak without embedded antiobjects.

Han T(1), Qiu CW, Tang X.

Author information: 
(1)EHF Key Laboratory of Fundamental Science, School of Electronic
Engineering,University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu,
Sichuan 611731, China.

We propose a distributed external cloak without embedded antiobjects, which
contains tunable windows and a cloaking area. It consists of closed and
standalone systems whose positions and parameters can be separately controlled by
the design purpose and folded geometry. Such an external cloak does not rely on
either cloaked material or the concept of the antiobject [Phys. Rev. Lett. 102,
093901 (2009)] in the complementary material, and can thus be kept unchanged when
different objects are considered. The object lies outside the cloak and is not
blinded in terms of multiple open windows desired by specific designs. Such a
distributed cloak enables us to conceal arbitrary objects of varying shape in
center areas, which may exceed the inner boundary of a perfect closed cloak.

PMID: 20680085  [PubMed]


160. Digestion. 2010;82(4):252-7. doi: 10.1159/000297161. Epub 2010 Jun 24.

Colonic adenomas found via colonoscopy: yield and risk factors for high-grade
dysplasia.

Kristjansdottir S(1), Jonasson JG, Cariglia N, Thjodleifsson B.

Author information: 
(1)Speglun ehf, Reykjavík, Iceland. skris@mmedia.is

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The adenoma-carcinoma sequence is the model for colorectal
carcinoma (CRC) developing through high-grade dysplasia (HGD) to CRC. The aim was
to assess prevalence and location of adenomas found during colonoscopy and risk
factors for HGD.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A population-based study using all colonoscopies and polyp 
specimens registered between 2000 and 2004 in Iceland. Multiple logistic
regression analysis was used to assess independent risk factors for HGD.
RESULTS: A total of 3,315 adenomas were removed from 2,385 patients. Only 14.0%
were >1 cm in size. HGD was found in 135 (4.1%) of the adenomas and
tubulovillous/villous histology in 15.0%. The prevalence of adenomas in the 50-
to 69-year age group was 15.5%, and 21.5% in the >or=70-year group. 60.9% of them
were located distal to the splenic flexure. Independent risk factors for HGD were
in the order of importance: size; multiplicity; tubulovillous/villous histology; 
location in rectum, and age. The prevalence of HGD in the group with an adenoma
size of 0.6-1.0 cm was 4.1% and in the 40- to 69-year age group it was 3.7%.
CONCLUSION: The study suggests a potential 15% yield per colonoscopy of adenomas 
in 50- to 69-year-olds. There is an appreciable risk of HGD in diminutive polyps 
and in middle age.

PMID: 20588041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Med Sci Monit. 2010 Jul;16(7):CR352-6.

Screening protocols for the prevention of occupational noise-induced hearing
loss: the role of conventional and extended high frequency audiometry may vary
according to the years of employment.

Riga M(1), Korres G, Balatsouras D, Korres S.

Author information: 
(1)ENT Department, University Hospital of Alexandroupolis, Demokritos University 
of Thrace, Thrace, Greece. mariariga@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Although occupational noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) has become a 
major problem in industrialized societies, there is a notable lack of effective
screening protocols to ensure its early diagnosis. The aim of this study was to
detect a potential role of extended high frequency (EHF) audiometry in industrial
hearing screening protocols.
MATERIAL/METHODS: The population consisted of 151 persons, working for 8 hours
daily in a noisy environment (90-110 dBA). The changes of hearing thresholds in
industrial workers were analyzed, not only with respect to their age, as has been
presented by previous studies, but also with respect to the duration of their
previous employment.
RESULTS: During the first 10 years of employment, the frequencies 12500, 14000
and 16000Hz were the only ones significantly affected. For the second decade of
employment, thresholds were significantly elevated only at 2000 and 4000Hz. After
exceeding 20 years of employment, the affected frequencies were 250, 500 and
1000Hz. The effects of age on hearing acuity were significant at all frequencies 
for the first 2 groups.
CONCLUSIONS: EHF audiometry seems able to identify the first signs of NIHL, much 
earlier than conventional audiometry, and therefore may need to be implemented in
the screening examinations especially of workers with less than 1 decade of
employment. Hearing screening protocols could become more efficient by adjusting 
their frequency ranges according to the frequencies "at risk", which correspond
to the duration of the workers' previous employment.

PMID: 20581779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2010;155:78-84.

Risk assessment of integrated electronic health records.

Bjornsson BT(1), Sigurdardottir G, Stefansson SO.

Author information: 
(1)Stiki ehf., Reykjavik, Iceland. bjarni@stiki.eu

The paper describes the security concerns related to Electronic Health Records
(EHR) both in registration of data and integration of systems. A description of
the current state of EHR systems in Iceland is provided, along with the Ministry 
of Health's future vision and plans. New legislation provides the opportunity for
increased integration of EHRs and further collaboration between institutions.
Integration of systems, along with greater availability and access to EHR data,
requires increased security awareness since additional risks are introduced. The 
paper describes the core principles of information security as it applies to EHR 
systems and data. The concepts of confidentiality, integrity, availability,
accountability and traceability are introduced and described. The paper discusses
the legal requirements and importance of performing risk assessment for EHR data.
Risk assessment methodology according to the ISO/IEC 27001 information security
standard is described with examples on how it is applied to EHR systems.

PMID: 20543313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Headache Pain. 2010 Aug;11(4):345-8. doi: 10.1007/s10194-010-0211-6. Epub 2010 
Apr 7.

Guidelines for telematic second opinion consultation on headaches in Europe: on
behalf of the European Headache Federation (EHF).

Pereira-Monteiro J(1), Wysocka-Bakowska MM, Katsarava Z, Antonaci F; European
Headache Federation.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Hospital Santo António and ICBAS, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal. pereiramonteiro@mail.telepac.pt

The seeking of a second opinion is the long-established process whereby a
physician or expert from the same or a similar specialty is invited to assess a
clinical case in order to confirm or reject a diagnosis or treatment plan.
Seeking a second opinion has become more common in recent years, and the trend is
associated with significant changes in the patient-doctor relationship.
Telemedicine is attractive because it is not only fast but also affordable and
thus makes it possible to reach highly qualified centres and experts that would
otherwise be inaccessible, being impossible, or too expensive, to reach by any
surface transport. In Europe, the European Headache Federation (EHF), being able 
to draw on a group of headache experts covering all the European languages, is
the organisation best placed to provide qualified second-opinion consultation on 
difficult headache cases and to develop a Headache Medical Opinion Service
Centre. The provision of good quality clinical information is crucial to the
formulation of a valid, expert second opinion. This preliminary step can be
properly accomplished only by the primary health care provider through the
furnishing of an appropriate clinical report, together with the results of all
available tests, including original films of all imaging studies already
performed. On receiving the EHF's proposed standardised data collection form,
properly filled in, we may be sure that we have all the relevant data necessary
to formulate a valid expert second opinion. This form can be accessed
electronically and downloaded from the EHF website. Once finalised, the EHF
second opinion project should be treated as a pilot strategy that requires
careful monitoring (for the first year at least), so that appropriate changes, as
suggested by the retrospective analysis and its quality control, can be
implemented.

PMCID: PMC3476343
PMID: 20373124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2010 Jun;21(4 Pt 1):577-85. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-3038.2010.00991.x. Epub 2010 Mar 10.

The effect of a partially hydrolysed formula based on rice protein in the
treatment of infants with cow's milk protein allergy.

Reche M(1), Pascual C, Fiandor A, Polanco I, Rivero-Urgell M, Chifre R, Johnston 
S, Martín-Esteban M.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy Department, University Children's Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
martareche@yahoo.es

Comment in
    Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2011 Dec;22(8):878-9.

Infants diagnosed with allergy to cow's milk protein (CMP) are fed extensively
hydrolysed cow's milk formulas, modified soy formulas or even amino acid-based
formulas. Hydrolysed rice protein infant formulas have become available and have 
been shown to be well tolerated by these infants. A prospective open, randomized 
clinical study to compare the clinical tolerance of a new hydrolysed rice protein
formula (HRPF) with an extensively hydrolysed CMP formula (EHF) in the feeding of
infants with IgE-mediated cow's milk allergy. Ninety-two infants (46 boys and 46 
girls, mean age 4.3 months, range 1.1-10.1 months) diagnosed with IgE-mediated
cow's milk allergy were enrolled in the study. Clinical tolerance to the formula 
products was tested. Clinical evaluation included skin prick tests with whole
cow's milk, soya and rice as well as antigens of CMP (beta-lactoglobulin,
alpha-lactalbumin, casein and bovine seroalbumin), HRPF and EHF and specific IgE 
determinations to CMP using CAP technology. Patients were randomized to receive
either an EHF based on CMP or a new HRPF. Follow-up was at 3, 6, 12, 18 and 24
months. Growth parameters were measured at each visit. One infant showed
immediate allergic reaction to EHF, but no reaction was shown by any infant in
the HRPF group. The number of infants who did not become tolerant to CMP during
the study was not statistically different between the two groups. Measurement of 
IgE levels of infants allergic to CMP during the study showed no significant
differences between the two formula groups. Growth parameters were in the normal 
range and similar between groups. In this study, the HRPF was well tolerated by
infants with moderate to severe symptoms of IgE-mediated CMP allergy. Children
receiving this formula showed similar growth and development of clinical
tolerance to those receiving an EHF. In accordance with current guidelines, this 
HRPF was tolerated by more than 90% of children with CMP allergy and therefore
could provide an adequate and safe alternative to CMP-hydrolysed formulas for
these infants.

PMCID: PMC2904490
PMID: 20337976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Headache Pain. 2010 Apr;11(2):161-5. doi: 10.1007/s10194-010-0195-2. Epub 2010 
Feb 24.

Guidelines for the organization of headache education in Europe: the headache
school II.

Jensen R(1), Mitsikostas DD, Valade D, Antonaci F.

Author information: 
(1)Danish Headache Center, Department of Neurology, Glostrup Hospital, University
of Copenhagen, Ndr. Ringvej 69, Building 24, Glostrup, Denmark.
rigj@glo.regionh.dk

In order to promote education on headache disorders, European Headache Federation
(EHF) in conjunction with National Headache Societies organizes educational
courses meeting uniform standards according to previous published guidelines.
Based on six headache summer schools' experience, an EHF subcommittee has
reviewed these guidelines, and here the revised version is presented. The goals
remain the same: quality courses that will attract physicians and neurologists
seeking to increase their knowledge, skills, and understanding in the area of
primary and secondary headache. Detailed guidelines, a day-to-day program, and a 
multiple-choice test battery have now been outlined. It is recommended to include
practical sessions with patient interviews and hands-on demonstrations of
non-pharmacological treatment strategies. For countries that want a 'low cost'
education program, a Video School program of a similar scientific standard has
been developed. To be certified for CME credits, patronage, and financial support
from EHF, it is highly recommended to adhere to the suggested teaching
strategies. We hereby aim to promote and professionalize the education in
headache disorders and endorse the educational courses meeting uniform standards 
of excellence.

PMCID: PMC3452286
PMID: 20179986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Metabolism. 2011 Feb;60(2):243-9. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2009.11.023. Epub 2010
Feb 20.

Increased bone resorption and impaired bone microarchitecture in short-term and
extended high-fat diet-induced obesity.

Patsch JM(1), Kiefer FW, Varga P, Pail P, Rauner M, Stupphann D, Resch H, Moser
D, Zysset PK, Stulnig TM, Pietschmann P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Pathophysiology, Department of
Pathophysiology, Center of Physiology, Pathophysiology and Immunology, Medical
University Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

Although obesity traditionally has been considered a condition of low risk for
osteoporosis, this classic view has recently been questioned. The aim of this
study was to assess bone microarchitecture and turnover in a mouse model of
high-fat diet-induced obesity. Seven-week-old male C57BL/6J mice (n = 18) were
randomized into 3 diet groups. One third (n = 6) received a low-fat diet for 24
weeks, one third was kept on an extended high-fat diet (eHF), and the remaining
was switched from low-fat to high-fat chow 3 weeks before sacrifice (sHF). Serum 
levels of insulin, leptin, adiponectin, osteocalcin, and cross-linked
telopeptides of type I collagen (CTX) were measured. In addition, bone
microarchitecture was analyzed by micro-computed tomography; and lumbar spine
bone density was assessed by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry. The CTX, body
weight, insulin, and leptin were significantly elevated in obese animals (sHF:
+48%, +24%, +265%, and +102%; eHF: +43%, +52%, +761%, and +292%). The CTX, body
weight, insulin, and leptin showed a negative correlation with bone density and
bone volume. Interestingly, short-term high-fat chow caused similar bone loss as 
extended high-fat feeding. Bone volume was decreased by 12% in sHF and 19% in
eHF. Bone mineral density was 25% (sHF) and 27% (eHF) lower when compared with
control mice on low-fat diet. As assessed by the structure model index, bone
microarchitecture changed from plate- to rod-like appearance upon high-fat
challenge. Trabecular and cortical thickness remained unaffected. Short-term and 
extended high-fat diet-induced obesity caused significant bone loss in male
C57BL/6J mice mainly because of resorptive changes in trabecular architecture.

© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20171704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Med Food. 2010 Feb;13(1):31-8. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2009.1233.

The ethyl alcohol extract of Hizikia fusiforme inhibits matrix metalloproteinase 
activity and regulates tight junction related protein expression in Hep3B human
hepatocarcinoma cells.

Kim SO(1), Choi YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomaterial Control (BK21 Program), Dongeui University Graduate 
School, Busan, Republic of Korea.

We tested the correlation between the tightness of tight junctions (TJs) and the 
anti-invasive activity of the ethyl alcohol extract of Hizikia fusiforme (EHF) in
Hep3B human hepatocarcinoma cells. EHF inhibited cell proliferation, motility,
and invasiveness, which were associated with increased TJ tightness, as
demonstrated by an increase in transepithelial electrical resistance. EHF
dose-dependently decreased the secretion of matrix metalloprotease-2 and -9,
which correlated with a decrease in mRNA and protein expression, but increased
tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 and -2 mRNA levels. Additionally,
immunoblotting results indicated that EHF suppressed the major components of TJ, 
claudins (-1, -3, and -4), which play a key role in the control and selectivity
of paracellular transport. These data indicate that EHF may inhibit cancer cell
invasion through the tightening of TJs, which may counteract the up-regulation of
claudins. Furthermore, EHF treatment decreased the expression of insulin-like
growth factor-1 receptor proteins, while concurrently increasing that of
thrombospondin-1 and E-cadherin. In conclusion, these results suggest that EHF
treatment may inhibit tumor metastasis and invasion and therefore act as a
dietary resource for decreasing the risk of developing cancer.

PMID: 20136433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Clin Exp Allergy. 2010 Apr;40(4):627-36. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03444.x.
Epub 2010 Jan 14.

Impact of early feeding on childhood eczema: development after nutritional
intervention compared with the natural course - the GINIplus study up to the age 
of 6 years.

Berg Av(1), Krämer U, Link E, Bollrath C, Heinrich J, Brockow I, Koletzko S,
Grübl A, Filipiak-Pittroff B, Wichmann HE, Bauer CP, Reinhardt D, Berdel D;
GINIplus study group.

Collaborators: Berdel D, Berg Av, Berdel D, Wichmann HE, Reinhardt D, Bauer CP,
Berg Av, Koletzko S, Grübl A, Berg Av, Bollrath C, Grübl A, Brockow I, Wichmann
HE, Heinrich J, Filipiak-Pittroff B, Krämer U, Heinrich J, Krämer U, Berg Av,
Krämer U, Wichmann HE, Heinrich J, Schoetzau A, Mosetter M, Schindler J, Höhnke
A, Franke K, Laubereau B, Gehring U, Sausenthaler S, Thaqi A, Zirngibl A,
Zutavern A, Berdel D, Berg Av, Filipiak-Pittroff B, Albrecht B, Baumgart A,
Bollrath C, Büttner S, Diekamp S, Gross I, Jakob T, Klemke K, Kurpiun S,
Möllemann M, Neusüss J, Varhelyi A, Koletzko S, Reinhard D, Weigand H, Antonie I,
Bäumler-Merl B, Tasch C, Göhlert R, Mühlbauer D, Sönnichsen C, Sauerwald T,
Kindermann A, Waag M, Koch M, Bauer CP, Grübl A, Bartels P, Brockow I, Fischer A,
Hoffmann U, Lötzbeyer F, Mayrl R, Negele K, Schill EM, Wolf B, Krämer U, Link E, 
Ranft U, Schins R, Sugiri D.

Author information: 
(1)Marien-Hospital Wesel, Department of Paediatrics, Germany.
vonberg@marine-hospital-wesel.de <vonberg@marine-hospital-wesel.de>

Comment in
    Clin Exp Allergy. 2010 Apr;40(4):534-5.

BACKGROUND: Nutritional intervention with hydrolysed infant formulas has been
shown efficacious in preventing eczema in children predisposed to allergy.
However, this preventive effect has never been related to the natural course of
eczema in children with or without a family history of allergy. The aim of this
study therefore was to compare the course of eczema in predisposed children after
nutritional intervention to the natural course of eczema.
METHOD: The prospective German birth cohort study GINIplus includes a total of
5991 children, subdivided into interventional and non-interventional groups.
Children with a familial predisposition for allergy whose parents agreed to
participate in the prospective, double-blind intervention trial (N=2252) were
randomly assigned at birth to one of four formulas: partially or extensively
hydrolysed whey, extensively hydrolysed casein (eHF-C) or standard cow's milk
formula. Children with or without familial predisposition represented the
non-interventional group (N=3739). Follow-up data were taken from yearly
self-administered questionnaires from 1 up to 6 years. The outcome was
physician-diagnosed eczema and its symptoms. The cumulative incidence of eczema
in predisposed children with or without nutritional intervention was compared
with that of non-predisposed children who did not receive intervention. Cox
regression was used to adjust for confounding.
RESULTS: Predisposed children without nutritional intervention had a 2.1 times
higher risk for eczema [95% confidence interval (CI) 1.6-2.7] than children
without a familial predisposition. The risk was smaller with nutritional
intervention even levelling out to 1.3 (95% CI 0.9-1.9) in children fed eHF-C
formula.
CONCLUSION: Although direct comparability is somewhat restricted, the data
demonstrate that early intervention with hydrolysed infant formulas can
substantially compensate up until the age of 6 years for an enhanced risk of
childhood eczema due to familial predisposition to allergy.

PMID: 20082618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Curr Med Res Opin. 2010 Feb;26(2):423-37. doi: 10.1185/03007990903510317.

Meta-analysis of the evidence for a partially hydrolyzed 100% whey formula for
the prevention of allergic diseases.

Szajewska H(1), Horvath A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, The Medical University of Warsaw, 01-184 Warsaw,
Dzialdowska 1, Poland. hania@ipgate.pl

OBJECTIVE: Infants with a documented hereditary risk of atopy (i.e., an affected 
parent and/or sibling) who cannot be breastfed exclusively are recommended to
receive a formula with confirmed reduced allergenicity, i.e., a partially or
extensively hydrolyzed formula (pHF and eHF, respectively), as a means of
preventing allergic reactions. The efficacy of each hydrolyzed formula for the
prevention of allergic diseases should be established separately, as factors such
as the protein source, hydrolysis method and degree of hydrolysis that often
depend on the manufacturer contribute to differences among hydrolysates. The aim 
was to systematically review data on the efficacy of a partially hydrolyzed 100% 
whey formula (pHF) in reducing the risk of allergy in healthy infants at high
risk for allergy.
METHODS: The Cochrane Library, MEDLINE, EMBASE, and CINAHL databases were
searched in September 2009 (from inception to September 2009) for randomized and 
quasi-randomized controlled trials (RCTs); additional references were obtained
from reviewed articles. The company that manufactures the pHF used was contacted 
for unpublished data.
RESULTS: The search yielded 84 citations. Fifteen RCTs were included, some of
which had potential methodological limitations such as unclear or inadequate
allocation concealment, no intention-to-treat analysis, and no true blinding. For
primary outcomes, i.e., all allergic diseases and atopic eczema/atopic
dermatitis, use of the pHF compared with standard formula (SF) was associated
with reduced risks (incidence, cumulative incidence, period prevalence) that were
statistically significant for most, albeit not all, time points. Comparison of
groups who received the pHF versus extensively hydrolyzed (eH) whey formula
revealed no significant differences in outcomes except for reductions in the
cumulative incidences of all allergic diseases at 0 to 36 months of age.
Comparison of groups who received the pHF versus eH casein formula revealed no
significant difference in outcomes between groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of the pHF compared to SF is effective in allergy prevention
in children at high risk for allergy at most time points. These results should be
interpreted with caution due to a lack of methodological rigor in many trials.
Reassuringly, the strongest evidence comes from a well-designed and conducted,
independently funded RCT.

PMID: 20001576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Allergy. 2010 Mar;65(3):368-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2009.02210.x. Epub 2009 
Oct 22.

Alternaria sensitization and allergic rhinitis with or without asthma in the
French Six Cities study.

Randriamanantany ZA(1), Annesi-Maesano I, Moreau D, Raherison C, Charpin D,
Kopferschmitt C, Lavaud F, Taytard A, De Blay F, Caillaud D.

Author information: 
(1)CHU Clermont-Ferrand, Hôpital Gabriel Montpied, Service de Pneumologie, rue
Montalembert, Clermont-Ferrand, France.

BACKGROUND: Allergic sensitization to Alternaria has been related to asthma in
various studies, but its association with allergic rhinitis is still
controversial.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to assess at the population level the
relationships in childhood between Alternaria sensitization and 'past-year
rhinoconjunctivitis' (PYRC), 'ever hay fever' (EHF) and 'ever allergic rhinitis
caused by allergens other than pollens' (EAR) according to the presence or the
absence of asthma.
METHODS: This study is part of the Six Cities Study, the French contribution to
the International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood (ISAAC) Phase II.
Children underwent skin prick test (SPT) to Alternaria and parents filled a
standardized medical questionnaire.
RESULTS: Some 6726 children with a mean age of 10 years were examined. The
overall prevalence of Alternaria sensitization was 2.8%, 0.8% for
monosensitization. Prevalences of symptoms in sensitized children were 27.7% for 
PYRC, 27.0% for EHF and 30.4% for EAR. Adjusted Odds Ratios (OR) between
Alternaria sensitization and allergic rhinitis phenotypes were 2.34 (95%
confidence interval: 1.51-3.63) for PYRC, 2.40 (1.65-3.50) for EHF and 2.95
(2.05-4.23) for EAR. The relationship still remained in the case of
monosensitization to Alternaria for both PYRC and EAR when excluding the
asthmatic children [OR = 3.87 (1.54-9.78) and 2.88 (1.10-7.55) respectively].
CONCLUSION: In our population-based sample of children, we found a link between
Alternaria sensitization and allergic rhinitis, independently of asthma, which is
compatible with the mechanisms of deposition of Alternaria in the upper airways.

PMID: 19849673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Nestle Nutr Workshop Ser Pediatr Program. 2009;64:239-47; discussion 247-57. doi:
10.1159/000235794. Epub 2009 Aug 19.

Modified proteins in allergy prevention.

von Berg A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, Children's Department, Marien Hospital-Wesel, Abteilung
für Kinderheilkunde, Wesel, Germany. vonberg@marien-hospital-wesel.de

Around 2.5% of neonates experience hypersensitivity reactions to cow's milk
protein during the first year of life, which is highly associated with early
exposure to cow's milk. To prevent early allergy development, cow's milk proteins
in infant formulas were modified by hydrolyzation processes for use in children
at high atopic risk who need milk supplementation in the first months of life.
Dependent on the degree of modification, hydrolyzed cow's milk formulas are
differentiated into extensively and partially hydrolyzed whey or casein
hydrolysates (pHF, eHF). However, their allergy-preventive potential seems not
only to dependent on the degree but also on the process of hydrolysis. pHF and
eHF can be used for primary prevention of allergy in infants at high atopic risk,
while only eHFs are indicated for secondary prevention in patients with manifest 
cow's milk allergy. In clinical trials a consistent trend to a reduction in
atopy, mainly atopic eczema and food allergy, by certain pHFs and eHFs could be
demonstrated in children with a familial risk of atopy until the age of 6 years. 
Because more than 50% of allergic children do not have a family history of atopy,
it would be worthwhile to consider primary allergy prevention with hydrolysates
for all children who need supplementation to breastfeeding.

Copyright 2009 Nestec Ltd., Vevey/S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19710526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2009 Jul-Aug;(4):32-7.

[Rehabilitative treatment of idiopathic scoliosis in children and adolescents].

[Article in Russian]

Miriutova NF, Kirichuk SV, Lipina EV.

Examination of 1326 children and adolescents revealed physiological asymmetry of 
neuro-orthopedic status in 57% of the subjects, functional scoliosis in 33%, and 
structural scoliosis in 4.5%. Only 5.5% of the examined children and adolescents 
did not show clinical and functional signs of spinal pathology. Treatment with
mechanical vibrations (vibro-massage or "swing" therapy), pulsed extremely high
frequency (EHF) waves and electrical current yielded good therapeutic effect in
cases with idiopathic scoliosis. Specifically, it resulted in a diminished angle 
of curvature of the spine and improved muscular support of the spine.

PMID: 19708563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Bioelectromagnetics. 2009 Sep;30(6):454-61. doi: 10.1002/bem.20499.

Features of anti-inflammatory effects of modulated extremely high-frequency
electromagnetic radiation.

Gapeyev AB(1), Mikhailik EN, Chemeris NK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biophysics of Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow
Region, Russia. gapeyev@icb.psn.ru

Using a model of acute zymosan-induced paw edema in NMRI mice, we test the
hypothesis that anti-inflammatory effects of extremely high-frequency
electromagnetic radiation (EHF EMR) can be essentially modified by application of
pulse modulation with certain frequencies. It has been revealed that a single
exposure of animals to continuous EHF EMR for 20 min reduced the exudative edema 
of inflamed paw on average by 19% at intensities of 0.1-0.7 mW/cm(2) and
frequencies from the range of 42.2-42.6 GHz. At fixed effective carrier frequency
of 42.2 GHz, the anti-inflammatory effect of EHF EMR did not depend on modulation
frequencies, that is, application of different modulation frequencies from the
range of 0.03-100 Hz did not lead to considerable changes in the effect level. On
the contrary, at "ineffective" carrier frequencies of 43.0 and 61.22 GHz, the use
of modulation frequencies of 0.07-0.1 and 20-30 Hz has allowed us to restore the 
effect up to a maximal level. The results obtained show the critical dependence
of anti-inflammatory action of low-intensity EHF EMR on carrier and modulation
frequencies. Within the framework of this study, the possibility of changing the 
level of expected biological effect of modulated EMR by a special selection of
combination of carrier and modulation frequencies is confirmed.

PMID: 19431156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Jun;89(6):1846-56. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2008.27373. Epub 2009
Apr 15.

Short- and long-term effects of feeding hydrolyzed protein infant formulas on
growth at < or = 6 y of age: results from the German Infant Nutritional
Intervention Study.

Rzehak P(1), Sausenthaler S, Koletzko S, Reinhardt D, von Berg A, Krämer U,
Berdel D, Bollrath C, Grübl A, Bauer CP, Wichmann HE, Heinrich J; German Infant
Nutritional Intervention Study Group.

Collaborators: Wichmann HE, Heinrich J, Schoetzau A, Popescu M, Mosetter M,
Schindler J, Franke K, Laubereau B, Sausenthaler S, Thaqi A, Zirngibl A, Zutavern
A, Filipiak B, Gehring U, Berdel D, von Berg A, Albrecht B, Baumgart A, Bollrath 
C, Büttner S, Diekamp S, Gros I, Jakob T, Klemke K, Kurpiun S, Möllemann M,
Neusüss J, Varhelyi A, Zorn C C, Koletzko S, Reinhard D, Weigand H, Antonie I,
Bäumler-Merl B, Tasch C, Göhlert R, Sönnichsen C, Bauer CP, Grübl A, Bartels P,
Brockow I, Hoffmann U, Lötzbeyer F, Mayrl R, Negele K, Schill EM, Wolf B, Krämer 
U, Link E, Sugiri D, Ranft U.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health,
Institute of Epidemiology, Neuherberg, Germany.
peter.rzehak@helmholtz-muenchen.de

BACKGROUND: The short- and long-term effects of feeding with hydrolyzed formulas 
on growth are uncertain.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim was to investigate the potential differences in body mass
index (BMI) over the first 6 y of life between infants fed with partially
hydrolyzed whey (pHF-W), extensively hydrolyzed whey (eHF-W), extensively
hydrolyzed casein (eHF-C), or cow-milk formula (CMF) and infants exclusively
breastfed for the first 16 wk of life.
DESIGN: We established a prospective, randomized, double-blind trial of full-term
neonates with atopic heredity in the German birth cohort followed by the German
Infant Nutritional Intervention Study through the first 6 y of life.
Intention-to-treat and per-protocol analyses of absolute and World Health
Organization-standardized BMI trajectories for 1840 infants (pHF-W: n = 253;
eHF-W: n = 265; eHF-C: n = 250, CMF: n = 276; breastfed: n = 796) were performed.
RESULTS: No significant differences in absolute or World Health
Organization-standardized BMI trajectories were found among the pHF-W, eHF-W,
CMF, and breastfed groups during the 6-y follow-up. However, in the eHF-C group, 
both intention-to-treat and per-protocol analyses showed a significantly slower
sex-adjusted BMI gain through the 8th to 48th week of life (-0.1 to -0.2 lower
BMI z score) but not beyond. Analyses of weight and length revealed that this
difference is due to a slightly diminished weight gain in the first year of life 
because growth in length did not differ among study groups for the entire
follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first randomized trial investigating
both short- and long-term effects of partially and extensively hydrolyzed formula
(pHF-W, eHF-W, eHF-C), CMF, and breastfeeding on growth in one trial. Feeding
with eHF-C led to a transient lower weight gain in the first year of life. No
long-term consequences of different formulas on BMI were observed.

PMID: 19369380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol. 2008 Dec;26(4):199-204.

Cow's milk allergy in Thai children.

Ngamphaiboon J(1), Chatchatee P, Thongkaew T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy and Immunology, Faculty of
Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
ngamphaiboon_j@yahoo.com

Cow's milk allergy (CMA) is nowadays a common problem in Thai children. We
reviewed medical records of patients with CMA from the Department of Pediatrics
at King Chulalongkom Memorial Hospital of the past 10 years, from 1998 to 2007.
The criteria for the diagnosis of CMA included: elimination of cow's milk formula
resulting in improvement of symptoms, and: recurrence of symptoms after
reintroduction of cow's milk by oral challenge or by accidental ingestion. Of the
382 children with a diagnosis of CMA, 168 were girls and 214 were boys. The
average age at the time of diagnosis was 14.8 months (7 days-13 years). The
average duration of symptoms before diagnosis was 9.2 months. A family history of
atopic diseases was found in 64.2% of the patients. All of the mothers reported
an increased consumption of cow's milk during their pregnancy. The most common
symptoms were respiratory (43.2%) followed by gastrointestinal (GI) (22.5%) and
skin manifestations (20.1%). Less common symptoms included failure to thrive
(10.9%), anemia (2.8%), delayed speech due to chronic serous otitis media (0.2%) 
and anaphylactic shock (0.2%). A prick skin test with cow milk extract was
positive in 61.4%. Exclusively breast-fed was found in 13.2% of the patients.
Successful treatment included elimination of cow's milk and milk products and
substitution with soy formula in 42.5%, partial hydrolysate formula (pHF) in
35.7%, extensive hydrolysate formula (eHF) in 14.2%, and amino acid formula in
1.7%. Continued breast feeding was successful in 5.9% (with maternal restriction 
of cow's milk and milk products). Our study demonstrates the variety of clinical 
manifestations of CMA in Thai children especially respiratory symptoms which are 
usually overlooked.

PMID: 19317338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell. 2009 May;31(5):869-83. doi:
10.1109/TPAMI.2008.130.

NV-tree: an efficient disk-based index for approximate search in very large
high-dimensional collections.

Lejsek H(1), Asmundsson FH, Jónsson Bt, Amsaleg L.

Author information: 
(1)Eff2 Technologies ehf., Kringlan1, IS-103 Reykjavík, Iceland. {herwig,
fridrik}@eff2.net

Over the last two decades, much research effort has been spent on nearest
neighbor search in high-dimensional data sets. Most of the approaches published
thus far have, however, only been tested on rather small collections. When large 
collections have been considered, high-performance environments have been used,
in particular systems with a large main memory. Accessing data on disk has
largely been avoided because disk operations are considered to be too slow. It
has been shown, however, that using large amounts of memory is generally not an
economic choice. Therefore, we propose the NV-tree, which is a very efficient
disk-based data structure that can give good approximate answers to nearest
neighbor queries with a single disk operation, even for very large collections of
high-dimensional data. Using a single NV-tree, the returned results have high
recall but contain a number of false positives. By combining two or three
NV-trees, most of those false positives can be avoided while retaining the high
recall. Finally, we compare the NV-tree to Locality Sensitive Hashing, a popular 
method for epsilon-distance search. We show that they return results of similar
quality, but the NV-tree uses many fewer disk reads.

PMID: 19299861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Leg Med (Tokyo). 2009 Apr;11 Suppl 1:S541-3. doi: 10.1016/j.legalmed.2009.01.030.
Epub 2009 Mar 6.

Diagnostic aspects for epidemic hemorrhagic fever in legal medical autopsy:
report of 2 cases and review.

Zhao R(1), Zhu BL, Guan DW, Li RB, Zhang GH, Wu X, Wang DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Pathology, China Medical University School of Forensic 
Medicine, No. 92, Beier Road, Heping District, Shenyang 110001, Liaoning
Province, PR China. zhaor400@yahoo.com.cn

Epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) is known also as hemorrhagic fever with renal
syndrome (HFRS). Hantaviruses, a notorious cause of EHF is spreaded by rodents or
biting insects, can cause epidemic hemorrhagic fever. This report describes two
rare medico-legal autopsy cases died from epidemic hemorrhagic fever. The victims
were two male individuals aged 34 years and 29 years. The medico-legal autopsies 
were requested for alleged medical negligence. In both cases, autopsy reveals
lesions to kidneys and lungs with multiple organ hemorrhage and edema, indicative
of the generalized capillary damage. On admission to hospital, both patients had 
the symptom of fever, lumbago, renal failure and recent outdoor activities. The
laboratory diagnosis results indicating multiple organ dysfunction syndrome are
also important for certificating of EHF. Though the ELISA-based detection of
virus-specific IgM antibody which has the highest titers between 8 and 25d after 
onset of disease is positive in the 34-year-old case and negative in 29-year-old 
case, the pathological findings and clinical laboratory analysis suggested the
both victims died of EHF. In addition, immunohistochemistry analysis for
Hantavirus antigen in lung or in tubular cells and PCR having been used
increasingly in recent years contribute to the diagnosis of Hantavirus infection.

PMID: 19269214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2009 Sep;48(7):734-44. doi: 10.1177/0009922809332682. Epub 
2009 Mar 4.

Growth and tolerance of healthy term infants receiving hydrolyzed infant formulas
supplemented with Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG: randomized, double-blind,
controlled trial.

Scalabrin DM(1), Johnston WH, Hoffman DR, P'Pool VL, Harris CL, Mitmesser SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Affairs, Mead Johnson Nutrition, Evansville, Indiana
47721, USA.

Healthy, term infants received extensively hydrolyzed casein formula (EHF;
control), the same formula supplemented with Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG
(EHF-LGG), or partially hydrolyzed whey:casein (60:40) formula supplemented with 
LGG (PHF-LGG), in this double-blind, randomized, controlled, parallel,
prospective study. Anthropometric measures and 24-hour dietary and tolerance
recalls were obtained at 30, 60, 90, 120, and 150 days of age. Blood collected in
a subset of infants was analyzed for fatty acid profiles in plasma and red blood 
cells and for markers of allergic sensitization. Adverse events were recorded
throughout the study. Growth rates were not statistically different between EHF
and PHF-LGG and between EHF and EHF-LGG from day 14 to day 30, 120, or 150. No
relevant differences in formula tolerance, adverse events, or allergic and immune
markers were demonstrated between groups. The extensively and partially
hydrolyzed formulas supplemented with LGG support normal growth in healthy, term 
infants and are well tolerated and safe.

PMID: 19264721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Rev Bras Enferm. 2008;61 Spec No:727-33.

[Post-treatment of Leprosy in Ceará: activity and functional limitation, safety
awareness and social participation].

[Article in Portuguese]

Barbosa JC(1), Ramos AN Jr, Alencar Mde J, Castro CG.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Saúde Comunitária, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal
do Ceará, Fortaleza, CE.

To characterize the functional limitation, activity limitation, risk conscience, 
and the social participation in people reached by hansen's disease in the
post-MDT period. Cross-sectional, descriptive study, accomplished in 2006.
Sixty-nine residents in Sobral that had discharge from MDT between 2003-2005
participated. The subjects were interviewed: demographic evaluation,
dermato-neurological exams, evaluation of functional limitation-activity-risk
conscience and the restriction in social participation. Twenty (28.9%) presented 
SALSA scores 19 and 20 and EHF score zero. The largest EHF score was reached by
two participants, with scores 25 and 28 in the SALSA scale. In the participation 
scale 37 (53.6%) didn't present restriction and had EHF scores zero. Two (2.9%)
with EHF score zero had mild restriction, and 1 (1.5%) severe restriction. This
study reaffirms the potentiality of these tools for integral care of people
reached.

PMID: 19009115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Laeknabladid. 2008 Nov;94(11):729-35.

[Access to own health information and services on the Internet by disability
pensioners and other citizens].

[Article in Icelandic]

Halldórsdóttir G(1), Thoroddsen AS.

Author information: 
(1)Heilsuneti ehf. gyda@heilsunet.is

OBJECTIVE: To study Icelandic citizens' perception, attitude and preferences
regarding access to own health information and interactive services at the State 
Social Security Institute of Iceland (SSSI). Hypotheses regarding differences
between disability pensioners and other citizens were put forward.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A descriptive mail survey was performed with a random
sample from the Icelandic population, 1400 individuals, age 16 to 67, divided
into two groups of 700 each: (1) persons entitled to disability pension (2) other
citizens in Iceland. The questionnaire consisted of 56 questions, descriptive
statistics were used and Chi square for comparison with 95% as confidence level
of significance. Response rate was 34.9%.
RESULTS: Perception of rights to access own's health information was
significantly higher by pensioners than other citizens. Attitude concerning
impact of access was in general positive, with pensioners significantly more
positive about effectiveness, perception of health, communication and decisions
owing to services, access at SSSI, maintaining health records and controlling
access.
CONCLUSIONS: The study, the first of its kind in Iceland, supports previous
research. The results, as well as foreign models of research projects, are
recommended to be used for evolution of electronic health services and
researching employees' viewpoints. Future research in Iceland should address the 
impact of interactive health communication on quality of life, health and
services' efficiency.

PMID: 18974434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. B-ENT. 2008;4(3):147-55.

Extended high-frequency audiometry in subjects exposed to occupational noise.

Korres GS(1), Balatsouras DG, Tzagaroulakis A, Kandiloros D, Ferekidis E.

Author information: 
(1)Ear, Nose and Throat Department, National University of Athens, Hippokration
Hospital, Greece.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to evaluate hearing in a population of
industrial workers exposed to occupational noise by using both conventional and
extended high-frequency (EHF) audiometry, and to compare our results with the
findings from a control group.
METHODS: A total of 139 industry workers exposed to noise were examined over a
period of two years and 32 healthy subjects were used as controls. Conventional
audiometry in the frequency range 0.25-8 kHz and EHF audiometry in the frequency 
range 9-20 kHz were performed.
RESULTS: Thresholds in the noise-exposed group were higher than in the control
group for both standard and extended high frequencies, but variability was
greater in EHF. Larger differences were found in the 4,000-18,000 Hz frequency
region, and especially in the 12,500-18,000 frequency zone. A statistically
significant correlation between the elevation of puretone thresholds and time of 
exposure was found across all frequencies (from 250 to 20,000 Hz), with the
exception of 10,000 Hz.
CONCLUSIONS: EHF audiometry is a useful adjunct to conventional audiometry in the
audiological assessment of subjects exposed to occupational noise. This test
performs well in the frequency range 12,500-18,000 Hz, but there is greater
variability in the results compared with conventional audiometry.

PMID: 18949961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Adv Gerontol. 2008;21(2):322-6.

[Application of extremely high frequency (EHF) therapy as a method of complex
therapy of the elderly patients with mixed form of bronchial asthma].

[Article in Russian]

Nikitin AV, Esaulenko IE, Shatalova OL.

The effectiveness assessment of using EHF-acupuncture to prevent the attacks in
the patients of mixed forms of bronchial asthma is given. The article presents
the special scheme of treatment of patients of different age groups in different 
phase of the disease using the points of acupuncture with the application of EHF.

PMID: 18942382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2008 Nov;47 Suppl 2:S58-9. doi:
10.1097/01.mpg.0000338816.82556.40.

Is there a consensus in food allergy management?

Lifschitz C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mead Johnson Nutritionals.

Approaches to the management of cow's milk allergy (CMA) include eliminating
dairy products from the diet and delaying the introduction of solids until 6
months of age. In addition, because children on strict elimination diets often
exhibit nutritional deficiencies that may lead to poor growth, some studies
suggest that replacement rather than elimination diets may be more appropriate.
Studies of amino acid-based formulas in children with CMA have shown them to be
safe and as effective as extensively hydrolysed formulas (eHF) at relieving
allergic symptoms. Certain subgroups, such as children with severe atopic eczema 
or exclusively breast-fed children exhibiting allergic symptoms, may develop
intolerance to eHF, and evidence suggests that the use of amino acid-based
formulas in these populations relieves symptoms and encourages growth. Further
studies are required to fully elucidate the benefits of amino acid-based formulas
in children with CMA intolerant to eHF.

PMID: 18931604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Intern Emerg Med. 2008 Oct;3 Suppl 1:S25-8. doi: 10.1007/s11739-008-0189-0.

Proposals for the organisation of headache services in Europe.

Antonaci F(1), Valade D, Lanteri-Minet M, Láinez JM, Jensen R, Steiner TJ;
European Headache Federation and Lifting The Burden: the Global Campaign to
Reduce the Burden of Headache Worldwide.

Author information: 
(1)Headache Centre, IRCCS C. Mondino Foundation, University Centre for Adaptive
Disorder and Headache (UCADH) section of Pavia, University of Pavia, Via Mondino,
2, 27100 Pavia, Italy. fabio.antonaci@unipv.it

The mission of the European Headache Federation (EHF) is to improve life for
those affected by headache disorders in Europe. Progress depends upon improving
access to good headache-related health care for people affected by these
disorders. Education about headache-its nature, causes, consequences and
management-is a key activity of EHF that supports this aim. It is also important 
to achieve an organisation of headache-related services within the health systems
of Europe in order that they can best deliver care in response to what are very
high levels of need. This publication assesses this need, and sets out proposals 
for service organisation, on three levels, to meet the resultant demand.

PMID: 18792808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Laeknabladid. 2008 Jun;94(6):463-72.

[Juvenile primary fibromyalgia syndrome--review].

[Article in Icelandic]

Baldursdóttir S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sjúkrathjálfun Styrkur ehf., Reykjavik. vefjagigt@vefjagigt.is

Fibromyalgia syndrome is known to cause significant morbidity among adults
characterised by widespread musculoskeletal pain, stiffness, fatigue,
non-restorative sleep, cognitive dysfunction and diminished physical function.
Although well-recognised in adults, the impact of the syndrome in the paediatric 
population has only recently been addressed. The estimated prevalence of juvenile
primary fibromyalgia syndrome (JPFS) is 1.2%-6.2%. Prevalence is higher in girls 
than boys, and peaks at the time of puberty. JPFS is of unknown aetiology,
characterised by numerous symptoms that mimic the symptoms of adult fibromyalgia 
syndrome, the most prevalent being sleep disturbance, widespread persistent
musculoskeletal pain and fatigue. JPFS has a major influence on health, physical 
function and quality of life. The diagnosis of JPFS is based on the criteria
defined by Yunus and Masi (1985), which include generalised musculoskeletal
aching at three or more regions for at least three months and at least five of
eighteen typical tender points. The precise cause of JPFS is unknown, but there
is an emerging understanding that the development of this syndrome is related to 
many factors, such as genetic and anatomic factors, disordered sleep and
psychological distress. According to emerging studies, a multidisciplinary
treatment may be helpful in treating JPFS. Multicomponent treatment that includes
attendance by patient and parents, sleep hygiene with or without medication,
physical training and cognitive behavioural therapy, is advocated.

PMID: 18591723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Vopr Virusol. 2008 May-Jun;53(3):21-3.

[Time course of changes in antibodies of various avidity in murine rodents in the
epizootic and epidemic processes in hantavirus infection].

[Article in Russian]

Maksema IG, Kushnareva TV, Kompanets GG, Slonova RA.

The paper presents the results of studying the time course of changes in
antibodies of varying avidity in murine rodents. The presence of low-avidity
antibodies is shown to reflect the status of acute infection in the rodent
population and their active viral shedding. A relationship is shown between the
detection of low-avidity antibodies in animals in spring and autumn and the rise 
of endemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) morbidity. The findings demonstrate it
possible to use data on the determination of antibodies of varying avidity in the
population of murine rodents for the assessment of epizootic and epidemic
processes.

PMID: 18590130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Pediatr. 2008 Aug;153(2):266-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2008.02.043. Epub 2008
Apr 9.

Hypoallergenicity and effects on growth and tolerance of a new amino acid-based
formula with docosahexaenoic acid and arachidonic acid.

Burks W(1), Jones SM, Berseth CL, Harris C, Sampson HA, Scalabrin DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Comment in
    J Pediatr. 2008 Aug;153(2):A2.

OBJECTIVE: In study 1, to compare the effect on growth in healthy infants of a
new amino acid-based formula (AAF) and a control extensively hydrolyzed formula
(EHF), with both docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and arachidonic acid (ARA) at levels 
similar to those in human milk worldwide. In study 2, to evaluate the
hypoallergenicity of this new AAF in infants and children with confirmed cow's
milk allergy (CMA).
STUDY DESIGN: In study 1, a total of 165 healthy, full-term, formula-fed infants 
randomly received the new AAF or control formula. Anthropometric measurements,
tolerance, and adverse events were recorded throughout the study. Plasma amino
acid profiles were evaluated in a subset of the infants. In study 2, the
hypoallergenicity of the new AAF was evaluated in 32 infants and children using a
double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenge; an open challenge; and a 7-day
feeding.
RESULTS: In study 1, overall growth, tolerance, and safety outcomes were similar 
in both groups. In study 2, 29 of the 32 subjects completed both challenges; no
allergic reaction was seen in any of the 32 subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: The new AAF with DHA and ARA at levels similar to those in human
milk worldwide is hypoallergenic. It also is safe and supports growth in healthy,
term infants.

PMID: 18534230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Hypertens Res. 2008 Mar;31(3):395-400. doi: 10.1291/hypres.31.395.

Enhanced left atrial reservoir, increased conduit, and weakened booster pump
function in hypertensive patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.

Cui Q(1), Wang H, Zhang W, Wang H, Sun X, Zhang Y, Yang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Echocardiography, FuWai Cardiovascular Hospital and
Cardiovascular Institute, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, PR China.
whcqq@yahoo.com.cn

The aim of this study was to evaluate whether paroxysmal atrial fibrillation
(PAF) has an impact on left atrial (LA) function in hypertensive patients and, if
so, to select clinical factors influencing this relationship. Sixty-four
essential hypertensive patients with PAF (group EHf) and fifty-five patients
without PAF (group EH) were enrolled. Using acoustic quantification, the maximal 
and minimum LA volume (LAVmax, LAVmin), the LA volume at the end of rapid
emptying (EREV), and the LA volume at the onset of atrial emptying (OAEV) were
measured. The LA total emptying volume (TE; TE=LAVmax-LAVmin), LA rapid emptying 
volume (RE; RE=LAVmax-EREV), and left atrial ejection fraction
(LAEF)=(OAEV-LAVmin)/OAEVx100% were calculated. LAVmax, LAVmax indexed to body
surface area (LAVmaxI), TE and RE were significantly increased in group EHf. LAEF
was clearly lower in group EHf than in group EH. The linear regression analysis
showed that the frequency and total number of PAF episodes were the factors with 
the greatest influence on LAVmaxI (r=0.787, p<0.05). TE and frequency of PAF
episodes were the most influential factors on RE (r=0.902, p<0.01). These results
suggest that the occurrence of PAF in hypertensive patients is associated with
enhanced LA reservoir and conduit function and worse booster pump function. The
enhancement of LA reservoir function may be related to the frequency and total
number of PAF episodes, and the increased LA conduit function may be related to
the LA total emptying volume and frequency of PAF episodes.

PMID: 18497457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Cell Res. 2008 Jun;18(6):649-63. doi: 10.1038/cr.2008.57.

Regulation of epithelium-specific Ets-like factors ESE-1 and ESE-3 in airway
epithelial cells: potential roles in airway inflammation.

Wu J(1), Duan R, Cao H, Field D, Newnham CM, Koehler DR, Zamel N, Pritchard MA,
Hertzog P, Post M, Tanswell AK, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Experimental Medicine and Canadian Institutes of 
Health Research Group in Lung Development, The Hospital for Sick Children, The
University of Toronto, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Airway inflammation is the hallmark of many respiratory disorders, such as asthma
and cystic fibrosis. Changes in airway gene expression triggered by inflammation 
play a key role in the pathogenesis of these diseases. Genetic linkage studies
suggest that ESE-2 and ESE-3, which encode epithelium-specific
Ets-domain-containing transcription factors, are candidate asthma susceptibility 
genes. We report here that the expression of another member of the Ets family
transcription factors ESE-1, as well as ESE-3, is upregulated by the inflammatory
cytokines interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha) in bronchial epithelial cell lines. Treatment of these cells with
IL-1beta and TNF-alpha resulted in a dramatic increase in mRNA expression for
both ESE-1 and ESE-3. We demonstrate that the induced expression is mediated by
activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB. We have characterized the ESE-1
and ESE-3 promoters and have identified the NF-kappaB binding sequences that are 
required for the cytokine-induced expression. In addition, we also demonstrate
that ESE-1 upregulates ESE-3 expression and downregulates its own induction by
cytokines. Finally, we have shown that in Elf3 (homologous to human ESE-1)
knockout mice, the expression of the inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6)
is downregulated. Our findings suggest that ESE-1 and ESE-3 play an important
role in airway inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4494831
PMID: 18475289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Am J Ind Med. 2008 Jun;51(6):452-62. doi: 10.1002/ajim.20580.

Extended high-frequency audiometry and noise induced hearing loss in cement
workers.

Somma G(1), Pietroiusti A, Magrini A, Coppeta L, Ancona C, Gardi S, Messina M,
Bergamaschi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopathology/Occupational Medicine, Tor Vergata University,
Rome, Italy. giusomma@libero.it

BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that extended high-frequency audiometry (EHFA) 
might be more sensitive than conventional audiometry in detecting early signs of 
hearing impairment. However, this technique has not been adequately tested in an 
occupational environment. We therefore investigated the usefulness of this method
in noise-exposed workers.
METHODS: We compared conventional frequency audiometry (0.25-8 kHz) and EHFA
(9-18 kHz) in 184 noise-exposed and 98 non-noise-exposed workers.
RESULTS: Both methods showed significantly higher threshold levels (P < 0.05) in 
noise-exposed workers for most of the tested frequencies; however, the
differences were more marked for EHFA, especially in young exposed workers.
Significant differences in the EHF range were detected also in the subgroup of
noise-exposed workers with normal findings at conventional audiometry. Stepwise
regression analysis showed that in 21- to 40-year-old workers the noise effect
was largely predominant at both conventional audiometry and EHFA, whereas in
older subjects the noise effect was predominant up to 6 kHz frequency, the effect
of age being significantly greater at higher frequencies.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that EHFA is more sensitive than conventional
audiometry in detecting noise induced hearing loss. However, hearing loss in the 
EHF range seems an age-dependent phenomenon with progression into the lower
speech range frequencies with increasing age. These changes seem to be
accentuated in the early years by noise exposure, suggesting that EHFA could
represent a useful preventive measure in young exposed workers.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18393354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2008;134:177-90.

ICW eHealth Framework.

Klein K(1), Wolff AC, Ziebold O, Liebscher T.

Author information: 
(1)InterComponentWare AG, Germany. karsten.klein@icw.de

The ICW eHealth Framework (eHF) is a powerful infrastructure and platform for the
development of service-oriented solutions in the health care business. It is the 
culmination of many years of experience of ICW in the development and use of
in-house health care solutions and represents the foundation of ICW product
developments based on the Java Enterprise Edition (Java EE). The ICW eHealth
Framework has been leveraged to allow development by external partners - enabling
adopters a straightforward integration into ICW solutions. The ICW eHealth
Framework consists of reusable software components, development tools,
architectural guidelines and conventions defining a full software-development and
product lifecycle. From the perspective of a partner, the framework provides
services and infrastructure capabilities for integrating applications within an
eHF-based solution. This article introduces the ICW eHealth Framework's basic
architectural concepts and technologies. It provides an overview of its module
and component model, describes the development platform that supports the
complete software development lifecycle of health care applications and outlines 
technological aspects, mainly focusing on application development frameworks and 
open standards.

PMID: 18376045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Pathophysiology. 2008 Jun;15(1):19-24. doi: 10.1016/j.pathophys.2007.11.001. Epub
2008 Mar 3.

Morphometric analysis of hypothalamic cells showing c-Fos proteins after movement
restriction and EHF-irradiation.

Novikova NS(1), Perekrest SV, Rogers VJ, Korneva EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Experimental
Medicine, RAMS, Pavlov St. 12, Saint-Petersburg 197376, Russia.

A morphometric analysis of hypothalamic cells containing c-Fos-like protein
detected by an indirect immunoperoxidase method was carried out to clarify the
responses to movement restriction and skin electromagnetic high frequency (EHF)
irradiation (7.1mm, 42.2GHz, 20mW output power) simultaneously to three
acupuncture projection areas. The morphometry of c-Fos-protein positive neurons
by their number and type was analyzed. Movement restriction (40min) induced c-Fos
protein expression primarily in cells with 10-50mum(2) sizes (associative type
neurons) only in anterior hypothalamic nucleus and lateral hypothalamic area;
while additional EHF-irradiation of acupuncture projection areas (under movement 
restriction) induced c-Fos expression in all hypothalamic structures and mostly
in cells with 70-150mum(2) sizes (relay type neurons), i.e. changed the pattern
of activated cell type distribution. In conclusion, the findings show that modest
stress under which experimental animals often are exposed increase c-Fos protein 
expression in hypothalamic centers and skin EHF-irradiation of acupuncture
projection areas seem to increase that.

PMID: 18313906  [PubMed]


193. Clin Nutr. 2008 Apr;27(2):264-8. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2007.12.009. Epub 2008 Feb
15.

Gastric emptying in healthy newborns fed an intact protein formula, a partially
and an extensively hydrolysed formula.

Staelens S(1), Van den Driessche M, Barclay D, Carrié-Faessler AL, Haschke F,
Verbeke K, Vandebroek H, Allegaert K, Van Overmeire B, Van Damme M,
Veereman-Wauters G.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Queen Paola Children's Hospital,
ZNA, Lindendreef 1, 2018 Antwerp, Belgium.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Gastric emptying (GE) is influenced by the type of nutrition. 
The objective of this study was to compare GE in infants fed an intact protein
formula (IPF), a partially hydrolysed formula (PHF), and an extensively
hydrolysed formula (EHF).
METHODS: This was a double-blind, randomized, cross-over study. Following a
fasting period of > or = 3 h, 20 healthy newborns were fed IPF, PHF, and EHF
containing 50 microl (13)C-octanoic acid (OA). Breath samples were taken before
feeding and every 15 min for 4 h thereafter. (13)C-OA breath test was assessed by
isotope-ratio mass spectrometry, and GE half-times (t(1/2)) were determined.
RESULTS: Seventeen infants with a mean gestational age of 37 wk (range 28-40 wk) 
and birth weight of 2698 g (range 720-3690 g) completed the study. At study
initiation, the mean age was 31 d (range 6 d-13 wk) and the mean weight was 3466 
g (range 2100-5700 g). EHF emptied significantly faster than IPF and PHF (medians
46 vs. 55 and 53 min, respectively, Wilcoxon, P<0.05 for both). There was no
significant difference between GE of PHF and IPF (Wilcoxon, P=0.2).
CONCLUSIONS: EHF may be better tolerated by infants with GE problems.

PMID: 18280619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2008 Jun;19(4):348-54. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-3038.2007.00653.x. Epub 2007 Dec 19.

Safety and efficacy of a new extensively hydrolyzed formula for infants with
cow's milk protein allergy.

Niggemann B(1), von Berg A, Bollrath C, Berdel D, Schauer U, Rieger C,
Haschke-Becher E, Wahn U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Pneumology and Immunology, University Children's
Hospital Charité, Berlin, Germany. bodo.niggemann@charite.de

Cow's milk protein allergy (CMPA) is best treated by complete elimination of
cow's milk from the diet. For infants with CMPA who cannot be breast-fed,
formulas based on extensively hydrolyzed proteins or on amino acids are the
preferred substitutes for cow's milk-based formulas. In this study, we compared
the tolerance and growth of infants with CMPA who were fed a new extensively
hydrolyzed formula containing lactose (eHF) with those who were fed an amino acid
formula (AAF). This was a prospective, multi-center, randomized,
reference-controlled study. Seventy-seven infants <12 months old with suspected
CMPA were enrolled. In 66 of these, CMPA was confirmed by oral challenge in a
double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenge (DBPCFC) or by a medical history 
of severe allergic reaction to cow's milk and a positive skin prick test. These
infants were then tested for their reaction to eHF and AAF in a DBPCFC. All
infants tolerated both formulas and were randomized to receive either eHF (n =
34) or AAF (n = 32) for 180 days. Growth (weight, length, and head circumference)
and tolerance [skin, gastro-intestinal, and respiratory tract symptoms of
allergy] were evaluated after 30, 60, 90, and 180 days. There were no significant
differences between the two groups in any of the growth measurements. Length and 
head circumference were similar to Euro-growth standards, but weight was slightly
lower. Gastro-intestinal and respiratory tract symptoms of allergy were also
similar in the two groups. However, whereas SCORAD scores for atopic dermatitis
remained constant throughout the study in infants-fed eHF, there was a slight
decrease in those fed AAF. Infants-fed eHF had significantly fewer incidents of
vomiting than infants-fed AAF and a significantly higher frequency of soft
stools. The new eHF is safe and well tolerated in infants diagnosed with CMPA.

PMID: 18167160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Infect Dis. 2007 Nov 15;196 Suppl 2:S193-8.

Laboratory diagnosis of Ebola hemorrhagic fever during an outbreak in Yambio,
Sudan, 2004.

Onyango CO(1), Opoka ML, Ksiazek TG, Formenty P, Ahmed A, Tukei PM, Sang RC,
Ofula VO, Konongoi SL, Coldren RL, Grein T, Legros D, Bell M, De Cock KM, Bellini
WJ, Towner JS, Nichol ST, Rollin PE.

Author information: 
(1)World Health Organization Collaborating Center for Arbovirus and Viral
Hemorrhagic Fever Reference and Research, Nairobi, Kenya. conyango@mrc.gm

Between the months of April and June 2004, an Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF)
outbreak was reported in Yambio county, southern Sudan. Blood samples were
collected from a total of 36 patients with suspected EHF and were tested by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for immunoglobulin G and M antibodies, 
antigen ELISA, and reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of a
segment of the Ebolavirus (EBOV) polymerase gene. A total of 13 patients were
confirmed to be infected with EBOV. In addition, 4 fatal cases were classified as
probable cases, because no samples were collected. Another 12 patients were
confirmed to have acute measles infection during the same period that EBOV was
circulating. Genetic analysis of PCR-positive samples indicated that the virus
was similar to but distinct from Sudan EBOV Maleo 1979. In response, case
management, social mobilization, and follow-up of contacts were set up as means
of surveillance. The outbreak was declared to be over on 7 August 2004.

PMID: 17940949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Bioelectromagnetics. 2008 Apr;29(3):197-206.

Anti-inflammatory effects of low-intensity extremely high-frequency
electromagnetic radiation: frequency and power dependence.

Gapeyev AB(1), Mikhailik EN, Chemeris NK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biophysics of Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow
Region, Russia. gapeyev@icb.psn.ru

Using a model of acute zymosan-induced footpad edema in NMRI mice, the frequency 
and power dependence of anti-inflammatory effect of low-intensity extremely
high-frequency electromagnetic radiation (EHF EMR) was found. Single whole-body
exposure of animals to EHF EMR at the intensity of 0.1 mW/cm(2) for 20 min at 1 h
after zymosan injection reduced both the footpad edema and local hyperthermia on 
average by 20% at the frequencies of 42.2, 51.8, and 65 GHz. Some other
frequencies from the frequency range of 37.5-70 GHz were less effective or not
effective at all. At fixed frequency of 42.2 GHz and intensity of 0.1 mW/cm(2),
the effect had bell-shaped dependence on exposure duration with a maximum at
20-40 min. Reduction of intensity to 0.01 mW/cm(2) resulted in a change of the
effect dependence on exposure duration to a linear one. Combined action of
cyclooxygenase inhibitor sodium diclofenac and EHF EMR exposure caused a partial 
additive effect of decrease in footpad edema. Combined action of antihistamine
clemastine and EHF EMR exposure caused a dose-dependent abolishment of the
anti-inflammatory effect of EHF EMR. The results obtained suggest that
arachidonic acid metabolites and histamine are involved in realization of
anti-inflammatory effects of low-intensity EHF EMR.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18044738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Cell Physiol. 2008 May;215(2):562-73.

ESE-1 is a potent repressor of type II collagen gene (COL2A1) transcription in
human chondrocytes.

Peng H(1), Tan L, Osaki M, Zhan Y, Ijiri K, Tsuchimochi K, Otero M, Wang H, Choy 
BK, Grall FT, Gu X, Libermann TA, Oettgen P, Goldring MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, New England
Baptist Bone and Joint Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The epithelium-specific ETS (ESE)-1 transcription factor is induced in
chondrocytes by interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta). We reported previously that early
activation of EGR-1 by IL-1beta results in suppression of the proximal COL2A1
promoter activity by displacement of Sp1 from GC boxes. Here we report that ESE-1
is a potent transcriptional suppressor of COL2A1 promoter activity in
chondrocytes and accounts for the sustained, NF-kappaB-dependent inhibition by
IL-1beta. Of the ETS factors tested, this response was specific to ESE-1, since
ESE-3, which was also induced by IL-1beta, suppressed COL2A1 promoter activity
only weakly. In contrast, overexpression of ETS-1 increased COL2A1 promoter
activity and blocked the inhibition by IL-1beta. These responses to ESE-1 and
ETS-1 were confirmed using siRNA-ESE1 and siRNA-ETS1. In transient
cotransfections, the inhibitory responses to ESE-1 and IL-1beta colocalized in
the -577/-132 bp promoter region, ESE-1 bound specifically to tandem ETS sites at
-403/-381 bp, and IL-1-induced binding of ESE-1 to the COL2A1 promoter was
confirmed in vivo by ChIP. Our results indicate that ESE-1 serves a potent
repressor function by interacting with at least two sites in the COL2A1 promoter.
However, the endogenous response may depend upon the balance of other ETS factors
such as ETS-1, and other IL-1-induced factors, including EGR-1 at any given time.
Intracellular ESE-1 staining in chondrocytes in cartilage from patients with
osteoarthritis (OA), but not in normal cartilage, further suggests a fundamental 
role for ESE-1 in cartilage degeneration and suppression of repair.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3937869
PMID: 18044710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Oncogene. 2008 May 1;27(20):2877-85. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Reduced expression and tumor suppressor function of the ETS transcription factor 
ESE-3 in prostate cancer.

Cangemi R(1), Mensah A, Albertini V, Jain A, Mello-Grand M, Chiorino G, Catapano 
CV, Carbone GM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Oncology, Oncology Institute of Southern
Switzerland, Bellinzona, Switzerland.

Deregulated expression of ETS transcription factors has emerged as an important
event in prostate cancer pathogenesis. Here we show that the expression of
epithelial-specific ETS (ESE)-3 factor is frequently reduced at the RNA and
protein level in prostate cancer clinical samples compared to normal prostate. In
PC3 and DU145 cells, ESE-3 was silenced by methylation of an evolutionarily
conserved CpG site in its promoter and treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
restored its expression. In a prostate epithelial cell transformation model,
methylation of this site was inversely correlated with ESE-3 expression and
occurred only in Ras-transformed and tumorigenic cells and not in normal and
immortalized cells suggesting that ESE-3 silencing was functionally linked to
oncogenic transformation. Consistent with a tumor suppressor function,
re-expression of ESE-3 in prostate cancer cells inhibited clonogenic survival and
induced apoptotic cell death. ESE-3 increased the level of procaspase-3, a key
element in the apoptotic cascade. This effect was mediated at the transcriptional
level by direct binding of ESE-3 to the caspase-3 promoter. Collectively, our
findings implicate ESE-3 as a candidate tumor suppressor in prostate cancer.
Decreased expression of ESE-3 may result in loss of important regulatory
mechanisms in prostate epithelial cells and contribute to the pathogenesis of
prostate cancer.

PMID: 18037958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Lepr Rev. 2007 Sep;78(3):270-80.

Monitoring impairment in leprosy: choosing the appropriate tool.

Ebenso J(1), Ebenso BE.

Author information: 
(1)Leprosy Mission Africa, c/o PMB 179 Minna, Niger State, Nigeria.
janninee@tlmaro.org

OBJECTIVE: To assess to what extent the Maximum WHO Impairment Grade, the EHF
Score and Impairment Summary Form (ISF) reflect changes in impairment, both in
number(s) and severity.
DESIGN: The impairment data at registration and at release from treatment of 444 
persons affected by leprosy registered for MDT from 1994-2003 in Federal Capital 
Territory, Nigeria were analysed using three monitoring tools.
RESULTS: Of the 444 patients, 92 people had a change (10 deteriorated, 70
improved while 12 had improvement in some parts of their body and deterioration
in other parts) in their impairment between Registration and Release from
Treatment. Of the 10 people whose impairment status deteriorated, the WHO Grade
missed 7 and the EHF score missed 4. The ISF missed none. Of the 70 whose
impairment status improved, the WHO grade missed 27; the EHF score missed 20 and 
the ISF missed 9. The WHO Grade had a sensitivity of 50%, the EHF Score 61% and
the ISF 90%. Negative predictive values were 88%, 91% and 98% respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The Maximum WHO Impairment Grade use should be limited to an
indicator of late case detection. The EHF score is better used at programme level
than individual patient level. The ISF is a sensitive tool for monitoring
impairments at patient level to aid clinical decision making.

PMID: 18035778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Antibiot Khimioter. 2006;51(9-10):3-7.

[Echinomycin production by Actinomadura sp. INA 654].

[Article in Russian]

Galatenko OA, Terekhova LP, Li IuV, Malkina ND, Boikova IuV, Zenkova VA, Katrukha
GS.

An actinomycete strain designated as Actinomadura sp. INA 654 was isolated from a
chernozem soil sample in the Voronezh Region by the soil sample treatment with
millimetric waves (EHF band). The strain produced an antibiotic complex of 2
components, named A-654-I and A-654-II. Investigation of their physico-chemical
properties showed that A-654-I was identical to echinomycin, a heteropeptide
lactone of the quinoxaline group with antitumor activity, while A-654-II proved
to be likely a new natural compound. Production of echinomycin by a
representative of the Actinomadura genus was detected for the first time. Up to
now, only representatives of the Streptomyces genus were known to produce
echinomycin.

PMID: 18030784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2007 Nov;293(5):L1359-68. Epub 2007 Sep 28.

Transactivation of lung lysozyme expression by Ets family member ESE-1.

Lei W(1), Jaramillo RJ, Harrod KS.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Program, Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, 2425
Ridgecrest Dr. SE, Albuquerque, NM 87108, USA.

Epithelial-specific Ets (ESE) transcription factors, consisting of ESE-1, ESE-2, 
and ESE-3, are constitutively expressed in distinct epithelia of mucosal tissues,
including the lung. Each ESE member exhibits alternative splicing and yields at
least two isoforms (a and b) with transcriptional targets largely unidentified.
The studies described herein define a novel role for ESE transcription factors in
transactivation of the human lysozyme gene (LYZ), an essential component of
innate defense in lung epithelia. Of the six ESE isoforms, ESE-1a and ESE-1b
transactivated LYZ promoter in reporter gene assays, whereas only ESE-1b
dramatically upregulated transcription of endogenous LYZ in both nonpulmonary and
pulmonary epithelial cells. Importantly, ESE-1a and ESE-1b could transactivate
the LYZ promoter in cultured primary airway epithelial cells. ESE-2 and ESE-3
isoforms were unable to substantially transactivate the lysozyme promoter or
upregulate transcription of endogenous LYZ. Two functional consensus Ets sites
located in the proximal 130-bp LYZ promoter were responsive to ESE-1b as
identified by site-directed mutagenesis and DNA binding assays. Short hairpin RNA
attenuation of endogenous ESE-1b mRNA levels in lung epithelia resulted in
decreased LYZ transcription. Furthermore, ESE-1 antibody specifically enriched
the 130-bp proximal LYZ promoter in chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses. These
findings define a novel role for ESE transcription factors in regulating lung
innate defense and suggest distinct regulatory functions for ESE family members.

PMID: 17905856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Pathophysiology. 2007 Oct;14(2):79-85. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

Responses of hypothalamic orexin-containing neurons to cyclophosphamide,
EHF-irradiation of the skin, and their combination in rats.

Abramova TV(1), Novikova NS, Perekrest SV, Rogers VJ, Korneva EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology and Pathophysiology, GUNII Experimental
Medicine RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.

Orexins are neuromediators that participate in the regulation of feeding
behavior, energy metabolism, circadian rhythms and perception of pain. The aim of
the present study was to clarify the responses of the hypothalamic
orexin-containing neurons to an intraperitoneal injection of cyclophosphamide
(CPA), extremely high frequency (EHF)-electromagnetic stimulation of skin, which 
is used to modulate side effects of cytostatics and their combination. The
activation of orexin-containing neurons was determined by recording of the
intensity of c-Fos protein expression. Injection of cyclophosphamide (40mg/kg) or
EHF-irradiation of the skin decreased the staining of orexin-containing neurons, 
which was most pronounced in the subfornical region of the lateral hypothalamic
area (LHAs). A redistribution of orexin from the perinuclear space to the
processes of these cells took place, which occurs after the activation and the
expression of the c-fos-gene. c-Fos protein was expressed in most neurons with
minimum content of orexin, i.e. activation of these neurons correlated with the
redistribution of orexins caused by skin EHF-irradiation and injection of
cyclophosphamide (CPA). EHF-irradiation of the skin before and after injection of
CPA increased the staining of orexin-containing neurons, i.e. it prevented the
redistribution of orexin.

PMID: 17881193  [PubMed]


203. Cancer Sci. 2007 Sep;98(9):1468-75. Epub 2007 Jul 11.

ESE-3, an Ets family transcription factor, is up-regulated in cellular
senescence.

Fujikawa M(1), Katagiri T, Tugores A, Nakamura Y, Ishikawa F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Assembly, Department of Biological
Information, Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of 
Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Normal cells irreversibly stop dividing after being exposed to a variety of
stresses. This state, called cellular senescence, has recently been demonstrated 
to act as a tumor-suppressing mechanism in vivo. A common set of features are
exhibited by senescent cells, but the molecular mechanism leading to the state is
poorly understood. It has been shown that p38, a stress-induced mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK), plays a pivotal role in inducing cellular senescence in
diverse settings. To better understand the senescence-inducing pathway,
microarray analyses of normal human fibroblasts that ectopically activated p38
were performed. It was found that five genes encoding ESE-3, inhibin betaA, RGS5,
SSAT and DIO2 were up-regulated in senescent cells induced by RasV12, H(2)O(2)
and telomere shortening, but not in quiescent or actively growing cells,
suggesting that these genes serve as molecular markers for various types of
cellular senescence. The ectopic expression of ESE-3 resulted in retarded growth,
up-regulation of p16(INK4a) but not of p21, and increased levels of SA-beta-gal
activity. In contrast, RGS5, SSAT and the constitutive active form of the inhibin
betaA receptor gene did not induce such senescence phenotypes when ectopically
expressed. ESE-3 expression increased the activity of the p16(INK4a) promoter in 
a reporter assay, and recombinant ESE-3 protein bound to the Ets-binding
sequences present in the promoter. These results suggest that ESE-3 plays a role 
in the induction of cellular senescence as a downstream molecule of p38.

PMID: 17627613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Ross Fiziol Zh Im I M Sechenova. 2007 Mar;93(3):255-63.

[Expression of c-Fos gene in the rat hypothalamus upon electric painful
stimulation and EHF irradiation of the skin].

[Article in Russian]

Novikova NS, Kazakova TB, Rogers V, Korneva EA.

Studies of the activation pattern of hypothalamic cells upon electric painful
stimulation have revealed an increase in the counts of c-Fos-positive cells
(72.02-98.95%) predominantly of a size ranging from 10 to 50 microm2. EHF
irradiation of the skin activates hypothalamic cells of the size ranging from 10 
to 70 microm2 in the paraventricular, dorsomedial nuclei, and in perifonical zone
of the lateral hypothalamic area. The combined action of EHF skin irradiation and
electric painful stimulation leads to a decrease in the counts of cells activated
in result of the painful stimulation in the anterior hypothalamic area,
ventromedial nucleus, and the basal part of the lateral area. Changes in size
distributions of activated cells are found in the ventromedial nucleus and the
basal part of the lateral area, occur mainly through decreased counts of smaller 
cells (10-30 microm2) and increased counts of lager cells. The modulatory effect 
of EHF irradiation of the skin was found to be expressed as a reduction in
hypothalamic cell activation caused by electric painful stimulation.

PMID: 17598468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2007 Mar-Apr;(2):30.

[Efficacy of EHF-therapy in functional biliary diseases in children with sequalae
of perinatal pathology of the central nervous system].

[Article in Russian]

Kir'ianova VV, Aleksandrova VA, Kokoladze IR.

PMID: 17563984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2007 Mar-Apr;(2):12-4.

[Administration of EHF-therapy in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy].

[Article in Russian]

Pashnin AG, Lebedeva NN, Avakian GN.

PMID: 17563980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Acta Oncol. 2007;46(5):651-8.

Expression microarray analysis reveals genes associated with in vitro resistance 
to cisplatin in a cell line model.

Watson MB(1), Lind MJ, Smith L, Drew PJ, Cawkwell L.

Author information: 
(1)The Cancer Biology Proteomics Group, Postgraduate Medical Institute of the
University of Hull, University of Hull, Hull, United Kingdom.

We aimed to investigate the mechanisms of cisplatin resistance using an in vitro 
cancer model. A derivative breast cancer cell line (MCF-7CR) was established
which demonstrated significant resistance to cisplatin at clinically relevant low
concentrations compared to the MCF-7 parental cell line. Expression microarray
analysis was used to identify targets from a 3k cancer-related oligonucleotide
platform which were differentially expressed between the derivative and parental 
cell lines. Real-time quantitative PCR was used to confirm the difference in
expression of a subset of genes which demonstrated significant up- or
down-regulation. Using expression microarray analysis a total of 28 genes were
identified to be differentially expressed (by at least 2-fold) between the MCF-7 
and MCF-7CR cells. Real-time quantitative PCR expression analysis confirmed the
differential expression of a selection of these genes (ACTG2, ARHD, CTSL, GSTM3, 
GSTM4 and EHF) between the two cell lines. An in vitro model of cisplatin
resistance has been established and expression microarray analysis revealed 28
genes which may be associated with cisplatin resistance.

PMID: 17562441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Neoplasia. 2007 May;9(5):382-91.

Correlation of MRI biomarkers with tumor necrosis in Hras5 tumor xenograft in
athymic rats.

Bradley DP(1), Tessier JJ, Ashton SE, Waterton JC, Wilson Z, Worthington PL, Ryan
AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Enabling Capabilities and Sciences, AstraZeneca, Alderley Park,
Macclesfield, Cheshire SK10 4TG, UK. daniel.bradley@astrazeneca.com

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can measure the effects of therapies targeting
the tumor vasculature and has demonstrated that vascular-damaging agents (VDA)
induce acute vascular shutdown in tumors in human and animal models. However, at 
subtherapeutic doses, blood flow may recover before the induction of significant 
levels of necrosis. We present the relationship between changes in MRI biomarkers
and tumor necrosis. Multiple MRI measurements were taken at 4.7 T in athymic rats
(n = 24) bearing 1.94 +/- 0.2-cm3 subcutaneous Hras5 tumors (ATCC 41000) before
and 24 hours after clinically relevant doses of the VDA, ZD6126 (0-10 mg/kg,
i.v.). We measured effective transverse relaxation rate (R2*), initial area under
the gadolinium concentration-time curve (IAUGC(60/150)), equivalent enhancing
fractions (EHF(60/150)), time constant (K(trans)), proportion of hypoperfused
voxels as estimated from fit failures in K(trans) analysis, and signal intensity 
(SI) in T2-weighted MRI (T(2)W). ZD6126 treatment induced > 90% dose-dependent
tumor necrosis at 10 mg/kg; correspondingly, SI changes were evident from T2W
MRI. Although R2* did not correlate, other MRI biomarkers significantly
correlated with necrosis at doses of > or = 5 mg/kg ZD6126. These data on Hras5
tumors suggest that the quantification of hypoperfused voxels might provide a
useful biomarker of tumor necrosis.

PMCID: PMC1877977
PMID: 17534443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Clin Exp Allergy. 2007 Jun;37(6):808-22.

The efficacy of amino acid-based formulas in relieving the symptoms of cow's milk
allergy: a systematic review.

Hill DJ(1), Murch SH, Rafferty K, Wallis P, Green CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.

The aim of this systematic review was to evaluate the efficacy of amino
acid-based formulas (AAF) in patients with cow's milk allergy (CMA). Studies were
identified using electronic databases and bibliography searches. Subjects
eligible for inclusion were patients of any age with CMA or symptoms suggestive
of it. Comparisons of interest were AAF vs. extensively hydrolysed formula (eHF),
AAF vs. soy-based formula (SF) and AAF vs. cow's milk or cow's milk-based
formula. Outcomes of interest were gastrointestinal (GI), dermatological,
respiratory and behavioural symptoms as well as growth. A total of 20 studies
[three head-to-head randomized controlled trials (RCTs), three cross-over
challenge RCTs, seven clinical trials (CTs) and seven case reports (CRs)] were
included in the review. In infants with confirmed or suspected CMA, the use of an
AAF was shown to be safe and efficacious. Findings from RCT comparisons of AAF
with eHF showed that both formulas are equally efficacious at relieving the
symptoms of CMA in confirmed or suspected cases. However, infants in specific
subgroups (e.g. non-IgE mediated food-induced gastro-enterocolitis-proctitis
syndromes with failure to thrive, severe atopic eczema, or with symptoms during
exclusive breastfeeding) were more likely overall to benefit from AAF, as
intolerance to eHF may occur. In such cases, symptoms persisting despite eHF
feeding usually remit on AAF, and catch-up growth may be seen. Meta-analysis of
the findings was not possible due to lack of homogenous reporting of outcomes in 
the original trials. This systematic review shows clinical benefit from use of
AAF in both symptoms and growth in infants and children with CMA who fail to
tolerate eHF. Further studies are required to determine the relative medical or
economic value of initial treatment with AAF in infants at high risk of eHF
intolerance.

PMID: 17517094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Clin Oncol. 2007 Apr 1;25(10):1190-5.

Early changes in auditory function as a result of platinum chemotherapy: use of
extended high-frequency audiometry and evoked distortion product otoacoustic
emissions.

Knight KR(1), Kraemer DF, Winter C, Neuwelt EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Audiology, Child Development and Rehabilitation
Center, Portland, Oregon, USA.

PURPOSE: The objective is to describe progressive changes in hearing and cochlear
function in children and adolescents treated with platinum-based chemotherapy and
to begin preliminary evaluation of the feasibility of extended high-frequency
audiometry and distortion product otoacoustic emissions for ototoxicity
monitoring in children.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Baseline and serial measurement of conventional pure-tone
audiometry (0.5 to 8 kHz) and evoked distortion product otoacoustic emissions
(DPOAEs) were conducted for 32 patients age 8 months to 20 years who were treated
with cisplatin and/or carboplatin chemotherapy. Seventeen children also had
baseline and serial measurement of extended high-frequency (EHF) audiometry (9 to
16 kHz). Audiologic data were analyzed to determine the incidence of ototoxicity 
using the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association criteria, and the
relationships between the different measures of ototoxicity.
RESULTS: Of the 32 children, 20 (62.5%) acquired bilateral ototoxicity in the
conventional frequency range during chemotherapy treatment, and 26 (81.3%) had
bilateral decreases in DPOAE amplitudes and dynamic range. Of the 17 children
with EHF audiometry results, 16 (94.1%) had bilateral ototoxicity in the EHF
range. Pilot data suggest that EHF thresholds and DPOAEs show ototoxic changes
before hearing loss is detected by conventional audiometry.
CONCLUSION: EHF audiometry and DPOAEs have the potential to reveal earlier
changes in auditory function than conventional frequency audiometry during
platinum chemotherapy in children.

PMID: 17401008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Curr Genomics. 2006;7(8):523-32.

Molecular classification of breast carcinoma in situ.

Raju U(1), Mei L, Seema S, Hina Q, Wolman SR, Worsham MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, Pathology.

Pleomorphic variant of invasive lobular carcinoma (PILC) is an aggressive variant
of invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC). Its in situ counterpart, pleomorphic lobular
carcinoma in situ (PLCIS) is a recently described entity. Morphologically it has 
the typical architectural pattern of LCIS, but the neoplastic cells resemble
intermediate grade DCIS. Molecular signatures that distinguish PLCIS from DCIS
and LCIS would provide additional tools to aid in the histopathologic
classification of PLCIS as a lesion distinct from LCIS and DCIS. CIS lesions,
obtained from a study cohort of 38 breast cancer patients, were divided into 18
DCIS, 14 PLCIS and 6 LCIS. DNA from microdissected archival tissue was
interrogated for loss or gain of 112 breast-cancer-specific genes using the
Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification Assay (MLPA). Classification
Regression Tree (CART) analysis was employed to develop a gene-based molecular
classification to distinguish or separate out PLCIS from DCIS and LCIS. Molecular
classification via CART, based on gene copy number, agreed with histopathology in
34/38 CIS cases. Loss of CASP1 was predictive of LCIS (n=4) with one
misclassified PLCIS. Gain of RELA predicted only the LCIS classification (n=2
cases). STK15 and TNFRSF1B were predictive only for DCIS with no
misclassifications. Gain of EHF and TNFRSF1B and loss of NCOA3 were predictive of
PLCIS, but not without misclassification. Molecular reclassification by CART was 
accomplished in 4 CIS cases: 1 PLCIS was reclassified as LCIS, 1 LCIS
reclassified as PLCIS, and 2 DCIS cases as PLCIS. This study provides additional 
rationale for molecular modeling strategies in the evaluation of CIS lesions.
This diagnostic aid may serve to minimize misclassification between PLCIS and
DCIS, and PLCIS and LCIS, aiding to increase accuracy in the differential
diagnosis of CIS lesions.

PMCID: PMC1828915
PMID: 17375183  [PubMed]


212. Biofizika. 2007 Jan-Feb;52(1):84-7.

[Investigation of the effect of doxorubicin on the intracellular signaling
system].

[Article in Russian]

Shchegoleva TIu, Nikitina NS, Ruzhel'nik EA.

The effect of the antitumor antibiotic doxorubicin on the mechanisms of
intracellular signal transduction in the region of free water dispersion has been
investigated by the EHF-dielectrometry method. It was shown that the drug whose
main target is nuclear DNA has a rather strong influence on free cells of the
nucleus, the functions of catecholamine receptors, and the complex of adenylate
cyclase with the cytoskeleton. The effect of the drug has significant individual 
and species differences. Variants of tests for individual selection of doses in
the therapeutic practice are suggested.

PMID: 17348401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biofizika. 2006 Nov-Dec;51(6):1055-68.

[Pharmacological analysis of anti-inflammatory effects of low-intensity extremely
high-frequency electromagnetic radiation].

[Article in Russian]

Gapeev AB, Lushnikov KV, Shumilina IuV, Chemeris NK.

The anti-inflammatory effect of low-intensity extremely high-frequency
electromagnetic radiation (EHF EMR, 42.0 GHz, 0.1 mW/cm2) was compared with the
action of the known anti-inflammatory drug sodium diclofenac and the
antihistamine clemastine on acute inflammatory reaction in NMRI mice. The local
inflammatory reaction was induced by intraplantar injection of zymosan into the
left hind paw. Sodium diclofenac in doses of 2, 3, 5, 10, and 20 mg/kg or
clemastine in doses of 0.02, 0.1, 0.2, 0.4, and 0.6 mg/kg were injected
intraperitoneally 30 min after the initiation of inflammation. The animals were
whole-body exposed to EHF EMR for 20 min at 1 h after the initiation of
inflammation. The inflammatory reaction was assessed over 3 - 8 h after the
initiation by measuring the footpad edema and hyperthermia of the inflamed paw.
Sodium diclofenac in doses of 5 - 20 mg/kg reduced the exudative edema on the
average by 26% as compared to the control. Hyperthermia of the inflamed paw
decreased to 60% as the dose of was increased diclofenac up to 20 mg/kg. EHF EMR 
reduced both the footpad edema and hyperthermia by about 20%, which was
comparable with the effect of a single therapeutic dose of diclofenac (3 - 5
mg/kg). The combined action of diclofenac and the exposure to the EHF EMR caused 
a partial additive effect. Clemastine in doses of 0.02-0.4 mg/kg it did not cause
any significant effects on the exudative edema, but in a dose of 0.6 mg/kg it
reduced edema by 14 - 22% by 5 - 8 h after zymosan injection. Clemastine caused a
dose-dependent increase in hyperthermia of inflamed paw at doses of 0.02-0.2
mg/kg and did not affect the hyperthermia at doses of 0.4 and 0.6 mg/kg. The
combined action of clemastine and EHF EMR exposure caused a dose-dependent
abolishment of the anti-inflammatory effect of EHF EMR. The results obtained
suggest that both arachidonic acid metabolites and histamine are involved in the 
realization of anti-inflammatory effects of low-intensity

PMID: 17175917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Jan;6(1):76-82.

Profile of Ets gene expression in human breast carcinoma.

He J(1), Pan Y, Hu J, Albarracin C, Wu Y, Dai JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Unit 951, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 25CR4.2026, 7435 Fannin St, Houston, Texas 77054, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Jan;6(1):83-4.

BACKGROUND: Ets genes encode a family of transcription factors that play key
roles in cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. Fusions of Ets genes 
with other targets have been described in Ewing's sarcoma, chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia and more recently prostate carcinoma. Ets expression in breast carcinoma
has not been comprehensively studied, and is the focus of this study.
METHODS: RT-Q-PCR was used to determine the expression of Ets genes in a panel of
ten common breast cancer cell lines, two immortalized normal breast epithelial
cell lines, and one primary culture of human mammary epithelial cells. Ets with
altered expression in cancer cell lines were verified in primary breast tumors.
RESULTS: Transcripts of 21 of the 27 Ets genes were detected in either normal or 
cancer cells. Of the 21 detectable genes, 14 were expressed at a similar level in
both normal and breast cancer cell lines. Four genes, Ehf, Elf3, Elf5 and Pdef,
were expressed at higher levels in breast cancer cells than normal epithelials.
Surprisingly, the expression of Elk3, Etsl and Flil was repressed in breast
cancer cells. The protein status of Ehf, Elf3, Pdef, Elk3, Etsl and Flil,
strongly correlated with the transcript data, suggesting that Ets expression is
regulated primarily at the transcriptional level. Similarly, Elf3, Pdef and Tel2 
were overexpressed, while Elk3, Etsl and Flil were under-expressed in primary
breast tumor specimens in comparison with normal mammary tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified a subset of Ets genes with altered expression
in breast carcinoma, implicating their roles in mammary tumorigenesis. While the 
Ets over-expression pattern is useful to uncover recurrent genetic alterations
involving Ets genes, the repressed expression of several Ets genes suggests that 
some Ets proteins may play suppressor roles during breast cancer progression. Our
results warrant detailed studies of individual Ets activity during mammary gland 
neoplasia.

PMID: 17172821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006 Dec;5(12):3191-6.

Influence of small interfering RNA corresponding to ets homologous factor on
senescence-associated modulation of prostate carcinogenesis.

Park C(1), Lee I, Kang WK.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, 50 Irwon-Dong, Seoul 135-710, Korea. cpark@smc.samsung.co.kr

Senescence is thought to be an inherent tumor-suppressive mechanism. In the
process of identifying senescence-associated genes, we found significant
suppression of the ets homologous factor (EHF) in cancer cells in a state of DNA 
damage-induced senescence. In this study, we show that EHF provides substantial
drug resistance in PC-3 prostate cancer cells by inhibiting senescence and cell
cycle arrest. Knockdown of EHF by small interfering RNA inhibited cell
proliferation and induced a premature cellular senescence characterized by
hypophosphorylation of Rb and increased level of p27, with concomitant decreases 
of cyclin A, cdc2, and E2F1. Telomeric repeat amplification protocol analysis
showed that transient EHF knockdown significantly decreased telomerase activity, 
whereas this activity was increased by overexpression of EHF. In vivo
tumorigenesis analyses revealed that tumors derived from EHF knockdown cells were
significantly smaller than those derived from control cells (P < 0.0001).
Further, the preestablished tumors were reduced after the injection of small
interfering RNA corresponding to EHF (P = 0.0122). Collectively, these
observations indicate that aberrant expression of EHF and the subsequent
disruption of p27-mediated senescence and telomerase activity is likely to
contribute significantly to tumor progression, and furthermore that EHF might be 
a promising target for future cancer therapeutics.

PMID: 17172423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Headache Pain. 2006 Dec;7(6):433-7. Epub 2006 Dec 10.

Migraine--the forgotten epidemic: development of the EHF/WHA Rome Declaration on 
Migraine.

Diener HC(1), Steiner TJ, Tepper SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 45147,
Essen, Germany. hans.diener@uni-duisburg-essen.de

Despite the availability of effective treatments, many migraine sufferers in
Europe still do not receive optimal treatment. A panel of specialists,
primary-care physicians and patient-group representatives met in Rome on 10-11
June 2005, under the auspices of the European Headache Federation (EHF), the
World Headache Alliance (WHA) and the University of Duisburg-Essen, to review the
scientific background, management issues, and physician, patient and government
perspectives on migraine. The goal of the meeting was to produce the EHF/WHA Rome
Declaration on Migraine, a statement of the actions required to improve migraine 
care and the quality of life of people with migraine. The key recommendation of
the EHF/WHA Rome Declaration on Migraine is education of migraine sufferers,
health professionals and health-policy makers.

PMCID: PMC3452226
PMID: 17149560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Nov 24;350(3):736-41. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

ESE-3 transcription factor is involved in the expression of death receptor (DR)-5
through putative Ets sites.

Lim JH(1), Cho JY, Park YB, Park JW, Kwon TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, 194
DongSan-Dong, Taegu 700-712, Republic of Korea.

The death receptor 5 (DR-5), a receptor for tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), is critical for TRAIL-mediated apoptosis in
various tumor cells. The ESE-3, a member of Ets transcription factors, regulates 
the expression of a variety of cellular genes by binding to purine-rich GGAA/T
core sequence in cooperation with other transcription factors and co-factors. In 
this study, we demonstrate for the first time that ESE-3 regulates DR-5
expression through Ets binding sequences on the DR-5 promoter. Using a
combination of the electrophoretic mobility shift assay and the luciferase
reporter assay, we identified putative Ets sites responsible for ESE-3
transcriptional activity on the DR-5 promoter. In addition, we show the possible 
involvement of co-factors CBP and p300 in ESE-3-mediated DR-5 up-regulation.

PMID: 17027647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2007 Jan;101(1):64-78. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

Morbidity and mortality of wild animals in relation to outbreaks of Ebola
haemorrhagic fever in Gabon, 1994-2003.

Lahm SA(1), Kombila M, Swanepoel R, Barnes RF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Tropical Ecology, Makokou, Gabon. sallyalahm@aol.com

Antibody to Ebola virus was found in 14 (1.2%) of 1147 human sera collected in
Gabon in 1981-1997. Six seropositive subjects were bled in the northeast in 1991,
more than 3 years prior to recognition of the first known outbreak of Ebola
haemorrhagic fever (EHF), whilst eight came from the southwest where the disease 
has not been recognised. It has been reported elsewhere that 98 carcasses of wild
animals were found in systematic studies in northeastern Gabon and adjoining
northwestern Republic of the Congo (RoC) during five EHF epidemics in August 2001
to June 2003, with Ebola virus infection being confirmed in 14 carcasses. During 
the present opportunistic observations, reports were investigated of a further
397 carcasses, mainly gorillas, chimpanzees, mandrills and bush pigs, found by
rural residents in 35 incidents in Gabon and RoC during 1994-2003. Sixteen
incidents had temporal and/or spatial coincidence with confirmed EHF outbreaks,
and the remaining 19 appeared to represent extension of disease from such sites. 
There appeared to be sustained Ebola virus activity in the northeast in
1994-1999, with sequential spread from 1996 onwards, first westwards, then
southerly, and then northeastwards, reaching the Gabon-RoC border in 2001. This
implies that there was transmission of infection between wild mammals, but the
species involved are highly susceptible and unlikely to be natural hosts of the
virus.

PMID: 17010400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2006 Jul-Aug;(4):13-5.

[Radon alpha-applicator in therapy of reactive and inflammatory arthropathies].

[Article in Russian]

Raspopova EA, Udartsev EIu, Rekhtin NF, Lavrinenko SI, Leonov EN.

The article presents the results of treatment of 42 patients with reactive and
inflammatory arthropathy of the knee and ankle joints. Nineteen patients were
exposed to EHF (460 MHz) electromagnetic field, 23 patients received local
cutaneous alpha therapy with radon applicator. Radon concentration was 7.4 Bq/l
(0.2 nCi/l), the exposure was 90 minutes. Local alpha-therapy by radon applicator
proved highly active as shown by attenuation of inflammation, excudative and
proliferative disorders in the joints.

PMID: 16989200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Gynecol Obstet Fertil. 2006 Sep;34(9):860-72. Epub 2006 Sep 8.

[Sociological aspects of late fatherhood].

[Article in French]

Bessin M(1).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, centre d'étude des mouvements sociaux (CEMS), école des hautes études en
sciences sociales (EHESS), 54, boulevard Raspail, 75006 Paris, France.
marc.bessin@ehess.fr

Starting from a sociological research on late parenthood, the article shows
quantitative and qualitative lessons on the subject--in particular concerning the
fathers' perspective. Late parenthood has declined over the 20th Century, to
increase again since 1980. The further exploitation of the survey EHF 99 shows
the processes and the socio-demographic of late fatherhood, over three
generations. This phenomenon is tightly related to the multiple descents and
family recombinings. We also observe in these configurations major age
differences between spouses and late relationship. The social bipolarity of this 
phenomenon appears clearly as far as late motherhood is concerned, but is less
clear concerning fatherhood, since more blue collars and non qualified men are
concerned. This difference is due to the important role played by migrants in
this phenomenon. A qualitative survey conducted on the basis of biographic
interviews has underlined the gendered logics of late family founding. These
logics are linked to the discrepancies due to man/woman differences regarding
their respective calendar of fertility and to their attitude towards work. The
interviews which provide an analysis of the biographical processes of late
parenthood are organised according to postponement or renewal logics, in the form
of refoundation or repetition. They are linked to self-introspection and to the
negotiations at work within a couple.

PMID: 16962815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Med Tekh. 2006 May-Jun;(3):13-8.

[A new information technology for system diagnosis of functional activity of
human organs].

[Article in Russian]

Avshalumov ASh, Sudakov KV, Filaretov GF.

The goal of this work was to consider a new diagnostic technology based on
analysis of objective information parameters of functional activity and
interaction of normal and pathologically changed human organs. The technology is 
based on the use of very low power millimeter (EHF) radiation emitted by human
body and other biological objects in the process of vital activity. The
importance of consideration of the information aspect of vital activity from the 
standpoint of the theory of functional systems suggested by P. K. Anokhin is
emphasized. The suggested information technology is theoretically substantiated. 
The capabilities of the suggested technology for diagnosis, as well as the
difficulties of its practical implementation caused by very low power of
electromagnetic fields generated by human body, are discussed. It is noted that
only use of modern radiophysical equipment together with new software based on
specially developed algorithms made it possible to construct a medical EHF
diagnostic system for effective implementation of the suggested technology. The
system structure, functions of its components, the examination procedure, and the
form of representation of diagnostic information are described together with the 
specific features of applied software based on the principle of maximal
objectivity of analysis and interpretation of the results of diagnosis on the
basis of artificial intelligence algorithms. The diagnostic capabilities of the
system are illustrated by several examples.

PMID: 16875138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2006 May-Jun;(3):14-6.

[Administration of ehf-therapy for rehabilitation of locomotor diseases].

[Article in Russian]

Miriutova NF, Bartfel'd NN, Kozhemiakin AM.

Noise EHF radiation under low-frequency (10 Hz) modulation both in monovariant
and in combination with spinal tractions promotes regression of neuro-orthopedic 
disorders. Good effects were achieved due to improvement of zonal hemodynamics,
conditions of functioning of the neuromuscular and locomotor system of the spine 
and limbs, favourable shifts in biochemical and autonomic status of patients with
lumbar osteochondrosis and osteoarthrosis.

PMID: 16862886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Lik Sprava. 2000 Oct-Dec;(7-8):60-2.

[Effects of low-intensity EHF-radiation on peripheral sections of the nervous
system].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Korkushko AO, Chupryna HM.

A study was made on effects of EHF-radiation on man. The study was conducted in
40 volunteers who ranged from 20 to 30 years old using the EHF-apparatus "Yav-I" 
(wavelength 7.1 mm, wattage 5 mW/cm2). As a result of 50 min exposure to
EHF-radiation of the area of the GI(II)4 acupuncture point in EEG study a
rearrangement has been recorded of cortical rhythm patterns characteristic of a
healthy man, that suggested the development of an unspecific reaction of
activation such as increase in the tone of the brain cortex. In the investigation
designed to study indication of EHF EMF, it has been shown that a field with the 
above parameters is recognized by 78 percent of examinees.

PMID: 16786651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Reprod Domest Anim. 2006 Jun;41(3):214-8.

Changes in semen quality in Estonian Holstein AI bulls at 3, 5 and 7 years of
age.

Hallap T(1), Jaakma U, Rodriguez-Martinez H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Comparative Reproduction, Obstetrics and Udder Health, Department 
of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science, Swedish 
University of Agricultural Sciences (SLU), Ultuna, Uppsala, Sweden.
triin.hallap@kv.slu.se

The predictability of semen quality of mature sires from measurements at an early
age is not well established. The aim of the present study was to determine
age-dependent changes in the quality of bull semen from six Estonian Holstein
(EHF) bulls, processed when the sires were 3, 5 and 7 years old. Fertility data
such as 60-day non-return to oestrus rates (60d-NRRs) were available for
3-year-old bulls. From each batch, semen straws were analysed immediately after
thawing [i.e. post-thaw (PT)] (controls) and after a swim-up (SU) procedure. The 
analyses comprised subjective and computerized measurements of sperm motility
using computer-assisted sperm analysis (CASA) as well as estimations of sperm
concentration, morphology and membrane integrity. There was a significant (p <
0.05) increase in the percentage of sperm motility (SU), membrane integrity (PT, 
SU) and normal tail and acrosome morphology (SU) with an increase in the age of
the sires. The percentage of total motile spermatozoa PT measured by CASA
correlated between 3- and 7-, and between 5- and 7-year-old bulls (p < 0.05). In 
addition, the proportion of head abnormalities tended to correlate between all
three age groups both PT and after SU (p < 0.1). The sperm parameters correlating
with fertility were average path velocity (VAP) (p < 0.001), total motility as
measured by CASA (p < 0.01), linearly motile spermatozoa (p < 0.05) and
CASA-assessed numbers of motile spermatozoa (p < 0.05), all after SU selection.
The results showed that overall semen quality examined at 3 years of age is
related to the semen parameters later in bulls' life. Moreover, CASA-assessed
motility after SU seems to be a reliable marker for semen quality assessment as
it shows correlation not only between the ages, but also to field fertility.

PMID: 16689884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Trends Mol Med. 2006 May;12(5):206-15. Epub 2006 Apr 17.

Ebola virus: unravelling pathogenesis to combat a deadly disease.

Hoenen T(1), Groseth A, Falzarano D, Feldmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Special Pathogens Program, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public Health
Agency of Canada, 1015 Arlington St., Winnipeg, MB R3E 3R2, Canada.

Ebola virus (EBOV) causes severe haemorrhagic fever leading to up to 90%
lethality. Increasingly frequent outbreaks and the placement of EBOV in the
category A list of potential biothreat agents have boosted interest in this
virus. Furthermore, development of new technologies (e.g. reverse genetics
systems) and extensive studies on Ebola haemorrhagic fever (EHF) in animal models
have substantially expanded the knowledge on the pathogenic mechanisms that
underlie this disease. Two major factors in EBOV pathogenesis are the impairment 
of the immune response and vascular dysfunction. Here, we attempt to summarize
the current knowledge on EBOV pathogenesis focusing on these two factors and on
recent progress in the development of vaccines and potential therapeutics.

PMID: 16616875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2006 Oct;14(10):968-74. Epub 2006 Mar 22.

Fusion of the septic knee with external hybrid fixator.

Kutscha-Lissberg F(1), Hebler U, Esenwein SA, Muhr G, Wick M.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital for Surgery, Ruhr-University Bochum, Chirurgische Klinik, 
Bürkle-de-la-Camp-Platz 1, 44789 Bochum, Germany.
Friedrich.Kutscha@bergmannsheil.de

Arthrodesis is a well-recognized salvage procedure in patients with septic
destruction of knee joints. It offers the opportunity for restoring weight
bearing capability and significant pain relief as well as eradication of
infection, but at the expense of joint motion. However, arthrodesis in order to
joint sepsis may be difficult to achieve because of poor bone stock, persistent
infection and soft tissue compromise. From 2000 to June 2004, in 70 consecutive
patients arthrodesis of the knee was indicated. Nineteen patients were considered
to have external hybrid fixator (EHF) and were therefore included to the
prospective study protocol. Forty-three stabilisations of destructed knee joints 
were done by a modular titanium rod. In these cases bony fusion was very unlikely
to be achieved because of devastating defects due to infected total knee
arthroplasties. Eight patients were treated by compression nailing. In these
situations EHF was not indicated. In three patients minor complication occurred. 
In two out of 17 patients fusion failed because of primary underestimated bony
defects (11.8%). The use of EHF for arthrodeses after septic destruction of knee 
joints can be recommended according to our results. However, EHF will not be
successful or applicable in each case. Therefore, physicians and institutions
that offer this special method should have not only experiences with EHF but also
with arthrodeses and alternative procedures.

PMID: 16552552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Fiziol Zh. 2005;51(6):70-8.

[Effect of hypokinetic stress and low intensity electromagnetic field of
extremely high frequency on changes of cytokine concentration in rat blood].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Chuian OM, Temur'iants NA, Makhonina MM, Zaiachnikova TV.

The influence of hypokinetic stress and low-intensive electromagnetic field of
extremely high frequency (EMF of EHF) on cytokine concentration changes (IL-1, 2,
4, 6 and TNF-6) in serum of rats was investigated. Using an immunoenzyme method
it was shown that the concentration of the investigated cytokines under influence
of the hypokinetic stress and low-intensive EMF of EHF is changed in an inversed 
direction.. An isolated influence of EMF of EHF on animals resulted in
significant decrease of IL- 1B concentration and in the tendency of IL-6
concentration reduction while concentration of IL-2, IL-4 and TNF-6 increased.
Mobility restriction of animals has caused substantial growth of IL-1B, IL-2,
IL-6 and TNF-6 concentration with simultaneous decrease of IL-4 concentration.
Variation of the investigated parameters differed considerably from the results
obtained for animals in the case of a restricted mobility, which does not take
place under activity of EMF of EHF with the combined influence of hypokinesia
activity and EMF of EHF. It is assumed that revealed changes of the cytokine
profile after the use of low-intensive EMF of EHF resulted in increase of the
nonspecific immunological reactivity level of animals that is very important
component of its physiological action.

PMID: 16485858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Chem Phys. 2005 Sep 22;123(12):124103.

DFT-based chemical reactivity indices in the Hartree-Fock method. II. Fukui
function, chemical potential, and hardness.

Balawender R(1), Geerlings P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physical Chemistry of the Polish Academy of Sciences (PAS),
Kasprzaka 44/52, PL-01-224 Warsaw, Poland. balawend@ichf.edu.pl

A derivation of the density-functional-theory- (DFT) based reactivity indices in 
the ensemble unrestricted Hartree-Fock (eUHF) method is presented. The comparison
between the properties of the reactivity indices evaluated in one and two sets of
spin-orbital approach of the eUHF and hyper-unrestricted Hartree-Fock (UHF)
methods are shown. All approaches give similar Fukui function irrespective of
methodology used, but significantly differ for the global indices, containing
important chemical information, and so their interpretation in terms of DFT-
based indices can be questionable. The calculation scheme for the indices using
the first- and second-order coupled perturbed eHF equations is proposed. A method
for the identification of the spinorbitals involved in the change of the total
number of electrons is included. The illustrative examples (water and hydrogen
cyanide) show that the ground-state (GS) properties of the (Z +/- 1)-electron
systems can be predicted from the GS properties of the Z-electron systems with an
accuracy comparable with the UHF calculations. The relaxation effect, important
for the HCN system in which a change in the symmetry of the highest-occupied
spin-orbital occurs, is effectively predicted.

PMID: 16392471  [PubMed]


229. J Headache Pain. 2005 Dec;6(6):429-40. Epub 2005 Dec 15.

The global burden of migraine: measuring disability in headache disorders with
WHO's Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF).

Leonardi M(1), Steiner TJ, Scher AT, Lipton RB.

Author information: 
(1)Scientific Direction, Italian National Neurological Institute Carlo Besta, Via
Celoria 11, I-20133, Milan, Italy. leonardi@istituto-besta.it

This overview of the published epidemiological evidence of migraine helps to
identify the size of the public-health problem that migraine represents. It also 
highlights the need for further epidemiological studies in many parts of the
world to gain full understanding of the scale of clinical, economic and
humanistic burdens attributable to it. This paper presents some of the work on
migraine undertaken by the World Health Organization (WHO) in the Global Burden
of Disease study conducted in 2000 and reported in the World Health Report 2001. 
Migraine was not included in the first Global Burden of Disease 1990. The paper
also discussed the measurement of disability attributable to headache disorders
using WHO ICF Classification. Using disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) as a
summary measure of population health (which adds disability to mortality), WHO
have shown that mental and neurological disorders collectively account for 30.8% 
of all years of healthy life lost to disability (YLDs) whilst migraine, one
amongst these, alone accounts for 1.4% and is in the top 20 causes of disability 
worldwide. This information is combined with the increasingly widely accepted
belief that disability and functioning are relevant parameters for monitoring the
health of nations and that there is an increasing need to measure them. WHO's
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) provides a model of
human functioning and disability, as well as a classification system, that allows
us to highlight and measure all dimensions of disability. ICF applied to headache
disorders allows comparability with other health conditions as well as evaluation
of the role of the environment as a cause of disability amongst people with
headache. Migraine causes a large proportion of the non-fatal disease-related
burden worldwide. Our knowledge of headache related burden is incomplete and it
is necessary to add to it epidemiological studies in many parts of the world and 
to combine this with measurements of disability using both DALYs and WHO's ICF
Classification. The work described here has been the base for the Global Campaign
against Headache disorders: "Lifting the Burden", launched in 2004 jointly by
WHO, IHS (International Headache Society), WHA (World Headache Alliance) and EHF 
(European Headache Federation).

PMCID: PMC3452308
PMID: 16388337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Blood. 2006 Apr 15;107(8):3265-70. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Epithelial-specific transcription factor ESE-3 is involved in the development of 
monocyte-derived DCs.

Appel S(1), Bringmann A, Grünebach F, Weck MM, Bauer J, Brossart P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, University of Tübingen,
Otfried-Müller Str 10, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are recognized as the most potent antigen-presenting cells 
of the immune system with the unique ability to initiate and maintain primary
immune responses. In order to better characterize the functional and phenotypic
features of DCs, a subtractive cDNA library to identify differentially expressed 
genes in monocyte-derived DCs (MDCs) was constructed. Using this approach, we
found that the epithelial transcription factor ESE-3, which was previously shown 
to be exclusively expressed in cells of epithelial origin, is differentially
expressed in MDCs. This was further confirmed by reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blot analyses. The expression of ESE-3 is
up-regulated upon maturation of MDCs and inhibited by treating the cells with
IL-10 or IFN-gamma. Knockdown experiments using siRNA suggest that ESE-3 plays an
important role during MDC development. Our results might help to improve the
phenotypic characterization of DCs and lead to a better understanding of the
cellular mechanisms involved in antigen presentation and T-cell stimulation.

PMID: 16380452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Dec;63(12):2161-6.

[Clinical aspects of viral hemorrhagic fever].

[Article in Japanese]

Saijo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology I, National Institute of Infectious Diseases.

Viral hemorrhagic fever (VHF) is defined as virus infections that usually cause
pyrexia and hemorrhagic symptoms with multiple organ failure. VHF includes
following viral infections: Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF), Marburg hemorrhagic
fever (MHF), Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) and Lassa fever. In
particular, the causative agents of EHF, MHF, CCHF, and Lassa fever are Ebola,
Marburg, CCHF, Lassa viruses, respectively, and regarded as biosafety level-4
pathogens because of their high virulence to humans. Recently, relatively large
outbreaks of EHF and MHF have occurred in Africa, and areas of EHF- and
MHF-outbreaks seem to be expanding. Although outbreaks of VHF have not been
reported in Japan, there is a possibility that the deadly hemorrhagic fever
viruses would be introduced to Japan in future. Therefore, preparedness for
possible future outbreaks of VHF is necessary in areas without VHF outbreaks.

PMID: 16363689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2005 Dec;16(8):641-6.

Feeding a soy formula to children with cow's milk allergy: the development of
immunoglobulin E-mediated allergy to soy and peanuts.

Klemola T(1), Kalimo K, Poussa T, Juntunen-Backman K, Korpela R, Valovirta E,
Vanto T.

Author information: 
(1)Jorvi Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Espoo, Finland. timo.klemola@hus.fi

Peanut allergy has been associated with the intake of soy milk or a soy formula. 
We studied the development of immunoglobulin E antibodies specific to soy and
peanuts and of allergic reactions caused by peanuts, in children with confirmed
cow's milk (CM) allergy fed either a soy formula or an extensively hydrolyzed
formula (EHF). One hundred and seventy infants with documented CM allergy (CMA)
were randomly assigned to receive either a soy formula or an EHF. The children
were followed to the age of 4 yr. Peanut-specific immunoglobulin E was measured
at the age of 4. A detailed history of the occurrence of allergic reactions
caused by peanuts was recorded by the parents. Soy-specific immunoglobulin E
antibodies were measured at the time of diagnosis and at the ages of 1, 2 and 4
yr. Immunoglobulin E antibodies to soy (> or =0.35 kU/l) were found in 22 of 70
children fed the soy formula, and in 14 of 70 of the children fed the EHF (p =
0.082). In an open challenge with soy at the age of 4, no immediate reactions
were observed. One of 72 children from the soy group had a delayed reaction.
immunoglobulin E antibodies to peanuts (> or =0.35 kU/l) were found in 21 of 70
children fed the soy formula and 17 of 69 infants fed the EHF (p = 0.717). The
incidence of reported peanut allergy in the soy group was two of 72 (3%) and four
of 76 (5%) in the EHF group (p = 0.68). Development of immunoglobulin
E-associated allergy to soy and peanuts was rare in our study group of milk
allergic children. The use of a soy formula during the first 2 yr of life did not
increase the risk of development of peanut-specific immunoglobulin E antibodies
or of clinical peanut allergy.

PMID: 16343085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Bull Soc Pathol Exot. 2005 Sep;98(3):230-6.

Medical anthropology and Ebola in Congo: cultural models and humanistic care.

Hewlett BS(1), Epelboin A, Hewlett BL, Formenty P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, Washington State University, 14204 NE Salmon
Creek, Vancouver, WA 98686, USA. hewlett@vancouver.wsu.edu

Seldom have medical anthropologists been involved in efforts to control high
mortality diseases such as Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) This paper describes the
results of two distinct but complementary interventions during the first phases
of an outbreak in the Republic of Congo in 2003. The first approach emphasized
understanding local peoples cultural models and political-economic explanations
for the disease while the second approach focused on providing more humanitarian 
care of patients by identifying and incorporating local beliefs and practices
into patient care and response efforts.

PMID: 16267966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Theriogenology. 2006 Apr 1;65(6):1122-36. Epub 2005 Sep 22.

Usefulness of a triple fluorochrome combination Merocyanine 540/Yo-Pro 1/Hoechst 
33342 in assessing membrane stability of viable frozen-thawed spermatozoa from
Estonian Holstein AI bulls.

Hallap T(1), Nagy S, Jaakma U, Johannisson A, Rodriguez-Martinez H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Animal
Science, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences (SLU), Ullsvägen 14C,
Clinical Center, P.O. Box 7054, Ultuna SE-750 07, Uppsala, Sweden.
triin.hallap@kv.slu.se

In a situation where technology allows for the simultaneous measurement of
numerous parameters of a single sperm cell, it becomes crucial to choose those
parameters which may be useful in estimating in vivo fertility. Sperm membrane
destabilization is believed to occur during chilling of semen, although its
effect on the post-thaw (PT) fertility of the spermatozoa has not yet been fully 
assessed. For this reason, we tested a new combination of fluorophores,
Merocyanine 540 (M540)/Yo-Pro 1/Hoechst 33342 (H33342), to detect sperm plasma
membrane destabilization in bull spermatozoa conventionally processed for
artificial insemination (AI). The samples were tested by flow cytometry (FC),
both immediately PT and following an in vitro swimup (SU) technique, and results 
were thereafter compared with conventional sperm quality measurements (of
concentration, motility, morphology, and membrane integrity), including in vivo
fertility. Semen samples from six Estonian Holstein (EHF) AI bulls, frozen when
the sires were aged 3, 5, and 7 years, allowed us to test the effect of bull age 
on quality of semen. Plasma membrane stability correlated to motility, normal
head morphology (p<0.05), and membrane integrity (p<0.01). Following the SU
selection, motility, membrane integrity (p<0.001), and membrane instability
increased (p<0.01), as did stability (p<0.05). Bull age did not influence the
degree of sperm membrane destabilization, except for the 3-year sample versus
7-year sample, in which the proportion of spermatozoa with destabilized plasma
lemma increased PT (p<0.05) without affecting membrane integrity. Only parameters
measured after SU, such as proportion of total motile and linearly motile
spermatozoa, assessed with computer-assisted sperm analysis (CASA) (p<0.01),
average path velocity (VAP) (p<0.001), and percentage of spermatozoa with
unstable plasma lemma (p<0.05), had a significant relationship with non-return
rate (NRR). The results indicate that a triple combination of the fluorophores
M540/Yo-Pro 1/H33342 is suitable for monitoring the status of membrane stability 
in frozen-thawed (FT) bull spermatozoa. As well, a SU preselection method seems
helpful in distinguishing relationships between sperm quality and fertility among
bulls in a homogenous sire population.

PMID: 16182357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Transcult Nurs. 2005 Oct;16(4):289-97.

Providing care and facing death: nursing during Ebola outbreaks in central
Africa.

Hewlett BL(1), Hewlett BS.

Author information: 
(1)Oregon State University, USA.

Few studies have focused on describing the experiences of health care workers
during rapid killing epidemics. In this article, the views and experiences of
nurses during three outbreaks of Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) in Central Africa 
are examined. These three outbreaks occurred in Kikwit, Democratic Republic of
Congo (DRC, 1995); Gulu, Uganda (2000-2001); and Republic of Congo (ROC, 2003).
Open-ended and semistructured interviews with individuals and small groups were
conducted during the outbreaks in Uganda and ROC; data from DRC are extracted
from published sources. Three key themes emerged from the interviews: (a) lack of
protective gear, basic equipment, and other resources necessary to provide care, 
especially during the early phases of the outbreaks; (b) stigmatization by
family, coworkers, and community; and (c) exceptional commitment to the nursing
profession in a context where the lives of the health care workers were in
jeopardy.

PMID: 16160191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Med Sci Monit. 2005 Sep;11(9):BR309-15. Epub 2005 Aug 26.

Natural killer cell cytotoxic activity and c-Fos protein synthesis in rat
hypothalamic cells after painful electric stimulation of the hind limbs and EHF
irradiation of the skin.

Shanin SN(1), Rybakina EG, Novikova NN, Kozinets IA, Rogers VJ, Korneva EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Experimental
Medicine, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Saint Petersburg, Russia.

BACKGROUND: The goal was to assess changes in natural killer (NK) cell activity
and the number of c-Fos-positive cells in hypothalamic structures induced by
painful electrical stimulation and to use extremely high-frequency (EHF)
irradiation of the skin to modulate these processes.
MATERIAL/METHODS: Experiments were performed on Wistar rats subjected to painful 
electrical stimulation of the hind limbs combined with EHF irradiation of the
skin. The cytotoxic activity of splenic NK cells was assessed by their ability to
lyse K-562 tumor cells in vitro. c-Fos-like protein was detected by an
immunoperoxidase technique.
RESULTS: Painful electric stimulation was associated with a significant decrease 
in splenic NK cytotoxicity and a dramatic increase in c-Fos-positive cell counts 
in some hypothalamic structures, particularly in the anterior hypothalamic
nucleus (AHN) and the perifornical lateral hypothalamic area (LHA). Two EHF
exposures, one before and one after electric stimulation, prevented the
suppression of splenic NK cell activity and caused a decrease in the number of
c-Fos-positive cells expressed in the ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) and
basal LHA. Negative correlation was shown between c-Fos-positive cell counts in
the AHN and LHA and the cytotoxic activity of NK cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that painful electric stimulation of the hind 
limbs of rats causes a reorganization of the central mechanisms that regulate
splenic NK cell activity, resulting in a decrease in their cytotoxicity, and that
EHF irradiation of the skin prevents this reorganization, thus protecting splenic
NK cell activity from the impairment induced by this stressor.

PMID: 16127352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Clin Otolaryngol. 2005 Jun;30(3):249-54.

Extended high-frequency audiometry in patients with acoustic trauma.

Balatsouras DG(1), Homsioglou E, Danielidis V.

Author information: 
(1)ENT Department of Tzanion General Hospital, Piraeus, Greece.
balats@panafonet.gr

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to examine extended high-frequency (EHF)
hearing in patients with acoustic trauma.
DESIGN: A prospective, case-control study in a group of soldiers with acoustic
trauma caused by shooting practice during basic training.
SETTING: Tertiary referral centre.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 39 young soldiers hospitalized for hearing loss and
tinnitus following exposure to weapon impulse noise were studied. Conventional
audiometry in the frequency range 0.25-8 kHz and EHF audiometry in the frequency 
range 9-20 kHz were performed, both on admittance and before discharge. Thirty
healthy recruits of similar age and sex were used as controls.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Pure-tone threshold changes documented by conventional and
EHF audiometry.
RESULTS: The most significant differences in pure-tone thresholds on initial
testing were found in the frequency range 0.25-11.2 kHz, and especially in the
4-8 kHz region. Reduction in thresholds across most frequencies was observed
after treatment, although recovery was partial in most cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The EHF audiometry adds no significant additional information to
conventional pure-tone audiometry in assessing and monitoring noise-induced
hearing loss.

PMID: 16111421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Lik Sprava. 2005 Apr-May;(3):38-43.

[Study of the systemic-organ blood circulation in acute period of the multiple
trauma based on water-electrolytic metabolism and its correction with
EHF-therapy].

[Article in Russian]

Malykhin AV.

In the present paper the new approach to study of relationships of system blood
circulation and its correction with the help of effect of EHF-therapy on the
organism of person is offered. The method is based on the study of dynamic
indexes of water-electrolytic metabolism, cell structure of a blood, ECG, REG,
computer-aided tomography of the brain. The correlation between cell structure of
blood, ionic structure and dynamic indexes of water-electrolytic metabolism is
found out. Some parameters, factor of solubility of oxygen, parameters of a
common water of organism were designed.

PMID: 16025675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Funct Neurol. 2005 Apr-Jun;20(2):89-93.

Guidelines for the organization of headache education in Europe: the headache
school.

Antonaci F(1), Láinez JM, Diener HC, Couturier EG, Agosti R, Afra J, Färkkilä M, 
Obelieniene D, Valade D; European Headache Federation.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Pavia, IRCCS C. Mondino
Institute of Neurology, Pavia, Italy. neuronet@libero.it

According to its mission statement, one of the goals of the European Headache
Federation (EHF) is to "educate Europe" about headache through the teaching of
the key health personnel, such as young physicians and all those involved in
headache management, about the seriousness of headache disorders. The countries
of Europe share a close geographical proximity that facilitates international
exchanges, particularly between university faculties. In recent years, this has, 
indeed, been the working basis of European educational endeavours in the field of
headache. For a number of years, annual summer schools were organized in
different European countries and a permanent Summer Headache School was set up in
Cambridge (to be held every alternate year). The last summer headache school was 
held in Vilnius in 2002. In the past decade, a patronage scheme was also set up, 
which, combining two or more countries (one developed, one or more developing),
allowed international exchanges of doctors and students for training purposes. In
some centres, participants were also able to gain clinical practice and research 
experience by staying at the host institutions for extended periods of time. As a
result of all this activity there have emerged, in Europe, "clusters" of people
with a particular interest in headache. However, the rapid growth of insight into
headache (new molecules, new headache categories, etc.) has contributed to a
widening of the scientific gap between developing and developed countries.
Moreover, in the past four years, due to the relative restriction of
national/international drug company budgets, it has proved possible to organize
only relatively inexpensive teaching courses. As a result, countries whose
medical communities had been developing a "headache culture" now find themselves 
destined to be increasingly held back. Therefore, the EHF, in order to promote
education on headache in Europe at national level, felt there was a need for
guidelines for the organization of educational courses that meet uniform
standards of excellence and in terms of code of conduct: guaranteed courses that 
will attract investors and those seeking to increase their knowledge, skills and 
understanding in the area of primary and secondary headache. The guidelines,
presented here, specify the ideal length of a headache course, the number of
lectures it should include, as well as the ideal number of participants and
teachers. A sample course outline is provided, together with a checklist to help 
the organizers to meet the criteria for an EHF-approved headache school.

PMID: 15966273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2005 Mar-Apr;(2):24-6.

[EHF-therapy and IR radiation in combined treatment of children suffering from
atopic dermatitis].

[Article in Russian]

Perminova EB, Gridneva TD.

One hundred and 30 patients with atopic dermatitis were divided into three
groups. The patients of group 1 (50 children) received EHF-IR therapy on
biologically active points, the patients of group 2 (50 children) received EHF
therapy alone, 30 children of group 3 received only chemotherapy. A comparison of
the three methods of atopic dermatitis treatment revealed that EHF-IR therapy is 
superior to the rest treatments by both short- and long-term treatment outcomes.

PMID: 15916369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Di Yi Jun Yi Da Xue Xue Bao. 2005 May;25(5):593-4, 598.

[Clinical observation of liver damages in epidemic hemorrhagic fever].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang ZY(1), Ye XG, Liao YZ, Li SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Diseases, Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou
Medical College, Guangzhou 510260, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the changes in liver function in patients with epidemic
hemorrhagic fever (EHF).
METHOD: A retrospective analysis of the laboratory tests of liver function in 103
patients with EHF and control subjects was carried out.
RESULTS: The alanine aminotransferase (ALT), serum bilirubin (SB) and albumin
levels in patients with severe and critical liver damages significantly differed 
from those in milder cases, and more sever liver damages were found in the death 
cases of EHF than in survived patients in terms of ALT and SB increment
(P=0.000). The liver damage was related to the clinical type, age and the levels 
of blood platelet , albumin, lactic dehydrogenase and creatinine in EHF cases
(P=0.000, 0.000, 0.030, 0.010, 0.000 and 0.013, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Liver damage is common in patients with EHF and exacerbates with the
severity of the disease. Monitoring of ALT, SB and albumin is helpful for
evaluating the progression and prognosis of EHF.

PMID: 15897149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Immunol. 2005 May 15;174(10):6184-94.

Enforced expression of Spi-B reverses T lineage commitment and blocks
beta-selection.

Lefebvre JM(1), Haks MC, Carleton MO, Rhodes M, Sinnathamby G, Simon MC,
Eisenlohr LC, Garrett-Sinha LA, Wiest DL.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Working Group, Division of Basic Sciences, Fox Chase Cancer
Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

The molecular changes that restrict multipotent murine thymocytes to the T cell
lineage and render them responsive to Ag receptor signals remain poorly
understood. In this study, we report our analysis of the role of the Ets
transcription factor, Spi-B, in this process. Spi-B expression is acutely induced
coincident with T cell lineage commitment at the CD4(-)CD8(-)CD44(-)CD25(+) (DN3)
stage of thymocyte development and is then down-regulated as thymocytes respond
to pre-TCR signals and develop beyond the beta-selection checkpoint to the
CD4(-)CD8(-)CD44(-)CD25(-) (DN4) stage. We found that dysregulation of Spi-B
expression in DN3 thymocytes resulted in a dose-dependent perturbation of
thymocyte development. Indeed, DN3 thymocytes expressing approximately five times
the endogenous level of Spi-B were arrested at the beta-selection checkpoint, due
to impaired induction of Egr proteins, which are important molecular effectors of
the beta-selection checkpoint. T lineage-committed DN3 thymocytes expressing even
higher levels of Spi-B were diverted to the dendritic cell lineage. Thus, we
demonstrate that the prescribed modulation of Spi-B expression is important for T
lineage commitment and differentiation beyond the beta-selection checkpoint; and 
we provide insight into the mechanism underlying perturbation of development when
that expression pattern is disrupted.

PMID: 15879115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Theriogenology. 2005 Apr 1;63(6):1752-63.

Sperm chromatin stability in frozen-thawed semen is maintained over age in AI
bulls.

Hallap T(1), Nagy S, Håård M, Jaakma U, Johannisson A, Rodriguez-Martinez H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and
Animal Science, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences (SLU), Ullsvägen 14C,
Clinical Center, P.O. Box 7039, Ultuna SE-75007, Uppsala, Sweden.
triin.hallap@og.slu.se

The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of age of the sire on 
the in vitro quality of frozen-thawed (FT) bull spermatozoa, both when tested
immediately postthaw (PT) and when assessed after cleansing and selection through
a swim-up (SU) procedure. Semen samples from six Swedish Red and White Breed
(SRB) artificial insemination (AI) bulls at age 1 and again, at 4 years were
collected and frozen in 0.25 ml plastic straws. Also, semen was collected from
six Estonian Holstein (EHF) bulls at the ages of 3, 5, and 7 years and likewise
processed. The FT semen was tested for the susceptibility of sperm nuclear
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) to undergo acid-induced denaturation in situ, as
quantified by flow cytometry (FCM). The DNA denaturability was expressed as
function alpha t, i.e., as the ratio of red (denaturated DNA) to red + green
(total cellular DNA) fluorescence intensity. The results were expressed as the
percentage of cells with high alpha t values, i.e., cells outside the main
population (% COMP alpha t). Morphological evaluation of the same samples was
performed to detect general and sperm head abnormalities and differences between 
ages. Fertility results were available as non-return rates (NRRs) for the semen
of the sires when they were 1 year (SRB) and 3 years (EHF) old, varying from 62.2
to 70.7% in SRB and from 52.2 to 76.0% in EHF animals. The COMP alpha t values
ranged from 0.5-3.6% (PT) to 0.2-1.7% (SU) for SRB bulls and from 0.4-1.8% (PT)
to 0.2-1.5% (SU) for EHF bulls. Both breeds lacked differences between ages,
either PT or after SU. However, the SU procedure yielded a significantly higher
population of spermatozoa with stable DNA following acid-induced denaturation,
than PT samples (p < 0.001). No correlation was detected between field fertility 
and chromatin stability. The results indicate that for these bull populations,
the SU procedure was able to select spermatozoa with stable chromatin from the
bulk samples. However, the use of DNA denaturation as a challenge to assess sperm
chromatin stability did not offer a more accurate tool to evaluate sperm quality 
than the conventional, light microscopical evaluation of morphology.

PMID: 15763115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Ear Hear. 2005 Feb;26(1):1-11.

Longitudinal study of pure-tone thresholds in older persons.

Lee FS(1), Matthews LJ, Dubno JR, Mills JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Comment in
    Ear Hear. 2006 Feb;27(1):91; author reply 92.

OBJECTIVE: Pure-tone thresholds for conventional and extended high frequencies
were analyzed for 188 older adult human subjects (91 females, 97 males). The
objectives were to study longitudinal changes in thresholds as well as the
effects of initial threshold levels, age, gender, and noise history on these
longitudinal changes.
DESIGN: At the time of entry into the study, subjects' ages ranged from 60 to 81 
years, with a mean age of 68 years. Subjects had between 2 and 21 visits (mean = 
9.81 visits) over a period of 3 to 11.5 years (mean = 6.40 years). Conventional
pure-tone thresholds at 0.25 to 8 kHz were measured during most visits. Extended 
high-frequency (EHF) thresholds at 9 to 18 kHz were measured every 2 to 3 years. 
The slope of a linear regression was used to estimate the rate of change in
pure-tone thresholds at 0.25 to 18 kHz for each ear. A questionnaire was used to 
identify those subjects with a positive noise history.
RESULTS: The average rate of change in thresholds was 0.7 dB per year at 0.25
kHz, increasing gradually to 1.2 dB per year at 8 kHz and 1.23 dB per year at 12 
kHz. The rate of change for thresholds increased significantly with age, at 0.25 
to 3, 10, and 11 kHz for females and at 6 kHz for males. After adjusting for age,
females had a significantly slower rate of change at 1 kHz but a significantly
faster rate of change at 6 to 12 kHz than males. For 0.25 and 1 kHz, subjects
with more hearing loss at higher frequencies had a faster rate of change at these
frequencies, whereas for 6 and 8 kHz, subjects with more hearing loss at mid and 
high frequencies had a slower rate of change at these frequencies. The rates of
threshold change for subjects with a positive noise history were not
statistically different from those with a negative noise history.
CONCLUSIONS: On average, hearing threshold increased approximately 1 dB per year 
for subjects age 60 and over. Age, gender, and initial threshold levels can
affect the rate of change in thresholds. Older female subjects (> or =70 years)
had faster rate of change at 0.25 to 3, 10, and 11 kHz than younger female
subjects (60 to 69 years). Older male subjects had faster rate of change at 6 kHz
than younger male subjects. Females had a slower rate of change at 1 kHz and a
faster rate of change at 6 to 12 kHz than males. Subjects with higher initial
thresholds at low and mid frequencies tended to have faster rate of threshold
change at 0.25 to 2 kHz in the following years. Subjects with higher initial
thresholds at mid and higher frequencies tended to have slower rate of change at 
6 to 8 kHz in the following years. Noise history did not have a significant
effect on the rate of threshold changes.

PMID: 15692300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2004 Sep-Oct;(5):34-5.

[EHF-therapy in early rehabilitation of patients after surgical treatment of
gastric and duodenal ulcer].

[Article in Russian]

Selianina GA, Miliukov AM, Miliukova AA, Gushchina NP, Shusharina LV.

PMID: 15575539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Lepr Rev. 2004 Sep;75(3):221-32.

Measuring impairment caused by leprosy: inter-tester reliability of the WHO
disability grading system.

Nienhuis WA(1), van Brakel WH, Butlin CR, van der Werf TS.

Author information: 
(1)Purulia Leprosy Mission Home & Hospital, West Bengal, India.
WA_Nienhuis@hotmail.com

This paper reports the results of a study on the inter-tester reliability of the 
WHO disability grading system. The WHO disability grading system is the most
frequently used method of grading impairment in leprosy patients. With this
method, a grade of 0-2 is assigned to each of six individual body sites (both
eyes, hands and feet). The maximum grade of any of these sites is used as an
overall indicator of the person's impairment status. To date, the WHO disability 
grading scale has not been subjected to reliability testing. The reliability of
the grading system depends on the operational definitions of the grades, the way 
the tester interprets these definitions and the skill of the tester. It is
therefore important that the definitions are unambiguous and leave as little room
as possible for multiple interpretations. Three testers with varying degrees of
experience did paired assessments on a total of 150 leprosy patients in the
Leprosy Mission Hospital Purulia, India, using recently published operational
definitions of the WHO disability grades. For every patient, they determined the 
maximum grade (minimum 0, maximum 2), and calculated the impairment sum-score
(EHF score), adding up the six grades for eyes, hands and feet (minimum 0,
maximum 12). The weighted Kappa statistic (Kw) was used as the coefficient of
inter-tester reliability. A kappa of 0 represents agreement no better than
chance, and 1.0 complete (chance-corrected) agreement. Kw values of > or = 0.80
are considered very good and adequate for monitoring and research. Weighted Kappa
analysis yielded a reliability coefficient of 0.89 (95%CI 0.84-0.94) for the
maximum grade and a Kw of 0.97 (95%CI 0.96-0.98) for the EHF score. We concluded 
that, when using standard operational definitions, the WHO disability grading
system can be used reliably in the hands of both experienced and inexperienced
testers, provided adequate training has been given. Reliability should be
evaluated further in a field setting, when used by primary health care workers.
It is recommended that the 'WHO disability grading' be renamed 'WHO impairment
grading', using the terminology as defined by the International Classification of
Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF).

PMID: 15508899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Bull Soc Pathol Exot. 2004 Aug;97(3):199-205.

[Epidemics of Ebola haemorrhagic fever in Gabon (1994-2002). Epidemiologic
aspects and considerations on control measures].

[Article in French]

Milleliri JM(1), Tévi-Benissan C, Baize S, Leroy E, Georges-Courbot MC.

Author information: 
(1)IMTSSA - Le Pharo -Allée du Médecin Colonel Jamot - BP 46, 13998 Marseille
Armées, France. j-m.milleliri@wanadoo.fr

Based on the description of the four Ebola haemorrhagic fever epidemics (EHF)
occurred in Gabon between 1994 and 2002, the authors are considering the cultural
and psycho-sociological aspects accounting for the difficulty to implement
control measures. On the whole, the result of these raging epidemics came up to
207 cases and 150 dead (lethality: 72%). Analysing precisely the aspects of the
third epidemic and pointing up the possible factors explaining its spreading far 
beyond its epicentre, the authors bring about the limits of measures not always
understood by local populations. The discussion will deal with the possibilities 
of a better surveillance, a quick management of intervention means including a
regional permanent pre-alert and taking into account the issue raised by the
possible Ebola virus endemic.

PMID: 15462203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Mar;18(1):88-90.

[Experimental study on enzyme dot assay for detection of hemorrhagic fever with
renal syndrome antigen].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang JA(1), Luo DD, Zeng LL, Li SL.

Author information: 
(1)Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
430022, China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish a new and efficient method(IEDA) for detection of
hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome virus (HFRSV) antigen.
METHODS: An immune enzyme dot assay (IEDA) with mixture of three sorts
anti-HFRSV-IgG, which was obtained from rabbit vaccinated with EHFV R22, Chen and
Hubei strain was employed to detect HFRSV antigen in serum and urine from
epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) patients, and compared with indirect immune
fluorescence assay (I-IFA), 76 serum samples and 40 urine samples were detected
in this study.
RESULTS: The results showed that the total positive rate of HFRSV antigen
detected by IEDA was 73.68% in serum and 65.00% in urine, while that detected by 
I-IFA was 75.00% and 70.00%, respectively. The positive rate in primary phase
(within 5 days) of HFRSV antigen detected by IEDA was 94.34% in serum and 83.33% 
in urine, while that detected by I-IFA was 64.42% and 55.56%, respectively, there
was significant difference in both serum and urine detections. Correlation study 
showed a high correlation in the result of IEDA and I-IFA.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study suggested that the IEDA, as compared with
I-IFA, was a more specific, sensitive, rapid and simple method with higher
positive rate in primary phase. IEDA could be widely used for early diagnosis of 
HFRS in hospital at grassroots level.

PMID: 15340537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Lancet Neurol. 2004 Sep;3(9):564-7.

Barriers to headache care in India and efforts to improve the situation.

Ravishankar K(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Headache and Migraine Clinic, Jaslok Hospital and Research Centre and
Lilavati Hospital and Research Centre, Mumbai India. dr_k_ravishankar@vsnl.com

With the recent launch of the joint Global Campaign to reduce the burden of
headache by the World Headache Alliance (WHA), the International Headache Society
(IHS), the European Headache Federation (EHF), and WHO, a welcome focus on the
management of migraine is expected. Migraine management is influenced by numerous
factors that are regionally different around the world. Through a discussion of
the "barriers to care" of migraine in India, I attempt to appraise the academic
headache community of the need for region-specific guidelines derived from the
standard guidelines. Some of these barriers are within the control of the
patient, some are within the control of the treating physician, and many are
beyond the control of both. The efforts needed to remedy the situation are also
discussed. Hopefully this article will serve to emphasise again the well-known
maxim that treatment of migraine is much more than just a prescription!

PMID: 15324725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Lik Sprava. 2001 Jan-Feb;(1):74-6.

[Using ultrahigh-frequency therapy in the treatment of chronic gastroduodenal
ulcers].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Macheret IeL, Korkushko OO, Chupryna HM.

Shown in the paper are pathogenetic mechanisms of peptic ulcer of the stomach and
duodenum that can be subjected to curative correction with the aid of
EHF-therapy. Results are submitted of treatment and examination of 72 patients
with peptic ulcer in whom EHF-therapy was instituted to deal with their
condition. Recommendations are given on optimization of methodological approaches
to the conduction of EHF-procedures, on combination of EHF-therapy with other
methods for treating peptic ulcer.

PMID: 15311699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Lepr Rev. 2004 Jun;75(2):131-4.

Inter-rater reliability of WHO 'disability' grading.

Brandsma W(1), Larsen M, Richard C, Ebenezer M.

Author information: 
(1)International Nepal Fellowship, Green Pastures Hospital and Rehabilitation
Centre, PO Box 5, Pokhara, Nepal. wbrandsma@inf.org.np

The World Health Organization 'disability' grading system was introduced in 1960.
It is mainly used as an indicator for early diagnosis or reporting. Disability
grades are usually aggregated at national levels. Comparison of data with
previous years or comparison of data between programmes may show that patients
report earlier for treatment, alternatively, are diagnosed earlier, that is
without, or with fewer 'disabilities'. Despite its long and universal use as an
epidemiological parameter, the WHO disability grading has not been the subject of
reliability studies. In this study, three testers unfamiliar with the grading
prior to the study each graded 65 (former) leprosy affected persons. The weighted
kappa ranged from 0.87 to 0.89 (95% CI 0.73-1.00) for the highest score and from 
0.90 to 0.96 (95% CI 0.90-0.99) for the EHF (Eye, Hand, Foot) score, indicating
excellent reliability. The study shows that with limited training and little
experience a high degree of reliability in grading 'disabilities' between testers
is attainable.

PMID: 15282963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Sci Total Environ. 2004 Jul 26;328(1-3):287-94.

Work environment and somatic hospital admissions in Denmark 1994-1999.

Tüchsen F(1), Mikkelsen KL, Hannerz H, Poulsen OM, Bach E.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Occupational Health, Lersø Parkallé 105, DK-2100
Copenhagen Ø, Denmark. ft@ami.dk

OBJECTIVE: The aim was to elucidate the usefulness of the excess hospitalisation 
fraction (EHF) approach-as a practical alternative to the calculation of
etiological fractions-for prioritising national preventive measures in the total 
environment. In this study we used the inequality in somatic hospitalisation
across industrial sectors as an example. The presented EHFs may provide an
estimate of the order of magnitude of the prevention potential, which may also be
useful in priority setting in countries comparable to Denmark.
METHODS: All economically active adults in Denmark were followed-up for 6 years
after hospital discharge, and industrial specific EHFs for 58 industrial sectors 
were calculated for 11 main diagnostic groups. Assuming 'education and research' 
to be the industrial sector which is least exposed to occupational hazards, we
calculated the EHFs as a practical approximation to the etiologic fraction for
all other industries, using hospitalisation rates adjusted for age. In addition, 
we also controlled for social class since many risk factors may also be related
to life style or living conditions.
RESULTS: Compared to 'education and research' the EHF in all other industries was
(additional control for social class in brackets): Women 11% (7%), men 15% (8%). 
The EHFs for some of the main diagnostic groups were as follows: Circulatory
diseases: Women 18% (12%), men 16% (10%). Neoplasms: Women 3% (4%), men 8% (6%). 
Musculoskeletal diseases: Women 19% (12%), men 21% (10%). Diseases in the
respiratory system: Women 12% (8%), men 16% (9%). Diseases in the nervous system:
Women 12% (7%), men 17% (12%). Violent events (injuries and trauma): Women 6%
(5%), men 17% (6%).
CONCLUSIONS: The advantage of this method is that the EHF can be calculated for
all diseases and for the whole population without detailed knowledge of causal
risk factors and their distribution in the population. Two main methodological
problems are that we cannot control for selection bias related to occupation, and
that the control for social class may lead to conservative estimates. Our
estimates are, however, close to estimates of etiologic fractions published in
the literature. Large unexpected EHFs for diseases of the blood and blood-forming
organs should be seen as challenges for future research.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 15207591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2004 May-Jun;20(3):219-24.

A new type 1 diabetes susceptibility locus containing the catalase gene
(chromosome 11p13) in a Russian population.

Chistiakov DA(1), Savost'anov KV, Turakulov RI, Titovich EV, Zilberman LI,
Kuraeva TL, Dedov II, Nosikov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Aquatic Ecology, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium. dimitry.chistiakov@bio.kuleuven.ac.be

BACKGROUND: Oxidative stress is involved in the origin of type 1 diabetes. Low
efficiency of the scavenging antioxidant system has been shown to be related to
the pathogenesis of the disease. This, therefore suggests that genes encoding
catalase and other antioxidant enzymes may implicate in the development of type 1
diabetes.
METHODS: Nine microsatellite markers that cover about 10 megabases around the
catalase (CAT) gene on chromosome 11p13 were analyzed using polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) and fluorescence-based genotyping on an automatic DNA sequencer.
We also evaluated three single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) within genes
encoding catalase (T1667T and C(-262)T dimorphism) and ETS homologous factor
(EHF) (C255T SNP) using a PCR-restriction fragment-length polymorphism approach. 
Multipont linkage analysis in 37 affected sibling pairs was performed using
GENEHUNTER 2.1. We examined the markers for association with the disease by
transmission disequilibrium tests in 57 discordant sibling pairs and by a
case-control study in 258 unrelated healthy donors and 247 affected patients.
RESULTS: We obtained close-to-suggestive evidence of linkage to type I diabetes, 
with the maximum linkage peak between markers D11S907 and D11S2008. Analysis of
three SNPs at the CAT and EHF gene located within the region of maximum linkage
showed that T1667T and C(-262)T markers of the CAT gene are strongly associated
with the disease.
CONCLUSION: Our findings support evidence of a new putative type 1 diabetes
susceptibility locus on chromosome 11p13 and suggest that the CAT gene may play a
role in conferring susceptibility to the disorder in Russian patients.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 15133753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2004 Jun;15 Suppl 16:4-5, 9-32.

Prevention of allergic disease in childhood: clinical and epidemiological aspects
of primary and secondary allergy prevention.

Halken S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Sønderborg Hospital, Denmark.

The development and phenotypic expression of atopic diseases depends on a complex
interaction between genetic factors, environmental exposure to allergens,and
non-specific adjuvant factors, such as tobacco smoke, air pollution and
infections. Preventive measures may include both exposure to allergens and
adjuvant risk/protective factors and pharmacological treatment. These measures
may address the general population, children at risk for development of atopic
disease (high-risk infants), children with early symptoms of allergic disease or 
children with chronic disease. The objective for this review was to evaluate
possible preventive measures as regards prevention of development of allergic
disease in childhood--primary prevention--and also some aspects of the effect of 
specific allergy treatment as regards secondary prevention in children with
allergic asthma and allergic rhinoconjunctivitis. In one prospective
observational study of a birth cohort of unselected infants we evaluated possible
predictive/risk factors. In two prospective intervention studies including 1 yr
birth cohorts of high-risk(HR) infants we investigated the effect of feeding HR
infants exclusively breast milk (BM) and/or hydrolyzed cow's milk-based formula
the first 4-6 months as regards: (i) the allergy preventive effect of
BM/extensively hydrolysed formula (eHF) compared with ordinary cow's milk-based
formula, (ii) the effect of two different eHFs, a whey (Profylac) and a
casein-based (Nutramigen) formula, as regards development of cow's milk protein
allergy (CMA), and (iii) a comparison of the preventive effect of eHF
(Profylac/Nutramigen) with a partially hydrolyzed cow's milk-based formula (pHF) 
(NanHA) as regards development of CMA. None of the mothers had a restricted diet 
during pregnancy or lactation period. In two prospective randomized intervention 
studies we evaluated the preventive effect of specific allergen avoidance and
specific immunotherapy (SIT) in children with allergic asthma and allergic
rhinoconjunctivitis, respectively. The combination of atopic heredity and
elevated cord blood IgE resulted in the best predictive discrimination as regards
development of allergic disease. The optimal high-risk group was defined by
either double parental atopic predisposition or single atopic predisposition, the
latter combined with a cord blood IgE > or = 0.3 kU/1. 66% of unselected infants 
were daily exposed to tobacco smoke, which was a significant risk factor for
recurrent wheezing until the age of 1.5 yr. HR infants were breastfed for a
longer period and less exposed to tobacco smoke than unselected infants.
Exclusively BM/eHF for at least 4 months was associated with a significantly
reduced cumulative prevalence of CMA [3.6% (5/141) vs. 20%(15/75) in the control 
group] up to 5 yr. The effect of the two different eHFs was similar. Exclusively 
breastfed infants were significantly less exposed to tobacco smoke and pets, had 
solid foods introduced later and belonged to higher social classes. pHF was
significantly (p = 0.05) less effective than eHF as regards prevention of
development of CMA. A diet period of 4 months seems to be as efficient as 6
months or more as regards development of CMA. A few ongoing prospective,
randomized intervention studies have produced the first indication that avoidance
of indoor allergens such as house dust mite (HDM) in HR infants may reduce the
incidence of severe wheeze and sensitization during the first 1-4 yr of age.
Long-term follow-up is awaited. In a prospective, double-blind placebo-controlled
study in children with doctors diagnosed asthma and documented HDM allergy, we
found that semipermeable polyurethane mattress and pillow encasings (Allergy
Control) when compared with placebo encasings resulted in a significant perennial
reduction of HDM exposure and a significant reduction in the needed dose of
inhaled steroids by approximately 50% (mean dose: 408 microg--227 microg/day)
after 1-yr follow-up. In another randomized prospective study we investigated the
possible preventive effect of SIT in children with allergic rhinoconjunctivitis
and grass/birch pollen allergy as regards development of asthma. Among those
without asthma significantly fewer in the SIT group developed asthma when
compared with the control group (19/79 = 24% vs.32/72 = 44%) after the first 3
yr; and methacholinebronchial provocation test results improved significant in
the SIT group. The results of our studies support the evidence that the risk for 
development of early allergic manifestations e.g. CMA and atopic dermatitis can
be reduced significantly by simple dietary measures for the first4 months of
life. In all infants breastfeeding should beencouraged for at least 4-6 months,
and exposure to tobacco smoke should be avoided during pregnancy and early
childhood. In HR infants a documented hypoallergenic formula (at present eHF) is 
recommended if exclusive breastfeeding is not possible for the first 4 months. In
homes of HR-infants, current evidence supports measures to reduce the levels of
indoor allergens. e.g. HDM and pets. In symptomatic children allergen-specific
treatment may influence both the symptoms and the prognosis. Allergen avoidance
can reduce the need for pharmacological treatment, SIT may have the potential for
preventing the development of asthma in children with allergic
rhinoconjunctivitis. and it may be possible to interfere with the natural course 
of allergic diseases.

PMID: 15125698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. West Indian Med J. 2004 Mar 4-7;53 Suppl 1:1-47.

New Trends in Diabetes Management. Abstracts of the 10th Annual Conference of the
UDOP, EHF, PAHO/WHO, and CFNI. March 4-7, 2004, Ocho Rios, Jamaica.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 15112675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2004 Jan-Feb;(1):9-12.

[EHF-puncture in combined rehabilitation of children with vertebrobasilar
insufficiency syndrome in spinal deformities].

[Article in Russian]

Poliakova AG, Loskytova NV, Kareva OV.

The results were compared of different programs of rehabilitation in 45 patients 
aged 5 to 18 years with spinal deformities and vertebrobasilar failure. Control
patients received only basic therapy, the study group received also EHF-puncture.
The efficacy of rehabilitation was confirmed by electropuncture diagnosis and
rheoencephalogram. The patients with high tonicity of small vessels demonstrated 
a significantly improved regional circulation. This favours differential use of
EHF puncture in the complex of rehabilitative measures.

PMID: 15052835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Virol. 2004 Apr;78(8):4330-41.

Rapid diagnosis of Ebola hemorrhagic fever by reverse transcription-PCR in an
outbreak setting and assessment of patient viral load as a predictor of outcome.

Towner JS(1), Rollin PE, Bausch DG, Sanchez A, Crary SM, Vincent M, Lee WF,
Spiropoulou CF, Ksiazek TG, Lukwiya M, Kaducu F, Downing R, Nichol ST.

Author information: 
(1)Special Pathogens Branch, Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, National
Center for Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA.

The largest outbreak on record of Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) occurred in
Uganda from August 2000 to January 2001. The outbreak was centered in the Gulu
district of northern Uganda, with secondary transmission to other districts.
After the initial diagnosis of Sudan ebolavirus by the National Institute for
Virology in Johannesburg, South Africa, a temporary diagnostic laboratory was
established within the Gulu district at St. Mary's Lacor Hospital. The laboratory
used antigen capture and reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) to diagnose Sudan
ebolavirus infection in suspect patients. The RT-PCR and antigen-capture
diagnostic assays proved very effective for detecting ebolavirus in patient
serum, plasma, and whole blood. In samples collected very early in the course of 
infection, the RT-PCR assay could detect ebolavirus 24 to 48 h prior to detection
by antigen capture. More than 1,000 blood samples were collected, with multiple
samples obtained from many patients throughout the course of infection. Real-time
quantitative RT-PCR was used to determine the viral load in multiple samples from
patients with fatal and nonfatal cases, and these data were correlated with the
disease outcome. RNA copy levels in patients who died averaged 2 log(10) higher
than those in patients who survived. Using clinical material from multiple EHF
patients, we sequenced the variable region of the glycoprotein. This Sudan
ebolavirus strain was not derived from either the earlier Boniface (1976) or
Maleo (1979) strain, but it shares a common ancestor with both. Furthermore, both
sequence and epidemiologic data are consistent with the outbreak having
originated from a single introduction into the human population.

PMCID: PMC374287
PMID: 15047846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Fiziol Zh. 2004;50(1):60-5.

[Using electromagnetic irradiation of extra high frequency for the correction of 
desynchronisation].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Chuian OM(1), Temur'iants NA, Moskovchuk OB.

Author information: 
(1)V.I. Vernadski Tavriysky National University, Simferopol.

The infradian rhythmicity of the open-field behavior of rats under the influence 
of EHF-waves was investigated. It was shown the development of desynchronosis
under the influence of EHF-waves on intact rats. Under the influence of EHF-waves
the development of desynchronosis on hypokinesic rats was remarkable decreased.
It was found that EHF-waves are able to modify the temporary organization of
physiological systems, however, the magnitude and the character of these changes 
depend on functional state of the organism. It has been suggested that the
ability of EHF-waves to modify temporary organization of physiological systems
plays an important role in mechanisms of their biological action.

PMID: 14965054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Work. 2004;22(1):57-61.

The relationship between fishermen's health and sleeping habits.

Olafsdóttir L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Solarplexus ehf, Health and Safety Advising, Borgartún 20, 105 Reykjavík,
Iceland. lovisa@solarplexus.is

This article describes research on fishermen's health and sleeping habits in
Iceland. It presents the first findings of the project that were presented in
October 2002 at a conference that was organized during Seamen Safety Week in
Iceland. It covers physical and mental stress symptoms, sleep disturbance, and
obesity, as well as fishermen's own reaction to their health and well-being. Take
notice that the findings that are presented in this article can be found in a
report presented in August, when the whole study will be finished. Finally, it is
concluded how successful the response has been and how the project can be used
positively with other studies. It is also noted that, in fact, these findings
will be used for further studies linked to safety on board.

PMID: 14757907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Lepr Rev. 2003 Dec;74(4):366-73.

WHO disability grading: operational definitions.

Brandsma JW(1), Van Brakel WH.

Author information: 
(1)Green Pastures Hospital and Rehabilitation Centre, PO Box 5, Nepal.
Wbrandsma@inf.org.np

The WHO disability grading has been in use for many years. Its main use has been 
as an indicator for early case detection/reporting. More recently, the WHO
grading has also been used as a change indicator of impairments for patients
while on treatment. In such instances, the individual scores for eyes hand, and
feet are added to obtain the so-called EHF sum score. A major drawback in the use
of the grading system has been the lack of operational definitions of the
descriptions for the grades. This may result in data and results of comparisons
of data across programs and countries being flawed. The paper discusses the WHO
grading in the light of its dual use: as an indicator for early case detection
and as an indicator for change in impairments. The paper presents operational
definitions for the grading options.

PMID: 14750582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Lepr Rev. 2003 Dec;74(4):337-48.

Impairments and Hansen's disease control in Rondônia state, Amazon region of
Brazil.

De Oliveira CR(1), De Alencar Mde J, De Sena Neto SA, Lehman LF, Schreuder PA.

Author information: 
(1)Hansen's Disease Control Program, State Secretary of Health, Rondônia, Brazil.

This retrospective study of impairments in a decentralized and integrated,
routine Hansen's disease (HD) programme was done on a cohort of all new patients 
detected in Rondônia state from 1996 to 1999. It shows that the dynamics of
impairments during treatment in Rondônia are similar to what has been published
in other recent studies from Africa and Asia. Data about impairments at detection
and at release from treatment (cure), the prescription of steroids, and
epidemiological information are provided. Of the original 5350 new patients, 4230
patients (80%) completed multidrug therapy (MDT) and had complete data about
their impairment status. At the start of treatment, 9% of the paucibacillary (PB)
and 26% of the multibacillary (MB) patients had WHO grade 1 impairment. Three
percent of the PB and 11% of the MB patients had visible deformities (WHO grade 2
impairment). Of the patients without impairments (grade 0) at the start of
treatment, 5% of the PB and 20% of the MB patients developed impairments during
treatment. Of the PB patients with a WHO impairment grade 1 at start of
treatment, 34% improved and 6% got worse. Of the MB patients 34% improved and 12%
became worse. In a separate study of patients from the 1997 intake, 17% of the PB
and 58% of the MB patients were treated at least once with a course of steroids
or thalidomide during MDT treatment. It is noted in the literature that the
percentage of persons with recent nerve function impairment (NFI), nerve pain or 
tenderness and/or reaction reactions differs between projects. This may reflect
real differences or may be caused by differences in routine monitoring and/or
criteria and methods of treatment. The use of the WHO maximum score, particularly
for the patients with grade 2, is not as sensitive to change as utilizing the
summary of Eye, Hand and Foot (EHF) scores. If overall impairment figures are
given, the proportions of MB patients may define the differences between
projects, therefore it is important to analysis and present the results of PB and
MB patients separately. The most simple (outcome) indicator to estimate the
effectiveness of patient management would be the proportions of patients with
impairment grade 0 at start of treatment who develop either grade 1 or 2
impairments during treatment. An additional (outcome) indicator could be the
proportion of patients with impairment grade 1 at start of treatment who develop 
grade 2 impairments during treatment. Currently, no operational targets or
acceptable level of performance for patient management have been set. This would 
be important to enable programme managers to determine if adequate patient
education, treatment and follow up have been provided after the disease detection
to prevent and/or minimize problems associated with the disease. The available
evidence strongly suggests that reactions and impairments related to HD will
continue to occur in large numbers, requiring the development of adequate
infrastructures and sustainable services to detect and to manage problems
associated with HD during and after MDT treatment.

PMID: 14750579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Int J Infect Dis. 2004 Jan;8(1):27-37.

Containing a haemorrhagic fever epidemic: the Ebola experience in Uganda (October
2000-January 2001).

Lamunu M(1), Lutwama JJ, Kamugisha J, Opio A, Nambooze J, Ndayimirije N, Okware
S.

Author information: 
(1)Uganda Ministry of Health, Kampala, Uganda. mlamunu@yahoo.co.uk

INTRODUCTION: The Ebola virus, belonging to the family of filoviruses, was first 
recognized in 1976 when it caused concurrent outbreaks in Yambuku in the
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), and in the town of Nzara in Sudan. Both
countries share borders with Uganda. A total of 425 cases and 224 deaths
attributed to Ebola haemorrhagic fever (EHF) were recorded in Uganda in 2000/01. 
Although there was delayed detection at the community level, prompt and efficient
outbreak investigation led to the confirmation of the causative agent on 14
October 2000 by the National Institute of Virology in South Africa, and the
subsequent institution of control interventions.
CONTROL INTERVENTIONS: Public health interventions to contain the epidemic aimed 
at minimizing transmission in the health care setting and in the community,
reducing the case fatality rate due to the epidemic, strengthening co-ordination 
for the response and building capacity for on-going surveillance and control.
Co-ordination of the control interventions was organized through the
Interministerial Committee, National Ebola Task Force, District Ebola Task
Forces, and the Technical Committees at national and district levels. The World
Health Organization (WHO) under the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network
co-ordinated the international response. The post-outbreak control interventions 
addressed weaknesses prior to outbreak detection and aimed at improving
preparations for future outbreak detection and response. Challenges to control
efforts included inadequate and poor quality protective materials, deaths of
health workers, numerous rumors and the rejection of convalescent cases by
members of the community.
CONCLUSIONS: This was recognized as the largest reported outbreak of EHF in the
world. Control interventions were very successful in containing the epidemic. The
community structures used to contain the epidemic have continued to perform well 
after containment of the outbreak, and have proved useful in the identification
of other outbreaks. This was also the first outbreak response co-ordinated by the
WHO under the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network, a voluntary
organization recently created to co-ordinate technical and financial resources to
developing countries during outbreaks.

PMID: 14690778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 19;279(12):11281-92. Epub 2003 Dec 8.

Changes in the expression of many Ets family transcription factors and of
potential target genes in normal mammary tissue and tumors.

Galang CK(1), Muller WJ, Foos G, Oshima RG, Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)Oncodevelopmental Biology Program, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Interfering with Ets transcription factor function reverses multiple aspects of
the transformed phenotype of mouse or human tumor cells. However, the unknown
number of individual Ets factors expressed in any cellular context and the
similar DNA binding specificities of Ets family members complicates the
identification of those that mediate transformation. By utilizing quantitative
PCR assays for 25 mouse Ets factors, we analyzed the expression of essentially
the entire Ets family in normal mammary tissue, mammary-related cell lines, and
mammary tumors. In normal mammary tissue, 24 Ets factors were expressed. Even
clonal derived cell lines expressed 14-20 Ets members. The most abundant Ets
factor mRNAs measured in normal mammary tissue were Elk4, Elf1, and Ets2.
Subtractive analysis of mammary tissue identified which Ets factors were
predominantly expressed in the myeloid/lymphoid or epithelial cell compartments. 
Comparison of Ets factor expression in normal mammary tissue and mammary tumors
identified significantly elevated expression of Pse/PDEF, Ese2/Elf5, Ese3/Ehf,
TEL/Etv6, and Elf2/NERF in mammary tumors and confirmed previously reported
alterations in expression of Ese1/Elf3 and the PEA3 subfamily. Expression of 13
Ets target genes, implicated in various aspects of tumor progression, was also
analyzed. Altered expression of particular Ets target genes was significantly
correlated with particular Ets factors (e.g. maspin and Ese2), suggesting
specific in vivo regulatory roles. Together, this comprehensive analysis revealed
unexpectedly diverse Ets family gene expression, characterized novel Ets factor
changes in mammary tumors, and implicated specific Ets factors in the regulation 
of multiple genes involved in mammary tumor progression.

PMID: 14662758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Radiats Biol Radioecol. 2003 Sep-Oct;43(5):559-64.

[Epidemiological risk assessment of pathology development in occupational
exposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic fields].

[Article in Russian]

Tikhonova GI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Occupational Health, Moscow, 105275 Russia.
Tichon_I@mail.ru

A cross-sectional study of working conditions and health of the personnel of the 
civil aircraft radar-tracking system has been conducted based on periodical
health examinations. The personnel was divided into three occupational groups.
Group I was exposed to EMF EHF, group II--to EMF HF and UHF and group III was not
exposed to EMF (reference group). The groups didn't differ in any occupational
and non-occupational parameters. Health status of 250 workers was examined. High 
prevalence rate of cardiovascular diseases (ICD-X I00-I99) was found in the
exposed groups. Odds ratio (OR) was 3.78 (95% CI 1.96-7.27) in group I and 2.13
(95% CI 1.13-4.03) in group II. High prevalence rate of cardiovascular diseases
is explained by arterial hypertension (ICD-X I10-I15) (OR = 1.96 95% CI 1.04-3.70
in group I and OR = 1.80 95% CI 0.93-3.50 in group II) and ischemic heart disease
(ICD-X I20-I25) (OR = 7.9 95% CI 3.48-18.06 in group I; OR = 3.0 95% CI
1.23-7.33--in group II). In the exposed groups cardiovascular diseases were
developed in young age. OR was 7.04 (95% CI 1.64-30.19) in group I and 4.33 (95% 
CI 0.96-19.65) in group II in 30-39 age sub groups. Myocardium infarction was
found in 2 out of 16 persons of this age in the group exposed to EMF.

PMID: 14658291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Biofizika. 2003 Sep-Oct;48(5):918-25.

[Decrease in the intensity of the cellular immune response and nonspecific
inflammation upon exposure to extremely high frequency electromagnetic
radiation].

[Article in Russian]

Lushnikov KV(1), Gapeedv AV, Shumilina IuV, Shibaev NV, Sadovnikov VB, Chmeris
NK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow
Region, 142290 Russia.

The effect of low-intensity extremely high-frequency electromagnetic radiation
(EHF EMR, 42.0 GHz, 0.1 mW/cm2, 20 min daily) on cell-mediated immunity and
nonspecific inflammatory response in mice was studied. The intensity of
cell-mediated immune response in the reaction of delayed-type hypersensitivity
and nonspecific inflammation was estimated by a relative increase in the
thickness of foot pad after immunization of animals by sheep red blood cells or
zymosan. It was shown for the first time that the radiation reduces both immune
and nonspecific inflammatory responses. It was shown with the use of models of
acute inflammation and full-thickness skin wounds that EHF EMR suppresses the
nonspecific inflammatory response but does not influence the duration of the
pathological process. We suppose that the basis of the effects revealed is the
modification of functional activity of phagocytic cells under the influence of
EHF EMR. The results suggest that some therapeutic effects of EHF EMR can be
realized via the inhibition of inflammatory processes.

PMID: 14582420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Med Trop (Mars). 2003;63(3):291-5.

[Outbreak of Ebola hemorrhagic fever in the Republic of the Congo, 2003: a new
strategy?].

[Article in French]

Formenty P(1), Libama F, Epelboin A, Allarangar Y, Leroy E, Moudzeo H, Tarangonia
P, Molamou A, Lenzi M, Ait-Ikhlef K, Hewlett B, Roth C, Grein T.

Author information: 
(1)Département des Maladies transmissibles, Surveillance et Action, Organisation 
Mondiale de la Santé, Genève, Suisse. formentyp@who.int

This article describes the last Ebola haemorrhagic fever (EHF) outbreak that
occurred in the Cuvette Ouest Region of the Republic of Congo from January to
April 2003. Epidemiological study demonstrated that the first patient, in whom
diagnosis was made retrospectively, became ill on December 25, 2002. Subsequently
until May 7, 2003, a total of 143 cases were recorded in the Mbomo and Kéllé
health districts including 129 fatalities. Thirteen cases were laboratory
confirmed and 130 were epidemiologically linked. Fifty-three percent of patients 
were male. Age ranged form 5 days to 80 years. Transmission involved direct
contact with an infected person especially within families. Epidemiological data 
traced introduction of Ebola virus into the population to three primary cases
mainly involving hunters. In all three cases development of the disease followed 
contact with non-human primates (gorillas) and other mammals (antelope) that had 
either been killed or found dead. Three health care workers were infected during 
the epidemic but nosocomial transmission played a minor role in the epidemic. On 
June 5, the Minister of Health and Population of the Congo Republic officially
declared that the outbreak of EHF was over in the Cuvette Ouest Region. The last 
case was recorded on April 22 in the small village of Ndjoukou.

PMID: 14579469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2003 Mar-Apr;(2):21-3.

[Electromagnetic fields of extremely high frequency and radon baths in the
treatment of Lyme disease with nervous system lesions].

[Article in Russian]

Levitskii EF, Zaitsev AA, Abdulkina NG, Dostovalova OV, Mavliautdinova IM.

Patients with borreliosis caused by exodic tick infestation running with
affection of the nervous system were exposed to scanning EHF-therapy (59-63 GHz) 
on biologically active zones of the upper third of the chest, right brachial
joint, biologically active points GI4, E36. Also, they took radon baths. The
treatment was planned with consideration of the principles of chronotherapy. This
therapeutic approach produced stimulation of general adaptive reactions and
reparative processes in the peripheral nervous system.

PMID: 12924187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Fiziol Zh. 2003;49(3):80-9.

[Expression of markers of immunocompetent cells, cytokine level, and L-arginine
metabolism in complex extremely high frequency and interferon therapy of
inflammatory diseases in women of highlands].

[Article in Russian]

Taradii NN(1), Bagdasarova IV, Uzdenova ZKh, Bichekueva FKh, Doloman LB,
Kotsiuruba AV, Krivokhatskaia LD, Kamenetskaia OV, Mandziuk IaP, Volkova LN.

Author information: 
(1)Kabardino-Balkar State University, Nalchik, Russia.

Chronic inflammatory gynecological diseases (CIGD) in highlanders (2,100-2,200 m 
a.s.l.) are accompanied with the following changes in immunoregulatory
parameters: strengthening in the expression of CD3+ (TCR), CD4+ (T-helpers),
CD16+ (NK-cells), CD25+ (activated IL-2R), increase in CD4+/CD8+ ratio, levels of
circulating cytokines--alpha-, beta-, gamma-interferon (IFN) and alpha-,
beta-tumor necrotizing factor (TNF), strengthening in immune adhesion of
thrombocytes (IAT), and inhibition of the oxidative metabolic way of L-arginine
with redistribution of the main metabolites formed via its non-oxidative way.
Complex extremely high frequency (EHF) therapy and interferon (with Laferon)
therapy of CIGD normalized expression of the differentiated and functional
CD-markers of immunocompetent cells (ICC), CD4+/CD8+ ratio, increased expression 
of CD8+, decreased IAT and levels of circulating cytokines (IFN, TNF), changed
L-arginine metabolism with activation of the oxidative way. Full-value of the
population signs of immune stabilization due to the treatment was complemented
with increase in the ICC functional parameters--markers of mitochondrial,
lysosomal and mitotic activity. We first demonstrated a high effectiveness of
complex use of EHF and Laferon as an immunocorrective therapy of CIGD in
highlanders.

PMID: 12918255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2003 Jul;129(7):754-9.

Identification of 9 genes differentially expressed in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Gonzalez HE(1), Gujrati M, Frederick M, Henderson Y, Arumugam J, Spring PW,
Mitsudo K, Kim HW, Clayman GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Current treatment modalities in squamous cell carcinoma of the head
and neck have failed to improve survival. Advances in the discovery of novel
biomarkers and targets for therapy are necessary.
DESIGN: Differential display and microarray analysis were used to identify
differences in gene expression between squamous carcinoma and matched
nonmalignant biopsy specimens. Differences in gene expression found in vivo were 
also tested in vitro by comparing primary cultured normal oral epithelium with
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines. Results were confirmed 
by relative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and
immunohistochemical analysis.
RESULTS: In tumors, microarray analysis showed down-regulation of calgranulin B
(CAGB), CD24, lymphoepithelial Kazal-type-related inhibitor (LEKTI), zinc finger 
protein (ZNF-185), transglutaminase-3 (TGM3), and the ETS homologous factor
(EHF). In addition, differential display revealed down-regulation of headpin. In 
contrast, periostin and the human homologue of the Drosophila white gene (ABCG1) 
were found to be up-regulated by microarray analysis and differential display,
respectively. In HNSCC cell lines, LEKTI, ZNF-185, TGM3, headpin, and ABCG1
showed an expression pattern similar to that observed in tumor specimens.
Periostin showed an opposite expression pattern in cell lines compared with that 
of tumor specimens. No consistent pattern of expression was found for CAGB, CD24,
and EHF in cell lines. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the expression 
of headpin in nonmalignant mucosa was undetectable in tumors.
CONCLUSION: Using differential display and microarray analysis, we have
identified and confirmed the differential expression of 9 genes in HNSCC. Work is
in progress to determine the biological significance of these genes and their
potential as biomarkers or targets for therapy.

PMID: 12874078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2003 Jun;20(2):305-7.

[Research of magnetism light compound therapy in clinical application].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu Z(1), Sun C, Zhang W, Mao J, Yan Y, Fu C.

Author information: 
(1)Second People's Hospital of Jianyang, Jianyang 641421.

This study is aimed to evaluate the clinical application of the millimeter wave
and magnetism light compound therapy. The EHF-98B MMW. RL compound therapy
apparatus made in the University of Electronic Technology(Chengdu) was used in
171 patients. The superficial, skin lesions or the visceral reflected skin
regions (acupoints) were directly exposed to the light from the apparatus. All
the cases were divided into five groups, namely skin mucosa superficial lesions, 
trauma of the bone and joint soft tissue, surgical incision, ENT infections, and 
rare intricate diseases. The therapeutic effects observed in the groups were
analyzed and evaluated by means of 4 levels. As for the 171 patients, the cure
rate was 42.7% (73 patients), the effective rate 25.1%(43 patients), the
improvement rate 31%(53 patients), and no effect constituted 1.2%(2 patients).
The total effective rate was 98.8%. This therapy was especially effective for
treating chronic cervicitis, cervical erosion, soft tissue trauma, surgical
incision. Also it was effective for treating some rare intricate diseases, e.g.
sterility, vitiligo, Behcet disease. So the millimeter wave and magnetism light
compound therapy may find wide clinical applications.

PMID: 12856605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2003 May-Jun;(3):35-7.

[Electromagnetic radiation of extra high frequency as a method of rehabilitation 
after surgical treatment of tubal-peritoneal infertility].

[Article in Russian]

Strugatskii VM, Silant'eva ES.

Seventy four patients entered the placebo-controlled study of rehabilitation EHF 
therapy 1 month after surgical laparoscopy for tubal-peritoneal infertility. It
was found that early EHF therapy corrects hemodynamics in small pelvis
vasculature characteristic for chronic inflammation of the uterine appendages
thus raising the rate of impregnation.

PMID: 12852014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Altern Complement Med. 2003 Apr;9(2):217-28.

Weak extremely high frequency microwaves affect pollen-tube emergence and growth 
in kiwifruit: pollen grain irradiation and water-mediated effects.

Calzoni GL(1), Borghini F, Del Giudice E, Betti L, Dal Rio F, Migliori M, Trebbi 
G, Speranza A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Bologna, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: This study was designed to evaluate the effects of weak-intensity
extremely high frequency (EHF) microwaves in a model system-the plant organism
pollen grain-lacking the placebo effect, available in large populations, to
ensure accurate statistical analysis, and whose sensitivity is closely relevant
to animal and human biology.
DESIGN: This study was blinded using an in vitro pollen germination technique.
SUBJECTS AND STUDY INTERVENTIONS: Pollen of kiwifruit (Actinidia deliciosa) was
either directly irradiated or grown in a medium prepared with irradiated water,
using a CromoStim 2000, (PromoPharma, Republic of San Marino) designed for EHF
microwave resonance therapy (MRT). It produces weak intensity EHF radiations
(40-78 GHz), either continuous wave (cw) or modulated, at a 10 Hz-frequency, with
infrared (IR) carried to 635-950 nm, and with an impedance (IPD) of 10(-21) W/Hz 
cm(2) and a power supply from 0 to 20 mW.
OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS: Pollen-tube emergence was expressed as a percent of grains 
producing a tube and tube elongation was measured at 4 hours of incubation by a
turbidimetric assay (A(500)) of cultures, expressed as the net absorbance
increase over time 0.
RESULTS: At days 2 and 4 during aging, both percent of germination and tube
growth significantly and consistently improved over controls in kiwifruit pollen 
grains irradiated for 30 minutes at day 0 at 10 Hz frequency with the CromoStim
2000. Highly significant effects, either stimulant or inhibitory, were also
observed on kiwifruit pollen (stressed or not) growing in a medium prepared with 
water previously irradiated either cw or modulated. Irradiated water affected
pollen germination immediately and even after several days following EHF
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Either direct or indirect EHF irradiation performed by the CromoStim
2000 is effective on pollen growth processes. In both cases, water seemed to play
a primary role. According to the quantum electrodynamical coherence theory, our
work could also have implications for homeopathy, suggesting a key to explain the
efficacy of high dilutions and succussion procedures.

PMID: 12804075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Klin Med (Mosk). 2003;81(4):22-6.

[Biofeedback-wave rehabilitation therapy in combined treatment of patients with
stable angina pectoris].

[Article in Russian]

Simonenko VB, Gofman IaB, Illarionova TV, Magnitskii AV, Goloukhova LM, Emelin
GG.

160 patients with stable stress angina pectoris (SSAP) received combined
treatment. One of the modalities was information-wave impact generated by devices
Azor-IR, Chrono-DMW (microwaves), Chrono-EHF. The impact from Azor-IR proved most
effective as it reduced the amount of medication without loss of therapeutic
activity.

PMID: 12785218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. DNA Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;22(2):79-94.

The epithelial-specific ETS transcription factor ESX/ESE-1/Elf-3 modulates breast
cancer-associated gene expression.

Eckel KL(1), Tentler JJ, Cappetta GJ, Diamond SE, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Program in Molecular Biology, and Colorado Cancer
Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado 80262,
USA.

Several members of the ETS family of transcription factors contribute to
tumorigenesis in many different tissues, including breast epithelium. The ESX
gene is an epithelial-specific Ets member that is particularly relevant to breast
cancer. ESX is amplified in early breast cancers, it is overexpressed in human
breast ductal carcinoma in situ, and there may be a positive feedback loop
between the HER2/neu proto-oncogene and ESX. Despite this progress in our
understanding of ESX, its ability to regulate tumor-related gene expression and
to modulate breast cell survival, remain unknown. Here we show that HA-ESX
stimulates the collagenase and HER2/neu promoters, but fails to activate an
intact stromelysin promoter. However, HA-ESX activates, in a dose-dependent
manner, a heterologous promoter containing eight copies of the Ets binding site
derived from the stromelysin gene (p8Xpal-CAT). Analysis of the ability of
constructs encoding nine Ets family members to activate the HER2/neu promoter
revealed three patterns of gene activation: (1) no effect or repressed promoter
activity (Elk-1 and NET); (2) intermediate activity (ER81, GABP, ESX, and
HA-Ets-2); and, (3) maximal activity (Ets-1, VP-16-Ets-1, and EHF). Based on
these observations, we also determined whether ESX is capable of conferring a
survival phenotype upon immortalized, but nontransformed and ESX negative MCF-12A
human breast cells. Using a colony formation assay, we found that HA-ESX and
HA-Ets-2, mediated MCF-12A cell survival rates that approached those generated by
oncogenic V12 Ras, whereas empty vector resulted in negligible colony formation. 
By contrast, in immortalized and transformed T47D breast cancer cells, which
express both HER2/neu and ESX, we found that antisense and dominant-negative
HA-ESX inhibited T47D colony formation, whereas control vector allowed formation 
of many colonies. These results are significant because they show that HA-ESX is 
able to differentially activate several malignancy-associated gene promoters, and
that ESX expression is required for cellular survival of nontransformed MCF-12A
and transformed T47D human mammary cells.

PMID: 12713734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Biol Res Nurs. 2003 Apr;4(4):276-81.

Ebola virus: immune mechanisms of protection and vaccine development.

Nyamathi AM(1), Fahey JL, Sands H, Casillas AM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, University of California, Los Angeles, Room 2-250, Factor
Building, Box 951720, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1702, USA. anyamath@sonnet.ucla.edu

Vaccination is one of our most powerful antiviral strategies. Despite the
emergence of deadly viruses such as Ebola virus, vaccination efforts have focused
mainly on childhood communicable diseases. Although Ebola virus was once believed
to be limited to isolated outbreaks in distant lands, forces of globalization
potentiate outbreaks anywhere in the world through incidental transmission.
Moreover, since this virus has already been transformed into weapon-grade
material, the potential exists for it to be used as a biological weapon with
catastrophic consequences for any population vulnerable to attack. Ebola
hemorrhagic fever (EHF) is a syndrome that can rapidly lead to death within days 
of symptom onset. The disease directly affects the immune system and vascular
bed, with correspondingly high mortality rates. Patients with severe disease
produce dangerously high levels of inflammatory cytokines, which destroy normal
tissue and microcirculation, leading to profound capillary leakage, renal
failure, and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Vaccine development has been
fraught with obstacles, primarily of a biosafety nature. Case reports of acutely 
ill patients with EHF showing improvement with the transfusion of convalescent
plasma are at odds with animal studies demonstrating further viral replication
with the same treatment. Using mRNA extracted from bone marrow of Ebola
survivors, human monoclonal antibodies against Ebola virus surface protein have
been experimentally produced and now raise the hope for the development of a safe
vaccine.

PMID: 12698920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Biol Res Nurs. 2003 Apr;4(4):268-75.

A current review of Ebola virus: pathogenesis, clinical presentation, and
diagnostic assessment.

Casillas AM(1), Nyamathi AM, Sosa A, Wilder CL, Sands H.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Los Angeles, School of Medicine, Room 52-175, Center
for Health Sciences, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. acasillas@mednet.ucla.edu

Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) is an acute viral syndrome that presents with fever
and an ensuing bleeding diathesis that is marked by high mortality in human and
nonhuman primates. Fatality rates are between 50% and 100%. Due to its lethal
nature, this filovirus is classified as a biological class 4 pathogen. The
natural reservoir of the virus is unknown. As a result, little is understood
about how Ebola virus is transmitted or how it replicates in its host. Although
the primary source of infection is unknown, the epidemiologic mode of
transmission is well defined. A variety of tests have proven to be specific and
useful for Ebola virus identification. There is no FDA-approved antiviral
treatment for EHF. Incubation ranges from 2 to 21 days. Patients who are able to 
mount an immune response to the virus will begin to recover in 7 to 10 days and
start a period of prolonged convalescence. Supportive management of infected
patients is the primary method of treatment, with particular attention to
maintenance of hydration, circulatory volume, blood pressure, and the provision
of supplemental oxygen. Since there is no specific treatment outside of
supportive management and palliative care, containment of this potentially lethal
virus is paramount. In almost all outbreaks of EHF, the fatality rate among
health care workers with documented infections was higher than that of non-health
care workers.

PMID: 12698919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Mikrobiologiia. 2003 Jan-Feb;72(1):131-5.

[The application of succession analysis in combination with extremely
high-frequency irradiation to the selective isolation of actinomycetes from
soil].

[Article in Russian]

Li IuV(1), Terekhova LP, Alferova IV, Galatenko OA, Gapochka MG.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of New Antibiotics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences,
ul. Bol'shaya Pirogovskaya 11, Moscow, 119867 Russia.

A new method employing succession analysis and extremely high-frequency (EHF)
irradiation is proposed for the selective isolation of actinomycetes from soil.
Total actinomycetes were efficiently isolated from soil suspensions irradiated in
the wavelength band 4.6-5.8 mm on the 14th and 45th days of succession initiated 
by soil wetting and from soil suspensions irradiated in the wavelength band
8-11.5 mm on the 7th day of succession. The rare actinomycete genera
Actinomadura, Micromonospora, Nonomuraea, Microbispora, Amycolatopsis,
Pseudonocardia, Saccharothrix, Streptosporangium, Actinosynnema, Nocardioides,
and Saccharopolyspora were isolated by either of the two approaches (succession
analysis and EHF irradiation); however, the range of isolated rare actinomycetes 
was considerably wider when the combination of the two approaches was used. For
instance, actinomycetes of the rare genera Actinocorallia, Promicromonospora,
Actinoplanes, and Kibdelosporangium were isolated only when EHF irradiation was
employed at the early stages of succession.

PMID: 12698804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Radiats Biol Radioecol. 2003 Jan-Feb;43(1):87-92.

[Effects of low-intensity extremely high frequency electromagnetic radiation on
chromatin structure of lymphoid cells in vivo and in vitro].

[Article in Russian]

Gapeev AB(1), Lushnikov KV, Shumilina IuV, Sirota NP, Sadovnikov VB, Chemeris NK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow
Region, 142290 Russia. gapeyev@ich.psn.ru

Using a comet assay technique, it was shown for the first time that low-intensity
extremely high-frequency electromagnetic radiation (EHF EMR) in vivo causes
oppositely directed effects on spatial organization of chromatin in cells of
lymphoid organs. In 3 hrs after single whole-body exposure of NMRI mice for 20
min at 42.0 GHz and 0.15 mW/cm2, an increase by 16% (p < 0.03 as compared with
control) and a decrease by 16% (p < 0.001) in fluorescence intensity of nucleoids
stained with ethidium bromide were found in thymocytes and splenocytes,
respectively. The fluorescence intensity of stained nucleoids in peripheral blood
leukocytes was not changed after the exposure. The exposure of cells of Raji
hunan lymphoid line and peripheral blood leukocytes to the EHF EMR in vitro
induced a decrease in fluorescence intensity by 23% (p < 0.001) and 18% (p <
0.05), respectively. These effects can be determined by changes in a number of
physiological alkali-labile sites in DNA of exposed cells. We suggested that the 
effects of low-intensity EHF EMR on the immune system cells are realized with the
participation of neuroendocrine and central nervous systems.

PMID: 12677665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003 Mar;111(3):533-40.

The effect of hydrolyzed cow's milk formula for allergy prevention in the first
year of life: the German Infant Nutritional Intervention Study, a randomized
double-blind trial.

von Berg A(1), Koletzko S, Grübl A, Filipiak-Pittroff B, Wichmann HE, Bauer CP,
Reinhardt D, Berdel D; German Infant Nutritional Intervention Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Prevention of Allergies and Airway Diseases, Department
of Paediatrics, Marien-Hospital Wesel, Wesel, Germany.

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003 Mar;111(3):467-70.
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Sep;132(3):770-1.
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Sep;132(3):770.

BACKGROUND: The potential of extensively or partially hydrolyzed formulas to
reduce the risks for allergies is controversial.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to assess the preventive effect of differently hydrolyzed
formulas compared with cow's milk formula (CMF) in high-risk infants.
METHODS: Between 1995 and 1998, 2252 infants with a hereditary risk for atopy
were enrolled in the German Infant Nutritional Intervention Study and randomly
assigned at birth to one of 4 blinded formulas: CMF, partially hydrolyzed whey
formula, extensively hydrolyzed whey formula, and extensively hydrolyzed casein
formula (eHF-C). The primary end point at 1 year of age was the presence of
allergic manifestation, which was defined as atopic dermatitis (AD),
gastrointestinal manifestation of food allergy, allergic urticaria, or a
combination of these factors.
RESULTS: At 12 months per protocol, analysis was performed on 945 infants exposed
to study formula: 304 (13.5%) infants had left the study, 138 (6.1%) infants were
excluded because of noncompliance, and 865 infants were exclusively breast-fed
the first 4 months of life. The incidence of allergic manifestation was
significantly reduced by using eHF-C compared with CMF (9% vs 16%; adjusted OR,
0.51; 95% CI, 0.28-0.92), and the incidence of AD was significantly reduced by
using eHF-C (OR, 0.42; 95% CI, 0.22-0.79) and partially hydrolyzed whey formula
(OR, 0.56; 95% CI, 0.32-0.99). Family history of AD was a significant risk factor
and modified the preventive effect of the hydrolysates.
CONCLUSIONS: Prevention of allergic diseases in the first year of life is
feasible by means of dietary intervention but influenced by family history of AD.
The preventive effect of each hydrolyzed formula needs to be clinically
evaluated.

PMID: 12642834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Euro Surveill. 2002 Mar;7(3):33-6.

Ebola in Africa--discoveries in the past decade.

Arthur RR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Global Alert and Response, Department of Communicable Disease Surveillance and
Response World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.

Within the past decade, Ebola haemorrhagic fever (EHF) has been recognised for
the first time in four countries. Our understanding of the epidemiology, clinical
aspects, laboratory diagnosis and control measures for EHF has improved
considerably as a result of the outbreaks in these countries and the re-emergence
that has occurred in another. The coordinated international responses to several 
of the large EHF outbreaks serve as models for controlling epidemics of other
communicable diseases. This report is a chronological overview of the EHF
outbreaks in Africa during the past decade, including the recent epidemics in
Gabon and the Republic of the Congo, and highlights new discoveries and some of
the remaining challenges.

PMID: 12631942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Ross Fiziol Zh Im I M Sechenova. 2002 Nov;88(11):1378-87.

[C-fos gene expression in the rat spinal cord and brain cells during stress and
the use of different types of halothane anesthesia].

[Article in Russian]

Novikova NS(1), Kazakova TB, Rogers V, Korneva EA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Medicine of the Russian Acad. Med. Sci., St.
Petersburg, 197376, Acad. Pavlov St., 12, Russia.

C-fos gene expression was studied as a marker of nervous cells activation in the 
rat spinal cord and brain cells under different conditions (different kinds of
narcosis). Using of 1.5% light halothane narcosis allowed the detection of
c-Fos-like proteins expression in the spinal cord cells only. Under initial 1.5% 
halothane narcosis, c-Fos-like proteins expression in the rat spinal cord (lumbar
segments) and the brain cells was observed after placing the rats into the
hammock, noxious mechanical stimulation (NMS) or high frequency electromagnetic
irradiation of the skin (EHF). The pattern of the brain structures reacting on
the NMS by c-Fos proteins expression, was determined. It was shown that NMS
increases the c-Fos positive cell quantity in the lateral hypothalamic area
(LHA), ventro-medial (VMH), dorso-medial (DMH) hypothalamic nuclei and anterior
hypothalamic area (AHN) by 116, 199, 101 and 157% resp., in comparison with the
c-Fos immunoreactive cell quantity in intact animals. EHF irradiation of the skin
decreased the intensity of c-Fos-like proteins synthesis induced by NMS in the
most of the investigated structures (LHA, VMH, DMH and AHA by 32.8, 29, 15 and
33%, resp.). It was shown that only initial halothane narcosis allowed to
determine the hypothalamic structures which realized the responses to the NMS,
and modification effects of EHF skin irradiation on the intensity of these
responses.

PMID: 12587265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Int J Audiol. 2003 Jan;42(1):29-33.

Temporary threshold shift in military pilots measured using conventional and
extended high-frequency audiometry after one flight.

Kuronen P(1), Sorri MJ, Pääkkönen R, Muhli A.

Author information: 
(1)Finnish Air Force Headquarters, PO Box 30, FI-41161 Tikkakoski, Finland.
pentti.kuronen@pp.inet.fi

Noise of such a high level that it can result in hearing deterioration is an
inherent characteristic of military flying. Susceptibility to hearing impairment 
was studied using 51 Finnish Air Force military personnel as subjects. The test
persons flew missions on a British Aerospace Hawk 51 advanced jet trainer, Boeing
F-18 Hornet, Mikoyan & Gurevich MiG-21bis and Saab 35 Draken interceptors, and a 
Valmet Redigo turboprop liaison aircraft. The duration of noise exposure was one 
flight mission, which varied from 30 to 60 min. Noise doses and levels were
measured using a miniature microphone at the inlet of the ear canal, while a
second microphone was located at the level of the subject's shoulder. Hearing
thresholds were measured before each flight using conventional (0.125-8 kHz) and 
extended high-frequency (EHF) (8.20 kHz) audiometry. The measurements were
repeated as soon as possible after the flight. The study showed that the
pre-flight threshold levels of the subjects were good. Both conventional and EHF 
audiometry revealed statistically significant temporary threshold shifts (TTS) at
several frequencies and with all aircraft types involved. The changes were,
however, minor. The risk of noise-induced hearing impairment at the studied
exposure levels is, in all probability, rather small. The role of extended
high-frequency audiometry would be in research, and it might be performed for
flying personnel upon entering service and every fifth year thereafter.

PMID: 12564513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Radiats Biol Radioecol. 2002 Sep-Oct;42(5):533-45.

[Effects of extremely high-frequency electromagnetic radiation on the immune
system and systemic regulation of homeostasis].

[Article in Russian]

Lushnikov KV(1), Gapeev AB, Chemeris NK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow
Region, 142290 Russia.

Low-intensity of electromagnetic radiation of extremely high frequencies (EHF
EMR) is effectively used in medical practice for diagnostics, prevention and
treatment of a broad spectrum of diseases of different etiology. However, in
spite of existence of many hypotheses about mechanisms of EHF EMR effects on the 
molecular and cellular levels of organization of living systems, there is not
conception that could explain all diversity of the EHF-therapy effects from
unified approach. In our opinion, the problem of determination of mechanisms of
EHF EMR effects on living organism is divided into two basic tasks: first,
determining subcellular structures which can receive radiation, and, second,
studying physiological reactions of the organism which are caused by radiation.
It is obviously, that investigation of functions of single cells and subcellular 
elements can not entirely explain therapeutic effects and mechanisms of EHF EMR
influence on multicellular organism on the whole. Plenty of functional
relationships between organs and systems of organs should be taken into account. 
In the present review, a realization of the EHF-therapy effects due to the
influence on immune system functions and start of system mechanisms of
maintenance of the homeostasis on the organism level is hypothesized. Potential
targets for EHF EMR acception on the level of different systems of the organism
are analysed. The material is formed so that functional relations between immune 
system and other regulatory systems (nervous and endocrine systems) are traced.

PMID: 12449822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2002 Dec;27(6):697-704.

Constitutive and cytokine-induced expression of the ETS transcription factor
ESE-3 in the lung.

Silverman ES(1), Baron RM, Palmer LJ, Le L, Hallock A, Subramaniam V, Riese RJ,
McKenna MD, Gu X, Libermann TA, Tugores A, Haley KJ, Shore S, Drazen JM, Weiss
ST.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine and Channing Laboratory,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston 02115, USA.
esilverm@hsph.harvard.edu

Family studies of asthma suggest that the genes ESE-2 and ESE-3 contain
polymorphisms that contribute to disease susceptibility. Each gene codes for an
ETS transcription factor that is characterized by epithelium-restricted
constitutive expression and may function as a context-dependent activator or
repressor of transcription; however, nothing is known about the role of these
genes in lung homeostasis or the pathogenesis of airway disease. In this study,
we show that ESE-3 mRNA and protein are constitutively expressed in bronchial and
mucous gland epithelial cells. Consistent with these findings, ESE-3 mRNA is
constitutively expressed in human bronchial epithelial cells grown in tissue
culture. In contrast, ESE-2 mRNA could not be detected in the lung or cultured
human bronchial epithelial cells. Human bronchial smooth muscle cells and
fibroblasts do not constitutively express ESE-3; however, after stimulation with 
interleukin-1beta or tumor necrosis factor-alpha, levels of ESE-3 mRNA and
protein increase dramatically by 24 h. This cytokine induction is dose-dependent 
and abrogated by specific inhibitors of the MEK1/2 (U0126) and p38 (SB03580)
signal transduction pathways. Overexpression of ESE-3 protein in 3T3 cells and
human bronchial smooth muscle cells inhibits MMP-1 promoter activity, suggesting 
that ESE-3 may function as a transcriptional repressor.

PMID: 12444029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med. 2002 Sep;49(7):365-72.

Pathological changes in the reproductive organs of cows and heifers culled
because of infertility.

Kübar H(1), Jalakas M.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Faculty of Estonian Agricultural University, Kreutzwaldi, Tartu.

The reproductive organs of 20 Estonian Holstein Breed (EHF) cows and three
heifers, culled because of infertility, were studied by palpation per rectum and 
ultrasonography. In addition, pathoanatomical and pathohistological studies were 
carried out after slaughtering. The pathohistological study revealed that small
cysts often (12 animals) existed in culled cows, whose diameter was less than 2.5
cm. These cysts were frequently accompanied by changes in secondary and Graafi
follicles, rete ovarii, ovarian stroma, and the endometrium. Three cows had
follicular cysts in the ovaries, which were 25-35 mm in diameter. Two cows
revealed luteal cysts in the ovaries; one of them had vaginal prolapse. Four
animals (one heifer and three cows) manifested tumours or tumour-like
malformations: ovarian endosalpingiosis, germ and stromal cell tumour, oviductal 
myolipoma, and haemangiosarcoma in the uterine blood vessels. One heifer had been
culled because of two abscesses in the vaginal wall close to the cervix and
another had chronic endometritis. The research findings indicate that the most
common cause of infertility in the culled cows was cystic degeneration in ovaries
(85%), accompanied by pathological changes elsewhere in the reproductive organs. 
We claim that these changes are responsible for the low pregnancy rate after the 
treatment of ovarian cysts. The second most common reason was genital tumours
(15%). In heifers, infertility is rare and its causes are heterogeneous.

PMID: 12440792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2002 Nov;43(11):3530-7.

Expression of the ETS transcription factor ELF3 in the retinal pigment
epithelium.

Jobling AI(1), Fang Z, Koleski D, Tymms MJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Vision Research Institute of Australia, Carlton, Victoria, Australia.
a.jobling@optometry@optometry.unimelb.edu.au

PURPOSE: The ETS family of transcription factors regulate several critical
cellular functions. They have also been implicated in invertebrate ocular
development. This work was undertaken to determine whether epithelium-specific
ETS transcription factors are expressed in the retinal pigment epithelium and to 
investigate the possible role of these factors in retinal diseases such as
age-related macular degeneration.
METHODS: The expression of the epithelial ETS transcription factors ELF5, ESE3,
and ELF3 was assessed by RT-PCR in the human RPE cell lines D407 and hTERT-RPE1. 
The full-length coding sequence of rat Elf3 was isolated with 3' rapid
amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) and degenerative primers, and its expression
was determined in various rat tissues, by RT-PCR and real-time PCR. A polyclonal 
ELF3 antibody produced from a C-terminal peptide was used to observe the
distribution of the transcription factor within the retina. To assess the
possible ELF3 regulation of the TIMP3 promoter, transient transfection assays
were performed. Promoter activity was determined with a firefly luciferase
reporter gene construct.
RESULTS: The epithelium-specific ETS transcription factor ELF3 was expressed in
the D407 and hTERT-RPE1 cell lines. Neither ESE3 nor ELF5 was detected in the
RPE. The cloning of rat Elf3 produced two splice variants, designated Elf3a (1786
bp) and Elf3b (1855 bp). The larger form, Elf3b, contained a 69-bp insert in the 
coding sequence, which showed high homology to a similar insert previously
identified in murine Elf3. Both splice variants were expressed in rat lung,
kidney, liver, and retina, but were absent in heart tissue. Real-time PCR
analysis showed the retina to contain high levels of Elf3, which was subsequently
localized to the RPE. Elf3 upregulated the TIMP3 promoter, with Elf3a and -3b
inducing an approximate sixfold increase in activity.
CONCLUSIONS: The ELF3 transcription factor is highly expressed in the RPE and can
regulate important ocular genes, such as TIMP3, in vitro. The specific expression
of ELF3 in the RPE may reflect an important role for this transcription factor in
retinal function. Furthermore, its regulation of TIMP3 may have implications for 
degenerative retinal diseases, such as age-related macular degeneration.

PMID: 12407165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2002 Jul-Aug;(4):34-7.

[EHF-therapy of herpetic keratouveitis].

[Article in Russian]

Gerasimenko MIu, Riabtseva AA, Goncharenko NL, Suchkov SV, Kuvshinov EV, Filatova
EV.

A device BIK for active suppression of infection has been used against Herpes
virus infection type 1 and 2 in 72 patients with keratouveitis. The immunological
and genotypic monitoring show that patients with herpetic keratouveitis after BIK
treatment have lower titers of antiherpetic antibodies, normal cellular and
humoral immunity, weaker viremia and reduced quantity of viral material in
corneal tissue. This positive effect persisted for 8-12 months. Thus, BIK device 
provides a definite, prolonged and stable therapeutic effect in patients with
herpetic keratouveitis.

PMID: 12380532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Oct 1;166(7):927-32.

DNA sequence variants in epithelium-specific ETS-2 and ETS-3 are not associated
with asthma.

Baron RM(1), Palmer LJ, Tantisira K, Gabriel S, Sonna LA, Le L, Hallock A,
Libermann TA, Drazen JM, Weiss ST, Silverman ES.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Epithelium-specific ETS-2 and ETS-3 are transcription factors that have been
proposed as asthma candidate genes. To investigate the association of sequence
variants in these genes with asthma, we conducted a case-control association
analysis in a sample of 311 white subjects with asthma and 177 white subjects
without asthma. Common polymorphisms in these genes were detected by sequencing
DNA from 32 cell lines obtained from Coriel (Camden, NJ). Seven noncoding or
synonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms were detected: three in
epithelium-specific ETS-2 and four in epithelium-specific ETS-3. Subjects were
genotyped at all loci by mass spectroscopy. To ensure the suitability of our
control subjects, we also genotyped subjects at 49 unlinked polymorphisms evenly 
distributed throughout the autosomes and found no evidence of population
stratification. Logistic regression adjusted for age and sex suggested a weak
association of one epithelium-specific ETS-2 polymorphism with asthma diagnosis
(odds ratio = 1.89, 95% confidence interval = 1.13-3.18, p = 0.02). Total serum
immunoglobulin E and FEV1 predicted levels were not associated with any of the
polymorphisms. Extended haplotyping indicated linkage disequilibrium in these
genes; however, no association or epistatic interaction was found. This study
suggests that epithelium-specific ETS-2 and ETS-3 genes are unlikely to contain
polymorphic loci that have a major impact on asthma susceptibility in our
population.

PMID: 12359648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Biofizika. 2002 Jul-Aug;47(4):759-68.

[A study of absorption of energy of the extremely high frequency electromagnetic 
radiation in the rat skin by various dosimetric methods and approaches].

[Article in Russian]

Gapeev AB(1), Sokolov PA, Chemeris NK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow
Region, 142290 Russia.

Using experimental and theoretical methods of dosimetry, the energy absorption of
extremely high-frequency electromagnetic radiation (EHF EMR) in the skin of
laboratory rats was analyzed. Specific absorption rate (SAR) in the skin was
determined on the basis of both microthermometric measurements of initial rates
of temperature rise in rat skin induced by the exposure and microcalorimetric
measurements of specific heat of the skin. Theoretical calculations of SAR in the
skin were performed with consideration for dielectric parameters of rat skin
obtained from the measurements of the standing wave ratio upon reflection of
electromagnetic waves from the skin surface and for the effective area of
stationary overheating measured by infrared thermography. A numerical method was 
developed to determine electromagnetic wave energy reflected, absorbed, and
transmitted in the model of flat layers. The algorithm of the method was realized
in a computer program and used to calculate SAR in the skin on the basis of the
complex dielectric constant of rat skin. The SAR values obtained from
experimental measurements, theoretical calculations and numerical analysis are in
good mutual correspondence and make about 220-280 W/kg at a frequency of 42.25
GHz and a power of 20 mW at the radiator output. The results obtained can be used
for dosimetric supply of biomedical experiments on studying the physicochemical
mechanisms of the biological effects of EHF EMR.

PMID: 12298218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Neuro Endocrinol Lett. 2002 Aug;23(4):315-20.

C-fos gene expression induced in cells in specific hypothalamic structures by
noxious mechanical stimulation and its [correction of it's] modification by
exposure of the skin to extremely high frequency irradiation.

Novikova NS(1), Kazakova TB, Rogers VJ, Korneva EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Experimental
Medicine, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Academy Pavlov Str 12, Saint
Petersburg 197376, Russia. korneva@VK5270.spb.edu

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to determine: 1) The spatial pattern of
c-fos gene expression in rat hypothalamic neurons after exposure to NMS and 2)
The expression of c-fos gene after combined exposure to NMS and EHF irradiation
of the rat skin.
METHODS: The experiments were performed on 28 male adult Sprague-Dawley rats.
After rats were subjected to noxious mechanical stimulation (NMS) or its
combination with EHF irradiation of the skin, cells in various hypothalamic
structures were analyzed to determine theirs effects on c-fos gene expression, an
accepted marker of the activation of neurons. C-Fos-like protein was revealed by 
an indirect immunoperoxidase method.
RESULTS: This study revealed that NMS stimulates c-fos gene expression in the
anterior hypothalamic nucleus (AHN), dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus (DMH),
ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH), and lateral hypothalamic area (LHA) by
157, 101, 199 and 115% respectively compared to control animals. Combined
exposure to NMS and EHF irradiation directed at the skin in the region of the
St36 acupuncture point projection site (left side) results in a decrease of the
number of neurons that are activated in the AHN, DMH, VMH, and LHA by 33.6, 13.2,
31.0 and 32.9% respectively compared to the number of neurons activated by
exposure to NMS by itself. EHF exposure of the skin of rats not subjected to NMS 
differentially effects the number of c-Fos positive cells expressed in
hypothalamic structures: a decrease of 39.7% was observed in the number of
activated neurons in the central part of LHA (level 28) compared to
sham-irradiated animals, while an increase of 80.95% was noted in the number of
c-Fos positive cells in the DMH compared to sham-irradiated animals.
CONCLUSIONS: The spatial pattern and degree of activation of c-fos gene
expression has been shown in cells of the hypothalamus of rats after exposure to 
NMS by itself and after NMS combined with EHF irradiation of the skin. The
"stress" reaction of cells in specific hypothalamic structures has been shown to 
be decreased after EHF exposure of the skin.

PMID: 12195233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Klin Med (Mosk). 2002;80(5):13-8.

[Effectiveness of ulcer treatment with electromagnetic radiation of extremely
high frequency (EHF therapy) and some mechanism of its therapeutic action].

[Article in Russian]

Tsimmerman IaS, Teliaper II.

A clinical response to and some mechanisms of therapeutic action of extremely
high frequency (EHF) therapy were studied in 132 patients with exacerbation of
duodenal ulcer vs routine pharmacological treatment. EHF-therapy was used alone
and in combination with famotidin (antisecretory drug) and norfloxacine
(antibacterial drug). EHF monotherapy proved highly effective in duodenal ulcer
exacerbation. It normalizes secretory and motor functions of the stomach,
suppresses initially high activity of free radical lipid oxidation, corrects
abnormal vegetative and psychoemotional status of the patients, moderately
potentiates the antihelicobacter effect of antibacterial drugs. These effects are
produced due to specific action of EHF therapy: mobilisation of sanogenesis
mechanisms, correction of mechanisms of adaptive regulation and self regulation
at different levels. Additional administration of antisecretory and antibacterial
drugs improved immediate but deteriorates long-term response to EHF-therapy.

PMID: 12087879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Gut. 2002 Jul;51(1):51-5.

Aberrant composition of gut microbiota of allergic infants: a target of
bifidobacterial therapy at weaning?

Kirjavainen PV(1), Arvola T, Salminen SJ, Isolauri E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Food Chemistry, University of Turku, Finland.
pirkka.kirjavainen@utu.fi

BACKGROUND: Recent data have outlined a relationship between the composition of
the intestinal microflora and allergic inflammation, and demonstrated the
competence of probiotics in downregulation of such inflammation.
AIMS: Our aims were to characterise the relationship between gut microbes and the
extent of allergic sensitisation and to assess whether the efficacy of
bifidobacterial supplementation in the treatment of allergy could relate to
modulation of the intestinal microbiota.
METHODS: This randomised study included 21 infants with early onset atopic eczema
of whom eight were intolerant (highly sensitised group (HSG)) and 13 tolerant
(sensitised group (SG)) to extensively hydrolysed whey formula (EHF). In the SG, 
six were weaned to EHF without (placebo group (PG)) and seven to EHF with
Bifidobacterium lactis Bb-12 supplementation (bifidobacteria treated group
(BbG)). The faecal microflora of infants in the HSG was analysed only before
weaning whereas in the SG the faecal microflora was analysed both before and
after weaning.
RESULTS: Infants in the HSG had greater numbers of lactobacilli/enterococci than 
those in the SG. Serum total IgE concentration correlated directly with
Escherichia coli counts in all infants and with bacteroides counts in the HSG,
indicating that the presence of these bacteria is associated with the extent of
atopic sensitisation. The effect of supplementation was characterised as a
decrease in the numbers of Escherichia coli and protection against an increase in
bacteroides numbers during weaning.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that bifidobacterial supplementation appears to 
modify the gut microbiota in a manner that may alleviate allergic inflammation.
Further studies are needed to confirm this conclusion.

PMCID: PMC1773282
PMID: 12077091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Trop Doct. 2002 Jan;32(1):10-5.

The outbreak and control of Ebola viral haemorrhagic fever in a Ugandan medical
school.

Bitekyerezo M(1), Kyobutungi C, Kizza R, Mugeni J, Munyarugero E, Tirwomwe F,
Twongyeirwe E, Muhindo G, Nakibuuka V, Nakate M, John L, Ruiz A, Frame K, Priotto
G, Pepper L, Kabakyenga J, Baingana S, Ledo D.

Author information: 
(1)Mbarara University Teaching Hospital, Uganda.

Uganda has just experienced the largest outbreak of Ebola haemorrhagic fever
(EHF) ever recorded. Mbarara University Teaching Hospital (MUTH) is responsible
for training approximately one-third of Uganda's doctors. Mbarara is located in
SouthWest Uganda, 614 km from Gulu, the main epicentre of the outbreak. On 23
October a patient was admitted to the medical ward of MUTH with an acute fever.
He soon exhibited haemorrhagic symptoms and died. He was later confirmed to have 
suffered Ebola. Three more patients subsequently contracted the disease. All
died. There were no further cases in Mbarara. No members of staff or medical
student was infected. We give details of the clinical features of those patients 
who contracted the disease, the setting up of an Ebola isolation unit, the case
surveillance and the search for the source of the outbreak. The implications for 
similar institutions in East Africa are discussed.

PMID: 11991014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Mikrobiologiia. 2002 Jan-Feb;71(1):119-22.

[Isolation of actinomycetes from soil using extremely high frequency radiation].

[Article in Russian]

Li IuV(1), Terekhova LP, Gapochka MG.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of New Antibiotics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences,
ul. Bol'shaya Pirogovskaya 11, Moscow, 119867 Russia.

A new method employing extremely high frequencies (EHFs) is proposed for the
selective isolation of actinomycetes from soil. The pretreatment of soil
suspensions with EHF wavelengths of 5.6 and 7.1 mm led to a nonselective
isolation of actinomycetes. At the same time, the irradiation of soil suspensions
within wavelength bands of 3.8-5.8 and 8-11.5 mm considerably augmented the total
number of isolated actinomycetes and increased the fraction of the isolated rare 
genera by 2 and 7 times, respectively. The rare actinomycete genera were
represented by Actinomadura, Microtetraspora, Nonomuraea, Micromonospora,
Amycolatopsis, Pseudonocardia, Saccharotrix, and Streptosporangium.

PMID: 11910800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2002 Jan-Feb;(1):18-20.

[Dynamics of vegetative indicators induced by low-frequency magnetotherapy and
EHF-puncture in hypertensive workers exposed to vibration].

[Article in Russian]

Drobyshev VA, Efremov AV, Loseva MI, Sukharevskaia TM, Michurin AI.

Low-frequency magnetic fields and EHF-therapy have been used in correction of
autonomic homeostasis in workers exposed to vibration for different periods of
time. The workers suffered from early arterial hypertension. Vegetative status
and central hemodynamics improved best in workers exposed to vibration for less
than 5 years. If the exposure was 6-15 years, a positive trend occurred in the
tension of regulatory mechanisms. Workers with long exposure to vibration
suffering from vagotonia showed an inadequate response of the autonomic
parameters to treatment. This necessitates enhancement of therapeutic measures
with medicines.

PMID: 11898374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr). 2002 Jan-Feb;30(1):36-41.

An extensively hydrolysed cow's milk formula improves clinical symptoms of
gastroesophageal reflux and reduces the gastric emptying time in infants.

Garzi A(1), Messina M, Frati F, Carfagna L, Zagordo L, Belcastro M, Parmiani S,
Sensi L, Marcucci F.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Surgery. Medicine and Surgery Department. Siena University, Siena,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: About 20 % of infants fed with breast-milk substitutes suffer from
Gastro Esophageal Reflux (GER) and 1/3 of them also show Cow's Milk Allergy (CMA)
symptoms.
METHODS: We planned this study to assess by dynamic echography the usefulness of 
an Extensively Hydrolysed Cow's Milk Formula (eHF) in infants suffering from GER.
Ten infants showing GER symptoms and 10 normal babies, all fed with breast-milk
substitutes, were enrolled. Clinical symptom scores related to GER were assessed 
for one week. The Gastric Emptying Time (GET) was determined by means of dynamic 
echography after feeding with cow's milk-derived formulae and again after a week 
feeding with eHF in subjects previously showing GER symptoms.
RESULTS: All infants with a clinical diagnosis for GER showed an abnormally high 
average GET in comparison to normal subjects (205 vs 124 min, p = 0.000).
Switching to the eHF led to a significant clinical improvement (p = 0.0039)
especially in babies skin-test and RAST positive to cow's milk, and to a
significant decrease toward the normal value of the GET (167 min, p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The eHF tested improves GER symptoms in infants suffering from this 
disease. Our experience confirms and supports the use of dynamic echography as a 
reliable, simple, and non-invasive diagnostic method for infants with an
increased GET associated with clinical symptoms of GER.

PMID: 11888491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Tsitologiia. 2001;43(12):1115-22.

[Information EHF-interactions in a system of live objects (human platelets)].

[Article in Russian]

Kirichuk VF(1), Maiborodin AV, Volin MV, Krenitskii AP, Tupikin VD.

Author information: 
(1)Saratov State Medical University, Saratov.

The molecular informational interaction has been first detected in a system that 
involves human platelets, exposed to electromagnetic EHF-fluctuations at
frequencies of molecular spectra of radiation and absorption of nitric oxide
(150.176-150.644 HHz), and native platelets. It has been established that the
incubation of a native platelet rich plasma with a similar plasma, exposed to a
5-minute effect of electromagnetic EHF-fluctuations at frequencies of molecular
spectra of radiation and absorption of nitric oxide at a mode of peak and
frequent modulation of a signal under in vitro conditions, causes a significant
(P < 0.05) inhibition of platelet functional activity in the native plasma, in
comparison with control. This was displayed by a decreased platelet activation
and falling platelet aggregation ability. Some possible mechanisms of interaction
are suggested to explain the described effect.

PMID: 11881149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2001 Nov-Dec;(6):21-3.

[The use of extremely high frequency electromagnetic fields during acute period
of ischemic stroke].

[Article in Russian]

Podoliako VA, Makarchik AV.

The rheological, coagulatory and clinical examination of 70 patients with acute
ischemic stroke has demonstrated that EHF therapy (53.53 GHz) improves
rheological and coagulatory parameters in such patients, has a positive effect on
hemostasis and clinical course of acute ischemic stroke. The technique and doses 
are presented.

PMID: 11868528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2000 Dec;21(6):448-50.

[Report on epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) surveillance in 1999].

[Article in Chinese]

Luo C(1), Tang L, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Epidemiology and Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Preventive
Medicine, Beijing 102206, China.

OBJECTIVE: To understand the epidemic tread of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF)
in 1999 and to develop programs for its control and prevention.
METHODS: Epidemiological, zoo-epidemiologic, serologic and viral diagnostics were
used to analyse the information of monthly and annual reports from surveillance
spots.
RESULTS: Twelve thousand nine hundred and thirty cases of EHF in all surveillance
spots were reported with 135 cases of death in 1999. The morbidity and mortality 
were 5.37/100,000, and 1.04% respectively, which had a 1.47% decrease and 9.47%
increase, comparing to that of 1998. The accordance of serological and clinical
diagnosis was 67.25%, with rate of misreporting 1.28%. In animal surveillance,
the density of mouse was 7.46% with predominant species Apodemus agrarius. In
residential areas, the density of mouse was 6.21%, with predominant species
Rattus norvegicus. For Apodemus agrarius in fields and Rattus norvegicus in
residential areas, the indexes of HV carrier were 0.032 and 0.031 respectively in
1999. In spring and autumn, the indexes of HV carrier in Rattus norvegicus were
apparently higher than that of Apodemus agrarius as the indexes of HV carrier in 
Rattus norvegicus were 0.028 and 0.036 comparing with 0.026 and 0.020 in Apodemus
agrarius.
CONCLUSION: It is suggested that more attention should be paid to the
surveillance in low and medium-sized epidemic areas because northern China is dry
with short rainy season while the epidemic situation in the serious epidemic
areas had been under control to some degree.

PMID: 11860833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2000 Dec;21(6):445-7.

[Safety and immunogenicity of inactivated bivalent EHF vaccine in humans].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu W(1), Xu X, Ruan Y, Weng S, Liu W, Zhou W, Dong G, Gu H, Zhu Z, Xu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Shanghai Medical University, Shanghai 200032,
China.

OBJECTIVE: Safety and immunogenicity of inactivated bivalent EHF vaccine in
humans were evaluated in the epidemic area of Zhejiang province, China.
METHODS: Susceptible persons with negative anti-EHF were selected in Jiande
county, Zhejiang province to receive 3 doses of inactivated bivalent EHF vaccine 
at 0, 7, 28 days. A booster injection was given one year after the primary
immunization. Antibody responses were measured in human volunteers by IFA and
MCPENT. Local and general reactions were recorded within 72 hours after each
vaccination by physicians.
RESULTS: Two weeks after the primary vaccination, 99.04% of the subjects
developed significant hantavirus antibody titre measured by IFA which had a
37.34% drop one year after the primary vaccination. Seroconversion rate increased
to 100% two weeks after the booster dose. Neutralising antibody titres paralleled
this trend with 100% of vaccine recipients producing neutralising antibody two
weeks after the primary doses. However, it dropped to 80% one year after the
primary vaccination. One hundred percent of the vaccine recipients started to
respond two weeks after boosting. The geometric mean titre (GMT) of neutralising 
antibody against 76 - 118 and UR were 18.27 +/- 2.21 and 12.47 +/- 2.16
respectively after the primary injections, but it increased to 37.09 +/- 2.24 and
32.61 +/- 2.05 respectively after the secondary immunization. General and local
reaction rates were 0.46% and 1.98%, with no severe side effects observed in the 
vaccinees.
CONCLUSION: The vaccine was well tolerated and could induce good humoral immune
response.

PMID: 11860832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2000 Oct;21(5):347-8.

[Preventive effects of three kinds of inactive vaccines against epidemic
hemorrhagic fever (EHF) after 5 years of vaccination].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen H(1), Tang L, Luo Z, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Hu M, Weng J, Liu W, Zhao T, Liu W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Epidemiology and Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Preventive
Medicine, Beijing 102206, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the safety and the preventive effects of three kinds of
vaccines as Mongolian gerbils kidney vaccine, mouse brains vaccine and hamster
kidney vaccine inoculated 5 years ago.
METHODS: Field study and laboratory tests were carried out by random grouping and
IFAT, MCPENT, ELISA, HI tests.
RESULTS: The antibody-dependent enhancement did not appear in all individuals who
received vaccines after four or five years. The seroconversion rates of MCPENT
were 8.97%, 11.76% and 18.75% while the seroconversion rates of IFAT were 20.73%,
30.22% and 23.40% respectively for Mongolian gerbils kidney vaccine, mouse brains
vaccine and hamster kidney vaccine. The protection rates were 100% for all three 
kinds of inactive vaccines which showed good epidemiological efficacy.
CONCLUSION: The vaccines can protect clinical infection of EHF effectively after 
four or five years of the initial vaccination.

PMID: 11860813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2000 Oct;21(5):344-6.

[A case-control study on the risk factors of epidemic hemorrhagic fever].

[Article in Chinese]

Ruan Y(1), Liu W, Xu X, Weng S, Zhou W, Deng X, Gu H, Zhu Z, Xu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Shanghai Medical University, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the risk factors of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF).
METHODS: A 1:1 matched case-control study was conducted to analyse EHF risk
factors.
RESULTS: One hundred and eighty-five matched pairs were investigated. Five
factors were associated with risks of the disease, including rodent activity in
house, farm working, travel, annual average income of an individual and ground
material of the house, when chi(2) test and logistic regression model were
processed respectively. The coefficients of rodent activity in house, farm
working, travel, annual average income of an individual and ground material of
the house in multivariable Logistic regression model were 1.377, 1.687, 1.630,
-1.216 and -0.888, respectively, when P value < 0.05 was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Factors as high average income of individuals, brick or cement used 
as material of the ground in the house, seemed to be protective factors of EHF,
which were important to the control and prevention of EHF.

PMID: 11860812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2000 Feb;21(1):30-3.

[A study on the epidemiology and preventive measure on epidemic haemorrhage fever
in army barrack area in Shandong].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang Z(1), Miao Z, Liu Y, Wu Q, Qiao Z, Peng Z, Yu X, Zhou J, Li L, Gao L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Military Medical Research Institute of Jinan
Command, Jinan 250014, China.

OBJECTIVE: In order to guide the army and civilians to carry out the prevention
on epidemic haemorrhage fever (EHF), it's necessary to elucidate the epidemic
feature of natural epidemic foci and the risk factors of EHF in the army -
stationed areas.
METHODS: Samples were tested by pathogenic and serologic means before data was
collected and analyzed by case - control or family - control studies.
RESULTS: Cases belong to house - mouse type (91.48%), field - mouse type (7.21%) 
and unclassified (1.31%) coexist in the stationed area. In the two types of
noticed cases, no significant difference in distributions of sex, profession and 
ages. Most house - mouse type cases occurred in the peak time from March to June 
and field - mouse type in November to next February. The type of EHF virus
antigen of mice and the type of serum were both accordant with their host types. 
Dwelling in border area, living rooms with mice, dogs raising, injury of mouth
tissue, eating food contaminated by mice, and household with mice living around
were more frequently seen in cases themselves and in families of the cases than
in controls of both groups (P < 0.05). The mice intensity could be under control 
to 1.0%, if comprehensive measure on mice control can be implemented.
CONCLUSIONS: The stationed area is an epidemic area mixed with both house - mouse
and field - mouse types, with majority of house - mouse type. It was house -
mouse type virus infection that caused the epidemic area expanded and the number 
of cases increased radically these years. EHF was epidemic in spring and summer
season in the stationed area mainly because the infections were among family
members. Food contaminated by mice or close contact with mice played an important
role. Mice eradication and prevention were the leading measures to prevent EHF,
from our more than ten years of experiences.

PMID: 11860754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Biofizika. 2002 Jan-Feb;47(1):71-7.

[Suppression of nonspecific resistance of the body under the effect of extremely 
high frequency electromagnetic radiation of low intensity].

[Article in Russian]

Kolomytseva MP(1), Gapeev AB, Sadovnikov VB, Chemeris NK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow
Region, 142290 Russia.

The dynamics of leukocyte number and functional activity of peripheral blood
neutrophils under whole-body exposure of healthy mice to low-intensity
extremely-high-frequency electromagnetic radiation (EHF EMR, 42.0 GHz, 0.15
mW/cm2, 20 min daily) was studied. It was shown that the phagocytic activity of
peripheral blood neutrophils was suppressed by about 50% (p < 0.01 as compared
with the sham-exposed control) in 2-3 h after the single exposure to EHF EMR. The
effect persisted for 1 day after the exposure, and then the phagocytic activity
of neutrophils returned to the norm within 3 days. A significant modification of 
the leukocyte blood profile in mice exposed to EHF EMR for 5 days was observed
after the cessation of exposures: the number of leukocytes increased by 44% (p < 
0.05 as compared with sham-exposed animals), mostly due to an increase in the
lymphocyte content. The supposition was made that EHF EMR effects can be mediated
via the metabolic systems of arachidonic acid and the stimulation of adenylate
cyclase activity, with subsequent increase in the intracellular cAMP level. The
results indicated that the whole-body exposure of healthy mice to low-intensity
EHF EMR has a profound effect on the indices of nonspecific immunity.

PMID: 11855293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Allergy. 2001 Dec;56(12):1144-56.

Cow's milk-specific cellular and humoral immune responses and atopy skin symptoms
in infants from atopic families fed a partially (pHF) or extensively (eHF)
hydrolyzed infant formula.

Nentwich I(1), Michková E, Nevoral J, Urbanek R, Szépfalusi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Vienna, Wahringer Guertel 18-20,
A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Hydrolyzed milk formulas are recommended to feed infants at high risk
of atopy if breast-feeding is not possible. We studied the specific cellular and 
humoral immune response to cow's milk proteins and occurrence of atopic
dermatitis under different feeding regimens: two hydrolyzed infant milk formulas 
(partially [pHF] and extensively hydrolyzed [eHF]) and under exclusive
breast-feeding (BF).
METHODS: Seventy-two infants from families with atopic symptoms were randomized
in the pHF and eHF groups, respectively. At 6 and 12 months of age, peripheral
blood mononuclear cell proliferation along with specific IgG and IgE to cow's
milk proteins was determined in infants fed pHF or eHF, respectively, and those
who had not yet received any formula at 6 months of age (BF). Cases of atopic
dermatitis were recorded throughout the first 12 months of life, and their
severity was evaluated with SCORAD points.
RESULTS: A significantly decreased proliferation to cow's milk caseins was found 
in the pHF group compared to the exclusively breast-fed group. Medians of
stimulation indexes for CAS at 6 months were as follows: pHF 1.18; n=24; BF 1.70;
n=24 (P=0.033, Mann-Whitney U-test). Higher levels of plasma IgG antibodies to
BCAS were found in infants fed pHF than in those fed eHF at 12 months. Optical
density (OD): (25th percentile; median; 75th percentile): pHF: 0.00; 0.14; 0.38; 
n=30; eHF: 0.00; 0.03; 0.14; n=28; P=0,089, Mann-Whitney U-test. Cow's
milk-specific IgE was detected at 6 months as follows: BF: 3 of 24; eHF: 2 of 21;
pHF: 0 of 23. The number of cases of atopic dermatitis and their severity did not
differ among the groups during the first 12 months.
CONCLUSIONS: Feeding pHF appears to suppress cow's milk-specific cellular
responses and stimulate specific IgG production. Specific IgE sensitization can
occur also with breast-feeding.

PMID: 11736743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Crit Rev Biomed Eng. 2001;29(3):482-92.

Application of millimeter waves in treating chronic prostatitis patients.

Matveev AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Balneology and Physiotherapy, Tomsk, Russia.

A comparative analysis was made of various EHF therapy treatments applied in
chronic prostatitis patients. The therapeutic efficiency of these treatments was 
assessed on a large number of patients. Besides general clinical examination, we 
employed ultrasonography, seminal analysis, local immununoassay, and the Voll
diagnosis technique. It was found that, when millimeter waves were tuned to
bioresonance, rectal treatment provided the highest clinical efficiency.

PMID: 11730107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Nihon Koshu Eisei Zasshi. 2001 Oct;48(10):853-9.

[Epidemics and related cultural factors for Ebola hemorrhagic fever in Gabon].

[Article in Japanese]

Kunii O(1), Kita E, Shibuya K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of International Community Health, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo.

OBJECTIVE: The Republic of Gabon experienced epidemics of Ebola hemorrhagic fever
(EHF) three times between 1994 and 1997. This study aimed at exploring cultural
factors related to the outbreaks.
METHODS: We collected information about EHF epidemics from the Gabon Ministry of 
Health, district hospitals and other facilities and conducted in-depth interviews
with 20 villagers and 2 traditional healers in the village where the third
epidemic occurred.
RESULTS: All three epidemics were supposed to have direct or indirect
relationship with great apes, the victims having cooked or eaten chimpanzees
meat. Although the reuse of syringes and needles in hospitals which had worsened 
past EHF outbreaks in Sudan and Zaire did not contribute to the outbreak in
Gabon, traditional practices as family members remaining close to the patient to 
nurse him/her, and hugging and touching the dead at funerals were suspected to be
crucial sources of infection. Interviews with traditional healers revealed that
traditional treatment methods as cutting a patient' skin with an unsterilized
knife and applying blood to the skin were risky and might have been contributory 
factors in the deaths of one traditionals healer and his assistant in the third
EHF outbreak. In one village where EHF had reached epidemic proportions, in-depth
interviews were conducted with 2 traditional healers and 20 persons of mean age
33 (20-46) years with a sampling method of selecting every tenth household from
the entrance. Even though they lived in a village suffering an EHF outbreak, only
two thirds of them knew the name of the disease and about half of them could not 
explain what kind of disease it was. One quarter felt it was fatal and another
quarter felt fearful. Three persons thought it had been due to evil spirits;
others responded the mosquitoes or patient's sweat/saliva were the cause.
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that cultural factors might be very crucial to EHF
outbreaks in developing countries. Quick intervention with health education is
needed to disseminate appropriate knowledge and persuade people that traditional 
practices could carry a high risk of infection.

PMID: 11725529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2001 Feb 9;50(5):73-7.

Outbreak of Ebola hemorrhagic fever Uganda, August 2000-January 2001.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

On October 8, 2000, an outbreak of an unusual febrile illness with occasional
hemorrhage and significant mortality was reported to the Ministry of Health (MoH)
in Kampala by the superintendent of St. Mary's Hospital in Lacor, and the
District Director of Health Services in the Gulu District. A preliminary
assessment conducted by MoH found additional cases in Gulu District and in Gulu
Hospital, the regional referral hospital. On October 15, suspicion of Ebola
hemorrhagic fever (EHF) was confirmed when the National Institute of Virology
(NIV), Johannesburg, South Africa, identified Ebola virus infection among
specimens from patients, including health-care workers at St. Mary's Hospital.
This report describes surveillance and control activities related to the EHF
outbreak and presents preliminary clinical and epidemiologic findings.

PMID: 11686289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Nippon Med Sch. 2001 Oct;68(5):370-5.

Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF): mechanism of transmission and pathogenicity.

Mwanatambwe M(1), Yamada N, Arai S, Shimizu-Suganuma M, Shichinohe K, Asano G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

Hemorrhagic fevers represent a wide spectrum of viral infectious diseases,
out-breaking mostly as epidemics, some of them being highly lethal. They range
from those caused by bunyaviridae, associated with renal or pulmonary syndromes
and those recently emerging and caused by the filoviridae family of thread-like
viruses. Among the latter, Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) bears the highest
mortality and morbidity rates. One form of the disease has been documented only
in monkeys. The human form, has occurred mainly in areas surrounding rain forests
in central Africa. Patients present with signs of hemorrhagic diathesis, fever,
diarrhea and neurological disorders, leading sometimes to confusion with local
endemic diseases. Fatal victims of the disease die of dehydration. Poor hygienic 
conditions facilitate the spread of the virus. Biologically, the virus seems to
target both the host blood coagulative and immune defense systems. Intensive
epidemiologic search have failed to establish the definitive natural host of the 
virus. Twice, with a 19-year interval, major outbreaks have taken place in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The second major outbreak in the northwestern
city of Kikwit in April 1995 will serve here to elucidate the mechanism of the
viral infection.

PMID: 11598619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Lik Sprava. 2001 May-Jun;(3):65-9.

[Clinical and laboratory support for multiple-modality treatment of rheumatic
patients with mitral valve disease].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Iakymenko OO, Mararenko AA.

In 158 rheumatic patients with mitral valvular disease (MVD),
clinical-and-laboratory indices were studied together with a possibility for
correction of the detected disorders in a multiple-modality staged treatment
involving basic drug therapy, EHF-therapy, and sanatorium-health resort stage of 
rehabilitation. It has been found out that EHF-therapy and sanatorium-health
resort treatment have a positive effect on the clinical course of the trouble and
on the laboratory indices for the inflammatory process contributing to
optimization of medicamentous treatment of rheumatic patients with MVD.

PMID: 11560031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Lepr Rev. 2001 Jun;72(2):158-70.

Dynamics of impairment during and after treatment: the AMFES cohort.

Meima A(1), Saunderson PR, Gebre S, Desta K, Habbema JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Erasmus 
University Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Meima@mgz.fgg.eur.nl

This study investigates the dynamics of impairment during and after multidrug
therapy treatment for the patient cohort of the prospective ALERT MDT Field
Evaluation Study (AMFES). The impairment status was compared at intake, at
release from treatment (rft), and at the time of the latest survey between 24 and
48 months after release from treatment (follow-up). The eye-hand-foot impairment 
score (EHF score), which is the sum of the WHO impairment grades of the eyes,
hands, and feet, was used as tool for comparison. In all, 433 out of the 592
patients (224 PB and 209 MB) completed treatment in time and were assessed at
release from treatment. The risk of getting impaired was 4% for the 113 PB and
21% for the 91 MB patients who were initially free from impairment. Out of the
111 initially impaired PB patients, 41% recovered or improved and 13% worsened in
EHF score. For the 118 initially impaired MB patients, these figures were:
recovery or improvement 43% and worsening 13%. Three hundred and twenty-three out
of the 433 patients (158 PB and 165 MB) had a follow-up examination in between
the next 24-48 months after rft. The risks of impairment at follow-up were 6% for
the 79 PB and 18% for the 77 MB patients without impairment at rft. Out of the 79
PB patients with impairment at rft, 35% recovered or improved and 28% worsened.
For the 88 impaired MB patients, these figures were: recovery or improvement 26% 
and worsening 27%. Patients showed a tendency to compensate EHF score improvement
before rft by worsening after rft and vice versa. The first main conclusion is
that the impairment status at intake was by far the most important determinant
for future impairment. The second one is that the dynamics of impairment were
less favourable after rft than before. Little is known about the long-term fate
of leprosy patients with irreversible nerve damage and the associated risk of
developing severe secondary impairment. Especially in this era of the leprosy
elimination goal, we should give this accumulating patient group due attention in
research and health policy agendas.

PMID: 11495447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Biofizika. 2001 Mar-Apr;46(2):291-7.

[Role of phospholipase A2 and epoxygenase in inhibition of respiration burst in
neutrophils by low intensity radiation of extremely high frequency].

[Article in Russian]

Alovskaia AA(1), Gabdulkhakova AG, Safronova VG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow
Region, 142290 Russia.

The role of some components of the phospholipid metabolism in the activation of
neutrophil respiratory burst and its inhibition by electromagnetic radiation
(EMR) of extremely high frequencies (EHF) was studied. It was shown that EHF EMR 
has effect on cells with a high sensitivity to the inhibitor of phospholipase A2 
4-bromophenacyl bromide. However, againsts the background of the inhibitor, the
effect of EHF EMR was not observed on cells with either high or low sensitivity
to the inhibitor. EHF EMR was also inefficient with cells pretreated with
proadifen, an inhibitor of epoxygenase (cytochrome P-450). The results obtained
suggest that the effect of EHF EMR manifests itself in cells with a high activity
of phospholipase A2 and is realized with the participation of epoxygenase
metabolites of arachidonic acid.

PMID: 11357344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2001 Apr;12(2):78-82.

Prospective, controlled, multi-center study on the effect of an amino-acid-based 
formula in infants with cow's milk allergy/intolerance and atopic dermatitis.

Niggemann B(1), Binder C, Dupont C, Hadji S, Arvola T, Isolauri E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Pneumology and Immunology, Children's Hospital
Charité, Humboldt University, Augustenburger Platz 1, D-13353 Berlin, Germany.
bodo.niggemann@charite.de

Cow's milk allergy/intolerance is treated by complete avoidance of cow's milk
proteins. Because cow's milk is an important food for infants, its avoidance may 
lead to an increased risk of growth impairment. Whilst there is evidence for the 
beneficial effects of extensively hydrolyzed cow's milk formulate (eHF) in
infants with cow's milk allergy/intolerance, little is known about the effects of
amino-acid-based formulae (AA) in such infants. We therefore performed a
prospective, controlled, multi-center trial to study the efficacy of AA in
comparison with eHF, on the growth and clinical symptoms of 73 infants (median
age 5.7 months) with cow's milk allergy/intolerance and atopic dermatitis. Cow's 
milk allergy/intolerance was proven in all infants by double-blind,
placebo-controlled food-challenge. We observed a significant improvement in the
SCORAD index in both groups, from a mean of 24.6, at entry, to a mean of 10.7 (p 
< 0.0001) after 6 months. In the AA group there was a significant increase in the
length standard deviation score (p < 0.04), whilst there was no difference in the
eHF group. The weight-for-length values were stable in both groups. The energy
intake during the study was similar in both groups. Both an AA and eHF resulted
in a significant clinical improvement in infants with an early onset of symptoms 
of cow's milk allergy/intolerance. Feeding an AA resulted in improved growth
compared with feeding eHF, despite similar dietary intakes, and may therefore be 
considered as a beneficial alternative in infants with severe cow's milk allergy 
intolerance.

PMID: 11338290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 8;276(23):20397-406. Epub 2001 Mar 19.

The epithelium-specific ETS protein EHF/ESE-3 is a context-dependent
transcriptional repressor downstream of MAPK signaling cascades.

Tugores A(1), Le J, Sorokina I, Snijders AJ, Duyao M, Reddy PS, Carlee L,
Ronshaugen M, Mushegian A, Watanaskul T, Chu S, Buckler A, Emtage S, McCormick
MK.

Author information: 
(1)Axys Pharmaceuticals, Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
autogores@yahoo.com

Exon trapping and cDNA selection procedures were used to search for novel genes
at human chromosome 11p13, a region previously associated with loss of
heterozygosity in epithelial carcinomas. Using these approaches, we found the
ESE-2 and ESE-3 genes, coding for ETS domain-containing transcription factors.
These genes lie in close proximity to the catalase gene within a approximately
200-kilobase genomic interval. ESE-3 mRNA is widely expressed in human tissues
with high epithelial content, and immunohistochemical analysis with a newly
generated monoclonal antibody revealed that ESE-3 is a nuclear protein expressed 
exclusively in differentiated epithelial cells and that it is absent in the
epithelial carcinomas tested. In transient transfections, ESE-3 behaves as a
repressor of the Ras- or phorbol ester-induced transcriptional activation of a
subset of promoters that contain ETS and AP-1 binding sites. ESE-3-mediated
repression is sequence- and context-dependent and depends both on the presence of
high affinity ESE-3 binding sites in combination with AP-1 cis-elements and the
arrangement of these sites within a given promoter. We propose that ESE-3 might
be an important determinant in the control of epithelial differentiation, as a
modulator of the nuclear response to mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling
cascades.

PMID: 11259407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Crit Rev Biomed Eng. 2000;28(5-6):60-76.

Novel concepts of the causes of EHF-radiation-induced stimulating effects.

Tambiev AK(1), Kirikova NN.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Faculty, M. V. Lomonosov Moscow State University.

This article reviewed our investigations and the literature on the interaction of
EHF radiation with biological objects. This allowed us to advance the general
mechanism for the effect of millimetric waves on photosynthesizing organisms.

PMID: 11211986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Probl Tuberk. 2000;(6):47-8.

[Hepatorenal correlations in patients with pulmonary tuberculosis in the presence
of viral hepatitis B markers and organic chlorine pesticides: radionuclide
studies].

[Article in Russian]

Mukhtarov DZ.

Excretory hepatic function (EHF) and effective renal plasma flow (ERPF) were
studied in 115 patients with pulmonary tuberculosis by the data of radionuclide
studies. The patients were divided into 2 groups: Group 1 included 89 patients
whose blood samples showed viral hepatitis B markers (VHBM) and organic chlorine 
pesticides (OCP) and Group 1 comprised 26 patients without VHBM and OCP. More
than 50% of the examinees were found to have impairments in both EHF and ERPF. In
some of them, these disorders progressed during treatment. There was a
correlation between these parameters, which makes it necessary to search for new 
pathogenetic exposures in order to improve hepatic and renal functions in
patients with blood VHBM and OCP.

PMID: 11210835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2000 Nov-Dec;(6):29-32.

[Physiopuncture therapy of trigeminal neuralgia].

[Article in Russian]

Samosiuk IZ, Kozhanova AK, Samosiuk NI.

137 patients with typical trifacial neuralgia (TN) were divided into four groups.
30 patients of group 1 received EHF therapy, 30 patients of group 2 were exposed 
to laser, 67 patients of group 3 were treated with combination of laser with
EHF-puncture, 10 patients of group 4 were controls on conventional physiotherapy.
Patients of all the groups were given drug of choice--carbamazepin. The highest
response was registered in group 3, 21(31.3%) patients of which could stop
carbamazepin, while 40(59.7%) patients reduced carbamazepin dose by 50-70%.
Positive results were due to restoration of self-regulation in pain and antipain 
systems which are disturbed in TN patients.

PMID: 11197651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Crit Rev Biomed Eng. 2000;28(3 - 4):589-602.

Effect of EHF radiation on metabolism of Cyanobacteria spirulina platensis and
other photosynthesizing organisms.

Tambiev AK(1), Kirikova NN.

Author information: 
(1)Moscow State University.

A stimulatory influence of EHF radiation on the growth and physiological activity
of photosynthetic organisms is shown. Some primary responses to this action are
studied. Oxygen is considered to be of great importance in the mechanism of the
stimulators effect of EHF radiation.

PMID: 11108235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Lepr Rev. 2000 Sep;71(3):344-54.

The hand-foot impairment score as a tool for evaluating prevention of disability 
activities in leprosy: an exploration in patients treated with corticosteroids.

Broekhuis SM(1), Meima A, Koelewijn LF, Richardus JH, Benbow C, Saunderson PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Erasmus University Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The hand-foot (HF) impairment score in leprosy patients is the sum of the WHO
disability grades for hands and feet. This retrospective study explored the
possibility of using the HF score for evaluation of the effectiveness of
corticosteroid treatment programmes for nerve function impairment (NFI). Changes 
in the score were compared with changes in sensory testing (ST) and voluntary
muscle testing (VMT) for 42 leprosy patients who received corticosteroid
treatment. The WHO grade did not change in 30/60 (50%) of extremities gaining,
and in 4/10 (40%) extremities losing sensation and/or muscle strength. However,
18/24 (75%) patients with a definite gain in function improved in HF score, while
the HF score remained unchanged in 10/11 (91%) patients with no change in nerve
function. Five patients with impairment in multiple extremities showed both gain 
and loss of sensation and/or muscle strength in the same or different
extremities. Overall, improvement, deterioration and absence of change in NFI, as
indicated by changes in ST and VMT were reflected correctly by the HF score in 28
(76%) of the remaining 37 patients. It was also shown that the HF score does not 
give appropriate information on the extent of the effect of corticosteroid
treatment. This study illustrates that the HF score can not be used to support
management of corticosteroid treatment of individual patients, but indicates this
score to be a promising device for the evaluation of the effectiveness of
corticosteroid treatment programmes. This study used the HF score because
information on (changes in) eye impairment was not considered reliable. However, 
in principle, we consider the EHF score, which is the sum of the WHO disability
grades for hands, feet and eyes, preferable for evaluation purposes. We strongly 
recommend further validation of the EHF score as a tool for evaluation of
corticosteroid treatment programmes for patient groups with different
distributions of NFI through prospective studies.

PMID: 11105494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Lepr Rev. 2000 Sep;71(3):285-308.

The pattern of leprosy-related neuropathy in the AMFES patients in Ethiopia:
definitions, incidence, risk factors and outcome.

Saunderson P(1), Gebre S, Desta K, Byass P, Lockwood DN.

Author information: 
(1)School of Community Health Science, Nottingham University, UK.
psaunderson@leprosy.org

The ALERT MDT Field Evaluation Study (AMFES) began in 1988 and followed patients 
prospectively for up to 10 years after release from treatment (RFT). This paper
presents the findings from this cohort with regard to neuropathy and nerve
damage. Five hundred and ninety-four new cases of leprosy are included in the
study, 300 multibacillary (MB) and 294 paucibacillary (PB) cases. Fifty-five
percent of patients had some degree of impairment at diagnosis and a further 73
(12%) developed new nerve function impairment (NFI) after starting multiple drug 
therapy (MDT). The overall incidence rate for neuropathy was 39 episodes per 100 
PYAR in the first year after diagnosis, gradually declining to 12 episodes per
100 PYAR in the sixth year. In those patients without impairment at diagnosis,
the incidence rate of neuropathy was 25 episodes per 100 PYAR for MB cases and 11
per 100 PYAR for PB cases in the first year; in 33% of MB cases whose first
episode of neuropathy occurred after diagnosis, that first episode took place
after the first year, or after the normal period of treatment with MDT.
Seventy-three patients with neuropathy developing after diagnosis are reported
more fully: 34 (47%) had only one nerve involved and of these 25 (73%) had a
single, acute episode of neuropathy. Nine (27%) had further episodes. Thirty-nine
(53%) had more than one nerve involved and of these 16 (41%) had a single, acute 
episode, while 23 (59%) had further episodes. The terms 'chronic' and 'recurrent'
neuropathy are defined and used to describe the pattern of neuropathy in those
with repeated attacks. In patients with no impairment at the start of the study, 
treatment with steroids resulted in full recovery in 88% of nerves with acute
neuropathy but only 51% of those with chronic or recurrent neuropathy. The median
time to full recovery from acute neuropathy was approximately 6 months, but in a 
few cases recovery occurred gradually over 2-3 years. Severe neuropathy was less 
likely to be followed by a complete recovery than mild or moderate neuropathy.
Forty-two percent of nerves with acute neuropathy that were not treated with
steroids also fully recovered. In the group of patients who were thought to have 
old, permanent impairments at diagnosis, full recovery of nerve function occurred
in 87/374 (23%) of the nerves involved. The overall outcome is illustrated by
examining the average EHF score for groups of patients. Patients with no new
neuropathy after diagnosis show a gradual improvement in their EHF score, while
those with any episodes of neuropathy after diagnosis show a gradual
deterioration after completion of MDT. Possible explanations for these findings
are discussed. Risk factors for neuropathy, for chronic and recurrent neuropathy,
and for a poor outcome 5 years after release from treatment, are examined.
Impairment at diagnosis was the main risk factor for a poor outcome, accompanied 
by the occurrence of chronic/recurrent neuropathy or a reversal reaction.

PMID: 11105488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Lik Sprava. 2000 Jul-Aug;(5):20-4.

[The anisotropy of the skin of the precordial area in patients with stable and
unstable stenocardia].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Lyzohub VH, Zaval's'ka TV, Ivanchenko IA, Rud'ko BR, Kolosovs'kyi IH.

Coronary patients were studied for the precordial area skin anisotropic
properties with the aid of EHF differential-diagnostic reflectometry. Disclosed
in the patients were the following points of anisotropia: E18S in the 5th
intercostal space along the medioclavicular line on the left, E18D--a symmetric
point on the right, R24S in the 3d intercostal space along the parasternal line
on the left, R24D--a symmetric point on the right. The value for anisotropia
determined by anisotropia factor in decibels will rest with the degree of
abnormal changes on the cardiac muscle, which fact has been documented by
electrocardiographic findings.

PMID: 11031441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Pharm Res. 2000 Jul;17(7):833-8.

Functional impairment of sinusoidal membrane transport of organic cations in rats
with CCl4-induced hepatic failure.

Hong SS(1), Chung SJ, Shim CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University,
Korea.

PURPOSE: The effect of CCl4-induced experimental hepatic failure (EHF) on the
sequential hepatobiliary transport of model organic cations (OCs),
triethylmethylammonium (TEMA), and tributylmethylammonium (TBuMA), was
investigated in rats.
METHODS: EHF was induced by an i.p. injection of CCl4 at a dose of 1 ml/kg 24 hr 
prior to the transport study. The cumulative in vivo biliary excretion, in vitro 
hepatic uptake by isolated hepatocytes, in vitro efflux (i.e., release) from
hepatocytes, and in vivo hepatobiliary excretion clearance were measured for
normal and CCl4-EHF rats.
RESULTS: The CCl4-EHF decreased the apparent in vivo biliary clearance (CL(b))
and the in vitro maximum uptake rate (Vmax, uptake) of TBuMA by 66 and 48%,
respectively. The CCl4-EHF had no effect on the CL(b) of TEMA. but decreased both
the Vmax, uptake (59%) and the in vitro maximum hepatic efflux rate (Vmax,
efflux) of TEMA (80%). On the contrary, the CCl4-EHF had no influence on the in
vivo hepatobiliary excretion clearance (CL(exc)) of both OCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Transport systems for the OCs on the sinusoidal membrane (uptake
and/or efflux), rather than those on the bile canalicular membrane (excretion)
appear to be prone to damage by the CC14-EHF.

PMID: 10990202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2000 May-Jun;(3):9-11.

[The use of low-frequency magnetotherapy and EHF puncture in the combined
treatment of arterial hypertension in vibration-induced disease].

[Article in Russian]

Drobyshev VA, Filippova GN, Loseva MI, Shpagina LA, Shelepova NV, Zhelezniak MS.

Combination of EHF therapy + magnetotherapy + drugs results in faster and
persistent hypotensive and analgetic effect compared to standard drug therapy,
potentiates action of vascular drugs on cerebral and peripheral circulation,
reduces dose of hypotensive drugs in patients with arterial hypertension and
vibration disease.

PMID: 10925662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Lepr Rev. 2000 Jun;71(2):154-68.

The treatment of acute nerve function impairment in leprosy: results from a
prospective cohort study in Bangladesh.

Croft RP(1), Nicholls PG, Richardus JH, Smith WC.

Author information: 
(1)Danish-Bangladesh Leprosy Mission (DBLM), Nilphamari.
richard@crofts32.freeserve.co.uk

In this paper, the outcome of 132 patients having acute nerve function impairment
(NFI) is reported at 4 and 12 months after the start of prednisolone treatment.
In all, 68% of sensory nerves and 67% of motor nerves showed improvement at 12
months, with no statistical difference in responsiveness of various nerves to
prednisolone. Duration and severity of impairment were not found significant
predictors of treatment outcome. A core of 32% of impaired nerves did not respond
to prednisolone, and 12% of impaired nerves had functional deterioration despite 
treatment. The mean eye-hand-foot (EHF) score improved from 2.02 to 1.33 in the
treatment group (median score improved from 2 to 1). Approximately one-third of
all patients requiring prednisolone treatment did not receive it, an important
reason being that some patients developed new NFI against a background of chronic
impairment, and were thus overlooked. The 'unjustly untreated' group of patients 
had a spontaneous sensory nerve function improvement rate of 62% and a motor
nerve function improvement rate of 33% at 12 months from onset of NFI. The EHF
score showed no statistically significant improvement.

PMID: 10920611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Ear Hear. 2000 Jun;21(3):206-11.

High-frequency hearing loss and wideband middle ear impedance in children with
otitis media histories.

Margolis RH(1), Saly GL, Hunter LL.

Author information: 
(1)Otitis Media Research Center, Department of Otolaryngology, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

OBJECTIVE: This study was undertaken to determine the relationship between
extended-high-frequency (EHF) hearing losses and wideband middle ear impedance in
children with chronic otitis media (OM) histories.
DESIGN: Children with OM histories were selected from a prospective study cohort 
if they had normal tympanograms, no air-bone gaps, and no otoscopic evidence of
active OM at the time of testing. OM subjects were divided into two groups, those
with Better Hearing in the EHF range and those with Worse Hearing in the EHF
range. The OM groups were compared with an age-matched, healthy Control group
that had no more than five documented episodes of OM and no more than two in any 
1 yr. All children were 9 to 16 yr of age. Subjects were tested by standard
audiometric methods in the conventional audiometric range (0.25 to 8.0 kHz) and
the EHF range (8 to 20 kHz). Middle ear impedance and reflectance were measured
with an experimental system over the frequency range 0.25 to 10.08 kHz.
RESULTS: The Worse Hearing OM group had slightly poorer hearing in the
conventional audiometric frequency range compared with the other two groups. The 
Better Hearing OM group and the Control group had nearly identical EHF hearing.
The Worse Hearing OM group had significantly poorer EHF hearing compared with the
other two groups, the difference increasing exponentially with frequency. Middle 
ear impedance differences among groups were confined to low frequencies (<2 kHz).
The Control group had significantly higher negative reactance than the two OM
groups. There were no significant group differences in impedance or reflectance
in the high frequencies (2 to 10 kHz).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study confirm those of previous reports that
children who have recovered from chronic OM have significantly poorer hearing in 
the EHF range compared with children without significant OM histories. The EHF
hearing losses that occur in children with OM histories are strongly frequency
dependent, suggesting a preferential effect on the base of the cochlea. Middle
ear impedance and reflectance differences do not account for the EHF hearing
losses observed in children with OM histories. The results support the hypothesis
that OM-related EHF hearing losses are cochlear in origin.

PMID: 10890728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 1998 Jun;13(3):193-207.

Implications of the analogy between recombinant cytokine toxicities and
manifestations of hantavirus infections.

Wimer BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)JBMW Immunotherapeutics, Albuquerque, NM 87123-4255, USA.

The etiologic hantavirus of the 1993 emergence of an acute pulmonary failure
syndrome in the area around northwestern New Mexico was quickly recognized as
related to the Hantaan virus responsible for the outbreak of Korean epidemic
hemorrhagic fever (EHF) among UN troops in 1951. Discovery of the new disease
which was named the hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) and its causative agent
the Sine Nombre virus (SNV) inspired detailed comparisons between the two
disorders. Major damage to the epithelial cells of the capillaries and arterioles
throughout the body leading to extensive capillary leak and subsequent
hypotension and shock was the common denominator. The lung capillaries and
arterioles were the focus of attack that could lead to rapid pulmonary failure in
HPS and the corresponding renal and retroperitoneal vessels that caused a more
protracted illness in EHF, but both displayed remarkably similar peripheral blood
abnormalities including abnormal mononuclear cells, immature neutrophilia,
thrombocytopenia, and hemoconcentration characteristic enough to make blood smear
examination a useful tool in early diagnosis. There are evidences that a heavy
virus presence in the involved endothelial cells is accompanied by various
mononuclear cells capable of generating potent immune response in these areas.
Relevant toxic effects of systemically-administered high-dose interleukin-2 for
resistant cancers include fever, chills, diarrhea, renal dysfunction, capillary
leak syndrome accompanied by hypotension requiring aggressive pressor support,
and occasional pleural effusions with diffuse pulmonary infiltrates and hypoxia
severe enough to require ventilatory assistance. Peripheral blood mononuclear
cells cultured in vitro with IL-2 secrete secondary cytokines such as IL-1,
TNF-alpha, and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). TNF-alpha, implicated in the
pathophysiology of septic shock, is capable of inducing adult respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS) in experimental animals and humans. The strong
similarity of these effects to the manifestations noted in the hantavirus
diseases justifies the conviction that these and other cytokines involved in
potent immune responses would constitute the pathogenic toxic substances
predicted by perceptive early investigators of EHF. This concept is favored by
clear indications that in both diseases active virus infection disappears the
first few days and the ages of involvement correlate with periods of
immunocompetence. The paradox of systemic injections of IL-2 that risk
hantavirus-type toxicities for treating renal cell carcinoma and melanoma might
be avoided by giving potentially more efficacious plant mitogens like PHA as
previously reported. The expanded disclosure of a collaborator's method
suggesting superior potential for cancer cure involves a unique application of
pokeweed mitogen that delivers various cellular and cytokine responses directly
to the tumor.

PMID: 10850356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Lik Sprava. 1999 Jul;(5):16-21.

[The outlook for the use of EHF-range electromagnetic radiation in the treatment 
of background and precancerous diseases of the cervix uteri].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Karpan' VM.

PMID: 10822666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Lik Sprava. 1999 Oct-Dec;(7-8):81-4.

[The use of differential reflectometry in the EHF range as a new method in the
diagnosis of ischemic heart disease].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Lyzohub VH, Zaval's'ka TV, Ivanchenko IA.

Described in the article is a new method of EHF differential reflectometry for
ischemic heart disease (IHD), which relies on measurement of the anisotropy
factor (AF) in sites of precardiac integumentum of patients in the millimeter
range. A total of 30 patients were examined divided into six groups according to 
different functional classes. It is for the first time that anisotropy zones have
been identified in IHD patients. The reflexogenic zone in the III intercostal
space along the parasternal line was found to be of the most informative value.
It is in this very zone that the largest AFmax values are achieved for myocardial
infarction (MI) group exceeding the corresponding values for the rest of
stenocardia groups by 20 to 100%. It follows from the foregoing that our method
of MM-reflectometry permits diagnosing IHD together with differentiating the
state of those patients presenting with angina pectoris and MI.

PMID: 10672698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 28;275(4):2986-98.

ESE-3, a novel member of an epithelium-specific ets transcription factor
subfamily, demonstrates different target gene specificity from ESE-1.

Kas K(1), Finger E, Grall F, Gu X, Akbarali Y, Boltax J, Weiss A, Oettgen P,
Kapeller R, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)New England Baptist Bone and Joint Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Most cancers originate as a result of aberrant gene expression in mainly
glandular epithelial tissues leading to defects in epithelial cell
differentiation. The latter is governed by distinct sets of transcriptional
regulators. Here we report the characterization of epithelium-specific Ets
factor, family member 3 (ESE-3), a novel member of the ESE subfamily of Ets
transcription factors. ESE-3 shows highest homology to two other epithelium
restricted Ets factors, ESE-1 and ESE-2. ESE-3, like ESE-1 and ESE-2, is
exclusively expressed in a subset of epithelial cells with highest expression in 
glandular epithelium such as prostate, pancreas, salivary gland, and trachea. A
potential role in branching morphogenesis is suggested, since ESE-3
transactivates the c-MET promoter via three high affinity binding sites.
Additionally, ESE-3 binding to DNA sequences in the promoters of several
glandular epithelium-specific genes suggests a role for ESE-3 in later stages of 
glandular epithelium differentiation. Although ESE-3 and ESE-1 bind with similar 
affinity to various Ets binding sites, ESE-3 and ESE-1 differ significantly in
their ability to transactivate the promoters containing these sites. Our results 
support the notion that ESE-1, ESE-2, and ESE-3 represent a unique
epithelium-specific subfamily of Ets factors that have critical but distinct
functions in epithelial cell differentiation and proliferation.

PMID: 10644770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 1999 Nov-Dec;(6):14-6.

[The effect of EHF puncture on the immune status of patients with gastric peptic 
ulcer].

[Article in Russian]

Razumov AN, Voznesenskaia OA.

Microwave puncture (MP) effects were compared to effects of 4-component basic
medication in 63 patients with gastric ulcer. The study was made of nonspecific
defense factors, serum levels of IgA, IgM, IgG, gastric juice levels of IgA, pool
structure of circulating lymphocytes (DR+, CD3+, CD22+, CD4+, CD8+), spontaneous 
and LPS-stimulated Ig-synthetic function of B-lymphocytes. Mean time of the ulcer
healing in MP usage made up 14.6 +/- 1.6 days, in standard therapy--27.2 +/- 3.1 
days (P < 0.001). Immunomodulating effect shown by MP consisted in activation of 
nonspecific defense factors and activation of immunoglobulin-synthetizing
function of B-lymphocytes.

PMID: 10641541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Dokl Akad Nauk. 1999 Nov;369(3):404-7.

[Dependence of EHF EMF effects on the value of the static magnetic field].

[Article in Russian]

Gapeev AB, Iakushina VS, Chemeris NK, Fesenko EE.

PMID: 10613248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. FEBS Lett. 1999 Dec 10;463(1-2):77-82.

A profile of differentially expressed genes in primary colorectal cancer using
suppression subtractive hybridization.

Hufton SE(1), Moerkerk PT, Brandwijk R, de Bruïne AP, Arends JW, Hoogenboom HR.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute Growth and Development, Department of Pathology, University
Hospital Maastricht, P.O. Box 5800, 6202 AZ, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

As a step towards understanding the complex differences between normal cells and 
cancer cells, we have used suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH) to
generate a profile of genes overexpressed in primary colorectal cancer (CRC).
From a 35¿ omitted¿000 clone SSH-cDNA repertoire, we have screened 400 random
clones by reverse Northern blotting, of which 45 clones were scored as
overexpressed in tumor compared to matched normal mucosa. Sequencing showed 37
different genes and of these, 16 genes corresponded to known genes in the public 
databases. Twelve genes, including Smad5 and Fls353, have previously been shown
to be overexpressed in CRC. A series of known genes which have not previously
been reported to be overexpressed in cancer were also recovered: Hsc70, PBEF,
ribophorin II and Ese-3B. The remaining 21 genes have as yet no functional
annotation. These results show that SSH in conjunction with high throughput
screening provides a very efficient means to produce a broad profile of genes
differentially expressed in cancer. Some of the genes identified may provide
novel points of therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 10601642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 1999 Sep-Oct;(5):10-1.

[A comparative evaluation of the efficacy of the monotherapy of peptic ulcer
using EHF-puncture and basic drug therapy].

[Article in Russian]

Razumov AN, Voznesenskaia OA.

20 patients with gastric ulcer and 82 ones with duodenal ulcer received basic
chemotherapy. 23 patients with gastric ulcer and 97 patients with duodenal ulcer 
were treated with EHF-puncture. Pain and dyspeptic syndromes in EHF-puncture
patients were relieved 2.5-3 times quicker than in chemotherapy. Time of scarring
of ulcer defect reduced, on the average, 1.5-fold. Fibrogastroduodenoscopy
detected mucosal erosions in 55% of patients with gastric and 26% of duodenal
ulcer patients given ampicillin. In patients treated with EHF-puncture erosions
were found in 2.2% of patients.

PMID: 10598520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Morfologiia. 1999;115(1):16-8.

[Adrenergic nerve plexuses of heart and adrenal and myocardial catecholamines of 
spontaneously hypertensive rats under the influence of electromagnetic
irradiation in the millimeter range].

[Article in Russian]

Belousova TE(1), Kargina-Terent'eva RA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuromorphology, Russian Cardiological Scientific Production
complex, Russian Ministry of Public Health, Moscow.

Condition of adrenergic cardiac and adrenal nervous plexuses of Kyoto-Wistar Rats
(WKY) and spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) was examined by quantitative
neurohistochemical methods before and after extremely high frequency field (EHF
field) influence of "Bayur" microwave therapy apparatus in mode 1 (42,194 MHz
frequency, 7.1 mm wavelength) and in mode 3 (53,534 MHz frequency, 5.6 mm
wavelength). Reduction of myocardial nervous plexus density and catecholamine
luminescence intensity were detected in SHR, as well as decrease of adrenal
glands relative weight and catecholamine luminescence intensity in adrenal
medulla of SHR, that is indicative of suppression of sympatho-adrenal system of
hypertensive animals by EHF field influence in medical operating modes.

PMID: 10561846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Oct 14;264(1):119-26.

Human chromosomal localization, tissue/tumor expression, and regulatory function 
of the ets family gene EHF.

Kleinbaum LA(1), Duggan C, Ferreira E, Coffey GP, Butticè G, Burton FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota,
55455-0217, USA.

Ets factors are members of an ancient multigene family of transcription factors
including oncoproteins and possibly tumor suppressors. We previously
characterized a novel divergent ets gene, Ehf (ets homologous factor) in mice.
Here we report the cDNA sequence, chromosomal location, and tissue/tumor
expression patterns of the human EHF gene and the regulatory activity of the EHF 
protein. EHF maps to 11p12, which is deleted in many prostate, breast, and lung
carcinomas and is a hot spot for inherited deletion- or amplification-associated 
developmental defects. EHF is differentially expressed in normal tissues and
carcinomas and between tumor stages and is most highly expressed in the organs
known to form carcinomas upon 11p12 deletion. EHF protein represses the ETS-2
induced activity of both stromelysin-1 and collagenase-1 promoters. These data
suggest that EHF may contribute to human development and carcinogenesis and is a 
candidate for the 11p12 tumor suppressor gene.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10527851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 1999 Jul-Aug;(4):45-6.

[The structure of erythrocyte membranes in patients with chronic obstructive
bronchitis and its alteration during EHF therapy].

[Article in Russian]

Vishnevskii AA, Iakovlev VM, Tupeev IR, Zakharov GA, Gorokhova GI.

PMID: 10513476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Lik Sprava. 1999 Apr-May;(3):82-5.

[The correction of the immunohormonal disorders in patients with hyperplastic
processes in the endometrium].

[Article in Russian]

Bespoiasnaia VV.

Effects were studied of extremely high-frequency electromagnetic radiation (EHF
ER) on indices for the immune and endocrine systems in 48 patients with
hyperplastic processes in the endometrium. It is ascertain that along with the
established normalization of parameters characterizing the above systems there
occurs a return of correlations back to normal, which fact permits using EHF ER
as an immunocorrective factor.

PMID: 10474944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Lepr Rev. 1999 Jun;70(2):180-8.

Grading impairment in leprosy.

van Brakel WH(1), Reed NK, Reed DS.

Author information: 
(1)INF Leprosy Project, Pokhara, Nepal. wvbrakel@iname.com

Comment in
    Lepr Rev. 2000 Mar;71(1):85-8.
    Lepr Rev. 2001 Jun;72(2):221-3.

The aim of the paper is to discuss the concept of 'severity grading' in relation 
to impairment in leprosy, and to describe the use of an impairment sum score, the
Eyes, Hands, Feet (EHF) score, as an indicator of the severity and the evolution 
of impairment over time. The use of an impairment sum score, the EHF score, is
illustrated using data on impairment at diagnosis and after a 2-year interval
from MB patients released from MDT in the Western Region of Nepal. The WHO 1988
'disability' grading scale (0-2, for both eyes, hands and feet--six sites) was
used as a measure of impairment. For the analysis, the WHO grades for the six
sites were summed to form an EHF score (minimum 0, maximum 12). The sensitivity
to change over time of the EHF score was compared with that of the 'method of
maximum grades'. Using the 'method of maximum grades', 509/706 patients (72%)
appeared not to have changed in impairment status, compared with only 399 (56.5%)
with the EHF score. Improvement or deterioration of impairment status was missed 
in 113 patients (16%). In 216/706 patients (30.6%), the changes detected with the
EHF score were bigger than those revealed by the method of maximum grades. The
six components of the WHO impairment grading may be added up to form a EHF sum
score of impairment. This score can be used to monitor changes in impairment
status in individuals or in groups. It should be recorded and reported at least
at diagnosis and release from treatment. Reporting could be done as the
'proportion of patients with improved EHF score', 'stable EHF score' and 'EHF
score worse', and 'proportion of patients without impairment', 'proportion with
WHO grade 1' and 'proportion with WHO grade 2'. It is recommended that the
concepts and terminology of the WHO International Classification of Impairments, 
Activities and Participation (ICIDH-2) be adopted in the field of leprosy,
particularly for the areas of prevention of impairment and disability and
rehabilitation. The 'WHO disability grade' should be renamed 'WHO impairment
grade'.

PMID: 10464436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Voen Med Zh. 1999 May;320(5):58-9.

[A trial of the use of an EHF therapy apparatus in preventing immunodeficiency
states in acute respiratory diseases].

[Article in Russian]

Efimov EI, Razgulin SA, Balchutov VA, Kornaukhov AV.

PMID: 10401252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Biol Phys. 1999 Jun;25(2-3):193-209. doi: 10.1023/A:1005165926739.

Model analysis of nonlinear modification of neutrophil calcium homeostasis under 
the influence of modulated electromagnetic radiation of extremely high
frequencies.

Gapeyev AB(1), Chemeris NK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biophysics of Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow
region, 142292 Russian Federation.

The problem of resonance effects of electromagnetic radiation (EMR) on biological
objects remained unsolved till now. Previously we demonstrated that low-intensity
amplitude-modulated EMR of extremely high frequencies (EHF) modified the activity
of mouse neutrophils in the synergistic reaction of calcium ionophore A23187 and 
phorbol ester PMA. The EHF EMR influence on the neutrophils was significant at
the carrier frequencies of radiation within a narrow range of 41.8-42.05 GHz and 
at the modulation frequency of 1 Hz. The purpose of the work was the analysis of 
frequency-dependent modification of intracellular free calcium concentration
([Ca(2+)](i)) by modulated EHF EMR on the basis of a special model for
[Ca(2+)](i) oscillations in the neutrophils. The calcium channels of plasma
membrane were chosen as the action target of external modulation in the model.
The computer simulation demonstrated the rise in [Ca(2+)](i) at the influence of 
the external field with a threshold dependence on the modulation amplitude. The
effect depended heavily on a sequence of delivery of the chemical and
electromagnetic stimuli. The narrow-band rise in [Ca(2+)](i) had a
phase-frequency dependence. With the modulation amplitudes exceeding the
threshold value, the rise in [Ca(2+)](i) of more than 50% of the initial level
was observed at the frequency of about 1 Hz and in the phase range of 0.3-2.5
radians. The results of the model analysis are in good correspondence with the
experimental data obtained before, namely, with the resonance modification of the
neutrophil activity at the modulation frequency of 1 Hz and with the presence of 
the effect only at high concentrations of calcium ionophore.

PMCID: PMC3455965
PMID: 23345697  [PubMed]


341. Ann Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999 Apr;5(2):94-100.

Extended use of hemofiltration and high perfusion flow rate in cardiopulmonary
bypass improves perioperative fluid balance in neonates and infants.

Sakurai H(1), Maeda M, Sai N, Miyahara K, Nakayama M, Hasegawa H, Hayakawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Shakaihoken Chukyo Hospital, 1-1-10
Sanjo, Minami-ku, Nagoya 457-8510.

We evaluated the efficacy of the extended use of hemofiltration (EHF) and high
perfusion flow rate in cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) in pediatric open-heart
surgery retrospectively. In the EHF method, hemofiltration was used for hemic
prime before initiation of the bypass and ultrafiltration was used throughout the
bypass. Thirty-four children, with transposition of great arteries who were
undergoing arterial switch operation with the use of hemic prime, were subjects
of this study. They were divided into 2 groups, a control group (n = 16) and a
group (n = 18) that underwent EHF. There were no significant differences between 
groups in demographics, but the maximum perfusion index and lowest rectal
temperature were higher in the EHF group. This study compared urination during
bypass, arterial oxygen pressure at the end of bypass and operation, the duration
of the ventilation, and postoperative soft tissue index (STI) expressing the
severity of edema. In the EHF group, urination during bypass was significantly
higher, and there was a tendency to higher arterial oxygen pressure. The patients
in the EHF group were weaned from the ventilator significantly earlier.
Postoperative STI was significantly higher, so edema was more severe in the
control group. We consider that the use of EHF and a high perfusion flow rate in 
CPB are an ideal method to improve the perioperative fluid balance in pediatric
open-heart surgery. We suspect that these good clinical effects result from
maintaining the inflammatory mediators at a low level throughout the bypass,
reducing the following release of the mediators and attenuating the interaction
of the mediators.

PMID: 10332112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 1998 Aug;19(4):218-20.

[Epidemiologic and experimental studies on epidemic haemorrhagic fever virus in
pigs].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang Z(1), Liu Y, Peng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Military Medicine, Jinan Command.

In order to study the roles of pigs with epidemic haemorrhagic fever virus,
epidemiologic and experimental studies were carried out in pigs. Aetiological,
serological and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques were performed.
Results showed that not only pigs could be infected with EHFV under natural or
experimental conditions but susceptible to EHFV as well. Virus may disseminate to
many organs of the animals through blood and cause transient pathologic changes. 
EHFV duplicates inside the animal bodies and be excreted to cause pollution of
environment. It is possible that pigs serve as sources of EHF infection. Our
research data also showed for the first time that EHEV were vertically
transmitted through the placenta of pigs. There was no evidence showing that
people raising pigs were symptomatically sick due to EHF infection.

PMID: 10322675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Infect Dis. 1999 Feb;179 Suppl 1:S274-80.

Long-term disease surveillance in Bandundu region, Democratic Republic of the
Congo: a model for early detection and prevention of Ebola hemorrhagic fever.

Lloyd ES(1), Zaki SR, Rollin PE, Tshioko K, Bwaka MA, Ksiazek TG, Calain P, Shieh
WJ, Kondé MK, Verchueren E, Perry HN, Manguindula L, Kabwau J, Ndambi R, Peters
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA.
pyr3@cdc.gov

After the large-scale outbreak of Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) in Bandundu
region, Democratic Republic of the Congo, a program was developed to help detect 
and prevent future outbreaks of EHF in the region. The long-term surveillance and
prevention strategy is based on early recognition by physicians, immediate
initiation of enhanced barrier-nursing practices, and the use of an
immunohistochemical diagnostic test performed on formalin-fixed skin specimens of
patients who die of suspected viral hemorrhagic fever. The program was
implemented in September 1995 during a 4-day workshop with 28 local physicians
representing 17 of 22 health zones in the region. Specimen collection kits were
distributed to clinics in participating health zones, and a follow-up evaluation 
was conducted after 6 months. The use of a formalin-fixed skin specimen for
laboratory confirmation of EHF can provide an appropriate method for EHF
surveillance when linked with physician training, use of viral hemorrhagic fever 
isolation precautions, and follow-up investigation.

PMID: 9988195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Infect Dis. 1999 Feb;179 Suppl 1:S268-73.

Organization of patient care during the Ebola hemorrhagic fever epidemic in
Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1995.

Guimard Y(1), Bwaka MA, Colebunders R, Calain P, Massamba M, De Roo A, Mupapa KD,
Kibadi K, Kuvula KJ, Ndaberey DE, Katwiki KR, Mapanda BB, Nkuku OB, Fleerackers
Y, Van den Enden E, Kipasa MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium.

In contrast with procedures in previous Ebola outbreaks, patient care during the 
1995 outbreak in Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo, was centralized for a 
large number of patients. On 4 May, before the diagnosis of Ebola hemorrhagic
fever (EHF) was confirmed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, an
isolation ward was created at Kikwit General Hospital. On 11 May, an
international scientific and technical committee established as a priority the
improvement of hygienic conditions in the hospital and the protection of health
care workers and family members; to this end, protective equipment was
distributed and barrier-nursing techniques were implemented. For patients living 
far from Kikwit, home care was organized. Initially, hospitalized patients were
given only oral treatments; however, toward the end of the epidemic, infusions
and better nutritional support were given, and 8 patients received blood from
convalescent EHF patients. Only 1 of the transfusion patients died (12.5%). It is
expected that with improved medical care, the case fatality rate of EHF could be 
reduced.

PMID: 9988194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Infect Dis. 1999 Feb;179 Suppl 1:S263-7.

Interventions to control virus transmission during an outbreak of Ebola
hemorrhagic fever: experience from Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
1995.

Kerstiëns B(1), Matthys F.

Author information: 
(1)Médecins sans Frontières, Brussels, Belgium. bkerstie@jhsph.edu

On 6 May 1995, the Médecins sans Frontières (MSF) coordinator in Kinshasa,
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), received a request for assistance for
what was believed to be a concurrent outbreak of bacillary dysentery and viral
hemorrhagic fever (suspected Ebola hemorrhagic fever [EHF]) in the town of
Kikwit, DRC. On 11 May, the MSF intervention team assessed Kikwit General
Hospital. This initial assessment revealed a nonfunctional isolation ward for
suspected EHF cases; a lack of water and electricity; no waste disposal system;
and no protective gear for medical staff. The priorities set by MSF were to
establish a functional isolation ward to deal with EHF and to distribute
protective supplies to individuals who were involved with patient care. Before
the intervention, 67 health workers contracted EHF; after the initiation of
control measures, just 3 cases were reported among health staff and none among
Red Cross volunteers involved in body burial.

PMID: 9988193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Infect Dis. 1999 Feb;179 Suppl 1:S188-91.

Markedly elevated levels of interferon (IFN)-gamma, IFN-alpha, interleukin
(IL)-2, IL-10, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha associated with fatal Ebola virus 
infection.

Villinger F(1), Rollin PE, Brar SS, Chikkala NF, Winter J, Sundstrom JB, Zaki SR,
Swanepoel R, Ansari AA, Peters CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine, Emory
University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA. fvillin@emory.edu

The role of immune mechanisms in the pathogenesis of Ebola hemorrhagic fever
(EHF) remains to be elucidated. In this report, the serum cytokine levels of
patients who died of EHF were compared with those of patients who recovered and
those of control patients. A marked elevation of interferon (IFN)-gamma levels
(>100 pg/mL) was observed in sequential serum samples from all fatal EHF cases
compared with patients who recovered or controls. Markedly elevated serum levels 
of interleukin (IL)-2, IL-10, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, and IFN-alpha
were also noted in fatal EHF cases; however, they had a greater degree of
variability. No differences were noted in serum levels of IL-4 and IL-6. mRNA
quantitation from blood clots of the same patients showed relatively elevated
levels of TNF-alpha and IFN-alpha in samples from EHF patients. Taken together,
these results suggest that a high degree of immune activation accompanies and
potentially contributes to a fatal outcome in EHF patients.

PMID: 9988183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Infect Dis. 1999 Feb;179 Suppl 1:S177-87.

Clinical virology of Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF): virus, virus antigen, and IgG
and IgM antibody findings among EHF patients in Kikwit, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, 1995.

Ksiazek TG(1), Rollin PE, Williams AJ, Bressler DS, Martin ML, Swanepoel R, Burt 
FJ, Leman PA, Khan AS, Rowe AK, Mukunu R, Sanchez A, Peters CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Special Pathogens Branch, Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, National
Center for Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA.

Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) patients treated at Kikwit General Hospital during 
the 1995 outbreak were tested for viral antigen, IgG and IgM antibody, and
infectious virus. Viral antigen could be detected in virtually all patients
during the acute phase of illness, while antibody was not always detectable
before death. Virus was also isolated from patients during the course of their
febrile illness, but attempts to quantify virus in Vero E6 cells by standard
plaque assay were often unsuccessful. IgG and IgM antibody appeared at
approximately the same time after disease onset (8-10 days), but IgM persisted
for a much shorter period among the surviving convalescent patients. IgG antibody
was detectable in surviving patients through about 2 years after onset, the
latest time that samples were obtained. Detection of Ebola virus antigens or
virus isolation appears to be the most reliable means of diagnosis for patients
with suspected acute EHF, since patients with this often-fatal disease (80%
mortality) may not develop detectable antibodies before death.

PMID: 9988182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Infect Dis. 1999 Feb;179 Suppl 1:S98-101.

Serologic survey among hospital and health center workers during the Ebola
hemorrhagic fever outbreak in Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1995.

Tomori O(1), Bertolli J, Rollin PE, Fleerackers Y, Guimard Y, De Roo A, Feldmann 
H, Burt F, Swanepoel R, Killian S, Khan AS, Tshioko K, Bwaka M, Ndambe R, Peters 
CJ, Ksiazek TG.

Author information: 
(1)World Health Organization, Harare, Zimbabwe.

From May to July 1995, a serologic and interview survey was conducted to describe
Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) among personnel working in 5 hospitals and 26
health care centers in and around Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Job-specific attack rates estimated for Kikwit General Hospital, the epicenter of
the EHF epidemic, were 31% for physicians, 11% for technicians/room attendants,
10% for nurses, and 4% for other workers. Among 402 workers who did not meet the 
EHF case definition, 12 had borderline positive antibody test results; subsequent
specimens from 4 of these tested negative. Although an old infection with
persistent Ebola antibody production or a recent atypical or asymptomatic
infection cannot be ruled out, if they occur at all, they appear to be rare. This
survey demonstrated that opportunities for transmission of Ebola virus to
personnel in health facilities existed in Kikwit because blood and body fluid
precautions were not being universally followed.

PMID: 9988171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Infect Dis. 1999 Feb;179 Suppl 1:S92-7.

Ebola hemorrhagic fever, Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1995: risk
factors for patients without a reported exposure.

Roels TH(1), Bloom AS, Buffington J, Muhungu GL, Mac Kenzie WR, Khan AS, Ndambi
R, Noah DL, Rolka HR, Peters CJ, Ksiazek TG.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemic Intelligence Service, Division of Applied Public Health Training,
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. tbr6@cdc.gov

In 1995, 316 people became ill with Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) in Kikwit,
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The exposure source was not reported for 55
patients (17%) at the start of this investigation, and it remained unknown for 12
patients after extensive epidemiologic evaluation. Both admission to a hospital
and visiting a person with fever and bleeding were risk factors associated with
infection. Nineteen patients appeared to have been exposed while visiting someone
with suspected EHF, although they did not provide care. Fourteen of the 19
reported touching the patient with suspected EHF; 5 reported that they had no
physical contact. Although close contact while caring for an infected person was 
probably the major route of transmission in this and previous EHF outbreaks, the 
virus may have been transmitted by touch, droplet, airborne particle, or fomite; 
thus, expansion of the use of barrier techniques to include casual contacts might
prevent or mitigate future epidemics.

PMID: 9988170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Infect Dis. 1999 Feb;179 Suppl 1:S87-91.

Transmission of Ebola hemorrhagic fever: a study of risk factors in family
members, Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1995. Commission de Lutte
contre les Epidémies à Kikwit.

Dowell SF(1), Mukunu R, Ksiazek TG, Khan AS, Rollin PE, Peters CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA. SFD2@cdc.gov

The surviving members of 27 households in which someone had been infected with
Ebola virus were interviewed in order to define the modes of transmission of
Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF). Of 173 household contacts of the primary cases, 28
(16%) developed EHF. All secondary cases had direct physical contact with the ill
person (rate ratio [RR], undefined; P < .001), and among those with direct
contact, exposure to body fluids conferred additional risk (RR, 3.6; 95%
confidence interval [CI], 1.9-6.8). After adjusting for direct contact and
exposure to body fluids, adult family members, those who touched the cadaver, and
those who were exposed during the late hospital phase were at additional risk.
None of the 78 household members who had no physical contact with the case during
the clinical illness were infected (upper 95% CI, 4%). EHF is transmitted
principally by direct physical contact with an ill person or their body fluids
during the later stages of illness.

PMID: 9988169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Infect Dis. 1999 Feb;179 Suppl 1:S76-86.

The reemergence of Ebola hemorrhagic fever, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
1995. Commission de Lutte contre les Epidémies à Kikwit.

Khan AS(1), Tshioko FK, Heymann DL, Le Guenno B, Nabeth P, Kerstiëns B,
Fleerackers Y, Kilmarx PH, Rodier GR, Nkuku O, Rollin PE, Sanchez A, Zaki SR,
Swanepoel R, Tomori O, Nichol ST, Peters CJ, Muyembe-Tamfum JJ, Ksiazek TG.

Author information: 
(1)Special Pathogens Branch and Infectious Disease Pathology Activity, Division
of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, National Center for Infectious Diseases, and
Epidemiology Program Office, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,

In May 1995, an international team characterized and contained an outbreak of
Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) in Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo. Active
surveillance was instituted using several methods, including house-to-house
search, review of hospital and dispensary logs, interview of health care
personnel, retrospective contact tracing, and direct follow-up of suspect cases. 
In the field, a clinical case was defined as fever and hemorrhagic signs, fever
plus contact with a case-patient, or fever plus at least 3 of 10 symptoms. A
total of 315 cases of EHF, with an 81% case fatality, were identified, excluding 
10 clinical cases with negative laboratory results. The earliest documented
case-patient had onset on 6 January, and the last case-patient died on 16 July.
Eighty cases (25%) occurred among health care workers. Two individuals may have
been the source of infection for >50 cases. The outbreak was terminated by the
initiation of barrier-nursing techniques, health education efforts, and rapid
identification of cases.

PMID: 9988168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Infect Dis. 1999 Feb;179 Suppl 1:S36-47.

A novel immunohistochemical assay for the detection of Ebola virus in skin:
implications for diagnosis, spread, and surveillance of Ebola hemorrhagic fever. 
Commission de Lutte contre les Epidémies à Kikwit.

Zaki SR(1), Shieh WJ, Greer PW, Goldsmith CS, Ferebee T, Katshitshi J, Tshioko
FK, Bwaka MA, Swanepoel R, Calain P, Khan AS, Lloyd E, Rollin PE, Ksiazek TG,
Peters CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, National Center for Infectious
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30333,
USA. sxzl@cdc.gov

Laboratory diagnosis of Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) is currently performed by
virus isolation and serology and can be done only in a few high-containment
laboratories worldwide. In 1995, during the EHF outbreak in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, the possibility of using immunohistochemistry (IHC) testing of
formalin-fixed postmortem skin specimens was investigated as an alternative
diagnostic method for EHF. Fourteen of 19 cases of suspected EHF met the
surveillance definition for EHF and were positive by IHC. IHC, serologic, and
virus isolation results were concordant for all EHF and non-EHF cases. IHC and
electron microscopic examination showed that endothelial cells, mononuclear
phagocytes, and hepatocytes are main targets of infection, and IHC showed an
association of cellular damage with viral infection. The finding of abundant
viral antigens and particles in the skin of EHF patients suggests an
epidemiologic role for contact transmission. IHC testing of formalin-fixed skin
specimens is a safe, sensitive, and specific method for laboratory diagnosis of
EHF and should be useful for EHF surveillance and prevention.

PMID: 9988163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Infect Dis. 1999 Feb;179 Suppl 1:S28-35.

Clinical, virologic, and immunologic follow-up of convalescent Ebola hemorrhagic 
fever patients and their household contacts, Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Commission de Lutte contre les Epidémies à Kikwit.

Rowe AK(1), Bertolli J, Khan AS, Mukunu R, Muyembe-Tamfum JJ, Bressler D,
Williams AJ, Peters CJ, Rodriguez L, Feldmann H, Nichol ST, Rollin PE, Ksiazek
TG.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology Program Office and Special Pathogens Branch, Division of Viral
and Rickettsial Diseases, National Center for Infectious Diseases, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30341, USA.

A cohort of convalescent Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) patients and their
household contacts (HHCs) were studied prospectively to determine if convalescent
body fluids contain Ebola virus and if secondary transmission occurs during
convalescence. Twenty-nine EHF convalescents and 152 HHCs were monitored for up
to 21 months. Blood specimens were obtained and symptom information was collected
from convalescents and their HHCs; other body fluid specimens were also obtained 
from convalescents. Arthralgias and myalgia were reported significantly more
often by convalescents than HHCs. Evidence of Ebola virus was detected by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction in semen specimens up to 91 days after
disease onset; however, these and all other non-blood body fluids tested negative
by virus isolation. Among 81 initially antibody negative HHCs, none became
antibody positive. Blood specimens of 5 HHCs not identified as EHF patients were 
initially antibody positive. No direct evidence of convalescent-to-HHC
transmission of EHF was found, although the semen of convalescents may be
infectious. The existence of initially antibody-positive HHCs suggests that mild 
cases of Ebola virus infection occurred and that the full extent of the EHF
epidemic was probably underestimated.

PMID: 9988162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Infect Dis. 1999 Feb;179 Suppl 1:S15-7.

Isolated case of Ebola hemorrhagic fever with mucormycosis complications,
Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Kalongi Y(1), Mwanza K, Tshisuaka M, Lusiama N, Ntando E, Kanzake L, Shieh WJ,
Zaki SR, Lloyd ES, Ksiazek TG, Rollin PE.

Author information: 
(1)Médecine Interne, Clinique Bondeko, Kinshasa-Limete, Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

A patient with undiagnosed Ebola (EBO) hemorrhagic fever (EHF) was transferred
from Kikwit to a private clinic in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo. A 
diagnosis of EHF was suspected on clinical grounds and was confirmed by detection
of EBO virus-specific IgM and IgG in serum of the patient. During the course of
the disease, although she had no known predisposing factors, the patient
developed a periorbital mucormycosis abscess on eyelid tissue that was biopsied
during surgical drainage; the abscess was histologically confirmed. Presence of
EBO antigen was also detected by specific immunohistochemistry on the biopsied
tissue. The patient survived the EBO infection but had severe sequelae associated
with the mucormycosis. Standard barrier-nursing precautions were taken upon
admission and upgraded when EHF was suspected; there was no secondary
transmission of the disease.

PMID: 9988159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Infect Dis. 1999 Feb;179 Suppl 1:S8-10.

Epidemiologic and clinical aspects of the Ebola virus epidemic in Mosango,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1995.

Ndambi R(1), Akamituna P, Bonnet MJ, Tukadila AM, Muyembe-Tamfum JJ, Colebunders 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Mosango General Hospital, Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Twenty-three Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) cases (15 males, 8 females) were
identified in Mosango, Democratic Republic of the Congo; 18 (78%) of them died.
Eight of the patients came from Kikwit General Hospital and were hospitalized at 
Mosango General Hospital, 10 acquired their infection at the Mosango hospital and
were treated there, and 5 acquired their infection through contact with a
hospitalized patient but were never hospitalized themselves. For most of the EHF 
cases, it was clear that they had been in contact with blood or body fluids of
another EHF patient. The Ebola outbreak in Mosango remained relatively small,
probably because hygienic conditions in this hospital were relatively good at the
time of the outbreak and because as soon as the epidemic was recognized, barrier 
nursing techniques were used.

PMID: 9988156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Lik Sprava. 1998 Jul-Aug;(5):139-42.

[The correction of immunoendocrine disorders in patients with hyperplastic
processes in the endometrium].

[Article in Russian]

Bespoiasnaia VV.

Effects were studied of extremely high-frequency electromagnetic radiation (EHF
EMR) on indices for the immune and endocrine systems in a series of 48 patients
presenting with hyperplastic processes in endometrium. EHF EMR-related
normalization of values for the above systems was found out to take place
together with a return of correlations back to normal, which fact makes it
possible to use this modality as an immunocorrective factor.

PMID: 9793335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 May 8;246(1):176-81.

Molecular cloning and expression of Ehf, a new member of the ets transcription
factor/oncoprotein gene family.

Bochert MA(1), Kleinbaum LA, Sun LY, Burton FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455-0347,
USA.

The ets family is a large multigene family of transcription factors that share a 
conserved DNA-binding "ETS" domain and include several oncoproteins that induce
tumorigenesis when overexpressed. Here we report the cDNA cloning from mouse
pituitary somatotroph tumors, sequence characterization and tissue-specific
expression pattern in mice of a novel ets family gene, "Ehf" ("ets homologous
factor"). The putative 300 amino acid Ehf protein is a highly divergent ets
family member, but is most related to the recently identified oncoprotein ESX
(36% overall and 84% ETS domain amino acid identity). Thus, Ehf and ESX comprise 
a new ets subfamily. Ehf is a single-copy gene, but produces four distinct mRNA
transcripts. Ehf transcripts are abundant in mouse kidney and lung, less so in
muscle and liver, and not detected in brain, spleen or testes. Because of its
presence in somatotroph tumors and its relationship to ESX, Ehf may represent a
new oncoprotein.

PMID: 9600089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1998 Apr;101(4 Pt 1):514-20.

Cord blood mononuclear cells and milk-specific T-cell clones are tools to
evaluate the residual immunogenicity of hydrolyzed milk formulas.

Szépfalusi Z(1), Nentwich I, Jost E, Gerstmayr M, Ebner C, Frischer T, Urbanek R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Hydrolyzed milk formulas (HFs) are given to infants allergic to cow's
milk proteins and, for preventive reasons, to atopy-prone newborns for which
breast feeding is not feasible. The ultimate properties of HFs are not only a
reduced allergenicity but also decreased immunogenic capacity combined with good 
taste and caloric value. No information is available concerning the capacity of
HFs to induce immune responses.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine the residual immunogenic capacity of partially 
(pHF) and extensively hydrolyzed milk formula (eHF), and we studied the cellular 
reactivity of cord blood-derived (n = 71) mononuclear cells induced by 10
different HFs.
METHODS: To test the effect of HF on T-helper cells, beta-casein-specific T-cell 
clones (TCCs, n = 21) from individuals allergic to milk were established, and
T-cell proliferation and cytokine profiles (interferon-gamma and IL-4) were
determined on stimulation with HF.
RESULTS: We found significantly reduced proliferative responses of eHF compared
with milk proteins. Whey-based pHF displayed the same proliferative capacity as
unmodified milk proteins. As expected, extensively processed whey products
displayed lower cellular responses compared with partially hydrolyzed products
(pHF whey vs eHF whey, p < 0.0001). No difference in cellular response was found 
between casein-based pHF and casein-based eHF. Beta-casein-specific TCCs (n = 21)
proliferated in response to casein-derived hydrolysates (14% with
casein/whey-based pHF, 4% with casein-based pHF, and 0% with casein-based eHF).
Whey-based pHF was also found to induce proliferation in beta-casein-specific
TCCs, indicating the presence or the generation of peptides displaying
cross-reactivity with these whey-derived hydrolysates. TCCs stimulated with whey-
or casein-based pHF or eHF produced the same amount of cytokines (IL-4,
interferon-gamma) as the same clones stimulated with unmodified products.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that whey- and casein-derived eHFs display highly
reduced immunogenic properties at the T-cell level. In contrast, pHFs display
residual immunogenic properties detectable at the T-cell level, reflecting a
potential for the induction of pathogenetically important T-cell responses.

PMID: 9564805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 1998 Jan-Feb;(1):23-5.

[An SHF electromagnetic field (460 MHz) combined with the preparation Tribimol in
treating duodenal peptic ulcer associated with Helicobacter pylori].

[Article in Russian]

Filimonov RM, Korolev IuN, Konicheva ER.

Epigastric exposure to EHF (460 MHz) electromagnetic field and administration of 
Tribimol were combined in the treatment of 103 patients with uncomplicated
duodenal ulcer. As shown by clinical, endoscopic and morphological examinations, 
biochemical and imprint tests for Helicobacter pylori, intragastric pH-metry, the
method is pathogenetically sound and can be recommended for combined treatment
and rehabilitation of patients with duodenal ulcer associated with Helicobacter
pylori.

PMID: 9560998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 1998 Jan-Feb;(1):16-8.

[A comparative evaluation of the effect of an extremely high-frequency
electromagnetic field on cerebral hemodynamics in hypertension patients exposed
in different reflexogenic areas].

[Article in Russian]

Sokolov BA, Bezruchenko SV, Kunitsyna LA.

A single session and multiple sinocarotid and temporal exposures to EHF
electromagnetic field in patients with stage I and II hypertension had different 
effects on cerebral circulation Variants of the above treatment are proposed.

PMID: 9560995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Surg Res. 1998 Jan;74(1):71-5.

Immediate and long-term portal hemodynamic consequences of small-diameter H-graft
portacaval shunt.

Zervos EE(1), Goode SE, Rosemurgy AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa
33606, USA.

BACKGROUND: Effective hepatic blood flow is thought to play a critical role in
outcome following portal decompressive procedures. We have shown previously that 
hepatic arterialization occurs soon after shunting, preserving nutrient flow, but
the remote effects of shunting are unknown. The purpose of this study was to
determine the effect of small-diameter prosthetic H-graft portacaval shunt
(HGPCS) on effective hepatic blood flow (EHF) and portal pressures 1 year from
shunt placement.
METHODS: Patients undergoing 8-mm HGPCS had effective hepatic blood flow
determined using low-dose galactose clearance preoperatively, postoperatively,
and at 1 year postshunt. Portal blood flow, pressures, and portal vein/inferior
vena cava pressure gradients were determined intraoperatively before and after
shunt placement and at 1 year.
RESULTS: Twenty patients undergoing shunting had flows measured. All patients had
significant reductions in portal vein/inferior vena cava pressure gradients while
effective hepatic flow was maintained immediately postoperatively. At 1 year
following shunting, effective hepatic blood flow was significantly lower than
both pre- and postoperative rates of flow while portal pressures and gradients
were significantly increased. Albumin, cholesterol, and PT were improved at 1
year while total bilirubin was slightly worse. Nineteen of 20 patients are still 
alive with average follow-up of 26 +/- 10.3 months. Four patients were
encephalopathic preop, 5 postop, and none chronically.
CONCLUSIONS: Recollateralization of varices and progression of cirrhosis may
account for the observed reductions in EHF at 1 year. Regardless of the cause,
diminution of EHF at 1 year is well compensated as demonstrated by minimal
encephalopathy and ascites, improved hepatic function reflected in blood
chemistry profiles, and good survival.

PMID: 9536977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Chest. 1998 Mar;113(3):645-51.

Early release of proinflammatory cytokines after lung transplantation.

Mal H(1), Dehoux M, Sleiman C, Boczkowski J, Lesèche G, Pariente R, Fournier M.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumologie et Réanimation Respiratoire, Hôpital Beaujon, Clichy,
France.

BACKGROUND: Systemic hypotension may complicate the early postoperative period
after lung transplantation. A release of proinflammatory cytokines secondary to
lung ischemia/reperfusion injury could be involved in the pathogenesis of this
early hemodynamic failure (EHF).
STUDY OBJECTIVE: To assess prospectively whether the occurrence of EHF is
associated with a release of cytokines in the systemic circulation.
DESIGN: Blood samples were taken daily during the first postoperative week in 26 
patients who underwent a double or a single-lung transplantation. These patients 
were divided into three groups: 7 patients who experienced EHF and subsequently
died (EHF group); 15 patients without EHF (control group); and 4 patients without
EHF but with an identified sepsis (sepsis group). The serum levels of interleukin
(IL)-1beta, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), IL-6, and IL-8 were compared
among the three groups.
RESULTS: In the EHF group, the levels of each cytokine peaked at day 1
postoperatively. Cytokine levels at day 1 were significantly higher in the EHF
group than in the control group (p<0.0006) or in the sepsis group (p<0.003 except
for TNF-alpha).
CONCLUSION: We conclude that EHF is associated with a massive release of
proinflammatory cytokines that could play a determinant role in the pathogenesis 
of this complication.

PMID: 9515837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Lik Sprava. 1997 Sep-Oct;(5):153-4.

[The correction of immunity in adolescents and children with focal staphylococcal
diseases].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Marushko IuV.

The aim of the work done was to improve treatment options for focal
Staphylococcus-induced diseases in adolescents and children with the aid of
adsorbed staphylococcal anatoxin (ASA) concurrently with low-intensive EHF
therapy. Overall fifty patients aged 3 to 17 years with Staphylococcus infection 
in tonsils, nose, ears were kept under medical surveillance. ASA and EHF
therapies were instituted according to the developed schemes of such therapies.
Positive dynamics was shown of clinical picture and parameters characterizing
humoral and cell-mediated immunity. There were no unfavourable side-effects. The 
proposed mode of treatment can, we believe, be widely used in a clinical setting.

PMID: 9491728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Biofizika. 1997 Sep-Oct;42(5):1125-34.

[Modulated extremely high frequency electromagnetic radiation of low intensity
activates or inhibits respiratory burst in neutrophils depending on modulation
frequency].

[Article in Russian]

Gapeev AB, Iakushina VS, Chemeris NK, Fesenko EE.

The influence of low-intensity modulated electromagnetic radiation of extremely
high frequencies (EHF EMR) on synergistic reaction of calcium ionophore A23187
and phorbol ester PMA in activation of the respiratory burst of the peritoneal
neutrophils of mice line NMRI was investigated. The production of reactive oxygen
species by the neutrophils was estimated by luminol-dependent chemiluminescence
technique. The cells were irradiated in the far field zone of the channel
radiator for 20 min in the presence of A23187 and then were activated by PMA
after switching off the irradiation. It was shown, that continuous EHF EMR (50
microW/cm2) inhibited quasi-resonantly the synergistic reaction. The maximum
effect was about 25% at carrier frequency of 41.95 GHz. Modulated radiation with 
carrier frequency of 41.95 GHz and modulation frequency of 1 Hz activated the
synergistic reaction, but at modulation frequencies of 0.1, 16 and 50 Hz
inhibited one. At fixed modulation frequency of 1 Hz the nonlinear dependence of 
the effect on the carrier frequency was found. The synergistic reaction was
activated in the frequency range of 41.95-42.05 GHz and was inhibited at the
frequencies of 41.8-41.9 GHz. The effect was observed only at raised
intracellular free calcium concentration and at calcium fluxes through plasma
membrane. The obtained results prove the possibility of control over cell
functioning by low-intensity modulated EHF EMR, presumably, manipulating by
connected systems of enzyme reactions.

PMID: 9410041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Pediatr. 1997 Nov;131(5):744-7.

Allergy to extensively hydrolyzed cow milk proteins in infants: identification
and treatment with an amino acid-based formula.

de Boissieu D(1), Matarazzo P, Dupont C.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Unit, Hôpital Saint Vincent de Paul, Paris, France.

Comment in
    J Pediatr. 1997 Nov;131(5):658-60.

We report on 13 infants allergic to extensively hydrolyzed protein formulas
(EHFs) who were first seen with chronic digestive symptoms. Feeding with an amino
acid-based formula decreased symptoms and improved weight gain. A challenge with 
EHF produced positive results in all these infants. Allergy to EHF must be
considered in patients who are allergic to cow milk and have persisting symptoms 
on an EHF diet.

PMID: 9403657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Int J Lepr Other Mycobact Dis. 1997 Sep;65(3):328-36.

Progress of impairment scores following commencement of chemotherapy in
multibacillary leprosy patients.

Reed NK(1), van Brakel WH, Reed DS.

Author information: 
(1)Physiotherapist, Green Pastures Hospital, Pokhara, Nepal.

STUDY AIM: To investigate the progress of impairment over time in multibacillary 
(MB) leprosy patients.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
STUDY POPULATION: One-thousand-eighty-two MB patients newly registered in nine
field clinics in the Western Region of Nepal between 1980 and 1993.
METHODS: Data on impairment at diagnosis and at yearly intervals afterward were
collected from patient records of MB patients already released from multidrug
therapy (MDT). The World Health Organization (WHO) 1988 "disability" grading
scale (0-2, for both eyes, hands and feet--six sites) was used as a measure of
impairment. For the analysis we summed the WHO grading for the six sites into an 
eyes-hands-feet (EHF) sum score (minimum 0, maximum 12). The EHF score at 2 years
of follow up was used to compute the main outcome measures: impairment at 2
years, yes or no, and deterioration of impairment compared with diagnosis. The
combined effect of age, sex, classification and impairment status at diagnosis on
the outcome was examined with logistic regression.
RESULTS: At diagnosis, 55.8% of the patients had some impairment. This proportion
decreased over 2 years to 43.9%. Among patients without initial impairment,
31/310 (10%) developed impairment during the study period. This was 81/396
(20.5%) among patients with impairment at diagnosis. The adjusted odds ratio (OR)
for developing impairment was 1.87 [95% confidence interval (CI) 1.06-3.32] for
patients with initial sensory impairment (WHO grade 1). and 1.98 (95% CI
1.15-3.4) for those with initial visible deformity (WHO grade 2). Among patients 
with impairment at diagnosis, 195/396 (49.2%) had improved after 2 years.
CONCLUSIONS: The proportion of patients with impairment after 2 years of
antileprosy treatment was 12% less than at diagnosis. Among patients without
initial impairment, 10% had developed some impairment after 2 years. The risk of 
developing impairment was almost double for those with sensory impairment or
visible deformity at diagnosis. For purposes of monitoring, evaluation and
planning, both the proportion of patients with sensory impairment (WHO grade 1)
and the proportion with visible deformity (WHO grade 2) should be reported at
diagnosis and at release from treatment.

PMID: 9401485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 1997 Nov;4(1-2):149-56.

Prevention of food allergy.

Halken S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Sønderborg Hospital, DK-6400 Sønderborg, Denmark.

Development of a food allergy appears to depend on both genetic factors and
exposure-especially in early infancy-to food proteins. In prospective studies,
the effect of dietary allergy prevention programmes has only been demonstrated in
high-risk infants, i.e. infants with at least one first degree relative with
documented atopic disease. High-risk infants feeding exclusively on breast milk
and/or extensively hydrolysed formula (eHF) combined with avoidance of cow's milk
proteins and solid foods during at least the first 4 months of life are found to 
have a significant reduction in the cumulative incidence of food allergy,
especially cow's milk protein allergy/intolerance (CMPA/CMPI), in the first 4
years of life. As no studies have been conducted pertaining to the preventive
effect of avoidance of milk and other foods after the age of 4-6 months,
recommendation of preventive elimination diets beyond this age is empirically
based. In order to reduce costs and to minimize the risks of stigmatisation and
malnutrition, it is important to avoid unnecessary restrictive and prolonged
diets. A diet period of 4-6 months appears to be sufficient in the majority of
infants. At present, eHF are recommended as a substitute for cow's milk. A few
high risk infants may benefit from a maternal diet during lactation, but there is
no documented beneficial effect of maternal dieting during pregnancy.

PMID: 21781814  [PubMed]


368. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 1997 Jul;12(7):540-6.

Liver involvement in epidemic haemorrhagic fever: in situ hybridization,
immunohistochemical and pathological studies.

Sun HC(1), Deng PF, Wang CJ, Jia TH, Lai JQ, Zhang W, Wang XX, Xiu HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Bethune International Peace Hospital, Shijiazhuang,
Hebei, China.

In the present study, liver biopsy specimens from 37 patients with epidemic
haemorrhagic fever (EHF) were investigated by using light and electron
microscopy, immunohistochemistry for the EHF virus envelope protein G2 and in
situ hybridization (ISH) for EHF viral RNA. Immunostaining and in situ
hybridization were both positive, and a few of the aetiological agents, the EHF
virus (EHFV) particles, were found individually within the dilated Golgi
cisternae and vesicles, and the dilated rough endoplasmic reticulum of the
hepatocyte. The pathological alterations of the liver cells infected with EHFV
were: hepatocellular degeneration, cytoplasmic vacuolation, and spotty necrosis; 
moreover, zonal necrosis was present and adjacent to the narrowed and occluded
sinusoids. In degenerated and spotty necrotic cells, the positive signals from of
ISH for EHFV RNA and those from immunostaining for the virus protein were both
stronger than those in the zonal liver cell necrosis area. The results showed
that hepatocellular degeneration and spotty necrosis might be directly related to
the virus and its duplication inside the liver cells, while the zonal necrosis
was ischaemic and thought to be caused by microcirculation dysfunction.

PMID: 9257248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Eur J Cancer. 1997 Jun;33(7):1141-8.

Inhibition of growth of androgen-independent DU-145 prostate cancer in vivo by
luteinising hormone-releasing hormone antagonist Cetrorelix and bombesin
antagonists RC-3940-II and RC-3950-II.

Jungwirth A(1), Pinski J, Galvan G, Halmos G, Szepeshazi K, Cai RZ, Groot K,
Vadillo-Buenfil M, Schally AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Tulane University School of Medicine, New
Orleans, Louisiana, USA.

Comment in
    Eur J Cancer. 1998 Jun;34(7):1134-6.

The aim of this study was to test the antagonist of LH-RH (Cetrorelix), agonist
[D-Trp6]LH-RH (triptorelin) and new bombesin antagonists RC-3940-II and
RC-3950-II for their effect on the growth of an androgen-independent prostate
cancer cell line, DU-145, xenografted into nude mice. Xenografts were grown in
male nude mice, and after 4 weeks, the animals were treated either with saline
(control) or with one of the analogues. One group of mice was given a combination
of Cetrorelix and RC-3950-II. Treatment was given for 4 weeks. Tumour and body
weights, and tumour volumes were measured. At sacrifice, tumours were dissected
for histological examination and receptor studies. Serum was collected for
measurement of hormone levels. The final tumour volume in control animals
injected with saline was 577 +/- 155 mm3 and that of animals treated with
Cetrorelix only 121.4 +/- 45 mm3 (P < 0.01). Bombesin antagonists RC-3940-II and 
RC-3950-II also significantly reduced DU-145 tumour volume in nude mice to 84.9
+/- 19.9 and 96.8 +/- 28 mm3, respectively. Agonist [D-Trp6]LH-RH did not
significantly inhibit tumour growth. Serum levels of LH were decreased to 0.08
+/- 0.02 ng/ml (P < 0.05) in the Cetrorelix treated group as compared to 1.02 +/-
0.1 ng/ml for the controls, and testosterone levels were reduced to castration
levels (0.01 +/- 0.01 ng/ml). Specific receptors for EGF and LH-RH in DU-145
tumours were significantly downregulated after treatment with Cetrorelix,
RC-3940-II and RC-3950-II. Although LH-RH could be a local regulator of growth of
prostate cancer, the fall in LH-RH receptors is not fully understood and the
inhibitory effects of Cetrorelix and bombesin antagonists on DU-145 tumour growth
might be attributed at least in part to a downregulation of EHF receptors. Since 
Cetrorelix and bombesin antagonists inhibit growth of androgen-independent DU-145
prostate cancers, these compounds could be considered for the therapy of advanced
prostate cancer in men, especially after relapse.

PMID: 9376196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1997 May;31(3):137-9.

[Studies on epidemic hemorrhagic fever among rats in Jianghan Plian, Hubei
Province, China].

[Article in Chinese]

Li S(1), Guo Y, Mo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Hubei Medical University, Wuhan.

Capture of rats by digging their cavities, identification of rat strains, sex and
age, examination of their skin cut or damage, and detection of antigen and
antibody of epidemic hemorrhagic fever virus (EHFV) were conducted in epidemic
areas of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) in Jinaghan Plain, Hubei Province, to
study prevalence of EHFV infection in rats. Results showed that Apodemus agarius 
and Rattus norvegius accounted for 69.7% and 23.6% of the total rats captured,
respectively, their infection rates of EHFV were 21.8% and 30.9%, respectively.
Infection rate of EHFV was significantly higher in adult rats than in sub-adult
and young ones, with prevalence of 40.8%, 17.0% and 12.4%, respectively.
Infection rate of EHFV was 45.9% in rats with skin cut, significantly higher than
in those without it (13.9%). There was an obvious litter-clustering phenomenon in
infected rats, but their litters distributed in space randomly. Serotyping of
infected rats showed that Apodemus agarius mainly was in a wild rat pattern,
Rattus norvegius in a domestic rat pattern, and a small number of rats were in
undefined patterns. It indicated that Jinaghan Plain was a mixed epidemic area of
EHF with domestic and wild rat patterns and with Apodemus agarius and Rattus
norvegius as main reservoir host, and age, skin cut, and close contact with them 
were important factors contributing to transmit it.

PMID: 9812588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 1997 May-Jun;(3):25-7.

[A quantitative evaluation of the action of EHF therapy in patients with leg
fractures].

[Article in Russian]

Reznikov KM, Nekhaenko NE, Nikitin AV, Trofimova OV, Nazarenko EA, Ermolaev AA.

PMID: 9334050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Ultrastruct Pathol. 1997 May-Jun;21(3):281-7.

Transmission electron microscopic study of the hemorrhagic spots in patients with
epidemic hemorrhagic fever in the early stage.

Wang S(1), Zang L, Feng M, Liang Z, Wang S, Zheng S, Zhang L, Jiang Z, Chen D.

Author information: 
(1)Zhengzhou 460 Hospital, China.

Epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) virus particles were found in the squamous
epithelial cells and the capillary endothelial cells of the petechial spots
located on the mucous membrane of the soft palate in 3 patients with severe
early-stage EHF with transmission electron microscopy. The virus particles were
round or oval in shape, about 100 nm in diameter, with a two-layer lipid envelope
from which spikes were protruding. The nucleocapsid of the virus appeared to be
hollow microfilamentoid or dense granules. Meanwhile, budding virus particles
with a diameter of 80 nm were found in the enlarged Golgi apparatus. The infected
cells displayed an enlarged and proliferating Golgi apparatus. The morphological 
characteristics of the viron mentioned above coincided with those of the virus
particles of the family Bunyaviridae. This study is the first to demonstrate that
the squamous epithelial cells on the mucous membrane of the soft palate are the
target cells of EHF infection and to provide subcellular morphological evidence
of petechial hemorrhage at the soft palate.

PMID: 9183829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. HNO. 1997 Mar;45(3):147-52.

[Hearing tests in extended high frequency range in pre-school age children.
Initial results].

[Article in German]

Reuter W(1), Schönfeld U, Fischer R, Gross M.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Audiologie und Phoniatrie, Universitätsklinikum Benjamin
Franklin, Freie Universität, Berlin.

Since reliable headphones are now available, clinical audiometry can also be
performed in extended high frequencies (EHF). Hearing in frequencies over 10 kHz 
is more influenced by age, noise and toxicity. Thus it is useful to take
additionally results in children to establish the normal hearing threshold. In
the present study, 35 pre-school children (ages 4-7 years) were tested by EHF (8 
kHz-16 kHz) using a new Sennheiser HDA-200 headphone. The hearing thresholds
recorded corresponded to those of other studied. Median and standard deviations
for 10 kHz were 25 dB(SPL) +/- 12 dB(SPL), 35 dB(SPL) +/- 12 dB(SPL) for 12.5 kHz
and 50 dB(SPL) +/- 15 dB(SPL) for 16 kHz. In the older children (> 5 years),
hearing thresholds could be more reliably determined and were 10 dB(SPL) better
than in the younger children (< 5 years). Thresholds at 10 kHz-12.5 kHz
corresponded to those found in adults, but were more sensitive by 5 dB(SPL)-15
dB(SPL) in the 14 kHz-16 kHz range.

PMID: 9417438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Urol Nefrol (Mosk). 1997 Mar-Apr;(2):32-4.

[The joint use of hyperbaric oxygenation and EHF therapy in benign prostatic
hyperplasia and its combination with chronic prostatitis].

[Article in Russian]

Loran OB, Dunaevskii IaL, Vishnevskii AE, Vashkevich VI.

33 patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) were exposed to hyperbaric
oxygenation (HBO) and SHF waves. Group 1 patients had no prostatic inflammation, 
group 2 patients had combination of BPH with chronic prostatitis. Both these
modalities are considered as to mechanism of action at different periods of the
development of urination disturbances. The combined therapy imposed a positive
trend in urination parameters, especially evident in group 2 patients. In them
mean urination frequency reduced from 14.8-8.5 times to 6.3, mean urine volume
increased from 83.6 to 199 ml. Index I-PSS fell in group 1 by 2 and group 2 by
6.4 scores. L index of quality of life declined by 1.2 and 1.6 scores in groups 1
and 2, respectively. It is inferred that combined use of HBO and SHF therapy is
highly effective in urination disorders in patients with BPH suffering from or
without chronic prostatitis.

PMID: 9206881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 1997 Feb;40(1):208-14.

Extended high-frequency thresholds in older adults.

Matthews LJ(1), Lee FS, Mills JH, Dubno JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Communicative Sciences Medical University of 
South Carolina, Charleston, USA.

Most measures of auditory sensitivity at extended high frequencies (frequencies
greater than 8 kHz) have been obtained from listeners with normal hearing less
than 40 years of age. The purpose of this study was (a) to measure thresholds at 
frequencies above 8 kHz in older listeners who, as a group, have elevated
thresholds at lower frequencies, and (b) to assess test-retest reliability, age
and gender effects, and the influence of thresholds below 8 kHz. Extended
high-frequency (EHF) thresholds were measured for 162 older listeners (60-79
years) using a commercially available high-frequency audiometer, with a frequency
range of 8 to 18 kHz and an intensity range of 0 to 110 dB SPL. Thresholds were
measured once at the beginning of a 1- to 2-hour test session and then remeasured
at the end of the test session. EHF thresholds of older listeners with normal
hearing at conventional audiometric frequencies were substantially higher than
the thresholds reported for younger listeners, with normal hearing by Dreschler
and van der Hulst (1987). EHF thresholds of older listeners with hearing loss at 
conventional audiometric frequencies were further elevated as compared to older
listeners with normal hearing. Differences in EHF thresholds between females and 
males were either not present or were reduced when gender differences in
conventional audiometric thresholds were taken into account. No significant
differences were seen in thresholds at 8 kHz and higher between the 60- to 69-and
70- to 79-year-old age groups. Results also indicated that thresholds above 8 kHz
can be measured in older listeners within a clinically acceptable +/- 10 dB
test-retest range.

PMID: 9113871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 1996 Nov-Dec;(6):19-21.

[The EHF therapy of children with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis].

[Article in Russian]

Shliapak EA, Gabidova NT, Evseeva SN, Apanasevich ZK.

138 children with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis were exposed to EHF treatment.
Three regimens of the microwave therapy were tested. The best results were
achieved at the exposure of the thymic acupuncture points and most affected
joint. Combination of microwave therapy with radon or effervescent sulfurated
hydrogen baths is also recommended.

PMID: 9103020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Urol Nefrol (Mosk). 1996 Nov-Dec;(6):37-9.

[A trial of using EHF therapy in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia and
its combination with chronic prostatitis].

[Article in Russian]

Loran OB, Dunaevskii IaL, Segal AS.

16 males with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) stage I-II received extremely
high-frequency (EHF) therapy alone (group 1), 47 BPH males stage I-II and chronic
nonspecific prostatitis EHF therapy plus antibacterial drugs (group 2). Group 3
was control. Clinical pretreatment parameters in group 1 averaged: IPSS--16.6;
QOL--4.1; Qmax--7.2 ml/s, RU-135 ml. Three to six months of treatment brought the
improvement: IPSS--14.7; QOL--3.2. Qmax rose to 8.3 ml/s, residual urine
decreased to 126 ml in 11 (68.7%) patients. The effectiveness of the 2 group
treatment was higher: initial IPSS--18.3, QOL-4.5, Qmax--9.2 ml/s, RU--62 ml
changed for IPSS--14.1, QOL--3.1 in 43(91.5%) patients, obstruction diminished in
31 (65.9%) patients (Qmax--10.2 ml/s, RU--53 ml). EHF therapy proved effective
and safe in BPH alone and especially in BPH combination with chronic nonspecific 
prostatis.

PMID: 9036608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 1996 Sep-Oct;(5):35-7.

[The role of physical balneological factors in the treatment of occupational
diseases].

[Article in Russian]

Oranskii IE, Semennikova TK, Tereshina LG, Budkar' LN, Antiuf'ev VF, Likhacheva
EI, Shirokov VA, Konevskikh LA, Borzunova IuM, Veselkova EE.

The authors review the results obtained in the treatment of some occupational
diseases using physical factors. In osteoarthritis patients exposed to fluorine
compounds good results were achieved at employment of decimeter-wave therapy
combined with mud applications or sulfurated hydrogen baths. Patients with
scapulohumeral periarthritis benefited from combination of EHF therapy with
alternating magnetic field. Initial lead intoxication was effectively treated
with magnetotherapy. Subjects with vascular pathology occupationally exposed to
high temperature responded to magnetolaser impact on reflexogenic regions of the 
heart.

PMID: 9036666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Radiats Biol Radioecol. 1996 Sep-Oct;36(5):722-6.

[Effects of low-intensity electromagnetic radiation of extremely high frequency
on the animal body within the framework of total low-dose x-ray irradiation].

[Article in Russian]

Gubkina EA, Kushnir AE, Bereziuk SK, Potapov VA, Lepekhin EA.

Effect of low-intensive electromagnetic radiation of extremely high frequency
(EMR EHF) on the rats, subjected to the low-dose X-ray irradiation (6.192 mC/rg) 
was investigated. Content of glial fibrillary acidic protein as well as glucose
content and activity of glutamate dehydrogenase and malate dehydrogenase was
studied. It was shown than EMR EHF modifies the X-ray irradiation effect:
filament GFAP concentration in brain and glucose content in serum were restored. 
The authors suggest central nervous system participation in realization of EMR
EHF effects on the organism.

PMID: 9019284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 1996 Aug;17(4):225-8.

[Study on the mode of transmission of EHFV among host animals and its
epidemiologic significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang ZQ(1), Meng XR, Yu XM.

Author information: 
(1)Military Medical Research Institute, Jinan Command.

In our study, IFA was adopted to detect the epidemic haemorrhagic fever virus
(EHFV) antigen and antibody. We studied on the mode of transmission of EHFV in
mice and its epidemiologic significance. The results demonstrated that both
horizontal and vertical modes of transmission existed in mice under natural
circumstances. Horizontal transmission was noticed as the major mode of
transmission of EHFV in mice which played an important role in the spread and
development of EHF natural foci. Vertical transmission seemed to act merely on
the maintenance of EHF natural foci in mice.

PMID: 9387588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Ear Hear. 1996 Apr;17(2):107-15.

The utility of acoustic reflex thresholds and other conventional audiologic tests
for monitoring cisplatin ototoxicity in the pediatric population.

Park KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Washington University, St. Louis Children's Hospital, Missouri, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The sensitivity of acoustic reflex threshold changes for monitoring
cisplatin ototoxicity in children was compared with the sensitivity of
conventional audiometric tests.
DESIGN: Acoustic reflex thresholds, thresholds for audiometric frequencies 0.250 
Hz to 2 kHz and 3 kHz to 8 kHz, extended high-frequency (EHF) audiometry for 10
kHz to 16 kHz, and the articulation index (AI) were compared at six different
cumulative dosage levels of cisplatin in 21 children, 3.08 yr to 19.25 yr of age.
RESULTS: Of these 21 patients, 100% showed significant changes in at least one
portion of the test battery when cumulative dosages exceeded 401 mg/m2. EHF
testing was found to be the most sensitive to ototoxicity once cumulative dosage 
levels of 150 to 250 mg/m2 were reached. Audiometric thresholds from 3 to 8 kHz, 
and acoustic reflex threshold changes were found to be the next most sensitive to
ototoxicity at cumulative dosages of 251 to 400 mg/m2. No significant threshold
changes were noted for frequencies from 250 Hz to 2 kHz.
CONCLUSIONS: Acoustic reflex threshold measures may prove to be a valuable
addition to current ototoxic test protocols. Although it is currently not the
most sensitive test to ototoxicity, it is one of the more objective tests.
Further data must be collected to determine the clinical utility of acoustic
reflex threshold testing to monitor ototoxicity.

PMID: 8698156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Gut. 1996 Mar;38(3):303-5.

Why is epidermal growth factor present in the gut lumen?

Playford RJ(1), Wright NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Leicester General Hospital.

The jury is still out on the role of luminal EGF in the normal gastrointestinal
tract. Recent evidence, however, suggests that its major function is to act as a 
'luminal surveillance' peptide, which is available to stimulate repair and that
it is not of major importance in maintaining normal gut growth. Recombinant EGF
administered via the gut lumen could still prove a valuable tool for the
treatment of gastrointestinal ulceration. Perhaps the old term for EGF,
'epidermal healing factor' or EHF, was more appropriate after all!

PMCID: PMC1383054
PMID: 8675078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Zh Nevrol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova. 1996;96(6):28-31.

[The treatment of neurotic depression by using extremely high-frequency
electromagnetic radiation].

[Article in Russian]

Morozov GV, Antropov IuF, Asanova LM, Shkanov SM.

Extremely high frequencies of electromagnetic waves (EHF-therapy) were used for
the treatment of 53 women with asthenic, anxious and combined forms of
depressions together with other methods (psychopharmacological treatment and
psychotherapy). The control group which consisted of 27 analogous patients was
treated without EHF-therapy. In the former group the recovery was observed in
50.9% of cases, considerable improvement in 41.5% and the improvement in 7.6% of 
cases. Meanwhile in the control group the treatment resulted in the recovery in
3.7%, in the considerable improvement in 48.1%, in the improvement in 40.7%, of
cases. No clinical changes occurred in the rest control patients. The highest
therapeutical effect was observed in patients with asthenic neurotic depression
(recovery in 66.7%).

PMID: 9072890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 1996 Jan-Feb;(1):9-11.

[The correction of hypoxic damage to the pulmonary surfactant system of rats with
extremely high-frequency electromagnetic fields].

[Article in Russian]

Alymkulov DA, Belov GV, Akhmetova MI.

54 white rats were studied physically, histochemically and morphometrically for
the effect of EHF electromagnetic field on repair of the lung surfactant system. 
The damage was inflicted by acute hypoxia existing at the altitude of 9000 m
above the sea level simulated in the chamber. For the period studied natural
repair was unable to secure the return to normal structure and function of the
surfactant system, whereas daily 20-minute exposures to millimetric waves on the 
chest stimulated repair on after-exposure day 1-5 and provided normalization of
all the physical and morphometric parameters.

PMID: 8686231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 1996 Jan-Feb;(1):12-4.

[The use of EHF therapy in the rehabilitation of patients with chronic bronchitis
at a moderate altitude].

[Article in Russian]

Shamenova ShI, Alymkulov DA, Simonenko TS, Omuralieva GT, Belov GV, Tupeev IR,
Solov'eva LI.

Patients treated in mid-altitude conditions for chronic bronchitis were exposed
to EHF radiation. As shown by positive changes in external respiration, systemic 
and pulmonary hemodynamics, immune status, surface activity of lung surfactant,
EHF therapy is effective in chronic bronchitis with ventilation disorders. The
more severe these disorders were, the more marked the benefit was.

PMID: 8686214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 1995 Nov-Dec;(6):16-8.

[The efficacy of using an electromagnetic field of extremely high frequency
(54-78 GHz) in treating patients with chronic nonspecific lung disease].

[Article in Russian]

Danilenko SR, Shatrov AA, Gerasimovich OI.

After a trial of the therapeutic complex including extra high frequency
electromagnetic field in 154 patients with chronic bronchitis and bronchial
asthma high efficacy of EHF-therapy was stated in the above diseases.

PMID: 8713300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 1995 Nov-Dec;(6):7-9.

[The mechanism of the action of electromagnetic radiation in the nano- and
millimeter ranges].

[Article in Russian]

Bogdanov NN, Bogdanov AN, Bezruchenko SV, Kunitsyna LA, Sokolov BA.

It is suggested that there exists not only resonance but also interference
interaction between laser radiation, millimetric electromagnetic radiation and
dissipative systems. A noticeable role here is played by opiate receptors and
their ligands determining cytoprotective, stress-limiting, immunomodulating and
other effects of EHF therapy.

PMID: 8713296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1995 Nov;29(6):344-7.

[Observational and experimental studies on relationship between domestic pigs and
epidemic hemorrhagic fever investigation].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y(1), Li X, Tang J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Military Medicine Nanjing Command, PLA.

Observational and experimental studies on the relationship between domestic pigs 
and epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) were carried out during 1986 to 1994 with
reverse passive hemagglutination (RPHA), reverse passive hemagglutination
inhibition (RPHI), horse-radish peroxidase-staphylococcal protein A (HRP-SPA),
indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) and reverse transcript polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) to understand the roles of domestic pigs played in the epidemic
areas. Results showed domestic pigs could infect epidemic hemorrhagic fever virus
(EHFV) naturally or experimentally, and EHFV could disseminate to many organs of 
the animals and caused transient pathologic changes in them. EHFV could duplicate
within the animal bodies and be excreted out of the bodies with their excreta.
Proportion of inapparent infection of EHF in people closely exposed to domestic
pigs was significantly higher than in those without it. It indicated domestic
pigs maybe played an important role in EHF as a reservoir host.

PMID: 8697938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Lik Sprava. 1995 Sep-Dec;(9-12):94-5.

[The hormone level of the blood plasma in neurodermatitis patients and its
dynamics during the performance of nondrug pathogenetic therapy].

[Article in Russian]

Radionov VG.

Concentrations of hormones of the hypophysis, thyroid gland and adrenal cortex
were measured in blood plasma of those patients presenting with neurodermatitis. 
A statistically significant reduction in the blood content of thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH) and hydrocortisone and rise in aldosterone, adrenocorticotrophic
hormone (ACTH), triiodothyronine and thyroxin were revealed in this patient
population. Combined non-drug therapy treatments involving endovascular
helium-neon laser therapy and EHF electromagnetic radiation resulted in
improvement in more than half of the measurements done: blood levels of TSH and
hydrocortisone got increased while those of ACTH, thyroxin and aldosterone
decreased, which fact correlated with the positive clinical picture of the
condition in question.

PMID: 8983807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Eur J Clin Nutr. 1995 Sep;49 Suppl 1:S77-83.

The effect of hypo-allergenic formulas in infants at risk of allergic disease.

Halken S(1), Jacobsen HP, Høst A, Holmenlund D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics Sønderborg Hospital, Denmark.

Development of atopic disease seems to depend on both genetic factors and
exposure to several environmental factors. At present ther is evidence that the
mode of early infant feeding influences the development of food allergy, whereas 
daily exposure to inhalant allergens and daily exposure to tobacco smoke is found
to be associated with an increased risk of recurrent wheezing/asthma and inhalant
allergy. In infants with atopic predisposition (first-degree relatives),
exclusively breastfeeding > or = four months is found associated with a
significant reduction of the cumulative prevalence of cow's milk
allergy/intolerance (CMA/CMI) during the first 1-2 years of age. When breastmilk 
is insufficient or lacking a substitute formula is needed. Several recent
prospective studies show a preventative effect of extensively hydrolysed formula 
(eHF) in combination with avoidance of cow's milk proteins and solid foods during
> or = 4 months in high-risk infants on the cumulative prevalence of food allergy
and atopic dermatitis during the first 2-4 years of life. Partially hydrolysed
formulas (pHF) may be effective in allergy prevention, but due to drawbacks of
study design and lack of documentation pHF cannot be recommended at present. The 
results of studies comparing the preventive effect of eHF and pHF are awaited.
The protective effect on the development of cow's milk allergy is a real
prevention and not only a postponement of the onset of symptoms. No studies have 
demonstrated a preventive effect of dietary measures as regards asthma/inhalant
allergy, at present until the age of four years. As no studies concerning the
preventive effect of avoidance of milk and other foods after the age of 4-6
months of life have been performed, recommendation of preventive elimination
diets beyond this age is empirically based. In order to reduce the costs, to
minimize the risk of stigmatisation and the risk of malnutrition it is important 
to avoid unnecessary restrictive and prolonged diets. A diet period of 4-6 months
seems sufficient in most infants. At present eHF are recommended for avoidance of
cow's milk. Some high risk infants may benefit from maternal diet during
lactation, but there is no documented beneficial effect of maternal diet during
pregnancy.

PMID: 8647067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Vet Microbiol. 1995 Jul;45(2-3):121-7.

Gene toxin patterns of Escherichia coli isolated from diseased and healthy
piglets.

Celemín C(1), Rubio P, Echeverria P, Suárez S.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Sanidad Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad de León, 
Spain.

DNA probes specific for genes coding for the heat stable enterotoxins (ST-I and
ST-II), the heat labile enterotoxins (LT-I and LT-II), Shiga like cytotoxins and 
for the enterohemorrhagic factor (EHF), were used to examined 150 fecal
Escherichia coli isolates from both diarrheic and healthy piglets. Thirty seven
percent of the isolates hybridized with the LT-I probe, seventy one of them did
so with the LT-II probe, while seventy six percent of the isolates possessed
genes coding for the heat stable enterotoxins. No SLT-I positive hybridization
was found and four percent of the isolates possessed SLT-II genes.

PMID: 7571363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1995 Jun;34(6):396-9.

[The significance of dynamic change of plasma endothelin level in epidemic
hemorrhagic fever].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang B(1), Ma Y, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University.

One hundred and twenty nine hospitalized cases of epidemic hemorrhagic fever
(EHF) diagnosed and classified according to the protocol of prevention and
treatment of this disease approved by the Ministry of Health in 1987 were studied
to ascertain the role of endothelin (ET) in the etiology. 30 healthy adult
subjects residing in the same area served as control. Blood samples were
collected and plasma ET level was measured with radioimmunoassay and its dynamic 
change noted. It is shown that plasma ET level of the EHF patients was higher in 
febrile, hypotensive or shock, oliguric and transitional stages than that of
controls. However, the level returned to normal in polyuric stage. Plasma ET
level was also highly positively correlated with that of Tamm-Horsfall protein
(THP) and beta 2 microglobulin. The higher the level of plasma ET, the poorer the
ontcome. It is suggested that ET plays an important role in the epidemiology of
EHF and monitoring of plasma ET level will be of help not only in predicting the 
prognosis, but also in guiding the clinical therapy.

PMID: 8582188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Lik Sprava. 1995 May-Jun;(5-6):93-7.

[The ultrastructural characteristics of the duodenal mucosa in peptic ulcer
patients undergoing treatment with EHF-range electromagnetic radiation].

[Article in Russian]

Kutsenok VA, Nikula TD, Stechenko LA, Andreenko TV, Kuftyreva TP.

An effect was studied of electromagnetic radiation of the millimetric wave band
(EHF EMR) on ultrastructural processes of the mucosa and healing of ulcer in 10
patients with duodenal ulcer. Biopsy specimens were taken from the base of the
margin of the ulcer and in the area 1 cm from the margin of the ulcer defect
before the treatment, after 5 and 10 sessions of EHF EMR to acupuncture points.
EHF EMR was found to exert a stimulating effect on the processes of ulcer
regeneration. Seen after session 5 are layers of proliferating poorly
differentiated enterocytes, activation of immune and autoimmune processes,
normalization of the hemomicrovessel endothelial cell structure, filling in the
ulcer defect with a newly formed granulation tissue in which, among fibroblasts, 
macrophages, mast cells and lymphocytes, there prevail plasmic cells with an
augmented secretion of immunoglobulins, increase in proliferation of
epitheliocytes, with their differentiation slowing down, and a complete
epithelialization of the ulcer following ten treatment procedures.

PMID: 8630825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 1995 Mar-Apr;(2):25-6.

[The mechanism of the therapeutic action of the EHF therapy of spinal
osteochondrosis].

[Article in Russian]

Droviannikova DP, Volobuev AN, Romanchuk PI.

Microwave therapy (millimetric waves) was used for treatment of spinal
osteochondrosis. The effect was manifest as early as the first sessions. The pain
alleviated, muscular tension decreased, movements recovered, convulsions and
numbness of the legs ceased. Possible biophysical mechanisms of EHF waves are
discussed.

PMID: 7660620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Probl Tuberk. 1995;(6):17-20.

[Significance of the functional state of blood phagocytes in the choice of
optimal regime of EHF therapy of patients with pulmonary tuberculosis].

[Article in Russian]

Novikova LN, Kaminskaia GO, Efimova LN.

A trial entered 136 patients with active tuberculosis of the lungs. 86 patients
received conventional chemotherapy and a course of microwave therapy. Control
patients received chemotherapy alone. Phagocyte cell viability and NB-test served
as assessment laboratory criteria. Millimetric waves in the treatment of
pulmonary tuberculosis potentiate the treatment efficacy documented as more rapid
infiltration resolution and cavern closure through the mechanism of normalization
of phagocyte cell function. The choice of wave length is principal: 5.6 mm waves 
affect phagocyte function negatively, 6.4 mm waves produce more significant
positive effect in young patients with new local lesions while 7.1 mm waves in
older patients and in severe involvement. In vitro radiation of the patients'
blood using different wave lengths and subsequent performance of NB-test provides
objective information for choice of optimal treatment regimen.

PMID: 8524760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 1994 Dec;23(6):361-3.

[Electron microscopic study on the petechial hemorrhagic spots in patients with
epidemic hemorrhage fever (EHF)].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang SQ(1), Feng M, Yang L.

Author information: 
(1)Zhengzhou Air Force Hospital.

EHF viral particles were found in the squamous epithelial cells and capillary
endothelial cells of the petechial spots located at the mucous membrane of the
soft palate in cases of early stage of severe type EHF by transmission electron
microscopy. The viral particles are round or oval in shape, about 100 nm in
diameter with a lipid bilayer envelope from which spikes are protruding. The
virions matured by budding through the intracytoplasmic membranes into the smooth
surfaced vesicles. The morphological characteristics of the virion coincided with
the viral particles of Family Bunyaviridae. It was the first time to demonstrate 
that the squamous epithelial cells of the soft palate is one of the target cells 
in EHF virus infection and to describe the subcellular morphological evidence of 
the petechial spots at the soft palate by EM.

PMID: 7720117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1994 Jul 14;1213(2):215-23.

Enantiospecific synthesis of bioactive hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HETEs) in
Hydra magnipapillata.

Leitz T(1), Muller W, De Petrocellis L, Di Marzo V.

Author information: 
(1)Zoologisches Institut der Universitat, Fachrichtung Physiologie, Heidelberg,
Germany.

Recent reports have shown the occurrence of regiospecific and enantioselective
lipoxygenase-mediated metabolism of arachidonic acid (AA) in cytosolic extracts
of marine and freshwater hydroids. Here we report that cytosolic extracts of
Hydra magnipapillata are unique among hydrozoans for their capability of
converting AA into two major metabolites which showed chromatographic, mass
spectrometric and nuclear magnetic resonance properties identical to those of
11-R- and 12-S-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (11-R-HETE and 12-S-HETE). The
production of neither compound was affected by co-incubation of H. magnipapillata
extracts with the cytochrome P-450 inhibitor proadifen. The 5- and
12-lipoxygenase inhibitor nordihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA), while inhibiting
12-S-HETE formation at high concentrations, did not influence 11-R-HETE
production, thus suggesting the co-localisation, unprecedented in hydroids, of
two separate enantioselective lipoxygenase-like activities. The possible role of 
the two metabolites in the control of hydroid body pattern was investigated. At
low micromolar concentrations, both enantiomers of 11-HETE inhibited
diacylglycerol-induced ectopic head formation (EHF), while 12-S-HETE, and its
likely precursor 12-S-hydroperoxy-eicosatetraenoic acid (12-S-HPETE), enhanced
bud formation, thus providing the first example of endogenous metabolites
controlling, respectively, hydroid 'head activation potential' and asexual
reproduction.

PMID: 8025133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1994 Jul;24(1):165-70.

Left atrial function and ventricular filling in hypertensive patients with
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.

Barbier P(1), Alioto G, Guazzi MD.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Cardiologia, Università degli Studi, Milano, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: We evaluated left atrial dimensions and function, as well as left
ventricular structure and filling, in hypertensive patients with paroxysmal
atrial fibrillation.
BACKGROUND: In hypertensive patients, left atrial dilation and enhanced volume
transport may facilitate arrhythmias.
METHODS: Left ventricular two-dimensional and M-mode echocardiograms and pulsed
Doppler echocardiography of transmitral flow were performed in 17 consecutive
primary hypertensive patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (group EHf) and
in 34 patients with high blood pressure without this arrhythmia (group EH).
Seventeen normal subjects (group N) were also investigated. Groups were matched
for age and gender.
RESULTS: The EH and EHf groups had similar systolic arterial pressures ([mean +/-
SD] group EH 185 +/- 27, group EHf 173 +/- 25 mm Hg, p = NS) and left ventricular
mass index (group EH 154 +/- 55, group EHf 131 +/- 57.8 g/m2, p = NS), and their 
M-mode left ventricular systolic wall stress and fractional shortening were
comparable to those of normal subjects. M-mode left atrial maximal (group N 37.8 
+/- 6, group EH 37.9 +/- 4.6, group EHf 44.6 +/- 6.7 mm, p < 0.05 for group EHf
vs. groups N and EH) and minimal diameters and the diameter preceding atrial
contraction (group N 31 +/- 3.6, group EH 34.5 +/- 5, group EHf 40.4 +/- 6.9 mm, 
p < 0.001 for group EHf vs. group N; p < 0.05 for group EHf vs. group EH) were
greater in group EHf than in group EH and group N subjects, whereas only the
latter diameter was increased in group EH (p < 0.05 vs. group N), so that left
atrial fractional shortening was higher than normal only in group EH (group N
10.8 +/- 4.4%, group EH 14.6 +/- 5.5%, group EHf 9.3 +/- 5.3%; group EH vs. group
N, p < 0.05; group EHf vs. group EH, p < 0.05). The pulsed Doppler ratio of early
to late transmitral flow rates (E and A wave velocity/time integrals x mitral
annulus area) was lower than normal in group EH (group N 2.9 +/- 2.2, group EH
1.75 +/- 0.8, group EHf 2.8 +/- 0.8; group EH vs. group N, p < 0.05; group EHf
vs. group EH, p < 0.001; group EHf vs. group N, p = NS) and was "normalized" in
group EHf, early flow being increased in this group (group N 42 +/- 13, group EH 
39 +/- 29, group EHf 60 +/- 17 ml; group EHf vs. group N, p < 0.05; group EHf vs.
group EH, p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the occurrence of paroxysmal atrial
fibrillation in hypertension is associated with enlargement of the left atrium,
depression of its contractile function and "normalization" of the pattern of left
ventricular filling and is independent of left ventricular hypertrophy and
systolic wall stress. The mechanisms linking these variables remain undefined.

PMID: 8006261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Dokl Akad Nauk. 1994 Jun;336(6):826-8.

[Effect of a low-energy pulse of EHF and SHF-radiation of nanosecond duration
with a high peak intensity on biological structures (malignant neoplasms)].

[Article in Russian]

Deviatkov ND, Pletnev SD, Chernov ZS, Faikin VV, Bernashevskii GA, Shchitkov KG.

PMID: 7951017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Biofizika. 1994 May-Jun;39(3):490-5.

[The mechanism of synchronizing yeast cell cultures with EHF-radiation].

[Article in Russian]

Golant MB, Kuznetsov AP, Bozhanova TP.

We investigated the development of a Saccharomyces carlsbergensis yeast cell
culture irradiated with EHF electromagnetic waves. Short-term EHF action was
found to produce change of the budding period. The cell-cycles synchronization
occurred after longer irradiation. Extraordinary prolonged synchrony of cycles
(more then 20 cycles) was explained as result of the culture self-organization
connected with activation of intercellular interaction.

PMID: 8043637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1994 May;28(3):132-5.

[Experimental studies on transmission of EHF in rodents].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y(1), Tao KH, Zhao XZ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Military Medicine Nanjing Command, PLA, Nanjing.

Studies on the possible routes of transmission of epidemic hemorrhagic fever
(EHF) were conducted in experimental animals. Results showed five-ID50/ml of EHF 
virus (EHFV) suspension could infect rats through their damaged skin. Both
gamasid mites and mower's mites collected from epidemic areas could naturally
infect and transmit EHFV by biting and stinging, or transmit transovarially. EHFV
excreted from the experimentally infected animals could be transmitted to normal 
ones by aerosol. Experimental rats could be infected with EHFV via damaged mucous
membrane of the digestive tract. The above results suggested the main route of
transmission of EHFV was via damaged skin. Mite-borne transmission played an
important role in perpetuating natural foci of EHF in rats. Respiratory
transmission of EHFV via aerosol also was a possible route of transmission under 
specific conditions. In general, EHFV could hardly be transmitted via digestive
tract. All those mentioned above provided an important scientific basis for
prevention of EHF.

PMID: 7842865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 1994 Mar-Apr;(2):6-8.

[The effect of millimeter-range electromagnetic radiation on the evoked
potentials from the vestibular cortical area of the cerebral hemispheres (an
experimental study)].

[Article in Russian]

Mal'tsev AE, Abakarov AT.

Acute experiments on 20 cats showed that EHF waves of nonthermal intensity can
influence evoked potentials (EP) of the exposed vestibular zone of the cerebral
hemispheres. Cerebral cortical exposure to low-frequency EHF waves stimulates
negative EP component. Higher frequencies (78.33-118 GHz) reduce the above
component amplitude. Changes in the positive EP component were minimal. It is
suggested that different effects of millimetric waves diverse frequencies are
related to the depth of the radiation penetration into the live tissue. The
findings can be used in new techniques of physiotherapy.

PMID: 8017050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1993 Nov;32(11):729-32.

[Functional changes of hypothalamic-pituitary target gland axes and their
clinical significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun ZJ(1), Huang XH, Wang MX.

Author information: 
(1)First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical College.

We examined the function of hypothalamic-pituitary target gland axes in 88 cases 
with epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF). It was found that all the three endocrine 
axes i.e. hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis,
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis and hypothalamic- pituitary-gonadal axis
showed some functional impairment. In acute phase there were increased plasma
ACTH, FSH and LH levels, which might be attributed to stress reaction in EHF
patients. Most cases showed low or weak response of TSH to TRH and delayed
response of LH to LHRH; some of the cases did not respond to 1mg of glucagon.
These manifestations might be related with poor reserve of anterior pituitary or 
to disordered regulation of endocrine axes. The increased plasma cortisol and
estradiol and the decreased plasma T3, T4 as well as testosterone during acute
phase may have important clinical significance. Hence we suggest that in any case
glucocorticosteroids should not be abused and that in severe patients thyroxine
and durabolin should be administered to improve immunity and hepato-renal
function.

PMID: 7907972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1993 Nov;32(11):726-8.

[A study on gastric mucosa damage, antigen location, and virus dissociation in
patients with epidemic hemorrhagic fever].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang YX(1), Dong J, Lu QY.

Author information: 
(1)94th Army Hospital.

Gastric mucosa damage was investigated with techniques of gastroscopy, gastric
biopsy, antigen location with immunohistochemical enzyme staining and virus
dissociation in 135 patients with epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF). We found that
the major pathologic finding in gastric mucosa is hemorrhage of squamous shape.
EHF virus antigen exists in epithelial cytoplasm of the superficial layer and
lamina propria of gastric mucosa and the virus is dissociated from gastric
mucosa. The virus is identified as of field-rat serotype with electronmicroscopy 
and monoclonal antibody techniques. These results suggest that it is necessary to
start antivirus therapy early and to give prophylactic measures to prevent
gastric mucosa damage and upper digestive tract bleeding.

PMID: 7907971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1993 Nov;73(11):645-6, 699.

[Inhibitory effect of selenium on complement activation and its clinical
significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Hou JC(1), Jiang ZY, He ZF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing.

In immunopathological study of complement activation, we recognised a marked
inhibitory effect of sodium selenite on the haemolysis induced by complement
fixation in vitro, thereafter on mouse complement activation in vivo induced by
endotoxin, inulin or aggregated IgG indicated by a special rocket
immunoelectrophoresis test of C3 split products. The effective inhibition usually
began at the concentration of 0.002 mol/L of selenite in vitro, and 20
micrograms/25 g BW intravenously in vivo. The inhibitory effect was found evident
on alternative pathway. This inhibitory effect was further identified in cases of
epidemic haemorrhagic fever (EHF) treated by multiple dosages of 2 mg selenite
per day in the first 9 days of hospitalization other than general management of
80 severe cases, including fulminant and moderate grade EHF cases. C3 activation 
was inhibited accordingly and the mortalities also dropped markedly from 100% of 
the non-treated group to 36% of the selenite treated group of fulminant type, and
from 22% to zero of severe type group.

PMID: 7907268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Chin Med J (Engl). 1993 Aug;106(8):608-10.

Early analysis of viremia and clinical tests in patients with epidemic
hemorrhagic fever.

Zhang TM(1), Yang ZQ, Zhang MY, Hu ZJ, Xiang JM, Huggins JW, Cosgriff TM, Smith
JI.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Research Institute, Hubei Medical College, Wuhan.

We analysed the early viremia and clinical tests in 82 patients with epidemic
hemorrhagic fever (EHF). The results showed that the changes in viremia and
clinical tests are related to the severity of the disease and prognosis. Higher
concentrations of the virus in infected patients might cause a more unfavourable 
prognosis and more abnormalities in clinical tests. CK-MB, SGOT, SGPT, serum
creatinine and urea nitrogen contents increased markedly, while serum total
protein, albumin and calcium contents decreased markedly, indicating that the
heart, liver and kidney in EHF patients were severely damaged. Markedly increased
WBC and monocytes showed that the patients were seriously infected. Platelet
count, antithrombin-III and plasminogen decreased markedly, demonstrating that
there were marked changes in the coagulation-anticoagulation and fibrinolytic
system of the EHF patients. Changes in RBC, Hb and HCT contents indicated that
the blood in the EHF patients had a higher concentration. This study gives
further evidence that EHFV plays an important role in the pathogenesis of EHF.

PMID: 7900974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 1993 Jun;22(3):140-2.

[A combined staining of immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization for
detecting epidemic hemorrhagic fever virus in tissue section].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang ZJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hubei Medical College, Wuhan.

A combined staining of immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization has been
successfully applied to detect antigen and viral RNA at the same tissue slice
from epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) autopsy. Multiple McAb were used to detect 
EHFV antigen, followed with a digoxigenin-labelling cDNA probe for detecting EHFV
RNA respectively. The viral antigen was seen in the cellular cytoplasm and viral 
RNA was demonstrated within the nuclei. It is emphasized that pretreatment of the
section with Lugol's solution and choice of suitable proteolytic enzyme as well
as proper temperature and time for the hybridization are the key points for the
staining.

PMID: 8106176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 1993 May;18(5):304-5, 320.

[Alternanthera philoxeroides (Mavt.) Griseb protection against fetal epidemic
hemorrhagic fever virus infection in suckling mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Qu CF(1), Yang ZQ, Xiang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Research Institute, Hubei Medical College, Wuhan.

It has been confirmed that Alternanthera philoxeroides (APG) can markedly protect
suckling mice from being infected by epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) virus.
After the infected mice were treated with the effective components their survival
rate increased, pathological lesion and virus antigen in the tissues mitigated as
compared with the controls. Therapeutical dose of APG caused only slight
deformation of the hepatic cells.

PMID: 8105801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 1993 Apr;13(4):217-9, 197.

[Changes in hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the deficiency-excess
syndrome differentiation on epidemic hemorrhagic fever patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Xijing Hospital, 4th Military University, Xi'an.

In order to understand the relationship between the functional changes of
hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the Deficiency-Excess Syndrome
Differentiation of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), the levels of serum
cortisol and urinary 17-hydroxy-corticosteroid (U 17-OH) per 24 hours were
studied. 171 serum samples and 139 urinary samples were obtained from 87 patients
suffering from epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) in various stage.RESULT: The
Syndrome displayed as Excess-Heat type accompanied with Blood Stasis in febrile
phase of EHF, both the level of serum cortisol and the U 17-OH increased to meet 
the stress. But the Syndrome converted from the Excess-Heat type to the
Cold-Deficiency type in hypotensive and shock phase and the secretion of HPA axis
began to reduce. However, in oliguric phase, the Syndrome was Kidney Deficiency
complicated with Blood-Heat and Blood Stasis, their U 17-OH lowered significantly
(7.53 +/- 3.82 mg/24 h.) in comparing with normal control (P < 0.01), but the
level of serum cortisol, on the contrary, raised significantly (1517.96 +/-
421.96 mol/L) in comparing with control (P < 0.01). And in diuretic phase, the
Syndrome was the Cold-Deficiency type, the HPA excretion tended to restore
gradually but 17-OH maintain at a lower level in serious case. Therefore the
change of serum cortisol was closely related with the HPA excretion in all phases
of EHF, as well as to the Deficiency-Excess Syndrome Differentiation.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8104564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 1993 Feb;14(1):41-4.

[Serotyping of patients with epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) and serotyping and 
antigen typing of main hosts of EHF in Shandong province].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Army Military Medical Research Institute, Jinan.

Serotyping with hemagglutination-inhibition test (HI) on 458 patients with EHF
showed that 419 (91.48%) of them belonged to the house-rat type, 33 (7.21%)
belonged to the wild-rat type, and 6 (1.31%) were undetermined. The majority
(80-100%) of the patients in various regions belonged to the house-rat type. The 
type of the virus antigen and the type of the antibody of rats were in conformity
with the species of rats. These indicate that the epidemic areas of EHF in
Shandong Province are mixed-type epidemic areas, predominantly the house-rat
type.

PMID: 8099309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 1993 Jan;102(1 Pt 1):1-5.

Effects of otitis media on extended high-frequency hearing in children.

Margolis RH(1), Hunter LL, Rykken JR, Giebink GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Otitis Media Research Center, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis.

Extended high-frequency (EHF) hearing was studied in children with and without
histories of chronic or recurrent otitis media (OM). The EHF thresholds were
found to have good test-retest repeatability. Children with OM histories had
poorer EHF hearing than children without OM histories. The EHF hearing in OM
children appeared to be related to OM severity. Children with residual
tympanometric abnormalities had poorer EHF hearing than OM children with normal
middle ear function. The results suggest evidence for middle ear and inner ear
components of EHF hearing losses in children with OM.

PMID: 8420462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1992 Nov;31(11):701-4, 731.

[The study of rapid calculation on clearance creatinine rate in normal and
epidemic hemorrhagic fever].

[Article in Chinese]

Yuan J(1), Huggins WS, Guan MY.

Author information: 
(1)First Affiliated Hospital of Hubei Medical College, Wuhan.

Height, weigh, urine volume/24 hours, serum creatinine (Scr) and urine creatinine
were measured in 207 normal people and 232 patients with EHF. The clearance
Creatinine rate (Ccr) was calculated by 24 hour urine volume method (therapy
measure method) and Cockcroft's method (formulation method). The clearance
creatinine rates between the two methods compared were significantly positive
correlation, but the average values of Ccr in different stages in EHF were
significantly different (P < 0.01). The result indicated that Cockcroft's
Formulation was not fit for HFRS. According to the difference of Ccr in each
stages of EHF, the adjustment values (ad) were presented and used to correct
Cockcroft's formulation, thus, the adjusted Cockcroft's formulation could be
obtained: Ccr = (140-ad-Age) x W/72 x Scr. In this paper, the Ccr of the adjusted
method was compared with that of therapy measure method, the average values
calculated by two methods were not different (P > 0.05). The result of 14 EHF
Clinic practice demonstrated that between adjustment and practice measured
methods were not significantly different. It shows that adjustment method is
practical and available and can be used easily by clinic doctors in basic
hospital.

PMID: 1363997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Chin Med J (Engl). 1992 Nov;105(11):909-12.

Primary and secondary changes in the brains of suckling Balb/c mice with
experimental hemorrhagic fever.

Liu YF(1), Li CX, Yan PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an.

To testify whether primary changes caused by the virus with its related factors
and secondary changes caused by hypotension in the brains of patient with
epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) could be repeated in the animal model, suckling 
Balb/c mice were inoculated IP with 100 LD50/0.05 ml of Chen strain of
hemorrhagic fever virus. After the onset of the disease, paraformaldehyde and
glutaraldehyde were used for fixation by perfusion through left ventricle.
Sections stained with HE and MAb against EHF virus by immunocytochemical method
(4-step PAP) showed diffuse viral antigen deposition. All brains were diffusely
scattered with single cell acidophilic necrosis which are believed to be caused
primarily by the virus. 33.3% of the brains also showed symmetrical distribution 
of cerebral infarct-like necrosis which are believed to be caused secondarily by 
hypotension. This result supports our previous study on the autopsy of brains of 
EHF patients.

PMID: 1363919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Biofizika. 1992 Sep-Oct;37(5):957-62.

[The effect of electromagnetic radiation with extremely high frequency and low
intensity on cytotoxic activity of human natural killer cells].

[Article in Russian]

Fedorchuk AG, Skivka LM, Stoliarov ZE, Levchuk IuN, Mostovaia AV.

EHF electromagnetic radiation under short-time action suppresses the cytotoxical 
activity of the natural killer cells from granulocyte fraction and peripheral
blood of healthy volunteers; the observed effect is non-linear. Under the
long-time irradiation of the natural killer cells from the mononuclear fraction
of blood, the suppressing effect gets a practically linear character after the
20-30 minutes action. Under the long-time irradiation of peripheral blood the
insignificant stimulation of natural killers was observed. It is assumed that the
radiation applied can suppress the cytotoxic activity of the natural killers,
breaking the normal metabolic pathway of phosphatidylinositphosphate.

PMID: 1335293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1992 Aug;72(8):481-3, 510.

[Leptotrombidium scutellare in transmission of epidemic hemorrhagic fever virus].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Military Medicine, Nanjing Military Command, PLA.

To further elucidate the role of Leptotrombidium scutellare in transmission of
epidemic hemorrhagic fever virus (EHFV), a series of studies were carried out
from 1988 to 1990. EHFV was isolated from both larvae of free mites collected
from the grassland of endemic areas and larvae of filial mites hatched in the
laboratory. The suckling mice bitten by these larvae were infected by EHFV.
Because only the larvae of chigger mite can bite vertebrate hosts and only take a
full meal in its entire life cycle, the pathogen carried by it can only be
originated from its parent mite via transovarial route. Thus it can be confirmed 
that the natural infection of EHFV in these mites is transferred via transovarial
transmission. The results demonstrate that L (L.) scutellare can naturally be
infected by EHFV; EHFV can be transmitted to the vertebrate host by biting of the
larvae and can be transferred via transovarial transmission in mites; and
therefore, L (L.) scutellare can serve as a transmitting vector of EHF.

PMID: 1363219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1992 May;26(3):151-3.

[A study on transmission of epidemic hemorrhagic fever virus through skin wounds 
among rodents in natural conditions].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang GQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Hubei Medical College, Wuhan.

224 rodents captured from endemic areas of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) in
Hubei province were examined for the presence of skin wounds and EHF viral
antigens and antibodies by immunofluorescent assay (IFA) technique. It was found 
that 30.8% (69/224) of the captured rodents had skin wounds and that 24.6%
(17/69) and 29.0% (20/69) of the wounded rodents were positive respectively to
EHF viral antigens and antibodies, as compared with the corresponding rates of
9.0% (14/155) and 8.4% (13/155) in rodents without skin wounds. This suggests
that infection through skin wounds could be an important route of transmission of
the EHF virus among rodents under natural conditions.

PMID: 1356718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 1992 Apr;13(2):72-5.

[Study on the serological typing of patients with epidemic hemorrhagic fever
(EHF) and host animals in Junan County, Shangdong Province].

[Article in Chinese]

Meng X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Military Medical Research Institute in Jinan.

Using hemagglutination inhibition test (HI), we confirmed that Junan County is an
endemic area of both EHF of R. norvegicus and A. agrarius, which indicated that
the main host animals were R. norvegicus and A. agrarius in the area. Remarkable 
difference was shown between the infectious rates of pigs from the endemic area
and that of pigs from the nonendemic area, which suggested that pigs could play
certain roles in the transmission of EHF. We also proved that the main
transmission mode of EHF virus in rats was horizontal transmission, and vertical 
transmission in rats also existed.

PMID: 1356628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 1992 Feb;13(1):45-6.

[A quick method for the diagnosis of leptospirosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Shi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Epidemiology and Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Preventive
Medicine, Beijing.

Seventy-nine sero-samples from patients with leptospirosis were tested by
dot-ELISA and microscopical agglutination test (MAT). Results showed that the
accordance rate was 96.19%. 20 sero-samples obtained from healthy people, 4 from 
hepatitis B(HBV) and 4 from epidemic hemorrhage fever (EHF) were negative by
dot-ELISA. We believe dot-ELISA is a simple, rapid method which can be used to
diagnose those patients with leptospirosis.

PMID: 1581955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1992 Feb;31(2):95-7, 126.

[A study on virus localization and microcirculation in the liver in patients with
epidemic hemorrhagic fever].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu JY(1), Yu YX, Zhao ZK.

Author information: 
(1)Liaocheng District Hospital, Shandong.

The findings in our clinical study was consistent with those reported by others
that a temporary elevation of serum alanine aminotransferase activity is
associated with epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF). However, the pathogenesis of
the concomitant changes in liver function tests is still not clear. To clarify
whether EHF virus is cytopathic or not for the liver, percutaneous liver biopsy
was done in 19 patients with EHF within 3-12 days after the onset of symptoms.
These liver biopsy specimens were examined with immunofluorescence assay and cell
cultural technique, showing the presence of active viral replication in liver
cells. Electron microscopy observation of the infected liver cells showed that
ultrastructural distortions was accompanied by the existence of inclusion bodies 
of EHF virus in vacuoles of rough endoplasmic reticulum, endotheliocyte and
microvilli. These findings strongly suggest that EHF virus may play a causative
role in liver injury in patients suffering from EHF and hepatic microcirculation 
disturbance may be involved in the pathogenesis of EHF-related liver dysfunction 
as well.

PMID: 1356713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 1992 Feb;13(1):16-8.

[Study on natural infection, biting and transovarial transmission of epidemic
haemorrhagic fever virus in Leptotrombidium (L.) scutellare].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Military Medicine, Nanjing Command, PLA.

In order to clarify the significance of Leptotrombidium (L.) scutellare in
transmitting EHF, from Oct. to Nov. 1988, lungs of rodents captured in endemic
areas of EHF in Shangxi Province were taken for detecting EHF antigen by IFAT,
Twenty-six out of 459 lungs were positive (5.7%). Six strains of EHFV were
isolated from L. (L.) scutellare collected from the rodents. In Oct. 1989, 28
Apodemus captured from areas without reported cases of EHF were placed on
grassland in endemic areas, free L. (L.) scutellare were lured in all mice and 3 
strains of EHFV were isolated. The above results demonstrate that L. (L.)
scutellare can naturally be infected by EHFV and can be transmitted via bites. It
is also suggested that this species of mites could transmit the disease
transovarially. These results further indicate that L. (L.) scutellare can serve 
as a transmitting vector of EHF.

PMID: 1349851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Nouv Rev Fr Hematol. 1992;34(1):31-5.

Detection of activated platelets using activation-dependent monoclonal antibody
(SZ-51) in clinical disorders.

Wu G(1), Li F, Li P, Li J, Ruan C.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Thrombosis and Hemostasis Research Unit,
Suzhou Medical College, China.

Platelets may become activated in a number of clinical disorders and participate 
in thrombus formation. A direct test for activated platelets in whole blood has
been developed by radioimmunoassay with 125I labelled SZ-51, an antibody specific
for an alpha-granule membrane protein (GMP-140) that associates with the platelet
surface during secretion. The assay with sufficient sensitivity can be applied
satisfactorily to detect as few as 2% activated platelets. In 50 normal subjects,
minimal GMP-140 molecules per platelet were expressed on the surface of
circulating platelets. The expression of GMP-140 molecules was increased
transiently in 10 patients undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass, especially at the
end of bypass. Evaluation of 18 patients with epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF)
showed that the number of GMP-140 molecules on the platelet surface increased
significantly, particularly at the shock phase, and closely related to the four
different phases of EHF. In 9 patients suffered from acute myocardial infarction 
(AMI), the number of GMP-140 molecules changed with the procession of AMI and the
highest occurred at the 48th h after AMI. The GMP-140 molecules were also
increased in patients with asthma attack (n = 14), but not in patients with
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (n = 11). Considered together, these results 
suggest that activated platelets can be measured reliably in whole blood using
radiolabeled SZ-51 antibody and the detection of activated platelets is
potentially useful in identifying patients with certain thrombotic disorders.

PMID: 1381818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 1992;17(1):45-7, 44.

[Influence of moxibustion on TXA2 and PGI2 in plasma of rat infected epidemic
hemorrhagic fever virus (EHFV)].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang Z(1), Song X, Zhou M, Zhang J, Dong C, Ni D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Acupuncture and Meridians, Anhui College of TCM, Hefei.

In this paper, the model of rat infected EHFV was made and the influence of
moxibustion on TXA2 and PGI2 in its plasma was observed. The results show that
the content of TXA2 increased and PGI2 decreased in rat significantly after the
abdominal inoculation of EHFV, and the content of TXA2 decreased and PGI2
increased markedly in rat infected EHFV to normal level after treatment with
moxibustion, suggesting that the regulative function of moxibustion on TXA2 and
PGI2 is one of its nerve-endocrine-immune regulations to the body, and there is
an important significance. This study provides an important reference for
mechanism exploration of moxibustion preventing and treating EHF.

PMID: 1356657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Klin Med (Mosk). 1991 Oct;69(10):74-7.

[Ultrahigh frequency therapy of duodenal ulcer].

[Article in Russian]

Teppone MV, Vetkin AN, Kalin AA, Krotenko AA.

Extremely high frequency (EHF) radiation was performed in 95 outpatients with
duodenal ulcer. Individual choice of the exposure site can improve the treatment 
results. The syndrome-oriented approach of the Chinese conventional medicine
warrants an effective choice of the acupuncture loci and the prognosis of the
outcome. A clinical syndrome was identified in which healing of the ulcer was
achieved on week two of the treatment in 92.3 +/- 7.7% of the patients. It is
suggested that EHF therapy provides positive responses in case of a valid
exposure zone selection, the frequency being less important.

PMID: 1766225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 1991 Aug;11(8):475-6, 453.

[Traditional Chinese medicine combined with Western medicine in the treatment of 
severe renal failure in patients with epidemic hemorrhagic fever].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu JB(1), Liu JX, Jin SL.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Infectious Diseases, Xijing Hospital, Xi'an.

This article reports the treatment of 23 cases (with the control group 20 cases) 
of severe renal failure in patients with epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) by
integrated traditional Chinese medicine and western medicine (TCM-WM), i.e., the 
renal protective decoction and modern medical treatment during the period of
1988-1989. The effects were as follows: (1) The curative rate was elevated and
the morbidity was dropped (P less than 0.01-0.05). (2) Both the period of
oliguria and albuminuria were shortened (P less than 0.01-0.05). (3) The severity
of the complication, e.g., massive gastro-intestinal hemorrhage, etc., was much
reduced (P less than 0.05). (4) The degree of azotemia was getting milder. And
the renal function was much improved (P less than 0.05). The mode of action of
the renal protective decoction is based on the point of view of the TCM in the
treatment of infectious disease.

PMID: 1683271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. G Ital Cardiol. 1991 Jun;21(6):661-8.

[Holter monitoring with a pill-shaped esophageal electrode].

[Article in Italian]

Sorgato A(1), Marchetti A, Simoncelli U, Rusconi C.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Cardiologia, Ospedale S. Orsola Fatebenefratelli, Brescia.

This study analyzes the possibility of using an oesophageal lead in the
ambulatory ECG monitoring in order to improve the diagnostic effectiveness of the
method by reliable identification of atrial activity. The oesophageal Holter
monitoring was performed on 19 patients (pts) (8 F and 11 M, aged 34 to 79
years). These patients posed precise diagnostic problems unsolved by previous
conventional Holter recordings. The oesophageal Holter recording was carried out 
with a Spacelabs recorder, model 90205 with two channels. One electrode was
positioned in the standard lead CM5 and the second in the oesophagus using an
Esodyn 2 electrode with a dynamic configuration made by C.B-Bioelettronica
(Calenzano, Florence). The oesophageal lead was connected with the recorder by
filter model EHF-4. The electrode was swallowed by the patient and the best
position regulated on the P diphasic deflection of the highest amplitude. The
monitoring allowed correct identification of the P wave over a 24-hour period.
The arrhythmia which required the oesophageal Holter monitoring was recorded
again in 15 of 18 patients examined. In each of these cases it was possible to
solve the diagnostic question. The following arrhythmias were found: constant
time correlation between the P deflection and the QRS in accordance with a
supraventricular tachycardia with intraventricular conduction delay (4 pts); A-V 
dissociation in accordance with a ventricular tachycardia (2 pts); pause caused
by atrioventricular block 2:1 (1 pt), second degree sinus-atrial block (1 pt),
blocked premature atrial beats (4 pts); premature ventricular and premature
atrial beats with intraventricular conduction delay (3 pts).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED
AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1743447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1991 Jun;30(6):357-9, 383.

[Kinetic observation on BRC immune function of patients with epidemic hemorrhagic
fever].

[Article in Chinese]

Kang Y(1), Wang WY, Zhao WQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Harbin Medical University.

The RBC immune function of 88 patients with epidemic haemorrhagic fever (EHF) was
examined kinetically with complement-labeled yeast method established by Guo
Feng. The results showed that the percentage of RBC c3b receptor rossette,
activity of RCIA-enhancing factor and c3 in sera of patients during the 3
different phases of EHF were markedly lower than those of the normal controls,
while the percentage of RBC IC rossete, activity of RCIA-inhibiting factor and
CIC in sera of the patients were manifestly higher (P less than 0.01). The change
of all the indices observed above was most apparent in oliguric phase. This
suggested that RBC immune function is lowered in the process of EHF.

PMID: 1680614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 1991 Jun;20(2):110-2.

[The distribution of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) viral antigen in tissues
from EHF autopsies].

[Article in Chinese]

Yi XP(1), Xing SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wuhan Medical School for Metallurgical Industry,
Hubei Province.

Tissues from twelve cases of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) autopsies between
1962 and 1986 were examined for the distribution of EHF viral antigen by double
bridge peroxidase antiperoxidase (PAP) method and avidin biotin conjugate
peroxidase technique. EHF viral antigen was found frequently in the brain,
kidney, heart, lung, liver, spleen, adrenal gland and pancreas. Viral antigen was
also detected in the cerebellum, spinal cord, pituitary gland, stomach, trachea, 
lymph nodes and tonsils in some of the cases. The positive cells were found
mainly in the endothelia of capillaries and small blood vessels. Only a few
parenchymal cells showed positive reaction. However, epithelia of renal tubules, 
alveolar cells of pancreas and some endocrine glands (adrenal, thyroid and
pituitary, etc) were positive. The distribution of viral antigen was not fully
consistent with the degree of pathologic changes in the tissues.

PMID: 1680572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 1991 Jun;12(3):140-3.

[A dynamic change of serotypes of HFRS patients in mixed epidemic area].

[Article in Chinese]

He J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Anti-epidemic Station of Shaoxing City.

In this paper, we have used HI assay in an observation of the dynamic changes of 
serotype of EHF patients in a mixed on demic area in Shaoxing, Zhejiang province.
The results showed that serotypes of EHF patients were strongly correlated with
different endemic areas and had obvious seasonal fluctuation in the incidence of 
the disease. This further demonstrates that the difference between the two
serotypes (Apodemus type and Rattus type) in different geographic areas.

PMID: 1677831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1990 Dec;29(12):739-41, 766.

[Clinical study and immunological observation on potenlini treatment of epidemic 
hemorrhage fever].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu XT(1), Jing PT, Wang CL.

Author information: 
(1)Liyi Medical School, Shandong.

439 cases of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) in the febrile stage of the disease
were randomly divided into two groups. 226 cases in therapeutic group were
treated with daily intravenous drip of 60-100 ml potenlini for 3 days. Other
measures of treatment in this group was just the same as those in the control
group. The results showed that the duration of both the febrile stage and the
hypotensive shock stage were shorter and the rate of recovering from hypotensive 
shock stage and oliguric stage in the therapeutic group (P less than 0.01) was
higher as compared with the control group. BUN, ALT, urinary protein, white blood
cells and platelets returned to normal level earlier than expected (P less than
0.01). The occurrence rate of complication and case fatality rate in therapeutic 
group were lower. The research showed that potenlini in the treatment of EHF has 
effects. But it has not remarkable effects on immune adjustment.

PMID: 1982648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1990 Nov;24(6):354-5.

[A ten-year retrospective investigation of serum against EHF antibodies in
Nanchong District, Sichuan].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiong JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, Nanchong District Hospital, Sichuan.

This paper reports a retrospective inquiry of blood serum against epidemic
hemorrhagic fever (EHF) antibodies in some of our hospital treated EHF patients
during 1974-1984. It was found that the total positive rate of sera against EHF
antibodies obtained from different periods of EHF patients was 86.8% (170/196).
The titers were highest in patients who had been attacked within one year and the
titers markedly decreased from the second year onwards. However certain level of 
serum titre could be detected up to 8th-10th year after the acute infection.
Normal persons in high-incidence districts and medical workers who had kept in
close contact for many years with EHF patients were found to be negative. It is
presumed that this disease's latent infection is probably very low.

PMID: 1983076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1990 Nov;24(6):351-3.

[Epidemiological survey of epidemic haemorrhagic fever in Xianning County].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang XF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Xianning Branch of Hubei Medical College.

The incidence, distribution pattern and trend of disease spreading of EHF in
Xianning Country, Hubei province during 1971-1985 are described. Serologic study 
showed that the serum antigen positivity rate was 12.90% for Apodemus Agragrius
and 6.67% for Rattus Norvegicus and that the serum antibody positivity rate was
61.54% in FHF patients and 30.85% in the exposed contacts of the patients'
families in the epidemic area. In 1985, the HFRS virus A24 was isolated from
Apodemus Agragrius and identified.

PMID: 1983075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1990 Sep;24(5):261-4.

[Study on natural infection of epidemic haemorrhagic fever virus in
Leptotrombidium scutellare].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Military Medicine PLA, Nanjing.

Leptotrombidium (L.) scutellare was considered to be the suspected vector of
epidemic haemorrhagic fever (EHF). In order to clarify the relationship between
this mite and EHF, from Oct to Nov 1988 and Oct of 1989, the larvae of this mite 
were collected from rats in areas with constantly high incidence of EHF in Shanxi
Province and larvae with only small quantity of meal were selected and for more
than 15 days before isolation of EHFV. Six strains of virus were isolated. The
viruses isolated were identified to be EHFV by serum test, immunofluorescent
blocking test as well as neutralization test. The above results further
demonstrate this mite can naturally be infected by EHFV and therefore serve as
vector of EHF.

PMID: 2124535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Carcinogenesis. 1990 Aug;11(8):1377-80.

Biochemical microanalysis of pyruvate kinase activity in preneoplastic and
neoplastic liver lesions induced in rats by N-nitrosomorpholine.

Klimek F(1), Bannasch P.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Cytopathologie, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg,
FRG.

Fundamental aberrations in carbohydrate metabolism have been previously
demonstrated in focal hepatic lesions emerging early during hepatocarcinogenesis 
induced in rat liver by limited oral administration (stop model) of
N-nitrosomorpholine. Using this experimental approach, we have now investigated
quantitatively the activity of pyruvate kinase (PK), a key enzyme of glycolysis
and gluconeogenesis, in individual preneoplastic and neoplastic hepatic lesions, 
particularly in glycogen storage foci, mixed cell foci, basophilic cell foci,
hepatocellular adenomas and carcinomas and in a specific type of preneoplastic
hepatic lesion designated as an enzymatically hyperactive focus (EHF). The focal 
lesions were dissected from freeze-dried tissue sections with a laser
microdissection device. This permits the excision of very small foci and the
measurement of enzyme activities in serial sections of the same focus with
different substrate concentrations, thus enabling possible changes in the
isoenzyme pattern to be detected. On average, PK activity was increased in
glycogen storage foci. Mixed cell foci showed a nearly normal or slightly
decreased enzyme activity. However, a pronounced reduction in PK activity was
observed in low glycogen basophilic foci and in basophilic hepatic tumors. An
exceptionally high PK activity was found in one glycogenotic adenoma. An
increased activity was also observed in EHF. The results suggest that a reduction
in PK activity is a relatively late event during the sequence of cellular changes
leading from glycogenotic foci to hepatocellular carcinomas. A drastic decrease
in the enzyme activity occurs only when low glycogen basophilic cell populations 
develop from the glycogenotic foci in later stages of hepatocarcinogenesis.

PMID: 2387024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Chin Med J (Engl). 1990 May;103(5):391-5.

Epidemic hemorrhagic fever. The mechanism of coagulation and fibrinolysis.

Xiang LB(1), Zhang ZY, Chen JM, Xiang JM, Cosgriff TM.

Author information: 
(1)First Affiliated Hospital, Hubei Medical University, Wuhan.

To understand the mechanism of hemorrhage, coagulation and fibrinolysis in
epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF), thrombin time (TT), prothrombin time (PT),
fibrinogen (FIG), the platelet count (PLAT), plasminogen (PLG), antithrombin-III 
(AT-III), fibrin-fibrinogen degraded products (FDP) and platelet functions of
aggregation and release were studied dynamically with advanced methods in 134 EHF
patients. TT and PT were prolonged, FIG, AT-III and PLG were decreased and FDP
was increased. Besides, the decrease of PLAT, the platelet functions of
aggregation and release were below the normal level. The results showed that the 
balance of blood coagulation and fibrinolysis was lost from the early stage of
the disease.

PMID: 1975230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1990 Mar;29(3):138-40, 188.

[A study of the role of plasma thromboxane B2 and 6-keto-prostaglandin F1 alpha
in epidemic hemorrhagic fever].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang GQ(1), Zou ZZ, Yu DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University.

Plasma concentrations of Thromboxane B2 (TXB2) and 6-keto-prostaglandin F1 alpha 
(6-keto-PGF1 alpha) were dynamically measured with radioimmunoassay in 30
patients of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF). It was found that the levels plasma
TXB2 significantly increased and 6-keto-PGF1 alpha decreased in EHF patients as
compared with those in controls. The more severe the patient's condition, the
higher the level of TXB2 and the lower the level of 6-keto-PGF1 alpha. The ratio 
of TXB2/6-keto-PGF1 alpha was parallel with the severity of the patient's
condition. Plasma TXB and TXB2/6-keto-PGF1 alpha ratio increased significantly in
the hemorrhagic and shock group, while 6-keto-PGF1 alpha decreased significantly 
in the shock group. The results showed that there is a distinct imbalance of
TXA2-PGI2 mediated through the increase of TXA2 and decrease of PGI2 in EHF. The 
imbalance of TXA2-PGI2 participates in the pathogenesis and pathophysiology of
hemorrhage, shock and renal dysfunction.

PMID: 1976492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Pediatr Surg. 1990 Feb;25(2):204-7.

A potential basis for suppressed inflammatory cell function in pediatric
cholestatic hosts.

Roughneen PT(1), Kulkarni AD, Andrassy RJ, Rowlands BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Texas Medical School, Houston 77030.

Infective mortality is common in children who have hepatic failure. We have
demonstrated that experimental hepatic failure (EHF) profoundly suppresses T cell
function in vivo. To determine the basis for immune suppression in EHF we
postulated that this phenomenon is attributable to alterations in accessory
macrophage (Ma) function, T cell subsets, interleukin-2 (IL-2) production, or
serum inhibition. Wistar Furth rats (200 g) were randomized to EHF (n = 23), Sham
(n = 23), and normal control (NC) (n = 23) groups. On day 21, splenocytes and
sera were harvested and immune assays performed in vitro. Following are the
results (mean +/- SEM; Student's t test). Serum bilirubin was elevated in EHF
versus Sham and NC groups (P less than .01). EHF splenic macrophages suppressed
PHA when added to microcultures at 10(5) concentration (-140 +/- 550 v 12,263 +/-
2,492 [Sham] and 21,413 +/- 1,702 [NC] P less than .01). This effect was not
evident when macrophages were added back to microcultures at 10(3) and 10(4)
concentrations, suggesting a dose-dependent inhibitory effect. T helper:
suppressor ratios did not differ in EHF (1.3 +/- 0.2) compared with Sham (1.4 +/-
0.2) and NC groups (1.2 +/- 0.1). IL-2 production was similar in EHF, Sham, and
NC animals (112,141 +/- 5,232 versus 106,691 +/- 1,419 and 120,759 +/- 3,249
counts per minute). T cell inhibitory activity was not demonstrable in EHF sera. 
These data show that splenic macrophages can inhibit T cell function in vitro.
This phenomenon may be paramount in predisposing children with liver disease to
infection.

PMID: 2137536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Biomater Artif Cells Artif Organs. 1990;18(4):491-7.

Novel endotoxin adsorbing materials, polymyxin-sepharose and polyporous
polyethylene membrane for removal of endotoxin from dialysis systems.

Umeda M(1), Niwa M, Yamagami S, Kishimot T, Maekawa M, Sawada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Tadaoka Municipal Hospital, Osaka, Japan.

In order to remove contaminated endotoxin from dialysis systems, we prepared and 
investigated two novel endotoxin adsorbing materials, Polymyxin-Sepharose
(PxSeph) and polyporous polyethylene hollow fiber membrane (EHF). PxSeph was
prepared by covalently immobilizing polymyxin B on Sepharose 4B beads by CNBr
coupling method. It adsorbed various endotoxins with a high affinity constant and
could effectively remove endotoxin from aqueous solution and human plasma. EHF
also removed endotoxins from contaminated water by filtration through EHF
modules, and its adsorption nature was demonstrated. Both PxSeph and EHF are
stable in physiological conditions and proved to be useful adsorbents for removal
of contaminated endotoxin from the hemodialysis systems.

PMID: 2285811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 1990;15(4):302-5.

[Experiment research on moxibustion treating infected EHFV rat].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang Z(1), Song X, Liu B, Zhou M, Dong C, Ni D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Acupuncture and Meridians, Anhui College of TCM Hefei.

In this experiment, we established a rat model of EHFV infected by abdominal
cavity, and observed the effect of moxibustion on the changes of antigens,
antibodies, neural transmitters in blood and tissue on 60 weanling Wistar rats
with EHF. The rats were divided into three groups: normal control group (N.
group), EHF control group (C. group) and EHF with moxibustion group (M. group) at
random. Moxibustion was given at "Shenshu" for 30 minutes daily, 7 days. The 14th
day after infection of EHFV, blood and lungs of the rats were fetched. The
results obtained are as follows: 1. The effect value of EHF antibodies dilution: 
in C. group, it is 1:267 +/- 82 (n = 8), in M.group, it is 1:336 +/- 176 (n =
10), there is a significantly different of specific antibodies between C.group
and M.group. The results show that moxibustion had an effect of enhancing the
function of immune system in rats with EHF. 2. The examination rate of EHFV
antigens in lungs, in C.group, it is 62.5% (n = 8), in M.group, it is 49.4% (n = 
16). The results show that moxibustion may enhance the immune function and the
effect of eliminating virus of lymphocytes in lungs. 3. The value of BUN in
serum: in N.group, it is 15.3 +/- 2.50 (n = 10), in C.group, it is 24.63 +/- 7.24
(n = 10), and in M.group, it is 16.36 +/- 4.59 (n = 26). There is a significantly
different between C.group and N.group or M.group (P less than 0.001). There is no
significantly different between N.group and M.group (P greater than
0.05).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1980432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1989 Nov;69(11):621-4, 44.

[Interruption of early viremia in patients with epidemic hemorrhagic fever].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang ZQ.

Kinetic changes of viremia were observed in 287 patients with epidemic
hemorrhagic fever (EHF) in whom ribavirin was administered with a double blind
random controlled study by means of virus isolation, indirect immunofluorescence 
technique and ELISA. The positive rate of viremia was 79.7%, and the positive
rate of EHF IgM was 85.0% before treatment. Viremia could be interrupted by
ribavirin. In the ribavirin group, the positive rate of viremia decreased,
duration of viremia was shortened, viral antigen products, viral titer and EHF
IgG level were reduced as compared with the control group. These showed that
viremia is very frequent in patients in the febrile phase, and ribavirin is an
effective antiviral drug in treatment of EHF during the febrile phase. Dosage of 
the drug and the course of treatment are discussed.

PMID: 2576861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 1989 Oct;98(10):767-71.

Air conduction thresholds and secretory otitis media: a conventional and
extra-high frequency audiometric comparison.

Mair IW(1), Fjermedal O, Laukli E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Tromsø, Norway.

A comparison has been made of air conduction threshold changes up to 1 year after
myringotomy, aspiration of middle ear fluid, and insertion of ventilation tubes
in ten patients with bilateral and 12 with unilateral secretory otitis media
(SOM). Pure tone air conduction thresholds have been analyzed in three frequency 
groups: low frequency (LF; 0.25 0.5, and 1 kHz), high frequency (HF; 2, 4, and 8 
kHz), and extra-high frequency (EHF; 10, 12, 14 and 16 kHz). In the LF and HF
ranges, significant improvement came during the first 24 hours after intubation, 
while in the EHF range, threshold lowering occurred gradually over the following 
2 months. Possible explanations for these findings are discussed.

PMID: 2802458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 1989 Sep;18(3):194-6.

[An electron microscopic study of viral infected peripheral mononuclear cells in 
epidemic hemorrhagic fever].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen DH.

Ultrathin sections of peripheral blood cells from 7 patients of early stage
epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) were reexamined under transmission electron
microscope. Virus particles were found in the cytoplasmic vacuoles of mononuclear
cells from two patients. The morphology and morphogenesis of the matured virus
were identical with those of Hantaan virus of the Bunyaviridae family.
Additionally, abnormal aggregations of tubuloreticular structure (TRS) were
sometimes encountered in the dilated cisternae of endoplasmic reticulum in the
lymphoid cells regardless of whether there are virus particles present in the
cytoplasm.

PMID: 2576865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Chin Med J (Engl). 1989 Aug;102(8):602-5.

Efficacy of inactivated vaccine containing cyto-hemagglutinin against epidemic
hemorrhagic fever in rabbits.

Zhu ZY, Tang HY, Li YJ, Weng JQ, Fu GM.

Using the Z-10 strain of epidemic hemorrhagic fever virus (EHFV) as seed, and the
primary cell of Meriones unguiculatus kidney tissue as incubation cell, a
propiolactone inactivated epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) vaccine was prepared, 
according to a similar procedure required for the production of biological
products such as the Japanese B encephalitis vaccine. Besides the EHFV antigen
detected by ELISA or reversed passive hemagglutination test (RPHA) as were used
for the formalin inactivated vaccine, higher titres (1:128-1:1024) of EHFV
hemagglutinin antigen was also detected in this EHFV vaccine. Immunization with
twice intramuscular injection of this vaccine produced high titred (1:20-1:160)
neutralizing antibody and low titred (1:10-1:20) hemagglutination antibody, in
addition to the immunofluorescence (IF) and reversed passive hemagglutination
inhibition (RPHI) antibodies. These results indicated an apparent difference in
the immunogenicity between the beta-propiolactone and formalin inactivated EHF
vaccines. With the approval of the Ministry of Health, human test is now underway
in this laboratory.

PMID: 2576866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 1989 Aug;10(4):238-40.

[Differentiation of the type of EHF antibodies by RPHI].

[Article in Chinese]

Li XF.

This article reports the use of for differentiation of the type of EHF
antibodies. A total of 58 convalescent-phase sera from EHF patients in natural
foci of predominant Apodemus type of EHF and in those of Rattus type of EFH were 
examined. In the former 34/36 (94.44%) belonged to Apodemus type, and in the
latter 22/22 (100%) belonged to Rattus type. Both RPHI and HI obtained the same
result in differentiation of the type of EHF antibodies. RPHI possesses
sensitivity and specificity in EHF diagnosis, and may be used for differentiation
of the type of EHF antibodies.

PMID: 2572325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1989 Apr;28(4):205-7, 250.

[Using urinary diagnostic indices to evaluate acute renal failure in epidemic
hemorrhagic fever].

[Article in Chinese]

Gong ZJ, Guan MY, Wu ZO.

The urinary diagnostic indices were used to evaluate acute renal failure in 118
cases with epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF). When the renal failure was mainly
caused by acute tubular necrosis, it would occur earlier and persist longer. The 
authors suggested that the indices are helpful in documenting the severity and
identifying the characteristics of acute renal failure in EHF. The mechanisms for
developing acute renal failure in EHF was discussed.

PMID: 2572406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1989 Mar;28(3):150-2, 186.

[Assay of NK cell activity and IL-2 and IFNr production in vitro in patients with
epidemic hemorrhagic fever].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao Q, Wang XH.

In order to study the immune function and pathogenesis of epidemic hemorrhagic
fever (EHF), we assayed NK cell cytotoxicity against K562 targets in 95 patients 
with EHF and the production of IL-2 and IFNr in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) after PHA stimulation In contrast to that in normal controls. NK
cell activity elevated markedly during febrile phase and reached a highest level 
during shock and oliguric phase and then gradually decreased to normal. NK cell
activity in patients with serious EHF elevated more markedly than that in
patients with mild EHF. The production of IL-2 and IFNr in PBMC of patients with 
EHF after PHA stimulation was normal. The production of IL-2 had significantly
positive correlation with NK, cell activity during oliguric, polyuric and
convalescent phases, so was the production of IFNr with shock, oliguric,
polyuric, and convalescent phases. These results suggests that patients with EHF 
have still normal cellular immune response. EHF virus may activate NK cells
directly and NK cells may participate in the pathogenesis of EHF.

PMID: 2572405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Chin Med J (Engl). 1989 Feb;102(2):116-9.

The duration of viremia patients with epidemic hemorrhagic fever.

Yao ZQ, Yang WS, Zhang WB, Bai XF.

The duration of viremia in patients with epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) was
studied using immunofluorescence technique and cell culture assays. The duration 
of virus in plasma of EHF patients was about 1 week, which was concomitant with
the febrile phase of the disease. Comparatively, the separation rate of viruses
in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) was greater (1.8 times) than in
plasma, while the detected peak of EHF (in 4-7 days after onset of the disease)
was found to be 2 or 3 days less than that of plasma, thus the detectable viremia
was prolonged until the 8th to 11th day of the disease. High titre EHF antibody
of IgG, TgM was unable to neutralize the virus in human blood. The results
revealed that a blood-cell-associated prolonged viremia is one of the
characteristics of EHF infection.

PMID: 2570679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1989 Feb;28(2):103-5, 127.

[Study on the mechanism of glucose intolerance and insulin resistance in epidemic
hemorrhagic fever].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun ZJ, Huang XH, Tang JH.

Intravenous glucose tolerance test (ivGTT) and insulin releasing test (IRT) were 
performed in 32 cases with epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF). 23 patients had
impaired glucose tolerance, 17 patients showed hyperinsulinemia in fasting state,
12 patients had flat insulin response curves and most patients had higher plasma 
levels of growth hormone (GH), cortisol (F), norepinephrine (NE) and epinephrine 
(E) in critical stage than in convalescent stage. These data suggest that in EHF 
there are disturbed glucose metabolism and insulin resistance due to decreased
pancreatic B cell reservoir and increased insulin antagonists such as GH, F, NE, 
E etc. It is suggested that use of insulin in addition to intravenous glucose
infusion may be beneficial to glucose utilization in EHF.

PMID: 2567660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 1989 Feb;10(1):6-10.

[Study on geographic epidemiology of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) in China].

[Article in Chinese]

Luo ZZ, Liu GZ.

The distribution, epidemic intensity and the focus type of EHF at county's level 
in China was studied by the method of discriptive, serological and geographic
epidemiology. The EHF foci distributed in 1,257 counties within 25 provinces
(cities, autonomous regions) by 1986, 633 of them were found before 1980 and the 
other 624 after it. The epidemic area have extended nearly twice in the last
years. The extension of rattus type focus was most significant. The number of
focus of Rattus type increased from 20 counties in 1980 (account for 3.73% of
total foci) to 288 in 1986 (26.77%); the mixed type also enlarged from 98
(18.28%) to 267 (24.81%); while the Apodemus type was relatively steady. More
than 250,000 small animals were captured and tested in this research. 4 orders 8 
families and 37 species were found carrying EHF virus antigen. The research
pointed out that the main kinds of the reservoir were limited. In addition, the
animals which carry EHF virus were found also in 111 non-case-reported counties, 
so these areas could be a potential EHF's foci. The relationship between the
distribution of EHF focus (especially Apodemus type) and natural geographic
factors, such as the physical features of a place, precipitation and water system
etc, was analysed. The preventive strategies and suggestions were also discussed.

PMID: 2567630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 1989 Feb;10(1):18-20.

[Analysis on distribution of epidemic hemorrhagic fever in different area].

[Article in Chinese]

Lin FX.

The data showed that there was acrrelation between EHF and host animals as well
as types of natural foci in plains, hills and mountain areas of Tian Tai county. 
It was clear that the main host animals were R. norvegicus and A. agrarius in
plain areas, so there are mixture foci of R. norvegicus and A. agrarius in the
above areas. The morbidity of EHF and the positive rate of mouse lung antigen as 
well as the inapparent infections rate of healthy population were high in plains.
As the attitude elevated, it gradually formed a natural focus of R. norvegicus as
the main host animal in hills and mountaim areas. The positive rate of the mouse 
lung antigen diminished sharply. Both the incidence rate of EHF and the
inapparent infection rate of healthy population were lower.

PMID: 2567629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 1989 Feb;10(1):11-3.

[Studies on inapparent infection of epidemic hemorrhagic fever in population of
Shanxi Province].

[Article in Chinese]

Mi EY.

Detection for IgG antibody to virus of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) in sera
from healthy people in Shanxi province were carried out by IFAT. Two hundred
thirty eight of 4873 serum samples were antibody-positive. Total positive rate
was 4.88%. The inapparent infection rate of EHF in residents of endemic areas was
5.48%. There was a statistically significant difference of epidemic strength
among different counties. Based on the analysis of antibody titers of positive
sera, value of upper limit (P95) of antibody titre for inapparent infection was
1:315. It was suggested that the antibody titre of 1:320 by IFAT in a single
sample of serum from patient with clinical manifestations of EHF might be used as
a criteria for specific diagnosis of EHF.

PMID: 2567627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 1989 Feb;10(1):1-5.

[Preliminary study on epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) in Guizhou Province].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang ZX.

During 1962-1986, EHF cases have been reported in 50 out of 82 counties in
Guizhou province. It was high in northern Guizhou province. However, serological 
survey of the population showed that endemic area extended to 51 counties. The
inapparent infection rate ranged from 0 to 4.04%. In 76 out of 82 counties the
rodents were found to carry hantavirus. Apodemus agrarius of Zunyi county of
Guizhou and Rattus norvegicus of the eastern and south Guizhou are important
reservoirs of EHF. Hantavirus has been isolated both from patients and from
rodents.

PMID: 2567626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Incl Mol Pathol. 1989;57(2):99-108.

Unusual histochemical pattern in preneoplastic hepatic foci characterized by
hyperactivity of several enzymes.

Enzmann H(1), Ohlhauser D, Enzmann H, Dettler T, Benner U, Hacker HJ, Bannasch P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Experimentelle Pathologie, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum,
Heidelberg, Federal Republic of Germany.

In a stop-experiment using the hepatocarcinogen N-nitrosomorpholine, as well as
glycogenotic and related lesions, hepatocellular foci with a different
histochemical pattern were identified. The outstanding features of these hepatic 
foci, which may progress to hepatocellular adenoma, were increased activities of 
mitochondrial glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (mG3PD), glycogen synthase,
pyruvate kinase and glucose-6-phosphatase detected by enzyme histochemistry.
Since no decrease in activity of any of the enzymes examined were seen in these
foci, compared with normal liver, the term enzymatically hyperactive focus (EHF) 
is proposed for this type of lesion. Only at the stage of overtly nodular growth 
did these lesions exhibit some of the characteristic changes seen in nodules
developing from glycogenotic foci, namely elevated activities of
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, gamma-glutamyl transferase and
glutathione-S-transferase P as well as decreased activities of
adenosine-triphosphatase, glucose-6-phosphatase and adenylate cyclase. Some of
these enzymes have been used widely in morphometric studies as markers for
preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions. The inability to detect early EHF may lead 
to an underestimation of preneoplastic liver lesions in quantitative studies.
Although there are apparent differences in the histochemical patterns of glycogen
storing foci and early EHF, these differences tend to disappear during
progression to overtly neoplastic lesions. In studies comparing the phenotypic
alterations in different types of preneoplastic hepatic lesions, the recognition 
of EHF may contribute to the distinction of obligatory from facultative phenomena
during transformation.

PMID: 2569254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1989 Jan;28(1):39-42, 63.

[Processes of pathologic coagulation and fibrinolysis in epidemic hemorrhagic
fever with renal lesion].

[Article in Chinese]

Gong ZJ, Wu ZO, Guan MY.

The processes of coagulation, anticoagulation and fibrinolysis as well as renal
function were studied in 114 cases with epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF). The
results showed that there were pathological coagulation and fibrinolysis and
abnormal renal function in EHF. Comparing with normal controls, there was
statistical significance (P less than 0.05) with the exception of fibrinogen. The
degree of abnormality corresponded with the severity of the disease. With the
observation of serial curves of these processes and renal function, we found out 
that there was correlation between them. Correlation analysis suggested that
pathological coagulation and fibrinolysis could cause renal lesion or exacerbate 
it (P less than 0.05). The lesion affects mainly the glomerular filtration;
whether it affects the tubular function or not is uncertain.

PMID: 2567659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Int J Biomed Comput. 1988 Oct;23(1-2):77-81.

Computer graphics and computer animation of the electric heart field.

Hulin I(1), Slavkovsky P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathophysiology of Medical School, Comenius University,
Bratislava, Czechoslovakia.

The authors present in their paper the possibilities of the application of
computer graphics and computer animation for visualization of the electric heart 
field (EHF). They describe the construction of three-dimensional potential maps
by the methods of interpolation, perspective projection, hidden line elimination 
and text generation. They also present a method for making of animation films
showing the electric activity of the heart by using 80 three-dimensional
potential maps recorded at different intervals over the entire cardiac cycle.

PMID: 3220598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Radiobiologiia. 1988 May-Jun;28(3):361-4.

[Effect of millimeter-range radiation on the effectiveness of bone marrow
transplantation].

[Article in Russian]

Deviatkov ND, Sevast'ianova LA, Zubenkova ES, Golant MB.

The results presented in this report show that while bone marrow of intact donors
transplanted to irradiated (10 Gy) recipient mice produces a 2.5-fold increase in
the life span of animals, bone marrow of donors exposed to EHF increases it by 35
times.

PMID: 3041439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 1988 Feb;9(1):29-32.

[The study on inapparent infection in the endemic areas of the wild and domestic 
rat types EHF in parts of north-east areas in China].

[Article in Chinese]

Hou PS.

PMID: 2898296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1987 Nov;21(6):325-7.

[Transmission of epidemic hemorrhagic fever virus between mice and mites in EHF
endemic areas].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y.

PMID: 2898326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Chin Med J (Engl). 1987 Sep;100(9):756-8.

Intrauterine infection of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) via placenta.

Liu YF, Yan PS, Wang BY, Liu J, Wang NP, Zhu XS, Huang M, Chen BQ.

PMID: 2894925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 1986 Feb;7(1):26-8.

[Carriers of epidemic hemorrhagic fever virus in rodents and mites in EHF endemic
area].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y.

PMID: 3087624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Gen Virol. 1985 Aug;66 ( Pt 8):1733-40.

Definition of three serotypes of Hantaviruses by a double sandwich ELISA with
biotin-avidin amplification system.

Goldgaber D, Gibbs CJ Jr, Gajdusek DC, Svedmyr A.

A total of seven different isolates of Hantaviruses from five mammalian species
and six geographical areas were examined by a double sandwich ELISA with
biotin-avidin amplification system. Three serotypes were recognized by comparing 
antigen titres to homologous and heterologous antibody and blocking antibody
titres to homologous and heterologous antigens. Serotype 1 included four strains:
Hantaan virus isolated from Apodemus agrarius in South Korea, Hupei-I isolated
from acute-phase serum from a patient with epidemic haemorrhagic fever (EHF) in
China, SR-11 isolated from a laboratory rat associated with an EHF outbreak in
Sapporo, Japan, and Tchoupitoulas isolated from a wharf rat (Rattus norvegicus)
trapped in New Orleans, La., U.S.A. Serotype 2 included two strains of
nephropathia epidemica virus, Hällnäs-I and Puumala, isolated from Clethrionomys 
glareolus trapped in nephropathia epidemica foci in Sweden and Finland,
respectively. Serotype 3 included one strain, Prospect Hill-I, isolated from
Microtus pennsylvanicus, trapped in Frederick, Md., U.S.A.

PMID: 3926952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Infect Dis. 1984 Dec;150(6):889-94.

Antigenic difference between viral strains causing classical and mild types of
epidemic hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome in China.

Song G, Hang CS, Liao HX, Fu JL, Gao GZ, Qiu HL, Zhang QF.

The antigenic relationship between viral isolates from Apodemus and Rattus that
appear to cause the classical and mild types of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) 
in China was studied by cross-immunofluorescence, cross-neutralization,
immunofluorescence blocking tests, and cross-enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA). Obvious antigenic diversity between the isolates was demonstrated by
cross-neutralization, immunofluorescence blocking tests, and cross-ELISA.
Antisera from patients with classical EHF neutralized viruses of both types to a 
similar degree, but antisera from patients with mild EHF showed little
neutralization of apodemus virus. Similarly, antisera from classical EHF blocked 
immunofluorescence by monoclonal antibody (25-1 McAb) derived from apodemus virus
to both viral antigens, but antisera from mild EHF gave only low-grade blocking
against apodemus viral antigen. Direct antigenic titrations of both viral strains
by cross-ELISA yielded similar results. That distinct antigenic differences exist
between viral strains causing these two types of EHF might be of great importance
to the serological differentiation of the viruses and the study of EHF vaccine.

PMID: 6150062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 1984 Oct;6(5):353-5.

[Studies on growth conditions of EHF virus in primary rat lung cell culture].

[Article in Chinese]

Hang CS, Fu JL, Liao HX, Gao GZ, Zhang QF, Qiu HL, Song G.

PMID: 6241087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Arch Intern Med. 1983 Nov;143(11):2070-2.

CNS manifestations of epidemic hemorrhagic fever. An advanced manifestation of
disease associated with poor prognosis.

Cohen MS, Kwei HE, Chin CC, Ge HC.

The records of 134 patients with the clinical diagnosis of epidemic hemorrhagic
fever (EHF) were evaluated. The conditions of 74 patients could be categorized as
"serious" based on hemorrhagic complications and magnitude of proteinuria, BP
abnormality, and pyrexia. Forty-six of these patients with a serious condition
had one or more CNS abnormalities. Common manifestations included confusion,
meningismus, and convulsions. Whereas abnormality in fever could not be related
to CNS abnormality, BP disturbance, acidosis, and azotemia were significantly
more common among patients with CNS disease. Fourteen percent of the patients in 
this study died, and all of them had CNS disturbance; mortality among patients
with CNS disturbance was 41%. These results suggest that the CNS manifestations
of EHF are multifactorial in cause and they identify a subset of patients with an
advanced stage of disease and a grave prognosis.

PMID: 6139098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Artif Organs. 1983 May;7(2):213-20.

Characterization of polyethylene membrane for plasma separation.

Sato H, Malchesky PS, Matsubara S, Nosé Y.

Three types of polyethylene hollow fiber membranes (Mitsubishi, Tokyo) were
evaluated for plasma separation: EHF-Type 1 (lowest porosity and smallest inner
diameter), Type 2 (medium porosity and diameter), and Type 3 (highest porosity
and largest inner diameter). Characterization of these membranes led to the
selection of the Type 3 membrane as the best, based on in vitro studies of
filtration and sieving properties. Analysis of the data suggests that pore size
and pore number (density) are more optimal for this membrane. Ex vivo studies of 
the Type 3 membrane showed high sieving (greater than 0.9) for albumin, total
protein, and total cholesterol; each was stable over time. No significant
hemolysis was observed.

PMID: 6870597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Ear Hear. 1983 May-Jun;4(3):162-5.

Influence of cigarette smoking on extra-high-frequency auditory thresholds.

Cunningham DR, Vise LK, Jones LA.

Twenty-five young adult nonsmokers and 18 smokers were studied with respect to
differences in their extra-high-frequency (EHF) auditory sensitivity. Although no
statistically significant differences were found between their EHF thresholds,
there was some evidence that smokers have poorer EHF hearing. The implication of 
this finding, vis-à-vis the use of EHF auditometry as a predictor of atheromatous
damage to blood vessel walls, is discussed with suggestions for future research.

PMID: 6862117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Infect Dis. 1983 Apr;147(4):654-9.

Etiologic studies of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (hemorrhagic fever with renal
syndrome).

Song G, Hang CS, Qui XZ, Ni DS, Liao HX, Gao GZ, Du YL, Xu JK, Wu YS, Zhao JN,
Kong BX, Wang ZS, Zhang ZQ, Shen HK, Zhou N.

Two strains of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) virus were isolated from the lung
tissues of Apodemus agrarius mice that were captured in an area where EHF is
endemic. The strains were isolated by passages in A. agrarius mice from a
nonendemic area. Identification of the isolates by usual procedures was confirmed
by repeated blind tests with coded sera. Contamination with certain known viruses
such as reovirus, adenovirus (types 3 and 7), and other pathogens, such as murine
typhus rickettsiae and Leptospira, which may be naturally present in wild
rodents, appeared to have been ruled out. The antigen slides made from these
isolates are in use in the specific diagnosis and seroepidemiologic studies of
EHF. The first successful application is the serodiagnosis of a mild type of
hemorrhagic fever that occurs with characteristic epidemiologic features in
certain provinces of China.

PMID: 6132949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1983 Feb;63(2):65-8.

[Identification of a strain of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) virus from
patients' sera].

[Article in Chinese]

Ni DS.

PMID: 6134574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Scand J Infect Dis Suppl. 1982;36:96-108.

Muroid virus nephropathies and muroid viruses of the Hantaan virus group.

Gajdusek DC.

Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) came dramatically to the attention
of Western medicine in 1951 with the "new" disease becoming a major source of
morbidity and mortality in American troops in Korea. Known there as epidemic
hemorrhagic fever (EHF) or Korean hemorrhagic fever (KHF), it became apparent
that it was the same disease as the endemic (epidemic) hemorrhagic
nephroso-nephritis of the Soviet Far East and Songo fever of the Japanese Army in
Manchuria. The conjecture that the milder epidemic (endemic) nephropathy of
Scandinavia and European Russia was the same or a related disease has now been
substantiated with the demonstration of close serological relationship of the
Bunyamwera-like virus causing KHF (Hantaan virus) to that of HFRS in Finland,
Sweden, European Russia, Greece and Yugoslavia. In the past decade the disease
has been recognized as a serious problem in 19 provinces of China and in Japan,
where the virus is the Hantaan virus. The severe EHF (or KHF) has its silent
reservoir in the wild mouse Apodemus agrarius or in laboratory rats while the
less virulent European disease resides in the voles Clethrionomys sp. A mild
nonhemorrhagic form of the East Asian nephropathy is carried to man by infected
urban rats, Rattus rattus or Rattus norvegicus, in Japan and Korea. All forms are
carried to man as a respiratory infection "when a mouse (or rat or vole) coughs".
Antibodies to the Hantaan virus have been found in man in India, Iran, Central
Africa, Alaska, Bolivia and in wild rodents and urban rats in the USA where human
cases of muroid virus nephropathy have not been recognized. Antibody patterns to 
Hantaan virus and to Scandinavian nephropathia epidemica virus antigens found in 
human and rodent sera in America and in Sweden, Yugoslavia, and European Russia
suggest the possibility of yet a third (or more) virus serotype(s), and also the 
possible presence of the East Asian type of virus in Europe.

PMID: 6134336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Immunol. 1981 Sep;127(3):1064-7.

Studies on immunopathogenesis in epidemic hemorrhagic fever: sequential
observations on activation of the first complement component in sera from
patients with epidemic hemorrhagic fever.

Yan D, Gu X, Wang D, Yang S.

Sequential measurements of activation of the 1st component of complement (C1) in 
the sera of 29 patients hospitalized with epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF) were
performed according to a method recently developed. These patients were treated
with supportive, routine therapy, but not immunosuppressive agents. This paper
describes the kinetic observations on the activation of C1 in the 29 cases. The
data confirm that an apparently increased extent of activation occurred in their 
sera. It was found that the more severely ill the patients were, the more
apparent the activation. Additionally, beginning with the 15th day of disease,
the extent of C1 activation diminished in most of the moderate and severe types
of patients, but not in those with moribund illness and fatal ones. On the basis 
of the study, it may be reasonably concluded that C1 activation was correlated
well with the severity and clinical course of EHF, indicating that the classical 
C pathway was activated in these patients. We feel that our findings are
important to an understanding and elucidation of the immunopathogenetic
mechanisms of EHF.

PMID: 6114975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Yale J Biol Med. 1981 Jan-Feb;54(1):41-55.

Epidemic hemorrhagic fever in Hubei Province, The People's Republic of China: a
clinical and serological study.

Cohen MS, Casals J, Hsiung GD, Kwei HE, Chin CC, Ge HC, Hsiang CM, Lee PW, Gibbs 
CJ Jr, Gajdusek DC.

Between July 1975 and April 1980, 71 patients were admitted to the Second
Attached Hospital of Hubei Provincial Medical College in Wuchang with the
diagnosis of epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF). The clinical course among these
patients was similar to that described for patients with Korean hemorrhagic
fever, and hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome of the U.S.S.R. The overall
mortality was 11.2 percent. Sera obtained from some of these patients as well as 
from patients admitted to the First Attached Hospital of Hubei Provincial Medical
College were tested against an antigen associated with Korean hemorrhagic fever
and showed exceedingly high antibody titers. We conclude that EHF in Central
China represents the same or a closely related disease process as Korean
hemorrhagic fever.

PMCID: PMC2595900
PMID: 6113714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Yale J Biol Med. 1981 Jan-Feb;54(1):11-20.

Are biomedical exchange programs inside The People's Republic of China feasible: 
report of a six-month study at Hubei Provincial Medical College.

Henderson GE, Cohen MS.

Between November 1979 and April 1980 we lived at Hubei Provincial Medical College
(HPMC) in Wuchang, Hubei Province, People's Republic of China, in order to
organize an exchange program on behalf of the Infectious Disease Section at Yale 
University School of Medicine. HPMC consists of a medical college, two affiliated
Western-style medical hospitals, and a dental hospital. This institution and the 
living and working conditions arranged on our behalf are described. Ultimately
our work centered on epidemic hemorrhagic fever (EHF), a disease with a high
incidence in Southern China; the study of EHF may serve as a focal point for
ongoing collaborations. Our results suggest that institution-to-institution
exchange programs are feasible and will probably become more common in the
future.

PMCID: PMC2595899
PMID: 6113713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Br J Radiol. 1978 Nov;51(611):847-50.

Radiologic manifestations of epidemic haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome.

Bahk YW, Kim CY.

Epidemic haemorrhagic fever is a viral disease characterized by acute febrile
onset followed by profound renal dysfunction. The endemic areas are widespread
throughout the Eurasian continent and the Japanese islands. The patient with EHF 
usually seeks medical care as an emergency for an "acute abdomen". Consequently
the X-ray examination becomes an essential part of the clinical study. We
analysed the plain abdomen and chest films of 62 patients with this disease. The 
radiologic manifestations represented diffuse capillary damage with resultant
oedema and haemorrhage, particularly in the retro-peritoneal space. Abnormal
findings were seen in 94% of the patients on the plain abdomen, and in 63% on the
chest film. The most significant finding was obliteration and blurring of
anatomical detail in both intra- and retro-peritoneal cavities and renal
enlargement. We believe that simultaneous presence of oedema and effusion in both
intra- and retro-peritoneal cavities along with renal enlargement is in practice 
pathognomic of EHF. Obliteration of the renal outline and cardiomegaly with overt
lung oedema was associated with the most severe renal dysfunction.

PMID: 30510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Mil Med. 1955 Dec;117(6):502-7.

European outbreaks of the Far-Eastern (Korean) type of epidemic hemorrhagic fever
(EHF).

MAYER CF.

PMID: 13272607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


