
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 22;11(3):e0152022. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152022.
eCollection 2016.

Proteomic Profiling of Mouse Liver following Acute Toxoplasma gondii Infection.

He JJ(1), Ma J(1,)(2), Elsheikha HM(3), Song HQ(1), Zhou DH(1), Zhu XQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR
China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Hunan Agricultural University,
Changsha, Hunan Province 410128, PR China. (3)Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham,
Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom.

Toxoplasma gondii remains a global public health problem. However, its
pathophysiology is still not-completely understood particularly the impact of
infection on host liver metabolism. We performed iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis
to evaluate early liver protein responses in BALB/c mice following infection with
T. gondii PYS strain (genotype ToxoDB#9) infection. Our data revealed
modification of protein expression in key metabolic pathways, as indicated by the
upregulation of immune response and downregulation of mitochondrial respiratory
chain, and the metabolism of fatty acids, lipids and xenobiotics. T. gondii seems
to hijack host PPAR signaling pathway to downregulate the metabolism of fatty
acids, lipids and energy in the liver. The metabolism of over 400 substances was 
affected by the downregulation of genes involved in xenobiotic metabolism. The
top 10 transcription factors used by upregulated genes were Stat2, Stat1, Irf2,
Irf1, Sp2, Egr1, Stat3, Klf4, Elf1 and Gabpa, while the top 10 transcription
factors of downregulated genes were Hnf4A, Ewsr1, Fli1, Hnf4g, Nr2f1, Pparg,
Rxra, Hnf1A, Foxa1 and Foxo1. These findings indicate global reprogramming of the
metabolism of the mouse liver after acute T. gondii infection. Functional
characterization of the altered proteins may enhance understanding of the host
responses to T. gondii infection and lead to the identification of new
therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4803215
PMID: 27003162  [PubMed - in process]


2. Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 26. [Epub ahead of print]

Mutational Landscape and Antiproliferative Functions of ELF Transcription Factors
in Human Cancer.

Ando M(1), Kawazu M(2), Ueno T(3), Koinuma D(4), Ando K(5), Koya J(6), Kataoka
K(6), Yasuda T(3), Yamaguchi H(3), Fukumura K(3), Yamato A(3), Soda M(3), Sai
E(2), Yamashita Y(3), Asakage T(7), Miyazaki Y(5), Kurokawa M(6), Miyazono K(4), 
Nimer SD(8), Yamasoba T(7), Mano H(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Signaling, Graduate School of Medicine, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery,
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department
of Medical Genomics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan. (3)Department of Cellular Signaling, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate
School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of
Hematology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki,
Japan. (6)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and
Neck Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami, Florida.
(9)Department of Cellular Signaling, Graduate School of Medicine, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Strategic Basic Research Program, Japan Science and
Technology Agency, Saitama, Japan. hmano@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

ELF4 (also known as MEF) is a member of the ETS family of transcription factors. 
An oncogenic role for ELF4 has been demonstrated in hematopoietic malignancies,
but its function in epithelial tumors remains unclear. Here, we show that ELF4
can function as a tumor suppressor and is somatically inactivated in a wide range
of human tumors. We identified a missense mutation affecting the transactivation 
potential of ELF4 in oral squamous cell carcinoma cells. Restoration of the
transactivation activity through introduction of wild-type ELF4 significantly
inhibited cell proliferationin vitroand tumor xenograft growth. Furthermore, we
found that ELF1 and ELF2, closely related transcription factors to ELF4, also
exerted antiproliferative effects in multiple cancer cell lines. Mutations in
ELF1 and ELF2, as in ELF4, were widespread across human cancers, but were almost 
all mutually exclusive. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with
high-throughput sequencing revealed ELF4-binding sites in genomic regions
adjacent to genes related to cell-cycle regulation and apoptosis. Finally, we
provide mechanistic evidence that the antiproliferative effects of ELF4 were
mediated through the induction of HRK, an activator of apoptosis, and DLX3, an
inhibitor of cell growth. Collectively, our findings reveal a novel subtype of
human cancer characterized by inactivating mutations in the ELF subfamily of
proteins, and warrant further investigation of the specific settings where ELF
restoration may be therapeutically beneficial.Cancer Res; 76(7); 1-11. ©2016
AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26921333  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Proteomics. 2016 Feb;16(3):417-26. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201500327. Epub 2016 Jan 8.

An interaction proteomics survey of transcription factor binding at recurrent
TERT promoter mutations.

Makowski MM(1), Willems E(1), Fang J(2), Choi J(2), Zhang T(2), Jansen PW(1),
Brown KM(2), Vermeulen M(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Radboud Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (2)Laboratory of Translational Genomics, Division of
Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. (3)Cancer GenomiCs Netherlands, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Aberrant telomerase reactivation in differentiated cells represents a major event
in oncogenic transformation. Recurrent somatic mutations in the human telomerase 
reverse transcriptase (TERT) promoter region, predominantly localized to two
nucleotide positions, are highly prevalent in many cancer types. Both mutations
create novel consensus E26 transformation-specific (ETS) motifs and are
associated with increased TERT expression. Here, we perform an unbiased
proteome-wide survey of transcription factor binding at TERT promoter mutations
in melanoma. We observe ELF1 binding at both mutations in vitro and we show that 
increased recruitment of GABP is enabled by the spatial architecture of native
and novel ETS motifs in the TERT promoter region. We characterize the dynamics of
competitive binding between ELF1 and GABP and provide evidence for ELF1 exclusion
by transcriptionally active GABP. This study thus provides an important
description of proteome-wide, mutation-specific binding at the recurrent,
oncogenic TERT promoter mutations.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26553150  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Gastroenterol. 2015 Oct 28. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetic characteristics of inflammatory bowel disease in a Japanese population.

Fuyuno Y(1,)(2), Yamazaki K(1), Takahashi A(3), Esaki M(2), Kawaguchi T(4),
Takazoe M(4), Matsumoto T(2), Matsui T(5), Tanaka H(6), Motoya S(6), Suzuki Y(7),
Kiyohara Y(8), Kitazono T(4), Kubo M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genotyping Development, Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Yokohama, Japan. (2)Department of Medicine
and Clinical Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, Center for Integrative
Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan. (4)Division of Gastroenterology,
Department of Medicine, Tokyo Yamate Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department 
of Gastroenterology, Fukuoka University Chikushi Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Sapporo-Kosei General Hospital, Sapporo,
Japan. (7)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Toho University, 
Chiba, Japan. (8)Department of Environmental Medicine, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (9)Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi, Yokohama,
Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan. michiaki.kubo@riken.jp.

BACKGROUND: Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) are two major forms 
of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Meta-analyses of genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) have identified 163 susceptibility loci for IBD among European
populations; however, there is limited information for IBD susceptibility in a
Japanese population.
METHODS: We performed a GWAS using imputed genotypes of 743 IBD patients (372
with CD and 371 with UC) and 3321 controls. Using 100 tag single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) (P < 5 × 10(-5)), a replication study was conducted with an 
independent set of 1310 IBD patients (949 with CD and 361 with UC) and 4163
controls. In addition, 163 SNPs identified by a European IBD GWAS were genotyped,
and genetic backgrounds were compared between the Japanese and European
populations.
RESULTS: In the IBD GWAS, two East Asia-specific IBD susceptibility loci were
identified in the Japanese population: ATG16L2-FCHSD2 and SLC25A15-ELF1-WBP4.
Among 163 reported SNPs in European IBD patients, significant associations were
confirmed in 18 (8 CD-specific, 4 UC-specific, and 6 IBD-shared). In Japanese CD 
patients, genes in the Th17-IL23 pathway showed stronger genetic effects, whereas
the association of genes in the autophagy pathway was limited. The association of
genes in the epithelial barrier and the Th17-IL23R pathways were similar in the
Japanese and European UC populations.
CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed two IBD susceptibility loci as common for CD and UC,
and East Asian-specific. The genetic architecture in UC appeared to be similar
between Europeans and East Asians, but may have some differences in CD.

PMID: 26511940  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 25;10(9):e0139051. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139051.
eCollection 2015.

Transcriptome-Wide Identification of Reference Genes for Expression Analysis of
Soybean Responses to Drought Stress along the Day.

Marcolino-Gomes J(1), Rodrigues FA(2), Fuganti-Pagliarini R(2), Nakayama TJ(3),
Ribeiro Reis R(1), Bouças Farias JR(2), Harmon FG(4), Correa Molinari HB(5),
Correa Molinari MD(1), Nepomuceno A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Embrapa Soybean, Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation, Londrina,
Paraná, Brazil; Department of Biology, State University of Londrina, Londrina,
Paraná, Brazil. (2)Embrapa Soybean, Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation, 
Londrina, Paraná, Brazil. (3)Embrapa Soybean, Brazilian Agricultural Research
Corporation, Londrina, Paraná, Brazil; Department of Crop Science, Federal
University of Viçosa, Viçosa, Minas Gerais, Brazil. (4)Plant Gene Expression
Center, ARS/USDA, Albany, California, United States of America; Department of
Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California-Berkeley, Berkeley,
California, United States of America. (5)Embrapa Agroenergy, Brazilian
Agricultural Research Corporation, Brasília, Brazil.

The soybean transcriptome displays strong variation along the day in optimal
growth conditions and also in response to adverse circumstances, like drought
stress. However, no study conducted to date has presented suitable reference
genes, with stable expression along the day, for relative gene expression
quantification in combined studies on drought stress and diurnal oscillations.
Recently, water deficit responses have been associated with circadian clock
oscillations at the transcription level, revealing the existence of hitherto
unknown processes and increasing the demand for studies on plant responses to
drought stress and its oscillation during the day. We performed data mining from 
a transcriptome-wide background using microarrays and RNA-seq databases to select
an unpublished set of candidate reference genes, specifically chosen for the
normalization of gene expression in studies on soybean under both drought stress 
and diurnal oscillations. Experimental validation and stability analysis in
soybean plants submitted to drought stress and sampled during a 24 h timecourse
showed that four of these newer reference genes (FYVE, NUDIX, Golgin-84 and CYST)
indeed exhibited greater expression stability than the conventionally used
housekeeping genes (ELF1-ß and ß-actin) under these conditions. We also
demonstrated the effect of using reference candidate genes with different
stability values to normalize the relative expression data from a
drought-inducible soybean gene (DREB5) evaluated in different periods of the day.

PMCID: PMC4583485
PMID: 26407065  [PubMed - in process]


6. Environ Entomol. 2015 Oct;44(5):1449-53. doi: 10.1093/ee/nvv117. Epub 2015 Jul
15.

Microsatellite Variation of two Pacific Coast Drosophila suzukii (Diptera:
Drosophilidae) Populations.

Bahder BW(1), Bahder LD(2), Hamby KA(3), Walsh DB(2), Zalom FG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Washington State University, 24106 N Bunn Rd. Prosser, WA 99350.
bwbahder@ucdavis.edu. (2)Washington State University, 24106 N Bunn Rd. Prosser,
WA 99350. (3)University of California, 374 Briggs Hall, One Shields Ave., Davis, 
CA 95616.

The vinegar fly, Drosophila suzukii (Diptera: Drosophilidae), is a recent invader
in North America that has become a serious threat to small fruit production. It
was first detected in California in 2008 and in Washington state in 2009. In this
study, D. suzukii populations from the area of the original detection on
California's central coast and from eastern Washington, the United States, were
sampled over a 3-year period to determine genetic variation in both using
microsatellite markers. Six different loci were successfully amplified and
included in the analysis. These loci included nanos, elf1, antennapedia,
mastermind, z600, and tenA. The population from eastern Washington was highly
monomorphic with one locus, mastermind, having multiple alleles. There was
greater genetic variation in the coastal California population with all loci
having multiple alleles, with the exception of tenA. Owing to the relatively low 
levels of genetic variation in the eastern Washington population compared with
the coastal California population, it appears that the D. suzukii population in
the eastern Washington region has undergone a significant bottleneck.

© The Authors 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Entomological Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26314019  [PubMed - in process]


7. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 7;10(7):e0132325. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132325.
eCollection 2015.

Differences in Transcriptional Activity of Human Papillomavirus Type 6 Molecular 
Variants in Recurrent Respiratory Papillomatosis.

Measso do Bonfim C(1), Simão Sobrinho J(2), Lacerda Nogueira R(3), Salgado Kupper
D(3), Cardoso Pereira Valera F(3), Lacerda Nogueira M(4), Villa LL(5), Rahal
P(1), Sichero L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genomic Studies, Universidade do Estado de São Paulo, UNESP, São
José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil. (2)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Center of
Translational Oncology, Instituto do Câncer do Estado de São Paulo, ICESP, São
Paulo, Brazil. (3)Department of Ophthalmology/Otorhinolaryngology and Head/Neck
Surgery, Discipline Otorhinolaryngology, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto,
Universidade de São Paulo, USP, São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Laboratory of Research in
Virology, Faculty of Medicine of São José do Rio Preto, FAMERP, São José do Rio
Preto, Brazil. (5)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Center of Translational Oncology,
Instituto do Câncer do Estado de São Paulo, ICESP, São Paulo, Brazil; Department 
of Radiology and Oncology, School of Medicine, Universidade de São Paulo, USP,
São Paulo, Brazil; School of Medicine, Santa Casa de São Paulo and HPV Institute,
São Paulo, Brazil.

A significant proportion of recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (RRP) is caused 
by human papillomavirus type 6 (HPV-6). The long control region (LCR) contains
cis-elements for regulation of transcription. Our aim was to characterize LCR
HPV-6 variants in RRP cases, compare promoter activity of these isolates and
search for cellular transcription factors (TFs) that could explain the
differences observed. The complete LCR from 13 RRP was analyzed. Transcriptional 
activity of 5 variants was compared using luciferase assays. Differences in
putative TFs binding sites among variants were revealed using the TRANSFAC
database. Chromatin immunoprecipation (CHIP) and luciferase assays were used to
evaluate TF binding and impact upon transcription, respectively. Juvenile-onset
RRP cases harbored exclusively HPV-6vc related variants, whereas among
adult-onset cases HPV-6a variants were more prevalent. The HPV-6vc reference was 
more transcriptionally active than the HPV-6a reference. Active FOXA1, ELF1 and
GATA1 binding sites overlap variable nucleotide positions among isolates and
influenced LCR activity. Furthermore, our results support a crucial role for ELF1
on transcriptional downregulation. We identified TFs implicated in the regulation
of HPV-6 early gene expression. Many of these factors are mutated in cancer or
are putative cancer biomarkers, and must be further studied.

PMCID: PMC4494706
PMID: 26151558  [PubMed - in process]


8. J Hypertens. 2015 Jun;33 Suppl 1:e115. doi: 10.1097/01.hjh.0000467661.76779.b2.

8D.07: GENE EXPRESSION ANALYSIS AND BIOINFORMATICS REVEALED POTENTIAL
TRANSCRIPTION FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH RENIN-ANGIOTENSIN-ALDOSTERONE SYSTEM IN
ATHEROMA.

Nehme A(1), Zibara K, Cerutti C, Bricca G.

Author information: 
(1)1EA4173 Functional Genomics of Arterial Hypertension, Claude Bernard
University-Lyon 1 (UCBL1), Hôpital Nord-Ouest, Lyon, FRANCE 2Biology Department, 
Lebanese University, Beirut, LEBANON.

OBJECTIVE: The implication of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) in 
atheroma development is well described. However, a complete view of the local
RAAS in atheroma is still missing. In this study we aimed to reveal the
organization of RAAS in atheroma at the transcriptomic level and identify the
transcriptional regulators behind it.
DESIGN AND METHOD: Extended RAAS (extRAAS) was defined as the set of 37 genes
coding for classical and novel RAAS participants (Figure 1). Five microarray
datasets containing overall 590 samples representing carotid and peripheral
atheroma were downloaded from the GEO database. Correlation-based hierarchical
clustering (R software) of extRAAS genes within each dataset allowed the
identification of modules of co-expressed genes. Reproducible co-expression
modules across datasets were then extracted. Transcription factors (TFs) having
common binding sites (TFBSs) in the promoters of coordinated genes were
identified using the Genomatix database tools and analyzed for their correlation 
with extRAAS genes in the microarray datasets.
RESULTS: Expression data revealed the expressed extRAAS components and their
relative abundance displaying the favored pathways in atheroma. Three
co-expression modules with more than 80% reproducibility across datasets were
extracted. Two of them (M1 and M2) contained genes coding for angiotensin
metabolizing enzymes involved in different pathways: M1 included ACE, MME, RNPEP,
and DPP3, in addition to 7 other genes; and M2 included CMA1, CTSG, and CPA3. The
third module (M3) contained genes coding for receptors known to be implicated in 
atheroma (AGTR1, MR, GR, LNPEP, EGFR and GPER). M1 and M3 were negatively
correlated in 3 of 5 datasets. We identified 19 TFs that have enriched TFBSs in
the promoters of genes of M1, and two for M3, but none was found for M2. Among
the extracted TFs, ELF1, MAX, and IRF5 showed significant positive correlations
with peptidase-coding genes from M1 and negative correlations with
receptors-coding genes from M3 (p<U+200A><<U+200A>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The identified co-expression modules display the transcriptional
organization of local extRAAS in human carotid atheroma. The identification of
several TFs potentially associated to extRAAS genes may provide a frame for the
discovery of atheroma-specific modulators of extRAAS activity.(Figure is included
in full-text article.).

PMID: 26102694  [PubMed]


9. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 May 18;16(5):11229-58. doi: 10.3390/ijms160511229.

Transcriptional (ChIP-Chip) Analysis of ELF1, ETS2, RUNX1 and STAT5 in Human
Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm.

Pahl MC(1), Erdman R(2), Kuivaniemi H(3,)(4), Lillvis JH(5), Elmore JR(6), Tromp 
G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Sigfried and Janet Weis Center for Research, Geisinger Health System,
Danville, PA 17822, USA. mcp3bp@virginia.edu. (2)Sigfried and Janet Weis Center
for Research, Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA 17822, USA.
rerdman@geisinger.edu. (3)Sigfried and Janet Weis Center for Research, Geisinger 
Health System, Danville, PA 17822, USA. shkuivaniemi@geisinger.edu. (4)Department
of Surgery, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.
shkuivaniemi@geisinger.edu. (5)Department of Ophthalmology, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48202, USA. johnlillvis@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Geisinger Health System,
Danville, PA 17822, USA. jelmore@geisinger.edu. (7)Sigfried and Janet Weis Center
for Research, Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA 17822, USA.
gctromp@geisinger.edu.

We investigated transcriptional control of gene expression in human abdominal
aortic aneurysm (AAA). We previously identified 3274 differentially expressed
genes in human AAA tissue compared to non-aneurysmal controls. Four expressed
transcription factors (ELF1, ETS2, STAT5 and RUNX1) were selected for genome-wide
chromatin immunoprecipitation. Transcription factor binding was enriched in 4760 
distinct genes (FDR < 0.05), of which 713 were differentially expressed in AAA.
Functional classification using Gene Ontology (GO), KEGG, and Network Analysis
revealed enrichment in several biological processes including "leukocyte
migration" (FDR = 3.09 × 10-05) and "intracellular protein kinase cascade" (FDR =
6.48 × 10-05). In the control aorta, the most significant GO categories differed 
from those in the AAA samples and included "cytoskeleton organization" (FDR =
1.24 × 10-06) and "small GTPase mediated signal transduction" (FDR = 1.24 ×
10-06). Genes up-regulated in AAA tissue showed a highly significant enrichment
for GO categories "leukocyte migration" (FDR = 1.62 × 10-11), "activation of
immune response" (FDR = 8.44 × 10-11), "T cell activation" (FDR = 4.14 × 10-10)
and "regulation of lymphocyte activation" (FDR = 2.45 × 10-09), whereas the
down-regulated genes were enriched in GO categories "cytoskeleton organization"
(FDR = 7.84 × 10-05), "muscle cell development" (FDR = 1.00 × 10-04), and "organ 
morphogenesis" (FDR = 3.00 × 10-04). Quantitative PCR assays confirmed a sub-set 
of the transcription factor binding sites including those in MTMR11, DUSP10,
ITGAM, MARCH1, HDAC8, MMP14, MAGI1, THBD and SPOCK1.

PMCID: PMC4463698
PMID: 25993293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 11;9(12):e114862. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114862.
eCollection 2014.

A co-association network analysis of the genetic determination of pig
conformation, growth and fatness.

Puig-Oliveras A(1), Ballester M(1), Corominas J(1), Revilla M(1), Estellé J(2),
Fernández AI(3), Ramayo-Caldas Y(4), Folch JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Ciència Animal i dels Aliments, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona (UAB), 08193, Bellaterra, Spain; Plant and Animal Genomics, Centre de
Recerca en Agrigenòmica (CRAG), 08193, Bellaterra, Spain. (2)Génétique Animale et
Biologie Intégrative UMR1313 (GABI), Institut National de la Recherche
Agronomique (INRA), 78350, Jouy-en-Josas, France; Génétique Animale et Biologie
Intégrative UMR1313 (GABI), AgroParisTech, 78350, Jouy-en-Josas, France;
Laboratoire de Radiobiologie et Etude du Génome (LREG), Commissariat à l'énergie 
atomique et aux énergies alternatives (CEA), 78350, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(3)Departamento de Genética Animal, Instituto Nacional de Investigación y
Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), 28040, Madrid, Spain. (4)Departament de 
Ciència Animal i dels Aliments, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), 08193,
Bellaterra, Spain; Plant and Animal Genomics, Centre de Recerca en Agrigenòmica
(CRAG), 08193, Bellaterra, Spain; Génétique Animale et Biologie Intégrative
UMR1313 (GABI), Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA), 78350,
Jouy-en-Josas, France; Génétique Animale et Biologie Intégrative UMR1313 (GABI), 
AgroParisTech, 78350, Jouy-en-Josas, France; Laboratoire de Radiobiologie et
Etude du Génome (LREG), Commissariat à l'énergie atomique et aux énergies
alternatives (CEA), 78350, Jouy-en-Josas, France.

BACKGROUND: Several QTLs have been identified for major economically relevant
traits in livestock, such as growth and meat quality, revealing the complex
genetic architecture of these traits. The use of network approaches considering
the interactions of multiple molecules and traits provides useful insights into
the molecular underpinnings of complex traits. Here, a network based methodology,
named Association Weight Matrix, was applied to study gene interactions and
pathways affecting pig conformation, growth and fatness traits.
RESULTS: The co-association network analysis underpinned three transcription
factors, PPAR<U+03B3>, ELF1, and PRDM16 involved in mesoderm tissue differentiation.
Fifty-four genes in the network belonged to growth-related ontologies and 46 of
them were common with a similar study for growth in cattle supporting our
results. The functional analysis uncovered the lipid metabolism and the
corticotrophin and gonadotrophin release hormone pathways among the most
important pathways influencing these traits. Our results suggest that the genes
and pathways here identified are important determining either the total body
weight of the animal and the fat content. For instance, a switch in the mesoderm 
tissue differentiation may determinate the age-related preferred pathways being
in the puberty stage those related with the miogenic and osteogenic lineages; on 
the contrary, in the maturity stage cells may be more prone to the adipocyte
fate. Hence, our results demonstrate that an integrative genomic co-association
analysis is a powerful approach for identifying new connections and interactions 
among genes.
CONCLUSIONS: This work provides insights about pathways and key regulators which 
may be important determining the animal growth, conformation and body proportions
and fatness traits. Molecular information concerning genes and pathways here
described may be crucial for the improvement of genetic breeding programs applied
to pork meat production.

PMCID: PMC4263716
PMID: 25503799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Physiol Genomics. 2014 Oct 15;46(20):779-87. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00054.2014. Epub 2014 Aug 26.

Dynamic gene expression patterns in animal models of early and late heart failure
reveal biphasic-bidirectional transcriptional activation of signaling pathways.

Rowell J(1), Koitabashi N(1), Kass DA(1), Barth AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, The Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland. (2)Department of Medicine, Division of
Cardiology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland
abarth3@jhmi.edu.

Altered cardiac gene expression in heart failure (HF) has mostly been identified 
by single-point analysis of end-stage disease. This may miss earlier changes in
gene expression that are transient and/or directionally opposite to those
observed later. Myocardial datasets from the largest microarray data repository
(Gene Expression Omnibus) yielded six HF studies with time-course data.
Differentially expressed transcripts between nonfailing controls, early HF (<3
days after cardiac insult) and late HF (usually >2 wk) were determined, and
analysis of KEGG pathways and predicted regulatory control elements performed. We
found that gene expression followed varying patterns: Downregulation of metabolic
pathways occurred early and was sustained into late-stage HF. In contrast, most
signaling pathways undergo a complex biphasic pattern: Calcium signaling, p53,
apoptosis, and MAPK pathways displayed a bidirectional response, declining early 
but rising late. These profiles were compatible with specific microRNA (miRNA)
and transcription regulators: Estrogen-related receptor-a and myocyte-enhancer
factor-2 binding sites were overrepresented in the promoter regions of
downregulated transcripts. Concurrently, there were overrepresented binding sites
for E2f and ETS family members (E-Twenty Six, including Gabp, Elf1, and Ets2),
serum response and interferon regulated factor in biphasic-bidirectional and
late-upregulated transcripts. Binding sites for miRNAs downregulated by HF were
more common in upregulated transcripts (e.g., miRNA-22,-133a/b, and -150 in early
HF and miRNA-1,-9,-499 in late HF). During the development of HF, gene expression
is characterized by dynamic overlapping sets of transcripts controlled by
specific interrelated regulatory mechanisms. While metabolic gene classes show
early and sustained downregulation in HF, signaling pathways undergo a complex
biphasic pattern with early down- and more pronounced late upregulation.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4200378
PMID: 25159852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Exp Med. 2014 Jun 2;211(6):1079-91. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131131. Epub 2014 May
19.

Transcriptional regulation of Munc13-4 expression in cytotoxic lymphocytes is
disrupted by an intronic mutation associated with a primary immunodeficiency.

Cichocki F(1), Schlums H(2), Li H(3), Stache V(2), Holmes T(2), Lenvik TR(4),
Chiang SC(2), Miller JS(4), Meeths M(5), Anderson SK(3), Bryceson YT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine; Clinical Genetics
Unit, Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, and Center for Molecular
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, 141 86 
Stockholm, Sweden Division of Hematology, Oncology and Transplantation,
University of Minnesota Cancer Center, Minneapolis, MN 55455. (2)Centre for
Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine; Clinical Genetics Unit, Department
of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, and Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, 141 86 Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Basic Science Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Laboratory of
Experimental Immunology, SAIC-Frederick Inc., Frederick National Laboratory,
Frederick, MD 21702. (4)Division of Hematology, Oncology and Transplantation,
University of Minnesota Cancer Center, Minneapolis, MN 55455. (5)Centre for
Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine; Clinical Genetics Unit, Department
of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, and Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, 141 86 Stockholm, Sweden
Childhood Cancer Research Unit, Department of Women's and Children's Health,
Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Solna, 171 76 Stockholm,
Sweden. (6)Centre for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine; Clinical
Genetics Unit, Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, and Center for
Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital
Huddinge, 141 86 Stockholm, Sweden Broegelmann Research Laboratory, Clinical
Institute, University of Bergen, N-5021 Bergen, Norway yenan.bryceson@ki.se.

Autosomal recessive mutations in UNC13D, the gene that encodes Munc13-4, are
associated with familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis type 3 (FHL3).
Munc13-4 expression is obligatory for exocytosis of lytic granules, facilitating 
cytotoxicity by T cells and natural killer (NK) cells. The mechanisms regulating 
Munc13-4 expression are unknown. Here, we report that Munc13-4 is highly
expressed in differentiated human NK cells and effector CD8(+) T lymphocytes. A
UNC13D c.118-308C>T mutation, causative of FHL3, disrupted binding of the ETS
family member ELF1 to a conserved intronic sequence. This mutation impairs UNC13D
intron 1 recruitment of STAT4 and the chromatin remodeling complex component
BRG1, diminishing active histone modifications at the locus. The intronic
sequence acted as an overall enhancer of Munc13-4 expression in cytotoxic
lymphocytes in addition to representing an alternative promoter encoding a novel 
Munc13-4 isoform. Mechanistically, T cell receptor engagement facilitated
STAT4-dependent Munc13-4 expression in naive CD8(+) T lymphocytes. Collectively, 
our data demonstrates how chromatin remodeling within an evolutionarily conserved
regulatory element in intron 1 of UNC13D regulates the induction of Munc13-4
expression in cytotoxic lymphocytes and suggests that an alternative Munc13-4
isoform is required for lymphocyte cytotoxicity. Thus, mutations associated with 
primary immunodeficiencies may cause disease by disrupting transcription factor
binding.

© 2014 Cichocki et al.

PMCID: PMC4042637
PMID: 24842371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 21;9(2):e89226. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089226. eCollection
2014.

Transcription factor binding sites prediction based on modified nucleosomes.

Talebzadeh M(1), Zare-Mirakabad F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, AmirKabir University of
Technology, Tehran, Iran.

In computational methods, position weight matrices (PWMs) are commonly applied
for transcription factor binding site (TFBS) prediction. Although these matrices 
are more accurate than simple consensus sequences to predict actual binding
sites, they usually produce a large number of false positive (FP) predictions and
so are impoverished sources of information. Several studies have employed
additional sources of information such as sequence conservation or the vicinity
to transcription start sites to distinguish true binding regions from random
ones. Recently, the spatial distribution of modified nucleosomes has been shown
to be associated with different promoter architectures. These aligned patterns
can facilitate DNA accessibility for transcription factors. We hypothesize that
using data from these aligned and periodic patterns can improve the performance
of binding region prediction. In this study, we propose two effective features,
"modified nucleosomes neighboring" and "modified nucleosomes occupancy", to
decrease FP in binding site discovery. Based on these features, we designed a
logistic regression classifier which estimates the probability of a region as a
TFBS. Our model learned each feature based on Sp1 binding sites on Chromosome 1
and was tested on the other chromosomes in human CD4+T cells. In this work, we
investigated 21 histone modifications and found that only 8 out of 21 marks are
strongly correlated with transcription factor binding regions. To prove that
these features are not specific to Sp1, we combined the logistic regression
classifier with the PWM, and created a new model to search TFBSs on the genome.
We tested the model using transcription factors MAZ, PU.1 and ELF1 and compared
the results to those using only the PWM. The results show that our model can
predict Transcription factor binding regions more successfully. The relative
simplicity of the model and capability of integrating other features make it a
superior method for TFBS prediction.

PMCID: PMC3931712
PMID: 24586611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Nov 27;1(6):545-59. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.10.006.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of transcription factors for lineage-specific ESC differentiation.

Yamamizu K(1), Piao Y(1), Sharov AA(1), Zsiros V(2), Yu H(1), Nakazawa K(2),
Schlessinger D(1), Ko MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. (2)Unit on Genetics of Cognition and Behavior, 
National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA. (3)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA ; Department of Systems Medicine, 
Sakaguchi Laboratory, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan ;
Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST, Tokyo160-8582, Japan.

A network of transcription factors (TFs) determines cell identity, but identity
can be altered by overexpressing a combination of TFs. However, choosing and
verifying combinations of TFs for specific cell differentiation have been
daunting due to the large number of possible combinations of ~2,000 TFs. Here, we
report the identification of individual TFs for lineage-specific cell
differentiation based on the correlation matrix of global gene expression
profiles. The overexpression of identified TFs-Myod1, Mef2c, Esx1, Foxa1, Hnf4a, 
Gata2, Gata3, Myc, Elf5, Irf2, Elf1, Sfpi1, Ets1, Smad7, Nr2f1, Sox11, Dmrt1,
Sox9, Foxg1, Sox2, or Ascl1-can direct efficient, specific, and rapid
differentiation into myocytes, hepatocytes, blood cells, and neurons.
Furthermore, transfection of synthetic mRNAs of TFs generates their appropriate
target cells. These results demonstrate both the utility of this approach to
identify potent TFs for cell differentiation, and the unanticipated capacity of
single TFs directly guides differentiation to specific lineage fates.

PMCID: PMC3871400
PMID: 24371809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Plant Signal Behav. 2013 Nov;8(11):e27117. doi: 10.4161/psb.27117. Epub 2013 Dec 
3.

An E3 ubiquitin ligase, ERECT LEAF1, functions in brassinosteroid signaling of
rice.

Sakamoto T(1), Kitano H(2), Fujioka S(3).

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Advanced Science Institute; Saitama, Japan. (2)Faculty of Bioresources
and Environmental Sciences; Ishikawa Prefectural University; Ishikawa, Japan.
(3)Bioscience and Biotechnology Center; Nagoya University; Aichi, Japan.

A spontaneous rice mutant, erect leaf1 (elf1-1), produced a dwarf phenotype with 
erect leaves and short grains. Physiological analyses suggested that elf1-1 is
brassinosteroid-insensitive, so we hypothesized that ELF1 encodes a positive
regulator of brassinosteroid signaling. ELF1, identified by means of positional
cloning, encodes a protein with both a U-box domain and ARMADILLO (ARM) repeats. 
U-box proteins have been shown to function as E3 ubiquitin ligases; in fact, ELF1
possessed E3 ubiquitin ligase activity in vitro. However, ELF1 itself does not
appear to be polyubiquitinated. Mutant phenotypes of 2 more elf1 alleles indicate
that the entire ARM repeats is indispensable for ELF1 activity. These results
suggest that ELF1 ubiquitinates target proteins through an interaction mediated
by ARM repeats. Similarities in the phenotypes of elf1 and d61 mutants (mutants
of brassinosteroid receptor gene OsBRI1), and in the regulation of ELF1 and
OsBRI1 expression, imply that ELF1 functions as a positive regulator of
brassinosteroid signaling in rice.

PMCID: PMC4091358
PMID: 24299927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Prostate. 2013 Sep;73(13):1413-26. doi: 10.1002/pros.22688. Epub 2013 Jun 27.

Integrative analysis of prostate cancer aggressiveness.

Feik E(1), Schweifer N, Baierl A, Sommergruber W, Haslinger C, Hofer P, Maj-Hes
A, Madersbacher S, Gsur A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Division: Institute of Cancer Research, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Clinical management of prostate cancer (PC) is still highly demanding
on the identification of robust biomarkers which will allow a more precise
prediction of disease progression.
METHODS: We profiled both mRNA expression and DNA copy number alterations (CNAs) 
from laser capture microdissected cells from 31 PC patients and 17 patients with 
benign prostatic hyperplasia using Affymetrix GeneChip® technology. PC patients
were subdivided into an aggressive (Gleason Score 8 or higher, and/or T3/T4
and/or N+/M+) and non-aggressive (all others) form of PC. Furthermore, we
correlated the two datasets, as genes whose varied expression is due to a
chromosomal alteration, may suggest a causal implication of these genes in the
disease. All statistical analyses were performed in R version 2.15.0 and
Bioconductor version 1.8.1., respectively.
RESULTS: We confirmed several common altered chromosomal regions as well as
recently discovered loci such as deletions on chromosomes 3p14.1-3p13 and
13q13.3-13q14.11 supporting a possible role for RYBP, RGC32, and ELF1 in tumor
suppression. Integrative analysis of expression and CN data combined with data
retrieved from online databases propose PTP4A3 and ELF1 as possible factors for
tumor progression.
CONCLUSIONS: Copy number data analysis revealed some significant differences
between aggressive and non-aggressive tumors, while gene expression data alone
could not define an aggressive group of patients. The assessment of CNA may have 
diagnostic and prognostic value in PC.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23813660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. BMC Genomics. 2013 May 29;14:358. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-358.

Mining genes involved in the stratification of Paris polyphylla seeds using
high-throughput embryo transcriptome sequencing.

Qi J, Zheng N, Zhang B, Sun P, Hu S, Xu W, Ma Q, Zhao T, Zhou L, Qin M, Li X.

BACKGROUND: Paris polyphylla var. yunnanensis is an important medicinal plant.
Seed dormancy is one of the main factors restricting artificial cultivation. The 
molecular mechanisms of seed dormancy remain unclear, and little genomic or
transcriptome data are available for this plant.
RESULTS: In this study, massive parallel pyrosequencing on the Roche 454-GS FLX
Titanium platform was used to generate a substantial sequence dataset for the P. 
polyphylla embryo. 369,496 high quality reads were obtained, ranging from 50 to
1146 bp, with a mean of 219 bp. These reads were assembled into 47,768 unigenes, 
which included 16,069 contigs and 31,699 singletons. Using BLASTX searches of
public databases, 15,757 (32.3%) unique transcripts were identified. Gene
Ontology and Cluster of Orthologous Groups of proteins annotations revealed that 
these transcripts were broadly representative of the P. polyphylla embryo
transcriptome. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes assigned 5961 of the
unique sequences to specific metabolic pathways. Relative expression levels
analysis showed that eleven phytohormone-related genes and five other genes have 
different expression patterns in the embryo and endosperm in the seed
stratification process.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene annotation and quantitative RT-PCR expression analysis
identified 464 transcripts that may be involved in phytohormone catabolism and
biosynthesis, hormone signal, seed dormancy, seed maturation, cell wall growth
and circadian rhythms. In particular, the relative expression analysis of sixteen
genes (CYP707A, NCED, GA20ox2, GA20ox3, ABI2, PP2C, ARP3, ARP7, IAAH, IAAS, BRRK,
DRM, ELF1, ELF2, SFR6, and SUS) in embryo and endosperm and at two temperatures
indicated that these related genes may be candidates for clarifying the molecular
basis of seed dormancy in P. polyphlla var. yunnanensis.

PMCID: PMC3679829
PMID: 23718911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Allergy. 2013;68(5):621-8. doi: 10.1111/all.12145. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

TLR2 down-regulates FceRI and its transcription factor PU.1 in human Langerhans
cells.

Herrmann N(1), Koch S, Leib N, Bedorf J, Wilms H, Schnautz S, Fimmers R, Bieber
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University of Bonn, D-53105 Bonn,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal Langerhans cells (LC) expressing the high-affinity receptor
for IgE (FceRI) play a key role in atopic dermatitis (AD). AD skin is highly
colonized with Staphylococcus aureus (S.a.), which are sensed by Toll-like
receptor 2 (TLR2). We hypothesized that TLR2 may impact on the expression of
FceRI on LC.
OBJECTIVES: To study a putative impact of TLR2 signaling on FceRI, we analyzed
FceRI and known transcription factors of the receptor after ligand binding to
TLR2.
METHODS: We generated LC from CD34(+) progenitors in vitro (CD34LC) expressing
FceRI and TLR2 as well as its partners TLR1 and TLR6. The expression of FceRI and
known transcription factors of the receptor was analyzed on the protein and RNA
level by flow cytometry, Western blotting, and real-time PCR.
RESULTS: For CD34LC from 123 donors, we observed a high heterogeneity in FceRI
surface expression correlating with mRNA level of its a-chain. Stimulation of
TLR1/2 or TLR2/6 dramatically down-regulated FceRI on protein and mRNA level of
both a- and <U+03B3>-chain. Further analysis of putative transcription factors for
FCER1A revealed the lack of GATA1 in CD34LC, weak expression of ELF1 and YY1, and
high expression of PU.1. While ELF1 and YY1 appeared to be little affected by
TLR2 engagement, PU.1 was significantly down-regulated.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our findings show that in human, LC ligation of TLR2
by S.a.-derived products down-regulates FceRI and its transcription factor PU.1, 
thus suggesting that FceRI is controlled by PU.1 in these cells.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23534406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 29;288(13):9457-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.415703. Epub 2013
Feb 7.

Mutations in the nucleolar phosphoprotein, nucleophosmin, promote the expression 
of the oncogenic transcription factor MEF/ELF4 in leukemia cells and potentiates 
transformation.

Ando K(1), Tsushima H, Matsuo E, Horio K, Tominaga-Sato S, Imanishi D, Imaizumi
Y, Iwanaga M, Itonaga H, Yoshida S, Hata T, Moriuchi R, Kiyoi H, Nimer S, Mano H,
Naoe T, Tomonaga M, Miyazaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Atomic Bomb Disease and Hibakusha Medicine Unit,
Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-12-4 Sakamoto,
Nagasaki, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

Myeloid ELF1-like factor (MEF/ELF4), a member of the ETS transcription factors,
can function as an oncogene in murine cancer models and is overexpressed in
various human cancers. Here, we report a mechanism by which MEF/ELF4 may be
activated by a common leukemia-associated mutation in the nucleophosmin gene. By 
using a tandem affinity purification assay, we found that MEF/ELF4 interacts with
multifactorial protein nucleophosmin (NPM1). Coimmunoprecipitation and GST
pull-down experiments demonstrated that MEF/ELF4 directly forms a complex with
NPM1 and also identified the region of NPM1 that is responsible for this
interaction. Functional analyses showed that wild-type NPM1 inhibited the DNA
binding and transcriptional activity of MEF/ELF4 on the HDM2 promoter, whereas
NPM1 mutant protein (Mt-NPM1) enhanced these activities of MEF/ELF4. Induction of
Mt-NPM1 into MEF/ELF4-overexpressing NIH3T3 cells facilitated malignant
transformation. In addition, clinical leukemia samples with NPM1 mutations had
higher human MDM2 (HDM2) mRNA expression. Our data suggest that enhanced HDM2
expression induced by mutant NPM1 may have a role in MEF/ELF4-dependent
leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3611015
PMID: 23393136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54132. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054132. Epub 2013 Jan 11.

Identification of reference genes for quantitative RT-PCR in ascending aortic
aneurysms.

Henn D(1), Bandner-Risch D, Perttunen H, Schmied W, Porras C, Ceballos F,
Rodriguez-Losada N, Schäfers HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Saarland University
Hospital, Homburg/Saar, Germany. s9dohenn@stud.uni-saarland.de

Hypertension and congenital aortic valve malformations are frequent causes of
ascending aortic aneurysms. The molecular mechanisms of aneurysm formation under 
these circumstances are not well understood. Reference genes for gene activity
studies in aortic tissue that are not influenced by aortic valve morphology and
its hemodynamic consequences, aortic dilatation, hypertension, or
antihypertensive medication are not available so far. This study determines genes
in ascending aortic tissue that are independent of these parameters. Tissue
specimens from dilated and undilated ascending aortas were obtained from 60
patients (age =70 years) with different morphologies of the aortic valve
(tricuspid undilated n<U+200A>=<U+200A>24, dilated n<U+200A>=<U+200A>11; bicuspid undilated n<U+200A>=<U+200A>6, dilated
n<U+200A>=<U+200A>15; unicuspid dilated n<U+200A>=<U+200A>4). Of the studied individuals, 36 had
hypertension, and 31 received ACE inhibitors or AT1 receptor antagonists. The
specimens were obtained intraoperatively from the wall of the ascending aorta. We
analyzed the expression levels of 32 candidate reference genes by quantitative
RT-PCR (RT-qPCR). Differential expression levels were assessed by parametric
statistics. The expression analysis of these 32 genes by RT-qPCR showed that
EIF2B1, ELF1, and PPIA remained constant in their expression levels in the
different specimen groups, thus being insensitive to aortic valve morphology,
aortic dilatation, hypertension, and medication with ACE inhibitors or AT1
receptor antagonists. Unlike many other commonly used reference genes, the genes 
EIF2B1, ELF1, and PPIA are neither confounded by aortic comorbidities nor by
antihypertensive medication and therefore are most suitable for gene expression
analysis of ascending aortic tissue.

PMCID: PMC3543309
PMID: 23326585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Gastroenterology. 2013 Apr;144(4):781-8. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.12.021. Epub 
2012 Dec 22.

A genome-wide association study identifies 2 susceptibility Loci for Crohn's
disease in a Japanese population.

Yamazaki K(1), Umeno J, Takahashi A, Hirano A, Johnson TA, Kumasaka N, Morizono
T, Hosono N, Kawaguchi T, Takazoe M, Yamada T, Suzuki Y, Tanaka H, Motoya S,
Hosokawa M, Arimura Y, Shinomura Y, Matsui T, Matsumoto T, Iida M, Tsunoda T,
Nakamura Y, Kamatani N, Kubo M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genotyping Development, Center for Genomic Medicine, The
Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Yokohama, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Crohn's disease is an inflammatory bowel disease induced by
multiple genetic and environmental factors. Genome-wide association studies have 
identified genetic factors that affect the risk for Crohn's disease in European
populations, but information from other ethnic groups is scarce. We therefore
investigated genetic factors associated with Crohn's disease in the Japanese
population.
METHODS: We performed a genome-wide association study with 372 individuals with
Crohn's disease (cases) and 3389 controls, all from the Japanese population. To
confirm identified associations, we performed a replication study with an
independent panel of 1151 Crohn's disease cases and 15,800 controls. We also
performed an association analysis using genome-wide genotype imputation in the
discovery cohort.
RESULTS: We confirmed associations of Crohn's disease with variants in MHC
(rs7765379, P = 2.11 × 10(-59)), TNFSF15 (rs6478106, P = 3.87 × 10(-45)), and
STAT3 (rs9891119, P = 2.24 × 10(-14)). We identified 2 new susceptibility loci:
on chromosome 4p14 (rs1487630, P = 2.40 × 10(-11); odds ratio, 1.33), and in the 
SLC25A15-ELF1-WBP4 region on 13q14 (rs7329174 in ELF1, P = 5.12 × 10(-9); odds
ratio, 1.27).
CONCLUSIONS: In a genome-wide association study, we identified 2 new
susceptibility loci for Crohn's disease in a Japanese population. These findings 
could increase our understanding of the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23266558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Radiat Oncol. 2012 Dec 5;7:205. doi: 10.1186/1748-717X-7-205.

Exposure to ionizing radiation induced persistent gene expression changes in
mouse mammary gland.

Datta K(1), Hyduke DR, Suman S, Moon BH, Johnson MD, Fornace AJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown
University, 3970 Reservoir Rd, Washington, DC, NW 20057-1468, USA.
datta_k2003@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Breast tissue is among the most sensitive tissues to the carcinogenic
actions of ionizing radiation and epidemiological studies have linked radiation
exposure to breast cancer. Currently, molecular understanding of radiation
carcinogenesis in mammary gland is hindered due to the scarcity of in vivo
long-term follow up data. We undertook this study to delineate radiation-induced 
persistent alterations in gene expression in mouse mammary glands 2-month after
radiation exposure.
METHODS: Six to eight week old female C57BL/6J mice were exposed to 2 Gy of whole
body <U+03B3> radiation and mammary glands were surgically removed 2-month after
radiation. RNA was isolated and microarray hybridization performed for gene
expression analysis. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was used for biological
interpretation of microarray data. Real time quantitative PCR was performed on
selected genes to confirm the microarray data.
RESULTS: Compared to untreated controls, the mRNA levels of a total of 737 genes 
were significantly (p<0.05) perturbed above 2-fold of control. More genes (493
genes; 67%) were upregulated than the number of downregulated genes (244 genes;
33%). Functional analysis of the upregulated genes mapped to cell proliferation
and cancer related canonical pathways such as 'ERK/MAPK signaling', 'CDK5
signaling', and '14-3-3-mediated signaling'. We also observed upregulation of
breast cancer related canonical pathways such as 'breast cancer regulation by
Stathmin1', and 'HER-2 signaling in breast cancer' in IPA. Interestingly, the
downregulated genes mapped to fewer canonical pathways involved in cell
proliferation. We also observed that a number of genes with tumor suppressor
function (GPRC5A, ELF1, NAB2, Sema4D, ACPP, MAP2, RUNX1) persistently remained
downregulated in response to radiation exposure. Results from qRT-PCR on five
selected differentially expressed genes confirmed microarray data. The PCR data
on PPP4c, ELF1, MAPK12, PLCG1, and E2F6 showed similar trend in up and
downregulation as has been observed with the microarray.
CONCLUSIONS: Exposure to a clinically relevant radiation dose led to long-term
activation of mammary gland genes involved in proliferative and metabolic
pathways, which are known to have roles in carcinogenesis. When considered along 
with downregulation of a number of tumor suppressor genes, our study has
implications for breast cancer initiation and progression after therapeutic
radiation exposure.

PMCID: PMC3551737
PMID: 23216862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Int J Legal Med. 2012 Nov;126(6):943-52. doi: 10.1007/s00414-012-0774-7. Epub
2012 Sep 26.

Stability of endogenous reference genes in postmortem human brains for
normalization of quantitative real-time PCR data: comprehensive evaluation using 
geNorm, NormFinder, and BestKeeper.

Wang Q(1), Ishikawa T, Michiue T, Zhu BL, Guan DW, Maeda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Legal Medicine, Osaka City University Medical School,
Asahi-machi 1-4-3, Abeno, 545-8585, Osaka, Japan. wangqi1980@live.com

In forensic molecular pathology, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(RT-qPCR) provides a rapid and sensitive method to investigate functional changes
in the death process. Accurate and reliable relative RT-qPCR requires ideal
amplification efficiencies of target and reference genes. However, the
amplification efficiency, changing during PCR, may be overestimated by the
traditional standard curve method. No single gene meets the criteria of an ideal 
endogenous reference. Therefore, it is necessary to select suitable reference
genes for specific requirements. The present study evaluated 32 potential
reference genes in the human brain of 15 forensic autopsy cases using three
different statistical algorithms, geNorm, NormFinder, and BestKeeper. On RT-qPCR 
data analyses using a completely objective and noise-resistant algorithm
(Real-time PCR Miner), 24 genes met standard efficiency criteria. Validation of
their stability and suitability as reference genes using geNorm suggested IPO8
and POLR2A as the most stable ones, and NormFinder indicated that IPO8 and POP4
had the highest expression stabilities, while BestKeeper highlighted ABL1 and
ELF1 as reference genes with the least overall variation. Combining these three
algorithms suggested the genes IPO8, POLR2A, and PES1 as stable endogenous
references in RT-qPCR analysis of human brain samples, with YWHAZ, PPIA, HPRT1,
and TBP being the least stable ones. These findings are inconsistent with those
of previous studies. Moreover, the relative stability of target and reference
genes remains unknown. These observations suggest that suitable reference genes
should be selected on the basis of specific requirements, experiment conditions, 
and the characteristics of target genes in practical applications.

PMID: 23010907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Genome Res. 2012 Aug;22(8):1407-18. doi: 10.1101/gr.132878.111. Epub 2012 Jun 8.

Genome-wide DNA methylation profiles in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells
reveal overrepresentation of ETS transcription factor binding sites.

Hogart A(1), Lichtenberg J, Ajay SS, Anderson S; NIH Intramural Sequencing
Center, Margulies EH, Bodine DM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

DNA methylation is an essential epigenetic mark that is required for normal
development. Knockout of the DNA methyltransferase enzymes in the mouse
hematopoietic compartment reveals that methylation is critical for hematopoietic 
differentiation. To better understand the role of DNA methylation in
hematopoiesis, we characterized genome-wide DNA methylation in primary mouse
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), common myeloid progenitors (CMPs), and
erythroblasts (ERYs). Methyl binding domain protein 2 (MBD) enrichment of DNA
followed by massively parallel sequencing (MBD-seq) was used to map genome-wide
DNA methylation. Globally, DNA methylation was most abundant in HSCs, with a 40% 
reduction in CMPs, and a 67% reduction in ERYs. Only 3% of peaks arise during
differentiation, demonstrating a genome-wide decline in DNA methylation during
erythroid development. Analysis of genomic features revealed that 98% of promoter
CpG islands are hypomethylated, while 20%-25% of non-promoter CpG islands are
methylated. Proximal promoter sequences of expressed genes are hypomethylated in 
all cell types, while gene body methylation positively correlates with gene
expression in HSCs and CMPs. Elevated genome-wide DNA methylation in HSCs and the
positive association between methylation and gene expression demonstrates that
DNA methylation is a mark of cellular plasticity in HSCs. Using de novo motif
discovery, we identified overrepresented transcription factor consensus binding
motifs in methylated sequences. Motifs for several ETS transcription factors,
including GABPA and ELF1, are overrepresented in methylated regions. Our
genome-wide survey demonstrates that DNA methylation is markedly altered during
myeloid differentiation and identifies critical regions of the genome and
transcription factor programs that contribute to hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3409254
PMID: 22684279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Dis Markers. 2012;32(3):203-10. doi: 10.3233/DMA-2011-0875.

Evaluation of reference genes and normalization strategy for quantitative
real-time PCR in human pancreatic carcinoma.

Mohelnikova-Duchonova B(1), Oliverius M, Honsova E, Soucek P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicogenomics, National Institute of Public Health, Prague,
Czech Republic.

Histologically verified pairs (n=10) of pancreatic tumors and non-neoplastic
tissues were used for quantitative real-time PCR and the stability of 24
reference genes was analyzed with geNorm and NormFinder software. Raw C{q} values
correlated with the degree of RNA degradation. This correlation was abolished by 
normalization to C{q} of 18S endogenous control gene. Both geNorm and NormFinder 
programs suggested EIF2B1, ELF1, MRPL19, and POP4 as the same most stable genes. 
We have thus identified suitable reference genes for future expression studies in
pancreatic carcinoma. Normalization method reducing the effects of RNA
degradation on the quality of results was also developed.

PMCID: PMC3826910
PMID: 22377737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Funct Integr Genomics. 2012 Jun;12(2):291-304. doi: 10.1007/s10142-012-0264-5.
Epub 2012 Feb 25.

Reduced tillering in Basmati rice T-DNA insertional mutant OsTEF1 associates with
differential expression of stress related genes and transcription factors.

Paul P(1), Awasthi A, Rai AK, Gupta SK, Prasad R, Sharma TR, Dhaliwal HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 247667,
India.

A T-DNA insertional mutant OsTEF1 of rice gives 60-80% reduced tillering,
retarded growth of seminal roots, and sensitivity to salt stress compared to wild
type Basmati 370. The insertion occurred in a gene encoding a transcription
elongation factor homologous to yeast elf1, on chromosome 2 of rice. Detailed
transcriptomic profiling of OsTEF1 revealed that mutation in the transcription
elongation factor differentially regulates the expression of more than 100 genes 
with known function and finely regulates tillering process in rice by inducing
the expression of cytochrome P450. Along with different transcription factors,
several stress associated genes were also affected due to a single insertion. In 
silico analysis of the TEF1 protein showed high conservation among different
organisms. This transcription elongation factor predicted to interact with other 
proteins that directly or indirectly positively regulate tillering in rice.

PMID: 22367482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Oncol Rep. 2011 Nov;26(5):1121-5. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1409. Epub 2011 Aug 2.

Protein expression of the Ets transcription factor Elf-1 in breast cancer cells
is negatively correlated with histological grading, but not with clinical
outcome.

Gerloff A(1), Dittmer A, Oerlecke I, Holzhausen HJ, Dittmer J.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Gynäkologie, Universität Halle, Halle/Saale, Germany.

Several members of the Ets (E26 transformation specific) transcription factor
family are involved in tumor progression, e.g. by activating matrix
metalloproteases. Ets proteins share a unique DNA-binding domain, the Ets domain,
which specifically recognizes GGAA/T-containing sequences common in many
promoters. While the roles of quite a number of Ets proteins in carcinogenesis
have been well established, little is known about the importance of the Ets
protein Elf-1 (E74-like factor 1) in cancer. Herein, we analyzed the expression
of Elf-1 in breast cancer. We found that, like T-cells, breast cancer cells
express both the 80 and 98 kDa isoforms of the Elf-1 protein with the 98 kDa
isoform only be present in the nucleus. Immunohistochemical analysis of 119
breast cancer biopsies showed anti-Elf-1 immunoreactivity exclusively in the
nucleus. Elf-1 expression varied largely among the breast cancer samples showing 
a negative correlation with histological grading. However, no association of
Elf-1 expression with clinical outcome was observed, even when sub-cohorts of
patients who received either only adjuvant endocrine treatment or only
chemotherapy were separately analyzed. These data suggest that Elf-1 may modulate
breast cancer progression to some extent without having an impact on survival of 
breast cancer patients.

PMID: 21811762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Cell Biochem. 2011 Oct;356(1-2):121-6. doi: 10.1007/s11010-011-0951-x. Epub
2011 Jul 14.

Interactions between subunits of protein kinase CK2 and their protein substrates 
influences its sensitivity to specific inhibitors.

Janeczko M(1), Maslyk M, Szyszka R, Baier A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biotechnology, John Paul II
Catholic University of Lublin, Krasnicka Av. 102, 20-718 Lublin, Poland.

Five isoforms of CK2 may exist simultaneously in yeast cells: free catalytic
subunits CK2a', CK2a and three holoenzymatic structures composed of aa'ßß',
a(2)ßß' and a'(2)ßß'. Each isolated and purified form exhibits properties typical
for CK2, but they differ in substrate specificity as well as in sensitivity to
specific modulators. All five isoforms of protein kinase CK2 from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae were examined for their binding capacity with ATP/GTP and two commonly
used ATP-competitive inhibitors TBB and TBI. Enzymes were tested with protein
substrates differently interacting with CK2 subunits: Elf1, Fip1, Svf1, P2B and
synthetic peptide. Obtained results show that K(m) for ATP varies from 2.4-53 µM 
for Elf1/CK2a' and Svf1/CK2a, respectively. Similar differences can be seen in
case when GTP was used as phosphate donor. The inhibitory effect depends on
composition of CK2/substrate complexes. Highest sensitivity to TBB shows all
complexes containing aa'ßß' isoform with K (i) values between 0.2 and 1.1 µM. The
prospect that TBB and TBI could be utilized to discriminate between different
molecular forms of CK2 in yeast cells was examined. Both inhibitors, TBB as well 
as TBI, decreases cell growth to extents devoting interactions with different CK2
isoforms present in the cell but the presence of ß/ß'-dimer has a high importance
towards sensitivity. Conceivably, a given inhibitor concentration can inhibit
only selected CK2-mediated processes in the cell.

PMID: 21755460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 15;6(3):e17442. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017442.

Genes and gene ontologies common to airflow obstruction and emphysema in the
lungs of patients with COPD.

Savarimuthu Francis SM(1), Larsen JE, Pavey SJ, Duhig EE, Clarke BE, Bowman RV,
Hayward NK, Fong KM, Yang IA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, The Prince Charles Hospital, Brisbane,
Australia. ss.francis@uqconnect.edu.au

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major public health problem
with increasing prevalence worldwide. The primary aim of this study was to
identify genes and gene ontologies associated with COPD severity. Gene expression
profiling was performed on total RNA extracted from lung tissue of 18 former
smokers with COPD. Class comparison analysis on mild (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>9, FEV(1) 80-110%
predicted) and moderate (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>9, FEV(1) 50-60% predicted) COPD patients identified
46 differentially expressed genes (p<0.01), of which 14 genes were technically
confirmed by quantitative real-time-PCR. Biological replication in an independent
test set of 58 lung samples confirmed the altered expression of ten genes with
increasing COPD severity, with eight of these genes (NNMT, THBS1, HLA-DPB1, IGHD,
ETS2, ELF1, PTGDS and CYRBD1) being differentially expressed by greater than 1.8 
fold between mild and moderate COPD, identifying these as candidate determinants 
of COPD severity. These genes belonged to ontologies potentially implicated in
COPD including angiogenesis, cell migration, proliferation and apoptosis. Our
secondary aim was to identify gene ontologies common to airway obstruction,
indicated by impaired FEV(1) and KCO. Using gene ontology enrichment analysis we 
have identified relevant biological and molecular processes including regulation 
of cell-matrix adhesion, leukocyte activation, cell and substrate adhesion, cell 
adhesion, angiogenesis, cell activation that are enriched among genes involved in
airflow obstruction. Exploring the functional significance of these genes and
their gene ontologies will provide clues to molecular changes involved in
severity of COPD, which could be developed as targets for therapy or biomarkers
for early diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC3057973
PMID: 21423603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Blood. 2011 Feb 10;117(6):1880-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-09-309468. Epub 2010
Dec 10.

Differential requirements for the Ets transcription factor Elf-1 in the
development of NKT cells and NK cells.

Choi HJ(1), Geng Y, Cho H, Li S, Giri PK, Felio K, Wang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University, Chicago,
IL 60611, USA.

E26 Transformation specific (Ets) family transcription factors control the
expression of a large number of genes regulating hematopoietic cell development
and function. Two such transcription factors, Ets-1 and myeloid Elf-1-like factor
(MEF), have been shown to play critical roles in both natural killer (NK)- and
NKT-cell development, but not in the development of conventional T cells. In this
study, we address the role of E74-like factor 1 (Elf-1), another Ets family
transcription factor that is closely related to MEF but divergent from Ets-1, in 
NK- and NKT-cell development using Elf-1-deficient (Elf-1(-/-)) mice. Whereas the
proportion of NK cells in Elf-1(-/-) mice was normal, the proportion of NKT cells
was significantly reduced in the thymus and periphery of Elf-1(-/-) mice compared
with wild-type (WT) mice. Although Ets-1-deficient mice lack NKT cells
altogether, Elf-1(-/-) mice exhibited only a partial block in NKT-cell
development caused by a cell-intrinsic defect in the selection, survival, and
maturation of NKT cells. In addition, residual NKT cells found in Elf-1(-/-) mice
produced less cytokine upon antigen stimulation compared with WT NKT cells. Our
data demonstrate that Elf-1 plays an important and nonredundant role in the
development and function of NKT cells, but is not involved in NK-cell
development.

PMCID: PMC3056637
PMID: 21148815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Feb 1;20(3):601-7. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq474. Epub 2010 Nov 2.

ELF1 is associated with systemic lupus erythematosus in Asian populations.

Yang J(1), Yang W, Hirankarn N, Ye DQ, Zhang Y, Pan HF, Mok CC, Chan TM, Wong RW,
Mok MY, Lee KW, Wong SN, Leung AM, Li XP, Avihingsanon Y, Rianthavorn P,
Deekajorndej T, Suphapeetiporn K, Shotelersuk V, Baum L, Kwan P, Lee TL, Ho MH,
Lee PP, Wong WH, Zeng S, Zhang J, Wong CM, Ng IO, Garcia-Barceló MM, Cherny SS,
Tam PK, Sham PC, Lau CS, Lau YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, LKS
Faculty of Medicine,The University of Hong Kong, 21 Sassoon Road, Hong Kong,
China.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease with a strong genetic
involvement. The susceptibility genes identified so far can only explain a small 
proportion of disease heritability. Through a genome-wide association in a Hong
Kong Chinese cohort and subsequent replication in two other Asian populations,
with a total of 3164 patients and 4482 matched controls, we identified
association of ELF1 (E74-like factor 1) with SLE (rs7329174, OR = 1.26, joint P= 
1.47 × 10(-8)). ELF1 belongs to the ETS family of transcription factors and is
known to be involved in T cell development and function. Database analysis
revealed transcripts making use of three alternative exon1s for this gene. Near
equivalent expression levels of distinct transcripts initiated from alternative
exon1s were detected in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from both SLE patients
and healthy controls. Although a direct association of rs7329174 with the three
forms of transcripts for this gene was not detected, these findings support an
important role of ELF1 in SLE susceptibility and suggest a potentially tight
regulation for the expression of this gene.

PMID: 21044949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Oct;17(10):1272-8. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1903. Epub 2010
Sep 5.

Uniform transitions of the general RNA polymerase II transcription complex.

Mayer A(1), Lidschreiber M, Siebert M, Leike K, Söding J, Cramer P.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Center Munich and Department of Biochemistry, Center for Integrated
Protein Science, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany.

We present genome-wide occupancy profiles for RNA polymerase (Pol) II, its
phosphorylated forms and transcription factors in proliferating yeast. Pol II
exchanges initiation factors for elongation factors during a 5' transition that
is completed 150 nucleotides downstream of the transcription start site (TSS).
The resulting elongation complex is composed of all the elongation factors and
shows high levels of Ser7 and Ser5 phosphorylation on the C-terminal repeat
domain (CTD) of Pol II. Ser2 phosphorylation levels increase until 600-1,000
nucleotides downstream of the TSS and do not correlate with recruitment of Spt6
and Pcf11, which bind the Ser2-phosphorylated CTD in vitro. This indicates
CTD-independent recruitment mechanisms and CTD masking in vivo. Elongation
complexes are productive and disassemble in a two-step 3' transition. Paf1, Spt16
(part of the FACT complex), and the CTD kinases Bur1 and Ctk1 exit upstream of
the polyadenylation site, whereas Spt4, Spt5, Spt6, Spn1 (also called Iws1) and
Elf1 exit downstream. Transitions are uniform and independent of gene length,
type and expression.

PMID: 20818391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Thromb Haemost. 2010 Nov;104(5):998-1008. doi: 10.1160/TH10-04-0243. Epub 2010
Aug 30.

Allele-specific transcription of the PAI-1 gene in human astrocytes.

Hultman K(1), Tjarnlund-Wolf A, Odeberg J, Eriksson P, Jern C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience and Rehabilitation, Institute of
Neuroscience and Physiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.

The 4G allele of the PAI-1 -675(4G/5G) insertion/deletion promoter polymorphism
has been associated with elevated plasma levels of PAI-1 and an increased risk of
myocardial infarction. However, this allele has also been associated with a
reduced risk of ischaemic stroke. In the brain, PAI-1 is mainly produced by
astrocytes, and can reduce the neurotoxic effects exerted by tissue-type
plasminogen activator during pathophysiologic conditions. The aim of the present 
study was to investigate whether the PAI-1 -675(4G/5G) polymorphism and the
linked -844A/G polymorphism affect transcriptional activity of the PAI-1 gene in 
human astrocytes. Haplotype chromatin immunoprecipitation (haploChIP) was used in
order to quantify allele-specific promoter activity in heterozygous cells.
Protein-DNA interactions were investigated by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay (EMSA). A clear allele-specific difference in PAI-1 gene expression was
observed in astrocytes, where the haplotype containing the 4G and the -844A
alleles was associated with higher transcriptional activity compared to the 5G
and -844G-containing haplotype. EMSA revealed an allele-specific binding of
nuclear proteins to the 4G/5G site as well as to the -844A/G site. Supershift
experiments identified specific binding of the transcription factors Elf-1 and
Elk-1 to the -844G allele. The relative impact of the different sites on
allele-specific PAI-1 promoter activity remains to be determined. We demonstrate 
that common polymorphisms within the PAI-1 promoter affect transcriptional
activity of the PAI-1 gene in human astrocytes, thus providing a possible
molecular genetic mechanism behind the association between PAI-1 promoter
variants and ischaemic stroke.

PMID: 20806116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Exp Hematol. 2010 Sep;38(9):798-8, 808.e1-2. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2010.06.006.
Epub 2010 Jun 23.

Identification of E74-like factor 1 (ELF1) as a transcriptional regulator of the 
Hox cofactor MEIS1.

Xiang P(1), Lo C, Argiropoulos B, Lai CB, Rouhi A, Imren S, Jiang X, Mager D,
Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Myeloid ectropic viral integration site 1 (MEIS1) is a Hox cofactor
known for its role in development and is strongly linked to normal and leukemic
hematopoiesis. Although previous studies have focused on identifying protein
partners of MEIS1 and its transcriptionally regulated targets, little is known
about the upstream transcriptional regulators of this tightly regulated gene.
Understanding the regulation of MEIS1 is important to understanding normal
hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Here we describe our studies focusing on the evolutionary 
conserved putative MEIS1 promoter region. Phylogenetic sequence analysis and
reporter assays in MEIS1-expressing (K562) and nonexpressing (HL60) leukemic cell
line models were used to identify key regulatory regions and potential
transcription factor binding sites within the candidate promoter region followed 
by functional and expression studies of one identified regulator in both cell
lines and primary human cord blood and leukemia samples.
RESULTS: Chromatin status of MEIS1 promoter region is associated with MEIS1
expression. Truncation and mutation studies coupled with reporter assays revealed
that a conserved ETS family member binding site located 289 bp upstream of the
annotated human MEIS1 transcription start site is required for promoter activity.
Of the three ETS family members tested, only ELF1 was enriched on the MEIS1
promoter as assessed by both electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments in K562. This finding was confirmed in
MEIS1-expressing primary human samples. Moreover, small interfering RNA-mediated 
knockdown of ELF1 in K562 cells was associated with a decreased MEIS1 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the ETS transcription factor ELF1 is an important
positive regulator of MEIS1 expression.

PMCID: PMC3887005
PMID: 20600580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Oct;38(19):6363-74. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq490. Epub 2010
Jun 4.

Transcriptional regulation of Elf-1: locus-wide analysis reveals four distinct
promoters, a tissue-specific enhancer, control by PU.1 and the importance of
Elf-1 downregulation for erythroid maturation.

Calero-Nieto FJ(1), Wood AD, Wilson NK, Kinston S, Landry JR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
University, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK. fjc28@cam.ac.uk

Ets transcription factors play important roles during the development and
maintenance of the haematopoietic system. One such factor, Elf-1 (E74-like factor
1) controls the expression of multiple essential haematopoietic regulators
including Scl/Tal1, Lmo2 and PU.1. However, to integrate Elf-1 into the wider
regulatory hierarchies controlling haematopoietic development and
differentiation, regulatory elements as well as upstream regulators of Elf-1 need
to be identified. Here, we have used locus-wide comparative genomic analysis
coupled with chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP-chip) assays which resulted in
the identification of five distinct regulatory regions directing expression of
Elf-1. Further, ChIP-chip assays followed by functional validation demonstrated
that the key haematopoietic transcription factor PU.1 is a major upstream
regulator of Elf-1. Finally, overexpression studies in a well-characterized
erythroid differentiation assay from primary murine fetal liver cells
demonstrated that Elf-1 downregulation is necessary for terminal erythroid
differentiation. Given the known activation of PU.1 by Elf-1 and our newly
identified reciprocal activation of Elf-1 by PU.1, identification of an
inhibitory role for Elf-1 has significant implications for our understanding of
how PU.1 controls myeloid-erythroid differentiation. Our findings therefore not
only represent the first report of Elf-1 regulation but also enhance our
understanding of the wider regulatory networks that control haematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2965225
PMID: 20525788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Biochem J. 2010 Aug 15;430(1):129-39. doi: 10.1042/BJ20091742.

Amino acid residues in the beta3 strand and subsequent loop of the conserved ETS 
domain that mediate basic leucine zipper (bZIP) recruitment and potentially
distinguish functional attributes of Ets proteins.

Shimokawa T(1), Nunomura S, Enomoto Y, Ra C.

Author information: 
(1)Nihon University Graduate School of Medical Science, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo,
Japan.

Ets family members share a conserved DNA-binding ETS domain, and serve a variety 
of roles in development, differentiation and oncogenesis. Besides DNA binding,
the ETS domain also participates in protein-protein interactions with other
structurally unrelated transcription factors. Although this mechanism appears to 
confer tissue- or development stage-specific functions on individual Ets
proteins, the biological significance of many of these interactions remains to be
evaluated, because their molecular basis has been elusive. We previously
demonstrated a direct interaction between the ETS domain of the widely expressed 
GABPalpha (GA-binding protein alpha) and the granulocyte inducer C/EBPalpha
(CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha), and suggested its involvement in
co-operative transcriptional activation of myeloid-specific genes, such as human 
FCAR encoding FcalphaR [Fc receptor for IgA (CD89)]. By deletion analysis, we
identified helix alpha3 and the beta3/beta4 region as the C/EBPalpha-interacting 
region. Domain-swapping of individual sub-domains with those of other Ets
proteins allowed us to highlight beta-strand 3 and the subsequent loop, which
when exchanged by those of Elf-1 (E74-like factor 1) reduced the ability to
recruit C/EBPalpha. Further analysis identified a four-amino acid swap mutation
of this region (I387L/C388A/K393Q/F395L) that reduces both physical interaction
and co-operative transcriptional activation with C/EBPalpha without affecting its
transactivation capacity by itself. Moreover, re-ChIP (re-chromatin
immunoprecipitation) analysis demonstrated that GABPalpha recruits C/EBPalpha to 
the FCAR promoter, depending on these residues. The identified amino acid
residues could confer the specificity of the action on the Ets proteins in
diverse biological processes through mediating the recruitment of its partner
factor.

PMID: 20522024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Chin J Cancer. 2010 Apr;29(4):396-402.

Expression of Elf-1 and survivin in non-small cell lung cancer and their
relationship to intratumoral microvessel density.

Yang DX(1), Li NE, Ma Y, Han YC, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Binzhou Medical College, Yantai, Shandong 264003, PR 
China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The expression of transcription factor Elf-1 and
inhibitor of apoptosis survivin in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is
correlated with the angiogenic factor vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), 
and are both factors affecting the cell cycle. This study investigated the
expression of Elf-1, survivin, and intratumoral microvessel density (iMVD)
assessed by monoclonal antibody CD105 in NSCLC, and explored their correlations
with clinicopathologic features and angiogenesis of NSCLC.
METHODS: PowerVision(TM)-9000 immunohistochemistry was used to evaluate the
expression of Elf-1, survivin, and CD105 in tissue microarrays containing 60
specimens of NSCLC and 9 specimens of normal tissue. Western blot analysis was
used to evaluate the protein levels of Elf-1 and survivin in 17 specimens of
NSCLC and 5 specimens of normal tissue.
RESULTS: Elf-1 and survivin were detected in 1 of the 9 normal tissues. The
positive rates of Elf-1 and survivin in NSCLC were 70.0% and 65.0%, respectively.
The expression levels of both Elf-1 and survivin were significantly related to
tumor differentiation, lymphatic metastasis, clinical stage, and postoperative
survival time (P < 0.05). Overexpression of both were related to poor prognosis: 
the survival rates were significantly lower in patients with positive expression 
than in those with negative expression (P < 0.01). Elf-1 expression was
positively correlated with survivin expression (r = 0.769, P < 0.01). Elf-1 and
survivin expressions were positively correlated with iMVD (r = 0.446, P < 0.01; r
= 0.435, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of Elf-1 and survivin in NSCLC is related to
differentiation, lymphatic metastasis, clinical stage, and prognosis, and both
are positively correlated with iMVD. Detection their combined expression can help
to predict the malignant behavior of NSCLC. Blocking the activity of Elf-1 and
survivin may be a new way to inhibit angiogenesis in NSCLC.

PMID: 20346215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Genes Immun. 2010 Mar;11(2):161-72. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.73. Epub 2009 Oct 15.

The mouse and human Fli1 genes are similarly regulated by Ets factors in T cells.

Svenson JL(1), Chike-Harris K, Amria MY, Nowling TK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Children's Research
Institute, Medical University of South Carolina, 96 Jonathon Lucas Street,
Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Fli1 is a member of the Ets family of transcription factors and is preferentially
expressed in hematopoietic cell lineages. Its expression level is linked to the
pathogenesis of lupus. In this study, we identified mechanisms involved in the
transcriptional regulation of the mouse and human Fli1 promoters. We show that
the Fli1 promoter is upregulated by Ets factors Ets1, Ets2, Fli1 and Elf1 either 
alone or in combination with GATA factors, but is inhibited by Tel. In vitro
binding studies show that Elf1, Tel and Fli1 in T cells bind the three
Ets-binding sites in the murine Fli1 proximal promoter. We identified
transcription factor-binding sites in the human Fli1 promoter region that
function in T cells in a similar manner to those in the mouse promoter.
Furthermore, we show similar binding of Ets factors to the endogenous mouse and
human Fli1 promoters in T cells and knocking down Ets1 results in an upregulation
of Fli1 expression. Together, these results suggest that the human and mouse
genes are regulated similarly and that Ets1 may be important in preventing the
overexpression of Fli1 in T cells. This report lays the groundwork for
identifying targets for manipulating Fli1 expression as a possible therapeutic
approach.

PMCID: PMC2832078
PMID: 19829305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Blood. 2009 Dec 24;114(27):5557-66. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-05-220434. Epub 2009 
Oct 12.

Differential roles for ETS, CREB, and EGR binding sites in mediating VEGF
receptor 1 expression in vivo.

Jin E(1), Liu J, Suehiro J, Yuan L, Okada Y, Nikolova-Krstevski V, Yano K, Janes 
L, Beeler D, Spokes KC, Li D, Regan E, Shih SC, Oettgen P, Minami T, Aird WC.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Vascular Biology Research and Division of Molecular and
Vascular Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (VEGFR1) is a marker for
endothelial-specific gene expression. We previously reported that the human
VEGFR1 promoter (between -748 and +284) contains information for expression in
the intact endothelium of transgenic mice. The objective of this study was to
dissect the cis-regulatory elements underlying VEGFR1 promoter activity in vitro 
and in vivo. In primary endothelial cells, binding sites for E74-like factor 1
(ELF-1; between -49 and -52), cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element
binding (CREB; between -74 and -81), and early growth response factor 1/3
(EGR-1/3; between -16 to -25) were shown to play a positive role in gene
transcription, whereas a putative E26 transformation-specificsequence (ETS) motif
between -36 and -39 had a net negative effect on promoter activity. When targeted
to the Hprt locus of mice, mutations of the ELF-1 binding site and the CRE
element reduced promoter activity in the embryonic vasculature and resulted in a 
virtual loss of expression in adult endothelium. Postnatally, the EGR binding
site mutant displayed significantly reduced promoter activity in a subset of
vascular beds. In contrast, mutation of the -39 ETS site resulted in increased
LacZ staining in multiple vascular beds. Together, these results provide new
insights into the transcriptional regulatory mechanisms of VEGFR1.

PMCID: PMC2798866
PMID: 19822898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2009 Jun;25(6):854-62.

[Transient expression in microplasmodia of Physarum polycephalum].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu S(1), Cheng C, Lin Z, Zhang J, Li M, Zhou Z, Tian S, Xing M.

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Microbial and Genetic Engineering, College of Life 
Sciences, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China.

The plasmodium of Physarum polycephalum is a suitable eukaryotic cell for cell
cycle investigation, but there is no compatible transient expression system for
the plasmodium. Using the promoter and terminator of ardC actin of Physarum
polycephalum substituted the CMV IE and SV40 polyA of plasmid pDsRedl-N1, using
cassette PardC-MCS-DsRed1-TardC substituted the cassette PardC-hph-TardC of
plasmid pTB38, we constructed plasmids pXM1 and pXM2 for transient expression of 
red fluorescent protein (RFP) in Physarum polycephalum respectively. After
reconstituting the transcription elongation factor homologous gene (pelf1) of
Physarum polycephalum into the pXM2, we generated a plasmid pXM2-pelf1. After the
plasmid pXM1, pXM2 and pXM2-pelf1 were electroporated into the plasmodium of
Physarum polycephalum, we observed optimum RFP and PELF1-RFP expression under
fluoroscope and confocal microscope between 24-48 h after electroporation, and
found that ELF1-RFP expression was accumulated in nucleus of microplasmodium, the
optimum electroporation parameters were 40 V/cm electric field, 1 ampere current,
and 70 micros electric shock time. The results suggest that this expression
system is qualified for transient expression of specific protein in plasmodium of
Physarum polycephalum.

PMID: 19777812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 16;284(42):29109-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.041145. Epub
2009 Aug 12.

Critical role for GATA3 in mediating Tie2 expression and function in large vessel
endothelial cells.

Song H(1), Suehiro J, Kanki Y, Kawai Y, Inoue K, Daida H, Yano K, Ohhashi T,
Oettgen P, Aird WC, Kodama T, Minami T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.

Endothelial phenotypes are highly regulated in space and time by both
transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms. There is increasing evidence
that the GATA family of transcription factors function as signal transducers,
coupling changes in the extracellular environment to changes in downstream target
gene expression. Here we show that human primary endothelial cells derived from
large blood vessels express GATA2, -3, and -6. Of these factors, GATA3 was
expressed at the highest levels. In DNA microarrays of human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVEC), small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of GATA3
resulted in reduced expression of genes associated with angiogenesis, including
Tie2. At a functional level, GATA3 knockdown inhibited angiopoietin
(Ang)-1-mediated but not vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF)-mediated 
AKT signaling, cell migration, survival, and tube formation. In electrophoretic
gel mobility shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation, GATA3 was shown to
bind to regulatory regions within the 5'-untranslated region of the Tie2 gene. In
co-immunoprecipitation and co-transfection assays, GATA3 and the Ets
transcription factor, ELF1, physically interacted and synergized to transactivate
the Tie2 promoter. GATA3 knockdown blocked the ability of Ang-1 to attenuate
vascular endothelial cell growth factor stimulation of vascular cell adhesion
molecule-1 expression and monocytic cell adhesion. Moreover, exposure of human
umbilical vein endothelial cells to tumor necrosis factor-alpha resulted in
marked down-regulation of GATA3 expression and reduction in Tie2 expression.
Together, these findings suggest that GATA3 is indispensable for
Ang-1-Tie2-mediated signaling in large vessel endothelial cells.

PMCID: PMC2781456
PMID: 19674970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Biol Direct. 2009 Jul 29;4:24. doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-4-24.

Identification of a crenarchaeal orthologue of Elf1: implications for chromatin
and transcription in Archaea.

Daniels JP(1), Kelly S, Wickstead B, Gull K.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, 
Oxford, OX1 3RE, UK. jan-peter.daniels@path.ox.ac.uk

The transcription machineries of Archaea and eukaryotes are similar in many
aspects, but little is understood about archaeal chromatin and its role in
transcription. Here, we describe the identification in hyperthermophilic
Crenarchaeota and a Korarchaeon of an orthologue of the eukaryotic transcription 
elongation factor Elf1, which has been shown to function in chromatin structure
maintenance of actively transcribed templates. Our discovery has implications for
the relationship of chromatin and transcription in Archaea and the evolution of
these processes in eukaryotes.

PMCID: PMC2732611
PMID: 19640276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Ai Zheng. 2009 Jul;28(7):762-7.

[Expression and significance of Elf-1 and vascular endothelial growth factor in
non-small cell lung cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang DX(1), Han YC, Liu LY, Yu N, Wang X, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Binzhou Medical College, Yantai, Shandong, 264003,
People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The roles of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
in tumor angiogenesis is related with Ets family. Elf-1, a member of Ets family, 
has seldom been studied. This study aimed to investigate the expression of Elf-1 
and VEGF in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and explore their correlations to
clinicopathologic features of NSCLC.
METHODS: Tissue microarray containing 69 specimens of NSCLC and six specimens of 
normal lung tissues was constructed. The expression of Elf-1 and VEGF was
detected by PowerVision-9000 immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Elf-1 and VEGF were not detected in all normal tissues; the positive
rates of Elf-1 and VEGF were 72.46% and 63.77% in NSCLC, respectively. The
expression levels of both Elf-1 and VEGF were significantly related with tumor
differentiation, lymphatic metastasis, clinical stage, and postoperative survival
time (all P < 0.01). Overexpression of them was related with poor prognosis: the 
survival rates were significantly lower in positive patients than in negative
patients (both P < 0.01). Elf-1 expression was positively correlated to VEGF
expression (r = 0.702, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of Elf-1 and VEGF in NSCLC is related to
differentiation, lymphatic metastasis, clinical stage and prognosis. Detecting
their expression in combination can help to predict the malignant behavior of
NSCLC.

PMID: 19624906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 17;106(7):2441-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0813002106. Epub 2009 Feb 3.

Systems-level analysis of cell-specific AQP2 gene expression in renal collecting 
duct.

Yu MJ(1), Miller RL, Uawithya P, Rinschen MM, Khositseth S, Braucht DW, Chou CL, 
Pisitkun T, Nelson RD, Knepper MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Kidney and Electrolyte Metabolism, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We used a systems biology-based approach to investigate the basis of
cell-specific expression of the water channel aquaporin-2 (AQP2) in the renal
collecting duct. Computational analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the AQP2
gene (Genomatix) revealed 2 conserved clusters of putative transcriptional
regulator (TR) binding elements (BEs) centered at -513 bp (corresponding to the
SF1, NFAT, and FKHD TR families) and -224 bp (corresponding to the AP2, SRF,
CREB, GATA, and HOX TR families). Three other conserved motifs corresponded to
the ETS, EBOX, and RXR TR families. To identify TRs that potentially bind to
these BEs, we carried out mRNA profiling (Affymetrix) in mouse mpkCCDc14
collecting duct cells, revealing expression of 25 TRs that are also expressed in 
native inner medullary collecting duct. One showed a significant positive
correlation with AQP2 mRNA abundance among mpkCCD subclones (Ets1), and 2 showed 
a significant negative correlation (Elf1 and an orphan nuclear receptor Nr1h2).
Transcriptomic profiling in native proximal tubules (PT), medullary thick
ascending limbs (MTAL), and IMCDs from kidney identified 14 TRs (including Ets1
and HoxD3) expressed in the IMCD but not PT or MTAL (candidate AQP2 enhancer
roles), and 5 TRs (including HoxA5, HoxA9 and HoxA10) expressed in PT and MTAL
but not in IMCD (candidate AQP2 repressor roles). In luciferase reporter assays, 
overexpression of 3 ETS family TRs transactivated the mouse proximal AQP2
promoter. The results implicate ETS family TRs in cell-specific expression of
AQP2 and point to HOX, RXR, CREB and GATA family TRs as playing likely additional
roles.

PMCID: PMC2650175
PMID: 19190182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 26;283(52):36249-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803693200. Epub 2008
Nov 5.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 down-regulates BRCA2 expression through the BRCA2
promoter.

Wang J(1), Bian C, Li J, Couch FJ, Wu K, Zhao RC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and School of Basic Medicine, Center of
Excellence in Tissue Engineering, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking 
Union Medical College, Beijing, P. R. China.

Expression of the BRCA2 tumor suppressor gene is tightly linked to its roles in
DNA damage repair and maintenance of chromosomal stability and genomic integrity.
Three transcription factors that activate (USF, NF-kappaB, and Elf1) and a single
factor that represses (SLUG) BRCA2 promoter activity have been reported. In
addition, a 67-bp region (-582 to -516) associated with inhibition of promoter
activity has been identified. However, it remains unclear how the 67-bp region
contributes to regulation of BRCA2 expression. Here, we describe the affinity
purification of a 120-kDa protein that binds to a silencer-binding region within 
the 67-bp repression region of the BRCA2 promoter. Mass spectrometry revealed the
identity of the protein as poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (Parp-1). Gel shift,
antibody super-shift, and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
demonstrated that Parp-1 is associated with the BRCA2 promoter both in vitro and 
in vivo. Furthermore, Parp-1 inhibitors (either 3-AB or NU1025) and Parp-1 gene
specific siRNA resulted in increased levels of endogenous BRCA2 expression.
Inhibition of Parp-1 activity (by 3-AB) reduced histone 3 lysine 9 acetylation
and blocked Parp-1 binding to the BRCA2 promoter. These results indicate that
Parp-1 down-regulates BRCA2 expression through an interaction with a repression
region of the BRCA2 promoter.

PMCID: PMC2605989
PMID: 18990703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. BMC Cancer. 2008 Oct 7;8:289. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-8-289.

Cell-cycle and suppressor proteins expression in uterine cervix in HIV/HPV
co-infection: comparative study by tissue micro-array (TMA).

Nicol AF(1), Pires AR, de Souza SR, Nuovo GJ, Grinsztejn B, Tristão A, Russomano 
FB, Velasque L, Lapa e Silva JR, Pirmez C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz - FIOCRUZ, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. nicol@ioc.fiocruz.br

BACKGROUND: The oncoproteins of human papillomavirus (HPVs) directly effect
cell-cycle control. We hypothesize that regulatory and cell cycle protein
expression might be additionally modified in the cervix of HIV/HPV co-infected
women.
METHODS: We analyzed the expression of Rb, p27, VEGF and Elf-1 transcriptor
factor by immunohistochemistry in 163 paraffin-embeded cervical samples using
Tissue Micro-Array (TMA) and correlated this to HIV-1 and HPV infection.
RESULTS: HIV/HPV co-infection was associated with a significant increase in
expression (p < 0.001) of VEGF and p27 in both low and high grade CIN when
compared to the cervices of women infected by HPV alone. Decreased Rb expression 
was evident with increased CIN grade in the cervices of women infected with HPV
alone (p = 0.003 average of cells/mm2 in CIN I: 17.9, CIN II/III: 4.8, and tumor 
3.9). Rb expression increased 3-fold for both low and high grade CIN with
HPV/HIV-1 co-infection compared to HPV infection alone but did not reach
statistical significance. There was a significant increase in Elf-1 expression in
HPV+/HIV- women with CIN II/III and tumor (average of cells/mm2 in CIN I: 63.8;
CIN II/III: 115.7 and tumor: 112.0, p = 0.005), in comparison to controls.
CONCLUSION: Co-infection of HPV and HIV leads to significant increase in the VEGF
and p27 expression when compared to HPV+/HIV-negative infection that could
facilitate viral persistence and invasive tumor development.

PMCID: PMC2577688
PMID: 18840277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mol Vis. 2008 Aug 31;14:1589-99.

Microarray analysis of retinal gene expression in chicks during imposed myopic
defocus.

Schippert R(1), Schaeffel F, Feldkaemper MP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Section of Neurobiology of the Eye,
University Eye Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.

PURPOSE: The retina plays an important regulatory role in ocular growth. To
screen for new retinal candidate genes that could be involved in the inhibition
of ocular growth, we used chick microarrays to analyze the changes in retinal
mRNA expression after myopic defocus was imposed by positive lens wear.
METHODS: Four male white leghorn chicks, aged nine days, wore +6.9D spectacle
lenses over both eyes for 24 h. Four untreated age-matched male chicks from the
same batch served as controls. The chicks were euthanized, and retinas from both 
eyes of each chick were pooled. RNA was isolated and labeled cRNA was prepared.
These samples were hybridized to Affymetrix GeneChip Chicken Genome arrays with
more than 28,000 characterized genes. After comparison of multiple normalization 
methods, GC-RMA and a false-discovery rate of 6% was chosen for normalization of 
the data. The expression of 16 candidate genes was further studied, using
semiquantitative real-time RT-PCR. In addition, the expression of the mRNA of
some of these candidate genes was assessed in chicks that wore either +6.9D
lenses for 4 h or -7D lenses for 24 h.
RESULTS: 123 transcripts were found to be differentially expressed (p<0.05; at
least 1.5-fold change in expression level), with an absolute mean fold-change of 
1.97+/-1.16 (mean+/-standard deviation). Nine of the sixteen genes that were
examined by real-time RT-PCR were validated. Regardless of whether positive or
negative lenses were worn, six of these nine genes were regulated in the same
direction after 24 h: arginyltransferase 1 (ATE1), E74-like factor 1 (ELF1),
growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (GRB2), SHQ1 homolog (S. cerevisiae)
(SHQ1), spectrin, beta, non-erythrocytic 1 (SPTBN1), prepro-urotensin II-related 
peptide (pp-URP). Three genes responded differently to positive and negative lens
treatment after 24 h: ATP-binding cassette, sub-family C, member 10 (ABCC10),
CD226 molecule (CD226) and oxysterol binding protein 2 (OSBP2).
CONCLUSIONS: The validated genes that were regulated only by myopic defocus may
represent elements in a pathway generating a "stop-signal" for eye growth. Some
of the genes identified in this study have so far not been described in the
retina. Further investigation of their function may improve the understanding of 
the signaling cascades in emmetropization. More general, published microarray
data are variable among different animal models (mouse, chick, monkeys), tissues 
(retina, retina/retinal pigment epithelium), treatments (diffusers, lenses,
lid-suture), as well as different treatment durations (hours, days), and
comparisons remain difficult. That only a small number of common genes were found
emphasizes the need for careful normalization of the experimental parameters.

PMCID: PMC2528026
PMID: 18769560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Immunol. 2008 Sep 1;181(5):3658-64.

PP2A dephosphorylates Elf-1 and determines the expression of CD3zeta and FcRgamma
in human systemic lupus erythematosus T cells.

Juang YT(1), Wang Y, Jiang G, Peng HB, Ergin S, Finnell M, Magilavy A, Kyttaris
VC, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

T cells from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus are characterized by
decreased expression of CD3zeta-chain and increased expression of FcRgamma-chain,
which becomes part of the CD3 complex and contributes to aberrant signaling.
Elf-1 enhances the expression of CD3zeta, whereas it suppresses the expression of
FcRgamma gene and lupus T cells have decreased amounts of DNA-binding 98 kDa form
of Elf-1. We show that the aberrantly increased PP2A in lupus T cells
dephosphorylates Elf-1 at Thr-231. Dephosphorylation results in limited
expression and binding of the 98 kDa Elf-1 form to the CD3zeta and FcRgamma
promoters. Suppression of the expression of the PP2A leads to increased
expression of CD3zeta and decreased expression of FcRgamma genes and correction
of the early signaling response. Therefore, PP2A serves as a central determinant 
of abnormal T cell function in human lupus and may represent an appropriate
treatment target.

PMCID: PMC2662392
PMID: 18714041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 30;283(22):15134-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800498200. Epub 2008
Mar 31.

Cooperative regulation of Fc receptor gamma-chain gene expression by multiple
transcription factors, including Sp1, GABP, and Elf-1.

Takahashi K(1), Hayashi N, Shimokawa T, Umehara N, Kaminogawa S, Ra C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Immunology and Allergology, Nihon University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 30-1 Oyaguchi Kamima-chi, Itabashi-ku,
Tokyo, Japan. fcericra@med.nihon-u.ac.jp

The Fc receptor gamma-chain (FcRgamma), which was first identified as a
constituent of the high affinity IgE receptor, associates with various cell
surface receptors to mediate intracellular signals. We identified three
transcriptional enhancer elements in the 5' region of the human FcRgamma gene;
one of the cis-elements was recognized by the transcription factor Sp-1 and
another was recognized by GABP or Elf-1. The sequence of the other element was
similar to a binding motif of the C/EBP family. Overexpression experiments showed
that these transcription factors cooperatively activated the FcRgamma promoter.
Furthermore, inactivation of the GABP-binding site by nucleotide substitutions as
well as repression of GABPalpha expression by RNA interference reduced
Sp1-mediated transactivation of the FcRgamma promoter, demonstrating that Sp1 and
GABP synergistically activated the FcRgamma promoter. This synergistic activation
was suggested to require physical interaction between the two transcription
factors, because the Ets domain of GABPalpha was demonstrated to directly bind
Sp1. On the other hand, GABP and Elf-1, whose recognition sequences overlapped,
were shown to bind the FcRgamma gene with similar affinity in the context of
chromatin, although Elf-1 exerted weaker enhancer activity for FcRgamma gene
expression than did GABP. Both were thought to compete for binding to the
element, because additional expression of Elf-1 in combination with Sp1 and GABP 
reduced FcRgamma promoter activity. Such functional and physical interactions
among transcription factors involved in the cooperative regulation of FcRgamma
gene expression as revealed in this study will become promising targets for
medical applications against various immune diseases involving FcRgamma.

PMCID: PMC3258888
PMID: 18378679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Feb;6(2):259-66. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-0068.

Oncogenic activation of the human Pygopus2 promoter by E74-like factor-1.

Andrews PG(1), Kennedy MW, Popadiuk CM, Kao KR.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Cancer Research Laboratories, Division of Basic Medical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St John's,
Newfoundland, Canada.

Pygopus is a component of the T-cell factor/beta-catenin transcriptional complex 
essential for activation of Wnt target genes and is also required for cell
regulation in the absence of Wnt signaling. Human Pygopus2 (hPygo2) is
overexpressed in a high proportion of breast and epithelial ovarian malignant
tumors and is required for the growth of several cell lines derived from these
carcinomas. The mechanisms regulating hPygo2 gene activation, however, are
unknown. Here, we have determined cis- and trans-interacting factors responsible 
for hPygo2 expression in cancer. The minimal region required for a maximal
109-fold activation of the hPygo2 promoter in MCF-7 breast cancer cells is 48 bp 
upstream of the start of transcription. Within 25 bp of the transcriptional
start, there are two overlapping tandem Ets transcription factor-binding sites,
which are critical for hPygo2 promoter activity. In vitro DNA pull-down assays
and proteomic analyses identified the Ets family members Elk-1 and E74-like
factor-1 (Elf-1) as potential hPygo2 promoter binding factors, whereas in vivo
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays verified that only Elf-1 specifically bound 
to the hPygo2 promoter in MCF-7 cells. Modulation of elf-1 in MCF-7 cells by
silencing via RNA interference or overexpression caused a corresponding decrease 
or increase, respectively, in hPygo2 promoter activity. Overexpression of Elf-1
in HeLa cells, in which Elf-1 is expressed at a lower level than in MCF-7 cells, 
caused a 4-fold increase in endogenous hPygo2 mRNA levels. These results provide 
new evidence that Elf-1 is involved in transcriptional activation of hPygo2. Like
hPygo2, previous studies implicated Elf-1 in breast and ovarian cancer and our
present findings suggest that the oncogenic requirement of hPygo2 is fulfilled,
in part, by Elf-1.

PMID: 18314487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Immunol. 2008 Jan;45(1):1-12. Epub 2007 Jul 2.

Ets factors and a newly identified polymorphism regulate Fli1 promoter activity
in lymphocytes.

Nowling TK(1), Fulton JD, Chike-Harris K, Gilkeson GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, 96 Jonathan Lucas Street, Ste 912 CSB, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.
nowling@musc.edu

Fli1 is an Ets family member that is essential for embryonic development.
Increasing evidence suggests modulating Fli1 gene expression impacts lymphocyte
development/function and is an important mediator in the autoimmune disease
lupus. Fli1 is over-expressed in splenic lymphocytes in lupus prone mouse strains
and in PBMCs of lupus patients. Presently, it is unknown how Fli1 gene expression
is controlled in lymphocytes or how it becomes over-expressed in lupus.
Therefore, we examined Fli1 regulation in a murine B cell line and T cell line
and identified several cis-regulatory elements within a 230 bp region that
contribute to Fli1 promoter activity. Ets factors Elf1, Tel and Fli1 bind in
vitro to this region and increase endogenous Fli1 expression when over-expressed 
in a T cell line. In addition, we determined that a microsatellite located
adjacent to the region containing these cis-regulatory elements is polymorphic in
three lupus prone mouse strains and that the length of the microsatellite is
inversely correlated with promoter activity in a T cell line. These results
suggest that several Ets factors, including Fli1 itself, are involved in the
transcriptional regulation of Fli1 in lymphocytes. Furthermore, the presence of a
polymorphic microsatellite in the Fli1 promoter may contribute to increased Fli1 
expression in T cells during lupus disease progression.

PMCID: PMC2045641
PMID: 17606295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Oncogene. 2007 Jun 7;26(27):4032-7. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

Tumor promoting properties of the ETS protein MEF in ovarian cancer.

Yao JJ(1), Liu Y, Lacorazza HD, Soslow RA, Scandura JM, Nimer SD, Hedvat CV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA.

We have previously shown that MEF (myeloid ELF1-like factor, also known as ELF4) 
functions as a transcriptional activator of the interleukin (IL)-8, perforin,
granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and IL-3 genes in
hematopoietic cells. MEF is also expressed in non-hematopoietic tissues including
certain ovarian cancer cells. To define the function of MEF in these cells, we
examined primary human ovarian epithelial tumors and found that MEF is expressed 
in a significant proportion of ovarian carcinomas, and in the CAOV3 and SKOV3
ovarian cancer cell lines, but not in normal ovarian surface epithelium.
Manipulating MEF levels in these cell lines altered their behavior; reducing MEF 
levels, using short hairpin RNA expressing vectors, significantly inhibited the
proliferation of SKOV3 and CAOV3 cells in culture, and impaired the
anchorage-independent growth of CAOV3 cells. Overexpression of MEF in SKOV3 cells
(via retroviral transduction) significantly increased their growth rate, enhanced
colony formation in soft agar and promoted tumor formation in nude mice. The
oncogenic activity of MEF was further shown by the ability of MEF to transform
NIH3T3 cells, and induce their tumor formation in nude mice. MEF is an important 
regulator of the tumorigenic properties of ovarian cancer cells and could be used
a therapeutic target in ovarian cancer.

PMID: 17213815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Blood. 2007 Mar 1;109(5):1908-16. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

The paralogous hematopoietic regulators Lyl1 and Scl are coregulated by Ets and
GATA factors, but Lyl1 cannot rescue the early Scl-/- phenotype.

Chan WY(1), Follows GA, Lacaud G, Pimanda JE, Landry JR, Kinston S, Knezevic K,
Piltz S, Donaldson IJ, Gambardella L, Sablitzky F, Green AR, Kouskoff V, Göttgens
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Transcription factors are key regulators of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), yet 
the molecular mechanisms that control their expression are largely unknown.
Previously, we demonstrated that expression of Scl/Tal1, a transcription factor
required for the specification of HSCs, is controlled by Ets and GATA factors.
Here we characterize the molecular mechanisms controlling expression of Lyl1, a
paralog of Scl also required for HSC function. Two closely spaced promoters
directed expression to hematopoietic progenitor, megakaryocytic, and endothelial 
cells in transgenic mice. Conserved binding sites required for promoter activity 
were bound in vivo by GATA-2 and the Ets factors Fli1, Elf1, Erg, and PU.1.
However, despite coregulation of Scl and Lyl1 by the same Ets and GATA factors,
Scl expression was initiated prior to Lyl1 in embryonic stem (ES) cell
differentiation assays. Moreover, ectopic expression of Scl but not Lyl1 rescued 
hematopoietic differentiation in Scl-/- ES cells, thus providing a molecular
explanation for the vastly different phenotypes of Scl-/- and Lyl1-/- mouse
embryos. Furthermore, coregulation of Scl and Lyl1 later during development may
explain the mild phenotype of Scl-/- adult HSCs.

PMID: 17053063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cell Res. 2006 Sep;16(9):780-96.

Transcription of the putative tumor suppressor gene HCCS1 requires binding of
ETS-2 to its consensus near the transcription start site.

Zhu JD(1), Fei Q, Wang P, Lan F, Mao da Q, Zhang HY, Yao XB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Epigenetics and Gene Therapy, The State-Key Laboratory
for Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai, China. zhujingde@yahoo.com

The hepatocellular carcinoma suppressor 1 (HCCS1) gene was identified by both
positional cloning from a predominant region of loss of heterozygosity (17p13.3) 
in liver cancer and by functional screening for genes affecting cell
proliferation in large-scale transfection assays. Its overexpression results in
inhibition of cell proliferation in cell culture and tumor growth in nude mice.
To understand its transcription regulation, the promoter architecture has been
dissected in detail. The major start of transcription was mapped by primer
extension to a C residue, 177 nucleotides upstream of the ATG codon. By assessing
the promoter activity of a set of linker-scanning mutants of the minimal promoter
(-60 to +148 region) in a transient transfection assay, we found that the +1 to +
40 region is critical to HCCS1 gene transcription, containing binding sites for
transcription factors NF-kappaB (-21 to +7 and +40 to +26), p53 (+29 to +9) and
ETS (+4 to +20 and +23 to +39). Biochemical and molecular analyses revealed that 
the ETS transcription factors ETS-2 and Elf-1 bind to the two ETS sites in situ
and contribute significantly to the transcriptionally active state of the HCCS1
gene, while NF-kappaB, p53 and two other members of the ETS family (ETS-1 and
NERF2) appear to play little role. Our observations provide insight into the
mechanistic aspects of HCCS1 transcription regulation.

PMID: 16953216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biochem Mol Biol. 2006 May 31;39(3):311-8.

Yeast elf1 factor is phosphorylated and interacts with protein kinase CK2.

Kubinski K(1), Zielinski R, Hellman U, Mazur E, Szyszka R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Environmental Protection Institute, John Paul
II Catholic University of Lublin, Poland.

One of the biggest group of proteins influenced by protein kinase CK2 is formed
by factors engaged in gene expression. Here we have reported recently identified 
yeast transcription elongation factor Elf1 as a new substrate for both monomeric 
and tetrameric forms of CK2. Elf1 serves as a substrate for both the recombinant 
CK2alpha' (K(m) 0.38 microM) and holoenzyme (K(m) 0.13 microM). By MALDI-MS we
identified the two serine residues at positions 95 and 117 as the most probable
in vitro phosphorylation sites. Coimmunoprecypitation experiments show that Elf1 
interacts with catalytic (alpha and alpha') as well as regulatory (beta and
beta') subunits of CK2. These data may help to elucidate the role of protein
kinase CK2 and Elf1 in the regulation of transcription elongation.

PMID: 16756761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz). 2006 May-Jun;54(3):149-63. Epub 2006 May 2.

ETS transcription factors and regulation of immunity.

Gallant S(1), Gilkeson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatolog, Medical University of South
Carolina, 96 Jonathan Lucas St. Suite 912, PO Box 250637, Charleston, SC 29425,
USA. gallant@musc.edu

The ETS family is a diverse group of transcription factors that control the
expressions of genes that participate in an array of cellular activities, ranging
from mitosis to apoptosis. As a consequence of regulating these processes, most
ETS factors are oncogenic. However, there is growing evidence that ETS factors
are also essential to regulation of the immune system. Of the 29 recognized ETS
factors, nine are known to regulate genes involved in immunity, including Ets1,
Ets2, GABP, Fli1, Elf1, MEF, ESE1, PU.1, and SpiB. These ETS factors typically
activate the transcription of genes associated with pathogen and tumor defense,
but several also demonstrate ability to repress transcription. Ets1 and PU.1
appear to have the greatest impact on immunity, primarily through their control
of immune cell development. Alterations of Fli1 and Elf1 expression are
associated with autoimmunity, emphasizing the role of ETS factors as not only
positive, but also negative regulators of immunity. This review summarizes the
roles of ETS factors in development of the immune system, defense against
pathogens and malignancies, and self-tolerance.

PMID: 16652219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2006 Jun;147(2):177-92. Epub 2006 Mar 6.

Identification and expression analysis of ABC protein-encoding genes in
Toxoplasma gondii. Toxoplasma gondii ATP-binding cassette superfamily.

Sauvage V(1), Millot JM, Aubert D, Visneux V, Marle-Plistat M, Pinon JM, Villena 
I.

Author information: 
(1)EA 3800, Interactions Cellules-Parasites, UFR de Médecine, IFR53, Reims,
France.

The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters are one of the largest evolutionarily
conserved families of proteins. They are characterized by the presence of
nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs), which are highly conserved among organisms. In
the present study, we used human and protozoan ABC sequences, and ATP-binding
consensus motifs to screen the Toxoplasma gondii TwinScan2 predicted proteins
database. We identified 24 ABC open reading frames (ORFs), whose deduced amino
acid sequences exhibited all the typical biochemical features of the ABC family
members. Fifteen of them clustered into five of the seven families of human ABC
proteins: six ABCBs (drug, peptides and lipid export), two ABCCs (organic anion
conjugates and drug export), one ABCE (Rnase L inhibitor, RLI, antibiotic
resistance and translation regulation), one ABCF (drug resistance and regulation 
of gene expression) and five ABCGs (drug export and resistance). The nine other
ORFs were represented by four ABCHs (energy-generating subunits), four SMCs
(structural maintenance of chromosomes) and one member of unclear origin, whose
closest homologue was the yeast Elf1 protein (mRNA export factor). A notable
feature of the Toxoplasma ABC superfamily seems to be the absence of genes
encoding ABCA and ABCD members. Expression analysis of ABC genes in tachyzoite
and bradyzoite stages revealed the presence of ABC transcripts for all genes
studied. Further research on the implication of these ABC proteins will increase 
our knowledge of the basic biology of Toxoplasma and provide the opportunity to
identify novel therapeutic targets. To our knowledge, this is the first report of
ABC transporters in T. gondii.

PMID: 16600400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(7):2615-25.

Transcriptional link between blood and bone: the stem cell leukemia gene and its 
+19 stem cell enhancer are active in bone cells.

Pimanda JE(1), Silberstein L, Dominici M, Dekel B, Bowen M, Oldham S, Kallianpur 
A, Brandt SJ, Tannahill D, Göttgens B, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 2XY, United Kingdom.

Blood and vascular cells are generated during early embryogenesis from a common
precursor, the hemangioblast. The stem cell leukemia gene (SCL/tal 1) encodes a
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that is essential for the normal
development of blood progenitors and blood vessels. We have previously
characterized a panel of SCL enhancers including the +19 element, which directs
expression to hematopoietic stem cells and endothelium. Here we demonstrate that 
SCL is expressed in bone primordia during embryonic development and in adult
osteoblasts. Despite consistent expression in cells of the osteogenic lineage,
SCL protein is not required for bone specification of embryonic stem cells. In
transgenic mice, the SCL +19 core enhancer directed reporter gene expression to
vascular smooth muscle and bone in addition to blood and endothelium. A 644-bp
fragment containing the SCL +19 core enhancer was active in both blood and bone
cell lines and was bound in vivo by a common array of Ets and GATA transcription 
factors. Taken together with the recent observation that a common progenitor can 
give rise to blood and bone cells, our results suggest that the SCL +19 enhancer 
targets a mesodermal progenitor capable of generating hematopoietic, vascular,
and osteoblastic progeny.

PMCID: PMC1430329
PMID: 16537906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Cancer Res. 2006 Feb;4(2):101-12.

Nuclear factor-kappaB dimer exchange promotes a p21(waf1/cip1) superinduction
response in human T leukemic cells.

Chang PY(1), Miyamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 301 Medical Sciences Center, 1300 University
Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB)/Rel transcription factors are recognized as
critical apoptosis regulators. We reported previously that NF-kappaB contributes 
to chemoresistance of CEM human T leukemic cells in part through its ability to
induce p21(waf1/cip1). Here, we provide evidence that sequential
NF-kappaB-activating signals induce heightened NF-kappaB DNA binding and
p21(waf1/cip1) induction in CEM and additional T leukemic cell lines. This
response arises from exceedingly low basal expression of the p105/p50 NF-kappaB
subunit encoded by the NFKB1 gene in these cell lines. An initial NF-kappaB
activation event enhances the recruitment of p65 and ELF1 to the NFKB1 promoter, 
leading to p65- and ELF1-dependent synthesis of p105/p50, which promotes an
exchange of NF-kappaB complexes to p50-containing complexes with an increased
DNA-binding activity to certain NF-kappaB target elements. Subsequent stimulation
of these cells with an anticancer agent, etoposide, results in augmented
NF-kappaB-dependent p21(waf1/cip1) induction and increased chemoresistance of the
leukemia cells. Thus, we propose that low basal NFKB1 expression coupled with
sequential NF-kappaB activation events can promote increased chemoresistance in
certain T leukemic cells.

PMID: 16513841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. BMC Mol Biol. 2006 Feb 7;7:4.

Regulation of the human LAT gene by the Elf-1 transcription factor.

Finco TS(1), Justice-Healy GE, Patel SJ, Hamilton VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Agnes Scott College, Decatur, GA 30030, USA.
tfinco@agnesscott.edu

BACKGROUND: The LAT gene encodes an intracellular adaptor protein that links
cell-surface receptor engagement to numerous downstream signalling events, and
thereby plays an integral role in the function of cell types that express the
gene, including T cells, mast cells, natural killer cells, and platelets. To
date, the mechanisms responsible for the transcriptional regulation of this gene 
have not been investigated.
RESULTS: In this study we have mapped the transcriptional start sites for the
human LAT gene and localized the 5' and 3' boundaries of the proximal promoter.
We find that the promoter contains both positive and negative regulatory regions,
and that two binding sites for the Ets family of transcription factors have a
strong, positive effect on gene expression. Each site binds the Ets family member
Elf-1, and overexpression of Elf-1 augments LAT promoter activity. The promoter
also contains a Runx binding site adjacent to one of the Ets sites. This site,
which is shown to bind Runx-1, has an inhibitory effect on gene expression.
Finally, data is also presented indicating that the identified promoter may
regulate cell-type specific expression.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, these results provide the first insights into the
transcriptional regulation of the LAT gene, including the discovery that the Ets 
transcription factor Elf-1 may play a central role in its expression.

PMCID: PMC1382244
PMID: 16464244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Nov;25(22):10122-35.

Identification and characterization of Elf1, a conserved transcription elongation
factor in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Prather D(1), Krogan NJ, Emili A, Greenblatt JF, Winston F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA.

In order to identify previously unknown transcription elongation factors, a
genetic screen was carried out to identify mutations that cause lethality when
combined with mutations in the genes encoding the elongation factors TFIIS and
Spt6. This screen identified a mutation in YKL160W, hereafter named ELF1
(elongation factor 1). Further analysis identified synthetic lethality between an
elf1Delta mutation and mutations in genes encoding several known elongation
factors, including Spt4, Spt5, Spt6, and members of the Paf1 complex. Genome-wide
synthetic lethality studies confirmed that elf1Delta specifically interacts with 
mutations in genes affecting transcription elongation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments show that Elf1 is cotranscriptionally recruited
over actively transcribed regions and that this association is partially
dependent on Spt4 and Spt6. Analysis of elf1Delta mutants suggests a role for
this factor in maintaining proper chromatin structure in regions of active
transcription. Finally, purification of Elf1 suggests an association with casein 
kinase II, previously implicated in roles in transcription. Together, these
results suggest an important role for Elf1 in the regulation of transcription
elongation.

PMCID: PMC1280281
PMID: 16260625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Blood. 2005 Oct 15;106(8):2680-7. Epub 2005 Jun 30.

Fli1, Elf1, and Ets1 regulate the proximal promoter of the LMO2 gene in
endothelial cells.

Landry JR(1), Kinston S, Knezevic K, Donaldson IJ, Green AR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
University, Hills Rd, Cambridge, CB2 2XY, United Kingdom. bg200@cam.ac.uk.

Transcriptional control has been identified as a key mechanism regulating the
formation and subsequent behavior of hematopoietic stem cells. We have used a
comparative genomics approach to identify transcriptional regulatory elements of 
the LMO2 gene, a transcriptional cofactor originally identified through its
involvement in T-cell leukemia and subsequently shown to be critical for normal
hematopoietic and endothelial development. Of the 2 previously characterized LMO2
promoters, the second (proximal) promoter was highly conserved in vertebrates
ranging from mammals to fish. Real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) expression analysis identified this promoter as the predominant
source of transcription in hematopoietic tissue. Transient and stable
transfections indicated that the proximal promoter was active in hematopoietic
progenitor and endothelial cell lines and this activity was shown to depend on 3 
conserved Ets sites that were bound in vivo by E74-like factor 1 (Elf1), Friend
leukemia integration 1 (Fli1), and erythroblastosis virus oncogene homolog E
twenty-six-1 (Ets1). Finally, transgenic analysis demonstrated that the LMO2
proximal promoter is sufficient for expression in endothelial cells in vivo. No
hematopoietic expression was observed, indicating that additional enhancers are
required to mediate transcription from the proximal promoter in hematopoietic
cells. Together, these results suggest that the conserved proximal promoter is
central to LMO2 transcription in hematopoietic and endothelial cells, where it is
regulated by Ets factors.

PMID: 15994290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Curr Biol. 2005 Jun 7;15(11):R425-7.

Cell biology: master regulators of sealing and healing.

Stramer B(1), Martin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, University of Bristol, UK.

The protective layer of the epidermis in Drosophila (cuticle) and mice (stratum
corneum) are structurally unrelated. Yet new evidence suggests a conserved
transcription factor, Grainyhead, controls both their development and the means
by which both structures repair themselves.

PMID: 15936265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Science. 2005 Apr 15;308(5720):364-5.

Cell biology. Of grainy heads and broken skins.

Harden N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, BC, V5A 1S6 Canada. nharden@sfu.ca

Comment on
    Science. 2005 Apr 15;308(5720):411-3.
    Science. 2005 Apr 15;308(5720):381-5.

PMID: 15831745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cancer Res. 2004 Nov 1;64(21):7748-55.

From mice to humans: identification of commonly deregulated genes in mammary
cancer via comparative SAGE studies.

Hu Y(1), Sun H, Drake J, Kittrell F, Abba MC, Deng L, Gaddis S, Sahin A, Baggerly
K, Medina D, Aldaz CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park-Research Division, Smithville 78957, USA.

Genetically engineered mouse mammary cancer models have been used over the years 
as systems to study human breast cancer. However, much controversy exists on the 
utility of such models as valid equivalents to the human cancer condition. To
perform an interspecies gene expression comparative study in breast cancer we
used a mouse model that most closely resembles human breast carcinogenesis. This 
system relies on the transplant of p53 null mouse mammary epithelial cells into
the cleared mammary fat pads of syngeneic hosts. Serial analysis of gene
expression (SAGE) was used to obtain gene expression profiles of normal and tumor
samples from this mouse mammary cancer model (>300,000 mouse mammary-specific
tags). The resulting mouse data were compared with 25 of our human breast cancer 
SAGE libraries (>2.5 million human breast-specific tags). We observed significant
similarities in the deregulation of specific genes and gene families when
comparing mouse with human breast cancer SAGE data. A total of 72 transcripts
were identified as commonly deregulated in both species. We observed a systematic
and significant down-regulation in all of the tumors from both species of various
cytokines, including CXCL1 (GRO1), LIF, interleukin 6, and CCL2. All of the mouse
and most human mammary tumors also displayed decreased expression of genes known 
to inhibit cell proliferation, including NFKBIA (IKBalpha), GADD45B, and CDKN1A
(p21); transcription-related genes such as CEBP, JUN, JUNB, and ELF1; and
apoptosis-related transcripts such as IER3 and GADD34/PPP1R15A. Examples of
overexpressed transcripts in tumors from both species include
proliferation-related genes such as CCND1, CKS1B, and STMN1 (oncoprotein 18); and
genes related to other functions such as SEPW1, SDFR1, DNCI2, and SP110.
Importantly, abnormal expression of several of these genes has not been
associated previously with breast cancer. The consistency of these observations
was validated in independent mouse and human mammary cancer sets. This is the
first interspecies comparison of mammary cancer gene expression profiles. The
comparative analysis of mouse and human SAGE mammary cancer data validates this
p53 null mouse tumor model as a useful system closely resembling human breast
cancer development and progression. More importantly, these studies are allowing 
us to identify relevant biomarkers of potential use in human studies while
leading to a better understanding of specific mechanisms of human breast
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4170686
PMID: 15520179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Immunol. 2004 Aug 15;173(4):2552-61.

Transcriptional regulation of the human TLR9 gene.

Takeshita F(1), Suzuki K, Sasaki S, Ishii N, Klinman DM, Ishii KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Retroviral Immunology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
takesita@yokohama-cu.ac.jp

To clarify the molecular basis of human TLR9 (hTLR9) gene expression, the
activity of the hTLR9 gene promoter was characterized using the human myeloma
cell line RPMI 8226. Reporter gene analysis and EMSA demonstrated that hTLR9 gene
transcription was regulated via four cis-acting elements, cAMP response element, 
5'-PU box, 3'-PU box, and a C/EBP site, that interacted with the CREB1, Ets2,
Elf1, Elk1, and C/EBPalpha transcription factors. Other members of the C/EBP
family, such as C/EBPbeta, C/EBPdelta, and C/EBPepsilon, were also important for 
TLR9 gene transcription. CpG DNA-mediated suppression of TLR9 gene transcription 
led to decreased binding of the trans-acting factors to their corresponding
cis-acting elements. It appeared that suppression was mediated via c-Jun and
NF-kappaB p65 and that cooperation among CREB1, Ets2, Elf1, Elk1, and C/EBPalpha 
culminated in maximal transcription of the TLR9 gene. These findings will help to
elucidate the mechanism of TLR9 gene regulation and to provide insight into the
process by which TLR9 evolved in the mammalian immune system.

PMID: 15294971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2004 Oct;24(10):1803-9. Epub 2004 Jul 29.

Expression of angiopoietin-2 in endothelial cells is controlled by positive and
negative regulatory promoter elements.

Hegen A(1), Koidl S, Weindel K, Marmé D, Augustin HG, Fiedler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology and Angiogenesis Research, Tumor Biology
Center, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2) is a non-signal transducing ligand of the
endothelial receptor tyrosine kinase Tie-2. Ang-2 is produced by endothelial
cells and acts as an autocrine regulator mediating vascular destabilization by
inhibiting Angiopoietin-1-mediated Tie-2 activation. To examine the
transcriptional regulation of Ang-2, we studied the Ang-2 promoter in endothelial
cells and nonendothelial cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The human Ang-2 promoter contains a 585-bp region around the
transcriptional start site (-109 to +476) that is sufficient to control
endothelial cell-specific and cytokine-dependent Ang-2 expression. Strong
repressor elements of Ang-2-promoter activity are located in the 5'-region of the
promoter and in the first intron. The Ets family transcription factors Ets-1 and 
Elf-1 act as strong enhancers of endothelial cell Ang-2-promoter activity.
Ets-binding sites -4 and -7 act as positive regulators, whereas Ets-binding site 
-3 acts as negative regulator. Demethylation experiments revealed that the Ang-2 
gene (in contrast to the Tie-2 gene) is not controlled by imprinting.
CONCLUSIONS: The data determine unique positive and negative regulatory
mechanisms of endothelial cell Ang-2 expression and provide further evidence for 
the critical role of Ang-2 as a key autocrine regulator of vascular stability and
responsiveness.

PMID: 15284088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Mar;24(5):1870-83.

The scl +18/19 stem cell enhancer is not required for hematopoiesis:
identification of a 5' bifunctional hematopoietic-endothelial enhancer bound by
Fli-1 and Elf-1.

Göttgens B(1), Broccardo C, Sanchez MJ, Deveaux S, Murphy G, Göthert JR,
Kotsopoulou E, Kinston S, Delaney L, Piltz S, Barton LM, Knezevic K, Erber WN,
Begley CG, Frampton J, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University
of Cambridge, United Kingdom. bg200@cam.ac.uk

Analysis of cis-regulatory elements is central to understanding the genomic
program for development. The scl/tal-1 transcription factor is essential for
lineage commitment to blood cell formation and previous studies identified an scl
enhancer (the +18/19 element) which was sufficient to target the vast majority of
hematopoietic stem cells, together with hematopoietic progenitors and
endothelium. Moreover, expression of scl under control of the +18/19 enhancer
rescued blood progenitor formation in scl(-/-) embryos. However, here we
demonstrate by using a knockout approach that, within the endogenous scl locus,
the +18/19 enhancer is not necessary for the initiation of scl transcription or
for the formation of hematopoietic cells. These results led to the identification
of a bifunctional 5' enhancer (-3.8 element), which targets expression to
hematopoietic progenitors and endothelium, contains conserved critical Ets sites,
and is bound by Ets family transcription factors, including Fli-1 and Elf-1.
These data demonstrate that two geographically distinct but functionally related 
enhancers regulate scl transcription in hematopoietic progenitors and endothelial
cells and suggest that enhancers with dual hematopoietic-endothelial activity may
represent a general strategy for regulating blood and endothelial development.

PMCID: PMC350551
PMID: 14966269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 23;279(17):17842-9. Epub 2004 Feb 14.

Factors binding a non-classical Cis-element prevent heterochromatin effects on
locus control region activity.

Harrow F(1), Amuta JU, Hutchinson SR, Akwaa F, Ortiz BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, City University of New York, Hunter
College, New York, New York 10021, USA.

A locus control region (LCR) is a cis-acting gene-regulatory element capable of
transferring the expression characteristics of its gene locus of origin to a
linked transgene. Furthermore, it can do this independently of the site of
integration in the genome of transgenic mice. Although most LCRs contain
subelements with classical transcriptional enhancer function, key aspects of LCR 
activity are supported by cis-acting sequences devoid of the ability to act as
direct transcriptional enhancers. Very few of these "non-enhancer" LCR components
have been characterized. Consequently, the sequence requirements and molecular
bases for their functions, as well as their roles in LCR activity, are poorly
understood. We have investigated these questions using the LCR from the mouse T
cell receptor (TCR) alpha/Dad1 gene locus. Here we focus on DNase hypersensitive 
site (HS) 6 of the TCRalpha LCR. HS6 does not support classical enhancer
activity, yet has gene regulatory activity in an in vivo chromatin context. We
have identified three in vivo occupied factor-binding sites within HS6, two of
which interact with Runx1 and Elf-1 factors. Deletion of these sites from the LCR
impairs its activity in vivo. This mutation renders the transgene locus
abnormally inaccessible in chromatin, preventing the normal function of other LCR
subelements and reducing transgene mRNA levels. These data show these
factor-binding sites are required for preventing heterochromatin formation and
indicate that they function to maintain an active TCRalpha LCR assembly in vivo.

PMID: 14966120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 19;279(12):11281-92. Epub 2003 Dec 8.

Changes in the expression of many Ets family transcription factors and of
potential target genes in normal mammary tissue and tumors.

Galang CK(1), Muller WJ, Foos G, Oshima RG, Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)Oncodevelopmental Biology Program, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Interfering with Ets transcription factor function reverses multiple aspects of
the transformed phenotype of mouse or human tumor cells. However, the unknown
number of individual Ets factors expressed in any cellular context and the
similar DNA binding specificities of Ets family members complicates the
identification of those that mediate transformation. By utilizing quantitative
PCR assays for 25 mouse Ets factors, we analyzed the expression of essentially
the entire Ets family in normal mammary tissue, mammary-related cell lines, and
mammary tumors. In normal mammary tissue, 24 Ets factors were expressed. Even
clonal derived cell lines expressed 14-20 Ets members. The most abundant Ets
factor mRNAs measured in normal mammary tissue were Elk4, Elf1, and Ets2.
Subtractive analysis of mammary tissue identified which Ets factors were
predominantly expressed in the myeloid/lymphoid or epithelial cell compartments. 
Comparison of Ets factor expression in normal mammary tissue and mammary tumors
identified significantly elevated expression of Pse/PDEF, Ese2/Elf5, Ese3/Ehf,
TEL/Etv6, and Elf2/NERF in mammary tumors and confirmed previously reported
alterations in expression of Ese1/Elf3 and the PEA3 subfamily. Expression of 13
Ets target genes, implicated in various aspects of tumor progression, was also
analyzed. Altered expression of particular Ets target genes was significantly
correlated with particular Ets factors (e.g. maspin and Ese2), suggesting
specific in vivo regulatory roles. Together, this comprehensive analysis revealed
unexpectedly diverse Ets family gene expression, characterized novel Ets factor
changes in mammary tumors, and implicated specific Ets factors in the regulation 
of multiple genes involved in mammary tumor progression.

PMID: 14662758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 20;279(8):6395-400. Epub 2003 Nov 17.

Myeloid ELF1-like factor is a potent activator of interleukin-8 expression in
hematopoietic cells.

Hedvat CV(1), Yao J, Sokolic RA, Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Aspects of Hematopoiesis, Department of Pathology,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.
hedvatc@mskcc.org

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 31;281(13):8996.

Myeloid ELF1-like factor (MEF), also known as ELF4, is a member of the ETS family
of transcription factors which is expressed in hematopoietic cells. MEF-deficient
mice have defects in natural killer cell and natural killer T cell development,
suggesting a role for MEF in regulating innate immunity. MEF also functions in
myeloid cells, where it can transactivate target genes. To identify MEF target
genes in a "myeloid" environment, we created an inducible expression system and
used oligonucleotide microarrays to examine the transcript profile of HEL cells
after induction of MEF expression. Sixteen genes were reproducibly turned on or
off more than 2-fold, 8 h after induction of MEF expression, and we examined one 
of the genes, interleukin-8 (IL-8), in greater detail. IL-8 is a CXC chemokine
involved in neutrophil chemoattraction, angiogenesis, and stem cell mobilization.
It is expressed by several tumor types, and its expression is regulated primarily
transcriptionally. The IL-8 promoter contains three ETS binding sites, and we
identified the specific site that binds MEF and is required for MEF
responsiveness. MEF, but not the closely related ETS factors PEA3, ETS1, ETS2,
ELF1, or PU.1, strongly activates the IL-8 promoter. MEF overexpression is
sufficient to induce IL-8 protein expression, and reduction in MEF expression
(using RNA interference) results in decreased IL-8 levels. These data
demonstrates that MEF is an important regulator of IL-8 expression.

PMID: 14625302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Nat Med. 2003 Dec;9(12):1513-9. Epub 2003 Nov 9.

Inositol- and folate-resistant neural tube defects in mice lacking the
epithelial-specific factor Grhl-3.

Ting SB(1), Wilanowski T, Auden A, Hall M, Voss AK, Thomas T, Parekh V,
Cunningham JM, Jane SM.

Author information: 
(1)Rotary Bone Marrow Research Laboratories, c/o Royal Melbourne Hospital Post
Office, Grattan Street, Parkville, Victoria, Australia 3050.

The neural tube defects (NTDs) spina bifida and anencephaly are widely prevalent 
severe birth defects. The mouse mutant curly tail (ct/ct) has served as a model
of NTDs for 50 years, even though the responsible genetic defect remained
unrecognized. Here we show by gene targeting, mapping and genetic complementation
studies that a mouse homolog of the Drosophila grainyhead (grh) gene,
grainyhead-like-3 (Grhl3), is a compelling candidate for the gene underlying the 
curly tail phenotype. The NTDs in Grhl3-null mice are more severe than those in
the curly tail strain, as the Grhl3 alleles in ct/ct mice are hypomorphic. Spina 
bifida in ct/ct mice is folate resistant, but its incidence can be markedly
reduced by maternal inositol supplementation periconceptually. The NTDs in
Grhl3-/- embryos are also folate resistant, but unlike those in ct/ct mice, they 
are resistant to inositol. These findings suggest that residual Grhl3 expression 
in ct/ct mice may be required for inositol rescue of folate-resistant NTDs.

PMID: 14608380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 13;278(24):21909-19. Epub 2003 Apr 3.

Multiple Ets factors and interferon regulatory factor-4 modulate CD68 expression 
in a cell type-specific manner.

O'Reilly D(1), Quinn CM, El-Shanawany T, Gordon S, Greaves DR.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, 
Oxford OX1 3RE, United Kingdom.

CD68 is a transmembrane glycoprotein expressed in all cells of the mononuclear
phagocyte lineage including monocytes and tissue resident macrophages. Deletion
analysis of the 5'-flanking sequences of the gene demonstrated that the proximal 
-150-bp sequence of the CD68 promoter exhibits high level promoter activity in
macrophages. Mutations that abolish Ets factor binding at positions -106 and -89 
reduce promoter activity in macrophages to 12 and 30%, respectively. Band shift
experiments show that PU.1 associates with the -89 site whereas, Elf-1
preferentially binds the -106 Ets binding site and enhances CD68 activity in
vitro. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments confirm that Elf-1 
and PU.1 associate with the CD68 proximal promoter in vivo in THP-1 cells. PU.1
does not bind to the CD68 promoter alone but instead forms heterocomplexes with
members of the interferon regulatory factor family (IRF) including IRF-4 and
IRF-8. IRF-4 and IRF-8 typically mediate transcriptional activation when
associated with PU.1 on composite elements. However, our data show that
PU.1/IRF-4 and IRF-8 heterocomplexes down-regulate CD68 promoter activity in
macrophages and repression is dependent on the integrity of both the IRF and PU.1
half-sites of this composite element. Chromatin immunoprecipitation data reveal
that neither IRF-4 nor IRF-8 associate with the CD68 proximal promoter in
macrophages in vivo but IRF-4 is associated with the promoter in B lymphocytes.
We propose that expression of CD68 in myeloid cells requires the Ets
transcription factors Elf-1 and PU.1 and CD68 expression is down-regulated in
lymphoid cells by combinatorial interactions between PU.1 and IRF-4.

PMID: 12676954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Dev Dyn. 2003 Apr;226(4):604-17.

Identification and characterization of Grainyhead-like epithelial transactivator 
(GET-1), a novel mammalian Grainyhead-like factor.

Kudryavtseva EI(1), Sugihara TM, Wang N, Lasso RJ, Gudnason JF, Lipkin SM,
Andersen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Divisions of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University 
of California, Irvine, California 92697, USA.

LMO-4 is an LIM-only factor that is highly expressed in many epithelial cells,
including those of the epidermis and hair follicles. Because LMOs may function by
interacting with DNA-binding proteins, we have used the yeast two-hybrid system
to screen mouse skin libraries for LMO-4-interacting DNA-binding proteins. In
this screen, we isolated a novel LMO-4-interacting factor highly related to the
Drosophila gene Grainyhead. Grainyhead is epidermally expressed and carries out
important functions in cuticular formation in the fly embryo. With the
identification of this novel mammalian Grainyhead-like gene, referred to as
Grainyhead-like epithelial transactivator 1 (GET-1), the known members of the
mammalian Grainyhead-like gene family are extended to six, falling into two
classes based on sequence homology. Of interest, the expression pattern of GET-1 
is similar to that of Drosophila Grainyhead with highest expression in the
somatic ectoderm/epidermis, but GET-1 is additionally expressed in epithelial
cells of gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and respiratory tracks. The GET-1
protein localizes to the nucleus and binds to at least one Grainyhead DNA-binding
site. The GET-1 DNA-binding domain maps to a region containing homology to the
Drosophila Grainyhead DNA-binding domain. GET-1 homodimerizes in solution by
means of a short C-terminally located domain that is homologous to other
Grainyhead-like genes. A short domain located between amino acids 100 and 190,
which bears no homology to known transactivation domains, is sufficient to confer
transactivation to the heterologous GAL4 DNA-binding domain. In addition, GET-1
appears to contain repression domains consistent with the observation that
Grainyhead and other mammalian Grainyhead-like genes can act both as activators
and repressors. These data suggest that GET-1 is a transcriptional regulator that
may perform important functions in epithelial tissues of mammals.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12666198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Genomics. 2003 Mar;81(3):249-59.

Comparative and functional analyses of LYL1 loci establish marsupial sequences as
a model for phylogenetic footprinting.

Chapman MA(1), Charchar FJ, Kinston S, Bird CP, Grafham D, Rogers J, Grützner F, 
Graves JA, Green AR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
University, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK.

Comparative genomic sequence analysis is a powerful technique for identifying
regulatory regions in genomic DNA. However, its utility largely depends on the
evolutionary distances between the species involved. Here we describe the
screening of a genomic BAC library from the stripe-faced dunnart, Sminthopsis
macroura, formerly known as the narrow-footed marsupial mouse. We isolated a
clone containing the LYL1 locus, completely sequenced the 60.6-kb insert, and
compared it with orthologous human and mouse sequences. Noncoding homology was
substantially reduced in the human/dunnart analysis compared with human/mouse,
yet we could readily identify all promoters and exons. Human/mouse/dunnart
alignments of the LYL1 candidate promoter allowed us to identify putative
transcription factor binding sites, revealing a pattern highly reminiscent of
critical regulatory regions of the LYL1 paralogue, SCL. This newly identified
LYL1 promoter showed strong activity in myeloid progenitor cells and was bound in
vivo by Fli1, Elf1, and Gata2-transcription factors all previously shown to bind 
to the SCL stem cell enhancer. This study represents the first large-scale
comparative analysis involving marsupial genomic sequence and demonstrates that
such comparisons provide a powerful approach to characterizing mammalian
regulatory elements.

PMID: 12659809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Acta Trop. 2002 Dec;84(3):205-18.

Molecular identification of vectors of Leishmania in Colombia: mitochondrial
introgression in the Lutzomyia townsendi series.

Testa JM(1), Montoya-Lerma J, Cadena H, Oviedo M, Ready PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, The Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, London
SW7 5BD, UK.

The identity of the sandfly vectors of Leishmania braziliensis in Valle del Cauca
Department, Colombia, was originally given as Lutzomyia townsendi, but then
changed to L. youngi, another member of the L. townsendi series (Verrucarum
group) with isomorphic females. To identify members of this series in Valle del
Cauca, we analyzed the nuclear gene elongation factor-alpha (EF-alpha) and the
mitochondrial gene cytochrome b (Cyt b). DNA sequences from the L. verrucarum
series (L. columbiana, L. evansi and L. ovallesi) were used as outgroups. Flies
from two locations on the western cordillera of the Andes were identified as L.
townsendi s.s., according to male morphology and distinctive gene lineages. In
the third location, on the central cordillera of the Andes, most specimens were
identified as belonging to a geographical population of L. youngi, according to
male morphology, an EF-alpha lineage shared with L. youngi from the
Venezuelan-type locality, and a distinctive Cyt b sub-lineage. All other
specimens were identified as L. youngi with the introgressed Cyt b sequences of
L. townsendi. Such interspecific introgression implies that vectorial traits and 
ecological associations may no longer be viewed as fixed properties of different 
morphospecies.

PMID: 12443799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 6;277(49):47898-906. Epub 2002 Sep 24.

T cell-specific expression of the murine CD3delta promoter.

Ji HB(1), Gupta A, Okamoto S, Blum MD, Tan L, Goldring MB, Lacy E, Roy AL,
Terhorst C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. hji@caregroup.harvard.edu

T cell-specific expression of human and mouse CD3delta is known to be governed by
an enhancer element immediately downstream from the gene. Here we demonstrate by 
transgenic and in vitro studies that the murine CD3delta (mCD3delta) promoter
prefers to be expressed in cells of the T lineage. Deletion analyses of a
promoter segment (-401/+48 bp) followed by transient transfections indicate that 
upstream elements between -149 and -112 bp contribute to full expression of the
gene. Furthermore, a core promoter region -37/+29 appears to contribute to a T
cell specificity. Using substitution mutant scanning, four positive and one
negative regulatory elements were found within the mCD3delta core promoter. The
first two positive elements comprise two classical initiator-like sites, which
recruit TFII-I, whereas a third contains a functional Ets binding site.
Immediately adjacent to the observed transcription start site is a negative
element that utilizes the transcription regulator YY1. The last positive
regulatory element contains a potentially functional CREB binding site and the
minor transcriptional start site. Because NERF-2, Elf-1, and Ets-1 are expressed 
preferentially in lymphocytes and because, in addition, YY1 represses the
promoter activity strongly in non-T cells, we conclude that the combination of
these transcription factors contributes to the T cell-specific expression pattern
of mouse CD3delta.

PMID: 12324448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Eur Cytokine Netw. 2002 Jul-Sep;13(3):331-9.

Induction of interleukin-2 receptor alpha (IL-2Ralpha) expression by
interleukin-2: important role of the interleukin-2 receptor beta chain region
between the two Stat5 docking sites.

Imbert V(1), Rezzonico R, Reichenbach P, Nabholz M.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Biology Unit, ISREC 155 ch des Boveresses, CH 1006
Epalinges/Lausanne, Switzerland. imbertv@unice.fr

The interleukin-2 receptor alpha (IL-2Ralpha) forms, together with IL-2Rbeta and 
gammac chains, a high affinity IL-2 receptor that is important for IL-2
responsiveness and normal T cell function. Expression of the IL-2Ralpha gene by T
cells is regulated mainly at the transcription level which is transiently
activated by antigen and upregulated and then prolonged by stimulation with IL-2.
The effect of IL-2 on the IL-2Ralpha gene depends on the activation of the
transcription factor Stat5, which acts on an IL-2- responsive enhancer that
consists of two Stat5 and an Elf1 binding site. To identify the functional
domains of the IL-2 receptor required for the stimulation of IL-2Ralpha gene
expression, we introduced, into the CTL44 T cell line, receptor chimeras between 
the extracellular domain of the IL-9 receptor and the cytoplasmic region of
IL-2Rbeta. Analyzing the effect of mutations in the intracellular IL-2Rbeta
segment, we found that a minimal receptor containing the Jak boxes and one intact
Stat5 docking site (i.e. tyrosine 392 or 510) can, as expected, mediate Stat5
activation, but is unable to stimulate IL-2Ralpha expression. However, when this 
minimal receptor includes the region between the two tyrosines, its capacity to
mediate IL-2Ralpha cell surface expression is restored. These data suggest that
the segment between the two Stat5 docking sites of the IL-2Rbeta chain mediates
signaling events that, together with Stat5 activation, are essential for the
stimulation of IL-2Ralpha gene transcription.

PMID: 12231477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mech Dev. 2002 Jun;114(1-2):37-50.

A highly conserved novel family of mammalian developmental transcription factors 
related to Drosophila grainyhead.

Wilanowski T(1), Tuckfield A, Cerruti L, O'Connell S, Saint R, Parekh V, Tao J,
Cunningham JM, Jane SM.

Author information: 
(1)Rotary Bone Marrow Research Laboratory, Royal Melbourne Hospital Research
Foundation, c/o Royal Melbourne Hospital Post Office, Grattan Street, Parkville, 
Victoria 3050, Australia.

The Drosophila transcription factor Grainyhead regulates several key
developmental processes. Three mammalian genes, CP2, LBP-1a and LBP-9 have been
previously identified as homologues of grainyhead. We now report the cloning of
two new mammalian genes (Mammalian grainyhead (MGR) and Brother-of-MGR (BOM)) and
one new Drosophila gene (dCP2) that rewrite the phylogeny of this family. We
demonstrate that MGR and BOM are more closely related to grh, whereas CP2, LBP-1a
and LBP-9 are descendants of the dCP2 gene. MGR shares the greatest sequence
homology with grh, is expressed in tissue-restricted patterns more comparable to 
grh and binds to and transactivates the promoter of the human Engrailed-1 gene,
the mammalian homologue of the key grainyhead target gene, engrailed. This
sequence and functional conservation indicates that the new mammalian members of 
this family play important developmental roles.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12175488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Oncogene. 2002 Aug 8;21(34):5255-67.

ELF a beta-spectrin is a neuronal precursor cell marker in developing mammalian
brain; structure and organization of the elf/beta-G spectrin gene.

Tang Y(1), Katuri V, Iqbal S, Narayan T, Wang Z, Lu RS, Mishra L, Mishra B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Development Molecular Biology, DVAMC, Washington, District of
Columbia, DC 20422, USA.

Spectrins play a pivotal role in axonal transport, neurite extension, the
organization of synaptic vesicles, as well as for protein sorting in the Golgi
apparatus and cell membrane. Among spectrins there is great variability in
sequence composition, tissue distribution, and function, with two known genes
encoding the alpha-chain, and at least five encoding the beta-chain. It remains
unclear as to whether novel beta-spectrins such as elf1-4 are distinct genes or
beta-G-spectrin isoforms. The role for ELF in the developing nervous system has
not been identified to date. In this study we demonstrate the genomic structure
of elf-3, as well as the expression of ELF in the developing mouse brain using a 
peptide specific antibody against its distinctive amino-terminal end. Full
genomic structural analyses reveal that elf-3 is composed of 31 exons spanning
approximately 67 kb, and confirm that elf and mouse brain beta-G-spectrin share
multiple exons, with a complex form of exon/intron usage. In embryonic stages,
E9-12, anti-ELF localized to the primary brain vesicular cells that also labeled 
strongly with anti-nestin but not anti-vimentin. At E12-14, anti-ELF localized to
axonal sprouts in the developing neuroblasts of cortex and purkinje cell layer of
the cerebellum, as well as in cell bodies in the diencephalon and metencephalon. 
Double labeling identified significant co-localization of anti-ELF, nestin and
dystrophin in sub ventricular zone cells and in stellate-like cells of the
developing forebrain. These studies define clearly the expression of ELF, a new
isoform of beta-G-spectrin in the developing brain. Based on its expression
pattern, ELF may have a role in neural stem cell development and is a marker of
axonal sprouting in mid stages of embryonic development.

PMID: 12149647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2002 Jul 1;22(7):1106-12.

Opposing functions of the Ets factors NERF and ELF-1 during chicken blood vessel 
development.

Gaspar J(1), Thai S, Voland C, Dube A, Libermann TA, Iruela-Arispe ML, Oettgen P.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, New England Baptist Bone and Joint Institute, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the role of the Ets factor
NERF in the regulation of the Tie1 and Tie2 genes during chicken blood vessel
development.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We have isolated the full-length cDNA for the chicken
homologue of the human Ets factor NERF2 (cNERF2). Northern blot analysis and in
situ hybridization demonstrate that cNERF2 is enriched in the developing blood
vessels of the chicken chorioallantoic membrane. Interestingly, cNERF2 functions 
as a competitive inhibitor of a highly related Ets factor cELF-1, which we have
previously shown to be enriched in chicken blood vessel development. Although in 
vitro-translated cELF-1 and cNERF2 can bind equally well to conserved Ets binding
sites in the promoters of the Tie1 and Tie2 genes, cELF-1 preferentially binds to
the Ets sites in these promoters during early stages of chicken blood vessel
development, suggesting that cNERF may bind during later stages of blood vessel
development and vascular remodeling.
CONCLUSIONS: cNERF2 is enriched during embryonic and extraembryonic blood vessel 
development in the chicken and facilitates tight control of Tie1 and Tie2 gene
regulation.

PMID: 12117724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 13;277(37):33580-9. Epub 2002 Jul 10.

Elf1p, a member of the ABC class of ATPases, functions as a mRNA export factor in
Schizosacchromyces pombe.

Kozak L(1), Gopal G, Yoon JH, Sauna ZE, Ambudkar SV, Thakurta AG, Dhar R.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, NCI/National Institutes
of Health, Bldg. 37/Rm. 6138B, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Rae1p and Mex67p/Tap are conserved mRNA export factors. We have used synthetic
lethal genetic screens in Schizosaccharomyces pombe to identify mutations in
genes that are functionally linked to rae1 and mex67 in mRNA export. From these
screens, we have isolated mutations in a putative S. pombe homologue of the
Candida albicans elf1 gene. The elf1 of S. pombe is not an essential gene. When
elf1 mutations are combined with rae1-167 mutation, growth and mRNA export is
inhibited in the double mutants. This inhibition can be suppressed by the
multicopy expression of mex67 suggesting that Mex67p can substitute for the loss 
of Elf1p function. Elf1p is a non-membrane member of the ATP-binding cassette
(ABC) class of ATPase and the GFP-Elf1p fusion localizes to the cytoplasm. Elf1p,
expressed and purified from Escherichia coli, binds and hydrolyzes ATP. A mutant 
Elf1p that carries a glycine to aspartic acid (G731D) mutation within the Walker 
A domain of the second ATP site retains the ATP binding but loses its ATPase
activity in vitro. This mutant protein no longer functions in mRNA export. Taken 
together, our results show that Elf1p functions as a mRNA export factor along
with Rae1p and Mex67p in S. pombe.

PMID: 12110682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. RNA. 2002 Mar;8(3):382-97.

Development and characterization of a reconstituted yeast translation initiation 
system.

Algire MA(1), Maag D, Savio P, Acker MG, Tarun SZ Jr, Sachs AB, Asano K, Nielsen 
KH, Olsen DS, Phan L, Hinnebusch AG, Lorsch JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205-2185, USA.

To provide a bridge between in vivo and in vitro studies of eukaryotic
translation initiation, we have developed a reconstituted translation initiation 
system using components from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We have purified
a minimal set of initiation factors (elFs) that, together with yeast 80S
ribosomes, GTP, and initiator methionyl-tRNA, are sufficient to assemble active
initiation complexes on a minimal mRNA template. The kinetics of various steps in
the pathway of initiation complex assembly and the formation of the first peptide
bond in vitro have been explored. The formation of active initiation complexes in
this system is dependent on ribosomes, mRNA, Met-tRNAi, GTP hydrolysis, elF1,
elF1A, elF2, elF5, and elF5B. Our data indicate that elF1 and elF1A both
facilitate the binding of the elF2 x GTP x Met-tRNAi complex to the 40S ribosomal
subunit to form the 43S complex. elF5 stimulates a step after 43S complex
formation, consistent with its proposed role in activating GTP hydrolysis by elF2
upon initiation codon recognition. The presence of elF5B is required for the
joining of the 40S and 60S subunits to form the 80S initiation complex. The step 
at which each of these factors acts in this reconstituted system is in agreement 
with previous data from in vivo studies and work using reconstituted mammalian
systems, indicating that the system recapitulates fundamental events in
translation initiation in eukaryotic cells. This system should allow us to couple
powerful yeast genetic and molecular biological experiments with in vitro kinetic
and biophysical experiments, yielding a better understanding of the molecular
mechanics of this central, complex process.

PMCID: PMC1370259
PMID: 12008673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 19;277(29):26036-45. Epub 2002 May 1.

A highly active homeobox gene promoter regulated by Ets and Sp1 family members in
normal granulosa cells and diverse tumor cell types.

Rao MK(1), Maiti S, Ananthaswamy HN, Wilkinson MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

One mechanism by which normal cells become converted to tumor cells involves the 
aberrant transcriptional activation of genes that are normally silent. We
characterize a promoter that normally exhibits highly tissue- and stage-specific 
expression but displays ubiquitous expression when cells become immortalized or
malignant, regardless of their lineage or tissue origin. This promoter normally
drives the expression of the Pem homeobox gene in specific cell types in ovary
and placenta but is aberrantly expressed in lymphomas, neuroblastomas,
retinoblastomas, carcinomas, and sarcomas. By deletion analysis we identified a
region between nucleotides -80 and -104 that was absolutely critical for the
expression from this distal Pem promoter (Pem Pd). Site-specific mutagenesis and 
transfection studies revealed that this region contains two consensus Ets sites
and a single Sp1 site that were necessary for Pem Pd expression. Gel shift
analysis showed that Ets and Sp1 family members bound to these sites.
Transfection studies demonstrated that the Ets family members Elf1 and Gabp and
the Sp1 family members Sp1 and Sp3 transactivated the Pem Pd. Surprisingly, we
found that Sp3 was a more potent activator of the Pem Pd than was Sp1; this is
unusual, because Sp3 is either a weak activator or a repressor of most other
promoters. Activation by either Elf1 or Gabp required an intact Sp1 family member
binding site, suggesting that Ets and Sp1 family members cooperate to activate
Pem Pd transcription. Expression from the Pem Pd (either transiently transfected 
or endogenous) depended on the Ras pathway, which could explain both its Ets- and
Sp1-dependent expression in normal cells and its aberrant expression in tumor
cells, in which ras protooncogenes are frequently mutated. We suggest that the
Pem Pd may be a useful model system to understand the molecular mechanism by
which a tissue-specific promoter can be corrupted in tumor cells.

PMID: 11986330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Immunol. 2001 Oct 1;167(7):3836-45.

Function and factor interactions of a locus control region element in the mouse T
cell receptor-alpha/Dad1 gene locus.

Ortiz BD(1), Harrow F, Cado D, Santoso B, Winoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, City University of New York, Hunter
College, New York, NY 10021, USA. ortiz@genectr.hunter.cuny.edu

Locus control regions (LCRs) refer to cis-acting elements composed of several
DNase I hypersensitive sites, which synergize to protect transgenes from
integration-site dependent effects in a tissue-specific manner. LCRs have been
identified in many immunologically important gene loci, including one between the
TCRdelta/TCRalpha gene segments and the ubiquitously expressed Dad1 gene.
Expression of a transgene under the control of all the LCR elements is T cell
specific. However, a subfragment of this LCR is functional in a wide variety of
tissues. How a ubiquitously active element can participate in tissue-restricted
LCR activity is not clear. In this study, we localize the ubiquitously active
sequences of the TCR-alpha LCR to an 800-bp region containing a prominent DNase
hypersensitive site. In isolation, the activity in this region suppresses
position effect transgene silencing in many tissues. A combination of in vivo
footprint examination of this element in widely active transgene and EMSAs
revealed tissue-unrestricted factor occupancy patterns and binding of several
ubiquitously expressed transcription factors. In contrast, tissue-specific,
differential protein occupancies at this element were observed in the endogenous 
locus or full-length LCR transgene. We identified tissue-restricted AML-1 and
Elf-1 as proteins that potentially act via this element. These data demonstrate
that a widely active LCR module can synergize with other LCR components to
produce tissue-specific LCR activity through differential protein occupancy and
function and provide evidence to support a role for this LCR module in the
regulation of both TCR and Dad1 genes.

PMID: 11564801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Mol Cell. 2001 Mar;7(3):461-73.

dpl-1 DP and efl-1 E2F act with lin-35 Rb to antagonize Ras signaling in C.
elegans vulval development.

Ceol CJ(1), Horvitz HR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biology, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

The synthetic multivulva (synMuv) genes define two functionally redundant
pathways that antagonize RTK/Ras signaling during Caenorhabditis elegans vulval
induction. The synMuv gene lin-35 encodes a protein similar to the mammalian
tumor suppressor pRB and has been proposed to act as a transcriptional repressor.
Studies using mammalian cells have shown that pRB can prevent cell cycle
progression by inhibiting DP/E2F-mediated transcriptional activation. We
identified C. elegans genes that encode proteins similar to DP or E2F.
Loss-of-function mutations in two of these genes, dpl-1 DP and efl-1 E2F, caused 
the same vulval abnormalities as do lin-35 Rb loss-of-function mutations. We
propose that rather than being inhibited by lin-35 Rb, dpl-1 DP and efl-1 E2F act
with lin-35 Rb in transcriptional repression to antagonize RTK/Ras signaling
during vulval development.

PMID: 11463372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Int Immunol. 2001 Jun;13(6):733-46.

Roles of Ets proteins, NF-kappa B and nocodazole in regulating induction of
transcription of mouse germline Ig alpha RNA by transforming growth factor-beta
1.

Shi MJ(1), Park SR, Kim PH, Stavnezer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Program in Immunology and
Virology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655-0122,
USA.

Antibody class switch recombination (CSR) occurs after antigen activation of B
cells. CSR is directed to specific heavy chain isotypes by cytokines and B cell
activators that induce transcription from the unrearranged, or germline (GL),
C(H) region genes. Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 is essential for switch
recombination to IgA due to its ability to induce transcription from GL Ig alpha 
genes. It has been shown that the promoters which regulate transcription of mouse
and human GL alpha RNAs contain a TGF-beta1-responsive element that binds Smad
and core binding factor (CBFalpha)/AML/PEBPalpha/RUNX: They also contain other
elements which bind the transcription factors CREB, BSAP and Ets family proteins.
In this manuscript we demonstrate that two tandem Ets sites in the mouse GL alpha
promoter bind the transcription factors Elf-1 and PU.1, and that the 3' site is
essential for expression of a luciferase reporter gene driven by the GL alpha
promoter. Binding of Elf-1 to the GL alpha promoter is inducible by
lipopolysaccharide in nuclear extracts from splenic B cells. An NF-kappaB site is
identified, although it does not contribute to expression of the promoter in
reporter gene assays. Since CSR to IgA is greatly reduced in
NF-kappaB/p50-deficient mice, these data support the hypothesis that NF-kappaB
has roles in switching in addition to regulation of GL transcription. Finally, we
demonstrate that nocodazole, which disrupts microtubules that sequester Smad
proteins in the cytoplasm, stimulates transcription from the GL alpha promoter.

PMID: 11369700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Blood. 2001 May 1;97(9):2908-12.

PU.1 exhibits partial functional redundancy with Spi-B, but not with Ets-1 or
Elf-1.

Garrett-Sinha LA(1), Dahl R, Rao S, Barton KP, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Pathology, University of Chicago, IL, USA.

Previously it was shown that the Ets proteins, PU.1 and Spi-B, exhibit functional
redundancy in B lymphocytes. To investigate the possibility that PU.1 or Spi-B or
both share overlapping roles with Ets-1 or Elf-1, PU.1(+/-)Ets-1(-/-),
PU.1(+/-)Elf-1(-/-), and Spi-B(-/-)Ets-1(-/-) animals were generated. No blood
cell defects were observed in these animals except those previously reported for 
Ets-1(-/-) mice. Therefore, no genetic overlap was detected between PU.1 or Spi-B
with Ets-1 or Elf-1. In contrast, the results confirmed functional redundancy for
PU.1 and Spi-B in that PU.1(+/-)Spi-B(-/-) bone marrow progenitors yielded
smaller colonies in methylcellulose cultures than did wild-type, PU.1(+/-) or
Spi-B(-/-) progenitors. In addition, PU.1(+/-)Spi-B(+/+), PU.1(+/-)Spi-B(+/-),
and PU.1(+/-) Spi-B(-/-) mice displayed extramedullary splenic hematopoiesis. In 
summary, PU.1 and Spi-B regulate common target genes required for proliferation
of hematopoietic progenitors or their committed descendants, whereas Ets-1 or
Elf-1 do not appear to regulate shared target genes with PU.1 or Spi-B.

PMID: 11313289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6409-16.

Sequence and functional properties of Ets genes in the model organism Drosophila.

Hsu T(1), Schulz RA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Hollings Cancer Center, and
Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Medical University of South Carolina, 86 
Jonathan Lucas Street, Charleston, South Carolina, SC 29425, USA.

Detailed molecular and genetic studies, coupled with the recent sequencing of the
fly genome, have identified eight Ets-related genes in the model organism
Drosophila. All show homology to genes in vertebrate species. Functional analyses
of some of the Drosophila ets genes have revealed their essential roles in
developmental processes such as metamorphosis, oogenesis, neurogenesis,
myogenesis, and eye development. Such studies have yielded important insights
into our understanding of the genetic control of hormonally-regulated gene
expression, programmed cell death, and signal transduction during cell fate
determination and differentiation. The developmental roles of E74 (ELF1), pointed
(Ets 1), yan (TEL), and D-elg (GABPalpha) will be reviewed in this article. The
context of their participation in signal transduction and gene regulation will
also be discussed. The information should be of significant value to the study of
related processes in higher organisms due to the growing evidence for the cross
species conservation of developmental mechanisms.

PMID: 11175357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Circ Res. 2001 Feb 2;88(2):237-44.

Elf-1 is a transcriptional regulator of the Tie2 gene during vascular
development.

Dube A(1), Thai S, Gaspar J, Rudders S, Libermann TA, Iruela-Arispe L, Oettgen P.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2001 Feb 2;88(2):127-8.

Vascular development requires the tightly coordinated expression of several
growth factors and their receptors. Among these are the Tie1 and Tie2 receptors, 
which are almost exclusively endothelial cell-specific. The critical
transcriptional regulators of vascular-specific gene expression remain largely
unknown. The Ets factors are a family of evolutionarily conserved transcription
factors that regulate genes involved in cellular growth and differentiation. We
have recently shown that the Ets factor NERF is a strong transactivator of the
Tie1 and Tie2 genes. To extend these studies, we have begun to identify the Ets
factors that are expressed in developing blood vessels of the chicken
chorioallantoic membrane (CAM), a highly vascular embryonic network. RNA was
extracted from microdissected CAM blood vessels, and reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction was performed using oligonucleotides
encoding conserved amino acids within the Ets domain. One of the polymerase chain
reaction fragments was subcloned and identified as the chicken homologue of the
Ets factor ELF-1, cELF-1. ELF-1 is most closely related to the Ets factor NERF.
In situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry demonstrate that cELF-1 is
enriched in developing chicken blood vessels. cELF-1 is also a strong
transactivator of the Tie1 and Tie2 genes and can bind to conserved Ets sites
within the promoters of these genes. A complex of similar size forms when gel
shifts are performed with cellular extracts derived from the CAM blood vessels,
which is recognized by an antibody against cELF-1. In summary, ELF-1 belongs to a
subset of Ets factors that regulate vascular-specific gene expression during
blood vessel development.

PMID: 11157678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Dev Neurosci. 2000;22(3):207-16.

Sonic hedgehog-mediated ventralization disrupts formation of the
midbrain-hindbrain junction in the chick embryo.

Zhang XM(1), Lin E, Yang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Department of Ophthalmology and Jules Stein Eye
Institute, University of California at Los Angeles, 90095, USA.
yang@jsei.ucla.edu

The secreted signaling molecule Sonic hedgehog (Shh) plays critical roles in
pattern formation of the vertebrate central nervous system. During neurulation,
Shh is produced by the ventral midline mesoderm as well as by the ventral neural 
tube, and its activity is required for the determination of ventral
characteristics along the anterior-posterior neuraxis. The morphological boundary
between midbrain and hindbrain, the isthmus, is an important tissue organizer
that regulates the development of both the midbrain and the anterior hindbrain.
In this study, we report that retrovirus-mediated misexpression of Shh in the
early chick neural tube disrupts formation of the boundary between the midbrain
and the hindbrain, and causes a fusion of the bilateral cerebellum primordia.
Dorsally expressed Shh signals induce ectopic transcription of its receptor Ptc1 
in the midbrain and the hindbrain. The expression of several genes (Noggin, Lmx1,
BMP7) along the dorsal midline of the midbrain is abolished, and ventral or
lateral markers (HNF3 beta, Ptc1, ELF1) are induced in the dorsal brain.
Furthermore, the normally restricted expression of two genes (En1 and Pax2) in
the mid/hindbrain junction region are expanded, reflecting the morphological
defects. These results suggest that maintaining proper dorsal-ventral patterns of
the neural tube is essential for normal development of the mid/hindbrain region.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 10894984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Med. 1998 Jun;4(6):392-401.

Expression pattern of the Ets-related transcription factor Elf-1.

Bassuk AG(1), Barton KP, Anandappa RT, Lu MM, Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Members of the Ets family of winged helix-loop-helix transcription factors play
important roles in the development and function of multiple mammalian cell
lineages. Elf-1 is an Ets-related transcription factor that is expressed at high 
levels in T cells and is known to regulate the expression of several T cell
genes, including the granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF)
gene, the interleukin-2 receptor alpha subunit (IL-2Ralpha) gene, and the CD4
gene. In the studies described in this report, we have characterized the pattern 
of expression of Elf-1 in the developing mouse embryo and in adult mouse tissues 
as well as in multiple immortalized human and murine cell lines. Elf-1 is
expressed at high levels throughout thymocyte development, with equivalent levels
of Elf-1 expression seen in all subsets of maturing thymocytes and T cells.
Somewhat surprisingly, however, Elf-1 is also expressed at high levels in
epithelial cells lining the oral cavity, the lung, the CNS, and the
gastrointestinal and urinary tracts as well as in the skin of the developing
mouse embryo and at lower levels in the adult mouse testis and liver. Western
blot analyses of a large number of immortalized cell lines demonstrated
high-level Elf-1 expression in T and B lymphocyte and macrophage cell lines as
well as in two prostate carcinoma cell lines. Low-level expression was observed
in fibroblasts, embryonic stem cells, and myoblasts. Taken together, our data
suggest that in addition to its role in regulating T cell development and
function, Elf-1 may regulate gene expression in the B cell and myelomonocytic
lineages, as well as in multiple epithelial cell types during murine embryonic
development.

PMCID: PMC2230273
PMID: 10780882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Plant Cell Physiol. 1999 Jul;40(7):702-8.

Late-flowering genes interact with early-flowering genes to regulate flowering
time in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Chou ML(1), Yang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology, National Chung Hsing
University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC.

To investigate the genetic mechanisms regulating the transition from the
vegetative to reproductive growth in Arabidopsis, double mutants between three
different early-flowering mutants, early flowering 1-1, 2-1, 3-1, (elf 1-1, 2-1, 
3-1) and five different late-flowering mutants, gi-1, ft-1, fwa-1, ld-1, and
fca-9, were constructed and phenotypes analyzed. Double mutants in all
combinations displayed the late-flowering phenotypes which resembled their
respective late-flowering parents in both flowering time and the number of
vegetative leaves produced. The results indicate that five late-flowering mutants
are epistatic to all three early-flowering mutants tested here. This epistatic
relationship suggests that ELF1, ELF2, and ELF3 genes function upstream of these 
five late-flowering genes no matter if they are functioning in autonomous or
photoperiod pathways. These three early-flowering genes may negatively modify the
activity of most late-flowering genes to influence the time of the
vegetative-to-reproductive transition in Arabidopsis.

PMID: 10501030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Biol Reprod. 1999 Jul;61(1):120-6.

Transcription factors Ets1, Ets2, and Elf1 exhibit differential localization in
human endometrium across the menstrual cycle and alternate isoforms in cultured
endometrial cells.

Kilpatrick LM(1), Kola I, Salamonsen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Prince Henry's Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, 3168,
Australia Institute of Reproduction and Development, Monash Medical Centre,
Clayton, Victoria, Australia. lynette.kilpatrick@med.monash.edu.au

To better understand the transcriptional regulation of human endometrial
remodeling, the localization of three members of the Ets family of transcription 
factors was examined at different stages of the menstrual cycle. Elf1 was found
by immunohistochemistry to be predominantly localized to the glandular
epithelium. In contrast, Ets1 and Ets2 were found at lower intensities in both
glandular epithelial and stromal cells. Low expression during the menstrual phase
of the cycle, and high expression and intensity of staining in decidualized
stromal cells of the late secretory phase were common to Ets1, Ets2, and Elf1.
These localization patterns were confirmed in cultured human endometrial stromal 
and epithelial cells by Western blotting, which also demonstrated different
isoforms and phosphorylation products of Ets1 and Ets2 in the two cell types.
This study has shown for the first time that members of the Ets family of
transcription factors, previously found predominantly during development and in
hematopoietic cells, are expressed in the human endometrium and display cell and 
cycle-stage specificity. Expression of Elf1 predominantly in the glandular
epithelium may indicate that Elf1 plays a unique role in epithelium-specific gene
regulation in the endometrium.

PMID: 10377039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Development. 1999 Jun;126(14):3131-48.

Precise developmental regulation of Ets family transcription factors during
specification and commitment to the T cell lineage.

Anderson MK(1), Hernandez-Hoyos G, Diamond RA, Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.
evroth@its.caltech.edu

Ets family transcription factors control the expression of a large number of
genes in hematopoietic cells. Here we show strikingly precise differential
expression of a subset of these genes marking critical, early stages of mouse
lymphocyte cell-type specification. Initially, the Ets family member factor Erg
was identified during an arrayed cDNA library screen for genes encoding
transcription factors expressed specifically during T cell lineage commitment.
Multiparameter fluorescence-activated cell sorting for over a dozen cell surface 
markers was used to isolate 18 distinct primary-cell populations representing
discrete T cell and B cell developmental stages, pluripotent lymphoid precursors,
immature NK-like cells and myeloid hematopoietic cells. These populations were
monitored for mRNA expression of the Erg, Ets-1, Ets-2, Fli-1, Tel, Elf-1,
GABPalpha, PU.1 and Spi-B genes. The earliest stages in T cell differentiation
show particularly dynamic Ets family gene regulation, with sharp transitions in
expression correlating with specification and commitment events. Ets, Spi-B and
PU.1 are expressed in these stages but not by later T-lineage cells. Erg is
induced during T-lineage specification and then silenced permanently, after
commitment, at the beta-selection checkpoint. Spi-B is transiently upregulated
during commitment and then silenced at the same stage as Erg. T-lineage
commitment itself is marked by repression of PU.1, a factor that regulates B-cell
and myeloid genes. These results show that the set of Ets factors mobilized
during T-lineage specification and commitment is different from the set that
maintains T cell gene expression during thymocyte repertoire selection and in all
classes of mature T cells.

PMID: 10375504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Apr;19(4):2681-9.

Interleukin-2 (IL-2) regulates the accessibility of the IL-2-responsive enhancer 
in the IL-2 receptor alpha gene to transcription factors.

Rusterholz C(1), Henrioud PC, Nabholz M.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), CH-1066 Epalinges,
Switzerland.

Interleukin-2 (IL-2) responsiveness of T lymphocytes is controlled through
transcription of the IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) alpha subunit by antigen and by IL-2
itself. IL-2 induces IL-2Ralpha transcription via an IL-2-responsive enhancer
(IL-2rE), whose activity depends on the cooperative binding of IL-2-induced STAT5
to two sites and of constitutively active Elf-1 to a third one. Here we describe 
the changes in IL-2rE chromatin that occur in normal T lymphocytes upon
activation of IL-2Ralpha expression. In cells induced to transiently express
IL-2Ralpha with concanavalin A (which mimics antigen), none of the IL-2rE sites
is occupied despite the presence of Elf-1 and STAT1, which bind to the IL-2rE in 
vitro. The two STAT binding sites are occupied rapidly upon IL-2 stimulation,
concomitantly with STAT5 activation. Occupation of the Elf-1 binding site is
delayed, although Elf-1 concentration and binding activity are not modified by
IL-2. Digestion of T-cell chromatin with DNase I and micrococcal nuclease shows
that IL-2 induces the appearance of nuclease-hypersensitive sites flanking the
IL-2rE. Thus IL-2, in addition to activating STAT5, appears to regulate
IL-2Ralpha transcription by making IL-2Ralpha chromatin accessible to
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC84061
PMID: 10082534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 30;273(44):29032-42.

Transcriptional regulation of the stem cell leukemia gene by PU.1 and Elf-1.

Bockamp EO(1), Fordham JL, Göttgens B, Murrell AM, Sanchez MJ, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, Medical Research Council
Centre, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom.

The SCL gene, also known as tal-1, encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor that is pivotal for the normal development of all hematopoietic lineages. 
SCL is expressed in committed erythroid, mast, and megakaryocytic cells as well
as in hematopoietic stem cells. Nothing is known about the regulation of SCL
transcription in mast cells, and in other lineages GATA-1 is the only
tissue-specific transcription factor recognized to regulate the SCL gene. We have
therefore analyzed the molecular mechanisms underlying SCL expression in mast
cells. In this paper, we demonstrate that SCL promoter 1a was regulated by GATA-1
together with Sp1 and Sp3 in a manner similar to the situation in erythroid
cells. However, SCL promoter 1b was strongly active in mast cells, in marked
contrast to the situation in erythroid cells. Full activity of promoter 1b was
dependent on ETS and Sp1/3 motifs. Transcription factors PU.1, Elf-1, Sp1, and
Sp3 were all present in mast cell extracts, bound to promoter 1b and
transactivated promoter 1b reporter constructs. These data provide the first
evidence that the SCL gene is a direct target for PU.1, Elf-1, and Sp3.

PMID: 9786909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Plant J. 1998 Jul;15(2):231-42.

FLD interacts with genes that affect different developmental phase transitions to
regulate Arabidopsis shoot development.

Chou ML(1), Yang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology, National Chung Hsing
University, Taichung, Taiwan, R.O.C.

A new fld mutant allele, fld-2, which significantly delayed flowering, was
isolated and characterized in Arabidopsis thaliana. Even under long-day
conditions after more than 100 days in the greenhouse, the majority of fld-2
mutant plants had not bolted. In addition, mutant inflorescences produced more
than 10 co-florescences that were subtended by a high number of rosette-like
leaves before giving rise to flowers. The late-flowering phenotype of the fld-2
mutation could be partially overcome by both vernalization and GA treatment but
it was not influenced by 5-azaC treatment. Phenotypic analyses of double mutants 
indicated that fld-2 is epistatic to early flowering mutants elf1, elf2 and elf3.
In addition, fld-2 could enhance vegetative characteristics in embryonic flower 1
(emf1) mutants by causing many small sessile leaves in fld-2 emf1 double mutants.
The relief of the terminal flower 1 (tfl1) mutant phenotype in fld-2 tfl1 double 
mutants, and the enhancement of leafy (lfy) and apetala1 (ap1) mutant phenotypes 
in fld-2 lfy and fld-2 ap1 double mutants, suggest that FLD is also likely to be 
involved in the floral transition. Our results strongly suggest that the FLD gene
plays a key role in regulating the reproductive competence of the shoot and
results in different developmental phase transitions in Arabidopsis.

PMID: 9721681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Microbiology. 1998 Aug;144 ( Pt 8):2311-21.

Disruption studies of a Candida albicans gene, ELF1: a member of the ATP-binding 
cassette family.

Sturtevant J(1), Cihlar R, Calderone R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Georgetown University School of
Medicine, Washington DC 20007, USA. jstury01@medlib.iaims.georgetown.edu

A 3.6 kb gene (ELF1) with homology to the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) gene family 
has been isolated from genomic libraries of Candida albicans. Members of this
gene family include both membrane transport proteins which confer a
drug-resistance phenotype, and proteins whose functions are associated with
protein translation. ELF1 (Elongation Like Factor) showed greatest homology with 
a Saccharomyces cerevisiae ORF (YPL226W), whose function is unknown, and lower
homology with fungal elongation factor 3 (EF-3) genes. In comparison, homology
with a gene conferring a drug-resistant phenotype (CDR1) was low. To understand
the function of ELF1 in C. albicans, gene-knockout experiments were conducted
using the hisG-URA3-hisG disruption cassette. Both single-copy (heterozygote) and
double-disrupted strains in ELF1 were isolated. Phenotypically, the disrupted
strains grew more slowly than wild-type and produced a mixture of large,
irregular cells and apparently normal cells.

PMID: 9720054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Plant Mol Biol. 1998 Aug;37(6):897-910.

Eucalyptus has a functional equivalent of the Arabidopsis floral meristem
identity gene LEAFY.

Southerton SG(1), Strauss SH, Olive MR, Harcourt RL, Decroocq V, Zhu X, Llewellyn
DJ, Peacock WJ, Dennis ES.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Plant Industry, Canberra, ACT, Australia.

Two genes cloned from Eucalyptus globulus, Eucalyptus LeaFy (ELF1 and ELF2), have
sequence homology to the floral meristem identity genes LEAFY from Arabidopsis
and FLORICAULA from Antirrhinum. ELF1 is expressed in the developing eucalypt
floral organs in a pattern similar to LEAFY while ELF2 appears to be a pseudo
gene. ELF1 is expressed strongly in the early floral primordium and then
successively in the primordia of sepals, petals, stamens and carpels. It is also 
expressed in the leaf primordia and young leaves and adult and juvenile trees.
The ELF1 promoter coupled to a GUS reporter gene directs expression in transgenic
Arabidopsis in a temporal and tissue-specific pattern similar to an equivalent
Arabidopsis LEAFY promoter construct. Strong expression is seen in young flower
buds and then later in sepals and petals. No expression was seen in rosette
leaves or roots of flowering plants or in any non-flowering plants grown under
long days. Furthermore, ectopic expression of the ELF1 gene in transgenic
Arabidopsis causes the premature conversion of shoots into flowers, as does an
equivalent 35S-LFY construct. These data suggest that ELF1 plays a similar role
to LFY in flower development and that the basic mechanisms involved in flower
initiation and development in Eucalyptus are similar to those in Arabidopsis.

PMID: 9700063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Int J Dev Biol. 1998 Mar;42(2):221-4.

Identification of elf1, a beta-spectrin, in early mouse liver development.

Mishra L(1), Cai T, Levine A, Weng D, Mezey E, Mishra B, Gearhart J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20422, USA. mishra.lopa@washington.va.gov

Beta-spectrins play essential roles in cell-cell interactions and in the
maintenance of cell polarity. Our aim was to identify beta-spectrin genes
important for the establishment of hepatocyte polarity and differentiation. Using
subtractive screening of cDNA libraries from early embryonic mouse livers
(post-coital days 10, 11, and 12), we have isolated elf1 (embryonic liver fodrin 
1), a differentially expressed beta-spectrin or fodrin (betaSpIIsigmaI). Elf1
encodes a 220-amino acid protein with an NH2 terminal actin-binding domain. In
situ hybridization studies demonstrate elf1 expression initially in day 10
embryonic heart tissue, then in day 11-11.5 hepatic tissue. These studies suggest
that elf1 may play a role in the emergence of hepatocyte polarity during liver
development.

PMID: 9551868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Aug;17(8):4419-33.

Isolation and characterization of a novel epithelium-specific transcription
factor, ESE-1, a member of the ets family.

Oettgen P(1), Alani RM, Barcinski MA, Brown L, Akbarali Y, Boltax J, Kunsch C,
Munger K, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

We report here the isolation of a novel, highly tissue-restricted member of the
ets transcription factor/oncogene family, ESE-1 (for epithelium-specific Ets),
which has features distinct from those of any other ets-related factor. ESE-1
contains two putative DNA binding domains: an ETS domain, which is unique in that
the 5' half shows relatively weak homology to known ets factors, and an A/T hook 
domain, found in HMG proteins and various other nuclear factors. In contrast to
any known ets factors, ESE-1 is expressed exclusively in epithelial cells. ESE-1 
expression is induced during terminal differentiation of the epidermis and in a
primary human keratinocyte differentiation system. The keratinocyte terminal
differentiation marker gene, SPRR2A, is a putative target for ESE-1, since SPRR2A
expression during keratinocyte differentiation correlates with induction of ESE-1
expression, and ESE-1 binds with high affinity to and transactivates the ets
binding site in the SPRR2A promoter. ESE-1 also binds to and transactivates the
enhancer of the Endo A gene, a potential target for ESE-1 in simple epithelia.
Due to the important role that other ets factors play in cellular
differentiation, ESE-1 is expected to be a critical regulator of epithelial cell 
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC232296
PMID: 9234700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Exp Med. 1997 Apr 7;185(7):1211-21.

Elf-1 contributes to the function of the complex interleukin (IL)-2-responsive
enhancer in the mouse IL-2 receptor alpha gene.

Serdobova I(1), Pla M, Reichenbach P, Sperisen P, Ghysdael J, Wilson A, Freeman
J, Nabholz M.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Biology Unit, Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research,
Epalinges, France.

Lymphocytes regulate their responsiveness to IL-2 through the transcriptional
control of the IL-2R alpha gene, which encodes a component of the high affinity
IL-2 receptor. In the mouse IL-2R alpha gene this control is exerted via two
regulatable elements, a promoter proximal region, and an IL-2-responsive enhancer
(IL-2rE) 1.3 kb upstream. In vitro and in vivo functional analysis of the IL-2rE 
in the rodent thymic lymphoma-derived, CD4- CD8- cell line PC60 demonstrated that
three separate elements, sites I, II, and III, were necessary for IL-2
responsiveness; these three sites demonstrate functional cooperation. Site III
contains a consensus binding motif for members of the Ets family of transcription
factors. Here we demonstrate that Elf-1, an Ets-like protein, binds to site III
and participates in IL-2 responsiveness. In vitro site III forms a complex with a
protein constitutively present in nuclear extracts from PC60 cells as well as
from normal CD4- CD8- thymocytes. We have identified this molecule as Elf-1
according to a number of criteria. The complex possesses an identical
electrophoretic mobility to that formed by recombinant Elf-1 protein and is
super-shifted by anti-Elf-1 antibodies. Biotinylated IL-2rE probes precipitate
Elf-1 from PC60 extracts provided site III is intact and both recombinant and
PC60-derived proteins bind with the same relative affinities to different mutants
of site III. In addition, by introducing mutations into the core of the site III 
Ets-like motif and comparing the corresponding effects on the in vitro binding of
Elf-1 and the in vivo IL-2rE activity, we provide strong evidence that Elf-1 is
directly involved in IL-2 responsiveness. The nature of the functional
cooperativity observed between Elf-1 and the factors binding sites I and II
remains unresolved; experiments presented here however suggest that this effect
may not require direct interactions between the proteins binding these three
elements.

PMCID: PMC2196269
PMID: 9104808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. EMBO J. 1997 Mar 17;16(6):1258-67.

Shared and distinct functions of RAGS and ELF-1 in guiding retinal axons.

Monschau B(1), Kremoser C, Ohta K, Tanaka H, Kaneko T, Yamada T, Handwerker C,
Hornberger MR, Löschinger J, Pasquale EB, Siever DA, Verderame MF, Müller BK,
Bonhoeffer F, Drescher U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Biology, Max Planck Institute for Developmental
Biology, Tübingen, Germany.

Two ligands for Eph-related receptor tyrosine kinases, RAGS and ELF-1, have been 
implicated in the control of development of the retinotectal projection. Both
molecules are expressed in overlapping gradients in the tectum, the target area
of retinal ganglion cell axons. In two in vitro assays ELF-1 is shown to have a
repellent axon guidance function for temporal, but apparently not for nasal
axons. RAGS on the other hand is repellent for both types of axons, though to
different degrees. Thus, RAGS and ELF-1 share some and differ in other
properties. The biological activities of these molecules correlate with the
strength of interaction with their receptors expressed on RGC axons. The meaning 
of these findings for guidance of retinal axons in the tectum is discussed.

PMCID: PMC1169724
PMID: 9135142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Development. 1997 Mar;124(5):959-69.

Evidence that FGF8 signalling from the midbrain-hindbrain junction regulates
growth and polarity in the developing midbrain.

Lee SM(1), Danielian PS, Fritzsch B, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, The Biolabs, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

The developing vertebrate mesencephalon shows a rostrocaudal gradient in the
expression of a number of molecular markers and in the cytoarchitectonic
differentiation of the tectum, where cells cease proliferating and differentiate 
in a rostral to caudal progression. Tissue grafting experiments have implicated
cell signalling by the mesencephalic-metencephalic (mid-hindbrain) junction (or
isthmus) in orchestrating these events. We have explored the role of Wnt-1 and
FGF8 signalling in the regulation of mesencephalic polarity. Wnt-1 is expressed
in the caudal mesencephalon and Fgf8 in the most rostral metencephalon. Wnt-1
regulates Fgf8 expression in the adjacent metencephalon, most likely via a
secondary mesencephalic signal. Ectopic expression of Fgf8 in the mesencephalon
is sufficient to activate expression of Engrailed-2 (En-2) and ELF-1, two genes
normally expressed in a decreasing caudal to rostral gradient in the posterior
mesencephalon. Ectopic expression of Engrailed-1 (En-1), a functionally
equivalent homologue of En-2 is sufficient to activate ELF-1 expression by
itself. These results indicate the existence of a molecular hierarchy in which
FGF8 signalling establishes the graded expression of En-2 within the tectum. This
in turn may act to specify other aspects of A-P polarity such as graded ELF-1
expression. Our studies also reveal that FGF8 is a potent mitogen within the
mesencephalon: when ectopically expressed, neural precursors continue to
proliferate and neurogenesis is prevented. Taken together our results suggest
that FGF8 signalling from the isthmus has a key role in coordinately regulating
growth and polarity in the developing mesencephalon.

PMID: 9056772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. EMBO J. 1996 Dec 2;15(23):6691-700.

A T cell controlled molecular pathway regulating the IgH locus: CD40-mediated
activation of the IgH 3' enhancer.

Grant PA(1), Andersson T, Neurath MF, Arulampalam V, Bauch A, Müller R, Reth M,
Pettersson S.

Author information: 
(1)Center For Biotechnology, Karolinska Institute, Novum, Huddinge, Sweden.

Immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) class switch recombination and regulation of IgH
expression levels are processes suggested to be controlled by the IgH 3'
enhancer. Here we demonstrate that CD40 or IgM receptor stimulation of primary B 
cells results in transactivation of this enhancer. 4-Hydroxy-3-nitrophenylacetyl 
(NIP)-BSA induction of a K46 B cell line expressing a chimeric NIP-specific CD40 
single chain receptor results in a ligand receptor-dependent response of a 3'
enhancer ETS/AP-1 minimal promoter construct. Gel retardation analysis and
genomic footprinting experiments reveal that CD40 or IgM induction recruits NFAB 
(nuclear factors of activated B cells) to the ETS/AP-1 motif. While IgM
signalling recruits c-Fos, JunB and Elf-1 (NFAB-I), only JunB and Elf-1 were
observed following CD40 signalling (NFAB-II). CD40 signalling, however, induces a
Fos family-related partner for JunB, which may account for the transcriptional
activity observed by NFAB-II in K46 cells. We propose a model whereby CD40 and
IgM receptor-mediated signalling converge in the process of 3' enhancer
activation in B lymphocytes. Our data provide a putative molecular explanation as
to why CD40L-deficient mice, and possibly patients with hyper-IgM syndrome, are
unable to undergo T cell-dependent class switch recombination but respond
properly upon lipopolysaccharide-induced switch recombination.

PMCID: PMC452493
PMID: 8978695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Neurosci. 1996 Nov 15;16(22):7182-92.

Detection of ligands in regions anatomically connected to neurons expressing the 
Eph receptor Bsk: potential roles in neuron-target interaction.

Zhang JH(1), Cerretti DP, Yu T, Flanagan JG, Zhou R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Biology, College of Pharmacy, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08855, USA.

Neuron-target interaction is a key feature in the establishment of neuronal
networks. However, the underlying mechanism remains unclear. We have shown that
at the time of target innervation, Bsk, an eph family receptor, is expressed at
high levels in several brain regions including the hippocampus, olfactory bulb,
and retina. To study whether the ligands are expressed in the target tissues, we 
investigated the expression of Bsk ligands using a ligand-affinity probe, Bsk-AP,
which consisted of the extracellular domain of Bsk fused in frame with a human
placental alkaline phosphatase. These analyses showed that the ligands were
expressed at high levels in the developing septum, hypothalamus, olfactory neural
epithelium, and tectum. In situ hybridization studies revealed that at least
three different factors were responsible for the Bsk-AP binding. In the septum,
Elf-1, Lerk3 (Eff-2), and AL-1/Lerk7 were transcribed. In the hypothalamus,
AL-1/Lerk7 was the ligand detected by Bsk-AP. In the olfactory system, high
levels of Lerk3 were detected in the sensory neurons. Both Elf-1 and AL-1/Lerk7
were present in the tectum. These ligand-positive areas are known to be
anatomically connected to Bsk-expressing regions. These observations strongly
suggest that Bsk and the ligands participate in neuron-target interactions in
multiple systems and provide support for their involvement in topographic
projection.

PMID: 8929427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 18;271(42):26007-12.

ELF-1 interacts with and transactivates the IgH enhancer pi site.

Akbarali Y(1), Oettgen P, Boltax J, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Hospital, and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

We previously identified a B-cell-specific regulatory element in the
immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) enhancer, pi, with striking similarity to
binding sites for ets-related transcription factors. Whereas the ability of
ets-related factors to bind to and transactivate the pi site has been
substantiated, the identification of the particular member of the ets family
responsible for B-cell-specific regulation of the pi site has remained
controversial. We have used antibodies specific for individual members of the ets
family to evaluate which ets-related factor in B-cell nuclear extracts interacts 
with the IgH pi site. We present strong evidence that ELF-1 is highly expressed
in B-cells and is one of two major factors specifically interacting with the
murine IgH enhancer pi site in B-cell nuclear extracts. Binding of ELF-1
correlates with activity of the pi site, since mutations abolishing function of
pi also inhibit binding of ELF-1. Furthermore, we demonstrate that ELF-1 can
transactivate the IgH enhancer in HeLa cells, suggesting a role for ELF-1 in
B-cell-specific IgH gene expression.

PMID: 8824239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Sep;16(9):5091-106.

Characterization of NERF, a novel transcription factor related to the Ets factor 
ELF-1.

Oettgen P(1), Akbarali Y, Boltax J, Best J, Kunsch C, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02215,
USA.

We have cloned the gene for a novel Ets-related transcription factor, new
Ets-related factor (NERF), from human spleen, fetal liver, and brain. Comparison 
of the deduced amino acid sequence of NERF with those of other members of the Ets
family reveals that the level of homology to ELF-1, which is involved in the
regulation of several T- and B-cell-specific genes, is highest. Homologies are
clustered in the putative DNA binding domain in the middle of the protein, a
basic domain just upstream of this domain, and several shorter stretches of
homology towards the amino terminus. The presence of two predominant NERF
transcripts in various fetal and adult human tissues is due to at least three
alternative splice products, NERF-1a, NERF-1b, and NERF-2, which differ in their 
amino termini and their expression in different tissues. Only NERF-2 and ELF-1,
and not NERF-1a and NERF-1b, function as transcriptional activators of the lyn
and blk gene promoters, although all isoforms of NERF bind with affinities
similar to those of ELF-1 to a variety of Ets binding sites in, among others, the
blk, lck, lyn, mb-1, and immunoglobulin H genes and are expressed at similar
levels. Since NERF and ELF-1 are coexpressed in B and T cells, both might be
involved in the regulation of the same genes.

PMCID: PMC231510
PMID: 8756667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jun 21;271(25):14849-55.

Tissue-specific activity of the gammac chain gene promoter depends upon an Ets
binding site and is regulated by GA-binding protein.

Markiewicz S(1), Bosselut R, Le Deist F, de Villartay JP, Hivroz C, Ghysdael J,
Fischer A, de Saint Basile G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U429, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 149 rue de Sèvres, 75743 Paris
Cedex 15, France.

The gammac chain is a subunit of multiple cytokine receptors (interleukin (IL)-2,
IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, and IL-15), the expression of which is restricted to
hematopoietic lineages. A defect in gammac leads to the X-linked severe combined 
immunodeficiency characterized by a block in T cell differentiation. In order to 
better characterize the human gammac promoter and define the minimal
tissue-specific promoter region, progressive 5'-deletion constructs of a segment 
extending 1053 base pairs upstream of the major transcription start site were
generated and tested for promoter activity in various hematopoietic and
nonhematopoietic cell types. The -1053/+34 construct allowed promoter activity
only in cells of hematopoietic origin, and tissue specificity was conserved in
all other constructs tested. The region downstream of -90 appeared critical for
basal promoter activity. It contains two potential Ets binding sites conserved in
the murine gammac promoter gene, one of which was found essential for functional 
promoter activity as determined by mutational analysis. The functional Ets
binding site was found to bind Ets family proteins, principally GA-binding
protein and Elf-1 and could be transactivated by GABPalpha and -beta
synergistically. These results indicate that, as already reported for the
IL2Rbeta promoter, GA-binding protein is an essential component of gammac basal
promoter activity. Although GABP expression is not restricted to the
hematopoietic lineage, its interaction with other specific factors may contribute
to the tissue-specific expression of the gammac gene.

PMID: 8663060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jun 14;271(24):14020-7.

Cooperation between core binding factor and adjacent promoter elements
contributes to the tissue-specific expression of interleukin-3.

Taylor DS(1), Laubach JP, Nathan DG, Mathey-Prevot B.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Tissue-specific expression of interleukin-3 (IL-3) is mediated via cis-acting
elements located within 315 base pairs of the transcription start. This is
achieved in part through the positive activities of the AP-1 and Elf-1 sites in
the IL-3 promoter. The contribution to T cell-specific expression by other
promoter sites was assessed in a transient expression assay with IL-3 promoter
constructs linked to a luciferase gene, focusing initially on the core binding
factor (CBF) site, which is footprinted in vivo upon T cell activation. Activity 
of the CBF site is shown to be critically dependent on the adjacent activator
site Act-1. Together the Act-1 and CBF sites form a functional unit (AC unit)
with dual activity. The AC unit is demonstrated to enhance basal activity of
promoters both in fibroblasts and T cells. This activity is further inducible in 
activated T cells, but not in fibroblasts. In addition to the already identified 
NIP repressor site, evidence is presented for a second repressor region that
restricts promoter activity in fibroblasts. Finally, a novel positive regulatory 
element has been mapped in the IL-3 promoter between nucleotide -180 and -210
that leads to increased expression in T cells. Together these results demonstrate
that T cell expression of IL-3 is not specified by the activity of a single
tissue-specific element, but instead involves multiple interacting elements that 
provide both specific positive regulation in T cells and specific negative
regulation in fibroblasts.

PMID: 8662845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Oncogene. 1995 Nov 16;11(10):2135-43.

ETS1 transactivates the human GM-CSF promoter in Jurkat T cells stimulated with
PMA and ionomycin.

Thomas RS(1), Tymms MJ, Seth A, Shannon MF, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Monash University Institute of Reproduction and Development, Monash Medical
Centre, Clayton, Melbourne, Australia.

Activation of T helper cells results in coordinate expression of a number of
cytokines involved in differentiation, proliferation and activation of the
haematopoietic system. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) 
is one such cytokine whose increased expression results partly from increases in 
transcription. Cis-acting elements with NF kappa B, AP-1 and ETS-like motifs have
been identified in the promoter region of the GM-CSF gene, which are important
for transcriptional activity following PMA and ionomycin stimulation. A number of
the ETS family of transcription factors are expressed in T cells, including ETS1 
and ELF1. Here we describe the ability of these factors to interact with a site
(GM5), located within the CLE0 element, -47 to -40 upstream of the GM-CSF
transcription initiation site. Exogenous ETS1, but not ELF1, can transactivate
GM-CSF, through the GM5 site, in a PMA/ionomycin dependent manner. Other
unidentified ETS-like factors present in Jurkat cells are also capable of binding
GM5. Mutation of the core ETS binding site from -GGAA- to -GGAT- prevents the
binding of ETS-like factors with the exception of ETS1. The GM-CSF promoter,
modified in this way to be ETS1 specific, is fully responsive to PMA/ionomycin
induction, in addition to ETS1 transactivation in the presence of PMA and
ionomycin. Together these data suggest that ETS1 may be involved in mediating the
increased GM-CSF production associated with T cell activation.

PMID: 7478534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. EMBO J. 1995 Sep 15;14(18):4501-13.

IgM receptor-mediated transactivation of the IgH 3' enhancer couples a novel
Elf-1-AP-1 protein complex to the developmental control of enhancer function.

Grant PA(1), Thompson CB, Pettersson S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology, Karolinska Institute, Novum, Huddinge, Sweden.

The function of the temporally regulated B lymphocyte-specific immunoglobulin
heavy chain (IgH) 3' enhancer has been linked to the IgH class switch machinery, 
but the physiological mechanism(s) of activation has not been discerned.
Following crosslinking of the IgM receptor, we demonstrate that the enhancer is
transactivated in the B lymphoma cell line BAL-17. In both induced primary B
lymphocytes and BAL-17 cells, the enhancer activation is concomitant with the
recruitment of a novel DNA binding complex, nuclear factor of activated B cells
(NFAB). NFAB contains the tissue-restricted Ets protein Elf-1 and the AP-1
factors Jun-B and c-Fos, which bind to a novel 3' enhancer ETS-AP-1 motif. IgM
receptor-mediated activation or stimulation by phorbol-ester in BAL-17 cells
demonstrates that the ETS-AP-1 motif, when linked to a heterologous gene, can
confer a ligand/receptor-dependent response. In NIH 3T3 cells, Elf-1 expression
is required for efficient ETS-AP-1 promoter activity in response to stimulation
by 12-O-tetradecanylphorbol 13-acetate. Our results suggest a biological role for
Elf-1 in the regulation of IgH gene expression, attribute a functional role for
receptor-induced AP-1 proteins in B lymphocytes and provide evidence for a direct
link between IgM receptor-mediated signalling and 3' enhancer activation.

PMCID: PMC394542
PMID: 7556093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Sep;15(9):4921-9.

ELF-2, a new member of the Eph ligand family, is segmentally expressed in mouse
embryos in the region of the hindbrain and newly forming somites.

Bergemann AD(1), Cheng HJ, Brambilla R, Klein R, Flanagan JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

The Eph receptors are the largest known family of receptor tyrosine kinases and
are notable for distinctive expression patterns in the nervous system and in
early vertebrate development. However, all were identified as orphan receptors,
and only recently have there been descriptions of a corresponding family of
ligands. We describe here a new member of the Eph ligand family, designated ELF-2
(Eph ligand family 2). The cDNA sequence for mouse ELF-2 indicates that it is a
transmembrane ligand. It shows closest homology to the other known transmembrane 
ligand in the family, ELK-L/LERK-2/Cek5-L, with 57% identity in the extracellular
domain. There is also striking homology in the cytoplasmic domain, including
complete identity of the last 33 amino acids, suggesting intracellular
interactions. On cell surfaces, and in a cell-free system, ELF-2 binds to three
closely related Eph family receptors, Elk, Cek10 (apparent ortholog of Sek-4 and 
HEK2), and Cek5 (apparent ortholog of Nuk/Sek-3), all with dissociation constants
of approximately 1 nM. In situ hybridization of mouse embryos shows ELF-2 RNA
expression in a segmental pattern in the hindbrain region and the segmenting
mesoderm. Comparable patterns have been described for Eph family receptors,
including Sek-4 and Nuk/Sek-3, suggesting roles for ELF-2 in patterning these
regions of the embryo.

PMCID: PMC230738
PMID: 7651410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Immunity. 1995 Aug;3(2):223-37.

A direct physical association between ETS and AP-1 transcription factors in
normal human T cells.

Bassuk AG(1), Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The Ets and AP-1 families of transcription factors bind distinct DNA elements and
subserve diverse functions in multiple lymphoid and nonlymphoid cell types.
Functionally important Ets and AP-1 binding sites have been identified in a large
number of enhancer elements, suggesting important cooperative interactions
between these two families of transcription factors. In this report, we have
demonstrated a direct physical interaction between Ets and AP-1 proteins both in 
vitro and in activated human T cells. This interaction is mediated by the binding
of the basic domain of Jun to the Ets domain of Ets proteins. Jun, in association
with Ets, is capable of interacting with Fos family members to form a
trimolecular protein complex. The physical association between Ets-1 and AP-1
proteins is required for the transcriptional activity of enhancer elements
containing adjacent Ets and AP-1 binding sites. We conclude that direct physical 
interactions between Ets and AP-1 transcription factors play an important role in
regulating mammalian gene expression.

PMID: 7648395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Dev Biol. 1995 Jun;169(2):421-35.

Genetic regulation of shoot development in Arabidopsis: role of the EMF genes.

Yang CH(1), Chen LJ, Sung ZR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, University of California at Berkeley 94720, USA.

To investigate the genetic mechanism regulating Arabidopsis shoot maturation and 
development, we characterized eight emf mutants that bypassed the vegetative
phase of the life cycle. Genetic complementation studies identified two EMF loci;
both mapped to chromosome five. Double mutant analysis showed that the early- and
late-flowering mutants, co, fb, elf1, elf2, and elf3, could not rescue vegetative
development in the emf mutants, confirming the need for both EMF gene activities 
for rosette development. A series of phenotypes involving successive loss of
reproductive organs was also observed in emf single mutants, in emf1-1/emf1-2
transheterozygotes, and in emf1 emf2 double mutants, suggesting that the EMF
genes not only specify the rosette (vegetative) but also are involved in
inflorescence and flower (reproductive) development. Phenotypic analysis of
double mutants between emf and tfl1, lfy, and ag indicated interactions between
EMF and genes regulating inflorescence meristem development and floral organ
identity. A model depicting the role of the EMF genes in regulating shoot
maturation and their interaction with genes that affect phase transitions is
presented.

PMID: 7781888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 31;270(13):7515-22.

The high mobility group transcription factor, SOX4, transactivates the human CD2 
enhancer.

Wotton D(1), Lake RA, Farr CJ, Owen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, United Kingdom.

A strong T cell-specific enhancer is located 3' to the human CD2 gene. Six
sequences within this enhancer are bound by proteins present in T cell nuclear
extracts. These sequences share homology with sequences bound by several
transcription factors involved in T cell- and lymphoid-specific transcription.
The results presented here demonstrate that the human T cell-specific
transcription factor, SOX4, is able to bind to one of these regions; further,
SOX4 transactivates transcription of a reporter gene via three tandem copies of
this sequence. The binding of SOX4 to this site is not via a canonical HMG
protein binding sequence, identifying a novel class of binding site for this
protein. A second sequence within the CD2 enhancer closely resembles the IL-2
NF-AT site. We show that it is bound by the ets-related factor, Elf1. However,
unlike the IL-2 NF-AT sequence, the CD2 NF-AT-like sequence is unable to confer
transcriptional inducibility on a reporter gene. Consistent with this result, we 
show that the observed increase in expression of CD2 protein on the cell surface 
following T cell activation is a post-transcriptional event.

PMID: 7706298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Mar;15(3):1786-96.

Regulation of cell-type-specific interleukin-2 receptor alpha-chain gene
expression: potential role of physical interactions between Elf-1, HMG-I(Y), and 
NF-kappa B family proteins.

John S(1), Reeves RB, Lin JX, Child R, Leiden JM, Thompson CB, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The interleukin 2 receptor alpha-chain (IL-2R alpha) gene is rapidly and potently
induced in T cells in response to mitogenic stimuli. Previously, an inducible
enhancer between nucleotides -299 and -228 that contains NF-kappa B and CArG
motifs was identified. We now report the characterization of a second essential
positive regulatory element located between nucleotides -137 and -64 that binds
Elf-1 and HMG-I(Y). This element had maximal activity in lymphoid cells,
paralleling the cell type specificity of Elf-1 expression. Transcription from the
IL-2R alpha promoter was inhibited when either the Elf-1 or the HMG-I(Y) binding 
site was mutated. Coexpression of both proteins activated transcription of the
-137 to -64 element in COS-7 cells. Elf-1 physically associated with HMG-I and
with NF-kappa B p50 and c-Rel in vitro, suggesting that protein-protein
interactions might functionally coordinate the actions of the upstream and
downstream positive regulatory elements. This is the first report of a physical
interaction between an Ets family member and NF-kappa B family proteins. These
findings provide significant new insights into the protein-protein and
protein-DNA interactions that regulate cell-type-specific and inducible IL-2R
alpha gene expression and also have implications for other genes regulated by
Elf-1 and NF-kappa B family proteins.

PMCID: PMC230403
PMID: 7862168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Oct;14(10):6452-63.

Elf-1 binds to a critical element in a second CD4 enhancer.

Wurster AL(1), Siu G, Leiden JM, Hedrick SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, 
La Jolla 92093-0063.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol 1994 Dec;14(12):8493.

The coordinated expression of CD4 and CD8 during T-cell development is tightly
coupled with the maturation state of the T cell. Additionally, the mutually
exclusive expression of these receptors in mature T cells is representative of
the functional T-cell subclasses (CD4+ helper T cells versus CD8+ cytotoxic T
cells). We have studied the regulation CD4 gene transcription during T-cell
development in an attempt to gain an understanding of the molecular mechanisms
involved in T-cell development and differentiation. Here we present the
identification of a second transcriptional enhancer in the murine CD4 locus 24 kb
upstream of the CD4 promoter. This enhancer is active in mature T cells and is
especially active in CD4+ helper T cells. A number of nuclear proteins bind to
elements in the minimal CD4 enhancer that includes consensus sites for AP-1, Sp1,
Gata, and Ets transcription factor families. We find that the Ets consensus site 
is crucial for enhancer activity and that the recently identified Ets factor,
Elf-1, which is expressed at high levels in T cells and involved in the
regulation of several other T-cell-specific genes, is a dominant protein in
T-cell nuclear extracts that binds to this site.

PMCID: PMC359175
PMID: 7935370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Feb;14(2):1153-9.

Activation of the granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor promoter in T 
cells requires cooperative binding of Elf-1 and AP-1 transcription factors.

Wang CY(1), Bassuk AG, Boise LH, Thompson CB, Bravo R, Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637.

The granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) gene has been
studied extensively as a model system of transcriptional induction during
T-lymphocyte activation. The GM-CSF gene is not expressed in resting peripheral
blood T cells but is rapidly induced at the transcriptional level following
activation through the cell surface T-cell receptor. A highly conserved 19-bp
element located immediately 5' of the human GM-CSF TATA box (bp -34 to -52),
herein called purine box 1 (PB1), has been shown to bind a T-cell nuclear protein
complex and to be required for transcriptional induction of the GM-CSF gene
following T-cell activation. The PB1 sequence motif is highly conserved in both
human and murine GM-CSF genes. In this report, we demonstrate that the PB1
element alone confers inducibility on a heterologous promoter following
transfection into human Jurkat T cells. In addition, we identify a major PB1
nuclear protein-binding complex that is not present in resting peripheral blood T
cells but is rapidly induced following T-cell activation. Sequence analysis
revealed that PB1 is composed of adjacent binding sites for Ets and AP-1
transcription factors. In vitro mutagenesis experiments demonstrated that both
the Ets and AP-1 sites are required for binding of the inducible PB1 nuclear
protein complex and for the transcriptional activity of this element and the
GM-CSF promoter in activated T cells. Using antibodies specific for different Ets
and AP-1 family members, we demonstrate that the major inducible PB1-binding
activity present in activated T-cell nuclear extracts is composed of the Elf-1,
c-Fos, and JunB transcription factors. Taken together, these results suggest that
cooperative interactions between specific Ets and AP-1 family members are
important in regulating inducible gene expression following T-cell activation.

PMCID: PMC358471
PMID: 8289796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Nov 11;21(22):5184-91.

A single amino-acid substitution in the Ets domain alters core DNA binding
specificity of Ets1 to that of the related transcription factors Elf1 and E74.

Bosselut R(1), Levin J, Adjadj E, Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1443, Institut Curie, Section de Biologie, Orsay, France.

Ets proteins form a family of sequence specific DNA binding proteins which bind
DNA through a 85 aminoacids conserved domain, the Ets domain, whose sequence is
unrelated to any other characterized DNA binding domain. Unlike all other known
Ets proteins, which bind specific DNA sequences centered over either GGAA or GGAT
core motifs, E74 and Elf1 selectively bind to GGAA corecontaining sites. Elf1 and
E74 differ from other Ets proteins in three residues located in an otherwise
highly conserved region of the Ets domain, referred to as conserved region III
(CRIII). We show that a restricted selectivity for GGAA core-containing sites
could be conferred to Ets1 upon changing a single lysine residue within CRIII to 
the threonine found in Elf1 and E74 at this position. Conversely, the reciprocal 
mutation in Elf1 confers to this protein the ability to bind to GGAT core
containing EBS. This, together with the fact that mutation of two invariant
arginine residues in CRIII abolishes DNA binding, indicates that CRIII plays a
key role in Ets domain recognition of the GGAA/T core motif and lead us to
discuss a model of Ets proteins--core motif interaction.

PMCID: PMC310635
PMID: 8255775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


