
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 8. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7988. [Epub ahead of print]

ChIP-on-chip analysis of thyroid hormone-regulated genes and their physiological 
significance.

Chung IH(1), Liu H(1,)(2,)(3), Lin YH(1), Chi HC(1), Huang YH(4), Yang CC(2,)(5),
Yeh CT(4), Tan BC(2,)(5,)(6), Lin KH(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan. (2)Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan. (3)Colorectal Section, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou,
Taoyuan, Taiwan. (4)Liver Research Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou, 
Taoyuan, Taiwan. (5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang
Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (6)Department of Neurosurgery, Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Triiodothyronine (T3) and its receptor (TR) modulate several physiological
processes, including cell development, proliferation, differentiation and
metabolism. The regulatory mechanism of T3/TR involves binding to the thyroid
hormone response element (TRE) within the target gene promoter. However, the
number of target genes directly regulated by TRa1 and the specific pathways of
TR-regulated target genes remain largely unknown. Here, we expressed TRa1 in a
HepG2 cell line and used chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with microarray to
determine the genes that are directly regulated by TRa1 and also involved in cell
metabolism and proliferation. Our analysis identified E74-like factor 2 (ELF2), a
transcription factor associated with tumor growth, as a direct target
downregulated by T3/TR. Overexpression of ELF2 enhanced tumor cell proliferation,
and conversely, its knockdown suppressed tumor growth. Additionally, ELF2
restored the proliferative ability of hepatoma cells inhibited by T3/TR. Our
findings collectively support a potential role of T3/TR in tumor growth
inhibition through regulation of ELF2.

PMID: 26968954  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 26. [Epub ahead of print]

Mutational Landscape and Antiproliferative Functions of ELF Transcription Factors
in Human Cancer.

Ando M(1), Kawazu M(2), Ueno T(3), Koinuma D(4), Ando K(5), Koya J(6), Kataoka
K(6), Yasuda T(3), Yamaguchi H(3), Fukumura K(3), Yamato A(3), Soda M(3), Sai
E(2), Yamashita Y(3), Asakage T(7), Miyazaki Y(5), Kurokawa M(6), Miyazono K(4), 
Nimer SD(8), Yamasoba T(7), Mano H(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Signaling, Graduate School of Medicine, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery,
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department
of Medical Genomics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan. (3)Department of Cellular Signaling, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate
School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of
Hematology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki,
Japan. (6)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and
Neck Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami, Florida.
(9)Department of Cellular Signaling, Graduate School of Medicine, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Strategic Basic Research Program, Japan Science and
Technology Agency, Saitama, Japan. hmano@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

ELF4 (also known as MEF) is a member of the ETS family of transcription factors. 
An oncogenic role for ELF4 has been demonstrated in hematopoietic malignancies,
but its function in epithelial tumors remains unclear. Here, we show that ELF4
can function as a tumor suppressor and is somatically inactivated in a wide range
of human tumors. We identified a missense mutation affecting the transactivation 
potential of ELF4 in oral squamous cell carcinoma cells. Restoration of the
transactivation activity through introduction of wild-type ELF4 significantly
inhibited cell proliferationin vitroand tumor xenograft growth. Furthermore, we
found that ELF1 and ELF2, closely related transcription factors to ELF4, also
exerted antiproliferative effects in multiple cancer cell lines. Mutations in
ELF1 and ELF2, as in ELF4, were widespread across human cancers, but were almost 
all mutually exclusive. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with
high-throughput sequencing revealed ELF4-binding sites in genomic regions
adjacent to genes related to cell-cycle regulation and apoptosis. Finally, we
provide mechanistic evidence that the antiproliferative effects of ELF4 were
mediated through the induction of HRK, an activator of apoptosis, and DLX3, an
inhibitor of cell growth. Collectively, our findings reveal a novel subtype of
human cancer characterized by inactivating mutations in the ELF subfamily of
proteins, and warrant further investigation of the specific settings where ELF
restoration may be therapeutically beneficial.Cancer Res; 76(7); 1-11. ©2016
AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26921333  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Dec 18;15:49. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0096-3.

Transcriptome profiling of bovine inner cell mass and trophectoderm derived from 
in vivo generated blastocysts.

Hosseini SM(1,)(2), Dufort I(3), Caballero J(4), Moulavi F(5), Ghanaei HR(6),
Sirard MA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biotechnology, Reproductive Biomedicine Research
Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan, Iran.
smhosseini@royaninstitute.org. (2)Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la
Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture et de l'Alimentation,
Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF, Université Laval, Québec, QC,
G1V 0A6, Canada. smhosseini@royaninstitute.org. (3)Centre de Recherche en
Biologie de la Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture et de
l'Alimentation, Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF, Université
Laval, Québec, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada. Isabelle.dufort@fsaa.ulaval.ca. (4)Centre de 
Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture
et de l'Alimentation, Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF,
Université Laval, Québec, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada. Julieta.caballero.1@ulaval.ca.
(5)Department of Reproductive Biotechnology, Reproductive Biomedicine Research
Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan, Iran.
f_moulavi@yahoo.com. (6)Department of Reproductive Biotechnology, Reproductive
Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan,
Iran. hamidghanai@yahoo.co.uk. (7)Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la
Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture et de l'Alimentation,
Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF, Université Laval, Québec, QC,
G1V 0A6, Canada. Marc-Andre.Sirard@fsaa.ulaval.ca.

BACKGROUND: This study describes the generation and analysis of the
transcriptional profile of bovine inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE),
obtained from in vivo developed embryos by using a bovine-embryo specific array
(EmbryoGENE) containing 37,238 probes.
RESULTS: A total of 4,689 probes were differentially expressed between ICM and
TE, among these, 2,380 and 2,309 probes were upregulated in ICM and TE tissues,
respectively (P = 0.01, FC = 2.0, FDR: 2.0). Ontological classification of the
genes predominantly expressed in ICM emerged a range of functional categories
with a preponderance of genes involved in basal and developmental signaling
pathways including P53, TGFß, IL8, mTOR, integrin, ILK, and ELF2 signalings.
Cross-referencing of microarray data with two available in vitro studies
indicated a marked reduction in ICM vs. TE transcriptional difference following
in vitro culture of bovine embryos. Moreover, a great majority of genes that were
found to be misregulated following in vitro culture of bovine embryos were known 
genes involved in epigenetic regulation of pluripotency and cell differentiation 
including DNMT1, GADD45, CARM1, ELF5 HDAC8, CCNB1, KDM6A, PRDM9, CDX2, ARID3A,
IL6, GADD45A, FGFR2, PPP2R2B, and SMARCA2. Cross-species referencing of
microarray data revealed substantial divergence between bovine and mouse and
human in signaling pathways involved in early lineage specification.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptional changes occur during ICM and TE lineages
specification in bovine is greater than previously understood. Therefore, this
array data establishes a standard to evaluate the in vitro imprint on the
transcriptome and to hypothesize the cross-species differences that allow in
vitro acquisition of pluripotent ICM in human and mice but hinder that process in
bovine.

PMCID: PMC4683974
PMID: 26681441  [PubMed - in process]


4. Exp Eye Res. 2015 Nov;140:130-8. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2015.08.022. Epub 2015 Sep
9.

Correlation of ER stress and retinal degeneration in tubby mice.

Cai X(1), Chen L(2), McGinnis JF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Dean McGee Eye Institute, University of Oklahoma 
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States. Electronic
address: xue-cai@ouhsc.edu. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Dean McGee Eye
Institute, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK
73104, United States. (3)Department of Ophthalmology, Dean McGee Eye Institute,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United
States; Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States; Oklahoma Center for Neuroscience,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United
States. Electronic address: james-mcginnis@ouhsc.edu.

Mutation of the Tub gene results in the mislocalization of photoreceptor-specific
proteins and eventually retinal degeneration. However, the exact mechanism
underlying the retinal degeneration remains largely unknown. In this study, we
discovered that the expression of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress markers,
IRE1, ATF6, eIF2a, GRP78/BiP, and XBP-1, is up regulated during tubby retinal
development. The dynamics of the expression of these genes are time-dependent and
coincided with the time-course of photoreceptor death. Our data also demonstrated
that ER stress triggers apoptosis via down-regulation of Bcl2, up-regulation of
CHOP and the activation of NF-<U+043A>B signaling.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4624508 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26325328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 25;5:11555. doi: 10.1038/srep11555.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress impairment in the spinal dorsal horn of a
neuropathic pain model.

Zhang E(1), Yi MH(2), Shin N(2), Baek H(2), Kim S(2), Kim E(2), Kwon K(2), Lee
S(3), Kim HW(4), Chul Bae Y(5), Kim Y(6), Kwon OY(2), Lee WH(3), Kim DW(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Anatomy, Brain Research Institute, Chungnam National
University School of Medicine, Daejeon 301-747, South Korea [2] Department of
Anesthesiology, Yanbian University Hospital, Yanbian, 133000, China.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Brain Research Institute, Chungnam National University 
School of Medicine, Daejeon 301-747, South Korea. (3)Department of Anesthesia and
Pain Medicine, Chungnam National University Hospital, Daejeon 301-721, South
Korea. (4)Department of Physiology, Brain Research Institute, Chungnam National
University School of Medicine, Daejeon 301-747, South Korea. (5)Department of
Oral Anatomy and Neurobiology, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu 700-412, South Korea. (6)Department of Chemical and Biological 
Engineering, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been implicated in neurodegenerative
diseases, but its role in neuropathic pain remains unclear. In this study, we
examined the ER stress and the unfolded protein response (UPR) activation in a L5
spinal nerve ligation (SNL)-induced rat neuropathic pain model. SNL-induced
neuropathic pain was assessed behaviorally using the CatWalk system, and
histologically with microglial activation in the dorsal spinal horn. L5 SNL
induced BIP upregulation in the neuron of superficial laminae of dorsal spinal
horn. It also increased the level of ATF6 and intracellular localization into the
nuclei in the neurons. Moreover, spliced XBP1 was also markedly elevated in the
ipsilateral spinal dorsal horn. The PERK-elF2 pathway was activated in astrocytes
of the spinal dorsal horn in the SNL model. In addition, electron microscopy
revealed the presence of swollen cisternae in the dorsal spinal cord after SNL.
Additionally, inhibition of the ATF6 pathway by intrathecal treatment with ATF6
siRNA reduced pain behaviors and BIP expression in the dorsal horn. The results
suggest that ER stress might be involved in the induction and maintenance of
neuropathic pain. Furthermore, a disturbance in UPR signaling may render the
spinal neurons vulnerable to peripheral nerve injury or neuropathic pain stimuli.

PMCID: PMC4479804
PMID: 26109318  [PubMed - in process]


6. Proteomics. 2015 Aug;15(15):2716-29. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201400508. Epub 2015 May
19.

Extensive differential protein phosphorylation as intraerythrocytic Plasmodium
falciparum schizonts develop into extracellular invasive merozoites.

Lasonder E(1), Green JL(2), Grainger M(2), Langsley G(3,)(4), Holder AA(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical and Healthcare Sciences, Plymouth University, Drake
Circus, Plymouth, Devon, UK. (2)The Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill
Laboratory, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, UK. (3)Laboratoire de Biologie
Cellulaire Comparative des Apicomplexes, Faculté de Médicine, Université Paris
Descartes - Sorbonne Paris Cité, France. (4)Inserm U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Institut 
Cochin, Paris, France.

Pathology of the most lethal form of malaria is caused by Plasmodium falciparum
asexual blood stages and initiated by merozoite invasion of erythrocytes. We
present a phosphoproteome analysis of extracellular merozoites revealing 1765
unique phosphorylation sites including 785 sites not previously detected in
schizonts. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier
PXD001684 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001684). The
observed differential phosphorylation between extra and intraerythrocytic
life-cycle stages was confirmed using both phospho-site and phospho-motif
specific antibodies and is consistent with the core motif [K/R]xx[pS/pT] being
highly represented in merozoite phosphoproteins. Comparative bioinformatic
analyses highlighted protein sets and pathways with established roles in
invasion. Within the merozoite phosphoprotein interaction network a subnetwork of
119 proteins with potential roles in cellular movement and invasion was
identified and suggested that it is coregulated by a further small subnetwork of 
protein kinase A (PKA), two calcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs), a
phosphatidyl inositol kinase (PI3K), and a GCN2-like elF2-kinase with a predicted
role in translational arrest and associated changes in the ubquitinome. To test
this notion experimentally, we examined the overall ubiquitination level in
intracellular schizonts versus extracellular merozoites and found it highly
upregulated in merozoites. We propose that alterations in the phosphoproteome and
ubiquitinome reflect a starvation-induced translational arrest as intracellular
schizonts transform into extracellular merozoites.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25886026  [PubMed - in process]


7. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 10;6(4):2250-62.

Inhibition of HIF-1a by PX-478 enhances the anti-tumor effect of gemcitabine by
inducing immunogenic cell death in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Zhao T(1), Ren H(1), Jia L(2), Chen J(1), Xin W(1), Yan F(1), Li J(1), Wang X(1),
Gao S(1), Qian D(1), Huang C(1), Hao J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, National Clinical
Research Center for Cancer, Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy,
Department of Pancreatic Cancer, Tianjin, China. (2)Centre for Haemato-Oncology, 
Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, EC1M 6BQ, UK.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the worst prognoses among all the
malignancies. Now, gemcitabine (Gem) is the first line chemotherapeutic drug for 
advanced pancreatic cancer. However, Gem is usually ineffective to the PDAC
because of high degree of drug resistance. Hypoxia and immune suppressive milieu 
are the best-described hallmarks of PDAC; therefore, we investigated the impact
of hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) inhibitor, PX-478, in combination with Gem 
on the induction of immunogenic cell death (ICD). We verified that combined
treatment with Gem/PX-478 significantly enhanced the anti-tumor effect and
increased proportion of tumor infiltrating T-lymphocytes in Panc02-bearing
immune-competent but not in immune-deficient mice. Vaccination using Panc02 cell 
line treated with single agent or in combination showed significant anti-tumor
effects. Pancreatic cell lines treated with Gem and PX-478 can induce an increase
in eIF2a phosphorylation was correlated with down-regulation of HIF-1a and
elicited exposure of CRT and release of HMGB1 and ATP. Only co-treated cells
induced DC maturation/phagocytosis and IFN-<U+03B3> secretion by cytotoxic T
lymphocytes. Altogether, combined treatment with Gem/PX-478 showed significantly 
inhibition on tumor growth and anti-tumor immunization. We propose that
inhibition HIF-1a elicits Gem-induced immune response and eliminates PDAC cells
by inducing ICD.

PMCID: PMC4385849
PMID: 25544770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Digestion. 2014;90(3):167-78.

Inhibition of the dephosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2a
ameliorates murine experimental colitis.

Okazaki T, Nishio A, Takeo M, Sakaguchi Y, Fukui T, Uchida K, Okazaki K.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in the intestine is closely
associated with the development of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, the
role of the protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase in this disease is not fully known.
We studied whether an inhibitor of the dephosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation
factor 2a, salubrinal, improves murine experimental colitis through the
amelioration of ER stress.
METHODS: Colitis was induced by the administration of 3% dextran sulfate sodium
(DSS) for 5 days. Mice were injected salubrinal intraperitoneally from the
commencement of DSS treatment and were sacrificed on day 10. The severity of
colitis was evaluated histologically using a scoring system.Myeloperoxidase
activity and the expression of proinflammatory cytokine genes in the colon were
analyzed. The expression levels of ER stress-related proteins were evaluated by
Western blotting.
RESULTS: The administration of salubrinal significantly attenuated body weight
loss and improved colitis, as assessed histologically. The elevation of
myeloperoxidase activity and the expression of proinflammatory cytokine genes
were suppressed in salubrinal-treated mice. The expression of glucose-regulated
protein 78, activating translation factor 4, and heat-shock protein 70 was
elevated in mice treated with salubrinal.
CONCLUSION: The amelioration of ER stress may be a therapeutic target for the
treatment of IBD.

PMID: 25339182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2014 Nov;38(3):783-91. doi:
10.1016/j.etap.2014.09.009. Epub 2014 Sep 28.

The role of nitric oxide synthase signaling pathway in the Zn-induced cellular
responses in MCF-7 cells.

Zhong L(1), Wang L(2), Xu L(2), Liu Q(2), Jiang L(3), Zhi Y(2), Lu W(4), Zhou
P(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, PR China; School of Agriculture and Biology,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, PR China; Bor S. Luh Food Safety 
Research Center, Shanghai 200240, PR China. (2)School of Agriculture and Biology,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, PR China; Key Laboratory of Urban
Agriculture (South) of Ministry of Agriculture, Shanghai 200240, PR China; Bor S.
Luh Food Safety Research Center, Shanghai 200240, PR China. (3)School of
Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, PR
China; Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) of Ministry of Agriculture,
Shanghai 200240, PR China; Bor S. Luh Food Safety Research Center, Shanghai
200240, PR China; Shanghai Food Safety Engineering Research Center, Shanghai
200240, PR China. (4)School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, PR China; Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture
(South) of Ministry of Agriculture, Shanghai 200240, PR China; Bor S. Luh Food
Safety Research Center, Shanghai 200240, PR China. Electronic address:
weilu@sjtu.edu.cn. (5)School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, PR China; Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture
(South) of Ministry of Agriculture, Shanghai 200240, PR China; Bor S. Luh Food
Safety Research Center, Shanghai 200240, PR China. Electronic address:
peizhousjtu@163.com.

Trace amount zinc plays key roles in biological systems, while in excessive
amount it causes toxic effects. Evidence shows that there exists a crosstalk
between NO and Zn apoptotic signal transduction pathway. However, the potential
mechanism of Zn-induced cellular responses through the NOS signaling pathway has 
not been determined yet. In this research, trace amount ZnCl2 (1nM) could induce 
the NO production, however it appears that this influence does not extend to
genetic level in MCF-7 cells. Whereas, excess ZnCl2 (100µM, 1mM) could lead to a 
decreased NO production first with the release of Ca(2+), and then induce the NO 
production with the transcriptional and translational activation of NOSs. The ROS
generation was also induced by excess ZnCl2, causing the elF2a phosphorylation.
The alleviation effect of N-acetyl-l-cysteine or l-arginine on the Zn-induced ROS
generation and apoptosis suggested that Zn-induced apoptosis was associated with 
the NOS-mediated oxidative stress.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25305739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2014 Jul;43(4):413-9.

[Correlation of PBX2/ELF2 expression with prognosis of non-small cell lung
cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Jin SQ(1), Pu YF(1), Qiu Y(2), Aozasa K(3), Morii E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University 2-2
Yamadaoka, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between pre B cell leukemia
transcription factor 2 (PBX2)/Ets domain transcription factor 2 (ELF2) expression
with prognosis of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Expressions of ELF2 and PBX2 were examined in 206 patients of NSCLC by
immunohistochemistry. The correlation of PBX2/ELF2 expression with
valosin-containing protein (VCP) expression and clinicopathologic factors of
NSCLC patients was analyzed. Chi-square test, Fisher's exact test and Cox's
regression were used for statistical analysis.
RESULTS: The level of PBX2/ELF2 expression was associated with VCP expression
(P=0.0126). Univariate analysis showed that 5-y disease free survival and overall
survival (OS) of NSCLC were correlated with expression of PBX2, PBX2/ELF2 and
VCP, tumor size, histological differentiation, visceral pleural invasion, N and T
in pTNM grades, and clinical stages (P<0.05). The 5-y OS was also related to
vascular invasion (P=0.0322). Multivariate analysis revealed that the expression 
level of PBX2/ELF2 and histological differentiation were independent predictors
for NSCLC.
CONCLUSION: The level of PBX2/ELF2 expression is related to VCP expression,
indicating that PBX2/ELF2-VCP pathway may be associated with the prognosis of
NSCLC patients.

PMID: 25187455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;43(4):1413-27. doi: 10.3233/JAD-140216.

Chronic copper exposure causes spatial memory impairment, selective loss of
hippocampal synaptic proteins, and activation of PKR/eIF2a pathway in mice.

Ma Q(1), Ying M(2), Sui X(3), Zhang H(3), Huang H(3), Yang L(3), Huang X(3),
Zhuang Z(3), Liu J(3), Yang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Shenzhen, Shenzhen Center for Disease
Control and Prevention, Shenzhen, China College of Life Sciences, Shenzhen
University, Shenzhen, China. (2)College of Life Sciences, Shenzhen University,
Shenzhen, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Shenzhen, Shenzhen
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shenzhen, China.

Copper is an essential element for human growth and development; however,
excessive intake of copper could contribute to neurotoxicity. Here we show that
chronic exposure to copper in drinking water impaired spatial memory with
simultaneous selective loss of hippocampal pre-synaptic protein synapsin 1, and
post-synaptic density protein (PSD)-93/95 in mice. Copper exposure was shown to
elevate the levels of nitrotyrosine and 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) in
hippocampus, two markers of oxidative stress. Concurrently, we also found that
copper exposure activated double stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) as
evidenced by increased ratio of phosphorylated PKR at Thr451 and total PKR and
increased the phosphorylation of its downstream signaling molecule eukaryotic
initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) at Ser51 in hippocampus. Consistent with activation 
of PKR/eIF2a signaling pathway which was shown to mediate synaptic deficit and
cognitive impairment, the levels of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF-4), a 
downstream signaling molecule of eIF2a and a repressor of CREB-mediated gene
expression, were significantly increased, while the activity of cAMP response
elements binding protein (CREB) was inactivated as suggested by decreased
phosphorylation of CREB at Ser133 by copper exposure. In addition, the expression
of the pro-apoptotic target molecule C/EBP homology protein (CHOP) of ATF-4 was
upregulated and hippocampal neuronal apoptosis was induced by copper exposure.
Taken together, we propose that chronic copper exposure might cause spatial
memory impairment, selective loss of synaptic proteins, and neuronal apoptosis
through the mechanisms involving activation of PKR/eIF2a signaling pathway.

PMID: 25159668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2014 Sep;17(9):1453-63. doi:
10.1017/S1461145714000443. Epub 2014 May 6.

Impaired endoplasmic reticulum stress response in bipolar disorder: cellular
evidence of illness progression.

Pfaffenseller B(1), Wollenhaupt-Aguiar B(1), Fries GR(1), Colpo GD(1), Burque
RK(1), Bristot G(1), Ferrari P(1), Ceresér KM(1), Rosa AR(1), Klamt F(1),
Kapczinski F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia - Translacional em Medicina (INCT),
Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre,Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do
Sul,Porto Alegre, RS,Brazil.

Bipolar disorder (BD) is a severe chronic psychiatric disorder that has been
associated with cellular dysfunctions related to mitochondria, neurotrophin
levels, and oxidative stress. Evidence has shown that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
stress may be a common pathway of the cellular changes described in BD. In the
present study we assessed unfolded protein response (UPR) and the effects of this
cellular process on lymphocytes from patients with BD. We also evaluated whether 
the stage of chronicity of BD was associated with changes in UPR parameters.
Cultured lymphocytes from 30 patients with BD and 32 age- and sex-matched
controls were treated with tunicamycin, an ER stressor, for 12 or 24 h to measure
levels of UPR-related proteins (GRP78, eIF2a-P, and CHOP) using flow cytometry,
and for 48 h to analyse ER stress-induced cell death. In healthy controls but not
in patients we found an increase in levels of GRP78, eIF2a-P, and CHOP after ER
stress induction. In addition, tunicamycin-induced cell death was significantly
higher in patients compared to controls. More importantly, early-stage patients
did not differ from controls while the late-stage patients showed an impaired ER 
stress response. Thus, dysfunction in ER-related stress response may be
associated with decreased cellular resilience in BD and illness progression.

PMID: 24800824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Learn Mem. 2014 Apr 16;21(5):298-304. doi: 10.1101/lm.032219.113.

The eIF2a kinase PERK limits the expression of hippocampal metabotropic glutamate
receptor-dependent long-term depression.

Trinh MA(1), Ma T, Kaphzan H, Bhattacharya A, Antion MD, Cavener DR, Hoeffer CA, 
Klann E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, New York 10003, USA.

The proper regulation of translation is required for the expression of
long-lasting synaptic plasticity. A major site of translational control involves 
the phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 a (eIF2a) by PKR-like
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) kinase (PERK). To determine the role of PERK in
hippocampal synaptic plasticity, we used the Cre-lox expression system to
selectively disrupt PERK expression in the adult mouse forebrain. Here, we
demonstrate that in hippocampal area CA1, metabotropic glutamate receptor
(mGluR)-dependent long-term depression (LTD) is associated with increased eIF2a
phosphorylation, whereas stimulation of early- and late-phase long-term
potentiation (E-LTP and L-LTP, respectively) is associated with decreased eIF2a
phosphorylation. Interesting, although PERK-deficient mice exhibit exaggerated
mGluR-LTD, both E-LTP and L-LTP remained intact. We also found that mGluR-LTD is 
associated with a PERK-dependent increase in eIF2a phosphorylation. Our findings 
are consistent with the notion that eIF2a phosphorylation is a key site for the
bidirectional control of persistent forms of synaptic LTP and LTD and suggest a
distinct role for PERK in mGluR-LTD.

PMCID: PMC3994503
PMID: 24741110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 13;9(2):e89021. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089021. eCollection
2014.

Ampelopsin induces cell growth inhibition and apoptosis in breast cancer cells
through ROS generation and endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway.

Zhou Y(1), Shu F(1), Liang X(1), Chang H(1), Shi L(1), Peng X(1), Zhu J(1), Mi
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Nutrition and Food Safety, Institute of Military
Preventive Medicine, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing Key Laboratory 
of Nutrition and Food Safety, Research Center for Medical Nutrition, Chongqing,
P.R. China.

Ampelopsin (AMP), a major bioactive constituent of Ampelopsis grossedentata,
exerts a number of biological effects. In this study, we investigated its
anti-cancer activity in human breast cancer cell lines, and explored the
underlying mechanism of this action. Our results showed that treatment with AMP
dose-dependently inhibited cell viability and induced apoptosis in MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells without cytotoxicity in human normal breast
epithelial cells MCF-10A. Meanwhile, AMP dose- dependently triggered reactive
oxygen species (ROS) generation in both breast cancer cells. The ROS scavenger
N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) strongly attenuated AMP-induced ROS production, along
with cell growth inhibition and apoptosis. Furthermore, AMP was observed to
activate endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, as evidenced by the up-regulation of 
ER stress-related proteins, including GRP78, p-PERK, p-elF2a, cleaved ATF6a and
CHOP, while knockdown of ATF6a or PERK markedly down-regulated AMP-induced CHOP
expression. Blocking ER stress using 4-phenylbutyric acid not only down-regulated
AMP-induced GRP78 and CHOP expression, but also significantly decreased
AMP-induced cell growth inhibition and apoptosis, whereas ER stress inducer
thapsigargin played opposing effects. Additionally, NAC inhibited AMP-induced ER 
stress by down-regulating GRP78 and CHOP expression. Conversely, blocking ER
stress using CHOP siRNA decreased AMP-induced ROS production and cell apoptosis. 
Taken together, these results demonstrate that AMP has anti-tumor effects against
breast cancer cells through ROS generation and ER stress pathway, which therefore
provide experimental evidences for developing AMP as a new therapeutic drug for
breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3923868
PMID: 24551210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Neuron. 2014 Jan 22;81(2):333-48. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.12.009.

Neuronal matrix metalloproteinase-9 is a determinant of selective
neurodegeneration.

Kaplan A(1), Spiller KJ(1), Towne C(2), Kanning KC(1), Choe GT(1), Geber A(1),
Akay T(3), Aebischer P(2), Henderson CE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Motor Neuron Biology and Disease, Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, NY 10032, USA; Departments of Rehabilitation and Regenerative
Medicine, Pathology and Cell Biology, Neurology, and Neuroscience, Columbia Stem 
Cell Initiative, and Columbia Translational Neuroscience Initiative, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA. (2)Brain Mind Institute, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. (3)Center for Motor Neuron
Biology and Disease, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA;
Department of Neurological Surgery, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, NY 10032, USA. (4)Center for Motor Neuron Biology and
Disease, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA; Departments
of Rehabilitation and Regenerative Medicine, Pathology and Cell Biology,
Neurology, and Neuroscience, Columbia Stem Cell Initiative, and Columbia
Translational Neuroscience Initiative, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032,
USA. Electronic address: ch2331@columbia.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2014 Apr;13(4):256.

Selective neuronal loss is the hallmark of neurodegenerative diseases. In
patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), most motor neurons die but
those innervating extraocular, pelvic sphincter, and slow limb muscles exhibit
selective resistance. We identified 18 genes that show >10-fold differential
expression between resistant and vulnerable motor neurons. One of these, matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), is expressed only by fast motor neurons, which are
selectively vulnerable. In ALS model mice expressing mutant superoxide dismutase 
(SOD1), reduction of MMP-9 function using gene ablation, viral gene therapy, or
pharmacological inhibition significantly delayed muscle denervation. In the
presence of mutant SOD1, MMP-9 expressed by fast motor neurons themselves
enhances activation of ER stress and is sufficient to trigger axonal die-back.
These findings define MMP-9 as a candidate therapeutic target for ALS. The
molecular basis of neuronal diversity thus provides significant insights into
mechanisms of selective vulnerability to neurodegeneration.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24462097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Nature. 2013 Nov 14;503(7475):272-6. doi: 10.1038/nature12599. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

Paneth cells as a site of origin for intestinal inflammation.

Adolph TE(1), Tomczak MF, Niederreiter L, Ko HJ, Böck J, Martinez-Naves E,
Glickman JN, Tschurtschenthaler M, Hartwig J, Hosomi S, Flak MB, Cusick JL, Kohno
K, Iwawaki T, Billmann-Born S, Raine T, Bharti R, Lucius R, Kweon MN, Marciniak
SJ, Choi A, Hagen SJ, Schreiber S, Rosenstiel P, Kaser A, Blumberg RS.

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK [2].

The recognition of autophagy related 16-like 1 (ATG16L1) as a genetic risk factor
has exposed the critical role of autophagy in Crohn's disease. Homozygosity for
the highly prevalent ATG16L1 risk allele, or murine hypomorphic (HM) activity,
causes Paneth cell dysfunction. As Atg16l1(HM) mice do not develop spontaneous
intestinal inflammation, the mechanism(s) by which ATG16L1 contributes to disease
remains obscure. Deletion of the unfolded protein response (UPR) transcription
factor X-box binding protein-1 (Xbp1) in intestinal epithelial cells, the human
orthologue of which harbours rare inflammatory bowel disease risk variants,
results in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, Paneth cell impairment and
spontaneous enteritis. Unresolved ER stress is a common feature of inflammatory
bowel disease epithelium, and several genetic risk factors of Crohn's disease
affect Paneth cells. Here we show that impairment in either UPR (Xbp1(<U+0394>IEC)) or
autophagy function (Atg16l1(<U+0394>IEC) or Atg7(<U+0394>IEC)) in intestinal epithelial cells
results in each other's compensatory engagement, and severe spontaneous
Crohn's-disease-like transmural ileitis if both mechanisms are compromised.
Xbp1(<U+0394>IEC) mice show autophagosome formation in hypomorphic Paneth cells, which
is linked to ER stress via protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase
(PERK), elongation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) and activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4). Ileitis is dependent on commensal microbiota and derives from
increased intestinal epithelial cell death, inositol requiring enzyme 1a
(IRE1a)-regulated NF-<U+03BA>B activation and tumour-necrosis factor signalling, which
are synergistically increased when autophagy is deficient. ATG16L1 restrains
IRE1a activity, and augmentation of autophagy in intestinal epithelial cells
ameliorates ER stress-induced intestinal inflammation and eases NF-<U+03BA>B
overactivation and intestinal epithelial cell death. ER stress, autophagy
induction and spontaneous ileitis emerge from Paneth-cell-specific deletion of
Xbp1. Genetically and environmentally controlled UPR function within Paneth cells
may therefore set the threshold for the development of intestinal inflammation
upon hypomorphic ATG16L1 function and implicate ileal Crohn's disease as a
specific disorder of Paneth cells.

PMCID: PMC3862182
PMID: 24089213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Nov;1830(11):5316-25. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.07.030. Epub 2013 Aug 3.

Oxidative stress-induced cyclin D1 depletion and its role in cell cycle
processing.

Pyo CW(1), Choi JH, Oh SM, Choi SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea 
University, Seoul 136-701, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Cyclin D1 is immediately down-regulated in response to reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and implicated in the induction of cell cycle arrest in G2
phase by an unknown mechanism. Either treatment with a protease inhibitor alone
or expression of protease-resistant cyclin D1 T286A resulted in only a partial
relief from the ROS-induced cell cycle arrest, indicating the presence of an
additional control mechanism.
METHODS: Cells were exposed to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and analyzed to assess
the changes in cyclin D1 level and its effects on cell cycle processing by kinase
assay, de novo synthesis, gene silencing, and polysomal analysis, etc.
RESULTS: Exposure of cells to excessive H2O2 induced ubiquitin-dependent
proteasomal degradation of cyclin D1, which was subsequently followed by
translational repression. This dual control mechanism was found to contribute to 
the induction of cell cycle arrest in G2 phase under oxidative stress. Silencing 
of an eIF2a kinase PERK significantly retarded cyclin D1 depletion, and
contributed largely to rescuing cells from G2 arrest. Also the cyclin D1 level
was found to be correlated with Chk1 activity.
CONCLUSIONS: In addition to an immediate removal of the pre-existing cyclin D1
under oxidative stress, the following translational repression appear to be
required for ensuring full depletion of cyclin D1 and cell cycle arrest.
Oxidative stress-induced cyclin D1 depletion is linked to the regulation of G2/M 
transit via the Chk1-Cdc2 DNA damage checkpoint pathway.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: The control of cyclin D1 is a gate keeping program to
protect cells from severe oxidative damages.

© 2013.

PMID: 23920145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. BMC Genomics. 2013 May 29;14:358. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-358.

Mining genes involved in the stratification of Paris polyphylla seeds using
high-throughput embryo transcriptome sequencing.

Qi J, Zheng N, Zhang B, Sun P, Hu S, Xu W, Ma Q, Zhao T, Zhou L, Qin M, Li X.

BACKGROUND: Paris polyphylla var. yunnanensis is an important medicinal plant.
Seed dormancy is one of the main factors restricting artificial cultivation. The 
molecular mechanisms of seed dormancy remain unclear, and little genomic or
transcriptome data are available for this plant.
RESULTS: In this study, massive parallel pyrosequencing on the Roche 454-GS FLX
Titanium platform was used to generate a substantial sequence dataset for the P. 
polyphylla embryo. 369,496 high quality reads were obtained, ranging from 50 to
1146 bp, with a mean of 219 bp. These reads were assembled into 47,768 unigenes, 
which included 16,069 contigs and 31,699 singletons. Using BLASTX searches of
public databases, 15,757 (32.3%) unique transcripts were identified. Gene
Ontology and Cluster of Orthologous Groups of proteins annotations revealed that 
these transcripts were broadly representative of the P. polyphylla embryo
transcriptome. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes assigned 5961 of the
unique sequences to specific metabolic pathways. Relative expression levels
analysis showed that eleven phytohormone-related genes and five other genes have 
different expression patterns in the embryo and endosperm in the seed
stratification process.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene annotation and quantitative RT-PCR expression analysis
identified 464 transcripts that may be involved in phytohormone catabolism and
biosynthesis, hormone signal, seed dormancy, seed maturation, cell wall growth
and circadian rhythms. In particular, the relative expression analysis of sixteen
genes (CYP707A, NCED, GA20ox2, GA20ox3, ABI2, PP2C, ARP3, ARP7, IAAH, IAAS, BRRK,
DRM, ELF1, ELF2, SFR6, and SUS) in embryo and endosperm and at two temperatures
indicated that these related genes may be candidates for clarifying the molecular
basis of seed dormancy in P. polyphlla var. yunnanensis.

PMCID: PMC3679829
PMID: 23718911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 30;8(4):e63205. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063205. Print 2013.

Ablation of C/EBP homologous protein does not protect T17M RHO mice from retinal 
degeneration.

Nashine S(1), Bhootada Y, Lewin AS, Gorbatyuk M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of North Texas Health
Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas, United States of America.

Despite the proposed link between ablation of the CHOP protein and delay of the
onset of ER stress-mediated disorders including diabetes, Alzheimer Disease, and 
cardiac hypertrophy, the role of CHOP protein in photoreceptor cell death
associated with Autosomal Dominant Retinitis Pigmentosa (ADRP) has not been
investigated. T17M RHO transgenic mice carry a mutated human rhodopsin transgene,
the expression of which in retina leads to protein misfolding, activation of UPR 
and progressive retinal degeneration. The purpose of this study is to investigate
the role of CHOP protein in T17M RHO retina. Wild-type, CHOP-/-, T17M RHO and
T17M RHO CHOP-/-mice were used in the study. Evaluation of the impact of CHOP
ablation was performed using electroretinography (ERG), spectral-domain optical
coherence tomography (SD-OCT), quantitative Real-Time PCR (qRT-PCR) and western
blot analysis. Dark-adapted ERG analysis demonstrated that by 1 month, the T17M
RHO CHOP-/- mice had a 70% reduction of the a-wave amplitude compared to the T17M
RHO mice. The loss of function in T17M RHO CHOP-/- photoreceptors was associated 
with a 22-24% decline in the thickness of the outer nuclear layer. These mice had
significant reduction in the expression of transcription factors, Crx and Nrl,
and also in mouse Rho, and human RHO. The reduction was associated with an 8-fold
elevation of the UPR marker, p-eIf2a protein and 30% down-regulation of sXbp1
protein. In addition, the histone deacetylase 1 (Hdac1) protein was 2-fold
elevated in the T17M RHO CHOP-/- retina. The ablation of CHOP led to a reduction 
in the expression of photoreceptor-specific transcriptional factors, and both
endogenous and exogenous RHO mRNA. Thus, despite its role in promoting apoptosis,
CHOP protects rod photoreceptors carrying an ADRP mutation.

PMCID: PMC3640035
PMID: 23646198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Cell. 2012 Nov 9;48(3):353-64. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.08.025. Epub 2012
Sep 27.

miR-211 is a prosurvival microRNA that regulates chop expression in a
PERK-dependent manner.

Chitnis NS(1), Pytel D, Bobrovnikova-Marjon E, Pant D, Zheng H, Maas NL,
Frederick B, Kushner JA, Chodosh LA, Koumenis C, Fuchs SY, Diehl JA.

Author information: 
(1)The Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

MicroRNAs typically function at the level of posttranscriptional gene silencing
within the cytoplasm; however, increasing evidence suggests that they may also
function in nuclear, Argonaut-containing complexes, to directly repress target
gene transcription. We have investigated the role of microRNAs in mediating
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress responses. ER stress triggers the activation of
three signaling molecules: Ire-1a/ß, PERK, and ATF6, whose function is to
facilitate adaption to the ensuing stress. We demonstrate that PERK induces
miR-211, which in turn attenuates stress-dependent expression of the proapoptotic
transcription factor chop/gadd153. MiR-211 directly targets the proximal
chop/gadd153 promoter, where it increases histone methylation and represses chop 
expression. Maximal chop accumulation ultimately correlates with miR-211
downregulation. Our data suggest a model in which PERK-dependent miR-211
induction prevents premature chop accumulation and thereby provides a window of
opportunity for the cell to re-establish homeostasis prior to apoptotic
commitment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3496065
PMID: 23022383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42636. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042636. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Dysregulation of autophagy in murine fibroblasts resistant to HSV-1 infection.

Le Sage V(1), Banfield BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Queen's University, Kingston,
Ontario, Canada.

The mouse L cell mutant, gro29, was selected for its ability to survive infection
by herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1). gro29 cells are fully susceptible to
HSV-1 infection, however, they produce 2000-fold less infectious virus than
parental L cells despite their capacity to synthesize late viral gene products
and assemble virions. Because productive HSV-1 infection is presumed to result in
the death of the host cell, we questioned how gro29 cells might survive
infection. Using time-lapse video microscopy, we demonstrated that a fraction of 
infected gro29 cells survived infection and divided. Electron microscopy of
infected gro29 cells, revealed large membranous vesicles that contained virions
as well as cytoplasmic constituents. These structures were reminiscent of
autophagosomes. Autophagy is an ancient cellular process that, under nutrient
deprivation conditions, results in the degradation and catabolism of cytoplasmic 
components and organelles. We hypothesized that enhanced autophagy, and resultant
degradation of virions, might explain the ability of gro29 to survive HSV-1
infection. Here we demonstrate that gro29 cells have enhanced basal autophagy as 
compared to parental L cells. Moreover, treatment of gro29 cells with
3-methyladenine, an inhibitor of autophagy, failed to prevent the formation of
autophagosome-like organelles in gro29 cells indicating that autophagy was
dysregulated in these cells. Additionally, we observed robust co-localization of 
the virion structural component, VP26, with the autophagosomal marker, GFP-LC3,
in infected gro29 cells that was not seen in infected parental L cells.
Collectively, these data support a model whereby gro29 cells prevent the release 
of infectious virus by directing intracellular virions to an autophagosome-like
compartment. Importantly, induction of autophagy in parental L cells did not
prevent HSV-1 production, indicating that the relationship between autophagy,
virus replication, and survival of HSV-1 infection by gro29 cells is complex.

PMCID: PMC3416809
PMID: 22900036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 May 11;421(3):578-84. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.048. Epub 2012 Apr 14.

The chemical chaperone 4-phenylbutyric acid attenuates pressure-overload cardiac 
hypertrophy by alleviating endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Park CS(1), Cha H, Kwon EJ, Sreenivasaiah PK, Kim do H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Systems Biology Research Center, Gwangju Institute
of Science and Technology, 123 Cheomdan-gwagiro (1 Oryong-dong), Buk-gu, Gwangju 
500-712, Republic of Korea.

Evidence has shown that endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) is associated with the
pathogenesis of cardiac hypertrophy. The aim of this study was to investigate
whether direct alleviation of ER stress by 4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA), a known
chemical chaperone drug, could attenuate pressure-overload cardiac hypertrophy in
mice. The effects of orally administered PBA (100mg/kg body weight daily for a
week) were examined using mice undergoing transverse aortic constriction
(TAC-mice), an animal model to produce pressure overload. TAC application for 1
week led to a 1.8-fold increase in the ratio of the heart weight over body weight
(HW/BW) and up-regulation of the hypertrophy markers ANF and BNF accompanied by
up-regulation of ERS markers (GRP78, p-PERK, and p-elF2a). The oral
administration of PBA to the TAC-mice reduced hypertrophy (19%) and severely
downregulated the fibrosis-related genes (transforming growth factor-ß1,
phospho-smad2, and pro-collagen isoforms). We conclude that ERS is induced as a
consequence of remodeling during pathological hypertrophy and that PBA may help
to relieve ERS and play a protective role against cardiac hypertrophy and
possibly heart failure. We suggest PBA as a novel therapeutic agent for cardiac
hypertrophy and fibrosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22525677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 4;287(19):15580-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.315218. Epub 2012 
Mar 16.

Chaperone insufficiency links TLR4 protein signaling to endoplasmic reticulum
stress.

Coope A(1), Milanski M, Arruda AP, Ignacio-Souza LM, Saad MJ, Anhê GF, Velloso
LA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Signaling, University of Campinas, 13084-761, Campinas SP, 
Brazil.

Inflammation plays an important pathogenic role in a number of metabolic diseases
such as obesity, type 2 diabetes, and atherosclerosis. The activation of
inflammation in these diseases depends at least in part on the combined actions
of TLR4 signaling and endoplasmic reticulum stress, which by acting in concert
can boost the inflammatory response. Defining the mechanisms involved in this
phenomenon may unveil potential targets for the treatment of
metabolic/inflammatory diseases. Here we used LPS to induce endoplasmic reticulum
stress in the human monocyte cell-line, THP-1. The unfolded protein response,
produced after LPS, was dependent on CD14 activity but not on RNA-dependent
protein kinase and could be inhibited by an exogenous chemical chaperone. The
induction of the endoplasmic reticulum resident chaperones, GRP94 and GRP78, by
LPS was of a much lower magnitude than the effect of LPS on TLR4 and MD-2
expression. In face of this apparent insufficiency of chaperone expression, we
induced the expression of GRP94 and GRP78 by glucose deprivation. This approach
completely reverted endoplasmic reticulum stress. The inhibition of either GRP94 
or GRP78 with siRNA was sufficient to rescue the protective effect of glucose
deprivation on LPS-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress. Thus, insufficient
LPS-induced chaperone expression links TLR4 signaling to endoplasmic reticulum
stress.

PMCID: PMC3346100
PMID: 22427667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29816. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029816. Epub 2012 Jan 4.

Identifying and characterizing alternative molecular markers for the symbiotic
and free-living dinoflagellate genus Symbiodinium.

Pochon X(1), Putnam HM, Burki F, Gates RD.

Author information: 
(1)Hawai'i Institute of Marine Biology, School of Ocean and Earth Science and
Technology, University of Hawai'i, Kane'ohe, Hawai'i, United States of America.
pochon@hawaii.edu

Dinoflagellates in the genus Symbiodinium are best known as endosymbionts of
corals and other invertebrate as well as protist hosts, but also exist
free-living in coastal environments. Despite their importance in marine
ecosystems, less than 10 loci have been used to explore phylogenetic
relationships in this group, and only the multi-copy nuclear ribosomal Internal
Transcribed Spacer (ITS) regions 1 and 2 have been used to characterize
fine-scale genetic diversity within the nine clades (A-I) that comprise the
genus. Here, we describe a three-step molecular approach focused on 1)
identifying new candidate genes for phylogenetic analysis of Symbiodinium spp.,
2) characterizing the phylogenetic relationship of these candidate genes from DNA
samples spanning eight Symbiodinium clades (A-H), and 3) conducting in-depth
phylogenetic analyses of candidate genes displaying genetic divergences equal or 
higher than those within the ITS-2 of Symbiodinium clade C. To this end, we used 
bioinformatics tools and reciprocal comparisons to identify homologous genes from
55,551 cDNA sequences representing two Symbiodinium and six additional
dinoflagellate EST libraries. Of the 84 candidate genes identified, 7
Symbiodinium genes (elf2, coI, coIII, cob, calmodulin, rad24, and actin) were
characterized by sequencing 23 DNA samples spanning eight Symbiodinium clades
(A-H). Four genes displaying higher rates of genetic divergences than ITS-2
within clade C were selected for in-depth phylogenetic analyses, which revealed
that calmodulin has limited taxonomic utility but that coI, rad24, and actin
behave predictably with respect to Symbiodinium lineage C and are potential
candidates as new markers for this group. The approach for targeting candidate
genes described here can serve as a model for future studies aimed at identifying
and testing new phylogenetically informative genes for taxa where transcriptomic 
and genomics data are available.

PMCID: PMC3251599
PMID: 22238660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Med Virol. 2011 Oct;83(10):1727-32. doi: 10.1002/jmv.21959.

Mutations in two PKR-binding domains in chronic hepatitis C of genotype 3a and
correlation with viral loads and interferon responsiveness.

Yokozaki S(1), Katano Y, Hayashi K, Ishigami M, Itoh A, Hirooka Y, Nakano I, Goto
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

Interferon (IFN) induces the double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR)
to inhibit viral replication. Two motifs of the PKR-binding domain exist in the
E2 and the NS5A regions of the hepatitis C virus (HCV). These regions are called 
the PKR-eukaryotic transcription factor (elF2-alpha) phosphorylation homology
domain (PePHD), and the IFN sensitivity-determining region (ISDR). Both regions
are inhibited by PKR. Thus, several studies have reported the relationship
between these regions and IFN responsiveness and the HCV viral load. However, the
data obtained from these studies remain controversial. The aim of this study was 
to investigate the genomic heterogeneity of the PePHD and the ISDR in patients
with genotype 3a and how this impacts HCV replication and the response to IFN
therapy. Twenty-one male patients infected with HCV genotype 3a were studied. The
PePHD was well conserved, and mutations were found in only one amino acid
position in two patients. Patients with three or more mutations in the ISDR had
lower viral loads than those with fewer than two mutations (192.2<U+2009>±<U+2009>176.7 vs.
1279.4<U+2009>±<U+2009>997.6<U+2009>KIU/ml, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0277). Ten (71.4%) of 14 patients achieved a
sustained virological response to IFN therapy. No specific amino acid
substitutions in the PePHD and the ISDR were associated with IFN responsiveness; 
however, the number of mutations in the ISDR was significantly associated with
the HCV viral load. The findings from this study suggest that the ISDR plays an
important role in regulating viral replication in patients infected with HCV
genotype 3a.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21837788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Neurosci Res. 2011 Oct;89(10):1586-95. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22693. Epub 2011 Jun
17.

A deregulated integrated stress response promotes interferon-<U+03B3>-induced
medulloblastoma.

Lin W(1), Lin Y, Li J, Harding HP, Ron D, Jamison S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of South Alabama
College of Medicine, Mobile, Alabama, USA. wlin@usouthal.edu

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress activates pancreatic ER kinase (PERK), which
coordinates an adaptive program known as the integrated stress response (ISR) by 
phosphorylating translation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a). There is evidence that 
the ISR is involved in tumor development. Recent studies also show that the ISR
stimulates the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A), a
master regulator of angiogenesis. Our previous studies have demonstrated that
enforced expression of interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN<U+03B3>) in the central nervous system during
development induces sonic hedgehog expression and leads to cerebellar dysplasia
or medulloblastoma. Here we report that PERK was activated in cerebellar
dysplasia and medulloblastoma in IFN<U+03B3>-expressing mice. We found that inactivation
of the growth arrest and DNA damage 34 (GADD34) gene, encoding the
stress-inducible regulatory subunit of a phosphatase complex that
dephosphorylates eIF2a, enhanced ISR signaling and facilitated medulloblastoma
formation in IFN<U+03B3>-expressing mice. Moreover, we found that the induction of
VEGF-A and enhanced angiogenesis were associated with medulloblastoma formation
in IFN<U+03B3>-expressing mice on the GADD34 mutation background. Thus, our data provide
genetic evidence that the ISR facilitates medulloblastoma development.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21688289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Virol J. 2011 May 5;8:204. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-8-204.

Positional effect of phosphorylation sites 266 and 267 in the cytoplasmic domain 
of the E2 protein of hepatitis C virus 3a genotype: interferon resistance
analysis via sequence alignment.

Rafique S(1), Idrees M, Ilyas M, Hussain A, Ali M, Ali L, Butt S, Afzal S, Ur
Rehman I, Saleem S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology & Molecular Diagnostics, National Centre of
Excellence in Molecular Biology, Thokar Niaz Baig Lahore-53700, University of the
Punjab Lahore, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Interferon is well thought-out as the key defence against all
infections including HCV. The only treatment for HCV infection is pegylated
interferon alpha (IFN-a) but unluckily more than half of the infected individuals
do not act in response to the cure and become chronic HCV carriers. The mechanism
how HCV induce interferon resistance is still elusive. It is recently reported
that HCV envelope protein 2 interacts with PKR which is the interferon-inducible 
protein kinase and which in turn blocks the activity of its target molecule
called eukaryotic initiation factor elF2. Sequence analysis of Envelope protein
reveals it contains a domain homologous to phosphorylation sites of PKR andthe
translation initiation factor eIF2alpha. Envelope protein competes for
phosphorylation with PKR. Inhibition of kinase activity of PKR is postulated as a
mechanism of to interferon (IFN) resistance.
RESULTS: Present study involves the insilico investigation of possible role of
potential phosphorylation in envelope 2 protein of 3a genotype in interferon
resistance. Envelope protein coding genes were isolated from local HCV isolates, 
cloned and sequenced. Phylogenetic analysis was done and tertiary structure of
envelope gene was predicted. Visualization of phosphorylation in tertiary
structure reveals that residue 266 and 267 of envelope gene 2 are surface exposed
and their phosphorylation may compete with the phosphorylation of PKR protein and
possibly involved in mediating Interferon Resistance.
CONCLUSION: A hybrid in-silico and wet laboratory approach of motif prediction,
evolutionary and structural analysis has pointed out serine 266 and 267 of the
HCV E2 gene as a hopeful claimant for the serine phosphorylation. Recognition of 
these nucleotide variations may assist to propose genotype precise therapy to
avoid and resolve HCV infections.

PMCID: PMC3098807
PMID: 21545731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Exp Mol Med. 2010 Dec 31;42(12):811-22.

Baicalein protects HT22 murine hippocampal neuronal cells against endoplasmic
reticulum stress-induced apoptosis through inhibition of reactive oxygen species 
production and CHOP induction.

Choi JH(1), Choi AY, Yoon H, Choe W, Yoon KS, Ha J, Yeo EJ, Kang I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Medical 
Science and Engineering Research Center for Bioreaction to Reactive Oxygen
Species, Biomedical Science Institute, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701,
Korea.

Baicalein is one of the major flavonoids in Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi and
possesses various effects, including cytoprotection and anti-inflammation.
Because endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been implicated in
neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and
cerebral ischemia, we investigated the effects of baicalein on apoptotic death of
HT22 mouse hippocampal neuronal cells induced by thapsigargin (TG) and brefeldin 
A (BFA), two representative ER stress inducers. Apoptosis, reactive oxygen
species (ROS) production, and mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) were
measured by flow cytometry. Expression level and phosphorylation status of ER
stress-associated proteins and activation and cleavage of apoptosis-associated
proteins were analyzed by Western blot. Baicalein reduced TG- and BFA-induced
apoptosis of HT22 cells and activation and cleavage of apoptosis-associated
proteins, such as caspase-12 and -3 and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Baicalein
also reduced the TG- and BFA-induced expression of ER stress-associated proteins,
including C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) and glucose-regulated protein 78, the
cleavage of X-box binding protein-1 and activating transcription factor 6a, and
the phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor-2a and mitogen-activated
protein kinases, such as p38, JNK, and ERK. Knock-down of CHOP expression by
siRNA transfection and specific inhibitors of p38 (SB203580), JNK (SP600125), and
ERK (PD98059) as well as anti-oxidant (N-acetylcysteine) reduced TG- or
BFA-induced cell death. Baicalein also reduced TG- and BFA-induced ROS
accumulation and MMP reduction. Taken together, these results suggest that
baicalein could protect HT22 neuronal cells against ER stress-induced apoptosis
by reducing CHOP induction as well as ROS accumulation and mitochondrial damage.

PMCID: PMC3015155
PMID: 20959717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Free Radic Biol Med. 2010 Dec 15;49(12):2068-77. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.10.686. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

Cardiac-specific overexpression of catalase attenuates paraquat-induced
myocardial geometric and contractile alteration: role of ER stress.

Ge W(1), Zhang Y, Han X, Ren J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.

Erratum in
    Free Radic Biol Med. 2011 Jan 1;50(1):217. Ge, We [corrected to Ge, Wei].

Paraquat, a quaternary nitrogen herbicide, is a highly toxic pro-oxidant that
causes multiorgan failure including that of the heart via generation of reactive 
oxygen species, although the underlying mechanism has not been well elucidated.
This study examined the influence of cardiac-specific overexpression of catalase,
an antioxidant detoxifying H(2)O(2), on paraquat-induced myocardial geometric and
functional alterations, with a focus on ER stress. FVB and catalase transgenic
mice were administered paraquat for 48h. Myocardial geometry, contractile
function, apoptosis, and ER stress were evaluated using echocardiography, edge
detection, caspase-3 activity, and immunoblotting. Our results revealed that
paraquat treatment significantly enlarged left ventricular (LV) end diastolic and
systolic diameters; increased LV mass and resting myocyte length; reduced
fractional shortening, cardiomyocyte peak shortening, and maximal velocity of
shortening/relengthening; and prolonged relengthening duration in the FVB group. 
Whereas the catalase transgene itself did not alter myocardial geometry and
function, it mitigated or significantly attenuated paraquat-elicited myocardial
geometric and functional changes. Paraquat promoted overt apoptosis and ER stress
as evidenced by increased caspase-3 activity, apoptosis, and ER stress markers
including Bax, Bcl-2, GADD153, calregulin, and phosphorylated JNK, IRE1a, and
eIF2a; all were ablated by the catalase transgene. Paraquat-induced cardiomyocyte
dysfunction was mitigated by the ER stress inhibitor tauroursodeoxycholic acid.
Moreover, the JNK inhibitor SP600125 reversed paraquat-induced ER stress as
evidenced by enhanced GADD153 and IRE1a phosphorylation. Taken together, these
data revealed that catalase may rescue paraquat-induced myocardial geometric and 
functional alteration possibly by alleviating JNK-mediated ER stress.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3005836
PMID: 20937379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 5;5(8):e11925. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011925.

Calcineurin interacts with PERK and dephosphorylates calnexin to relieve ER
stress in mammals and frogs.

Bollo M(1), Paredes RM, Holstein D, Zheleznova N, Camacho P, Lechleiter JD.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigación Médica Mercedes y Martín Ferreyra (INIMEC CONICET),
Córdoba, Argentina.

BACKGROUND: The accumulation of misfolded proteins within the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) triggers a cellular process known as the Unfolded Protein Response
(UPR). One of the earliest responses is the attenuation of protein translation.
Little is known about the role that Ca2+ mobilization plays in the early UPR.
Work from our group has shown that cytosolic phosphorylation of calnexin (CLNX)
controls Ca2+ uptake into the ER via the sarco-endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase 
(SERCA) 2b.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we demonstrate that calcineurin (CN), a
Ca2+ dependent phosphatase, associates with the (PKR)-like ER kinase (PERK), and 
promotes PERK auto-phosphorylation. This association, in turn, increases the
phosphorylation level of eukaryotic initiation factor-2 alpha (eIF2-alpha) and
attenuates protein translation. Data supporting these conclusions were obtained
from co-immunoprecipitations, pull-down assays, in-vitro kinase assays, siRNA
treatments and [35S]-methionine incorporation measurements. The interaction of CN
with PERK was facilitated at elevated cytosolic Ca2+ concentrations and involved 
the cytosolic domain of PERK. CN levels were rapidly increased by ER stressors,
which could be blocked by siRNA treatments for CN-Aalpha in cultured astrocytes. 
Downregulation of CN blocked subsequent ER-stress-induced increases in
phosphorylated elF2-alpha. CN knockdown in Xenopus oocytes predisposed them to
induction of apoptosis. We also found that CLNX was dephosphorylated by CN when
Ca2+ increased. These data were obtained from [gamma32P]-CLNX
immunoprecipitations and Ca2+ imaging measurements. CLNX was dephosphorylated
when Xenopus oocytes were treated with ER stressors. Dephosphorylation was
pharmacologically blocked by treatment with CN inhibitors. Finally, evidence is
presented that PERK phosphorylates CN-A at low resting levels of Ca2+. We further
show that phosphorylated CN-A exhibits decreased phosphatase activity, consistent
with this regulatory mechanism being shut down as ER homeostasis is
re-established.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data suggest two new complementary roles for CN in 
the regulation of the early UPR. First, CN binding to PERK enhances inhibition of
protein translation to allow the cell time to recover. The induction of the early
UPR, as indicated by increased P-elF2alpha, is critically dependent on a
translational increase in CN-Aalpha. Second, CN dephosphorylates CLNX and likely 
removes inhibition of SERCA2b activity, which would aid the rapid restoration of 
ER Ca2+ homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2916823
PMID: 20700529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cell Death Differ. 2011 Jan;18(1):133-44. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2010.82. Epub 2010 Jul
9.

The TSC1 and TSC2 tumor suppressors are required for proper ER stress response
and protect cells from ER stress-induced apoptosis.

Kang YJ(1), Lu MK, Guan KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Moores Cancer Center, University of California 
at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC)1 and TSC2 are tumor suppressors that inhibit
cell growth and mutation of either gene causes benign tumors in multiple tissues.
The TSC1 and TSC2 gene products form a functional complex that has
GTPase-activating protein (GAP) activity toward Ras homolog enriched in brain
(Rheb) to inhibit mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1), which is
constitutively activated in TSC mutant tumors. We found that cells with mutation 
in either TSC1 or TSC2 are hypersensitive to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
and undergo apoptosis. Although the TSC mutant cells show elevated eIF2a
phosphorylation, an early ER stress response marker, at both basal and induced
conditions, induction of other ER stress response markers, including ATF4, ATF6
and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), is severely compromised. The defects in ER
stress response are restored by raptor knockdown but not by rapamycin treatment
in the TSC mutant cells, indicating that a rapamycin-insensitive mTORC function
is responsible for the defects in ER stress response. Consistently, activation of
Rheb sensitizes cells to ER stress. Our data show an important role of TSC1/TSC2 
and Rheb in unfolded protein response and cell survival. We speculate that an
important physiological function of the TSC1/2 tumor suppressors is to protect
cells from harmful conditions. These observations indicate a potential
therapeutic application of using ER stress agents to selectively kill TSC1 or
TSC2 mutant cells for TSC treatment.

PMCID: PMC3131877
PMID: 20616807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Neurosci. 2010 May 26;30(21):7358-68. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5358-09.2010.

Activity-dependent augmentation of spontaneous neurotransmission during
endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Nosyreva E(1), Kavalali ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9111, USA.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an essential cellular compartment responsible
for Ca(2+) sequestration, signaling, protein translation, folding as well as
transport. Several acute and chronic disease conditions impair ER function
leading to ER stress. To study the impact of ER stress on synaptic transmission
we applied tunicamycin (TM) or thapsigargin (TG) to hippocampal neurons, which
triggered sustained elevation of key ER stress markers. We monitored evoked and
spontaneous neurotransmission during 4 d of TM or TG treatment and detected only 
a 20% increase in paired pulse depression suggesting an increase in
neurotransmitter release probability. However, the treatments did not
significantly affect the number of active synapses or the size of the total
recycling vesicle pool as measured by uptake and release of styryl dye FM1-43. In
contrast, under the same conditions, we observed a dramatic fourfold increase in 
spontaneous excitatory transmission, which could be reversed by chronic treatment
with the NMDA receptor blocker AP-5 or by treatment with salubrinal, a selective 
inhibitor of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2alpha)
dephosphorylation. Furthermore, ER stress caused NMDA receptor-dependent
suppression of eukaryotic elongation factor-2 (eEF2) phosphorylation thus
reversing downstream signaling mediated by spontaneous release. Together, these
findings suggest that chronic ER stress augments spontaneous excitatory
neurotransmission and reverses its downstream signaling in a NMDA
receptor-dependent manner, which may contribute to neuronal circuitry
abnormalities that precede synapse degeneration in several neurological
disorders.

PMCID: PMC2892630
PMID: 20505103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2010 Sep;31(8):1418-23. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A2108. Epub 2010
Apr 29.

Clinical and neuroimaging findings of Cree leukodystrophy: a retrospective case
series.

Harder S(1), Gourgaris A, Frangou E, Hopp K, Huntsman R, Lowry N, Seshia S,
Lemire E, Robinson C, Tynan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Loma Linda University Medical Center, Loma Linda, CA,
USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: CLD is a rapidly progressive and invariably fatal
neurodegenerative disorder. We describe clinical and neuroimaging findings in 5
infants with CLD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Retrospective review of medical records of infants with
CLD from the past 11 years at our institution was performed. Relevant clinical
and demographic data were recorded. Specific attention was directed toward
postmortem examination findings and genetic testing. CT and MR imaging results
were reviewed.
RESULTS: Five Cree infants were diagnosed with CLD. CT demonstrated bilateral
symmetric hypoattenuation of the white matter and globus pallidus. MR imaging
demonstrated corresponding T2 hyperintensity in these regions and abnormal signal
intensity in the thalami and substantia nigra. Symmetric restricted diffusion in 
the deep white matter was seen. MRS demonstrated decreased NAA, elevated choline,
and the presence of lactate. Postmortem examination in 1 infant showed
corresponding poor myelination in the brain stem, cerebellum, deep gray
structures, and the cerebral hemispheres. Genetic testing in 2 infants revealed
homozygous mutations in the eIF2B5 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Neuroimaging in CLD is striking and is an important tool in
diagnosing CLD. Extensive white matter involvement as well as involvement of the 
globus pallidus and patchy involvement of the thalami and substantia nigra are
characteristic. MRS findings are compatible with destruction of normal brain
parenchyma with evidence of anaerobic metabolism in the regions of demyelination.
Clinical suspicion of VWM in a Native American infant from this region should
prompt the consideration of CLD with appropriate imaging work-up and genetic
testing.

PMID: 20430848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Hepatol. 2010 Apr;52(4):586-93. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.01.003. Epub 2010 Feb 
13.

Palmitoleate attenuates palmitate-induced Bim and PUMA up-regulation and
hepatocyte lipoapoptosis.

Akazawa Y(1), Cazanave S, Mott JL, Elmi N, Bronk SF, Kohno S, Charlton MR, Gores 
GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Saturated free fatty acids induce hepatocyte lipoapoptosis.
This lipotoxicity involves an endoplasmic reticulum stress response, activation
of JNK, and altered expression and function of Bcl-2 proteins. The
mono-unsaturated free fatty acid palmitoleate is an adipose-derived lipokine
which suppresses free fatty acid-mediated lipotoxicity by unclear mechanisms.
Herein we examined the mechanisms responsible for cytoprotection.
METHODS: We employed isolated human and mouse primary hepatocytes, and the Huh-7 
and Hep 3B cell lines for these studies. Cells were incubated in presence and
absence of palmitate (16:0), stearate (18:0), and or palmitoleate (16:1, n-7).
RESULTS: Palmitoleate significantly reduced lipoapoptosis by palmitate or
stearate in both primary cells and cell lines. Palmitoleate accentuated
palmitate-induced steatosis in Huh-7 cells excluding inhibition of steatosis as a
mechanism for reduced apoptosis. Palmitoleate inhibited palmitate induction of
the endoplasmic reticulum stress response as demonstrated by reductions in CHOP
expression, eIF2-alpha phosphorylation, XBP-1 splicing, and JNK activation.
Palmitate increased expression of the BH3-only proteins PUMA and Bim, which was
attenuated by palmitoleate. Consistent with its inhibition of PUMA and Bim
induction, palmitoleate prevented activation of the downstream death mediator
Bax.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest palmitoleate inhibits lipoapoptosis by blocking
endoplasmic reticulum stress-associated increases of the BH3-only proteins Bim
and PUMA.

PMCID: PMC2847010
PMID: 20206402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Br J Pharmacol. 2010 Jan 1;159(2):428-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2009.00544.x. 
Epub 2009 Dec 15.

A unique modulator of endoplasmic reticulum stress-signalling pathways: the novel
pharmacological properties of amiloride in glial cells.

Hosoi T(1), Kume A, Otani K, Oba T, Ozawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Hiroshima University, Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Stress on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) can trigger
rescuer responses such as the unfolded protein response (UPR). However,
pharmacological modulators of these ER-regulated stress responses are not well
understood. In the present study, we found that amiloride, a potassium-sparing
diuretic, has unique properties relating to such stress.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: We treated mouse primary cultured glial cells with
amiloride, in the absence and presence of the ER stress-inducing reagents
tunicamycin (Tm) or dithiothreitol, and measured UPR and ER stress-induced cell
death. IRE1alpha phosphorylation, eIF2alpha phosphorylation, X-box binding
protein 1 (XBP1) splicing, glucose regulated protein 78 (GRP78) and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) expression by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting were used to assess 
UPR and lactate dehydrogenase activity was determined to measure ER
stress-induced cell death.
KEY RESULTS: Amiloride completely inhibited ER stress-induced activation of
IRE1alpha, an ER-localized stress sensor protein, splicing of XBP1, and
subsequent expression of GRP78 at the mRNA and protein levels. ER stress induces 
the phosphorylation of eIF2alpha, leading to the expression of CHOP or an
attenuation of translation in cells. Surprisingly, treatment with amiloride alone
markedly promoted the phosphorylation but actually inhibited ER stress-induced
CHOP expression. Finally, we found that amiloride (200 microM) synergistically
enhanced ER stress-induced cell death, which was mediated through caspases. On
the other hand, a low dose of amiloride (20 microM) significantly prevented
Tm-induced cell death.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: These results suggest that amiloride can modulate
UPR. They also suggest amiloride to be an important pharmacological agent and
provide basic information for understanding and preventing ER stress-related
diseases.

PMCID: PMC2825364
PMID: 20015086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Int J Cancer. 2010 May 15;126(10):2268-81. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25102.

Ras inhibits endoplasmic reticulum stress in human cancer cells with amplified
Myc.

Yaari-Stark S(1), Shaked M, Nevo-Caspi Y, Jacob-Hircsh J, Shamir R, Rechavi G,
Kloog Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, The George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences,
Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.

In neuroblastoma LAN-1 cells harboring an amplified MycN gene, disruption of
cooperation between Ras and MycN proteins by the Ras inhibitor
farnesylthiosalicylic acid (FTS, Salirasib) reportedly arrests cell growth. Our
aim was to establish whether this is a general phenomenon. We examined the
effects of FTS on gene-expression profiles, growth and death of NCIH929 myeloma
cells and K562 leukemia cells, which-like LAN-1 cells-exhibit Myc gene
amplification and harbor active Ras. Under specified conditions, FTS reduced Ras 
and Myc and induced cell growth arrest and death in all Myc-amplified cell lines 
but not in SHEP, a neuroblastoma cell line without Myc gene amplification.
Gene-expression analysis revealed a common pattern of FTS-induced endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, known as the unfolded protein response (UPR), in
Myc-amplified cells, but not in SHEP. Thus, Ras negatively regulates ER stress in
cells with amplified Myc. ER stress was also inducible by dominant-negative
(DN)-Ras or shRNA to Ras isoforms, all of which induced an increase in BIP (the
master regulator of ER stress) and its downstream targets Nrf2 and eIF2alpha,
both regulated by active p-PERK. FTS also induced an increase in p-PERK, while
small interfering RNA to PERK reduced Nrf2 and ATF4 and rescued cells from
FTS-induced death. BIP and its downstream targets were also increased by
inhibitors of MAPK p38 and MEK. Ras, acting through MAPK p38 and MEK, negatively 
regulates the ER stress cascades BIP/PERK/Nrf2 and eIF2alpha/ATF4/ATF3. These
findings can explain the Ras-dependent protection of Myc-amplified cells from ER 
stress-associated death.

PMID: 19998334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Adv Gerontol. 2009;22(2):223-7.

[The mechanism of phenoptosis: I. Age-dependent decrease of the overall rate of
protein synthesis is caused by the programmed attenuation of bio-energetics].

[Article in Russian]

Trubitsyn AG.

The age-dependent degradation of all vital processes of an organism can be result
of influences of destructive factors (the stochastic mechanism of aging), or
effect of realizations of the genetic program (phenoptosis). The stochastic
free-radical theory of aging dominating now contradicts the set of empirical
data, and the semicentenial attempts to create the means to slow down aging did
not give any practical results. It makes obvious that the stochastic mechanism of
aging is incorrect. At the same time, the alternative mechanism of the programmed
aging is not developed yet but preconditions for it development have already been
created. It is shown that the genes controlling process of aging exist (contrary 
to the customary opinion) and the increase in the level of damaged macromolecules
(basic postulate of the free-radical theory) can be explained by programmed
attenuation of bio-energetics. As the bio-energetics is a driving force of all
vital processes, decrease of its level is capable to cause degradation of all
functions of an organism. However to transform this postulate into a basis of the
theory of phenoptosis it is necessary to show, that attenuation of bio-energetics
predetermines such fundamental processes accompanying aging as decrease of the
overall rate of protein biosynthesis, restriction of cellular proliferations
(Hayflick limit), loss of telomeres etc. This article is the first step in this
direction: the natural mechanism of interaction of overall rate of protein
synthesis with a level of cellular bio-energetics is shown. This is built-in into
the translation machine and based on dependence of recirculation rate of
eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (elF2) from ATP/ADP value that is created by
mitochondrial bio-energetic machine.

PMID: 19947384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Neurosci Res. 2010 Jan;66(1):124-30. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2009.10.005. Epub 2009
Oct 14.

Endogenous catecholamine enhances the dysfunction of unfolded protein response
and alpha-synuclein oligomerization in PC12 cells overexpressing human
alpha-synuclein.

Ito S(1), Nakaso K, Imamura K, Takeshima T, Nakashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurological Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, Tottori University, Japan. s-itou@med.tottori-u.ac.jp

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the
selective loss of dopaminergic neurons and the presence of Lewy bodies.
alpha-Synuclein is a major component of Lewy bodies. Recently, many studies have 
focused on the interaction between alpha-synuclein and catecholamine in the
pathogenesis of PD. However, no detailed relationship between cathecholamine and 
alpha-synuclein cytotoxicity has been elucidated. Therefore, this study
established PC12 cell lines which overexpress human alpha-synuclein in a
tetracycline-inducible manner. The overexpression of human alpha-synuclein
increased the number of apoptotic cells in a long-term culture. Moreover, human
alpha-synuclein expressing PC12 cells demonstrated an increased vulnerability to 
several stressors in a short culture period. Thapsigargin increased the SDS
soluble oligomers of alpha-synuclein associated with catecholamine-quinone. The
unfolded protein response (UPR) study showed that thapsigargin increased
eIF2alpha phosphorylation and nuclear GADD153/CHOP induction under
alpha-synuclein overexpressed conditions. The activities of the ATF6alpha and
IRE1alpha pathways decreased. These findings suggest that an overexpression of
alpha-synuclein partly inactivates the UPR. alpha-Methyltyrosine inhibited the
dysfunction of the UPR caused by an overexpression of human alpha-synuclein.
Therefore, these findings suggest that the coexistence of human alpha-synuclein
with catecholamine enhances the endoplasmic reticulum stress-related toxicity in 
PD pathogenesis.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and the Japan Neuroscience Society. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 19835916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Neurobiol Dis. 2009 May;34(2):357-65. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.02.005. Epub 2009
Feb 20.

Inhibition of mitochondrial function induces an integrated stress response in
oligodendroglia.

Silva JM(1), Wong A, Carelli V, Cortopassi GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of California, Davis, 95616,
USA.

Maternal inheritance of a pathogenic point mutation within complex I of the
mitochondrial genome causes Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON), resulting
in the neurodegeneration and demyelination of the optic nerve. The integrated
stress response (ISR), a signaling pathway that responds to various stresses by
activating a common set of genes, has been linked to both mitochondrial defects
and demyelinating diseases. Therefore, we wanted to determine whether
mitochondrial dysfunction induced by complex I inhibition with rotenone can
activate the ISR, specifically by the ER kinase PERK, in oligodendroglial cells. 
Our complex I-deficient oligodendroglial model reproduced similar biochemical
defects as in LHON by decreasing ATP synthesis and ATP levels. The same doses of 
rotenone that reduced ATP production also induced dose-dependent increases in
PERK and eIF2alpha phosphorylation as well as activated the ISR stress genes,
ATF4 and CHOP. In addition, complex I inhibition at these same concentrations
induced a PERK-dependent activation of the cell death kinase, JNK, and inhibited 
oligodendroglial proliferation. Taken together, our results demonstrate that
activation of the ISR may be one example of mitochondrial retrograde signaling in
response to complex I deficiency and we suggest that this response mechanism may 
be relevant to the pathophysiology of LHON.

PMID: 19233273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Neuron. 2008 Dec 26;60(6):988-1009. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.10.047.

Phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor eIF2alpha increases BACE1
levels and promotes amyloidogenesis.

O'Connor T(1), Sadleir KR, Maus E, Velliquette RA, Zhao J, Cole SL, Eimer WA,
Hitt B, Bembinster LA, Lammich S, Lichtenthaler SF, Hébert SS, De Strooper B,
Haass C, Bennett DA, Vassar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2008 Dec 26;60(6):941-3.

beta-site APP cleaving enzyme-1 (BACE1), the rate-limiting enzyme for
beta-amyloid (Abeta) production, is elevated in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here,
we show that energy deprivation induces phosphorylation of the translation
initiation factor eIF2alpha (eIF2alpha-P), which increases the translation of
BACE1. Salubrinal, an inhibitor of eIF2alpha-P phosphatase PP1c, directly
increases BACE1 and elevates Abeta production in primary neurons. Preventing
eIF2alpha phosphorylation by transfection with constitutively active PP1c
regulatory subunit, dominant-negative eIF2alpha kinase PERK, or PERK inhibitor
P58(IPK) blocks the energy-deprivation-induced BACE1 increase. Furthermore,
chronic treatment of aged Tg2576 mice with energy inhibitors increases levels of 
eIF2alpha-P, BACE1, Abeta, and amyloid plaques. Importantly, eIF2alpha-P and
BACE1 are elevated in aggressive plaque-forming 5XFAD transgenic mice, and BACE1,
eIF2alpha-P, and amyloid load are correlated in humans with AD. These results
strongly suggest that eIF2alpha phosphorylation increases BACE1 levels and causes
Abeta overproduction, which could be an early, initiating molecular mechanism in 
sporadic AD.

PMCID: PMC2667382
PMID: 19109907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Cardiovasc Res. 2009 Jan 1;81(1):148-58. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvn262. Epub 2008 Sep
24.

Salvianolic acid B protects human endothelial cells from oxidative stress damage:
a possible protective role of glucose-regulated protein 78 induction.

Wu HL(1), Li YH, Lin YH, Wang R, Li YB, Tie L, Song QL, Guo DA, Yu HM, Li XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Health Science
Center, Peking University, Xueyuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100083, PR
China.

AIMS: The purposes of the present study were to both evaluate the protective
effects of Salvianolic acid B (Sal B) and to determine the possible molecular
mechanisms by which Sal B protects endothelial cells from damage caused by
oxidative stress.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Pretreatment with Sal B markedly attenuated H(2)O(2)-induced
viability loss, lactate dehydrogenase leakage and apoptosis in human umbilical
vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). The mechanism of Sal B protection was studied
using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis coupled with hybrid quadrupole
time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Database searching implicated that
glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), a central regulator for endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, was up-regulated in Sal B-exposed HUVECs. GRP78 expression
regulation was confirmed by western blot and RT-PCR (reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction) analyses. Additionally, GRP94, which
shares significant sequence homology with GRP78, was also up-regulated in Sal
B-treated cells. Sal B caused pancreatic ER kinase (PKR)-like ER kinase (PERK)
activation followed by the phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 2 alpha (eIF2 alpha) and the expression of activating transcription factor
4 (ATF4). Knockdown of endogenous ATF4 expression partially repressed Sal
B-induced GRP78 induction. Further investigation showed that ATF6 was also
activated by Sal B. Knockdown of GRP78 by siRNA significantly reduced the
protective effects of Sal B.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that Sal B induces the expression of GRP78 by
activating ATF6 and the PERK-eIF2 alpha-ATF4 pathway. Furthermore, up-regulation 
of GRP78 by Sal B may play an important role in protecting human endothelial
cells from oxidative stress-induced cellular damage.

PMID: 18815184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Exp Mol Pathol. 2008 Jun;84(3):226-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2008.04.004. Epub 2008
May 7.

E74-like factor 2 transactivates valosin-containing protein gene, a gene involved
in cancer growth.

Qiu Y(1), Morii E, Zhang B, Tomita Y, Aozasa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, 
Osaka, Japan.

Enhanced expression of valosin-containing protein (VCP) correlates with
invasiveness and metastatic potential of cancer cells; therefore its
transcriptional regulation could be a new target for cancer therapy. Here, the
mechanism for transactivation of VCP promoter by E74-like factor 2 (ELF2), a
transcription factor which enhances VCP transcription, was investigated. There
was a highly conserved region among species in VCP promoter with one proven motif
for ELF2 binding. However, the mutation at this motif did not obviously change
the promoter activity. Further survey revealed another ELF2 binding motif in the 
upstream of the conserved region. The promoter activity was modestly reduced when
this upstream motif was mutated, and completely abolished when both upstream and 
downstream motifs were mutated. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that
ELF2 bound both upstream and downstream motifs. These findings indicate that ELF2
transactivates VCP promoter through binding to two motifs, with a predominant
contribution of the upstream one.

PMID: 18544453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Toxicol Sci. 2008 Mar;102(1):1-2. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfm299.

Nonanimal alternatives for skin sensitization: a step forward?

Basketter DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)St John's Institute of Dermatology, St Thomas Hospital, London SE1 7EH, UK.
david.basketter@ukonline.co.uk

Comment in
    Toxicol Sci. 2008 Dec;106(2):572-4; author reply 575.

Comment on
    Toxicol Sci. 2008 Mar;102(1):110-9.

PMID: 18256044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Aug 28;87(32):2245-8.

[Full-length cloning of a novel gene, ELF2C, related to familial acute
myelogenous leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang CY(1), Wang SY, Lin X, Zhang YW, Li JG.

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Institute of Hematology, Department of Hematology, Union Hospital,
Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou 350001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To clone the full-length cDNA of a novel gene of familial acute
myelogenous leukemia and to explain the molecular mechanism of the disease at the
gene level.
METHODS: Based on a EST sequence (zywb4) from a subtractive cDNA library of
specially or differentially expressed genes constructed in familial acute
myelogenous leukemia, electronic cDNA cloning and SMART-rapid amplification of
cDNA ends (SMART-RACE) were used to clone the full-length cDNA of a novel
associated gene of familial acute myelogenous leukemia.
RESULTS: One sequence of 2257 bp was obtained, which obeyed Kozak rules, and
contained an open reading frame (ORF) and a polyA tail. BLAST analysis showed
that it may be a novel gene. The new sequence was submitted to GenBank with the
accession number: DQ359746 and designated as ELF2C.
CONCLUSION: A full- length cDNA of a novel gene (ELF2C) related to familial acute
myelogenous leukemia is obtained, which is helpful to further investigation of
its function in familial acute myelogenous leukemia.

PMID: 18001542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Virology. 2008 Feb 5;371(1):71-85. Epub 2007 Oct 22.

Development of plaque assays for hepatitis C virus-JFH1 strain and isolation of
mutants with enhanced cytopathogenicity and replication capacity.

Sekine-Osajima Y(1), Sakamoto N, Mishima K, Nakagawa M, Itsui Y, Tasaka M,
Nishimura-Sakurai Y, Chen CH, Kanai T, Tsuchiya K, Wakita T, Enomoto N, Watanabe 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo, Japan.

HCV culture in vitro results in massive cell death, which suggests the presence
of HCV-induced cytopathic effects. Therefore, we investigated its mechanisms and 
viral nucleotide sequences involved in this effect using HCV-JFH1 cell culture
and a newly developed HCV plaque assay technique. The plaque assay developed
cytopathic plaques, depending on the titer of the inoculum. In the virus-infected
cells, the ER stress markers, GRP78 and phosphorylated eIF2-alpha, were
overexpressed. Cells in the plaques were strongly positive for an apoptosis
marker, annexin V. Isolated virus subclones from individual plaque showed greater
replication efficiency and cytopathogenicity than the parental virus. The
plaque-purified virus had 9 amino acid substitutions, of which 5 were clustered
in the C terminal of the NS5B region. Taken together, the cytopathic effect of
HCV infection involves ER-stress-induced apoptotic cell death. Certain HCV
genomic structures may determine the viral replication capacity and
cytopathogenicity.

PMID: 17949770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Toxicol Sci. 2008 Mar;102(1):110-9. Epub 2007 Oct 11.

Skin sensitizers induce antioxidant response element dependent genes: application
to the in vitro testing of the sensitization potential of chemicals.

Natsch A(1), Emter R.

Author information: 
(1)Givaudan Schweiz AG, Ueberlandstrasse 138, CH-8600 Duebendorf, Switzerland.
andreas.natsch@givaudan.com

Comment in
    Toxicol Sci. 2008 Mar;102(1):1-2.
    Toxicol Sci. 2008 Dec;106(2):572-4; author reply 575.

Tests for skin sensitization are required prior to the market launch of new
cosmetic ingredients and in vitro tests are needed to replace the current animal 
tests. Protein reactivity is the common feature of skin sensitizers and it is a
crucial question whether a cellular in vitro assay can detect protein reactivity 
of diverse test chemicals. The signaling pathway involving the repressor protein 
Keap1 and the transcription factor nuclear factor-erythroid 2-related factor 2,
which binds to the antioxidant response element (ARE) in the promoter of many
phase II detoxification genes, is a potential cellular marker because Keap1 had
been shown to be covalently modified by electrophiles which leads to activation
of ARE-dependent genes. To evaluate whether this regulatory pathway can be used
to develop a predictive cellular in vitro test for sensitization, 96 different
chemicals of known skin sensitization potential were added to Hepa1C1C7 cells and
the induction of the ARE-regulated quinone reductase (QR) activity was
determined. In parallel, 102 chemicals were tested on the reporter cell line
AREc32, which contains an eightfold repeat of the ARE sequence upstream of a
luciferase gene. Among the strong/extreme skin sensitizers 14 out of 15 and 30
out of 34 moderate sensitizers induced the ARE-dependent luciferase activity and 
in many cases this response was paralleled by an induction of QR activity in
Hepa1C1C7 cells. Sixty percent of the weak sensitizers also induced luciferase
activity, and the overall accuracy of the assay was 83 percent. Only four of 30
tested nonsensitizers induced low levels of luciferase activity, indicating a
high specificity of the assay. Thus, measurement of the induction of this
signaling pathway provides an interesting in vitro test to screen for the skin
sensitization potential of novel chemicals.

PMID: 17932397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Methods Enzymol. 2007;429:163-83.

In vivo stabilization of preinitiation complexes by formaldehyde cross-linking.

Valásek L(1), Szamecz B, Hinnebusch AG, Nielsen KH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, AS CR, Prague, Czech Republic.

Translation initiation starts with the formation of the 43S preinitiation complex
(PIC) consisting of several soluble factors, including the ternary complex (TC;
elF2-GTP-Met-tRNA(i)(Met)), which associate with the small ribosomal subunit. In 
the next step, mRNA is recruited to form the 48S PIC and the entire machinery
starts scanning the 5' untranslated region of the mRNA until the AUG start codon 
is encountered. The most widely used method to separate 40S and 60S ribosomal
subunits from soluble factors, monosomes and polysomes, is sucrose density
centrifugation (SDC). Since PICs are intrinsically unstable complexes that cannot
withstand the forces imposed by SDC, a stabilization agent must be employed to
detect the association of factors with the 40S subunit after SDC. This was
initially achieved by adding heparin (a highly sulfated glycosaminoglycan)
directly to the breaking buffer of cells treated with cycloheximide (a
translation elongation inhibitor). However, the mechanism of stabilization is not
understood and, moreover, there are indications that the use of heparin may lead 
to artifactual factor associations that do not reflect the factor occupancy of
the 43S/48S PICs in the cell at the time of lysis. Therefore, we developed an
alternative method for PIC stabilization using formaldehyde (HCHO) to cross-link 
factors associated with 40S ribosomal subunits in vivo before the disruption of
the yeast cells. Results obtained using HCHO stabilization strongly indicate that
the factors detected on the 43S/48S PIC after SDC approximate a real-time in vivo
"snapshot" of the 43S/48S PIC composition. In this chapter, we will present the
protocol for HCHO cross-linking in detail and demonstrate the difference between 
heparin and HCHO stabilization procedures. In addition, different conditions for 
displaying the polysome profile or PIC analysis by SDC, used to address different
questions, will be outlined.

PMID: 17913623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Dev Cell. 2007 Sep;13(3):322-4.

Coping with stress: ATF6alpha takes the stage.

Bobrovnikova-Marjon E(1), Diehl JA.

Author information: 
(1)The Leonard and Madlyn Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University
of Pennsylvania Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. adiehl@mail.upenn.edu

Comment on
    Dev Cell. 2007 Sep;13(3):365-76.
    Dev Cell. 2007 Sep;13(3):351-64.

In this issue of Developmental Cell, two groups, Yamamoto et al. and Wu et al.,
describe the generation of mice with targeted deletion of the ATF6alpha gene.
While ATF6alpha is nonessential for embryonic and postnatal development, deletion
has a profound effect on the transcriptional program elicited by endoplasmic
reticulum stress, revealing a broader than anticipated role for ATF6 in this
signaling network.

PMID: 17765676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Neurol Res. 2007 Dec;29(8):767-71.

Increased ER stress during motor neuron degeneration in a transgenic mouse model 
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Nagata T(1), Ilieva H, Murakami T, Shiote M, Narai H, Ohta Y, Hayashi T, Shoji M,
Abe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry, Okayama
University, Japan. ktnagata@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which plays important roles in apoptosis, is
susceptible to oxidative stress. ER stress is also thought to be involved in the 
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. In this study, we investigated
whether ER stress is involved in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS) using the anterior part of the lumbar spinal cord of transgenic
mice carrying a mutation (G93A) in the superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene.
Western blot and immunohistochemical analyses demonstrated that the expressions
of p-PERK and p-eIF2alpha were increased in the microsome fraction (P3) of the
lumbar spinal cord at the pre-symptomatic age of 12 weeks (12W), while the
expression of activated caspase-12 was increased in the cytoplasmic fraction (S3)
of the lumbar spinal cord at both the pre-symptomatic age of 12W and the late
symptomatic age of 20W. In contrast, GRP78 did not show any increases in the
microsome fraction (P3) of the lumbar spinal cord at either the pre-symptomatic
or symptomatic ages. Thus, the present results strongly suggest that the balance 
between anti- and pro-apoptotic proteins related to ER stress is impaired from
the pre-symptomatic stage in this ALS mouse model, and that this imbalance may be
related to the pathogenesis of motor neuron degeneration in ALS.

PMID: 17672929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Leukemia. 2007 Jun;21(6):1232-8. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Complex MLL rearrangements in t(4;11) leukemia patients with absent AF4.MLL
fusion allele.

Kowarz E(1), Burmeister T, Lo Nigro L, Jansen MW, Delabesse E, Klingebiel T,
Dingermann T, Meyer C, Marschalek R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology, ZAFES, DCAL, JWG-University Frankfurt,
Biocenter, Frankfurt, Main, Germany.

The human mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene is frequently involved in genetic
rearrangements with more than 55 different translocation partner genes, all
associated with acute leukemia. Reciprocal chromosomal translocations generate
two MLL fusion alleles, where 5'- and 3'-portions of MLL are fused to gene
segments of given fusion partners. In case of t(4;11) patients, about 80% of all 
patients exhibit both reciprocal fusion alleles, MLL.AF4 and AF4.MLL,
respectively. By contrast, 20% of all t(4;11) patients seem to encode only the
MLL.AF4 fusion allele. Here, we analyzed these 'MLL.AF4(+)/AF4.MLL(-)' patients
at the genomic DNA level to unravel their genetic situation. Cryptic
translocations and three-way translocations were found in this group of t(4;11)
patients. Reciprocal MLL fusions with novel translocation partner genes, for
example NF-KB1 and RABGAP1L, were identified and actively transcribed in leukemic
cells. In other patients, the reciprocal 3'-MLL gene segment was fused
out-of-frame to PBX1, ELF2, DSCAML1 and FXYD6. The latter rearrangements caused
haploinsufficiency of genes that are normally expressed in hematopoietic cells.
Finally, patients were identified that encode only solitary 3'-MLL gene segments 
on the reciprocal allele. Based on these data, we propose that all t(4;11)
patients exhibit reciprocal MLL alleles, but due to the individual recombination 
events, provide different pathological disease mechanisms.

PMID: 17410185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 May 11;356(3):536-41. Epub 2007 Mar 9.

E74-like factor 2 regulates valosin-containing protein expression.

Zhang B(1), Tomita Y, Qiu Y, He J, Morii E, Noguchi S, Aozasa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, 
Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Enhanced expression of valosin-containing protein (VCP) correlates with invasion 
and metastasis of cancers. To clarify the transcription mechanism of VCP, human
and mouse genomic sequence was compared, revealing a 260 bp DNA sequence in the
5'-flanking region of VCP gene to be highly conserved between the two, in which
binding motif of E74-like factor 2/new Ets-related factor (ELF2/NERF) was
identified. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed binding of ELF2/NERF to
the 5'-flanking region of VCP gene. Knock-down of ELF2/NERF by siRNA decreased
expression level of VCP. Viability of cells under tumor necrosis factor-alpha
treatment significantly reduced in ELF2/NERF-knock-down breast cancer cell line. 
Immunohistochemical analysis on clinical breast cancer specimens showed a
correlation of nuclear ELF2/NERF expression with VCP expression and proliferative
activity of cells shown by Ki-67 immunohistochemistry. These findings indicate
that ELF2/NERF promotes VCP transcription and that ELF2/NERF-VCP pathway might be
important for cell survival and proliferation under cytokine stress.

PMID: 17368566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev. 2006;12(2):123-8.

Vanishing white matter disease: a review with focus on its genetics.

Pronk JC(1), van Kollenburg B, Scheper GC, van der Knaap MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter (VWM) is an autosomal recessive
brain disorder, most often with a childhood onset. Magnetic resonance imaging and
spectroscopy indicate that, with time, increasing amounts of cerebral white
matter vanish and are replaced by fluid. Autopsy confirms white matter
rarefaction and cystic degeneration. The process of localization and
identification of the first two genes related to VWM, EIF2B5 and EIF2B2, was
facilitated by two founder effects in the Dutch population. EIF2B5 and EIF2B2
encode the epsilon and beta subunits of translation initiation factor eIF2B. Soon
it was shown that mutations in all five eIF2B subunit genes can cause VWM. EIF2B 
is essential for the initiation of translation of RNA into protein and is
involved in regulation of the process, especially under stress conditions, which 
may explain the sensitivity to stress conditions observed in VWM patients. The
pathophysiology of the disease is still poorly understood.

PMID: 16807905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Apr 28;343(1):135-43. Epub 2006 Mar 3.

Absence of typical unfolded protein response in primary cultured cystic fibrosis 
airway epithelial cells.

Nanua S(1), Sajjan U, Keshavjee S, Hershenson MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0688, USA.

We examined whether the unfolded protein response is activated in cells
expressing incorrectly folded cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator. Airway epithelial cells from three control and three CF patients
homozygous for the deltaF508 mutation were tested. There were no differences in
protein expression of the pro-apoptotic factor C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) or
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperone binding Ig protein. Nor were there
differences in phosphorylation of protein kinase R-like ER kinase or eukaryotic
initiation factor-2alpha, or the splicing of X-box binding protein (XBP)-1.
However, CF cells showed increased mRNA expression of CHOP and XBP-1. A
proteasome inhibitor increased CHOP expression in CF cells, suggesting that
enhanced proteasome activation is responsible for the observed
post-transcriptional regulation. Finally, CF cells were resistant to apoptosis,
suggesting that post-transcriptional regulation of CHOP prevents apoptosis. While
CHOP and XBP-1 mRNA expression is increased in CF cells, the classic UPR is not
present.

PMID: 16530168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Trends Mol Med. 2005 Aug;11(8):347-50.

A new pharmacology--drugging stressed folding pathways.

Wiseman RL(1), Balch WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and The Skaggs Institute of Chemical Biology, The
Scripps Research Institute, 10550 N. Torrey Pines Rd, MB-6, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA.

Folding in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) must couple protein-synthesis pathways 
operating outside of the compartment with ER-assisted folding (ERAF) pathways in 
the lumen. Chaperone-mediated folding imbalances that are associated with
numerous misfolding diseases, including diabetes, trigger the unfolded-protein
response (UPR), using both transcriptional and translational pathways to correct 
the problem. Recent work suggests that small-molecule inhibitors could be useful 
to help rebalance protein synthesis with ERAF pathways through the ribosomal
initiating factor eIF2alpha. Reprogramming stress pathways with drugs provides a 
potential new approach for balancing ER-protein load with cellular-folding
capacity, thus correcting disease.

PMID: 16005683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 1;64(17):6091-100.

TEL2, an ETS factor expressed in human leukemia, regulates monocytic
differentiation of U937 Cells and blocks the inhibitory effect of TEL1 on
ras-induced cellular transformation.

Kawagoe H(1), Potter M, Ellis J, Grosveld GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

TEL2 is a member of the ETS family of transcription factors, which is highly
similar to TEL1/ETV6. It binds to DNA via the ETS domain and interacts with
itself or TEL1 via the pointed domain. The expression of TEL2 in normal and
leukemic hematopoietic cells suggests a role in hematopoietic development. In
this article, we describe the role of TEL2 in hematopoietic differentiation and
cellular transformation. Quantitative reverse transcription-PCR showed that the
expression of TEL2 mRNA was down-regulated during monocytic differentiation of
U937 and HL60 induced by 1,25-(OH)2 vitamin D3 and 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol
13-acetate, respectively. Overexpression of TEL2 in U937 cells inhibited
differentiation induced by vitamin D3. In contrast, overexpression of a TEL2
mutant lacking either the pointed domain or a functional ETS domain induced both 
differentiation of U937 cells and inhibited their growth in vitro and in vivo. In
addition, these mutants blocked TEL2-mediated transcriptional repression of a
synthetic promoter containing TEL2 binding sites. These data suggest that
dominant-negative inhibition of TEL2 might cause differentiation. Quantitative
reverse transcription-PCR demonstrated that TEL2 is expressed at higher level in 
some primary human leukemia samples than in normal bone marrow. Furthermore,
overexpression of TEL2 in NIH3T3-UCLA cells blocked the inhibitory effect of TEL1
on Ras-induced cellular transformation. These results suggest that TEL2 may play 
an important role in hematopoiesis and oncogenesis.

PMID: 15342392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Exp Dermatol. 2004 Sep;13(9):529-34.

Characterization of Ets-binding sequence of human transglutaminase 3 gene
promoter.

Kim CD(1), Seo EY, Sung YH, Kim HW, Seo YJ, Park JK, Lee JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, Chungnam National University,
640 Daesa-dong, Daejeon, 301-040, South Korea.

The Ets- and Sp1-transcription factors have been implicated in the epithelial
specific expression of transglutaminase 3 gene (TGM3) in vitro. By
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), the core motif of Ets-binding
sequence of TGM3 was determined as ACAGGAAT (-118 to -111 bp from transcriptional
start site). However, a sequence extending from -120 to +10 of TGM3 proximal
promoter region failed to induce the expression of CAT reporter in transfected
normal human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEKs). In contrast, a construct extending 
from -126 to +10 bp showed the highest expression of CAT gene, indicating the
presence of an important element(s) between -126 and -120 bp that affects TGM3
expression in NHEKs. To find the critical sequences in this promoter region, we
performed EMSA analysis with competitor oligonucleotides, in which the upstream
nucleotides of Ets core motif were mutated. The results showed that the mutation 
of A at -125 dramatically reduced the binding of Ets to its recognition sequence.
Transient transfection assay revealed that the mutation in this nucleotide
greatly diminished the expression of CAT reporter gene in NHEKs. Together, these 
results suggest that the upstream sequence of Ets core motif is critical for the 
expression of TGM3 in NHEKs cultured in vitro.

PMID: 15335352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Learn Mem. 2004 Jul-Aug;11(4):365-72. Epub 2004 Jul 14.

Synaptic plasticity and translation initiation.

Klann E(1), Antion MD, Banko JL, Hou L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. eklann@bcm.tmc.edu

It is widely accepted that protein synthesis, including local protein synthesis
at synapses, is required for several forms of synaptic plasticity. Local protein 
synthesis enables synapses to control synaptic strength independent of the cell
body via rapid protein production from pre-existing mRNA. Therefore, regulation
of translation initiation is likely to be intimately involved in modulating
synaptic strength. Our understanding of the translation-initiation process has
expanded greatly in recent years. In this review, we discuss various aspects of
translation initiation, as well as signaling pathways that might be involved in
coupling neurotransmitter and neurotrophin receptors to the translation machinery
during various forms of synaptic plasticity.

PMID: 15254214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Exp Cell Res. 2004 May 1;295(2):448-59.

Identification of the protein Zibra, its genomic organization, regulation, and
expression in breast cancer cells.

Thompson HG(1), Harris JW, Lin L, Brody JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California-Irvine, Irvine,
CA 92697-2715, USA.

The mRNA that encodes zibra (zinc, in-between-ring finger, ubiquitin-associated
domain), previously known as hypothetical protein FLJ10111, or RNF31 is expressed
in several distinct cancers. Little is known about the genomic organization,
expression, or regulation of zibra. Using RNA ligase-mediated rapid amplification
of cDNA ends (RLM-RACE), we cloned the full-length zibra cDNA from a transformed 
breast cell line. We identified a novel exon, the 5' untranslated region
including the +1 start site, and three alternatively spliced zibra transcripts.
The zibra protein contains three zinc ring-finger motifs, an ubiquitin-associated
domain, and an in-between-ring-finger domain, characteristic of ubiquitin
ligases. We obtained an antibody to zibra and confirmed the presence of
translated zibra protein for the first time. Promoter studies localized a core
element responsible for basal activity to a 14-bp region in the 5' untranslated
region. Although there are numerous consensus Ets factor binding sites in the
zibra promoter, we found no affect on promoter activity from Ets-1, PDEF, or
PEA-3/E1A-F. Treatment of cells with the proteasome inhibitor I (PSI) decreased
zibra protein to an undetectable level after 8 h. Zibra remained undetectable
even after 32 h, while mRNA levels remained essentially unchanged. In conclusion,
zibra is a translationally regulated putative ubiquitin ligase that is frequently
overexpressed in different forms of cancer.

PMID: 15093743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Apr 1;91(5):896-903.

Ets proteins in biological control and cancer.

Hsu T(1), Trojanowska M, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, South Carolina, USA.

The Ets family consists of a large number of evolutionarily conserved
transcription factors, many of which have been implicated in tumor progression.
Extensive studies on this family of proteins have focused so far mainly on the
biochemical properties and cellular functions of individual factors. Since most
of the Ets factors can bind to the core consensus DNA sequence GGAA/T in vitro,
it has been a challenge to differentiate redundant from specific functions of
various Ets proteins in vivo. Recent findings, however, suggest that such
apparent redundancy may in fact be a central component of a network of
differentially regulated specific Ets factors, resulting in distinct biological
and pathological consequences. The programmed "Ets conversion" appears to play a 
critical role during tumor progression, especially in control of cellular changes
during epithelial-mesenchymal transition and metastasis. Coordination of multiple
Ets gene functions also mediates interactions between tumor and stromal cells. As
such, these new insights may provide a novel view of the Ets gene family as well 
as a focal point for studying the complex biological control involved in tumor
progression.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2265084
PMID: 15034925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Mar 11;357(3):191-4.

Phosphorylation of translation initiation factor eIF2alpha in the brain during
pilocarpine-induced status epilepticus in mice.

Carnevalli LS(1), Pereira CM, Longo BM, Jaqueta CB, Avedissian M, Mello LE,
Castilho BA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiologia, Imunologia e Parasitologia, Escola Paulista de 
Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Botucatu 862, 5 andar, São
Paulo, SP 04023-062, Brazil.

In this work, we show extensive phosphorylation of the alpha subunit of
translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2alpha) occurring in the brain of mice
subjected to 30 min of status epilepticus induced by pilocarpine. eIF2alpha(P)
immunoreactivity was detected in the hippocampal pyramidal layer CA1 and CA3,
cortex layer V, thalamus and amygdala. After 2 h of recovery, there was a marked 
decrease in total brain eIF2alpha(P), with the cortex layer V showing the most
pronounced loss of anti-eIF2alpha(P) labeling, whereas the CA1 subregion had a
significant increase in eIF2alpha(P). These results indicate that inhibition of
protein synthesis in experimental models of epilepsy might be due to low levels
of eIF2-GTP caused by the phosphorylation of eIF2alpha, and suggest that
translational control may contribute to cell fate in the affected areas.

PMID: 15003282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 7;279(19):19512-22. Epub 2004 Feb 17.

Isoforms of the Ets transcription factor NERF/ELF-2 physically interact with AML1
and mediate opposing effects on AML1-mediated transcription of the B
cell-specific blk gene.

Cho JY(1), Akbarali Y, Zerbini LF, Gu X, Boltax J, Wang Y, Oettgen P, Zhang DE,
Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)BIDMC Genomics Center and the New England Baptist Bone and Joint Institute,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 4 Blackfan Circle, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We previously isolated different isoforms of a new Ets transcription factor
family member, NERF/ELF-2, NERF-2, NERF-1a, and NERF-1b. In contrast to the
inhibitory isoforms NERF-1a and NERF-1b, NERF-2 acts as a transactivator of the B
cell-specific blk promoter. We now report that NERF-2 and NERF-1 physically
interact with AML1 (RUNX1), a frequent target for chromosomal translocations in
leukemia. NERF-2 bound to AML1 via an interaction site located in a basic region 
upstream of the Ets domain. This is in contrast to most other Ets factors such as
Ets-1 that bind to AML1 via the Ets domain, suggesting that different Ets factors
utilize different domains for interaction with AML1. The interaction between AML1
and NERF-2 led to cooperative transactivation of the blk promoter, whereas the
interaction between AML1 and NERF-1a led to repression of AML1-mediated
transactivation. To delineate the differences in function of the different NERF
isoforms, we determined that the transactivation domain of NERF-2 is encoded by
the N-terminal 100 amino acids, which have been replaced in NERF-1a by a 19-amino
acid transcriptionally inactive sequence. Furthermore, acidic domains A and B,
which are conserved in NERF-2 and the related proteins ELF-1 and MEF/ELF-4, but
not in NERF-1a, are largely responsible for NERF-2-mediated transactivation.
Because translocation of the Ets factor Tel to AML1 is a frequent event in
childhood pre-B leukemia, understanding the interaction of Ets factors with AML1 
in the context of a B cell-specific promoter might help to determine the function
of Ets factors and AML1 in leukemia.

PMID: 14970218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 19;279(12):11281-92. Epub 2003 Dec 8.

Changes in the expression of many Ets family transcription factors and of
potential target genes in normal mammary tissue and tumors.

Galang CK(1), Muller WJ, Foos G, Oshima RG, Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)Oncodevelopmental Biology Program, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Interfering with Ets transcription factor function reverses multiple aspects of
the transformed phenotype of mouse or human tumor cells. However, the unknown
number of individual Ets factors expressed in any cellular context and the
similar DNA binding specificities of Ets family members complicates the
identification of those that mediate transformation. By utilizing quantitative
PCR assays for 25 mouse Ets factors, we analyzed the expression of essentially
the entire Ets family in normal mammary tissue, mammary-related cell lines, and
mammary tumors. In normal mammary tissue, 24 Ets factors were expressed. Even
clonal derived cell lines expressed 14-20 Ets members. The most abundant Ets
factor mRNAs measured in normal mammary tissue were Elk4, Elf1, and Ets2.
Subtractive analysis of mammary tissue identified which Ets factors were
predominantly expressed in the myeloid/lymphoid or epithelial cell compartments. 
Comparison of Ets factor expression in normal mammary tissue and mammary tumors
identified significantly elevated expression of Pse/PDEF, Ese2/Elf5, Ese3/Ehf,
TEL/Etv6, and Elf2/NERF in mammary tumors and confirmed previously reported
alterations in expression of Ese1/Elf3 and the PEA3 subfamily. Expression of 13
Ets target genes, implicated in various aspects of tumor progression, was also
analyzed. Altered expression of particular Ets target genes was significantly
correlated with particular Ets factors (e.g. maspin and Ese2), suggesting
specific in vivo regulatory roles. Together, this comprehensive analysis revealed
unexpectedly diverse Ets family gene expression, characterized novel Ets factor
changes in mammary tumors, and implicated specific Ets factors in the regulation 
of multiple genes involved in mammary tumor progression.

PMID: 14662758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Virol. 2003 May;77(9):5507-11.

Activation of PKR by Bunyamwera virus is independent of the viral interferon
antagonist NSs.

Streitenfeld H(1), Boyd A, Fazakerley JK, Bridgen A, Elliott RM, Weber F.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Virologie, Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene,
Universität Freiburg, Germany.

Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) is a by-product of viral RNA polymerase activity, and
its recognition is one mechanism by which the innate immune system is activated. 
Cellular responses to dsRNA include induction of alpha/beta interferon (IFN)
synthesis and activation of the enzyme PKR, which exerts its antiviral effect by 
phosphorylating the eukaryotic initiation factor eIF-2 alpha, thereby inhibiting 
translation. We have recently identified the nonstructural protein NSs of
Bunyamwera virus (BUNV), the prototype of the family Bunyaviridae, as a virulence
factor that blocks the induction of IFN by dsRNA. Here, we investigated the
potential of NSs to inhibit PKR. We show that wild-type (wt) BUNV that expresses 
NSs triggered PKR-dependent phosphorylation of eIF-2 alpha to levels similar to
those of a recombinant virus that does not express NSs (BUNdelNSs virus).
Furthermore, the sensitivity of viruses in cell culture to IFN was independent of
PKR and was not determined by NSs. PKR knockout mice, however, succumbed to
infection approximately 1 day earlier than wt mice or mice deficient in
expression of RNase L, another dsRNA-activated antiviral enzyme. Our data
indicate that (i) bunyaviruses activate PKR, but are only marginally sensitive to
its antiviral effect, and (ii) NSs is different from other IFN antagonists, since
it inhibits dsRNA-dependent IFN induction but has no effect on the
dsRNA-activated PKR and RNase L systems.

PMCID: PMC153953
PMID: 12692253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Leuk Res. 2003 May;27(5):387-92.

The level of MEF but not ELF-1 correlates with FAB subtype of acute myeloid
leukemia and is low in good prognosis cases.

Fukushima T(1), Miyazaki Y, Tsushima H, Tsutsumi C, Taguchi J, Yoshida S,
Kuriyama K, Scadden D, Nimer S, Tomonaga M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Molecular Medicine Unit, Atomic Bomb Disease
Institute, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, Nagasaki, Japan.

ETS proteins (such as PU.1, Fli-1 and ETS-1) have been shown to play important
roles in normal and abnormal hematopoiesis. We examined the expression of the ELF
subfamily of ETS genes (ELF-1, MEF and NERF) in acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
cells using Northern blot analysis. ELF-1 and MEF were expressed in all samples, 
whereas NERF was not. The relative expression (RE) of MEF, but not ELF-1, was
significantly lower (P<0.0001) in AML with t(8;21) and t(15;17) compared with AML
with normal karyotype. The pattern of MEF expression was not uniform among cells 
with CD34(+)/CD33(+). It is suggested that the low RE of MEF might be part of a
gene expression profile characterizing AML with a good prognosis.

PMID: 12620289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2002 Jul 1;22(7):1106-12.

Opposing functions of the Ets factors NERF and ELF-1 during chicken blood vessel 
development.

Gaspar J(1), Thai S, Voland C, Dube A, Libermann TA, Iruela-Arispe ML, Oettgen P.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, New England Baptist Bone and Joint Institute, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the role of the Ets factor
NERF in the regulation of the Tie1 and Tie2 genes during chicken blood vessel
development.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We have isolated the full-length cDNA for the chicken
homologue of the human Ets factor NERF2 (cNERF2). Northern blot analysis and in
situ hybridization demonstrate that cNERF2 is enriched in the developing blood
vessels of the chicken chorioallantoic membrane. Interestingly, cNERF2 functions 
as a competitive inhibitor of a highly related Ets factor cELF-1, which we have
previously shown to be enriched in chicken blood vessel development. Although in 
vitro-translated cELF-1 and cNERF2 can bind equally well to conserved Ets binding
sites in the promoters of the Tie1 and Tie2 genes, cELF-1 preferentially binds to
the Ets sites in these promoters during early stages of chicken blood vessel
development, suggesting that cNERF may bind during later stages of blood vessel
development and vascular remodeling.
CONCLUSIONS: cNERF2 is enriched during embryonic and extraembryonic blood vessel 
development in the chicken and facilitates tight control of Tie1 and Tie2 gene
regulation.

PMID: 12117724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. RNA. 2002 Mar;8(3):382-97.

Development and characterization of a reconstituted yeast translation initiation 
system.

Algire MA(1), Maag D, Savio P, Acker MG, Tarun SZ Jr, Sachs AB, Asano K, Nielsen 
KH, Olsen DS, Phan L, Hinnebusch AG, Lorsch JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205-2185, USA.

To provide a bridge between in vivo and in vitro studies of eukaryotic
translation initiation, we have developed a reconstituted translation initiation 
system using components from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We have purified
a minimal set of initiation factors (elFs) that, together with yeast 80S
ribosomes, GTP, and initiator methionyl-tRNA, are sufficient to assemble active
initiation complexes on a minimal mRNA template. The kinetics of various steps in
the pathway of initiation complex assembly and the formation of the first peptide
bond in vitro have been explored. The formation of active initiation complexes in
this system is dependent on ribosomes, mRNA, Met-tRNAi, GTP hydrolysis, elF1,
elF1A, elF2, elF5, and elF5B. Our data indicate that elF1 and elF1A both
facilitate the binding of the elF2 x GTP x Met-tRNAi complex to the 40S ribosomal
subunit to form the 43S complex. elF5 stimulates a step after 43S complex
formation, consistent with its proposed role in activating GTP hydrolysis by elF2
upon initiation codon recognition. The presence of elF5B is required for the
joining of the 40S and 60S subunits to form the 80S initiation complex. The step 
at which each of these factors acts in this reconstituted system is in agreement 
with previous data from in vivo studies and work using reconstituted mammalian
systems, indicating that the system recapitulates fundamental events in
translation initiation in eukaryotic cells. This system should allow us to couple
powerful yeast genetic and molecular biological experiments with in vitro kinetic
and biophysical experiments, yielding a better understanding of the molecular
mechanics of this central, complex process.

PMCID: PMC1370259
PMID: 12008673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Cell Biochem. 2002;85(3):505-15.

NERF2, a member of the Ets family of transcription factors, is increased in
response to hypoxia and angiopoietin-1: a potential mechanism for Tie2 regulation
during hypoxia.

Christensen RA(1), Fujikawa K, Madore R, Oettgen P, Varticovski L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Research, St. Elizabeth's Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and angiopoietins regulate endothelial 
cell survival and migration and are essential for angiogenesis. Considerable
progress has been made towards understanding hypoxia-mediated regulation of VEGF 
and its receptors. In contrast, little is known about the regulation of
angiopoietins and their receptors in hypoxic cells. Using RT-PCR, RNAase
protection assay, and Western blotting, we found that Tie1 and Tie2 mRNA and
protein levels increased in response to hypoxia in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. Previously, we have shown that NERF2, a member of Ets family
of transcription factors that is specifically expressed in endothelial cells,
binds to the promoter region of Tie2 and transactivates Tie2 expression. In this 
study, we show that expression of NERF2 was increased under hypoxia and that this
increase temporally correlated with the increase in Tie2 expression.
Hypoxia-induced expression of NERF2 and Tie2 was blocked by angiopoietin-2, a
competitive inhibitor of angiopoietin-1, and by recombinant soluble extracellular
domain of Tie2 but not by VEGF-neutralizing antibodies. In addition,
angiopoietin-1 directly induced expression of NERF2 in quiescent cells. These
novel findings suggest that angiopoietin-1 regulates expression of NERF2 and its 
own receptor in hypoxic cells.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11967990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Circ Res. 2001 Feb 2;88(2):237-44.

Elf-1 is a transcriptional regulator of the Tie2 gene during vascular
development.

Dube A(1), Thai S, Gaspar J, Rudders S, Libermann TA, Iruela-Arispe L, Oettgen P.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2001 Feb 2;88(2):127-8.

Vascular development requires the tightly coordinated expression of several
growth factors and their receptors. Among these are the Tie1 and Tie2 receptors, 
which are almost exclusively endothelial cell-specific. The critical
transcriptional regulators of vascular-specific gene expression remain largely
unknown. The Ets factors are a family of evolutionarily conserved transcription
factors that regulate genes involved in cellular growth and differentiation. We
have recently shown that the Ets factor NERF is a strong transactivator of the
Tie1 and Tie2 genes. To extend these studies, we have begun to identify the Ets
factors that are expressed in developing blood vessels of the chicken
chorioallantoic membrane (CAM), a highly vascular embryonic network. RNA was
extracted from microdissected CAM blood vessels, and reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction was performed using oligonucleotides
encoding conserved amino acids within the Ets domain. One of the polymerase chain
reaction fragments was subcloned and identified as the chicken homologue of the
Ets factor ELF-1, cELF-1. ELF-1 is most closely related to the Ets factor NERF.
In situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry demonstrate that cELF-1 is
enriched in developing chicken blood vessels. cELF-1 is also a strong
transactivator of the Tie1 and Tie2 genes and can bind to conserved Ets sites
within the promoters of these genes. A complex of similar size forms when gel
shifts are performed with cellular extracts derived from the CAM blood vessels,
which is recognized by an antibody against cELF-1. In summary, ELF-1 belongs to a
subset of Ets factors that regulate vascular-specific gene expression during
blood vessel development.

PMID: 11157678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mol Cell. 2000 Aug;6(2):269-79.

Uncharged tRNA activates GCN2 by displacing the protein kinase moiety from a
bipartite tRNA-binding domain.

Dong J(1), Qiu H, Garcia-Barrio M, Anderson J, Hinnebusch AG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Gene Regulation, National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Protein kinase GCN2 regulates translation in amino acid-starved cells by
phosphorylating elF2. GCN2 contains a regulatory domain related to histidyl-tRNA 
synthetase (HisRS) postulated to bind multiple deacylated tRNAs as a general
sensor of starvation. In accordance with this model, GCN2 bound several
deacylated tRNAs with similar affinities, and aminoacylation of tRNAphe weakened 
its interaction with GCN2. Unexpectedly, the C-terminal ribosome binding segment 
of GCN2 (C-term) was required in addition to the HisRS domain for strong tRNA
binding. A combined HisRS+ C-term segment bound to the isolated protein kinase
(PK) domain in vitro, and tRNA impeded this interaction. An activating mutation
(GCN2c-E803V) that weakens PK-C-term association greatly enhanced tRNA binding by
GCN2. These results provide strong evidence that tRNA stimulates the GCN2 kinase 
moiety by preventing an inhibitory interaction with the bipartite tRNA binding
domain.

PMID: 10983975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Plant Cell Physiol. 1999 Jul;40(7):702-8.

Late-flowering genes interact with early-flowering genes to regulate flowering
time in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Chou ML(1), Yang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology, National Chung Hsing
University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC.

To investigate the genetic mechanisms regulating the transition from the
vegetative to reproductive growth in Arabidopsis, double mutants between three
different early-flowering mutants, early flowering 1-1, 2-1, 3-1, (elf 1-1, 2-1, 
3-1) and five different late-flowering mutants, gi-1, ft-1, fwa-1, ld-1, and
fca-9, were constructed and phenotypes analyzed. Double mutants in all
combinations displayed the late-flowering phenotypes which resembled their
respective late-flowering parents in both flowering time and the number of
vegetative leaves produced. The results indicate that five late-flowering mutants
are epistatic to all three early-flowering mutants tested here. This epistatic
relationship suggests that ELF1, ELF2, and ELF3 genes function upstream of these 
five late-flowering genes no matter if they are functioning in autonomous or
photoperiod pathways. These three early-flowering genes may negatively modify the
activity of most late-flowering genes to influence the time of the
vegetative-to-reproductive transition in Arabidopsis.

PMID: 10501030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 4;274(23):16126-34.

A potential role for Elf-1 in CD4 promoter function.

Sarafova S(1), Siu G.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Program in Cellular, Molecular, and Biophysical Studies, Columbia
University, College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.

The control of CD4 gene expression is believed to be linked directly to the
signaling events that mediate T cell development and is directly dependent on the
CD4 promoter. We have previously determined that this promoter contains four
factor-binding sites important for its function. One of these sites, referred to 
as the P4 site, contains an Ets consensus recognition sequence. Using functional 
and biochemical analyses, we determine that Elf-1 binds to this site and
specifically activates the CD4 promoter, indicating that Elf-1 is playing an
important role in CD4 promoter function. In addition, a second nuclear factor
binds to this region. Although there are consensus recognition sites for other
factors, we demonstrate that none of these factors binds to the P4 site, nor do
other known members of the Ets family. Thus, a novel transcription factor may
bind to the CD4 promoter and help mediate its function.

PMID: 10347164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Circ Res. 1999 May 28;84(10):1177-85.

Role of the Ets transcription factors in the regulation of the vascular-specific 
Tie2 gene.

Dube A(1), Akbarali Y, Sato TN, Libermann TA, Oettgen P.

Author information: 
(1)New England Baptist Bone and Joint Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Boston, MA, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 1999 May 28;84(10):1234-5.

The Tie2 gene encodes a vascular endothelium-specific receptor tyrosine kinase
that is required for normal vascular development and is also upregulated during
angiogenesis. The regulatory regions of the Tie2 gene that are required for
endothelium-specific gene expression in vivo have been identified. However, the
transcription factors required for Tie2 gene expression remain largely unknown.
We have identified highly conserved binding sites for Ets transcription factors
in the Tie2 promoter. Mutations in 2 particular binding sites lead to a 50%
reduction in the endothelium-specific activity of the promoter. We have compared 
the ability of several members of the Ets family to transactivate the Tie2
promoter. Our results demonstrate that 1 of 3 distinct isoforms of the novel Ets 
transcription factor NERF, NERF2, is expressed in endothelial cells and can
strongly transactivate the regulatory regions of the Tie2 gene in comparison to
other Ets factors, which have little or no effect. NERF2 can bind to the Tie2
promoter Ets sites in electrophoretic mobility shift assays. These studies
support a role for Ets factors in the regulation of vascular-specific gene
expression and suggest that the novel Ets factor NERF2 may be a critical
transcription factor in specifying the expression of the Tie2 gene in vascular
endothelial cells.

PMID: 10347092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Shock. 1999 Apr;11(4):235-41.

Mechanism of IL-1 induced inhibition of protein synthesis in skeletal muscle.

Cooney RN(1), Maish GO 3rd, Gilpin T, Shumate ML, Lang CH, Vary TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Pennsylvania State University, College of Medicine,
Hershey 17033, USA.

Chronic interleukin (IL)-1 administration is associated with negative nitrogen
balance and the loss of lean body mass. To elucidate the molecular mechanism(s)
by which IL-1 modulates protein metabolism in muscle, we investigated the effects
of chronic (6 day) IL-1alpha infusion on protein synthesis in Individual muscles 
(gastrocnemius, soleus, heart) compared with saline-infused control rats. IL-1
significantly decreased muscle weight, protein content, and the rate of protein
synthesis in gastrocnemius (fast-twitch muscle). IL-1 had no effect on these
parameters in the heart, whereas only the rate of protein synthesis was reduced
in soleus (slow-twitch muscle). The reduction in gastrocnemius protein synthesis 
was not the result of a decrease in total RNA content, but was associated with a 
diminished translational efficiency. The diminished translational efficiency
correlated with a 40% reduction in the epsilon-subunit of eukaryotic initiation
factor 2B (elF2Bepsilon) in gastrocnemius from IL-1 -treated animals. However,
the content of the alpha-subunit of elF2 (elF2alpha) was unaffected. In contrast,
the elF2alpha content in heart was increased by IL-1, although elF2Bepsilon
levels were unchanged. Reductions in skeletal muscle protein synthesis were not
associated with a concomitant reduction in circulating or tissue content of
insulin-like growth factor I. In summary, the IL-1-induced decrease in
gastrocnemius protein synthesis appears to be regulated at the level of RNA
translation via a reduction in elF2Bepsilon. These findings support a regulatory 
role for IL-1 as a mediator of muscle protein synthesis and the alterations in
body composition observed in catabolic states where this cytokine is
overexpressed.

PMID: 10220298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Plant J. 1998 Jul;15(2):231-42.

FLD interacts with genes that affect different developmental phase transitions to
regulate Arabidopsis shoot development.

Chou ML(1), Yang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology, National Chung Hsing
University, Taichung, Taiwan, R.O.C.

A new fld mutant allele, fld-2, which significantly delayed flowering, was
isolated and characterized in Arabidopsis thaliana. Even under long-day
conditions after more than 100 days in the greenhouse, the majority of fld-2
mutant plants had not bolted. In addition, mutant inflorescences produced more
than 10 co-florescences that were subtended by a high number of rosette-like
leaves before giving rise to flowers. The late-flowering phenotype of the fld-2
mutation could be partially overcome by both vernalization and GA treatment but
it was not influenced by 5-azaC treatment. Phenotypic analyses of double mutants 
indicated that fld-2 is epistatic to early flowering mutants elf1, elf2 and elf3.
In addition, fld-2 could enhance vegetative characteristics in embryonic flower 1
(emf1) mutants by causing many small sessile leaves in fld-2 emf1 double mutants.
The relief of the terminal flower 1 (tfl1) mutant phenotype in fld-2 tfl1 double 
mutants, and the enhancement of leafy (lfy) and apetala1 (ap1) mutant phenotypes 
in fld-2 lfy and fld-2 ap1 double mutants, suggest that FLD is also likely to be 
involved in the floral transition. Our results strongly suggest that the FLD gene
plays a key role in regulating the reproductive competence of the shoot and
results in different developmental phase transitions in Arabidopsis.

PMID: 9721681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Plant Mol Biol. 1998 Aug;37(6):897-910.

Eucalyptus has a functional equivalent of the Arabidopsis floral meristem
identity gene LEAFY.

Southerton SG(1), Strauss SH, Olive MR, Harcourt RL, Decroocq V, Zhu X, Llewellyn
DJ, Peacock WJ, Dennis ES.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Plant Industry, Canberra, ACT, Australia.

Two genes cloned from Eucalyptus globulus, Eucalyptus LeaFy (ELF1 and ELF2), have
sequence homology to the floral meristem identity genes LEAFY from Arabidopsis
and FLORICAULA from Antirrhinum. ELF1 is expressed in the developing eucalypt
floral organs in a pattern similar to LEAFY while ELF2 appears to be a pseudo
gene. ELF1 is expressed strongly in the early floral primordium and then
successively in the primordia of sepals, petals, stamens and carpels. It is also 
expressed in the leaf primordia and young leaves and adult and juvenile trees.
The ELF1 promoter coupled to a GUS reporter gene directs expression in transgenic
Arabidopsis in a temporal and tissue-specific pattern similar to an equivalent
Arabidopsis LEAFY promoter construct. Strong expression is seen in young flower
buds and then later in sepals and petals. No expression was seen in rosette
leaves or roots of flowering plants or in any non-flowering plants grown under
long days. Furthermore, ectopic expression of the ELF1 gene in transgenic
Arabidopsis causes the premature conversion of shoots into flowers, as does an
equivalent 35S-LFY construct. These data suggest that ELF1 plays a similar role
to LFY in flower development and that the basic mechanisms involved in flower
initiation and development in Eucalyptus are similar to those in Arabidopsis.

PMID: 9700063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Methods. 1997 Apr;11(4):403-17.

Using GCN4 as a reporter of eIF2 alpha phosphorylation and translational
regulation in yeast.

Dever TE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Gene Regulation, National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

Molecular genetic analyses in yeast are a powerful method to study gene
regulation. Conservation of the mechanism and regulation of protein synthesis
between yeast and mammalian cells makes yeast a good model system for the
analysis of translation. One of the most common mechanisms of translational
regulation in mammalian cells is the phosphorylation of serine-51 on the alpha
subunit of the translation initiation factor elF2, which causes an inhibition of 
general translation. In contrast, in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
phosphorylation of elF2 alpha on serine-51 by the GCN2 protein kinase mediates
the translational induction of GCN4 expression. The unique structure of the GCN4 
mRNA makes GCN4 expression especially sensitive to elF2 alpha phosphorylation,
and the simple microbiological tests developed in yeast to analyze GCN4
expression serve as good reporters of elF2 alpha phosphorylation. It is
relatively simple to express heterologous proteins in yeast, and it has been
shown that the mammalian elF2 alpha kinases will functionally substitute for
GCN2. Structure-function analyses of translation factors or translational
regulators can also be performed by assaying for effects on general and
GCN4-specific translation. Three tests can be used to study elF2 alpha
phosphorylation and/or translational activity in yeast. First, general
translation can be monitored by simple growth tests, while GCN4 expression can be
analyzed using sensitive replicaplating tests. Second, GCN4 translation can be
quantitated by measuring expression from GCN4-lacZ reporter constructs. Finally, 
isoelectric focusing gels can be used to directly monitor in vivo phosphorylation
of elF2 alpha in yeast.

PMID: 9126554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. RNA. 1997 Apr;3(4):438-48.

Surprising specificity of PKR binding to delta agent genomic RNA.

Circle DA(1), Neel OD, Robertson HD, Clarke PA, Mathews MB.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Biochemistry and Structural Biology, Cornell University Medical
College, New York 10021, USA.

A direct, ribonuclease T1 protection assay was employed to study the binding of a
delta agent genomic RNA transcript containing the conserved domain to the
double-stranded RNA- (dsRNA-) dependent protein kinase of mammalian cells, PKR
(also known as DAI, p1-elF2, or p68 kinase). In a control reaction, this assay
identified a major portion of the same PKR binding site in VA RNA as deduced
previously using a footprinting technique (Clarke PA, Mathews MB, 1995, RNA
1:1-20). Although delta agent RNA contains extensive secondary structure
throughout the conserved region, we found a remarkable specificity in its PKR
binding. The same region was protected by intact PKR and by a 184-amino acid
fragment thereof containing the two RNA-binding motifs (dsRBMs) but lacking
kinase activity. Two specific opposed, continuous segments of delta agent RNA
(extending about 65-70 bases) were obtained reproducibly. Each is more than twice
as long as those protected in VA RNA (about 25 bases), suggesting the involvement
of PKR dimers in delta RNA binding. The PKR-protected region of delta agent RNA
also contains a characteristic tertiary structural element that may be involved
in binding specificity.

PMCID: PMC1369495
PMID: 9085850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Leukemia. 1997 Jan;11(1):86-96.

Elf-2, a rhombotin-2 binding ets transcription factor: discovery and potential
role in T cell leukemia.

Wilkinson DA(1), Neale GA, Mao S, Naeve CW, Goorha RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Molecular Biology, St Jude Children's Research
Hospital, University of Tennessee, Memphis 38101, USA.

Rhombotin-2 (RBTN-2) is a proto-oncogene only in the context of T lymphocytes. We
postulated that the oncogenic effect of RBTN-2 in T cells is likely mediated by
binding protein(s) with T cell-specific expression. By screening a T cell cDNA
library, we identified a novel ets transcription factor that binds RBTN-2. This
protein was named elf-2 because its DNA-binding domain is virtually identical to 
that of ets family member elf-1. Northern analyses showed similar levels of two
elf-2 transcripts (3.5 kb and 3.8 kb) in all tissues except thymus. Thymocytes
expressed four- to 10-fold greater amounts of the 3.5 kb transcript than other
tissues. Sequence analyses of cDNA clones indicated that these transcripts encode
proteins differing only at their amino termini, and likely represent
alternatively spliced isoforms. These isoforms (elf-2a and elf-2b) contain
identical RBTN-2 binding regions and DNA-binding domains. Elf-2b lacks a putative
transactivation domain. The expression patterns suggest that RBTN-2 normally
interacts equally with elf-2a and elf-2b. In contrast, when RBTN-2 is
inappropriately expressed in T cells, RBTN-2 would interact predominantly with
elf-2b; this interaction may lead to T cell proliferation.

PMID: 9001422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Sep;16(9):5091-106.

Characterization of NERF, a novel transcription factor related to the Ets factor 
ELF-1.

Oettgen P(1), Akbarali Y, Boltax J, Best J, Kunsch C, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02215,
USA.

We have cloned the gene for a novel Ets-related transcription factor, new
Ets-related factor (NERF), from human spleen, fetal liver, and brain. Comparison 
of the deduced amino acid sequence of NERF with those of other members of the Ets
family reveals that the level of homology to ELF-1, which is involved in the
regulation of several T- and B-cell-specific genes, is highest. Homologies are
clustered in the putative DNA binding domain in the middle of the protein, a
basic domain just upstream of this domain, and several shorter stretches of
homology towards the amino terminus. The presence of two predominant NERF
transcripts in various fetal and adult human tissues is due to at least three
alternative splice products, NERF-1a, NERF-1b, and NERF-2, which differ in their 
amino termini and their expression in different tissues. Only NERF-2 and ELF-1,
and not NERF-1a and NERF-1b, function as transcriptional activators of the lyn
and blk gene promoters, although all isoforms of NERF bind with affinities
similar to those of ELF-1 to a variety of Ets binding sites in, among others, the
blk, lck, lyn, mb-1, and immunoglobulin H genes and are expressed at similar
levels. Since NERF and ELF-1 are coexpressed in B and T cells, both might be
involved in the regulation of the same genes.

PMCID: PMC231510
PMID: 8756667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1996 Aug;8(2/3):199-209.

Similarities and Differences in the Way Transmembrane-Type Ligands Interact with 
the Elk Subclass of Eph Receptors

Brambilla R(1), Br&uuml;ckner K, Orioli D, Bergemann AD, Flanagan JG, Klein R.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Meyerhofstrasse 1, Heidelberg, 69117,
Germany

The Eph family of receptor tyrosine kinases and their cell surface bound ligands 
have been implicated in a number of developmental processes, including axon
pathfinding and fasciculation, as well as patterning in the central nervous
system. To better understand the complex signaling events taking place, we have
undertaken a comparative analysis of ligand-receptor interactions between a
subset of ligands, those that are tethered to the cell surface via a
transmembrane domain, and a subset of Eph receptors, the so-called Elk subclass. 
Based on binding characteristics, receptor autophosphorylation, and cellular
transformation assays, we find that the transmembrane-type ligands Lerk2 and Elf2
have common and specific receptors within the Elk subclass of receptors. The
common receptors Cek10 and Elk bind and signal in response to Lerk2 and Elf2,
whereas the Myk1 receptor is specific for Elf2. Elf2, however, fails to signal
through Cek5 in a cellular transformation assay, suggesting that Lerk2 may be the
preferred Cek5 ligand in vivo. A recently identified third transmembrane-type
ligand, Elf3, specifically, but weakly, binds Cek10 and only induces focus
formation when activated by C-terminal truncation. This suggests that the
physiological Elf3 receptor may have yet to be identified. Knowledge regarding
functional ligand-receptor interactions as presented in this study will be
important for the design and interpretation of in vivo experiments, e.g.,
loss-of-function studies in transgenic mice.

PMID: 8954633  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


81. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1996;8(2-3):199-209.

Similarities and differences in the way transmembrane-type ligands interact with 
the Elk subclass of Eph receptors.

Brambilla R(1), Brückner K, Orioli D, Bergemann AD, Flanagan JG, Klein R.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.

The Eph family of receptor tyrosine kinases and their cell surface bound ligands 
have been implicated in a number of developmental processes, including axon
pathfinding and fasciculation, as well as patterning in the central nervous
system. To better understand the complex signaling events taking place, we have
undertaken a comparative analysis of ligand-receptor interactions between a
subset of ligands, those that are tethered to the cell surface via a
transmembrane domain, and a subset of Eph receptors, the so-called Elk subclass. 
Based on binding characteristics, receptor autophosphorylation, and cellular
transformation assays, we find that the transmembrane-type ligands Lerk2 and Elf2
have common and specific receptors within the Elk subclass of receptors. The
common receptors Cek10 and Elk bind and signal in response to Lerk2 and Elf2,
whereas the Myk1 receptor is specific for Elf2. Elf2, however, fails to signal
through Cek5 in a cellular transformation assay, suggesting that Lerk2 may be the
preferred Cek5 ligand in vivo. A recently identified third transmembrane-type
ligand, Elf3, specifically, but weakly, binds Cek10 and only induces focus
formation when activated by C-terminal truncation. This suggests that the
physiological Elf3 receptor may have yet to be identified. Knowledge regarding
functional ligand-receptor interactions as presented in this study will be
important for the design and interpretation of in vivo experiments, e.g.,
loss-of-function studies in transgenic mice.

PMID: 8918835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Virology. 1995 Dec 20;214(2):653-9.

Human PKR transfected into murine cells stimulates expression of genes under
control of the HIV1 or HTLV-I LTR.

Meurs EF(1), McMillan N, Williams BR, Hovanessian AG, Southern PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455-0312,
USA.

Erratum in
    Virology 1998 Jul 20;247(1):125.

We have analyzed the effect of transfection into murine NIH/3T3 cells of the
human dsRNA-activated kinase PKR on the expression of the beta-galactosidase
reporter gene, placed under control of the HIV1 or the HTLV-I LTR.
beta-Galactosidase expression is stimulated when the reporter plasmids are
cotransfected with wild-type PKR but inhibited when cotransfected with a
catalytically inactive mutant PKR. In the case of HIV1, beta-galactosidase
expression was not stimulated when cotransfection was carried out with PKR
harboring mutations in the dsRNA binding domains, indicating that stimulation
depends on the classical mode of PKR activation through dsRNA binding. In
contrast, the dsRNA binding mutants of PKR could still partially stimulate
beta-galactosidase expression from the HTLV-I LTR, suggesting that PKR activation
in this case may involve different/additional mechanisms. These results show
that, in addition to the known down-regulation of protein synthesis through elF2 
phosphorylation, PKR can also positively stimulate gene expression in vivo, most 
probably through phosphorylation of a substrate distinct from elF2.

PMID: 8553571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Virology. 1995 Dec 1;214(1):222-8.

Binding of the influenza virus NS1 protein to double-stranded RNA inhibits the
activation of the protein kinase that phosphorylates the elF-2 translation
initiation factor.

Lu Y(1), Wambach M, Katze MG, Krug RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Rutgers, State University of
New Jersey, Piscataway 08855, USA.

The NS1 protein of influenza A virus binds not only to poly(A) and a stem-bulge
region in U6 small nuclear RNA (snRNA), but also to double-stranded (ds) RNA.
Binding assays with NS1 protein mutants established that the previously
identified RNA-binding domain of the NS1 protein is required for binding to ds
RNA as well as for binding to poly(A) and U6 snRNA. In addition, dsRNA competed
with U6 snRNA for binding to the NS1 protein, consistent with both RNAs sharing
the same binding site on the protein. As a consequence of its binding to dsRNA,
the NS1 protein blocks the activation of the dsRNA-activated protein kinase (PKR)
in vitro. This kinase phosphorylates the alpha subunit of eukaryotic translation 
initiation factor 2 (elF-2 alpha), leading to a decrease in the rate of
initiation of translation. Assays using purified PKR and purified elF2
demonstrated that the NS1 protein blocks the dsRNA activation of PKR, and
experiments using reticulocyte extracts showed that the NS1 protein blocks the
inhibition of translation caused by dsRNA activation of PKR. The implications of 
these results for control mechanisms occurring in influenza virus-infected cells 
are discussed.

PMID: 8525619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Dev Biol. 1995 Jun;169(2):421-35.

Genetic regulation of shoot development in Arabidopsis: role of the EMF genes.

Yang CH(1), Chen LJ, Sung ZR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, University of California at Berkeley 94720, USA.

To investigate the genetic mechanism regulating Arabidopsis shoot maturation and 
development, we characterized eight emf mutants that bypassed the vegetative
phase of the life cycle. Genetic complementation studies identified two EMF loci;
both mapped to chromosome five. Double mutant analysis showed that the early- and
late-flowering mutants, co, fb, elf1, elf2, and elf3, could not rescue vegetative
development in the emf mutants, confirming the need for both EMF gene activities 
for rosette development. A series of phenotypes involving successive loss of
reproductive organs was also observed in emf single mutants, in emf1-1/emf1-2
transheterozygotes, and in emf1 emf2 double mutants, suggesting that the EMF
genes not only specify the rosette (vegetative) but also are involved in
inflorescence and flower (reproductive) development. Phenotypic analysis of
double mutants between emf and tfl1, lfy, and ag indicated interactions between
EMF and genes regulating inflorescence meristem development and floral organ
identity. A model depicting the role of the EMF genes in regulating shoot
maturation and their interaction with genes that affect phase transitions is
presented.

PMID: 7781888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


