
1. Mol Genet Genomics. 2016 Mar 31. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of candidate genes for an early-maturing soybean mutant by genome 
resequencing analysis.

Lee KJ(1,)(2), Kim DS(1), Kim JB(3), Jo SH(4), Kang SY(1), Choi HI(1), Ha BK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Breeding Research Team, Advanced Radiation Technology Institute,
Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, Jeongeup, 580-185, Republic of Korea.
(2)National Agrobiodiversity Center, NAAS, RDA, Jeonju, 560-500, Republic of
Korea. (3)Radiation Breeding Research Team, Advanced Radiation Technology
Institute, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, Jeongeup, 580-185, Republic of
Korea. jbkim74@kaeri.re.kr. (4)Seeders Inc., Daejeon, 305-509, Republic of Korea.
(5)Division of Plant Biotechnology, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences,
Chonnam National University, Gwangju, 500-757, Republic of Korea. bkha@jnu.ac.kr.

Flowering is indicative of the transition from vegetative to reproductive phase, 
a critical event in the life cycle of plants. In this study, we performed whole
genome resequencing by Illumina HiSeq to identify changes in flowering genes
using an early-flowering phenotype of soybean mutant line Josaengserori (JS)
derived from Korean landrace, Seoritae (SR), and we obtained mapped reads of
131,769,690 and 167,669,640 bp in JS and SR, respectively. From the whole genome 
sequencing results between JS and SR, we identified 332,821 polymorphic SNPs and 
65,178 indels, respectively. Among these, 30 flowering genes were in SNPs and 25 
were in indels. Among 30 flowering genes detected in SNPs, Glyma02g33040,
Glyma06g22650, Glyma10g36600, Glyma13g01290, Glyma14g10530, Glyma16g01980,
Glyma17g11040, Glyma18g53690, and Glyma20g29300 were non-synonymous substitutions
between JS and SR. Changes in Glyma10g36600 (GI), Glya02g33040 (AGL18),
Glyma17g11040 (TOC1), and Glyma14g10530 (ELF3) in JS affected the expression of
GmFT2a and resulted in early flowering. These results provide insight into the
regulatory pathways of flowering in soybean mutants and help to improve our
knowledge of soybean mutation breeding.

PMID: 27033554  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Cancer Cell. 2016 Mar 14;29(3):367-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2016.02.012.

Protein Kinase C<U+03B9> Drives a NOTCH3-dependent Stem-like Phenotype in Mutant KRAS
Lung Adenocarcinoma.

Ali SA(1), Justilien V(1), Jamieson L(1), Murray NR(1), Fields AP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Jacksonville, FL
32224, USA. (2)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Cancer Center,
Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA. Electronic address: fields.alan@mayo.edu.

We report that the protein kinase C<U+03B9> (PKC<U+03B9>) oncogene controls expression of
NOTCH3, a key driver of stemness, in KRAS-mediated lung adenocarcinoma (LADC).
PKC<U+03B9> activates NOTCH3 expression by phosphorylating the ELF3 transcription factor
and driving ELF3 occupancy on the NOTCH3 promoter. PKC<U+03B9>-ELF3-NOTCH3 signaling
controls the tumor-initiating cell phenotype by regulating asymmetric cell
division, a process necessary for tumor initiation and maintenance. Primary LADC 
tumors exhibit PKC<U+03B9>-ELF3-NOTCH3 signaling, and combined pharmacologic blockade of
PKC<U+03B9> and NOTCH synergistically inhibits tumorigenic behavior in vitro and LADC
growth in vivo demonstrating the therapeutic potential of PKC<U+03B9>-ELF3-NOTCH3 signal
inhibition to more effectively treat KRAS LADC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4795153 [Available on 2017-03-14]
PMID: 26977885  [PubMed - in process]


3. F1000Res. 2016 Feb 16;5. pii: F1000 Faculty Rev-178. doi:
10.12688/f1000research.7346.1. eCollection 2016.

The role of COP1 in repression of photoperiodic flowering.

Xu D(1), Zhu D(1), Deng XW(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, Peking-Tsinghua
Center for Life Sciences, School of Advanced Agriculture Sciences and School of
Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

Plants use the circadian clock as a timekeeping mechanism to regulate
photoperiodic flowering in response to the seasonal changes. CONSTITUTIVELY
PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1 (COP1), initially identified as a central repressor of
seedling photomorphogenesis, was recently shown to be involved in the regulation 
of light input to the circadian clock, modulating the circadian rhythm and
flowering. COP1 encodes a RING-finger E3 ubiquitin ligase and works in concert
with SUPPRESSOR of phyA-105 (SPA) proteins to repress photoperiodic flowering by 
regulating proteasome-mediated degradation of CONSTANS (CO), a central regulator 
of photoperiodic flowering. In addition, COP1 and EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3)
indirectly modulate CO expression via the degradation of GIGANTEA (GI). Here, we 
summarize the current understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying COP1's
role in controlling of photoperiodic flowering.

PMCID: PMC4756798
PMID: 26949521  [PubMed]


4. Biochem J. 2016 Feb 26. pii: BCJ20160019. [Epub ahead of print]

A transcriptional repressive role for epithelial-specific ETS factor ELF3 on
estrogen receptor-alpha in breast cancer cells.

Gajulapalli VN(1), Samathanpudi VS(2), Pulaganti M(3), Khumukcham SS(2),
Malisetty VL(4), Guruprasad L(5), Chitta SK(6), Manavathi B(7).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry, University of Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Hyderabad, Massachusetts,
500046, India. (2)University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, 500046, India. (3)Sri
Krishnadevaraya University, Anantapur, 515055, India. (4)Biotechnology, Acharya
Nagarjuna University, Guntur, India. (5)Chemistry, University of Hyderabad,
Hyderabad, 500046, India. (6)Sri Krishnadevaraya University, Anantapur, India.
(7)Biochemistry, University of Hyderabad, School of life sciences, Gachibowli,
Hyderabad, 500046, India Manavathibsl@uohyd.ernet.in.

Estrogen receptor-a (ERa) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that
primarily mediates estrogen (E2)-dependent gene transcription required for
mammary gland development. Coregulators critically regulate ERa transcription
functions by directly interacting with it. In this study, we report that ELF3, an
epithelial-specific ETS transcription factor, acts as a transcriptional repressor
of ERa. Coimmunoprecipitation (Co-IP) analysis demonstrated that ELF3 strongly
binds to ERa in the absence of E2, but ELF3 dissociation occurs upon E2 treatment
in a dose- and time-dependent manner suggesting that E2 negatively influences
such interaction. Domain mapping studies further revealed that ETS domain of ELF3
interacts with DNA binding domain of ERa. Accordingly, ELF3 inhibited ERa's DNA
binding activity by preventing receptor dimerization, partly explaining the
mechanism by which ELF3 represses ER transcriptional activity. Ectopic expression
of ELF3 decreases ERa transcriptional activity as demonstrated by ERE-luciferase 
reporter assay or by endogenous ERa target genes. Conversely ELF3 knockdown
increases ERa transcriptional activity. Consistent with these results, ELF3
ectopic expression decreases E2-dependent MCF7 cell proliferation whereas ELF3
knockdown increases it. We also found that E2 induces ELF3 expression in MCF7
cells suggesting a negative feedback regulation of ERa signaling in breast cancer
cells. A small peptide sequence of ELF3 derived through functional interaction
between ERa and ELF3 could inhibit DNA binding activity of ERa and breast cancer 
cell growth. These findings demonstrate that ELF3 is a novel transcriptional
repressor of ERa in breast cancer cells. Peptide interaction studies further
represent a novel therapeutic option in breast cancer therapy.

Copyright 2016 The Author(s).

PMID: 26920025  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. BMC Cancer. 2016 Feb 9;16(1):76. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2127-2.

Using gene expression from urine sediment to diagnose prostate cancer:
development of a new multiplex mRNA urine test and validation of current
biomarkers.

Mengual L(1,)(2), Lozano JJ(3), Ingelmo-Torres M(4), Izquierdo L(5), Musquera
M(6), Ribal MJ(7), Alcaraz A(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory and Department of Urology, Hospital Clínic, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. LMENGUAL@clinic.ub.es. (2)Laboratory of Urology,
Hospital Clínic, Centre de Recerca Biomèdica CELLEX, office B22, C/Casanova, 143,
08036, Barcelona, Spain. LMENGUAL@clinic.ub.es. (3)CIBERehd. Plataforma de
Bioinformática, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en red de Enfermedades
Hepáticas y Digestivas, Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques
August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
juanjo.lozano@Ciberehd.org. (4)Laboratory and Department of Urology, Hospital
Clínic, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS),
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. INGELMO@clinic.ub.es. (5)Laboratory
and Department of Urology, Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques
August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
LIZQUIER@clinic.ub.es. (6)Laboratory and Department of Urology, Hospital Clínic, 
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. MMUSQUER@clinic.ub.es. (7)Laboratory and
Department of Urology, Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques
August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
mjribal@clinic.ub.es. (8)Laboratory and Department of Urology, Hospital Clínic,
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. ALCARAZ@clinic.ub.es.

BACKGROUND: Additional accurate non-invasive biomarkers are needed in the
clinical setting to improve prostate cancer (PCa) diagnosis. Here we have
developed a new and improved multiplex mRNA urine test to detect prostate cancer 
(PCa). Furthermore, we have validated the PCA3 urinary transcript and some panels
of urinary transcripts previously reported as useful diagnostic biomarkers for
PCa in our cohort.
METHODS: Post-prostatic massage urine samples were prospectively collected from
PCa patients and controls. Expression levels of 42 target genes selected from our
previous studies and from the literature were studied in 224 post-prostatic
massage urine sediments by quantitative PCR. Univariate logistic regression was
used to identify individual PCa predictors. A variable selection method was used 
to develop a multiplex biomarker model. Discrimination was measured by ROC curve 
AUC for both, our model and the previously published biomarkers.
RESULTS: Seven of the 42 genes evaluated (PCA3, ELF3, HIST1H2BG, MYO6, GALNT3,
PHF12 and GDF15) were found to be independent predictors for discriminating
patients with PCa from controls. We developed a four-gene expression signature
(HIST1H2BG, SPP1, ELF3 and PCA3) with a sensitivity of 77 % and a specificity of 
67 % (AUC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.763) for discriminating between tumor and control urines. The
accuracy of PCA3 and previously reported panels of biomarkers is roughly
maintained in our cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: Our four-gene expression signature outperforms PCA3 as well as
previously reported panels of biomarkers to predict PCa risk. This study suggests
that a urinary biomarker panel could improve PCa detection. However, the accuracy
of the panels of urinary transcripts developed to date, including our signature, 
is not high enough to warrant using them routinely in a clinical setting.

PMCID: PMC4746764
PMID: 26856686  [PubMed - in process]


6. Cancer Cell. 2016 Feb 8;29(2):229-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.12.012. Epub 2016
Jan 21.

Genomic Sequencing Identifies ELF3 as a Driver of Ampullary Carcinoma.

Yachida S(1), Wood LD(2), Suzuki M(3), Takai E(3), Totoki Y(3), Kato M(4),
Luchini C(2), Arai Y(3), Nakamura H(3), Hama N(3), Elzawahry A(4), Hosoda F(3),
Shirota T(3), Morimoto N(5), Hori K(5), Funazaki J(5), Tanaka H(6), Morizane
C(7), Okusaka T(7), Nara S(8), Shimada K(8), Hiraoka N(9), Taniguchi H(9),
Higuchi R(10), Oshima M(11), Okano K(11), Hirono S(12), Mizuma M(13), Arihiro
K(14), Yamamoto M(10), Unno M(13), Yamaue H(12), Weiss MJ(15), Wolfgang CL(15),
Furukawa T(16), Nakagama H(17), Vogelstein B(18), Kiyono T(17), Hruban RH(19),
Shibata T(20).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo 
1040045, Japan; Division of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 1040045, Japan. Electronic address:
syachida@ncc.go.jp. (2)Department of Pathology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer
Research Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21287, USA. (3)Division of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, Tokyo 1040045, Japan. (4)Department of Bioinformatics, National Cancer
Center Research Institute, Tokyo 1040045, Japan. (5)Division of Medical Elemental
Technology Development, Department of Advanced Analysis Technology, R&D Group,
Olympus Corporation, Tokyo 1630914, Japan. (6)Division of Virology, National
Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo 1040045, Japan. (7)Department of
Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo
1040045, Japan. (8)Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery Division, National Cancer
Center Hospital, Tokyo 1040045, Japan. (9)Department of Pathology and Clinical
Laboratories, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo 1040045, Japan.
(10)Department of Surgery, Institute of Gastroenterology, Tokyo Women's Medical
University, Tokyo 1628666, Japan. (11)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, 
Kagawa University, Kagawa 7610793, Japan. (12)Second Department of Surgery,
Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama 6418509, Japan. (13)Department of Surgery, 
Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai Miyagi 9808575, Japan.
(14)Department of Anatomical Pathology, Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima 
7348551, Japan. (15)Department of Surgery, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. (16)Institute for Integrated Medical Science,
Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo 1628666, Japan. (17)Division of
Carcinogenesis and Cancer Prevention, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 
Tokyo 1040045, Japan. (18)Department of Pathology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic
Cancer Research Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA; The Ludwig Center and The Howard Hughes Medical
Institute at Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.
(19)Department of Pathology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center,
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA;
Department of Oncology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center, The
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.
(20)Division of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo
1040045, Japan; Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, The
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 1088639, Japan.

Ampullary carcinomas are highly malignant neoplasms that can have either
intestinal or pancreatobiliary differentiation. To characterize somatic
alterations in ampullary carcinomas, we performed whole-exome sequencing and DNA 
copy-number analysis on 60 ampullary carcinomas resected from clinically
well-characterized Japanese and American patients. We next selected 92 genes and 
performed targeted sequencing to validate significantly mutated genes in an
additional 112 cancers. The prevalence of driver gene mutations in carcinomas
with the intestinal phenotype is different from those with the pancreatobiliary
phenotype. We identified a characteristic significantly mutated driver gene
(ELF3) as well as previously known driver genes (TP53, KRAS, APC, and others).
Functional studies demonstrated that ELF3 silencing in normal human epithelial
cells enhances their motility and invasion.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26806338  [PubMed - in process]


7. Cell Rep. 2016 Feb 2;14(4):907-19. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.005. Epub 2016
Jan 21.

Ampullary Cancers Harbor ELF3 Tumor Suppressor Gene Mutations and Exhibit
Frequent WNT Dysregulation.

Gingras MC(1), Covington KR(2), Chang DK(3), Donehower LA(4), Gill AJ(5), Ittmann
MM(6), Creighton CJ(7), Johns AL(8), Shinbrot E(2), Dewal N(2), Fisher WE(9);
Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative, Pilarsky C(10), Grützmann R(11), 
Overman MJ(12), Jamieson NB(13), Van Buren G 2nd(9), Drummond J(2), Walker K(2), 
Hampton OA(2), Xi L(2), Muzny DM(2), Doddapaneni H(2), Lee SL(2), Bellair M(2),
Hu J(2), Han Y(2), Dinh HH(2), Dahdouli M(2), Samra JS(14), Bailey P(15), Waddell
N(16), Pearson JV(16), Harliwong I(17), Wang H(18), Aust D(19), Oien KA(20),
Hruban RH(21), Hodges SE(22), McElhany A(22), Saengboonmee C(23), Duthie FR(20), 
Grimmond SM(24), Biankin AV(3), Wheeler DA(25), Gibbs RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Human Genome Sequencing Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Michael DeBakey Department of
Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Dan L. Duncan Cancer
Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address:
mgingras@bcm.edu. (2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Human Genome
Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Wolfson
Wohl Cancer Research Centre, Institute for Cancer Sciences, University of
Glasgow, Garscube Estate, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK; West of Scotland
Pancreatic Unit, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow G31 2ER, UK; The Kinghorn
Cancer Centre and the Cancer Research Program Garvan Institute of Medical
Research, Darlinghurst, Sydney, NSW 2010, Australia; South Western Sydney
Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Liverpool,
NSW 2170, Australia. (4)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Human Genome 
Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department
of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA. (5)The Kinghorn Cancer Centre and the Cancer Research Program Garvan 
Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, Sydney, NSW 2010, Australia;
Department of Anatomical Pathology, Royal North Shore Hospital, St Leonards,
Sydney, NSW 2065, Australia; Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney,
NSW 2006, Australia. (6)Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Michael E. DeBakey Department of Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (7)Department of Molecular and
Human Genetics, Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (8)The Kinghorn Cancer Centre and the Cancer Research
Program Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, Sydney, NSW 2010,
Australia. (9)Michael DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; The Elkins Pancreas Center at Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (10)Department of Surgery, TU Dresden, 01307 Dresden,
Germany. (11)Department of Surgery, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 91054
Erlangen, Germany. (12)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology,
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(13)Wolfson Wohl Cancer Research Centre, Institute for Cancer Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Garscube Estate, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK; West of
Scotland Pancreatic Unit, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow G31 2ER, UK; Academic 
Unit of Surgery, Institute of Cancer Sciences, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Level 2, 
New Lister Building, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G31 2ER, UK. (14)Sydney
Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia; Department of 
Surgery, Royal North Shore Hospital, St Leonards, Sydney, NSW 2065, Australia.
(15)Wolfson Wohl Cancer Research Centre, Institute for Cancer Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Garscube Estate, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.
(16)Queensland Centre for Medical Genomics, Institute for Molecular Bioscience,
The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia; QIMR
Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Brisbane, QLD 4006, Australia.
(17)Queensland Centre for Medical Genomics, Institute for Molecular Bioscience,
The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia.
(18)Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (19)Department of Pathology, TU Dresden, 01307 Dresden,
Germany. (20)Wolfson Wohl Cancer Research Centre, Institute for Cancer Sciences, 
University of Glasgow, Garscube Estate, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK; Department
of Pathology, Southern General Hospital, Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS, Glasgow
G51 4TF, UK. (21)Department of Pathology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer
Research Center, the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21231, USA. (22)Michael DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; The Elkins Pancreas Center at Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (23)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics,
Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030,
USA; Department of Biochemistry and Liver Fluke and Cholangiocarcinoma Research
Center, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen 40002, Thailand.
(24)Wolfson Wohl Cancer Research Centre, Institute for Cancer Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Garscube Estate, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK; Queensland
Centre for Medical Genomics, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University
of Queensland, St Lucia, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia. (25)Department of
Molecular and Human Genetics, Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: wheeler@bcm.edu.

The ampulla of Vater is a complex cellular environment from which adenocarcinomas
arise to form a group of histopathologically heterogenous tumors. To evaluate the
molecular features of these tumors, 98 ampullary adenocarcinomas were evaluated
and compared to 44 distal bile duct and 18 duodenal adenocarcinomas. Genomic
analyses revealed mutations in the WNT signaling pathway among half of the
patients and in all three adenocarcinomas irrespective of their origin and
histological morphology. These tumors were characterized by a high frequency of
inactivating mutations of ELF3, a high rate of microsatellite instability, and
common focal deletions and amplifications, suggesting common attributes in the
molecular pathogenesis are at play in these tumors. The high frequency of WNT
pathway activating mutation, coupled with small-molecule inhibitors of ß-catenin 
in clinical trials, suggests future treatment decisions for these patients may be
guided by genomic analysis.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26804919  [PubMed - in process]


8. Cancer Res. 2016 Jan 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Combined Treatment with Epigenetic, Differentiating, and Chemotherapeutic Agents 
Cooperatively Targets Tumor-Initiating Cells in Triple-Negative Breast Cancer.

Merino VF(1), Nguyen N(2), Jin K(2), Sadik H(2), Cho S(2), Korangath P(2), Han
L(2), Foster YM(2), Zhou XC(2), Zhang Z(2), Connolly RM(2), Stearns V(2), Ali
SZ(3), Adams C(3), Chen Q(4), Pan D(4), Huso DL(5), Ordentlich P(6), Brodie A(7),
Sukumar S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland. saras@jhmi.edu vmerino1@jhmi.edu. (2)Department of Oncology,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (3)Department
of Pathology, Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (4)Department of Molecular
Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland. (5)Department of Molecular and Comparative Pathobiology, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (6)Syndax Pharmaceuticals,
Department of Translational Medicine, Waltham, Massachusetts. (7)Department of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

Efforts to induce the differentiation of cancer stem cells through treatment with
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) have yielded limited success, partially due to the
epigenetic silencing of the retinoic acid receptor (RAR)-ß The histone
deacetylase inhibitor entinostat is emerging as a promising antitumor agent when 
added to the standard-of-care treatment for breast cancer. However, the
combination of epigenetic, cellular differentiation, and chemotherapeutic
approaches against triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) has not been
investigated. In this study, we found that combined treatment of TNBC xenografts 
with entinostat, ATRA, and doxorubicin (EAD) resulted in significant tumor
regression and restoration of epigenetically silencedRAR-ßexpression. Entinostat 
and doxorubicin treatment inhibited topoisomerase II-ß (TopoII-ß) and relieved
TopoII-ß-mediated transcriptional silencing ofRAR-ß Notably, EAD was the most
effective combination in inducing differentiation of breast tumor-initiating
cellsin vivo Furthermore, gene expression analysis revealed that the
epithelium-specific ETS transcription factor-1 (ESE-1 or ELF3), known to regulate
proliferation and differentiation, enhanced cell differentiation in response to
EAD triple therapy. Finally, we demonstrate that patient-derived metastatic cells
also responded to treatment with EAD. Collectively, our findings strongly suggest
that entinostat potentiates doxorubicin-mediated cytotoxicity and retinoid-driven
differentiation to achieve significant tumor regression in TNBC.Cancer Res;
76(7); 1-12. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26787836  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2016 Apr;24(4):655-63. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2015.10.019.
Epub 2015 Nov 19.

Targeted re-sequencing of linkage region on 2q21 identifies a novel functional
variant for hip and knee osteoarthritis.

Taipale M(1), Jakkula E(2), Kämäräinen OP(3), Gao P(3), Skarp S(1), Barral S(4), 
Kiviranta I(5), Kröger H(6), Ott J(7), Wei GH(3), Ala-Kokko L(8), Männikkö M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter Oulu and Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University 
of Oulu, Finland; Center for Life Course Epidemiology and Systems Medicine,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. (2)Biocenter Oulu and
Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of Oulu, Finland;
Public Health Genomics Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki,
Finland. (3)Biocenter Oulu and Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine,
University of Oulu, Finland. (4)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, College for
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, USA. (5)Department of
Orthopaedics and Traumatology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University
Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology,
Jyväskylä Central Hospital, Jyväskylä, Finland. (6)Department of Orthopaedics and
Traumatology, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland; Bone and Cartilage
Research Unit, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland. (7)Institute of
Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. (8)Connective Tissue
Gene Tests, Allentown, PA, USA. (9)Biocenter Oulu and Faculty of Biochemistry and
Molecular Medicine, University of Oulu, Finland; Center for Life Course
Epidemiology and Systems Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu,
Finland. Electronic address: minna.mannikko@oulu.fi.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to identify genetic variants predisposing to 
primary hip and knee osteoarthritis (OA) in a sample of Finnish families.
METHODS: Genome wide analysis was performed using 15 independent families (279
individuals) originating from Central Finland identified as having multiple
individuals with primary hip and/or knee OA. Targeted re-sequencing was performed
for three samples from one 33-member, four-generation family contributing most
significantly to the LOD score. In addition, exome sequencing was performed in
three family members from the same family.
RESULTS: Genome wide linkage analysis identified a susceptibility locus on
chromosome 2q21 with a multipoint LOD score of 3.91. Targeted re-sequencing and
subsequent linkage analysis revealed a susceptibility insertion variant
rs11446594. It locates in a predicted strong enhancer element region with maximum
LOD score 3.42 under dominant model of inheritance. Insertion creates a
recognition sequence for ELF3 and HMGA1 transcription factors. Their DNA-binding 
affinity is highly increased in the presence of A-allele compared to wild type
null allele.
CONCLUSION: A potentially novel functional OA susceptibility variant was
identified by targeted re-sequencing. This variant locates in a predicted
regulatory site and creates a recognition sequence for ELF3 and HMGA1
transcription factors that are predicted to play a significant role in articular 
cartilage homeostasis.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26603474  [PubMed - in process]


10. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Jan;15(1):201-17. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.054064. Epub
2015 Nov 6.

Identification of Evening Complex Associated Proteins in Arabidopsis by Affinity 
Purification and Mass Spectrometry.

Huang H(1), Alvarez S(1), Bindbeutel R(1), Shen Z(2), Naldrett MJ(1), Evans
BS(1), Briggs SP(2), Hicks LM(3), Kay SA(4), Nusinow DA(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, 975 N. Warson Road, St. Louis,
Missouri, 63132; (2)§University of California San Diego, Division of Biological
Sciences, Cell and Developmental Biology Section, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla,
California 92093-0116; (3)¶The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Department of Chemistry, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599; (4)<U+2016>University of
Southern California, Molecular and Computational Biology Section, Los Angeles,
California 90089. (5)From the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, 975 N.
Warson Road, St. Louis, Missouri, 63132; meter@danforthcenter.org.

Many species possess an endogenous circadian clock to synchronize internal
physiology with an oscillating external environment. In plants, the circadian
clock coordinates growth, metabolism and development over daily and seasonal time
scales. Many proteins in the circadian network form oscillating complexes that
temporally regulate myriad processes, including signal transduction,
transcription, protein degradation and post-translational modification. In
Arabidopsis thaliana, a tripartite complex composed of EARLY FLOWERING 4 (ELF4), 
EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3), and LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX), named the evening complex,
modulates daily rhythms in gene expression and growth through transcriptional
regulation. However, little is known about the physical interactions that connect
the circadian system to other pathways. We used affinity purification and mass
spectrometry (AP-MS) methods to identify proteins that associate with the evening
complex in A. thaliana. New connections within the circadian network as well as
to light signaling pathways were identified, including linkages between the
evening complex, TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION1 (TOC1), TIME FOR COFFEE (TIC), all
phytochromes and TANDEM ZINC KNUCKLE/PLUS3 (TZP). Coupling genetic mutation with 
affinity purifications tested the roles of phytochrome B (phyB), EARLY FLOWERING 
4, and EARLY FLOWERING 3 as nodes connecting the evening complex to clock and
light signaling pathways. These experiments establish a hierarchical association 
between pathways and indicate direct and indirect interactions. Specifically, the
results suggested that EARLY FLOWERING 3 and phytochrome B act as hubs connecting
the clock and red light signaling pathways. Finally, we characterized a clade of 
associated nuclear kinases that regulate circadian rhythms, growth, and flowering
in A. thaliana. Coupling mass spectrometry and genetics is a powerful method to
rapidly and directly identify novel components and connections within and between
complex signaling pathways.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4762519
PMID: 26545401  [PubMed - in process]


11. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Oct 13;6:829. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00829. eCollection
2015.

Exploring potential new floral organ morphogenesis genes of Arabidopsis thaliana 
using systems biology approach.

Xie W(1), Huang J(1), Liu Y(1), Rao J(1), Luo D(1), He M(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University Guangzhou, China.

Flowering is one of the important defining features of angiosperms. The
initiation of flower development and the formation of different floral organs are
the results of the interplays among numerous genes. But until now, just fewer
genes have been found linked with flower development. And the functions of lots
of genes of Arabidopsis thaliana are still unknown. Although, the quartet model
successfully simplified the ABCDE model to elaborate the molecular mechanism by
introducing protein-protein interactions (PPIs). We still don't know much about
several important aspects of flower development. So we need to discriminate even 
more genes involving in the flower development. In this study, we identified
seven differentially modules through integrating the weighted gene co-expression 
network analysis (WGCNA) and Support Vector Machine (SVM) method to analyze
co-expression network and PPIs using the public floral and non-floral expression 
profiles data of Arabidopsis thaliana. Gene set enrichment analysis was used for 
the functional annotation of the related genes, and some of the hub genes were
identified in each module. The potential floral organ morphogenesis genes of two 
significant modules were integrated with PPI information in order to detail the
inherent regulation mechanisms. Finally, the functions of the floral patterning
genes were elucidated by combining the PPI and evolutionary information. It was
indicated that the sub-networks or complexes, rather than the genes, were the
regulation unit of flower development. We found that the most possible potential 
new genes underlining the floral pattern formation in A. thaliana were FY, CBL2, 
ZFN3, and AT1G77370; among them, FY, CBL2 acted as an upstream regulator of AP2; 
ZFN3 activated the flower primordial determining gene AP1 and AP2 by HY5/HYH gene
via photo induction possibly. And AT1G77370 exhibited similar function in floral 
morphogenesis, same as ELF3. It possibly formed a complex between RFC3 and RPS15 
in cytoplasm, which regulated TSO1 and CPSF160 in the nucleus, to control the
floral organ morphogenesis. This process might also be fine tuning by AT5G53360
in the nucleus.

PMCID: PMC4602108
PMID: 26528302  [PubMed]


12. J Exp Bot. 2016 Jan;67(1):287-99. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erv458. Epub 2015 Oct 17.

Delimitation of the Earliness per se D1 (Eps-D1) flowering gene to a subtelomeric
chromosomal deletion in bread wheat (Triticum aestivum).

Zikhali M(1), Wingen LU(1), Griffiths S(2).

Author information: 
(1)John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, Norfolk, UK. (2)John Innes 
Centre, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, Norfolk, UK. simon.griffiths@jic.ac.uk.

Earliness per se (Eps) genes account for the variation in flowering time when
vernalization and photoperiod requirements are satisfied. Genomics and
bioinformatics approaches were used to describe allelic variation for 40 Triticum
aestivum genes predicted, by synteny with Brachypodium distachyon, to be in the
1DL Eps region. Re-sequencing 1DL genes revealed that varieties carrying early
heading alleles at this locus, Spark and Cadenza, carry a subtelomeric deletion
including several genes. The equivalent region in Rialto and Avalon is intact. A 
bimodal distribution in the segregating Spark X Rialto single seed descent (SSD) 
populations enabled the 1DL QTL to be defined as a discrete Mendelian factor,
which we named Eps-D1. Near isogenic lines (NILs) and NIL derived key
recombinants between markers flanking Eps-D1 suggest that the 1DL deletion
contains the gene(s) underlying Eps-D1. The deletion spans the equivalent of the 
Triticum monoccocum Eps-A (m) 1 locus, and hence includes MODIFIER OF
TRANSCRIPTION 1 (MOT1) and FTSH PROTEASE 4 (FTSH4), the candidates for Eps-A (m) 
1. The deletion also contains T. aestivum EARLY FLOWERING 3-D1 (TaELF3-D1) a
homologue of the Arabidopsis thaliana circadian clock gene EARLY FLOWERING 3.
Eps-D1 is possibly a homologue of Eps-B1 on chromosome 1BL. NILs carrying the
Eps-D1 deletion have significantly reduced total TaELF3 expression and altered
TaGIGANTEA (TaGI) expression compared with wild type. Altered TaGI expression is 
consistent with an ELF3 mutant, hence we propose TaELF3-D1 as the more likely
candidate for Eps-D1. This is the first direct fine mapping of Eps effect in
bread wheat.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

PMCID: PMC4682435
PMID: 26476691  [PubMed - in process]


13. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Sep 23;16(9):23057-75. doi: 10.3390/ijms160923057.

Reference Genes in the Pathosystem Phakopsora pachyrhizi/ Soybean Suitable for
Normalization in Transcript Profiling.

Hirschburger D(1), Müller M(2), Voegele RT(3), Link T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Phytopathology, Institute of Phytomedicine, Faculty of
Agricultural Sciences, University of Hohenheim, Otto-Sander-Straße 5, 70599
Stuttgart, Germany. Daniela.Hirschburger@uni-hohenheim.de. (2)Department of
Phytopathology, Institute of Phytomedicine, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences,
University of Hohenheim, Otto-Sander-Straße 5, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany.
Manuel.Mueller@uni-hohenheim.de. (3)Department of Phytopathology, Institute of
Phytomedicine, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, University of Hohenheim,
Otto-Sander-Straße 5, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany. Ralf.Voegele@uni-hohenheim.de.
(4)Department of Phytopathology, Institute of Phytomedicine, Faculty of
Agricultural Sciences, University of Hohenheim, Otto-Sander-Straße 5, 70599
Stuttgart, Germany. Tobias.Link@uni-hohenheim.de.

Phakopsora pachyrhizi is a devastating pathogen on soybean, endangering soybean
production worldwide. Use of Host Induced Gene Silencing (HIGS) and the study of 
effector proteins could provide novel strategies for pathogen control. For both
approaches quantification of transcript abundance by RT-qPCR is essential.
Suitable stable reference genes for normalization are indispensable to obtain
accurate RT-qPCR results. According to the Minimum Information for Publication of
Quantitative Real-Time PCR Experiments (MIQE) guidelines and using algorithms
geNorm and NormFinder we tested candidate reference genes from P. pachyrhizi and 
Glycine max for their suitability in normalization of transcript levels
throughout the infection process. For P. pachyrhizi we recommend a combination of
CytB and PDK or GAPDH for in planta experiments. Gene expression during in vitro 
stages and over the whole infection process was found to be highly unstable.
Here, RPS14 and UbcE2 are ranked best by geNorm and NormFinder. Alternatively
CytB that has the smallest Cq range (Cq: quantification cycle) could be used. We 
recommend specification of gene expression relative to the germ tube stage rather
than to the resting urediospore stage. For studies omitting the resting spore and
the appressorium stages a combination of Elf3 and RPS9, or PKD and GAPDH should
be used. For normalization of soybean genes during rust infection Ukn2 and cons7 
are recommended.

PMCID: PMC4613351
PMID: 26404265  [PubMed - in process]


14. Plant Signal Behav. 2015 Dec 2;10(12):e1087630. doi:
10.1080/15592324.2015.1087630.

The plant circadian clock looks like a traditional Japanese clock rather than a
modern Western clock.

Mizuno T(1), Yamashino T(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Laboratory of Molecular and Functional Genomics; School of Agriculture;
Nagoya University ; Nagoya , Japan.

Life cycle adaptation to seasonal changes in photoperiod and ambient temperature 
is a major determinant of the ecological success behind the widespread
domestication of flowering plants. The circadian clock plays a role in the
underlying mechanism for adaptation through generating endogenous rhythms that
allow plants to adapt and adjust to both the 24 h diurnal rotation and 365 d
seasonal revolution. Nevertheless, the mechanism by which the circadian clock
tracks seasonal changes in photoperiod and temperature is a longstanding subject 
in the field. Recently, we have begun to understand the question of how the light
and ambient temperature signals feed into the circadian clock transcriptional
circuitry in day-night cycles in order to track seasonal changes in photoperiod
and ambient temperature. (1-4) Our results collectively indicate that the evening
complex (EC) nighttime repressor consisting of LUX-ELF3-ELF4 plays a crucial role
in this respect. Here, we discuss about these recent studies to add further
implications.

PMID: 26382718  [PubMed - in process]


15. Mol Plant. 2015 Nov 2;8(11):1679-82. doi: 10.1016/j.molp.2015.08.004. Epub 2015
Aug 19.

OsELF3-2, an Ortholog of Arabidopsis ELF3, Interacts with the E3 Ligase APIP6 and
Negatively Regulates Immunity against Magnaporthe oryzae in Rice.

Ning Y(1), Shi X(1), Wang R(1), Fan J(2), Park CH(3), Zhang C(1), Zhang T(1),
Ouyang X(4), Li S(4), Wang GL(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests,
Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing 100193, China. (2)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and 
Insect Pests, Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Beijing 100193, China; Department of Plant Pathology, Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (3)Department of Plant Pathology, Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (4)Rice Genetics and Breeding, Rice Research
Institute, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu, Sichuan 611130, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests,
Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing 100193, China; Department of Plant Pathology, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Electronic address: wang.620@osu.edu.

PMID: 26296797  [PubMed - in process]


16. BMC Plant Biol. 2015 Aug 14;15:197. doi: 10.1186/s12870-015-0566-6.

Natural variants of ELF3 affect thermomorphogenesis by transcriptionally
modulating PIF4-dependent auxin response genes.

Raschke A(1), Ibañez C(2), Ullrich KK(3), Anwer MU(4), Becker S(5), Glöckner
A(6), Trenner J(7), Denk K(8), Saal B(9), Sun X(10), Ni M(11), Davis SJ(12,)(13),
Delker C(14), Quint M(15,)(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Signal Processing, Leibniz Institute of Plant
Biochemistry, Weinberg 3, 06120, Halle, Saale, Germany.
anja.raschke@landw.uni-halle.de. (2)Department of Molecular Signal Processing,
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Weinberg 3, 06120, Halle, Saale,
Germany. cibanez@ipb-halle.de. (3)Department of Molecular Signal Processing,
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Weinberg 3, 06120, Halle, Saale,
Germany. Kristian.Ullrich@biologie.uni-marburg.de. (4)Department of Plant
Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, 50829,
Cologne, Germany. anwer@mpipz.mpg.de. (5)Department of Molecular Signal
Processing, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Weinberg 3, 06120, Halle,
Saale, Germany. sebastian.becker@student.uni-halle.de. (6)Department of Molecular
Signal Processing, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Weinberg 3, 06120,
Halle, Saale, Germany. annemarie.gloeckner@uni-hamburg.de. (7)Department of
Molecular Signal Processing, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Weinberg 3,
06120, Halle, Saale, Germany. Jana.Trenner@ipb-halle.de. (8)Department of
Molecular Signal Processing, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Weinberg 3,
06120, Halle, Saale, Germany. kdenk@ipb-halle.de. (9)PlantaServ GmbH, Erdinger
Straße 82a, 85356, Freising, Germany. saal@baypmuc.de. (10)Department of Plant
Biology, University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Saint Paul, MN, USA.
xdsun@plantsciences.ucdavis.edu. (11)Department of Plant Biology, University of
Minnesota Twin Cities, Saint Paul, MN, USA. nixxx008@umn.edu. (12)Department of
Plant Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research,
50829, Cologne, Germany. seth.davis@york.ac.uk. (13)Department of Biology,
University of York, York, YO10 5DD, UK. seth.davis@york.ac.uk. (14)Department of 
Molecular Signal Processing, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Weinberg 3,
06120, Halle, Saale, Germany. cdelker@ipb-halle.de. (15)Department of Molecular
Signal Processing, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Weinberg 3, 06120,
Halle, Saale, Germany. mquint@ipb-halle.de. (16)Martin Luther University
Halle-Wittenberg, Institute of Agricultural and Nutritional Sciences,
Betty--Heimann-Str. 5, Halle (Saale), 06120, Germany. mquint@ipb-halle.de.

BACKGROUND: Perception and transduction of temperature changes result in altered 
growth enabling plants to adapt to increased ambient temperature. While
PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTOR4 (PIF4) has been identified as a major ambient
temperature signaling hub, its upstream regulation seems complex and is poorly
understood. Here, we exploited natural variation for thermo-responsive growth in 
Arabidopsis thaliana using quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis.
RESULTS: We identified GIRAFFE2.1, a major QTL explaining ~18 % of the phenotypic
variation for temperature-induced hypocotyl elongation in the Bay-0 x Sha
recombinant inbred line population. Transgenic complementation demonstrated that 
allelic variation in the circadian clock regulator EARLY FLOWERING3 (ELF3) is
underlying this QTL. The source of variation could be allocated to a single
nucleotide polymorphism in the ELF3 coding region, resulting in differential
expression of PIF4 and its target genes, likely causing the observed natural
variation in thermo-responsive growth.
CONCLUSIONS: In combination with other recent studies, this work establishes the 
role of ELF3 in the ambient temperature signaling network. Natural variation of
ELF3-mediated gating of PIF4 expression during nightly growing periods seems to
be affected by a coding sequence quantitative trait nucleotide that confers a
selective advantage in certain environments. In addition, natural ELF3 alleles
seem to differentially integrate temperature and photoperiod information to
induce architectural changes. Thus, ELF3 emerges as an essential coordinator of
growth and development in response to diverse environmental cues and implicates
ELF3 as an important target of adaptation.

PMCID: PMC4535396
PMID: 26269119  [PubMed - in process]


17. Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):1003-10. doi: 10.1038/ng.3375. Epub 2015 Aug 10.

Genomic spectra of biliary tract cancer.

Nakamura H(1), Arai Y(1), Totoki Y(1), Shirota T(1,)(2), Elzawahry A(1), Kato
M(3), Hama N(1), Hosoda F(1), Urushidate T(4), Ohashi S(1), Hiraoka N(5), Ojima
H(5,)(6), Shimada K(7), Okusaka T(8), Kosuge T(7), Miyagawa S(2), Shibata
T(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan. (2)First Department of Surgery, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, Japan. (3)Department of Bioinformatics, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human
Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan. (5)Division of Pathology and Clinical Laboratories, National Cancer Center
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of Pathology, Keio University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery,
National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (8)Department of Hepatobiliary and
Pancreatic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):967-8.

The incidence of biliary tract cancer (BTC), including intrahepatic (ICC) and
extrahepatic (ECC) cholangiocarcinoma and gallbladder cancer, has increased
globally; however, no effective targeted molecular therapies have been approved
at the present time. Here we molecularly characterized 260 BTCs and uncovered
spectra of genomic alterations that included new potential therapeutic targets.
Gradient spectra of mutational signatures with a higher burden of the
APOBEC-associated mutation signature were observed in gallbladder cancer and ECC.
Thirty-two significantly altered genes, including ELF3, were identified, and
nearly 40% of cases harbored targetable genetic alterations. Gene fusions
involving FGFR2 and PRKACA or PRKACB preferentially occurred in ICC and ECC,
respectively, and the subtype-associated prevalence of actionable growth
factor-mediated signals was noteworthy. The subgroup with the poorest prognosis
had significant enrichment of hypermutated tumors and a characteristic elevation 
in the expression of immune checkpoint molecules. Accordingly, immune-modulating 
therapies might also be potentially promising options for these patients.

PMID: 26258846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Genome Med. 2015 Aug 7;7(1):87. doi: 10.1186/s13073-015-0210-y. eCollection 2015.

Mutational landscape of mucinous ovarian carcinoma and its neoplastic precursors.

Ryland GL(1), Hunter SM(1), Doyle MA(2), Caramia F(2), Li J(2), Rowley SM(1),
Christie M(3), Allan PE(4), Stephens AN(5), Bowtell DD(6); Australian Ovarian
Cancer Study Group, Campbell IG(7), Gorringe KL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne,
Victoria Australia. (2)Bioinformatics Core Facility, Peter MacCallum Cancer
Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria Australia. (3)Department of Anatomical
Pathology, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria Australia. (4)Department
of Pathology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria Australia. 
(5)Centre for Cancer Research, MIMR-PHI Institute of Medical Research, Clayton,
Victoria Australia ; Department of Molecular and Translational Sciences, Monash
University, Clayton, Victoria Australia ; Epworth Research Institute, Epworth
HealthCare, Richmond, Victoria Australia. (6)Cancer Genetics and Genomics
Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria Australia ;
Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria Australia ; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University
of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria Australia. (7)Cancer Genetics Laboratory, Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria Australia ; Sir Peter MacCallum
Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria Australia ; 
Department of Pathology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria Australia.

BACKGROUND: Mucinous ovarian tumors are an unusual group of rare neoplasms with
an apparently clear progression from benign to borderline to carcinoma, yet with 
a controversial cell of origin in the ovarian surface epithelium. They are
thought to be molecularly distinct from other ovarian tumors but there have been 
no exome-level sequencing studies performed to date.
METHODS: To understand the genetic etiology of mucinous ovarian tumors and assess
the presence of novel therapeutic targets or pathways, we undertook exome
sequencing of 24 tumors encompassing benign (5), borderline (8) and carcinoma
(11) histologies and also assessed a validation cohort of 58 tumors for specific 
gene regions including exons 4-9 of TP53.
RESULTS: The predominant mutational signature was of C>T transitions in a NpCpG
context, indicative of deamination of methyl-cytosines. As well as mutations in
known drivers (KRAS, BRAF and CDKN2A), we identified a high percentage of
carcinomas with TP53 mutations (52 %), and recurrent mutations in RNF43, ELF3,
GNAS, ERBB3 and KLF5.
CONCLUSIONS: The diversity of mutational targets suggests multiple routes to
tumorigenesis in this heterogeneous group of tumors that is generally distinct
from other ovarian subtypes.

PMCID: PMC4528310
PMID: 26257827  [PubMed]


19. Plant Cell. 2015 Aug;27(8):2227-43. doi: 10.1105/tpc.15.00335. Epub 2015 Aug 4.

Quantitative Variation in Responses to Root Spatial Constraint within Arabidopsis
thaliana.

Joseph B(1), Lau L(2), Kliebenstein DJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis, California
95616 Bayer Crop Science, Crop Genetics Department, Morrisville, North Carolina
27560. (2)Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis,
California 95616. (3)Department of Plant Sciences, University of California,
Davis, California 95616 DynaMo Center of Excellence, University of Copenhagen,
DK-1871 Frederiksberg C, Denmark kliebenstein@ucdavis.edu.

Among the myriad of environmental stimuli that plants utilize to regulate growth 
and development to optimize fitness are signals obtained from various sources in 
the rhizosphere that give an indication of the nutrient status and volume of
media available. These signals include chemical signals from other plants,
nutrient signals, and thigmotropic interactions that reveal the presence of
obstacles to growth. Little is known about the genetics underlying the response
of plants to physical constraints present within the rhizosphere. In this study, 
we show that there is natural variation among Arabidopsis thaliana accessions in 
their growth response to physical rhizosphere constraints and competition. We
mapped growth quantitative trait loci that regulate a positive response of foliar
growth to short physical constraints surrounding the root. This is a highly
polygenic trait and, using quantitative validation studies, we showed that
natural variation in EARLY FLOWERING3 (ELF3) controls the link between root
constraint and altered shoot growth. This provides an entry point to study how
root and shoot growth are integrated to respond to environmental stimuli.

© 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4568506
PMID: 26243313  [PubMed - in process]


20. Plant Cell Physiol. 2015 Sep;56(9):1738-47. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcv094. Epub 2015
Jun 24.

Insight into a Physiological Role for the EC Night-Time Repressor in the
Arabidopsis Circadian Clock.

Mizuno T(1), Kitayama M(1), Takayama C(1), Yamashino T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Functional Genomics, School of Agriculture, Nagoya
University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8601 Japan. (2)Laboratory of
Molecular and Functional Genomics, School of Agriculture, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8601 Japan yamasino@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

Life cycle adaptation to seasonal variation in photoperiod and temperature is a
major determinant of ecological success of widespread domestication of
Arabidopsis thaliana. The circadian clock plays a role in the underlying
mechanism for adaptation. Nevertheless, the mechanism by which the circadian
clock tracks seasonal changes in photoperiod and temperature is a longstanding
subject of research in the field. We previously showed that a set of the target
genes (i.e. GI, LNK1. PRR9 and PRR7) of the Evening Complex (EC) consisting of
LUX-ELF3-ELF4 is synergistically induced in response to both warm-night and
night-light signals. Here, we further show that the responses occur within a wide
range of growth-compatible temperatures (16-28°C) in response to a small change
in temperature (<U+0394>4°C). A dim light pulse (<1 µmol m(-2) s(-1)) causes the
enhanced effect on the transcription of EC targets. The night-light pulse
antagonizes against a positive effect of the cool-night signal on the EC
activity. The mechanism of double-checking external temperature and light signals
through the EC nighttime repressor might enable plants to ignore (or tolerate)
daily fluctuation of ambient temperature within a short time interval in their
natural habitats. Taken together, the EC night-time repressor might play a
physiological role in tracking seasonal variation in photoperiod and temperature 
by conservatively double-checking both the light and temperature conditions.
Another EC target output gene PIF4 regulating plant morphologies is also
regulated by both the temperature and light stimuli during the night. Hence, the 
EC night-time repressor is also implicated in a physiological output of the
PIF4-mediated regulation of morphologies in response to seasonal variation in
photoperiod and ambient temperature.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Japanese
Society of Plant Physiologists. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26108788  [PubMed - in process]


21. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2015 Aug;14(8):2243-60. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.047183. Epub
2015 Jun 19.

Quantitative Circadian Phosphoproteomic Analysis of Arabidopsis Reveals Extensive
Clock Control of Key Components in Physiological, Metabolic, and Signaling
Pathways.

Choudhary MK(1), Nomura Y(2), Wang L(3), Nakagami H(2), Somers DE(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Integrative Biosciences and Biotechnology, POSTECH,
Hyojadong, Pohang, Kyungbuk, 790-784, Republic of Korea. (2)¶Plant Proteomics
Research Unit, RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science (CSRS), Yokohama,
Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan; (3)From the Division of Integrative Biosciences and
Biotechnology, POSTECH, Hyojadong, Pohang, Kyungbuk, 790-784, Republic of Korea
§Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
43210; <U+2016>Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Physiology, Institute of Botany,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China. (4)From the Division of
Integrative Biosciences and Biotechnology, POSTECH, Hyojadong, Pohang, Kyungbuk, 
790-784, Republic of Korea §Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio 43210; somers.24@osu.edu.

The circadian clock provides adaptive advantages to an organism, resulting in
increased fitness and survival. The phosphorylation events that regulate
circadian-dependent signaling and the processes which post-translationally
respond to clock-gated signals are largely unknown. To better elucidate
post-translational events tied to the circadian system we carried out a survey of
circadian-regulated protein phosphorylation events in Arabidopsis seedlings. A
large-scale mass spectrometry-based quantitative phosphoproteomics approach
employing TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment techniques identified and
quantified 1586 phosphopeptides on 1080 protein groups. A total of 102
phosphopeptides displayed significant changes in abundance, enabling the
identification of specific patterns of response to circadian rhythms. Our
approach was sensitive enough to quantitate oscillations in the phosphorylation
of low abundance clock proteins (early flowering4; ELF4 and pseudoresponse
regulator3; PRR3) as well as other transcription factors and kinases. During
constant light, extensive cyclic changes in phosphorylation status occurred in
critical regulators, implicating direct or indirect regulation by the circadian
system. These included proteins influencing transcriptional regulation,
translation, metabolism, stress and phytohormones-mediated responses. We
validated our analysis using the elf4-211 allele, in which an S45L transition
removes the phosphorylation herein identified. We show that removal of this
phosphorylatable site diminishes interaction with early flowering3 (ELF3), a key 
partner in a tripartite evening complex required for circadian cycling. elf4-211 
lengthens period, which increases with increasing temperature, relative to the
wild type, resulting in a more stable temperature compensation of circadian
period over a wider temperature range.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4528250 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26091701  [PubMed - in process]


22. Cell Host Microbe. 2015 Jun 10;17(6):820-8. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2015.05.005. Epub
2015 Jun 2.

Cyclic GMP-AMP Synthase Is an Innate Immune DNA Sensor for Mycobacterium
tuberculosis.

Collins AC(1), Cai H(2), Li T(2), Franco LH(3), Li XD(2), Nair VR(1), Scharn
CR(1), Stamm CE(1), Levine B(4), Chen ZJ(5), Shiloh MU(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9113, USA; Department of Microbiology, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9113, USA. (2)Department of
Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390-9148, USA. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA; Center for Autophagy
Research, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9113,
USA. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9113, USA; Department of Microbiology, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9113, USA; Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390-9148, USA; Center for Autophagy Research, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9113, USA. (5)Department of Molecular Biology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA;
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA. Electronic address: zhijian.chen@utsouthwestern.edu. 
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9113, USA; Department of Microbiology, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9113, USA. Electronic
address: michael.shiloh@utsouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2015 Jun 10;17(6):733-5.
    Cell Host Microbe. 2015 Jun 10;17(6):799-810.

Activation of the DNA-dependent cytosolic surveillance pathway in response to
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection stimulates ubiquitin-dependent autophagy and
inflammatory cytokine production, and plays an important role in host defense
against M. tuberculosis. However, the identity of the host sensor for M.
tuberculosis DNA is unknown. Here we show that M. tuberculosis activated cyclic
guanosine monophosphate-adenosine monophosphate (cGAMP) synthase (cGAS) in
macrophages to produce cGAMP, a second messenger that activates the adaptor
protein stimulator of interferon genes (STING) to induce type I interferons and
other cytokines. cGAS localized with M. tuberculosis in mouse and human cells and
in human tuberculosis lesions. Knockdown or knockout of cGAS in human or mouse
macrophages blocked cytokine production and induction of autophagy. Mice
deficient in cGAS were more susceptible to lethality caused by infection with M. 
tuberculosis. These results demonstrate that cGAS is a vital innate immune sensor
of M. tuberculosis infection.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4499468 [Available on 2016-06-10]
PMID: 26048137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Plant Signal Behav. 2015;10(5):e1000164. doi: 10.1080/15592324.2014.1000164.

The regulation of UV-B responses by the circadian clock.

Horak E(1), Farré EM.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Plant Biology; Michigan State University ; East Lansing , MI
USA.

The circadian clock modulates plant responses to environmental stimuli. In a
recent study we showed that light and the circadian clock regulate daily changes 
in sensitivity to short treatments of high UV-B. Here we demonstrate that these
time dependent changes in UV-B stress sensitivity are not mediated by the UV-B
receptor UV resistantce locus 8. We also discuss the potential mechanisms
involved in this process and the role of the circadian clock in the acclimation
to UV-B.

PMCID: PMC4623035
PMID: 26039469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cancer Inform. 2015 Apr 20;14:47-54. doi: 10.4137/CIN.S16912. eCollection 2015.

Profiling age-related epigenetic markers of stomach adenocarcinoma in young and
old subjects.

Kim BC(1), Jeong HO(1), Park D(1), Kim CH(2), Lee EK(3), Kim DH(3), Im E(1), Kim 
ND(1), Lee S(4), Yu BP(5), Bhak J(4), Chung HY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Inflammation Research Center for Aging Intervention, Pusan National 
University, Busan, Republic of Korea. ; Interdisciplinary Research Program of
Bioinformatics and Longevity Science, Pusan National University, Busan, Republic 
of Korea. (2)Genomictree Inc., Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(3)Molecular Inflammation Research Center for Aging Intervention, Pusan National 
University, Busan, Republic of Korea. (4)Personal Genomics Institute, Genome
Research Foundation, Suwon, Republic of Korea. ; BioMedical Engineering, UNIST,
Ulsan, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Physiology, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA.

The purpose of our study is to identify epigenetic markers that are differently
expressed in the stomach adenocarcinoma (STAD) condition. Based on data from The 
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we were able to detect an age-related difference in
methylation patterns and changes in gene and miRNA expression levels in young (n 
= 14) and old (n = 70) STAD subjects. Our analysis identified 323 upregulated and
653 downregulated genes in old STAD subjects. We also found 76 miRNAs with
age-related expression patterns and 113 differentially methylated genes (DMGs),
respectively. Our further analysis revealed that significant upregulated genes (n
= 35) were assigned to the cell cycle, while the muscle system process (n = 27)
and cell adhesion-related genes (n = 57) were downregulated. In addition, by
comparing gene and miRNA expression with methylation change, we identified that
three upregulated genes (ELF3, IL1ß, and MMP13) known to be involved in
inflammatory responses and cell growth were significantly hypomethylated in the
promoter region. We further detected target candidates for age-related,
downregulated miRNAs (hsa-mir-124-3, hsa-mir-204, and hsa-mir-125b-2) in old STAD
subjects. This is the first report of the results from a study exploring
age-related epigenetic biomarkers of STAD using high-throughput data and provides
evidence for a complex clinicopathological condition expressed by the age-related
STAD progression.

PMCID: PMC4406278
PMID: 25983541  [PubMed]


25. Immunol Res. 2015 Jun;62(2):198-212. doi: 10.1007/s12026-015-8651-3.

Epithelial-specific ETS-1 (ESE1/ELF3) regulates apoptosis of intestinal
epithelial cells in ulcerative colitis via accelerating NF-<U+03BA>B activation.

Li L(1), Miao X, Ni R, Miao X, Wang L, Gu X, Yan L, Tang Q, Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, 20 
Xisi Road, Nantong, 226001, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China.

Epithelial-specific ETS-1 (ESE1), also named as ELF3, ERT and ESX, belonging to
the ETS family of transcription factors, exerts multiple activities in
inflammation, epithelial differentiation and cancer development. Previous data
demonstrated that ESE1 synergizes with NF-<U+03BA>B to induce inflammation and drive
tumor progress, and the nuclear translocation of ESE1 promotes colon cells
apoptosis. However, the expression and biological functions of ESE1 in ulcerative
colitis (UC) remain unclear. In this study, we reported for the first time that
ESE1/ELF3 was over-expressed in intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) of patients
with UC. In DSS-induced colitis mouse models, we observed the up-regulation of
ESE1/ELF3 accompanied with the elevated levels of IEC apoptotic markers (active
caspase-3 and cleaved PARP) and NF-<U+03BA>B activation indicators [phosphorylated NF-<U+03BA>B
p65 subunit (p-p65) and p-I<U+03BA>B] in colitis IECs. Increased co-localization of
ESE1/ELF3 with active caspase-3 (and p-p65) in IECs of the DSS-induced colitis
group further indicated the possible involvement of ESE1/ELF3 in NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated
IEC apoptosis in UC. Employing the TNF-a-treated HT-29 cells as an IEC apoptosis 
model, we confirmed the positive correlation of ESE1/ELF3 with NF-<U+03BA>B activation
and caspase-dependent IEC apoptosis in vitro. Immunoprecipitation and
immunofluorescence assay revealed the physical interaction and increased nuclear 
translocation of ESE1/ELF3 and the NF-<U+03BA>B p65 subunit in TNF-a-treated HT-29
cells. Knocking ESE1/ELF3 down by siRNA significantly alleviated TNF-a-induced
NF-<U+03BA>B activation and cellular apoptosis in HT-29 cells. Taken together, our data 
suggested that ESE1/ELF3 may promote the UC progression via accelerating NF-<U+03BA>B
activation and thus facilitating IEC apoptosis.

PMID: 25926267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Genes Immun. 2015 Jul-Aug;16(5):356-61. doi: 10.1038/gene.2015.10. Epub 2015 Apr 
23.

The uncovering of ESE-1 in human neutrophils: implication of its role in
neutrophil function and survival.

Lee CM(1), Gupta S(2), Parodo J(3), Wu J(4), Marshall JC(3), Hu J(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] SickKids Research Institute, Program in Physiology and Experimental
Medicine, Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, SickKids Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada [2] Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada [3] The Keenan Research Centre, Li Ka Shing
Knowledge Institute, St Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)1] The
Keenan Research Centre, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St Michael's Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada [2] Human Biology Department, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)1] The Keenan Research Centre, Li Ka Shing Knowledge
Institute, St Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada [2] Department of
Surgery, St Michael's Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
(4)SickKids Research Institute, Program in Physiology and Experimental Medicine, 
Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, SickKids Hospital, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. (5)1] SickKids Research Institute, Program in Physiology and
Experimental Medicine, Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, SickKids
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada [2] Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Epithelium-specific Ets transcription factor 1 (ESE-1) is a member of the E26
transformation-specific family of transcription factors that has an
epithelial-restricted constitutive expression but is induced by inflammatory
stimuli in non-epithelial cells. Here we report that ESE-1 is constitutively
expressed in human, but not in murine, neutrophils and that ESE-1 is modestly
upregulated in septic patient neutrophils. In normal human neutrophils, ESE-1 was
detected at both RNA and protein levels but was found to be an unstable nuclear
protein ex vivo. ESE-1 transcription was also induced during all-trans retinoic
acid-mediated HL-60 differentiation, a human promyelocytic cell line often used
as an in vitro model of human neutrophils. Elf3-/- mice had normal neutrophils
but a reduced number of circulating B-lymphocytes. These findings indicate a
potential role of ESE-1 in regulating human neutrophil differentiation and
function, and that it has different roles in the immune system of different
species.

PMID: 25906252  [PubMed - in process]


27. Plant Cell. 2015 Apr;27(4):1128-39. doi: 10.1105/tpc.15.00044. Epub 2015 Apr 3.

The Transcriptional Regulator BBX19 Promotes Hypocotyl Growth by Facilitating
COP1-Mediated EARLY FLOWERING3 Degradation in Arabidopsis.

Wang CQ(1), Sarmast MK(1), Jiang J(1), Dehesh K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, University of California, Davis, California
95616. (2)Department of Plant Biology, University of California, Davis,
California 95616 kdehesh@ucdavis.edu.

Hypocotyl elongation is a highly coordinated physiological response regulated by 
myriad internal and external cues. Here, we show that BBX19, a transcriptional
regulator with two B-box motifs, is a positive regulator of growth; diminished
BBX19 expression by RNA interference reduces hypocotyl length, and its
constitutive expression promotes growth. This function of BBX19 is dependent on
the E3 ubiquitin ligase CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC1 (COP1), EARLY FLOWERING3
(ELF3), and PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTOR4 (PIF4) and PIF5. BBX19 is
nucleus-colocalized and interacts physically with COP1 and ELF3, a component of
the evening complex that represses the expression of PIF4 and PIF5. Moreover,
ELF3 protein abundance inversely correlates with BBX19 expression levels in a
COP1-dependent manner. By contrast, PIF expression, coinciding with the
initiation of hypocotyl growth in the early evening, is positively correlated
with the BBX19 transcript abundance. These results collectively establish BBX19
as an adaptor that binds to and recruits ELF3 for degradation by COP1 and, as
such, dynamically gates the formation of the evening complex, resulting in
derepression of PIF4/5. This finding refines our perspective on how plants grow
by providing a molecular link between COP1, ELF3, and PIF4/5 as an underlying
mechanism of photomorphogenic development in Arabidopsis thaliana.

© 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4558699
PMID: 25841036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cell Rep. 2015 Mar 3. pii: S2211-1247(15)00142-4. doi:
10.1016/j.celrep.2015.02.014. [Epub ahead of print]

ErbB2 Pathway Activation upon Smad4 Loss Promotes Lung Tumor Growth and
Metastasis.

Liu J(1), Cho SN(1), Akkanti B(2), Jin N(1), Mao J(1), Long W(3), Chen T(4),
Zhang Y(5), Tang X(6), Wistub II(6), Creighton CJ(7), Kheradmand F(8), DeMayo
FJ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry
& Molecular Biology, Wright State University, Dayton, OH 45435, USA.
(4)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (5)The Dan L. Duncan
Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (6)Department 
of Translational Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (7)The Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Departments of Medicine, Hematology and Oncology, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (8)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary
and Critical Care, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; The Dan L.
Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(9)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; The Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: fdemayo@bcm.edu.

Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer death. Genome sequencing of lung 
tumors from patients with squamous cell carcinoma has identified SMAD4 to be
frequently mutated. Here, we use a mouse model to determine the molecular
mechanisms by which Smad4 loss leads to lung cancer progression. Mice with
ablation of Pten and Smad4 in airway epithelium develop metastatic adenosquamous 
tumors. Comparative transcriptomic and in vivo cistromic analyses determine that 
loss of PTEN and SMAD4 results in ELF3 and ErbB2 pathway activation due to
decreased expression of ERRFI1, a negative regulator of ERBB2 in mouse and human 
cells. The combinatorial inhibition of ErbB2 and Akt signaling attenuate tumor
progression and cell invasion, respectively. Expression profile analysis of human
lung tumors substantiated the importance of the ErbB2/Akt/ELF3 signaling pathway 
as both a prognostic biomarker and a therapeutic drug target for treating lung
cancer.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25753424  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Plant Signal Behav. 2015;10(3):e992707. doi: 10.4161/15592324.2014.992707.

Gibberellin driven growth in elf3 mutants requires PIF4 and PIF5.

Filo J(1), Wu A, Eliason E, Richardson T, Thines BC, Harmon FG.

Author information: 
(1)a Keck Science Department ; Pitzer College ; Claremont , CA USA.

The regulatory connections between the circadian clock and hormone signaling are 
essential to understand, as these two regulatory processes work together to time 
growth processes relative to predictable environmental events. Gibberellins (GAs)
are phytohormones that control many growth processes throughout all stages of the
plant life cycle, including germination and flowering. An increasing number of
examples demonstrate that the circadian clock directly influences GA biosynthesis
and signaling. EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3) participates in a tripartite
transcriptional complex known as the Evening Complex (EC). In this capacity, ELF3
is fundamental to core circadian clock activity, as well as time-of-day specific 
regulation of genes directly responsible for growth control, namely the
PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR 4 (PIF4) and PIF5 genes. Here we show that the GA 
biosynthesis inhibitor paclobutrazol substantially reduces the long hypocotyl and
petiole phenotypes of Arabidopsis elf3 mutants. In addition, loss of ELF3
activity causes upregulation of the key GA biosynthesis genes GA20ox1 and
GA20ox2. Moreover, GA20ox1 and GA20ox2 expression depends strongly on the
redundant activities of PIF4 and PIF5. These findings indicate that the defining 
growth phenotypes of elf3 mutants arise from altered GA biosynthesis due to
misregulation of PIF4 and PIF5. These observations agree with recent work linking
increased GA production with the elongated growth phenotypes of the barley elf3
mutant. Thus, the role of the EC in regulation of GA biosynthesis and signaling
in eudicots is shared with monocots and, therefore, is a highly conserved
mechanism for growth control.

PMCID: PMC4622946
PMID: 25738547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2015 May 1;308(9):C750-7. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00381.2014. Epub 2015 Feb 25.

Regulation of basal promoter activity of the human thiamine pyrophosphate
transporter SLC44A4 in human intestinal epithelial cells.

Nabokina SM(1), Ramos MB(1), Valle JE(1), Said HM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Physiology/Biophysics, University of California,
Irvine, California; and Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Long
Beach, California. (2)Departments of Medicine and Physiology/Biophysics,
University of California, Irvine, California; and Department of Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, Long Beach, California hmsaid@uci.edu.

Microbiota of the large intestine synthesize considerable amount of vitamin B1 in
the form of thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP). There is a specific high-affinity
regulated carrier-mediated uptake system for TPP in human colonocytes (product of
the SLC44A4 gene). The mechanisms of regulation of SLC44A4 gene expression are
currently unknown. In this study, we characterized the SLC44A4 minimal promoter
region and identified transcription factors important for basal promoter activity
in colonic epithelial cells. The 5'-regulatory region of the SLC44A4 gene (1,022 
bp) was cloned and showed promoter activity upon transient transfection into
human colonic epithelial NCM460 cells. With the use of a series of 5'- and
3'-deletion luciferase reporter constructs, the minimal genomic region that
required basal transcription of the SLC44A4 gene expression was mapped between
nucleotides -178 and +88 (using the distal transcriptional start site as +1).
Mutational analysis performed on putative cis-regulatory elements established the
involvement of ETS/ELF3 [E26 transformation-specific sequence (ETS) proteins],
cAMP-responsive element (CRE), and SP1/GC-box sequence motifs in basal SLC44A4
promoter activity. By means of EMSA, binding of ELF3 and CRE-binding protein-1
(CREB-1) transcription factors to the SLC44A4 minimal promoter was shown.
Contribution of CREB into SLC44A4 promoter activity was confirmed using NCM460
cells overexpressing CREB. We also found high expression of ELF3 and CREB-1 in
colonic (NCM460) compared with noncolonic (ARPE19) cells, suggesting their
possible contribution to colon-specific pattern of SLC44A4 expression. This study
represents the first characterization of the SLC44A4 promoter and reports the
importance of both ELF3 and CREB-1 transcription factors in the maintenance of
basal promoter activity in colonic epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4420793 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25715703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Insect Sci. 2015 Jan 23. doi: 10.1111/1744-7917.12205. [Epub ahead of print]

Next generation sequencing of Apis mellifera syriaca identifies genes for Varroa 
resistance and beneficial bee keeping traits.

Haddad N(1), Mahmud Batainh A, Suleiman Migdadi O, Saini D, Krishnamurthy V,
Parameswaran S, Alhamuri Z.

Author information: 
(1)Bee Research Department, National Center for Agricultural Research and
Extension, P.O.Box 639-Baqa, 19381.

Apis mellifera syriaca exhibits a high degree of tolerance to pests and pathogens
including varroa mites. This native honey bee subspecies of Jordan expresses
behavioral adaptations to high temperature and dry seasons typical of the region.
However, persistent honey bee imports of commercial breeder lines are endangering
local honey bee population. This study reports the use of next-generation
sequencing (NGS) technology to study the A. m. syriaca genome and to identify
genetic factors possibly contributing toward mite resistance and other favorable 
traits. We obtained a total of 46.2 million raw reads by applying the NGS to
sequence A. m. syriaca and used extensive bioinformatics approach to identify
several candidate genes for Varroa mite resistance, behavioral and immune
responses characteristic for these bees. As a part of characterizing the
functional regulation of molecular genetic pathway, we have mapped the pathway
genes potentially involved using information from Drosophila melanogaster and
present possible functional changes implicated in responses to Varroa destructor 
mite infestation toward this. We performed in-depth functional annotation methods
to identify ~600 candidates that are relevant, genes involved in pathways such as
microbial recognition and phagocytosis, peptidoglycan recognition protein family,
Gram negative binding protein family, phagocytosis receptors, serpins, Toll
signaling pathway, Imd pathway, Tnf, JAK-STAT and MAPK pathway, heamatopioesis
and cellular response pathways, antiviral, RNAi pathway, stress factors, etc.
were selected. Finally, we have cataloged function-specific polymorphisms between
A. mellifera and A. m. syriaca that could give better understanding of varroa
mite resistance mechanisms and assist in breeding. We have identified immune
related embryonic development (Cactus, Relish, dorsal, Ank2, baz), Varroa hygiene
(NorpA2, Zasp, LanA, gasp, impl3) and Varroa resistance (Pug, pcmt, elk,
elf3-s10, Dscam2, Dhc64C, gro, futsch) functional variations genes between A.
mellifera and A. m. syriaca that could be used to develop an effective molecular 
tool for bee conservation and breeding programs to improve locally adapted
strains such as syriaca and utilize their advantageous traits for the benefit of 
apiculture industry.

© 2015 Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 25615619  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


32. Curr Biol. 2015 Jan 19;25(2):187-93. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.10.070. Epub 2014
Dec 31.

ELF3-PIF4 interaction regulates plant growth independently of the Evening
Complex.

Nieto C(1), López-Salmerón V(1), Davière JM(1), Prat S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento Genética Molecular de Plantas, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología
(CSIC), Campus de Cantoblanco, Darwin 3, 28049 Madrid, Spain. (2)Departamento
Genética Molecular de Plantas, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CSIC), Campus de
Cantoblanco, Darwin 3, 28049 Madrid, Spain. Electronic address:
sprat@cnb.csic.es.

The circadian clock plays a pivotal role in the control of Arabidopsis hypocotyl 
elongation by regulating rhythmic expression of the bHLH factors PHYTOCHROME
INTERACTING FACTOR 4 and 5 (PIF4 and 5). Coincidence of increased PIF4/PIF5
transcript levels with the dark period allows nuclear accumulation of these
factors, and in short days it phases maximal hypocotyl growth at dawn. During
early night, PIF4 and PIF5 transcription is repressed by the Evening Complex (EC)
proteins EARLY FLOWERING3 (ELF3), EARLY FLOWERING4 (ELF4), and LUX ARRHYTHMO
(LUX). While ELF3 has an essential role in EC complex assembly, several lines of 
evidence indicate that this protein controls plant growth via other mechanisms
that are presently unknown. Here, we show that the ELF3 and PIF4 proteins
interact in an EC-independent manner, and that this interaction prevents PIF4
from activating its transcriptional targets. We also show that PIF4
overexpression leads to ELF3 protein destabilization, and that this effect is
mediated indirectly by negative feedback regulation of photoactive PHYTOCHROME B 
(phyB). Physical interaction of the phyB photoreceptor with ELF3 has been
reported, but its functional relevance remains poorly understood. Our findings
establish that phyB is needed for ELF3 accumulation in the light, most likely by 
competing for CONSTITUTIVELY PHOTOMORPHOGENIC1 (COP1)-mediated ubiquitination and
the proteasomal degradation of ELF3. Our results explain the short hypocotyl
phenotype of ELF3 overexpressors, despite their normal clock function, and
provide a molecular framework for understanding how warm temperatures promote
hypocotyl elongation and affect the endogenous clock.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25557667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Curr Biol. 2015 Jan 19;25(2):194-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.10.076. Epub 2014 Dec
31.

ELF3 controls thermoresponsive growth in Arabidopsis.

Box MS(1), Huang BE(2), Domijan M(1), Jaeger KE(1), Khattak AK(3), Yoo SJ(1),
Sedivy EL(1), Jones DM(1), Hearn TJ(4), Webb AA(4), Grant A(5), Locke JC(1),
Wigge PA(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Sainsbury Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1LR, UK.
(2)Computational Informatics, CSIRO, Dutton Park, QLD 4012, Australia. (3)Cell
and Developmental Biology, John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 
7UH, UK; School of Environmental Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4
7TJ, UK. (4)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 
3EA, UK. (5)School of Environmental Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich 
NR4 7TJ, UK. (6)The Sainsbury Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 
1LR, UK. Electronic address: philip.wigge@slcu.cam.ac.uk.

Plant development is highly responsive to ambient temperature, and this trait has
been linked to the ability of plants to adapt to climate change. The mechanisms
by which natural populations modulate their thermoresponsiveness are not known.
To address this, we surveyed Arabidopsis accessions for variation in thermal
responsiveness of elongation growth and mapped the corresponding loci. We find
that the transcriptional regulator EARLY FLOWERING3 (ELF3) controls elongation
growth in response to temperature. Through a combination of modeling and
experiments, we show that high temperature relieves the gating of growth at
night, highlighting the importance of temperature-dependent repressors of growth.
ELF3 gating of transcriptional targets responds rapidly and reversibly to changes
in temperature. We show that the binding of ELF3 to target promoters is
temperature dependent, suggesting a mechanism where temperature directly controls
ELF3 activity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25557663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Plant Cell. 2014 Oct;26(10):3911-21. doi: 10.1105/tpc.114.129031. Epub 2014 Oct
3.

Differentially phased leaf growth and movements in Arabidopsis depend on
coordinated circadian and light regulation.

Dornbusch T(1), Michaud O(1), Xenarios I(2), Fankhauser C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Genomics, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University
of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. (2)SIB-Swiss Institute of
Bioinformatics, University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. (3)Center for
Integrative Genomics, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne,
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland christian.fankhauser@unil.ch.

Comment in
    Plant Cell. 2014 Oct;26(10):3828.

In contrast to vastly studied hypocotyl growth, little is known about diel
regulation of leaf growth and its coordination with movements such as changes in 
leaf elevation angle (hyponasty). We developed a 3D live-leaf growth analysis
system enabling simultaneous monitoring of growth and movements. Leaf growth is
maximal several hours after dawn, requires light, and is regulated by daylength, 
suggesting coupling between growth and metabolism. We identify both blade and
petiole positioning as important components of leaf movements in Arabidopsis
thaliana and reveal a temporal delay between growth and movements. In hypocotyls,
the combination of circadian expression of PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR4 (PIF4)
and PIF5 and their light-regulated protein stability drives rhythmic hypocotyl
elongation with peak growth at dawn. We find that PIF4 and PIF5 are not essential
to sustain rhythmic leaf growth but influence their amplitude. Furthermore, EARLY
FLOWERING3, a member of the evening complex (EC), is required to maintain the
correct phase between growth and movement. Our study shows that the mechanisms
underlying rhythmic hypocotyl and leaf growth differ. Moreover, we reveal the
temporal relationship between leaf elongation and movements and demonstrate the
importance of the EC for the coordination of these phenotypic traits.

© 2014 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4247567
PMID: 25281688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Dev Cell. 2014 Sep 29;30(6):660-72. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.07.008. Epub 2014 
Sep 11.

Cpeb4-mediated translational regulatory circuitry controls terminal erythroid
differentiation.

Hu W(1), Yuan B(2), Lodish HF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
Electronic address: whu@wi.mit.edu. (2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical
Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical
Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of Biology and Department of
Bioengineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

While we have considerable understanding of the transcriptional networks
controlling mammalian cell differentiation, our knowledge of posttranscriptional 
regulatory events is very limited. Using differentiation of primary erythroid
cells as a model, we show that the sequence-specific mRNA-binding protein Cpeb4
is strongly induced by the erythroid-important transcription factors Gata1 and
Tal1 and is essential for terminal erythropoiesis. By interacting with the
translation initiation factor eIF3, Cpeb4 represses the translation of a large
set of mRNAs, including its own mRNA. Thus, transcriptional induction and
translational repression combine to form a negative feedback loop to control
Cpeb4 protein levels within a specific range that is required for terminal
erythropoiesis. Our study provides an example of how translational control is
integrated with transcriptional regulation to precisely control gene expression
during mammalian cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4182162
PMID: 25220394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 22;9(8):e104391. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104391.
eCollection 2014.

Eukaryotic initiation factor 4G suppresses nonsense-mediated mRNA decay by two
genetically separable mechanisms.

Joncourt R(1), Eberle AB(2), Rufener SC(1), Mühlemann O(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Bern, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Bern,
Switzerland; Graduate School for Cellular and Biomedical Sciences, University of 
Bern, Bern, Switzerland. (2)University of Bern, Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Bern, Switzerland.

Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), which is best known for degrading mRNAs with 
premature termination codons (PTCs), is thought to be triggered by aberrant
translation termination at stop codons located in an environment of the mRNP that
is devoid of signals necessary for proper termination. In mammals, the
cytoplasmic poly(A)-binding protein 1 (PABPC1) has been reported to promote
correct termination and therewith antagonize NMD by interacting with the
eukaryotic release factors 1 (eRF1) and 3 (eRF3). Using tethering assays in which
proteins of interest are recruited as MS2 fusions to a NMD reporter transcript,
we show that the three N-terminal RNA recognition motifs (RRMs) of PABPC1 are
sufficient to antagonize NMD, while the eRF3-interacting C-terminal domain is
dispensable. The RRM1-3 portion of PABPC1 interacts with eukaryotic initiation
factor 4G (eIF4G) and tethering of eIF4G to the NMD reporter also suppresses NMD.
We identified the interactions of the eIF4G N-terminus with PABPC1 and the eIF4G 
core domain with eIF3 as two genetically separable features that independently
enable tethered eIF4G to inhibit NMD. Collectively, our results reveal a function
of PABPC1, eIF4G and eIF3 in translation termination and NMD suppression, and
they provide additional evidence for a tight coupling between translation
termination and initiation.

PMCID: PMC4141738
PMID: 25148142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Exp Bot. 2014 Nov;65(20):6003-12. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eru339. Epub 2014 Aug 21.

Light and the circadian clock mediate time-specific changes in sensitivity to
UV-B stress under light/dark cycles.

Takeuchi T(1), Newton L(1), Burkhardt A(1), Mason S(1), Farré EM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
48824, USA. (2)Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI 48824, USA farre@msu.edu.

In Arabidopsis, the circadian clock regulates UV-B-mediated changes in gene
expression. Here it is shown that circadian clock components are able to inhibit 
UV-B-induced gene expression in a gene-by-gene-specific manner and act downstream
of the initial UV-B sensing by COP1 (CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1) and UVR8
(UV RESISTANCE LOCUS 8). For example, the UV-B induction of ELIP1 (EARLY LIGHT
INDUCIBLE PROTEIN 1) and PRR9 (PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR 9) is directly regulated
by LUX (LUX ARRYTHMO), ELF4 (EARLY FLOWERING 4), and ELF3. Moreover,
time-dependent changes in plant sensitivity to UV-B damage were observed.
Wild-type Arabidopsis plants, but not circadian clock mutants, were more
sensitive to UV-B treatment during the night periods than during the light
periods under diel cycles. Experiments performed under short cycles of 6h light
and 6h darkness showed that the increased stress sensitivity of plants to UV-B in
the dark only occurred during the subjective night and not during the subjective 
day in wild-type seedlings. In contrast, the stress sensitivity of Arabidopsis
mutants with a compromised circadian clock was still influenced by the light
condition during the subjective day. Taken together, the results show that the
clock and light modulate plant sensitivity to UV-B stress at different times of
the day.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

PMCID: PMC4203133
PMID: 25147271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nat Commun. 2014 Aug 14;5:4636. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5636.

Phytochrome-interacting transcription factors PIF4 and PIF5 induce leaf
senescence in Arabidopsis.

Sakuraba Y(1), Jeong J(2), Kang MY(3), Kim J(4), Paek NC(3), Choi G(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Plant Science, Plant Genomics and Breeding Institute,
Research Institute of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Seoul National University,
Seoul 151-921, Korea [2]. (2)1] Department of Biological Sciences, KAIST, Daejeon
305-701, Korea [2]. (3)Department of Plant Science, Plant Genomics and Breeding
Institute, Research Institute of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul 151-921, Korea. (4)Department of Biological Sciences, KAIST,
Daejeon 305-701, Korea.

Plants initiate senescence to shed photosynthetically inefficient leaves. Light
deprivation induces leaf senescence, which involves massive transcriptional
reprogramming to dismantle cellular components and remobilize nutrients. In
darkness, intermittent pulses of red light can inhibit senescence, likely via
phytochromes. However, the precise molecular mechanisms transducing the signals
from light perception to the inhibition of senescence remain elusive. Here, we
show that in Arabidopsis, dark-induced senescence requires
phytochrome-interacting transcription factors PIF4 and PIF5 (PIF4/PIF5). ELF3 and
phytochrome B inhibit senescence by repressing PIF4/PIF5 at the transcriptional
and post-translational levels, respectively. PIF4/PIF5 act in the signalling
pathways of two senescence-promoting hormones, ethylene and abscisic acid, by
directly activating expression of EIN3, ABI5 and EEL. In turn, PIF4, PIF5, EIN3, 
ABI5 and EEL directly activate the expression of the major senescence-promoting
NAC transcription factor ORESARA1, thus forming multiple, coherent feed-forward
loops. Our results reveal how classical light signalling connects to senescence
in Arabidopsis.

PMID: 25119965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 25;450(2):984-90. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.06.079. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Transcriptional regulation of OCT4 by the ETS transcription factor ESE-1 in NCCIT
human embryonic carcinoma cells.

Park SW(1), Do HJ(1), Ha WT(1), Han MH(1), Yang HM(1), Lee SH(1), Song H(2), Kim 
NH(3), Kim JH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Life Science, CHA University,
Seongnam-Si, Gyeonggi-Do, South Korea. (2)Department of Animal & Food Bioscience,
College of Natural Science, Konkuk University, Chungju, Chungbuk, South Korea.
(3)Department of Animal Sciences, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju,
Chungbuk, South Korea. (4)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Life
Science, CHA University, Seongnam-Si, Gyeonggi-Do, South Korea. Electronic
address: jaehwan_k@cha.ac.kr.

The epithelium-specific ETS transcription factor-1 (ESE-1) is physiologically
important in the pathogenesis of various diseases. Recently, OCT4, a
transcription factor involved in stem cell pluripotency, has been implicated in
tumorigenesis. In this study, we invested the molecular mechanism by which ESE-1 
regulates transcription of OCT4 in NCCIT human embryonic carcinoma cells.
Real-time PCR analysis revealed that OCT4 levels were high in undifferentiated
NCCIT cells but significantly decreased upon retinoic acid-mediated
differentiation, concomitant with up-regulation of ESE-1 expression. OCT4 mRNA
level rose following shRNA-mediated knockdown of ESE-1, but declined when ESE-1
was overexpressed, suggesting that the expression levels of OCT4 and ESE-1 may be
coordinated in an opposite manner. Promoter-reporter assays revealed that induced
OCT4 promoter activity in NCCIT cells was significantly down-regulated by ESE-1
overexpression in a dose-dependent manner. The inhibitory effect of ESE-1 on OCT4
promoter activity was relieved by co-expression of an ESE-1 mutant lacking the
transactivation domain, but not by mutants lacking other domains. Serial deletion
and site-directed mutagenesis of the OCT4 promoter revealed that a potential ETS 
binding site (EBS) is present in the conserved region 2 (CR2). ESE-1 interacted
with the EBS element in CR2 and enrichment of CR2 significantly increased upon
RA-mediated differentiation of NCCIT cells, suggesting that this binding is
likely to be involved in ESE-1-mediated repression of OCT4 promoter activity upon
differentiation. Taken together, the results of this study reveal the molecular
details of the mechanism by which the oncogenic factor ESE-1 regulates expression
of the stem cell transcription factor OCT4 in pluripotent NCCIT cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24971534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. BMC Plant Biol. 2014 May 19;14:136. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-14-136.

Alternative splicing and nonsense-mediated decay of circadian clock genes under
environmental stress conditions in Arabidopsis.

Kwon YJ, Park MJ, Kim SG, Baldwin IT, Park CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.
cmpark@snu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: The circadian clock enables living organisms to anticipate recurring 
daily and seasonal fluctuations in their growth habitats and synchronize their
biology to the environmental cycle. The plant circadian clock consists of
multiple transcription-translation feedback loops that are entrained by
environmental signals, such as light and temperature. In recent years,
alternative splicing emerges as an important molecular mechanism that modulates
the clock function in plants. Several clock genes are known to undergo
alternative splicing in response to changes in environmental conditions,
suggesting that the clock function is intimately associated with environmental
responses via the alternative splicing of the clock genes. However, the
alternative splicing events of the clock genes have not been studied at the
molecular level.
RESULTS: We systematically examined whether major clock genes undergo alternative
splicing under various environmental conditions in Arabidopsis. We also
investigated the fates of the RNA splice variants of the clock genes. It was
found that the clock genes, including EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3) and ZEITLUPE (ZTL)
that have not been studied in terms of alternative splicing, undergo extensive
alternative splicing through diverse modes of splicing events, such as intron
retention, exon skipping, and selection of alternative 5' splice site. Their
alternative splicing patterns were differentially influenced by changes in
photoperiod, temperature extremes, and salt stress. Notably, the RNA splice
variants of TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1 (TOC1) and ELF3 were degraded through the 
nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) pathway, whereas those of other clock genes were
insensitive to NMD.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our observations demonstrate that the major clock
genes examined undergo extensive alternative splicing under various environmental
conditions, suggesting that alternative splicing is a molecular scheme that
underlies the linkage between the clock and environmental stress adaptation in
plants. It is also envisioned that alternative splicing of the clock genes plays 
more complex roles than previously expected.

PMCID: PMC4035800
PMID: 24885185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 29;5:e1263. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.206.

Elf3 drives ß-catenin transactivation and associates with poor prognosis in
colorectal cancer.

Wang JL(1), Chen ZF(1), Chen HM(1), Wang MY(1), Kong X(1), Wang YC(1), Sun TT(1),
Hong J(1), Zou W(2), Xu J(1), Fang JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogene and Related Genes, Key Laboratory of
Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Ministry of Health, Department of Gastroenterology
and Hepatology, Ren-Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao-Tong
University, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease,
145 Middle Shandong Road, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Surgery, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Aberrant regulation of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway plays important roles in
colorectal carcinogenesis, with over 90% of cases of sporadic colon cancer
featuring ß-catenin accumulation. While ubiquitination-mediated degradation is
widely accepted as a major route for ß-catenin protein turnover, little is known 
about the regulation of ß-catenin in transcriptional level. Here we show that
Elf3, a member of the E-twenty-six family of transcription factors, drives
ß-catenin transactivation and associates with poor survival of colorectal cancer 
(CRC) patients. We first found recurrent amplification and upregulation of Elf3
in CRC tissues, and further Gene Set Enrichment Analysis identified significant
association between Elf3 expression and activity of WNT/ß-catenin pathway.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
consistently revealed that Elf3 binds to and transactivates ß-catenin promoter.
Ectopic expression of Elf3 induces accumulation of ß-catenin in both nucleus and 
cytoplasm, causing subsequent upregulation of several effector genes including
c-Myc, VEGF, CCND1, MMP-7 and c-Jun. Suppressing Elf3 in CRC cells attenuates
ß-catenin signaling and decreases cell proliferation, migration and survival.
Targeting Elf3 in xenograft tumors suppressed tumor progression in vivo. Taken
together, our data identify Elf3 as a pivotal driver for ß-catenin signaling in
CRC, and highlight potential prognostic and therapeutic significance of Elf3 in
CRC.

PMCID: PMC4047871
PMID: 24874735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Elife. 2014 May 27;3. doi: 10.7554/eLife.02206.

Natural variation reveals that intracellular distribution of ELF3 protein is
associated with function in the circadian clock.

Anwer MU(1), Boikoglou E(1), Herrero E(1), Hallstein M(1), Davis AM(1),
Velikkakam James G(1), Nagy F(2), Davis SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for Plant
Breeding Research, Cologne, Germany. (2)Institute of Plant Biology, Biological
Research Centre of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, Hungary.

Natural selection of variants within the Arabidopsis thaliana circadian clock can
be attributed to adaptation to varying environments. To define a basis for such
variation, we examined clock speed in a reporter-modified Bay-0 x Shakdara
recombinant inbred line and localized heritable variation. Extensive variation
led us to identify EARLY FLOWERING3 (ELF3) as a major quantitative trait locus
(QTL). The causal nucleotide polymorphism caused a short-period phenotype under
light and severely dampened rhythm generation in darkness, and entrainment
alterations resulted. We found that ELF3-Sha protein failed to properly localize 
to the nucleus, and its ability to accumulate in darkness was compromised.
Evidence was provided that the ELF3-Sha allele originated in Central Asia.
Collectively, we showed that ELF3 protein plays a vital role in defining its
light-repressor action in the circadian clock and that its functional abilities
are largely dependent on its cellular localization.

PMCID: PMC4071560
PMID: 24867215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Plant Cell. 2014 Apr 29;26(4):1557-1569. [Epub ahead of print]

EARLY FLOWERING3 Regulates Flowering in Spring Barley by Mediating Gibberellin
Production and FLOWERING LOCUS T Expression.

Boden SA(1), Weiss D(2), Ross JJ(3), Davies NW(3), Trevaskis B(1), Chandler
PM(1), Swain SM(4).

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia. (2)Institute of Plant Sciences and
Genetics in Agriculture, The Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and
Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot 76100, Israel. (3)School
of Biological Sciences, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania 7001, Australia.
(4)CSIRO, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia steve.swain@csiro.au.

EARLY FLOWERING3 (ELF3) is a circadian clock gene that contributes to
photoperiod-dependent flowering in plants, with loss-of-function mutants in
barley (Hordeum vulgare), legumes, and Arabidopsis thaliana flowering early under
noninductive short-day (SD) photoperiods. The barley elf3 mutant displays
increased expression of FLOWERING LOCUS T1 (FT1); however, it remains unclear
whether this is the only factor responsible for the early flowering phenotype. We
show that the early flowering and vegetative growth phenotypes of the barley elf3
mutant are strongly dependent on gibberellin (GA) biosynthesis. Expression of the
central GA biosynthesis gene, GA20oxidase2, and production of the bioactive GA,
GA1, were significantly increased in elf3 leaves under SDs, relative to the wild 
type. Inhibition of GA biosynthesis suppressed the early flowering of elf3 under 
SDs independently of FT1 and was associated with altered expression of floral
identity genes at the developing apex. GA is also required for normal flowering
of spring barley under inductive photoperiods, with chemical and genetic
attenuation of the GA biosynthesis and signaling pathways suppressing
inflorescence development under long-day conditions. These findings illustrate
that GA is an important floral promoting signal in barley and that ELF3
suppresses flowering under noninductive photoperiods by blocking GA production
and FT1 expression.

© 2014 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4036571
PMID: 24781117  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


44. Biol Pharm Bull. 2014;37(4):659-65.

Differential expression of ETS family transcription factors in NCCIT human
embryonic carcinoma cells upon retinoic acid-induced differentiation.

Park SW(1), Do HJ, Ha WT, Han MH, Song H, Uhm SJ, Chung HJ, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Life Science, CHA University.

E26 transformation-specific (ETS) transcription factors play important roles in
normal and tumorigenic processes during development, differentiation,
homeostasis, proliferation, and apoptosis. To identify critical ETS factor(s) in 
germ cell-derived cancer cells, we examined the expression patterns of the 27 ETS
transcription factors in naive and differentiated NCCIT human embryonic carcinoma
cells, which exhibit both pluripotent and tumorigenic characteristics. Overall,
expression of ETS factors was relatively low in NCCIT cells. Among the 27 ETS
factors, polyomavirus enhancer activator 3 (PEA3) and epithelium-specific ETS
transcription factor-1 (ESE-1) exhibited the most significant changes in their
expression levels. Western blot analysis confirmed these patterns, revealing
reduced levels of PEA3 protein and elevated levels of ESE-1 protein in
differentiated cells. PEA3 increased the proportion of cells in S-phase and
promoted cell growth, whereas ESE-1 reduced proliferation potential. These data
suggest that PEA3 and ESE-1 may play important roles in pluripotent and
tumorigenic embryonic carcinoma cells. These findings contribute to our
understanding of the functions of oncogenic ETS factors in germ cell-derived stem
cells during processes related to tumorigenesis and pluripotency.

PMID: 24694612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Plant Signal Behav. 2014;9(3):e28505. Epub 2014 Jan 1.

The LNK1 night light-inducible and clock-regulated gene is induced also in
response to warm-night through the circadian clock nighttime repressor in
Arabidopsis thaliana.

Mizuno T(1), Takeuchi A(1), Nomoto Y(1), Nakamichi N(2), Yamashino T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Functional Genomics; School of Agriculture; Nagoya
University; Furocho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Molecular and
Functional Genomics; School of Agriculture; Nagoya University; Furocho,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan; Institute of Transformative Bio-Molecules; Nagoya
University; Furocho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan.

Ambient temperature has two fundamental impacts on the Arabidopsis circadian
clock system in the processes referred to as temperature compensation and
entrainment, respectively. These temperature-related longstanding problems have
not yet been fully clarified. Recently, we provided evidence that temperature
signals feed into the clock transcriptional circuitry through the evening complex
(EC) nighttime repressor composed of LUX-ELF3-ELF4, and that the transcription of
PRR9, PRR7, GI and LUX is commonly regulated through the nighttime repressor in
response to both moderate changes in temperature (<U+2206>6 °C) and differences in
steady-state growth-compatible temperature (16 °C to 28 °C). These
temperature-associated characteristics of the core clock genes might be relevant 
to the fundamental oscillator functions. Here, we further show that the recently 
identified LNK1 night light-inducible and clock-controlled gene, which actually
has a robust peak at daytime, is induced also by warm-night through the EC
nighttime repressor in a manner very similar to PRR7, which is also night
light-inducible daytime gene. Based on these findings, a hypothetical view is
proposed with regard to the temperature entrainment of the central oscillator.

PMCID: PMC4091318
PMID: 24690904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Plant Cell Physiol. 2014 May;55(5):958-76. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcu030. Epub 2014 Feb
4.

Ambient temperature signal feeds into the circadian clock transcriptional
circuitry through the EC night-time repressor in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Mizuno T(1), Nomoto Y, Oka H, Kitayama M, Takeuchi A, Tsubouchi M, Yamashino T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Functional Genomics, School of Agriculture, Nagoya
University, Furocho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8601 Japan.

An interlocking multiloop model has been generally accepted to describe the
transcriptional circuitry of core clock genes, through which robust circadian
rhythms are generated in Arabidopsis thaliana. The circadian clock must have the 
ability to integrate ambient temperature signals into the clock transcriptional
circuitry to regulate clock function properly. Clarification of the underlying
mechanism is a longstanding subject in the field. Here, we provide evidence that 
temperature signals feed into the clock transcriptional circuitry through the
evening complex (EC) night-time repressor consisting of EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3, 
ELF4) and LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX; also known as PCL1). Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assays showed that PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR7 (PRR7), GIGANTEA (GI) and LUX are
direct targets of the night-time repressor. Consequently, transcription of
PRR9/PRR7, GI and LUX is commonly regulated through the night-time repressor in
response to both moderate changes in temperature (<U+0394>6°C) and differences in the
steady-state growth-compatible temperature (16-28°C). A warmer temperature
inhibits EC function more, whereas a cooler temperature stimulates it more.
Consequently, the expression of these target genes is up-regulated in response to
a warm temperature specifically during the dark period, whereas they are
reversibly down-regulated in response to a cool temperature. Transcription of
another EC target, the PIF4 (PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTOR 4) gene, is modulated
through the same thermoregulatory mechanism. The last finding revealed the
sophisticated physiological mechanism underlying the clock-controlled output
pathway, which leads to the PIF4-mediated temperature-adaptive regulation of
hypocotyl elongation.

PMID: 24500967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Genomics. 2014 Apr;103(4):264-75. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2013.12.007. Epub 2014 Jan
24.

Temporal profiling of cytokine-induced genes in pancreatic ß-cells by
meta-analysis and network inference.

Lopes M(1), Kutlu B(2), Miani M(3), Bang-Berthelsen CH(4), Størling J(5), Pociot 
F(6), Goodman N(7), Hood L(8), Welsh N(9), Bontempi G(10), Eizirik DL(11).

Author information: 
(1)Machine Learning Group, Computer Science Department, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium; Interuniversity Institute of Bioinformatics in
Brussels (IB)(2), Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: mlopes@ulb.ac.be.
(2)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, USA. Electronic address:
burak.kutlu@systemsbiology.org. (3)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Faculty
of Medicine, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. Electronic
address: mmiani@ulb.ac.be. (4)Diagnostic Unit and Center for Non-Coding RNA in
Technology and Health, Glostrup Research Institute, Glostrup Hospital, University
of Copenhagen, Glostrup, Denmark. Electronic address:
claus.heiner.bang-berthelsen@regionh.dk. (5)Diagnostic Unit and Center for
Non-Coding RNA in Technology and Health, Glostrup Research Institute, Glostrup
Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Glostrup, Denmark. Electronic address:
joachim.stoerling@regionh.dk. (6)Diagnostic Unit and Center for Non-Coding RNA in
Technology and Health, Glostrup Research Institute, Glostrup Hospital, University
of Copenhagen, Glostrup, Denmark. Electronic address: flemming.pociot@regionh.dk.
(7)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, USA. Electronic address:
natg@shore.net. (8)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, USA. Electronic
address: lhood@systemsbiology.org. (9)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden. Electronic address: Nils.Welsh@medcellbiol.uu.se.
(10)Machine Learning Group, Computer Science Department, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium; Interuniversity Institute of Bioinformatics in
Brussels (IB)(2), Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: gbonte@ulb.ac.be.
(11)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: deizirik@ulb.ac.be.

Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune disease where local release of cytokines
such as IL-1ß and IFN-<U+03B3> contributes to ß-cell apoptosis. To identify relevant
genes regulating this process we performed a meta-analysis of 8 datasets of
ß-cell gene expression after exposure to IL-1ß and IFN-<U+03B3>. Two of these datasets
are novel and contain time-series expressions in human islet cells and rat INS-1E
cells. Genes were ranked according to their differential expression within and
after 24 h from exposure, and characterized by function and prior knowledge in
the literature. A regulatory network was then inferred from the human time
expression datasets, using a time-series extension of a network inference method.
The two most differentially expressed genes previously unknown in T1D literature 
(RIPK2 and ELF3) were found to modulate cytokine-induced apoptosis. The inferred 
regulatory network is thus supported by the experimental validation, providing a 
proof-of-concept for the proposed statistical inference approach.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24462878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nature. 2014 Feb 20;506(7488):371-5. doi: 10.1038/nature12881. Epub 2013 Dec 25.

Landscape of genomic alterations in cervical carcinomas.

Ojesina AI(1), Lichtenstein L(2), Freeman SS(3), Pedamallu CS(4),
Imaz-Rosshandler I(5), Pugh TJ(4), Cherniack AD(3), Ambrogio L(3), Cibulskis
K(3), Bertelsen B(6), Romero-Cordoba S(5), Treviño V(7), Vazquez-Santillan K(5), 
Guadarrama AS(5), Wright AA(8), Rosenberg MW(3), Duke F(9), Kaplan B(4), Wang
R(10), Nickerson E(3), Walline HM(11), Lawrence MS(3), Stewart C(3), Carter
SL(3), McKenna A(3), Rodriguez-Sanchez IP(12), Espinosa-Castilla M(5), Woie
K(13), Bjorge L(14), Wik E(14), Halle MK(14), Hoivik EA(14), Krakstad C(14),
Gabiño NB(5), Gómez-Macías GS(12), Valdez-Chapa LD(12), Garza-Rodríguez ML(12),
Maytorena G(15), Vazquez J(15), Rodea C(15), Cravioto A(15), Cortes ML(3),
Greulich H(16), Crum CP(17), Neuberg DS(18), Hidalgo-Miranda A(5), Escareno
CR(19), Akslen LA(20), Carey TE(21), Vintermyr OK(20), Gabriel SB(3),
Barrera-Saldaña HA(12), Melendez-Zajgla J(5), Getz G(22), Salvesen HB(23),
Meyerson M(24).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA [2] The Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute of
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA [3]. (2)1] The Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute of
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA [2]. (3)The Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute of
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA. (4)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA [2] The Eli and Edythe L.
Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA. (5)Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genomica, 
Mexico City 14610, Mexico. (6)Department of Pathology, Haukeland University
Hospital, N5021 Bergen, Norway. (7)Tecnológico de Monterrey, Monterrey 64849,
Mexico. (8)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA [2] Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (9)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. (10)1] Department
of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215,
USA [2] Department of Thoracic Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, 
Shanghai 200032, China. (11)Cancer Biology Program, Program in the Biomedical
Sciences, Rackham Graduate School, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109, USA. (12)Facultad de Medicina y Hospital Universitario 'Dr. José Eluterio 
González' de la Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Nuevo León 64460, 
México. (13)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Haukeland University
Hospital, N5021 Bergen, Norway. (14)1] Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Haukeland University Hospital, N5021 Bergen, Norway [2] Department of Clinical
Science, Centre for Cancer Biomarkers, University of Bergen, N5020 Bergen,
Norway. (15)Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Mexico City 06720, Mexico.
(16)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA [2] The Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute of
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA [3] Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (17)Department of Pathology, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (18)Department of
Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA. (19)1] Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genomica, Mexico 
City 14610, Mexico [2] Claremont Graduate University, Claremont, California
91711, USA. (20)1] Department of Pathology, Haukeland University Hospital, N5021 
Bergen, Norway [2] Centre for Cancer Biomarkers, Department of Clinical Medicine,
University of Bergen, N5020 Bergen, Norway. (21)Head and Neck Oncology Program
and Department of Otolaryngology, University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan 38109, USA. (22)1] The Eli and Edythe L. Broad
Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [2] Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center and Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. (23)1] Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Haukeland University Hospital, N5021 Bergen, Norway [2]
Department of Clinical Science, Centre for Cancer Biomarkers, University of
Bergen, N5020 Bergen, Norway [3]. (24)1] Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA [2] The Eli and
Edythe L. Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [3] Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA [4].

Cervical cancer is responsible for 10-15% of cancer-related deaths in women
worldwide. The aetiological role of infection with high-risk human papilloma
viruses (HPVs) in cervical carcinomas is well established. Previous studies have 
also implicated somatic mutations in PIK3CA, PTEN, TP53, STK11 and KRAS as well
as several copy-number alterations in the pathogenesis of cervical carcinomas.
Here we report whole-exome sequencing analysis of 115 cervical carcinoma-normal
paired samples, transcriptome sequencing of 79 cases and whole-genome sequencing 
of 14 tumour-normal pairs. Previously unknown somatic mutations in 79 primary
squamous cell carcinomas include recurrent E322K substitutions in the MAPK1 gene 
(8%), inactivating mutations in the HLA-B gene (9%), and mutations in EP300
(16%), FBXW7 (15%), NFE2L2 (4%), TP53 (5%) and ERBB2 (6%). We also observe
somatic ELF3 (13%) and CBFB (8%) mutations in 24 adenocarcinomas. Squamous cell
carcinomas have higher frequencies of somatic nucleotide substitutions occurring 
at cytosines preceded by thymines (Tp*C sites) than adenocarcinomas. Gene
expression levels at HPV integration sites were statistically significantly
higher in tumours with HPV integration compared with expression of the same genes
in tumours without viral integration at the same site. These data demonstrate
several recurrent genomic alterations in cervical carcinomas that suggest new
strategies to combat this disease.

PMCID: PMC4161954
PMID: 24390348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Dev Biol. 2014 Feb 15;386(2):321-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.12.028. Epub 2013 
Dec 25.

Identification of ELF3 as an early transcriptional regulator of human urothelium.

Böck M(1), Hinley J(2), Schmitt C(1), Wahlicht T(2), Kramer S(3), Southgate J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Computer Science I12, Technische Universität München,
Boltzmannstr. 3, 85748 Garching, Germany. (2)Jack Birch Unit for Molecular
Carcinogenesis, Department of Biology, University of York, York YO10 5DD, UK.
(3)Institute of Computer Science, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz,
Staudingerweg 9, 55128 Mainz, Germany. (4)Jack Birch Unit for Molecular
Carcinogenesis, Department of Biology, University of York, York YO10 5DD, UK.
Electronic address: jennifer.southgate@york.ac.uk.

Despite major advances in high-throughput and computational modelling techniques,
understanding of the mechanisms regulating tissue specification and
differentiation in higher eukaryotes, particularly man, remains limited.
Microarray technology has been explored exhaustively in recent years and several 
standard approaches have been established to analyse the resultant datasets on a 
genome-wide scale. Gene expression time series offer a valuable opportunity to
define temporal hierarchies and gain insight into the regulatory relationships of
biological processes. However, unless datasets are exactly synchronous, time
points cannot be compared directly. Here we present a data-driven analysis of
regulatory elements from a microarray time series that tracked the
differentiation of non-immortalised normal human urothelial (NHU) cells grown in 
culture. The datasets were obtained by harvesting differentiating and control
cultures from finite bladder- and ureter-derived NHU cell lines at different time
points using two previously validated, independent differentiation-inducing
protocols. Due to the asynchronous nature of the data, a novel ranking analysis
approach was adopted whereby we compared changes in the amplitude of experiment
and control time series to identify common regulatory elements. Our approach
offers a simple, fast and effective ranking method for genes that can be applied 
to other time series. The analysis identified ELF3 as a candidate transcriptional
regulator involved in human urothelial cytodifferentiation.
Differentiation-associated expression of ELF3 was confirmed in cell culture
experiments and by immunohistochemical demonstration in situ. The importance of
ELF3 in urothelial differentiation was verified by knockdown in NHU cells, which 
led to reduced expression of FOXA1 and GRHL3 transcription factors in response to
PPAR<U+03B3> activation. The consequences of this were seen in the repressed expression 
of late/terminal differentiation-associated uroplakin 3a gene expression and in
the compromised development and regeneration of urothelial barrier function.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24374157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. BMC Bioinformatics. 2013;14 Suppl 10:S3. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-S10-S3. Epub
2013 Aug 12.

A Bayesian approach for parameter estimation in the extended clock gene circuit
of Arabidopsis thaliana.

Higham CF, Husmeier D.

The circadian clock is an important molecular mechanism that enables many
organisms to anticipate and adapt to environmental change. Pokhilko et al.
recently built a deterministic ODE mathematical model of the plant circadian
clock in order to understand the behaviour, mechanisms and properties of the
system. The model comprises 30 molecular species (genes, mRNAs and proteins) and 
over 100 parameters. The parameters have been fitted heuristically to available
gene expression time series data and the calibrated model has been shown to
reproduce the behaviour of the clock components. Ongoing work is extending the
clock model to cover downstream effects, in particular metabolism, necessitating 
further parameter estimation and model selection. This work investigates the
challenges facing a full Bayesian treatment of parameter estimation. Using an
efficient adaptive MCMC proposed by Haario et al. and working in a high
performance computing setting, we quantify the posterior distribution around the 
proposed parameter values and explore the basin of attraction. We investigate if 
Bayesian inference is feasible in this high dimensional setting and thoroughly
assess convergence and mixing with different statistical diagnostics, to prevent 
apparent convergence in some domains masking poor mixing in others.

PMCID: PMC3750527
PMID: 24267177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 29;8(10):e78032. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078032.
eCollection 2013.

Fine-mapping an association of FSHR with preterm birth in a Finnish population.

Chun S(1), Plunkett J, Teramo K, Muglia LJ, Fay JC.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Systems Biology Program, Washington University, St. Louis,
Missouri, United States of America.

Preterm birth is a complex disorder defined by gestations of less than 37 weeks. 
While preterm birth is estimated to have a significant genetic component,
relative few genes have been associated with preterm birth. Polymorphism in one
such gene, follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR), has been associated with
preterm birth in Finnish and African American mothers but not other populations. 
To refine the genetic association of FSHR with preterm birth we conducted a
fine-mapping study at the FSHR locus in a Finnish cohort. We sequenced a total of
44 kb, including protein-coding and conserved non-coding regions, in 127 preterm 
and 135 term mothers. Overall, we identified 288 single nucleotide variants and
65 insertion/deletions of 1-2 bp across all subjects. While no common SNPs in
protein-coding regions were associated with preterm birth, including one
previously associated with timing of fertilization, multiple SNPs spanning the
first and second intron showed the strongest associations. Analysis of the
associated SNPs revealed that they form both a protective (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.50, 95%
CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.25-0.93) as well as a risk (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.89, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.08-3.39) haplotype with 
independent effects. In these haplotypes, two SNPs, rs12052281 and rs72822025,
were predicted to disrupt ZEB1 and ELF3 transcription factor binding sites,
respectively. Our results show that multiple haplotypes at FSHR are associated
with preterm birth and we discuss the frequency and structure of these haplotypes
outside of the Finnish population as a potential explanation for the absence of
FSHR associations in some populations.

PMCID: PMC3812121
PMID: 24205076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Hum Genet. 2014 Mar;133(3):299-310. doi: 10.1007/s00439-013-1380-6. Epub 2013 Oct
19.

Genetic characterization of congenital tufting enteropathy: epcam associated
phenotype and involvement of SPINT2 in the syndromic form.

Salomon J(1), Goulet O, Canioni D, Brousse N, Lemale J, Tounian P, Coulomb A,
Marinier E, Hugot JP, Ruemmele F, Dufier JL, Roche O, Bodemer C, Colomb V,
Talbotec C, Lacaille F, Campeotto F, Cerf-Bensussan N, Janecke AR, Mueller T,
Koletzko S, Bonnefont JP, Lyonnet S, Munnich A, Poirier F, Smahi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Université Paris
Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 149 rue de Sèvres, 75015, Paris, France,
julie.salomon@nck.aphp.fr.

Congenital tufting enteropathy (CTE) is a rare and severe enteropathy recently
ascribed to mutations in the epcam gene. Here we establish SPINT2, previously
ascribed to congenital sodium diarrhea, as a second gene associated with CTE and 
report molecular and immunohistochemistry data in 57 CTE patients. Inclusion
criteria were early onset diarrhea and intestinal insufficiency with the typical 
histological CTE abnormalities. The clinical phenotype was registered, the entire
coding regions of epcam and SPINT2 sequenced, and immunostaining of EpCAM and
SPINT2 performed on intestinal biopsies. An epcam mutation was involved in 41
patients (73 %) who mainly displayed isolated digestive symptoms. Mutations
severely affected gene expression since the EpCAM signal on intestinal tissues
was either undetectable or low and irregular. Twelve other patients (21 %)
carried mutations in SPINT2, and were phenotypically characterized by systematic 
association with keratitis (p < 10(-4)) and, for half of them, with choanal
atresia (p < 10(-4)). Dependency on parenteral nutrition (PN) was comparable in
patients with epcam or SPINT2 mutations, but the frequent epcam mutation
c.556-14A>G (abnormal splicing) was significantly associated with a better
outcome (p = 0.032) with milder PN dependency to weaning in some cases. Finally, 
four patients (7 %) with isolated digestive symptoms had no detectable epcam or
SPINT2 mutation. Two candidate genes, Elf3 and Claudin7, were excluded from this 
population. Our study allows us to separate CTE patients into at least three
genetic classes, each with specific phenotypes. The genetics approach raises the 
question of the distinction between two congenital enteropathies. Our findings
should help improve the diagnosis of CTE, guide toward strategies of long-term PN
management, and limit indications for intestinal transplantation to
life-threatening PN complications.

PMID: 24142340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 6;8(9):e74013. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074013. eCollection 
2013.

Loss of the BRCA1-interacting helicase BRIP1 results in abnormal mammary acinar
morphogenesis.

Daino K(1), Imaoka T, Morioka T, Tani S, Iizuka D, Nishimura M, Shimada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Radiobiology for Children's Health Program, Research Center for Radiation
Protection, National Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba, Japan ; Radiation
Effect Accumulation and Prevention Project, Fukushima Project Headquarters,
National Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba, Japan.

BRIP1 is a DNA helicase that directly interacts with the C-terminal BRCT repeat
of the breast cancer susceptibility protein BRCA1 and plays an important role in 
BRCA1-dependent DNA repair and DNA damage-induced checkpoint control. Recent
studies implicate BRIP1 as a moderate/low-penetrance breast cancer susceptibility
gene. However, the phenotypic effects of BRIP1 dysfunction and its role in breast
cancer tumorigenesis remain unclear. To explore the function of BRIP1 in acinar
morphogenesis of mammary epithelial cells, we generated BRIP1-knockdown MCF-10A
cells by short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated RNA interference and examined its
effect in a three-dimensional culture model. Genome-wide gene expression
profiling by microarray and quantitative RT-PCR were performed to identify
alterations in gene expression in BRIP1-knockdown cells compared with control
cells. The microarray data were further investigated using the pathway analysis
and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) for pathway identification. BRIP1
knockdown in non-malignant MCF-10A mammary epithelial cells by RNA interference
induced neoplastic-like changes such as abnormal cell adhesion, increased cell
proliferation, large and irregular-shaped acini, invasive growth, and defective
lumen formation. Differentially expressed genes, including MCAM, COL8A1, WIPF1,
RICH2, PCSK5, GAS1, SATB1, and ELF3, in BRIP1-knockdown cells compared with
control cells were categorized into several functional groups, such as cell
adhesion, polarity, growth, signal transduction, and developmental process.
Signaling-pathway analyses showed dysregulation of multiple cellular signaling
pathways, involving LPA receptor, Myc, Wnt, PI3K, PTEN as well as DNA damage
response, in BRIP1-knockdown cells. Loss of BRIP1 thus disrupts normal mammary
morphogenesis and causes neoplastic-like changes, possibly via dysregulating
multiple cellular signaling pathways functioning in the normal development of
mammary glands.

PMCID: PMC3765252
PMID: 24040146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Biol Reprod. 2013 Oct 31;89(4):104. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.110403. Print
2013 Oct.

A genome-wide analysis of open chromatin in human epididymis epithelial cells
reveals candidate regulatory elements for genes coordinating epididymal function.

Bischof JM(1), Gillen AE, Song L, Gosalia N, London D, Furey TS, Crawford GE,
Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center, and
Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine
Chicago, Illinois.

The epithelium lining the epididymis has a pivotal role in ensuring a luminal
environment that can support normal sperm maturation. Many of the individual
genes that encode proteins involved in establishing the epididymal luminal fluid 
are well characterized. They include ion channels, ion exchangers, transporters, 
and solute carriers. However, the molecular mechanisms that coordinate expression
of these genes and modulate their activities in response to biological stimuli
are less well understood. To identify cis-regulatory elements for genes expressed
in human epididymis epithelial cells, we generated genome-wide maps of open
chromatin by DNase-seq. This analysis identified 33,542 epididymis-selective
DNase I hypersensitive sites (DHS), which were not evident in five cell types of 
different lineages. Identification of genes with epididymis-selective DHS at
their promoters revealed gene pathways that are active in immature epididymis
epithelial cells. These include processes correlating with epithelial function
and also others with specific roles in the epididymis, including retinol
metabolism and ascorbate and aldarate metabolism. Peaks of epididymis-selective
chromatin were seen in the androgen receptor gene and the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene, which has a critical role in
regulating ion transport across the epididymis epithelium. In silico prediction
of transcription factor binding sites that were overrepresented in
epididymis-selective DHS identified epithelial transcription factors, including
ELF5 and ELF3, the androgen receptor, Pax2, and Sox9, as components of epididymis
transcriptional networks. Active genes, which are targets of each transcription
factor, reveal important biological processes in the epididymis epithelium.

PMCID: PMC4076396
PMID: 24006278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2013 Oct 9;50(2):181-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2013.06.014. Epub
2013 Jul 5.

Dithiiranylmethyloxy azaxanthone shows potent anti-tumor activity via suppression
of HER2 expression and HER2-mediated signals in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer
cells.

Nam JM(1), Jeon KH, Kwon H, Lee E, Jun KY, Jin YB, Lee YS, Na Y, Kwon Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Global Top5
Research Program, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, Republic of Korea.

Dithiiranylmethyloxy azaxanthone (CHO10), which was discovered by screening
compounds in a reporter gene assay, inhibited the ESX-Sur2 interaction in a
dose-dependent manner with potency similar to canertinib. The intervention of
CHO10 during the ESX-Sur2 interaction caused down-regulation of both HER2 gene
amplification and HER2 protein expression, which led to the attenuation of
HER2-mediated downstream signal cascades and autocrine cell growth in SK-BR-3
cells, which are HER2 overexpressing breast cancer cells. The cell growth
inhibitory activity of CHO10 was more potent in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer
cells (AU-565, BT474 and SK-BR-3) than in HER2-negative cells (HEK293) and breast
cancer cells (MCF-7) that express a basal level of HER2. Treatment with CHO10 in 
combination with tamoxifen sensitized BT474 cells, tamoxifen-resistant
ER-positive breast cancer cell line, toward chemotherapeutic. The anti-tumor
activity of CHO10 was validated by the significant reduction in tumor size of
NCI-H460 or DLD-1 subcutaneously implanted xenograft tumors through treatment
with 1mg/kg five times every other 2days.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23835029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Theor Appl Genet. 2013 Sep;126(9):2267-77. doi: 10.1007/s00122-013-2133-6. Epub
2013 Jun 5.

The effect of day-neutral mutations in barley and wheat on the interaction
between photoperiod and vernalization.

Turner AS(1), Faure S, Zhang Y, Laurie DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crop Genetics, John Innes Centre, Colney Lane, Norwich, UK.
adrian.turner-crls@jic.ac.uk

Vernalization-2 (Vrn-2) is the major flowering repressor in temperate cereals. It
is only expressed under long days in wild-type plants. We used two day-neutral
(photoperiod insensitive) mutations that allow rapid flowering in short or long
days to investigate the day length control of Vrn-2. The barley (Hordeum vulgare)
early maturity8 (eam8) mutation affects the barley ELF3 gene. eam8 mutants
disrupt the circadian clock resulting in elevated expression of Ppd-H1 and the
floral activator HvFT1 under short or long days. When eam8 was crossed into a
genetic background with a vernalization requirement Vrn-2 was expressed under all
photoperiods and the early flowering phenotype was partially repressed in
unvernalized (UV) plants, likely due to competition between the constitutively
active photoperiod pathway and the repressing effect of Vrn-2. We also
investigated the wheat (Triticum aestivum) Ppd-D1a mutation. This differs from
eam8 in causing elevated levels of Ppd-1 and TaFT1 expression without affecting
the circadian clock. We used genotypes that differed in "short-day
vernalization". Short days were effective in promoting flowering in individuals
wild type at Ppd-D1, but not in individuals that carry the Ppd-D1a mutation. The 
latter showed Vrn-2 expression in short days. In summary, eam8 and Ppd-D1a mimic 
long days in terms of photoperiod response, causing Vrn-2 to become aberrantly
expressed (in short days). As Ppd-D1a does not affect the circadian clock, this
also shows that clock regulation of Vrn-2 operates indirectly through one or more
downstream genes, one of which may be Ppd-1.

PMCID: PMC3755224
PMID: 23737074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Aug;12(8):1515-25. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-1110. Epub
2013 May 30.

Genetic and chemical targeting of epithelial-restricted with serine box reduces
EGF receptor and potentiates the efficacy of afatinib.

Zhang M(1), Taylor CE, Piao L, Datta J, Bruno PA, Bhave S, Su T, Lang JC, Xie X, 
Teknos TN, Mapp AK, Pan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The Ohio State University 
Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

EGF receptor (EGFR) is elevated in more than 90% of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC). However, a majority of patients with HNSCC do not respond to
anti-EGFR therapeutics. Insensitivity to EGFR inhibitors may be due to
kinase-independent actions of EGFR and/or activation of Her2. Strategies to
reduce EGFR and Her2 protein levels in concert may be an optimal approach to
enhance the efficacy of current anti-EGFR molecules. In this study, knockdown of 
epithelial-restricted with serine box (ESX) decreased EGFR and Her2 promoter
activity, expression, and levels. ESX was elevated in primary HNSCC tumors and
associated with increased EGFR and Her2. Genetic ablation of ESX decreased EGFR
and Her2 levels and enhanced the antiproliferative effects of EGFR/Her2 tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors (TKI), lapatinib and afatinib. Biphenyl isoxazolidine, a novel 
small-molecule ESX inhibitor, reduced EGFR and Her2 levels and potentiated the
antiproliferative efficacy of afatinib. Single-agent biphenyl isoxazolidine
retarded the in vivo tumorigenicity of CAL27 cells. Importantly, the combination 
of biphenyl isoxazolidine and afatinib was significantly superior in vivo and
resulted in a 100% response rate with a 94% reduction in tumor volume. Targeting 
EGFR/Her2 levels with an ESX inhibitor and EGFR/Her2 kinase activity with a TKI
simultaneously is a highly active therapeutic approach to manage HNSCC. Our work 
provides evidence to support the further development of ESX inhibitors as an
adjuvant to enhance the response rate of patients with HNSCC to current
anti-EGFR/Her2 therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3746004
PMID: 23723125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 15;73(14):4533-47. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4537. Epub 
2013 May 16.

ETS transcription factor ESE1/ELF3 orchestrates a positive feedback loop that
constitutively activates NF-<U+03BA>B and drives prostate cancer progression.

Longoni N(1), Sarti M, Albino D, Civenni G, Malek A, Ortelli E, Pinton S,
Mello-Grand M, Ostano P, D'Ambrosio G, Sessa F, Garcia-Escudero R, Thalmann GN,
Chiorino G, Catapano CV, Carbone GM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oncology Research (IOR), Oncology Institute of Southern
Switzerland (IOSI), Bellinzona, Switzerland.

Chromosomal translocations leading to deregulated expression of ETS transcription
factors are frequent in prostate tumors. Here, we report a novel mechanism
leading to oncogenic activation of the ETS factor ESE1/ELF3 in prostate tumors.
ESE1/ELF3 was overexpressed in human primary and metastatic tumors. It mediated
transforming phenotypes in vitro and in vivo and induced an inflammatory
transcriptome with changes in relevant oncogenic pathways. ESE1/ELF3 was induced 
by interleukin (IL)-1ß through NF-<U+03BA>B and was a crucial mediator of the phenotypic
and transcriptional changes induced by IL-1ß in prostate cancer cells. This
linkage was mediated by interaction of ESE1/ELF3 with the NF-<U+03BA>B subunits p65 and 
p50, acting by enhancing their nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity
and by inducing p50 transcription. Supporting these findings, gene expression
profiling revealed an enrichment of NF-<U+03BA>B effector functions in prostate cancer
cells or tumors expressing high levels of ESE1/ELF3. We observed concordant
upregulation of ESE1/ELF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B in human prostate tumors that was associated 
with adverse prognosis. Collectively, our results define an important new
mechanistic link between inflammatory signaling and the progression of prostate
cancer.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23687337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2013 Aug;17(4):331-40. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2013.03.003. 
Epub 2013 May 3.

Loss of ELF3 immunoexpression is useful for detecting oral squamous cell
carcinoma but not for distinguishing between grades of epithelial dysplasia.

AbdulMajeed AA(1), Dalley AJ, Farah CS.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland, UQ Centre for Clinical Research, Herston, QLD
4029, Australia. a.abdulmajeed@uq.edu.au

Early diagnosis and targeted therapy are crucial to mitigating the morbidity and 
mortality of oral squamous cell carcinoma. Among the potentially malignant oral
disorders, epithelial dysplasia has known association with malignant
transformation, but defensible gradation of dysplasia severity presents unmet
challenges. Published microarray data has denoted dysregulation of CLSP, ELF3,
IFI44, USP18, and CXCL13 genes in potentially malignant oral disorders. The
present study investigated the diagnostic potential of these gene products to
grade oral epithelial dysplasia severity. Archived biopsies from independent
patient cohorts comprised "training" (n=107) and "test" (n=278) sample sets.
Immunoreactivity for candidate markers was determined in the "training" set of
normal oral mucosa (NOM), mild dysplasia (MD), moderate to severe dysplasia, and 
oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). The diagnostic potential of ELF3
immunoscoring to improve detection and severity gradation of epithelial dysplasia
was assessed with the "test" set. A reciprocal relationship between disease
severity and immunoreactivity score for CLSP and ELF3 was observed (MD/NOM to
OSCC: P<.08, Mann-Whitney U test), whereas elevated IFI44 immunostaining was
present for OSCC compared to MD/NOM (P<.08, Mann-Whitney U test). Loss of ELF3
immunostaining effectively distinguished OSCC from non-malignant tissues
(sensitivity=0.81; specificity=0.56; area under the curve [AUC]=0.68) but did not
distinguish dysplasia from NOM (sensitivity=0.55; specificity=0.40; AUC=0.47) or 
moderate to severe dysplasia from MD (sensitivity=0.63; specificity=0.51;
AUC=0.57). The results confirm via immunohistochemistry the relevance of
published CLSP, ELF3, and IFI44 (but not USP18 or CXCL13) gene expression data to
potentially malignant oral lesion severity. Loss of ELF3 immunostaining
discriminated OSCC from dysplasia but was unreliable for grading dysplasia
severity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23643910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Prep Biochem Biotechnol. 2013;43(4):364-75. doi: 10.1080/10826068.2012.738273.

Expression and purification of a soluble ESX-binding core domain of SUR2.

Jeon KH(1), Jun KY, Kim EY, Kwon Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea.

For HER2 overexpression, the ESX transcription factor must interact with both the
HER2 promoter and Sur2, a subunit of human mediator complex, using its Ets domain
and transactivation domain, respectively. HER2 overexpression is a marker of poor
prognosis in various types of cancers. Thus, interfering with the ESX-Sur2
interaction has been suggested as a novel strategy for the treatment of HER2
positive cancers. To design small molecule inhibitors against the ESX-Sur2
interaction, it is necessary to identify the structure of the interface of
ESX-Sur2 binding. Therefore, in this study, we determined the optimal conditions 
for the overexpression and purification of a new version of Sur2, Sur2391-582,
which was able to bind to ESX. To stabilize (His)6-Sur2391-582, various different
buffered conditions over a wide range of pH and ionic strengths were examined.
The molecular mass of (His)6-Sur2391-582 was determined using mass spectroscopy
and size exclusion chromatography. The purified (His)6-Sur2391-582 protein
displayed the same biological properties as that of the Sur2 full-length protein.

PMID: 23464919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Oncogene. 2014 Feb 13;33(7):862-71. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.15. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

ELF3 is a repressor of androgen receptor action in prostate cancer cells.

Shatnawi A(1), Norris JD(2), Chaveroux C(1), Jasper JS(2), Sherk AB(2), McDonnell
DP(2), Giguère V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC, USA. (3)1] Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University,
Montréal, Québec, Canada. [2] Departments of Biochemistry, Medicine and Oncology,
McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

The androgen receptor (AR) has a critical role in the development and progression
of prostate cancer (PC) and is a major therapeutic target in this disease. The
transcriptional activity of AR is modulated by the coregulators with which it
interacts, and consequently deregulation of cofactor expression and/or activity
impacts the expression of genes whose products can have a role in PC
pathogenesis. Here we report that E74-like factor 3 (ELF3), a member of the ETS
family of transcription factors, is a repressor of AR transcriptional activity.
Exogenous expression of ELF3 represses AR transcriptional activity when assessed 
using reporter-based transfection assays or when evaluated on endogenous AR
target genes. Conversely, ELF3 knock down increases the AR transcriptional
activity. Biochemical dissection of this activity indicates that it results from 
the physical interaction between ELF3 and AR and that this interaction inhibits
the recruitment of AR to specific androgen response elements within target gene
promoters. Significantly, we observed that depletion of ELF3 expression in LNCaP 
cells promotes cell migration, whereas increased ELF3 expression severely
inhibits tumor growth in vitro and in a mouse xenograft model. Taken together,
these results suggest that modulation of ELF3 expression and/or AR/ELF3
interaction may have utility in the treatment of PC.

PMCID: PMC4103030
PMID: 23435425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 5;288(14):10061-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.421156. Epub 2013
Feb 15.

Regulated transcription of human matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP13) and
interleukin-1ß (IL1B) genes in chondrocytes depends on methylation of specific
proximal promoter CpG sites.

Hashimoto K(1), Otero M, Imagawa K, de Andrés MC, Coico JM, Roach HI, Oreffo RO, 
Marcu KB, Goldring MB.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Hospital for Special Surgery and Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York 10021, USA.

The role of DNA methylation in the regulation of catabolic genes such as MMP13
and IL1B, which have sparse CpG islands, is poorly understood in the context of
musculoskeletal diseases. We report that demethylation of specific CpG sites at
-110 bp and -299 bp of the proximal MMP13 and IL1B promoters, respectively,
detected by in situ methylation analysis of chondrocytes obtained directly from
human cartilage, strongly correlated with higher levels of gene expression. The
methylation status of these sites had a significant impact on promoter activities
in chondrocytes, as revealed in transfection experiments with site-directed CpG
mutants in a CpG-free luciferase reporter. Methylation of the -110 and -299 CpG
sites, which reside within a hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) consensus motif in
the respective MMP13 and IL1B promoters, produced the most marked suppression of 
their transcriptional activities. Methylation of the -110 bp CpG site in the
MMP13 promoter inhibited its HIF-2a-driven transactivation and decreased HIF-2a
binding to the MMP13 proximal promoter in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
In contrast to HIF-2a, MMP13 transcriptional regulation by other positive (RUNX2,
AP-1, ELF3) and negative (Sp1, GATA1, and USF1) factors was not affected by
methylation status. However, unlike the MMP13 promoter, IL1B was not susceptible 
to HIF-2a transactivation, indicating that the -299 CpG site in the IL1B promoter
must interact with other transcription factors to modulate IL1B transcriptional
activity. Taken together, our data reveal that the methylation of different CpG
sites in the proximal promoters of the human MMP13 and IL1B genes modulates their
transcription by distinct mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3617244
PMID: 23417678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Feb;138(1):37-45. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2408-2.
Epub 2013 Jan 18.

Frequent copy number gains at 1q21 and 1q32 are associated with overexpression of
the ETS transcription factors ETV3 and ELF3 in breast cancer irrespective of
molecular subtypes.

Mesquita B(1), Lopes P, Rodrigues A, Pereira D, Afonso M, Leal C, Henrique R,
Lind GE, Jerónimo C, Lothe RA, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Rua Dr. António
Bernardino de Almeida, 4200-072 Porto, Portugal.

Several ETS transcription factors are involved in the pathogenesis of human
cancers by different mechanisms. As gene copy number gain/amplification is an
alternative mechanism of oncogenic activation and 1q gain is the most common copy
number change in breast carcinoma, we investigated how that genomic change
impacts in the expression of the three 1q ETS family members ETV3, ELK4, and
ELF3. We have first evaluated 141 breast carcinomas for genome-wide copy number
changes by chromosomal CGH and showed that 1q21 and 1q32 were the two chromosome 
bands with most frequent genomic copy number gains. Second, we confirmed by FISH 
with locus-specific BAC clones that cases showing 1q gain/amplification by CGH
showed copy number increase of the ETS genes ETV3 (located in 1q21~23), ELF3, and
ELK4 (both in 1q32). Third, gene expression levels of the three 1q ETS genes, as 
well as their potential targets MYC and CRISP3, were evaluated by quantitative
real-time PCR. We here show for the first time that the most common genomic copy 
number gains in breast cancer, 1q21 and 1q32, are associated with overexpression 
of the ETS transcription factors ETV3 and ELF3 (but not ELK4) at these loci
irrespective of molecular subtypes. Among the three 1q ETS genes, ELF3 has a
relevant role in breast carcinogenesis and is also the most likely target of the 
1q copy number increase. The basal-like molecular subtype presented the worst
prognosis regarding disease-specific survival, but no additional prognostic value
was found for 1q copy number status or ELF3 expression. In addition, we show that
there is a correlation between the expression of the oncogene MYC, irrespectively
of copy number gain at its loci in 8q24, and the expression of both the
transcriptional repressor ETV3 and the androgen respondent ELK4.

PMID: 23329352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Dev Biol. 2013 Mar 15;375(2):128-39. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.12.010. Epub 2012 
Dec 22.

Kruppel-like factor 5 controls villus formation and initiation of
cytodifferentiation in the embryonic intestinal epithelium.

Bell SM(1), Zhang L, Xu Y, Besnard V, Wert SE, Shroyer N, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Perinatal Institute, Divisions of Neonatology-Perinatal-Pulmonary Biology,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College
of Medicine, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Kruppel-like factor 5 (Klf5) is a transcription factor expressed by embryonic
endodermal progenitors that form the lining of the gastrointestinal tract. A Klf5
floxed allele was efficiently deleted from the intestinal epithelium by a Cre
transgene under control of the Shh promoter resulting in the inhibition of villus
morphogenesis and epithelial differentiation. Although proliferation of the
intestinal epithelium was maintained, the expression of Elf3, Ppar<U+03B3>, Atoh1,
Ascl2, Neurog3, Hnf4a, Cdx1, and other genes associated with epithelial cell
differentiation was inhibited in the Klf5-deficient intestines. At E18.5,
Klf5(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) fetuses lacked the apical brush border characteristic of enterocytes,
and a loss of goblet and enteroendocrine cells was observed. The failure to form 
villi was not attributable to the absence of HH or PDGF signaling, known
mediators of this developmental process. Klf5-deletion blocked the decrease in
FoxA1 and Sox9 expression that accompanies normal villus morphogenesis. KLF5
directly inhibited activity of the FoxA1 promoter, and in turn FOXA1 inhibited
Elf3 gene expression in vitro, linking the observed loss of Elf3 with the
persistent expression of FoxA1 observed in Klf5-deficient mice. Genetic network
analysis identified KLF5 as a key transcription factor regulating intestinal cell
differentiation and cell adhesion. These studies indicate a novel requirement for
KLF5 to initiate morphogenesis of the early endoderm into a compartmentalized
intestinal epithelium comprised of villi and terminally differentiated cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3582784
PMID: 23266329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 18;109(51):21158-63. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1207943110. Epub 2012 Dec 3.

A conserved molecular basis for photoperiod adaptation in two temperate legumes.

Weller JL(1), Liew LC, Hecht VF, Rajandran V, Laurie RE, Ridge S, Wenden B,
Vander Schoor JK, Jaminon O, Blassiau C, Dalmais M, Rameau C, Bendahmane A,
Macknight RC, Lejeune-Hénaut I.

Author information: 
(1)School of Plant Science, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania 7001,
Australia. jim.weller@utas.edu.au

Legumes were among the first plant species to be domesticated, and accompanied
cereals in expansion of agriculture from the Fertile Crescent into diverse
environments across the Mediterranean basin, Europe, Central Asia, and the Indian
subcontinent. Although several recent studies have outlined the molecular basis
for domestication and eco-geographic adaptation in the two main cereals from this
region, wheat and barley, similar questions remain largely unexplored in their
legume counterparts. Here we identify two major loci controlling differences in
photoperiod response between wild and domesticated pea, and show that one of
these, high response to photoperiod (HR), is an ortholog of early flowering 3
(ELF3), a gene involved in circadian clock function. We found that a significant 
proportion of flowering time variation in global pea germplasm is controlled by
HR, with a single, widespread functional variant conferring altered circadian
rhythms and the reduced photoperiod response associated with the spring habit. We
also present evidence that ELF3 has a similar role in lentil, another major
legume crop, with a distinct functional variant contributing to reduced
photoperiod response in cultivars widely deployed in short-season environments.
Our results identify the factor likely to have permitted the successful
prehistoric expansion of legume cultivation to Northern Europe, and define a
conserved genetic basis for major adaptive changes in flowering phenology and
growth habit in an important crop group.

PMCID: PMC3529011
PMID: 23213200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 20;109(47):19363-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1211021109. Epub 2012 Nov 5.

Background-dependent effects of polyglutamine variation in the Arabidopsis
thaliana gene ELF3.

Undurraga SF(1), Press MO, Legendre M, Bujdoso N, Bale J, Wang H, Davis SJ,
Verstrepen KJ, Queitsch C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Tandem repeats (TRs) have extremely high mutation rates and are often considered 
to be neutrally evolving DNA. However, in coding regions, TR copy number
mutations can significantly affect phenotype and may facilitate rapid adaptation 
to new environments. In several human genes, TR copy number mutations that expand
polyglutamine (polyQ) tracts beyond a certain threshold cause incurable
neurodegenerative diseases. PolyQ-containing proteins exist at a considerable
frequency in eukaryotes, yet the phenotypic consequences of natural variation in 
polyQ tracts that are not associated with disease remain largely unknown. Here,
we use Arabidopsis thaliana to dissect the phenotypic consequences of natural
variation in the polyQ tract encoded by EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3), a key
developmental gene. Changing ELF3 polyQ tract length affected complex
ELF3-dependent phenotypes in a striking and nonlinear manner. Some natural ELF3
polyQ variants phenocopied elf3 loss-of-function mutants in a common reference
background, although they are functional in their native genetic backgrounds. To 
test the existence of background-specific modifiers, we compared the phenotypic
effects of ELF3 polyQ variants between two divergent backgrounds, Col and Ws, and
found dramatic differences. In fact, the Col-ELF3 allele, encoding the shortest
known ELF3 polyQ tract, was haploinsufficient in Ws × Col F(1) hybrids. Our data 
support a model in which variable polyQ tracts drive adaptation to internal
genetic environments.

PMCID: PMC3511081
PMID: 23129635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 16;109(42):17129-34. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1209148109. Epub 2012 Oct 1.

CIRCADIAN CLOCK-ASSOCIATED 1 regulates ROS homeostasis and oxidative stress
responses.

Lai AG(1), Doherty CJ, Mueller-Roeber B, Kay SA, Schippers JH, Dijkwel PP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular BioSciences, Massey University, Palmerston North 4442, 
New Zealand.

Organisms have evolved endogenous biological clocks as internal timekeepers to
coordinate metabolic processes with the external environment. Here, we seek to
understand the mechanism of synchrony between the oscillator and products of
metabolism known as Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) in Arabidopsis thaliana.
ROS-responsive genes exhibit a time-of-day-specific phase of expression under
diurnal and circadian conditions, implying a role of the circadian clock in
transcriptional regulation of these genes. Hydrogen peroxide production and
scavenging also display time-of-day phases. Mutations in the core-clock
regulator, CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1 (CCA1), affect the transcriptional
regulation of ROS-responsive genes, ROS homeostasis, and tolerance to oxidative
stress. Mis-expression of EARLY FLOWERING 3, LUX ARRHYTHMO, and TIMING OF CAB
EXPRESSION 1 affect ROS production and transcription, indicating a global effect 
of the clock on the ROS network. We propose CCA1 as a master regulator of ROS
homeostasis through association with the Evening Element in promoters of ROS
genes in vivo to coordinate time-dependent responses to oxidative stress. We also
find that ROS functions as an input signal that affects the transcriptional
output of the clock, revealing an important link between ROS signaling and
circadian output. Temporal coordination of ROS signaling by CCA1 and the
reciprocal control of circadian output by ROS reveal a mechanistic link that
allows plants to master oxidative stress responses.

PMCID: PMC3479464
PMID: 23027948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Anticancer Res. 2012 Sep;32(9):3753-8.

Significance of ELF3 mRNA expression for detection of lymph node metastases of
colorectal cancer.

Nakarai C(1), Osawa K, Matsubara N, Ikeuchi H, Yamano T, Okamura S, Kamoshida S, 
Tsutou A, Takahashi J, Ejiri K, Hirota S, Tomita N, Kido Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Faculty of Health Sciences, Kobe University Graduate
School of Health Sciences, Kobe, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Lymph node (LN) evaluation is an important factor for the prognosis
of colorectal cancer (CRC). The purpose of our study was to investigate the
effectiveness of E74-like factor 3 (ELF3) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) as
useful markers to detect LN metastases in CRC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined the mRNA expression of ELF3 and CEA in LNs and
tissues from 22 patients with CRC and in controls with ulcerative colitis (UC) by
real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, as well
as by hematoxylin-eosin staining.
RESULTS: ELF3 and CEA expression showed statistically significant differences
among four LN groups: LNs from patients with CRC categorized into three Dukes'
stages and LNs from patients with UC (p<0.001 and p<0.001, respectively). We
found a statistical correlation between the expression levels of both markers in 
patients with CRC compared with each Dukes' stage.
CONCLUSION: ELF3, as a gene marker, may be sufficiently practical to detect LN
metastases of CRC, rather than CEA.

PMID: 22993316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Am J Cancer Res. 2012;2(5):549-65. Epub 2012 Aug 20.

RanBPM expression regulates transcriptional pathways involved in development and 
tumorigenesis.

Atabakhsh E(1), Wang JH, Wang X, Carter DE, Schild-Poulter C.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of 
Medicine & Dentistry, Western University London, Ontario, N6A 5K8, Canada.

RanBPM is a ubiquitous protein that has been reported to regulate several
cellular processes through interactions with various proteins. However, it is not
known whether RanBPM may regulate gene expression patterns. As it has been shown 
that RanBPM interacts with a number of transcription factors, we hypothesized
that it may have wide ranging effects on gene expression that may explain its
function. To test this hypothesis, we generated stable RanBPM shRNA cell lines to
analyze the effect of RanBPM on global gene expression. Microarray analyses were 
conducted comparing the gene expression profile of Hela and HCT116 RanBPM shRNA
cells versus control shRNA cells. We identified 167 annotated genes significantly
up- or down-regulated in the two cell lines. Analysis of the gene set revealed
that down-regulation of RanBPM led to gene expression changes that affect
regulation of cell, tissue, and organ development and morphology, as well as
biological processes implicated in tumorigenesis. Analysis of Transcription
Factor Binding Sites (TFBS) present in the gene set identified several
significantly over-represented transcription factors of the Forkhead, HMG, and
Homeodomain families of transcription factors, which have previously been
demonstrated as having important roles in development and tumorigenesis. In
addition, the combined results of these analyses suggested that several signaling
pathways were affected by RanBPM down-regulation, including ERK1/2, Wnt, Notch,
and PI3K/Akt pathways. Lastly, analysis of selected target genes by quantitative 
RT-qPCR confirmed the changes revealed by microarray. Several of the genes
up-regulated in RanBPM shRNA cells encode proteins with known oncogenic
functions, such as the RON tyrosine kinase, the adhesion molecule L1CAM, and
transcription factor ELF3/ESE-1, suggesting that RanBPM functions as a tumor
suppressor to prevent deregulated expression of these genes. Altogether, these
results suggest that RanBPM does indeed function to regulate many genomic events 
that regulate embryonic, tissue, and cellular development as well as those
involved in cancer development and progression.

PMCID: PMC3433104
PMID: 22957307  [PubMed]


70. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43705. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043705. Epub 2012 Aug 17.

OsELF3-1, an ortholog of Arabidopsis early flowering 3, regulates rice circadian 
rhythm and photoperiodic flowering.

Zhao J(1), Huang X, Ouyang X, Chen W, Du A, Zhu L, Wang S, Deng XW, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)Rice Research Institute, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu, Sichuan,
China.

Arabidopsis thaliana early flowering 3 (ELF3) as a zeitnehmer (time taker) is
responsible for generation of circadian rhythm and regulation of photoperiodic
flowering. There are two orthologs (OsELF3-1 and OsELF3-2) of ELF3 in rice (Oryza
sativa), but their roles have not yet been fully identified. Here, we performed a
functional characterization of OsELF3-1 and revealed it plays a more predominant 
role than OsELF3-2 in rice heading. Our results suggest OsELF3-1 can affect rice 
circadian systems via positive regulation of OsLHY expression and negative
regulation of OsPRR1, OsPRR37, OsPRR73 and OsPRR95 expression. In addition,
OsELF3-1 is involved in blue light signaling by activating early heading date 1
(Ehd1) expression to promote rice flowering under short-day (SD) conditions.
Moreover, OsELF3-1 suppresses a flowering repressor grain number, plant height
and heading date 7 (Ghd7) to indirectly accelerate flowering under long-day (LD) 
conditions. Taken together, our results indicate OsELF3-1 is essential for
circadian regulation and photoperiodic flowering in rice.

PMCID: PMC3422346
PMID: 22912900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Plant. 2013 Jan;6(1):202-15. doi: 10.1093/mp/sss062. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

OsELF3 is involved in circadian clock regulation for promoting flowering under
long-day conditions in rice.

Yang Y(1), Peng Q, Chen GX, Li XH, Wu CY.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, National Center of Plant 
Gene Research-Wuhan, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.

Heading date is a critical trait that determines cropping seasons and regional
adaptability in rice (Oryza sativa). Research efforts during the last decade have
identified some important photoperiod pathway genes that are conserved between
Arabidopsis and rice. In this study, we identified a novel gene, Oryza sativa
ELF3 (OsELF3), which is a putative homolog of the ELF3 gene in Arabidopsis
thaliana. OsELF3 was required for the control of heading date under long-day
conditions. Its Tos17-tagging mutants exhibited a delayed heading date phenotype 
only under long-day, but not short-day, conditions. OsELF3 was highly expressed
in leaf blades, and the OsELF3 protein was localized in the nucleolus. An obvious
diurnal rhythm of OsELF3 transcript level was observed, with a trough in the
early day and a peak in the late night in wild-type plants. However, this
expression pattern was disrupted in oself3 mutants. Further investigations showed
that the expression of OsGI and Ghd7 was up-regulated in the oself3 mutant,
indicating that OsELF3 acts as a negative regulator upstream of OsGI and Ghd7 in 
the flowering-time control under long-day conditions. The rhythmic expression of 
circadian clock-related genes, including some OsPRR members, was obviously
affected in oself3 mutants. Our results indicated that OsELF3 acts as a floral
activator in the long-day photoperiodic pathway via its crosstalk with the
circadian clock in rice.

PMID: 22888152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cancer Lett. 2012 Dec 1;325(1):72-9. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.06.004. Epub 2012
Jun 23.

A-62176, a potent topoisomerase inhibitor, inhibits the expression of human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2.

Kim HL(1), Jeon KH, Jun KY, Choi Y, Kim DK, Na Y, Kwon Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Division of Life & Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

HER2 overexpression is observed in ~6-35% of all gastric cancers, while
co-amplification of topoisomerase IIa occurs in ~32-90% of all cancers with HER2 
amplification. The present study reports that HER2 expression is down-regulated
by A-62176, a fluoroquinophenoxazine derivative that we previously demonstrated
to inhibit topoisomerase I and IIa. The results suggest that A-62176 inhibits the
interaction between the ESX, an ets transcription factor, and its co-activator
Sur2, leading to the attenuation of HER2-mediated phosphorylation of MAPK/Akt.
A-62176 arrests the cell cycle in the G1 phase via the down-regulation of cyclin 
D1 and the up-regulation of p27(Kip1) in NCI-N87 gastric cancer cells. The
combination of A-62176 with doxorubicin provides a strong synergistic activity.
We propose that A-62176 is a dual inhibitor that impairs the expression of HER2
and restrains the activity of topoisomerase IIa. Our results may lead to the
rational design of anticancer molecules targeting a subgroup of gastric cancer
cells overexpressing both HER2 and topoisomerase IIa.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22732416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 22;109(21):8328-33. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1120496109. Epub 2012 May 7.

Mutation at the circadian clock gene EARLY MATURITY 8 adapts domesticated barley 
(Hordeum vulgare) to short growing seasons.

Faure S(1), Turner AS, Gruszka D, Christodoulou V, Davis SJ, von Korff M, Laurie 
DA.

Author information: 
(1)Crop Genetics Department, John Innes Centre, Norwich NR4 7UH, United Kingdom.

The circadian clock is an autonomous oscillator that produces endogenous
biological rhythms with a period of about 24 h. This clock allows organisms to
coordinate their metabolism and development with predicted daily and seasonal
changes of the environment. In plants, circadian rhythms contribute to both
evolutionary fitness and agricultural productivity. Nevertheless, we show that
commercial barley varieties bred for short growing seasons by use of early
maturity 8 (eam8) mutations, also termed mat-a, are severely compromised in clock
gene expression and clock outputs. We identified EAM8 as a barley ortholog of the
Arabidopsis thaliana circadian clock regulator EARLY FLOWERING3 (ELF3) and
demonstrate that eam8 accelerates the transition from vegetative to reproductive 
growth and inflorescence development. We propose that eam8 was selected as barley
cultivation moved to high-latitude short-season environments in Europe because it
allowed rapid flowering in genetic backgrounds that contained a previously
selected late-flowering mutation of the photoperiod response gene Ppd-H1. We show
that eam8 mutants have increased expression of the floral activator HvFT1, which 
is independent of allelic variation at Ppd-H1. The selection of independent eam8 
mutations shows that this strategy facilitates short growth-season adaptation and
expansion of the geographic range of barley, despite the pronounced clock defect.

PMCID: PMC3361427
PMID: 22566625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Biol Evol. 2012 Oct;29(10):3143-52. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

Local adaptation in the flowering-time gene network of balsam poplar, Populus
balsamifera L.

Keller SR(1), Levsen N, Olson MS, Tiffin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, University of Minnesota, MN, USA.
skeller@umces.edu

Identifying the signature and targets of local adaptation is an increasingly
important goal in empirical population genetics. Using data from 443 balsam
poplar Populus balsamifera trees sampled from 31 populations, we tested for
evidence of geographically variable selection shaping diversity at 27 homologues 
of the Arabidopsis flowering-time network. These genes are implicated in the
control of seasonal phenology, an important determinant of fitness. Using 335
candidate and 412 reference single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), we tested for
evidence of local adaptation by searching for elevated population differentiation
using F(ST)-based outlier analyses implemented in BayeScan or a Hierarchical
Model in Arelquin and by testing for significant associations between allele
frequency and environmental variables using BAYENV. A total of 46 SNPs from 14
candidate genes had signatures of local adaptation-either significantly greater
population differentiation or significant covariance with one or more
environmental variable relative to reference SNP distributions. Only 11 SNPs from
two genes exhibited both elevated population differentiation and covariance with 
one or more environmental variables. Several genes including the abscisic acid
gene ABI1B and the circadian clock genes ELF3 and GI5 harbored a large number of 
SNPs with signatures of local adaptation-with SNPs in GI5 strongly covarying with
both latitude and precipitation and SNPs in ABI1B strongly covarying with
temperature. In contrast to several other systems, we find little evidence that
photoreceptors, including phytochromes, play an important role in local
adaptation. Our results additionally show that detecting local adaptation is
sensitive to the analytical approaches used and that model-based significance
thresholds should be viewed with caution.

PMID: 22513286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012 Jun;23(6):1008-18. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2011070738. Epub 2012 
Mar 22.

Quantitative proteomics identifies vasopressin-responsive nuclear proteins in
collecting duct cells.

Schenk LK(1), Bolger SJ, Luginbuhl K, Gonzales PA, Rinschen MM, Yu MJ, Hoffert
JD, Pisitkun T, Knepper MA.

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892-1603, USA.

Vasopressin controls transport in the renal collecting duct, in part, by
regulating transcription. This complex process, which can involve translocation
and/or modification of transcriptional regulators, is not completely understood. 
Here, we applied a method for large-scale profiling of nuclear proteins to
quantify vasopressin-induced changes in the nuclear proteome of cortical
collecting duct (mpkCCD) cells. Using stable isotope labeling and tandem mass
spectrometry, we quantified 3987 nuclear proteins and identified significant
changes in the abundance of 65, including previously established targets of
vasopressin signaling in the collecting duct. Vasopressin-induced changes in the 
abundance of the transcription factors JunB, Elf3, Gatad2b, and Hmbox1;
transcriptional co-regulators Ctnnb1 (ß-catenin) and Crebbp; subunits of the
Mediator complex; E3 ubiquitin ligase Nedd4; nuclear transport regulator RanGap1;
and several proteins associated with tight junctions and adherens junctions.
Bioinformatic analysis showed that many of the quantified transcription factors
have putative binding sites in the 5'-flanking regions of genes coding for the
channel proteins Aqp2, Aqp3, Scnn1b (ENaCß), and Scnn1g (ENaC<U+03B3>), which are known 
targets of vasopressin. Immunoblotting demonstrated that the increase in
ß-catenin in nuclear fractions was accompanied by an even larger increase in its 
phosphorylated form (pSer552). The findings provide a new online database
resource for nuclear proteomics (http://helixweb.nih.gov/ESBL/Database/mNPD/) and
generate new hypotheses regarding vasopressin-mediated transcriptional regulation
in the collecting duct.

PMCID: PMC3358758
PMID: 22440904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Plant Cell Physiol. 2012 Apr;53(4):717-28. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcs029. Epub 2012 Mar
14.

Ef7 encodes an ELF3-like protein and promotes rice flowering by negatively
regulating the floral repressor gene Ghd7 under both short- and long-day
conditions.

Saito H(1), Ogiso-Tanaka E, Okumoto Y, Yoshitake Y, Izumi H, Yokoo T, Matsubara
K, Hori K, Yano M, Inoue H, Tanisaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

Much progress has been made in our understanding of photoperiodic flowering of
rice and the mechanisms underlying short-day (SD) promotion and long-day (LD)
repression of floral induction. In this study, we identified and characterized
the Ef7 gene, one of the rice orthologs of Arabidopsis EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3). 
The ef7 mutant HS276, which was induced by <U+03B3>-irradiation of the japonica rice
cultivar 'Gimbozu', flowers late under both SD and LD conditions. Expression
analyses of flowering time-related genes demonstrated that Ef7 negatively
regulates the expression of Ghd7, which is a repressor of the photoperiodic
control of rice flowering, and consequently up-regulates the expression of the
downstream Ehd1 and FT-like genes under both SD and LD conditions. Genetic
analyses with a non-functional Ghd7 allele provided further evidence that the
delayed flowering of ef7 is mediated through the Ghd7 pathway. The analysis of
light-induced expression of Ghd7 revealed that the ef7 mutant was more sensitive 
to red light than the wild-type plant, but the gate of Ghd7 expression was
unchanged. Thus, our results show that Ef7 functions as a floral promoter by
repressing Ghd7 expression under both SD and LD conditions.

PMID: 22422935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Plant Cell Physiol. 2012 Apr;53(4):709-16. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcs028. Epub 2012 Mar
6.

Natural variation in Hd17, a homolog of Arabidopsis ELF3 that is involved in rice
photoperiodic flowering.

Matsubara K(1), Ogiso-Tanaka E, Hori K, Ebana K, Ando T, Yano M.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Flowering time of rice depends strongly on photoperiodic responses. We previously
identified a quantitative trait locus, Heading date 17 (Hd17), that is associated
with a difference in flowering time between Japanese rice (Oryza sativa L.)
cultivars. Here, we show that the difference may result from a single nucleotide 
polymorphism within a putative gene that encodes a homolog of the Arabidopsis
EARLY FLOWERING 3 protein, which plays important roles in maintaining circadian
rhythms. Our results demonstrate that natural variation in Hd17 may change the
transcription level of a flowering repressor, Grain number, plant height and
heading date 7 (Ghd7), suggesting that Hd17 is part of rice's photoperiodic
flowering pathway.

PMID: 22399582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Mar 13;109(11):4326-31. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1113009109. Epub 2012 Feb 27.

Induced mutations in circadian clock regulator Mat-a facilitated short-season
adaptation and range extension in cultivated barley.

Zakhrabekova S(1), Gough SP, Braumann I, Müller AH, Lundqvist J, Ahmann K,
Dockter C, Matyszczak I, Kurowska M, Druka A, Waugh R, Graner A, Stein N,
Steuernagel B, Lundqvist U, Hansson M.

Author information: 
(1)Carlsberg Laboratory, 1799 Copenhagen V, Denmark.

Time to flowering has an important impact on yield and has been a key trait in
the domestication of crop plants and the spread of agriculture. In 1961, the
cultivar Mari (mat-a.8) was the very first induced early barley (Hordeum vulgare 
L.) mutant to be released into commercial production. Mari extended the range of 
two-row spring barley cultivation as a result of its photoperiod insensitivity.
Since its release, Mari or its derivatives have been used extensively across the 
world to facilitate short-season adaptation and further geographic range
extension. By exploiting an extended historical collection of early-flowering
mutants of barley, we identified Praematurum-a (Mat-a), the gene responsible for 
this key adaptive phenotype, as a homolog of the Arabidopsis thaliana circadian
clock regulator Early Flowering 3 (Elf3). We characterized 87 induced mat-a
mutant lines and identified >20 different mat-a alleles that had clear mutations 
leading to a defective putative ELF3 protein. Expression analysis of HvElf3 and
Gigantea in mutant and wild-type plants demonstrated that mat-a mutations disturb
the flowering pathway, leading to the early phenotype. Alleles of Mat-a therefore
have important and demonstrated breeding value in barley but probably also in
many other day-length-sensitive crop plants, where they may tune adaptation to
different geographic regions and climatic conditions, a critical issue in times
of global warming.

PMCID: PMC3306670
PMID: 22371569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Plant Cell. 2012 Feb;24(2):428-43. doi: 10.1105/tpc.111.093807. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

EARLY FLOWERING4 recruitment of EARLY FLOWERING3 in the nucleus sustains the
Arabidopsis circadian clock.

Herrero E(1), Kolmos E, Bujdoso N, Yuan Y, Wang M, Berns MC, Uhlworm H, Coupland 
G, Saini R, Jaskolski M, Webb A, Gonçalves J, Davis SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, D-50829 Cologne, Germany.

The plant circadian clock is proposed to be a network of several interconnected
feedback loops, and loss of any component leads to changes in oscillator speed.
We previously reported that Arabidopsis thaliana EARLY FLOWERING4 (ELF4) is
required to sustain this oscillator and that the elf4 mutant is arrhythmic. This 
phenotype is shared with both elf3 and lux. Here, we show that overexpression of 
either ELF3 or LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX) complements the elf4 mutant phenotype.
Furthermore, ELF4 causes ELF3 to form foci in the nucleus. We used expression
data to direct a mathematical position of ELF3 in the clock network. This
revealed direct effects on the morning clock gene PRR9, and we determined
association of ELF3 to a conserved region of the PRR9 promoter. A cis-element in 
this region was suggestive of ELF3 recruitment by the transcription factor LUX,
consistent with both ELF3 and LUX acting genetically downstream of ELF4. Taken
together, using integrated approaches, we identified ELF4/ELF3 together with LUX 
to be pivotal for sustenance of plant circadian rhythms.

PMCID: PMC3315225
PMID: 22327739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31264. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031264. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

S-LOCUS EARLY FLOWERING 3 is exclusively present in the genomes of short-styled
buckwheat plants that exhibit heteromorphic self-incompatibility.

Yasui Y(1), Mori M, Aii J, Abe T, Matsumoto D, Sato S, Hayashi Y, Ohnishi O, Ota 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Sakyou-ku, Kyoto, Japan.
yasyas@kais.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The different forms of flowers in a species have attracted the attention of many 
evolutionary biologists, including Charles Darwin. In Fagopyrum esculentum
(common buckwheat), the occurrence of dimorphic flowers, namely short-styled and 
long-styled flowers, is associated with a type of self-incompatibility (SI)
called heteromorphic SI. The floral morphology and intra-morph incompatibility
are both determined by a single genetic locus named the S-locus. Plants with
short-styled flowers are heterozygous (S/s) and plants with long-styled flowers
are homozygous recessive (s/s) at the S-locus. Despite recent progress in our
understanding of the molecular basis of flower development and plant SI systems, 
the molecular mechanisms underlying heteromorphic SI remain unresolved. By
examining differentially expressed genes from the styles of the two floral
morphs, we identified a gene that is expressed only in short-styled plants. The
novel gene identified was completely linked to the S-locus in a linkage analysis 
of 1,373 plants and had homology to EARLY FLOWERING 3. We named this gene S-LOCUS
EARLY FLOWERING 3 (S-ELF3). In an ion-beam-induced mutant that harbored a
deletion in the genomic region spanning S-ELF3, a phenotype shift from
short-styled flowers to long-styled flowers was observed. Furthermore, S-ELF3 was
present in the genome of short-styled plants and absent from that of long-styled 
plants both in world-wide landraces of buckwheat and in two distantly related
Fagopyrum species that exhibit heteromorphic SI. Moreover, independent
disruptions of S-ELF3 were detected in a recently emerged self-compatible
Fagopyrum species and a self-compatible line of buckwheat. The nonessential role 
of S-ELF3 in the survival of individuals and the prolonged evolutionary presence 
only in the genomes of short-styled plants exhibiting heteromorphic SI suggests
that S-ELF3 is a suitable candidate gene for the control of the short-styled
phenotype of buckwheat plants.

PMCID: PMC3270035
PMID: 22312442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Plant. 2012 May;5(3):619-28. doi: 10.1093/mp/ssr122. Epub 2012 Feb 6.

Diurnal dependence of growth responses to shade in Arabidopsis: role of hormone, 
clock, and light signaling.

Sellaro R(1), Pacín M, Casal JJ.

Author information: 
(1)IFEVA, Facultad de Agronomía, Universidad de Buenos Aires and Consejo Nacional
de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Av. San Martín 4453, 1417 Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

We investigated the diurnal dependence of the hypocotyl-growth responses to shade
under sunlight-night cycles in Arabidopsis thaliana. Afternoon shade events
promoted hypocotyl growth, while morning shade was ineffective. The lhy-D, elf3, 
lux, pif4 pif5, toc1, and quadruple della mutants retained the response to
afternoon shade and the lack of response to morning shade while the lhy cca1
mutant responded to both morning and afternoon shade. The phyB mutant, plants
overexpressing the multidrug resistance-like membrane protein ABCB19, and the
iaa17/axr3 loss-of-function mutant failed to respond to shade. Transient exposure
of sunlight-grown seedlings to synthetic auxin in the afternoon caused a stronger
promotion of hypocotyl growth than morning treatments. The promotion of hypocotyl
growth by afternoon shade or afternoon auxin required light perceived by
phytochrome A or cryptochromes during the previous hours of the photoperiod.
Although the ELF4-ELF3-LUX complex, PIF4, PIF5, and DELLA are key players in the 
generation of diurnal hypocotyl-growth patterns, they exert a minor role in the
control of the diurnal pattern of growth responses to shade. We conclude that the
strong diurnal dependency of hypocotyl-growth responses to shade relates to the
balance between the antagonistic actions of LHY-CCA1 and a light-derived signal.

PMID: 22311777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Plant Signal Behav. 2012 Feb;7(2):170-3. doi: 10.4161/psb.18766. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

ELF3 recruitment to the PRR9 promoter requires other Evening Complex members in
the Arabidopsis circadian clock.

Chow BY(1), Helfer A, Nusinow DA, Kay SA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell & Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences,
Center for Chronobiology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

Biological timekeeping is essential for proper growth and development. Organisms 
such as the model plant Arabidopsis use the circadian clock to coordinate
biological processes with the environment so that changes in conditions are
anticipated and processes favorably phased. Despite the identification of
numerous clock genes, knowledge of their molecular connectivity and influence on 
output programs remains limited. We recently showed LUX encodes a
sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that directly regulates expression of the
morning clock gene PRR9. We also showed that LUX interacts with the
evening-phased proteins ELF3 and ELF4 to form a complex called the Evening
Complex (EC). The EC binds the PIF4 and PIF5 promoters to control hypocotyl
growth as a clock output. Here we provide evidence that LUX also recruits ELF3 to
the PRR9 promoter. As with the PIF4 and PIF5 promoters, both LUX and its close
homolog NOX are required for recruitment. Hence the entire EC likely functions
together as part of the core clock oscillator to optimize plant fitness.

PMCID: PMC3405715
PMID: 22307044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Plant Physiol. 2012 Feb;158(2):1079-88. doi: 10.1104/pp.111.189670. Epub 2011 Dec
21.

CCA1 and ELF3 Interact in the control of hypocotyl length and flowering time in
Arabidopsis.

Lu SX(1), Webb CJ, Knowles SM, Kim SH, Wang Z, Tobin EM.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental
Biology, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

The circadian clock is an endogenous oscillator with a period of approximately 24
h that allows organisms to anticipate, and respond to, changes in the
environment. In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), the circadian clock regulates
a wide variety of physiological processes, including hypocotyl elongation and
flowering time. CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED1 (CCA1) is a central clock component, 
and CCA1 overexpression causes circadian dysfunction, elongated hypocotyls, and
late flowering. EARLY FLOWERING3 (ELF3) modulates light input to the clock and is
also postulated to be part of the clock mechanism. elf3 mutations cause
light-dependent arrhythmicity, elongated hypocotyls, and early flowering.
Although both genes affect similar processes, their relationship is not clear.
Here, we show that CCA1 represses ELF3 by associating with its promoter,
completing a CCA1-ELF3 negative feedback loop that places ELF3 within the
oscillator. We also show that ELF3 acts downstream of CCA1, mediating the
repression of PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTOR4 (PIF4) and PIF5 in the control of
hypocotyl elongation. In the regulation of flowering, our findings show that ELF3
and CCA1 either cooperate or act in parallel through the CONSTANS/FLOWERING LOCUS
T pathway. In addition, we show that CCA1 represses GIGANTEA and SUPPRESSOR OF
CONSTANS1 by direct interaction with their promoters, revealing additional
connections between the circadian clock and the flowering pathways.

PMCID: PMC3271744
PMID: 22190341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 27;287(5):3559-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.265744. Epub 2011 
Dec 9.

E74-like factor 3 (ELF3) impacts on matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP13)
transcriptional control in articular chondrocytes under proinflammatory stress.

Otero M(1), Plumb DA, Tsuchimochi K, Dragomir CL, Hashimoto K, Peng H, Olivotto
E, Bevilacqua M, Tan L, Yang Z, Zhan Y, Oettgen P, Li Y, Marcu KB, Goldring MB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cartilage Biology, Research Division, the Hospital for Special 
Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-13 has a pivotal, rate-limiting function in
cartilage remodeling and degradation due to its specificity for cleaving type II 
collagen. The proximal MMP13 promoter contains evolutionarily conserved E26
transformation-specific sequence binding sites that are closely flanked by AP-1
and Runx2 binding motifs, and interplay among these and other factors has been
implicated in regulation by stress and inflammatory signals. Here we report that 
ELF3 directly controls MMP13 promoter activity by targeting an E26
transformation-specific sequence binding site at position -78 bp and by
cooperating with AP-1. In addition, ELF3 binding to the proximal MMP13 promoter
is enhanced by IL-1ß stimulation in chondrocytes, and the IL-1ß-induced MMP13
expression is inhibited in primary human chondrocytes by siRNA-ELF3 knockdown and
in chondrocytes from Elf3(-/-) mice. Further, we found that MEK/ERK signaling
enhances ELF3-driven MMP13 transactivation and is required for IL-1ß-induced ELF3
binding to the MMP13 promoter, as assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation.
Finally, we show that enhanced levels of ELF3 co-localize with MMP13 protein and 
activity in human osteoarthritic cartilage. These studies define a novel role for
ELF3 as a procatabolic factor that may contribute to cartilage remodeling and
degradation by regulating MMP13 gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC3271009
PMID: 22158614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Lab Invest. 2012 Mar;92(3):320-30. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2011.186. Epub 2011 Dec
12.

Multiple roles of the epithelium-specific ETS transcription factor, ESE-1, in
development and disease.

Oliver JR(1), Kushwah R, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The E26 transformation-specific (ETS) family of transcription factors comprises
of 27 and 26 members in humans and mice, respectively, which are known to
regulate many different biological processes, including cell proliferation, cell 
differentiation, embryonic development, neoplasia, hematopoiesis, angiogenesis,
and inflammation. The epithelium-specific ETS transcription factor-1 (ESE-1) is a
physiologically important ETS transcription factor, which has been shown to play 
a role in the pathogenesis of various diseases, and was originally characterized 
as having an epithelial-restricted expression pattern, thus placing it within the
epithelium-specific ETS subfamily. Despite a large body of published work on ETS 
biology, much remains to be learned about the precise functions of ESE-1 and
other epithelium-specific ETS factors in regulating diverse disease processes.
Clues as to the specific function of ESE-1 in the setting of various diseases can
be obtained from studies aimed at examining the expression of putative target
genes regulated by ESE-1. Thus, this review will focus primarily on the various
roles of ESE-1 in different pathophysiological processes, including regulation of
epithelial cell differentiation during both intestinal development and lung
regeneration; regulation of dendritic cell-driven T-cell differentiation during
allergic airway inflammation; regulation of mammary gland development and breast 
cancer; and regulation of the effects of inflammatory stimuli within the setting 
of synovial joint and vascular inflammation. Understanding the exact mechanisms
by which ESE-1 regulates these processes can have important implications for the 
treatment of a wide range of diseases.

PMID: 22157719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS Genet. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002295. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002295. Epub 2011 
Sep 29.

Genomic analysis of QTLs and genes altering natural variation in stochastic
noise.

Jimenez-Gomez JM(1), Corwin JA, Joseph B, Maloof JN, Kliebenstein DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, University of California Davis, Davis,
California, United States of America.

Quantitative genetic analysis has long been used to study how natural variation
of genotype can influence an organism's phenotype. While most studies have
focused on genetic determinants of phenotypic average, it is rapidly becoming
understood that stochastic noise is genetically determined. However, it is not
known how many traits display genetic control of stochastic noise nor how broadly
these stochastic loci are distributed within the genome. Understanding these
questions is critical to our understanding of quantitative traits and how they
relate to the underlying causal loci, especially since stochastic noise may be
directly influenced by underlying changes in the wiring of regulatory networks.
We identified QTLs controlling natural variation in stochastic noise of
glucosinolates, plant defense metabolites, as well as QTLs for stochastic noise
of related transcripts. These loci included stochastic noise QTLs unique for
either transcript or metabolite variation. Validation of these loci showed that
genetic polymorphism within the regulatory network alters stochastic noise
independent of effects on corresponding average levels. We examined this
phenomenon more globally, using transcriptomic datasets, and found that the
Arabidopsis transcriptome exhibits significant, heritable differences in
stochastic noise. Further analysis allowed us to identify QTLs that control
genomic stochastic noise. Some genomic QTL were in common with those altering
average transcript abundance, while others were unique to stochastic noise. Using
a single isogenic population, we confirmed that natural variation at ELF3 alters 
stochastic noise in the circadian clock and metabolism. Since polymorphisms
controlling stochastic noise in genomic phenotypes exist within wild germplasm
for naturally selected phenotypes, this suggests that analysis of Arabidopsis
evolution should account for genetic control of stochastic variance and average
phenotypes. It remains to be determined if natural genetic variation controlling 
stochasticity is equally distributed across the genomes of other multi-cellular
eukaryotes.

PMCID: PMC3183082
PMID: 21980300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Immunol. 2011 Nov 1;187(9):4639-53. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101967. Epub 2011
Sep 23.

Elf3 regulates allergic airway inflammation by controlling dendritic cell-driven 
T cell differentiation.

Kushwah R(1), Oliver JR, Wu J, Chang Z, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)Physiology and Experimental Medicine Research Program, Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Elf3 belongs to the Ets family of transcription factors and has been implicated
in inflammation. Elf3 is highly expressed in the lungs, and Elf3(-/-) mice are
impaired in IL-6 production after intranasal LPS exposure. To identify the role
of Elf3 in Th17-driven pulmonary inflammation, we have performed epicutaneous
sensitization of Elf3(-/-) mice with OVA followed by airway OVA challenge and
have identified Elf3(-/-) mice to be impaired in induction of Th17 response,
attributable to impairment of IL-6 production by dendritic cells (DCs). However, 
increased serum levels of OVA-specific IgG1 and IgE were observed, pointing
toward an exaggerated Th2 response. To study Th2 response, we performed i.p.
sensitization of Elf3(-/-) mice with OVA and confirmed loss of Elf3 to result in 
an aggravated Th2 response, characterized by increased generation of
IL-4-producing T cells, increased levels of OVA-specific IgE and IgG1 Ab titers, 
and increased serum levels of Th2 cytokines, together with extensive inflammation
and mucus production in airways. Elf3(-/-) DCs were impaired in priming Th1
differentiation, which, in turn, promoted Th2 differentiation. This was mediated 
by the ability of Elf3(-/-) DCs to undergo hypermaturation but secrete
significantly lower levels of IL-12 in response to inflammatory stimuli. The
impairment of IL-12 production was due to impairment of IL-12p40 gene induction
in Elf3(-/-) DCs in response to inflammatory stimuli. Taken together, our study
identifies a novel function of Elf3 in regulating allergic airway inflammation by
regulating DC-driven Th1, Th2, and Th17 differentiation.

PMID: 21948981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Plant Cell. 2011 Sep;23(9):3230-46. doi: 10.1105/tpc.111.088195. Epub 2011 Sep 9.

A reduced-function allele reveals that EARLY FLOWERING3 repressive action on the 
circadian clock is modulated by phytochrome signals in Arabidopsis.

Kolmos E(1), Herrero E, Bujdoso N, Millar AJ, Tóth R, Gyula P, Nagy F, Davis SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, 50829 Cologne, Germany.

Arabidopsis thaliana EARLY FLOWERING3 (ELF3) is essential for the generation of
circadian rhythms. ELF3 has been proposed to restrict light signals to the
oscillator through phytochrome photoreceptors, but that has not been explicitly
shown. Furthermore, the genetic action of ELF3 within the clock had remained
elusive. Here, we report a functional characterization of ELF3 through the
analysis of the elf3-12 allele, which encodes an amino acid replacement in a
conserved domain. Circadian oscillations persisted, and unlike elf3 null alleles,
elf3-12 resulted in a short circadian period only under ambient light. The period
shortening effect of elf3-12 was enhanced by the overexpression of phytochromes
phyA and phyB. We found that elf3-12 was only modestly perturbed in resetting of 
the oscillator and in gating light-regulated gene expression. Furthermore,
elf3-12 essentially displayed wild-type development. We identified targets of
ELF3 transcriptional repression in the oscillator, highlighting the action at the
morning gene PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR9. Taken together, we identified two
separable roles for ELF3, one affecting the circadian network and the other
affecting light input to the oscillator. This is consistent with a dual function 
of ELF3 as both an integrator of phytochrome signals and a repressor component of
the core oscillator.

PMCID: PMC3203447
PMID: 21908721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Cancer. 2011 Aug 28;10:103. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-10-103.

Mapping of ESE-1 subdomains required to initiate mammary epithelial cell
transformation via a cytoplasmic mechanism.

Prescott JD(1), Poczobutt JM, Tentler JJ, Walker DM, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 
80045, USA.

BACKGROUND: The ETS family transcription factor ESE-1 is often overexpressed in
human breast cancer. ESE-1 initiates transformation of MCF-12A cells via a
non-transcriptional, cytoplasmic process that is mediated by a unique 40-amino
acid serine and aspartic acid rich (SAR) subdomain, whereas, ESE-1's nuclear
transcriptional property is required to maintain the transformed phenotype of
MCF7, ZR-75-1 and T47D breast cancer cells.
RESULTS: To map the minimal functional nuclear localization (NLS) and nuclear
export (NES) signals, we fused in-frame putative NLS and NES motifs between GFP
and the SAR domain. Using these GFP constructs as reporters of subcellular
localization, we mapped a single NLS to six basic amino acids (242 HGKRRR 247) in
the AT-hook and two CRM1-dependent NES motifs, one to the pointed domain (NES1:
102 LCNCALEELRL 112) and another to the DNA binding domain (DBD), (NES2: 275
LWEFIRDILI 284). Moreover, analysis of a putative NLS located in the DBD (316
GQKKKNSN 323) by a similar GFP-SAR reporter or by internal deletion of the DBD,
revealed this sequence to lack NLS activity. To assess the role of NES2 in
regulating ESE-1 subcellular localization and subsequent transformation potency, 
we site-specifically mutagenized NES2, within full-length GFP-ESE-1 and
GFP-NES2-SAR reporter constructs. These studies show that site-specific mutation 
of NES2 completely abrogates ESE-1 transforming activity. Furthermore, we show
that exclusive cytoplasmic targeting of the SAR domain is sufficient to initiate 
transformation, and we report that an intact SAR domain is required, since block 
mutagenesis reveals that an intact SAR domain is necessary to maintain its full
transforming potency. Finally, using a monoclonal antibody targeting the SAR
domain, we demonstrate that the SAR domain contains a region accessible for
protein - protein interactions.
CONCLUSIONS: These data highlight that ESE-1 contains NLS and NES signals that
play a critical role in regulating its subcellular localization and function, and
that an intact SAR domain mediates MEC transformation exclusively in the
cytoplasm, via a novel nontranscriptional mechanism, whereby the SAR motif is
accessible for ligand and/or protein interactions. These findings are
significant, since they provide novel molecular insights into the functions of
ETS transcription factors in mammary cell transformation.

PMCID: PMC3183030
PMID: 21871131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Plant Signal Behav. 2011 Aug;6(8):1162-71. doi: 10.4161/psb.6.8.16361. Epub 2011 
Aug 1.

Suppression of late-flowering and semi-dwarf phenotypes in the Arabidopsis clock 
mutant lhy-12;cca1-101 by phyB under continuous light.

Miyata K(1), Calviño M, Oda AO, Sugiyama H, Mizoguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Research Center, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Photoperiodic flowering in Arabidopsis is controlled not only by floral
activators such as GI, CO, and FT, but also by repressors such as SVP and FLC.
Double mutations in LHY and CCA1 (lhy;cca1) accelerated flowering under short
days, mainly by the GI-CO dependent pathway. In contrast, lhy;cca1 showed delayed
flowering under continuous light (LL), probably due to the GI-CO independent
pathway. This late-flowering phenotype was suppressed by svp, flc, and elf3.
However, how SVP, FLC, and ELF3 mediate LHY/CCA1 and flowering time is not fully 
understood. We found that lhy;cca1 exhibited short hypocotyls and petioles under 
LL, but the molecular mechanism for these effects has not been elucidated. To
address these questions, we performed a screen for mutations that suppress either
or both of the lhy;cca1 phenotypes under LL, using two different approaches. We
identified two novel mutations, a dominant (del1) and a recessive (phyB-2511)
allele of phyB. The flowering times of single mutants of three phyB alleles,
hy3-1, del1, and phyB-2511, are almost the same and earlier than those of
wild-type plants. A similar level of acceleration of flowering time was observed 
in all three phyB mutants tested when combined with the late-flowering mutations 
co-2 and SVPox. However, the effect of phyB-2511 on lhy;cca1 was different from
those by hy3-1 or del1. svp-3 did not strongly enhance the early-flowering
phenotypes of phyB-2511 or del1. These results suggest that light signaling via
PhyB may affect factors downstream of the clock proteins, controlling flowering
time and organ elongation. phyB mutations with different levels of effects on
lhy;cca1-dependent late flowering would be useful to determine a specific role
for PHYB in the flowering pathway controlled by lhy;cca1 under LL.

PMCID: PMC3260714
PMID: 21822060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Dev Biol. 2011 Oct 1;358(1):79-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.07.020. Epub 2011
Jul 22.

Kruppel-like factor 5 is required for formation and differentiation of the
bladder urothelium.

Bell SM(1), Zhang L, Mendell A, Xu Y, Haitchi HM, Lessard JL, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Perinatal Institute of Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division
of Neonatology-Perinatal-Pulmonary Biology, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Kruppel-like transcription factor 5 (Klf5) was detected in the developing and
mature murine bladder urothelium. Herein we report a critical role of KLF5 in the
formation and terminal differentiation of the urothelium. The Shh(GfpCre)
transgene was used to delete the Klf5(floxed) alleles from bladder epithelial
cells causing prenatal hydronephrosis, hydroureter, and vesicoureteric reflux.
The bladder urothelium failed to stratify and did not express terminal
differentiation markers characteristic of basal, intermediate, and umbrella cells
including keratins 20, 14, and 5, and the uroplakins. The effects of Klf5
deletion were unique to the developing bladder epithelium since maturation of the
epithelium comprising the bladder neck and urethra was unaffected by the lack of 
KLF5. mRNA analysis identified reductions in Ppar<U+03B3>, Grhl3, Elf3, and
Ovol1expression in Klf5 deficient fetal bladders supporting their participation
in a transcriptional network regulating bladder urothelial differentiation. KLF5 
regulated expression of the mGrhl3 promoter in transient transfection assays. The
absence of urothelial Klf5 altered epithelial-mesenchymal signaling leading to
the formation of an ectopic alpha smooth muscle actin positive layer of cells
subjacent to the epithelium and a thinner detrusor muscle that was not
attributable to disruption of SHH signaling, a known mediator of detrusor
morphogenesis. Deletion of Klf5 from the developing bladder urothelium blocked
epithelial cell differentiation, impaired bladder morphogenesis and function
causing hydroureter and hydronephrosis at birth.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3180904
PMID: 21803035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Nature. 2011 Jul 13;475(7356):398-402. doi: 10.1038/nature10182.

The ELF4-ELF3-LUX complex links the circadian clock to diurnal control of
hypocotyl growth.

Nusinow DA(1), Helfer A, Hamilton EE, King JJ, Imaizumi T, Schultz TF, Farré EM, 
Kay SA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell & Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences,
University of California San Diego 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California
92093-0130, USA.

The circadian clock is required for adaptive responses to daily and seasonal
changes in environmental conditions. Light and the circadian clock interact to
consolidate the phase of hypocotyl cell elongation to peak at dawn under diurnal 
cycles in Arabidopsis thaliana. Here we identify a protein complex (called the
evening complex)--composed of the proteins encoded by EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3),
ELF4 and the transcription-factor-encoding gene LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX; also known as
PHYTOCLOCK 1)--that directly regulates plant growth. ELF3 is both necessary and
sufficient to form a complex between ELF4 and LUX, and the complex is diurnally
regulated, peaking at dusk. ELF3, ELF4 and LUX are required for the proper
expression of the growth-promoting transcription factors encoded by PHYTOCHROME
INTERACTING FACTOR 4 (PIF4) and PIF5 (also known as PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING
FACTOR 3-LIKE 6) under diurnal conditions. LUX targets the complex to the
promoters of PIF4 and PIF5 in vivo. Mutations in PIF4 and/or PIF5 are epistatic
to the loss of the ELF4-ELF3-LUX complex, suggesting that regulation of PIF4 and 
PIF5 is a crucial function of the complex. Therefore, the evening complex
underlies the molecular basis for circadian gating of hypocotyl growth in the
early evening.

PMCID: PMC3155984
PMID: 21753751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Curr Biol. 2011 Jul 26;21(14):1232-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.06.025. Epub 2011
Jul 7.

FLOWERING LOCUS T regulates stomatal opening.

Kinoshita T(1), Ono N, Hayashi Y, Morimoto S, Nakamura S, Soda M, Kato Y, Ohnishi
M, Nakano T, Inoue S, Shimazaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Nagoya, Aichi 464-8602, Japan. kinoshita@bio.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2011 Aug 23;21(16):R636-8.

Stomatal pores surrounded by a pair of guard cells in the plant epidermis control
gas exchange for photosynthesis in response to light, CO(2), and phytohormone
abscisic acid. Phototropins (phot1 and phot2) are plant blue-light receptor
kinases and mediate stomatal opening via activation of the plasma membrane
H(+)-ATPase. However, the signaling mechanism from phototropins to the
H(+)-ATPase has yet to be determined. Here, we show that FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT)
is expressed in guard cells and regulates stomatal opening. We isolated an scs
(suppressor of closed-stomata phenotype in phot1 phot2) 1-1 mutant of Arabidopsis
thaliana and showed that scs1-1 carries a novel null early flowering 3 (elf3)
allele in a phot1 phot2 background. scs1-1 (elf3 phot1 phot2 triple mutant) had
an open-stomata phenotype with high H(+)-ATPase activity and showed increased
levels of FT mRNA in guard cells. Transgenic plants overexpressing FT in guard
cells showed open stomata, whereas a loss-of-function FT allele, ft-1, exhibited 
closed stomata and failed to activate the H(+)-ATPase in response to blue light. 
Our results define a new cell-autonomous role for FT and demonstrate that the
flowering time genes ELF3 and FT are involved in the regulation of H(+)-ATPase by
blue light in guard cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21737277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Lab Invest. 2011 Oct;91(10):1514-29. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2011.100. Epub 2011
Jun 27.

Elf3 plays a role in regulating bronchiolar epithelial repair kinetics following 
Clara cell-specific injury.

Oliver JR(1), Kushwah R, Wu J, Pan J, Cutz E, Yeger H, Waddell TK, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada.

E74-like transcription factor-3 (Elf3), a member of the E26
transformation-specific transcription factor family, is strongly expressed in
epithelial-rich tissues, such as small intestine, fetal lung, and various lung
cancers. Although previous studies have shown a defect in terminal
differentiation of the small intestinal epithelium of Elf3-deficient (Elf3-/-)
mice during embryonic development, very little is known about the role Elf3 may
play in repair of the airway epithelium after injury. In order to investigate
whether Elf3 is involved in regeneration of the bronchiolar epithelium after
Clara cell-specific injury, we administered naphthalene to both wild-type
(Elf3+/+) and Elf3-/- mice. Histopathological analysis revealed no significant
difference in the extent of naphthalene-induced Clara cell necrosis between
Elf3+/+ mice and Elf3-/- mice. In the bronchiolar epithelium of Elf3-/- mice,
there was a substantial delay in the kinetics of cell proliferation and mitosis
along with Clara cell renewal, whereas in the peribronchiolar interstitium, there
was a significantly greater level of cell proliferation and mitosis in Elf3-/-
mice than in Elf3+/+ mice. Last, the intensity of immunopositive signal for
transforming growth factor-ß type II receptor, which is a well-known
transcriptional target gene of Elf3 and involved in the induction of epithelial
cell differentiation, was significantly lower in the bronchiolar epithelium of
Elf3-/- mice when compared with Elf3+/+ mice. Taken together, our results suggest
that Elf3 plays an important role in the regulation of lung cell proliferation
and differentiation during repair of the injured bronchiolar airway epithelium.

© 2011 USCAP, Inc All rights reserved

PMID: 21709667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Mol Histol. 2011 Aug;42(4):365-70. doi: 10.1007/s10735-011-9333-7. Epub 2011
Jun 10.

In vitro cultured primary cells from a human utricle explant possesses hair cell 
like characteristics.

Marano RJ(1), Redmond SL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Otolaryngology Research Laboratory, Ear Science
Institute Australia, 2nd Floor, M Block, Room 2.27 (M507), QEII Medical Centre,
Nedlands, WA, 6009, Australia. rob.marano@earscience.org.au

The utricle is the enlarged portion of the membranous labyrinth of the inner ear 
and is essential for balance. It comprises of fine hair cells (mechanoreceptors),
supporting cells and calcareous otoliths. Utricle cells are considered to be
post-mitotic and possess a limited capacity for regeneration. Unlike birds and
reptiles, mammalian mechanosensory hair cells do not regenerate. The in vitro
culture of primary cells from the utricle and other inner ear structures of
mammals have proven difficult. Presented here for the first time is the culture
of primary cells derived from an explant of an adult human utricle, without any
intervention or manipulation. Cells were proliferative until cellular quiescence 
occurred during passage six. Cell morphology was atypical of epithelial cells,
appearing as a homogenous, slightly elongated population. Analysis of cultured
utricle cells by immunofluorescent staining (IF) and reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) have shown these cells to possess epithelial
(Epithelium-specific ets-1 (ESE-1)), supporting hair cell (p27(Kip1)), and hair
cell specific (Atoh1 and Myosin VI) markers. Additionally, RT-PCR revealed
positive gene expression for the proliferation control marker fibroblast growth
factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) and negative gene expression for E-cadherin (CDH1), a
vestibular cell differentiation marker.

PMID: 21660457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Plant J. 2011 Jul;67(1):37-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04573.x. Epub 2011
Apr 26.

Functional interaction of the circadian clock and UV RESISTANCE
LOCUS 8-controlled UV-B signaling pathways in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Fehér B(1), Kozma-Bognár L, Kevei E, Hajdu A, Binkert M, Davis SJ, Schäfer E, Ulm
R, Nagy F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Biology, Biological Research Centre of the Hungarian
Academy of Sciences, H-6726 Szeged, Hungary.

Circadian clocks regulate many molecular and physiological processes in
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), allowing the timing of these processes to
occur at the most appropriate time of the day in a 24-h period. The accuracy of
timing relies on the synchrony of the clock and the environmental day/night
cycle. Visible light is the most potent signal for such synchronization, but
light-induced responses are also rhythmically attenuated (gated) by the clock.
Here, we report a similar mutual interaction of the circadian clock and
non-damaging photomorphogenic UV-B light. We show that low-intensity UV-B
radiation acts as entraining signal for the clock. UV RESISTANCE LOCUS 8 (UVR8)
and CONSTITUTIVELY PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1 (COP1) are required, but ELONGATED
HYPOCOTYL 5 (HY5) and HY5 HOMOLOG (HYH) are dispensable for this process. UV-B
responsiveness of clock gene expression suggests that photomorphogenic UV-B
entrains the plant clock through transcriptional activation. We also demonstrate 
that UV-B induction of gene expression under these conditions is gated by the
clock in a HY5/HYH-independent manner. The arrhythmic early flowering 3-4 mutant 
showed non-gated, high-level gene induction by UV-B, yet displayed no increased
tolerance to UV-B stress. Thus, the temporal restriction of UV-B responsiveness
by the circadian clock can be considered as saving resources during acclimation
without losing fitness.

© 2011 The Authors. The Plant Journal © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21395889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Plant Cell Environ. 2011 Jun;34(6):877-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3040.2011.02286.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 24.

Circadian control of root elongation and C partitioning in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Yazdanbakhsh N(1), Sulpice R, Graf A, Stitt M, Fisahn J.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, 14476 Potsdam/Golm, Am
Mühlenberg 1, Germany.

Plants grow in a light/dark cycle. We have investigated how growth is buffered
against the resulting changes in the carbon supply. Growth of primary roots of
Arabidopsis seedlings was monitored using time-resolved video imaging. The
average daily rate of growth is increased in longer light periods or by addition 
of sugars. It responds slowly over days when the conditions are changed. The
momentary rate of growth exhibits a robust diel oscillation with a minimum 8-9 h 
after dawn and a maximum towards the end of the night. Analyses with starch
metabolism mutants show that starch turnover is required to maintain growth at
night. A carbon shortfall leads to an inhibition of growth, which is not
immediately reversed when carbon becomes available again. The diel oscillation
persists in continuous light and is strongly modified in clock mutants. Central
clock functions that depend on CCA1/LHY are required to set an appropriate rate
of starch degradation and maintain a supply of carbon to support growth through
to dawn, whereas ELF3 acts to decrease growth in the light period and promote
growth in the night. Thus, while the overall growth rate depends on the carbon
supply, the clock orchestrates diurnal carbon allocation and growth.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21332506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Exp Bot. 2011 May;62(8):2731-44. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erq450. Epub 2011 Feb 4.

Double loss-of-function mutation in EARLY FLOWERING 3 and CRYPTOCHROME 2 genes
delays flowering under continuous light but accelerates it under long days and
short days: an important role for Arabidopsis CRY2 to accelerate flowering time
in continuous light.

Nefissi R(1), Natsui Y, Miyata K, Oda A, Hase Y, Nakagawa M, Ghorbel A, Mizoguchi
T.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Research Center, University of Tsukuba, Tennodai 1-1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 
305-8572, Japan.

The photoperiodic response is one of the adaptation mechanisms to seasonal
changes of lengths of day and night. The circadian clock plays pivotal roles in
this process. In Arabidopsis, LHY, CCA1, ELF3, and other clock proteins play
major roles in maintaining circadian rhythms. lhy;cca1 double mutants with severe
defects in circadian rhythms showed accelerated flowering under short days (SDs),
but delayed flowering under continuous light (LL). The protein level of the
floral repressor SVP increased in lhy;cca1 mutants under LL, and the
late-flowering phenotype of lhy;cca1 mutants was partially suppressed by svp,
flc, or elf3. ELF3 interacted with both CCA1 and SVP, and elf3 suppressed the SVP
accumulation in lhy;cca1 under LL. These results suggest that the unique
mechanism of the inversion of the flowering response of lhy;cca1 under LL may
involve both the ELF3-SVP/FLC-dependent and -independent pathways. In this work, 
elf3-1 seeds were mutagenized with heavy-ion beams and used to identify
mutation(s) that delayed flowering under LL but not long days (LDs) or SDs even
without ELF3. In this screening, seven candidate lines named suppressor of elf3 1
(self1), sel3, sel5, sel7, sel14, sel15, and sel20 were identified. Genetic
analysis indicated that sel20 was a new deletion allele of a mutation in the blue
light receptor, CRY2. A late-flowering phenotype and decrease of FT expression in
the elf3;sel20 double mutant was obvious under LL but not under SDs or LDs. These
results indicated that the late-flowering phenotype in the double mutant
elf3;sel20 as well as in lhy;cca1 was affected by the presence of darkness. The
results suggest that CRY2 may play more essential roles in the acceleration of
flowering under LL than LDs or SDs.

PMID: 21296763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Plant J. 2011 May;66(3):480-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04505.x. Epub 2011 
Mar 4.

Light inputs shape the Arabidopsis circadian system.

Wenden B(1), Kozma-Bognár L, Edwards KD, Hall AJ, Locke JC, Millar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Mayfield Road,
Edinburgh EH93JH, UK.

The circadian clock is a fundamental feature of eukaryotic gene regulation that
is emerging as an exemplar genetic sub-network for systems biology. The circadian
system in Arabidopsis plants is complex, in part due to its phototransduction
pathways, which are themselves under circadian control. We therefore analysed two
simpler experimental systems. Etiolated seedlings entrained by temperature cycles
showed circadian rhythms in the expression of genes that are important for the
clock mechanism, but only a restricted set of downstream target genes were
rhythmic in microarray assays. Clock control of phototransduction pathways
remained robust across a range of light inputs, despite the arrhythmic
transcription of light-signalling genes. Circadian interactions with light
signalling were then analysed using a single active photoreceptor. Phytochrome A 
(phyA) is expected to be the only active photoreceptor that can mediate far-red
(FR) light input to the circadian clock. Surprisingly, rhythmic gene expression
was profoundly altered under constant FR light, in a phyA-dependent manner,
resulting in high expression of evening genes and low expression of morning
genes. Dark intervals were required to allow high-amplitude rhythms across the
transcriptome. Clock genes involved in this response were identified by mutant
analysis, showing that the EARLY FLOWERING 4 gene is a likely target and mediator
of the FR effects. Both experimental systems illustrate how profoundly the light 
input pathways affect the plant circadian clock, and provide strong experimental 
manipulations to understand critical steps in the plant clock mechanism.

© 2011 The Authors. The Plant Journal © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21255161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Curr Biol. 2011 Jan 25;21(2):120-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2010.12.013. Epub 2011 Jan
13.

Temporal repression of core circadian genes is mediated through EARLY FLOWERING 3
in Arabidopsis.

Dixon LE(1), Knox K, Kozma-Bognar L, Southern MM, Pokhilko A, Millar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Systems Biology at Edinburgh, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
Midlothian EH9 3JD, UK.

The circadian clock provides robust, ~24 hr biological rhythms throughout the
eukaryotes. The clock gene circuit in plants comprises interlocking
transcriptional feedback loops, reviewed in [1], whereby the morning-expressed
transcription factors CIRCADIAN CLOCK-ASSOCIATED 1 (CCA1) and LATE ELONGATED
HYPOCOTYL (LHY) repress the expression of evening genes, notably TIMING OF CAB
EXPRESSION 1 (TOC1). EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3) has been implicated as a repressor 
of light signaling to the clock [2, 3] and, paradoxically, as an activator of the
light-induced genes CCA1 and LHY [4, 5]. We use cca1-11 lhy-21 elf3-4 plants to
separate the repressive function of ELF3 from its downstream targets CCA1 and
LHY. We further demonstrate that ELF3 associates physically with the promoter of 
PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR 9 (PRR9), a repressor of CCA1 and LHY expression, in a 
time-dependent fashion. The repressive function of ELF3 is thus consistent with
indirect activation of LHY and CCA1, in a double-negative connection via a direct
ELF3 target, PRR9. This mechanism reconciles the functions of ELF3 in the clock
network during the night and points to further effects of ELF3 during the day.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3028277
PMID: 21236675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. BMB Rep. 2010 Dec;43(12):830-5. doi: 10.5483/BMBRep.2010.43.12.830.

Epigenetic modification of retinoic acid-treated human embryonic stem cells.

Cheong HS(1), Lee HC, Park BL, Kim H, Jang MJ, Han YM, Kim SY, Kim YS, Shin HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Epidemiology, SNP Genetics, Inc., Seoul 153-803, Korea.

Epigenetic modification of the genome through DNA methylation is the key to
maintaining the differentiated state of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), and
it must be reset during differentiation by retinoic acid (RA) treatment. A
genome-wide methylation/gene expression assay was performed in order to identify 
epigenetic modifications of RA-treated hESCs. Between undifferentiated and
RA-treated hESCs, 166 differentially methylated CpG sites and 2,013
differentially expressed genes were discovered. Combined analysis of methylation 
and expression data revealed that 19 genes (STAP2, VAMP8, C10orf26, WFIKKN1,
ELF3, C1QTNF6, C10orf10, MRGPRF, ARSE, LSAMP, CENTD3, LDB2, POU5F1, GSPT2, THY1, 
ZNF574, MSX1, SCMH1, and RARB) were highly correlated with each other. The
results provided in this study will facilitate future investigations into the
interplay between DNA methylation and gene expression through further functional 
and biological studies.

PMID: 21189161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Plant Cell Physiol. 2011 Feb;52(2):373-83. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcq198. Epub 2010 Dec
23.

The circadian clock modulates water dynamics and aquaporin expression in
Arabidopsis roots.

Takase T(1), Ishikawa H, Murakami H, Kikuchi J, Sato-Nara K, Suzuki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Photobiology, Photodynamics Research Center, RIKEN, 519-1399
Aoba, Aramaki, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi, 980-0845 Japan.

We have developed a plant growth system to analyze water dynamics in the roots of
a small model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
microscopic imaging. Using the two-dimensional slice technique, we obtained a
series of images with high signal-to-noise ratio indicating the water
distribution in the root. To demonstrate light regulation of water transport in
the root and involvement of aquaporin gene expression, we visualized the
distribution of water in Arabidopsis roots under various light conditions and
compared the data with the expression profiles of two aquaporin genes. (1)H-NMR
imaging revealed that water content in Arabidopsis roots is lower in the light
than in the dark. This diurnal variation in water content was clearly observed in
the basal zone of the root. In addition, an autonomous rhythm of water dynamics
was observed under continuous light (LL) and darkness (DD). However, the
circadian oscillation in water dynamics was obscured in the early-flowering 3
(elf3) mutant under LL. The expression of both the aquaporin genes, AtPIP1;2 and 
AtPIP2;1, oscillated with the circadian rhythm under LL conditions in wild-type
seedlings, but not in the elf3 mutant. These results demonstrate the advantages
of our technique for monitoring water dynamics in roots of living Arabidopsis
seedlings, and suggest that the circadian clock modulates water dynamics and
aquaporin expression.

PMID: 21186174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Vet J. 2011 Oct;190(1):165-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2010.09.027. Epub 2010 Nov 3.

Potential markers for detection of circulating canine mammary tumor cells in the 
peripheral blood.

da Costa A(1), Oliveira JT, Gärtner F, Kohn B, Gruber AD, Klopfleisch R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Pathology, Freie Universität Berlin,
Robert-von-Ostertag-Straße 15, Berlin, Germany.

Major discrepancies exist between histological predictions and actual metastatic 
potential of canine mammary tumors. Detection of circulating tumor cells (CTC)
has a proven prognostic value for human breast cancer but similar markers for
canine CTC are lacking. In the present study a panel of 16 human CTC markers was 
tested for their ability to specifically and sensitively detect canine carcinoma 
cells in peripheral blood. PCR assays for CK19, ERBB2, EGFR, CLDN7 and ELF3 were 
able to sensitively detect one carcinoma cell in up to 10(7) peripheral blood
leukocytes. These CTC markers are thus candidate markers for identifying canine
mammary CTC in the peripheral blood and may serve as prognostic factors for
metastatic behavior in the future.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21051248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2010 Jul;20(5):724-31.

Gene expression profiling and cancer-related pathways in type I endometrial
carcinoma.

Saghir FS(1), Rose IM, Dali AZ, Shamsuddin Z, Jamal AR, Mokhtar NM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.

INTRODUCTION: Malignant transformation of type I endometrium involves alteration 
in gene expression with subsequent uncontrolled proliferation of altered cells.
OBJECTIVE: The main objective of the present study was to identify the
cancer-related genes and gene pathways in the endometrium of healthy and cancer
patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty endometrial tissues from healthy and type I EC
patients were subjected to total RNA isolation. The RNA samples with good
integrity number were hybridized to a new version of Affymetrix Human Genome
GeneChip 1.0 ST array. We analyzed the results using the GeneSpring 9.0 GX and
the Pathway Studio 6.1 software. For validation assay, quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction was used to analyze 4 selected genes in normal and EC
tissue.
RESULTS: Of the 28,869 genes profiled, we identified 621 differentially expressed
genes (2-fold) in the normal tissue and the tumor. Among these genes, 146 were
up-regulated and 476 were down-regulated in the tumor as compared with the normal
tissue (P < 0.001). Up-regulated genes included the v-erb-a erythroblastic
leukemia viral oncogene homolog 3 (ErbB3), ErbB4, E74-like factor 3 (ELF3), and
chemokine ligand 17 (CXCL17). The down-regulated genes included signal transducer
and activator transcription 5B (STAT5b), transforming growth factor A receptor
III (TGFA3), caveolin 1 (CAV1), and protein kinase C alpha (PKCA). The gene set
enrichment analysis showed 10 significant gene sets with related genes (P <
0.05). The quantitative polymerase chain reaction of 4 selected genes using
similar RNA confirmed the microarray results (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Identification of molecular pathways with their genes related to
type I EC contribute to the understanding of pathophysiology of this cancer,
probably leading to identifying potential biomarkers of the cancer.

PMID: 20973258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. PLoS Genet. 2010 Sep 9;6(9):e1001100. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001100.

Network analysis identifies ELF3 as a QTL for the shade avoidance response in
Arabidopsis.

Jiménez-Gómez JM(1), Wallace AD, Maloof JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, College of Biological Sciences, University of
California Davis, Davis, California, United States of America.

Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL) analyses in immortal populations are a powerful
method for exploring the genetic mechanisms that control interactions of
organisms with their environment. However, QTL analyses frequently do not
culminate in the identification of a causal gene due to the large chromosomal
regions often underlying QTLs. A reasonable approach to inform the process of
causal gene identification is to incorporate additional genome-wide information, 
which is becoming increasingly accessible. In this work, we perform QTL analysis 
of the shade avoidance response in the Bayreuth-0 (Bay-0, CS954) x Shahdara (Sha,
CS929) recombinant inbred line population of Arabidopsis. We take advantage of
the complex pleiotropic nature of this trait to perform network analysis using
co-expression, eQTL and functional classification from publicly available
datasets to help us find good candidate genes for our strongest QTL, SAR2. This
novel network analysis detected EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3; AT2G25930) as the most
likely candidate gene affecting the shade avoidance response in our population.
Further genetic and transgenic experiments confirmed ELF3 as the causative gene
for SAR2. The Bay-0 and Sha alleles of ELF3 differentially regulate developmental
time and circadian clock period length in Arabidopsis, and the extent of this
regulation is dependent on the light environment. This is the first time that
ELF3 has been implicated in the shade avoidance response and that different
natural alleles of this gene are shown to have phenotypic effects. In summary, we
show that development of networks to inform candidate gene identification for
QTLs is a promising technique that can significantly accelerate the process of
QTL cloning.

PMCID: PMC2936530
PMID: 20838594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Exp Bot. 2011 Jan;62(1):167-76. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erq253. Epub 2010 Aug 16.

Genetic mapping of natural variation in a shade avoidance response: ELF3 is the
candidate gene for a QTL in hypocotyl growth regulation.

Coluccio MP(1), Sanchez SE, Kasulin L, Yanovsky MJ, Botto JF.

Author information: 
(1)IFEVA, Facultad de Agronomía, Universidad de Buenos Aires y Consejo Nacional
de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Av. San Martín 4453, C1417DSE, Ciudad 
de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

When plants become shaded by neighbouring plants, they perceive a decrease in the
red/far-red (R/FR) ratio of the light environment, which provides an early and
unambiguous warning of the presence of competing vegetation. The mechanistic
bases of the natural genetic variation in response to shade signals remain
largely unknown. This study demonstrates that a wide range of genetic variation
for hypocotyl elongation in response to an FR pulse at the end of day (EOD), a
light signal that simulates natural shade, exists between Arabidopsis accessions.
A quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping analysis was done in the
Bayreuth×Shahdara recombinant inbred line population. EODINDEX1 is the most
significant QTL identified in response to EOD. The Shahdara alleles at EODINDEX1 
caused a reduced response to shade as a consequence of an impaired hypocotyl
inhibition under white light, and an accelerated leaf movement rhythm, which
correlated positively with the pattern of circadian expression of clock genes
such as PRR7 and PRR9. Genetic and quantitative complementation analyses
demonstrated that ELF3 is the most likely candidate gene underlying natural
variation at EODINDEX1. In conclusion, ELF3 is proposed as a component of the
shade avoidance signalling pathway responsible for the phenotypic differences
between Arabidopsis populations in relation to adaptation in a changing light
environment.

PMCID: PMC2993907
PMID: 20713464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Am J Hypertens. 2010 Dec;23(12):1312-7. doi: 10.1038/ajh.2010.164. Epub 2010 Aug 
5.

The counter-regulatory effects of ESE-1 during angiotensin II-mediated vascular
inflammation and remodeling.

Zhan Y(1), Yuan L, Kondo M, Oettgen P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Hypertens. 2010 Dec;23(12):1252.

BACKGROUND: Angiotensin II (Ang II) is a critical mediator vascular inflammation 
and remodeling in a number of diseases including hypertension and
atherosclerosis. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the role of the
epithelium-specific ETS transcription factor-1 (ESE-1), a member of E26
transformation-specific sequence (ETS) transcription factors, as a mediator of
Ang II-mediated vascular responses.
METHODS: ESE-1 knockout mice were used to evaluate the role of ESE-1 in
regulating Ang II-mediated vascular inflammation and remodeling.
RESULTS: ESE-1 levels are low to undetectable under basal conditions but rapidly 
increase in response to Ang II. Intimal medial thickness and perivascular
fibrosis of the aorta were significantly greater in ESE-1 knockout mice compared 
with the wild-type littermate controls. Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA)
staining was also greater in the aorta of the Ang II-infused ESE-1 knockout mice 
compared with the controls. The infiltration of T cells and macrophage into the
vessel wall of the aorta was dramatically enhanced in the ESE-1 knockout mice
compared with the controls. Finally, Ang II-induced expression of a known
downstream target of ESE-1, nitric oxide synthase 2 (NOS2), was significantly
blunted in ESE-1 knockout mice compared to littermate controls. The alterations
in vascular inflammation and remodeling were associated with an exaggerated
systolic blood pressure response to Ang II in ESE-1 knockout mice.
CONCLUSIONS: ESE-1 is an Ang II-inducible transcription factor that plays an
important counter-regulatory role in the setting of vascular inflammation and
remodeling.

PMCID: PMC3715883
PMID: 20689519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Am J Pathol. 2010 Aug;177(2):698-712. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.091226. Epub 2010 
Jun 21.

Transcriptional control of tight junction proteins via a protein kinase C signal 
pathway in human telomerase reverse transcriptase-transfected human pancreatic
duct epithelial cells.

Yamaguchi H(1), Kojima T, Ito T, Kimura Y, Imamura M, Son S, Koizumi J, Murata M,
Nagayama M, Nobuoka T, Tanaka S, Hirata K, Sawada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.

In human pancreatic cancer, integral membrane proteins of tight junction claudins
are abnormally regulated, making these proteins promising molecular diagnostic
and therapeutic targets. However, the regulation of claudin-based tight junctions
remains unknown not only in the pancreatic cancer cells but also in normal human 
pancreatic duct epithelial (HPDE) cells. To investigate the regulation of tight
junction molecules including claudins in normal HPDE cells, we introduced the
human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) gene into HPDE cells in primary
culture. The hTERT-transfected HPDE (hTERT-HPDE) cells were positive for the
pancreatic duct epithelial markers such as CK7, CK19, and carbonic anhydrase
isozyme 2 and expressed epithelial tight junction molecules claudin-1, -4, -7
and, -18, occludin, JAM-A, ZO-1, ZO-2, and tricellulin. By treatment with fetal
bovine serum or 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA), the tight junction
molecules were up-regulated at the transcriptional level via a protein kinase C
(PKC) signal pathway. A PKC-alpha inhibitor, Gö6976, prevented up-regulation of
claudin-4 by TPA. Furthermore, a PKC-delta inhibitor, rottlerin, prevented
up-regulation of claudin-7, occludin, ZO-1, and ZO-2 by TPA. By GeneChip
analysis, up-regulation of the transcription factor ELF3 was observed in both
fetal bovine serum- and TPA-treated cells. Treatment with small interfering RNAs 
of ELF3 prevented up-regulation of claudin-7 by TPA. These data suggest that
tight junctions of normal HPDE cells were at least in part regulated via a PKC
signal pathway by transcriptional control.

PMCID: PMC2913360
PMID: 20566751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. BMC Genomics. 2010 May 25;11:324. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-324.

Genomic profiling of tumor initiating prostatospheres.

Duhagon MA(1), Hurt EM, Sotelo-Silveira JR, Zhang X, Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Stem Cell Section, Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer
Institute at Frederick, 1050 Boyles Street, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
mduhagon@fcien.edu.uy

BACKGROUND: The cancer stem cell (CSC) hypothesis proposes that a population of
tumor cells bearing stem cell properties is responsible for the origin and
maintenance of tumors. Normal and cancer stem cells possess the ability to grow
in vitro as self-renewing spheres, but the molecular basis of this phenotype
remains largely unknown. We intended to establish a comprehensive culture system 
to grow prostatospheres (PSs) from both cancer cell lines and patient tumors. We 
then used gene expression microarrays to gain insight on the molecular pathways
that sustain the PS tumor initiating cell (TIC) phenotype.
RESULTS: Traditional stem cell medium (SCM) supplemented with KnockoutSR (KO)
allows the propagation of monoclonal PSs from cell lines and primary cells. PSs
display gene expression and tumorigenicity hallmarks of TICs. Gene expression
analysis defined a gene signature composed of 66 genes that characterize LNCaP
and patient PSs. This set includes novel prostate TIC growth factors (NRP1, GDF1,
JAG1), proteins implicated in cell adhesion and cytoskeletal maintenance,
transcriptional regulators (MYCBP, MYBL1, ID1, ID3, FOS, ELF3, ELF4, KLF2, KLF5) 
and factors involved in protein biosynthesis and metabolism. Meta-analysis in
Oncomine reveals that some of these genes correlate with prostate cancer status
and/or progression. Reporter genes and inhibitors indicate that the Notch pathway
contributes to prostatosphere growth.
CONCLUSIONS: We have developed a model for the culture of PSs, and provide a
genomic profile that support CSCs identity. This signature identifies novel
markers and pathways that are predicted to correlate with prostate cancer
evolution.

PMCID: PMC2900264
PMID: 20500816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 16;107(7):3257-62. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0911006107. Epub 2010 Jan 28.

Ambient temperature response establishes ELF3 as a required component of the core
Arabidopsis circadian clock.

Thines B(1), Harmon FG.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Gene Expression Center, US Department of Agriculture-Agricultural
Research Service, Albany, CA 94710, USA.

Circadian clocks synchronize internal processes with environmental cycles to
ensure optimal timing of biological events on daily and seasonal time scales.
External light and temperature cues set the core molecular oscillator to local
conditions. In Arabidopsis, EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3) is thought to act as an
evening-specific repressor of light signals to the clock, thus serving a
zeitnehmer function. Circadian rhythms were examined in completely dark-grown, or
etiolated, null elf3-1 seedlings, with the clock entrained by thermocycles, to
evaluate whether the elf3 mutant phenotype was light-dependent. Circadian rhythms
were absent from etiolated elf3-1 seedlings after exposure to temperature cycles,
and this mutant failed to exhibit classic indicators of entrainment by
temperature cues, consistent with global clock dysfunction or strong perturbation
of temperature signaling in this background. Warm temperature pulses failed to
elicit acute induction of temperature-responsive genes in elf3-1. In fact, warm
temperature-responsive genes remained in a constitutively "ON" state because of
clock dysfunction and, therefore, were insensitive to temperature signals in the 
normal time of day-specific manner. These results show ELF3 is broadly required
for circadian clock function regardless of light conditions, where ELF3 activity 
is needed by the core oscillator to allow progression from day to night during
either light or temperature entrainment. Furthermore, robust circadian rhythms
appear to be a prerequisite for etiolated seedlings to respond correctly to
temperature signals.

PMCID: PMC2840299
PMID: 20133619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Mol Biol. 2010 Mar 19;397(1):278-89. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.01.017. Epub 2010 
Jan 15.

Crystal structure of mouse Elf3 C-terminal DNA-binding domain in complex with
type II TGF-beta receptor promoter DNA.

Agarkar VB(1), Babayeva ND, Wilder PJ, Rizzino A, Tahirov TH.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, 987696 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-7696,
USA.

The Ets family of transcription factors is composed of more than 30 members. One 
of its members, Elf3, is expressed in virtually all epithelial cells as well as
in many tumors, including breast tumors. Several studies observed that the
promoter of the type II TGF-beta receptor gene (TbetaR-II) is strongly stimulated
by Elf3 via two adjacent Elf3 binding sites, the A-site and the B-site. Here, we 
report the 2.2 A resolution crystal structure of a mouse Elf3 C-terminal
fragment, containing the DNA-binding Ets domain, in complex with the B-site of
mouse type II TGF-beta receptor promoter DNA (mTbetaR-II(DNA)). Elf3 contacts the
core GGAA motif of the B-site from a major groove similar to that of known Ets
proteins. However, unlike other Ets proteins, Elf3 also contacts sequences of the
A-site from the minor groove of the DNA. DNA binding experiments and cell-based
transcription studies indicate that minor groove interaction by Arg349 located in
the Ets domain is important for Elf3 function. Equally interesting, previous
studies have shown that the C-terminal region of Elf3, which flanks the Ets
domain, is required for Elf3 binding to DNA. In this study, we determined that
Elf3 amino acid residues within this flanking region, including Trp361, are
important for the structural integrity of the protein as well as for the Efl3 DNA
binding and transactivation activity.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2830650
PMID: 20079749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2009 Dec 1;65(Pt 12):1261-3.
doi: 10.1107/S1744309109038007. Epub 2009 Nov 27.

Preliminary crystallographic analysis of mouse Elf3 C-terminal DNA-binding domain
in complex with type II TGF-beta receptor promoter DNA.

Agarkar VB(1), Babayeva ND, Rizzino A, Tahirov TH.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, 986805 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-7696,
USA.

Ets proteins are transcription factors that activate or repress the expression of
genes that are involved in various biological processes, including cellular
proliferation, differentiation, development, transformation and apoptosis. Like
other Ets-family members, Elf3 functions as a sequence-specific DNA-binding
transcriptional factor. A mouse Elf3 C-terminal fragment (amino-acid residues
269-371) containing the DNA-binding domain has been crystallized in complex with 
mouse type II TGF-beta receptor promoter (TbetaR-II) DNA. The crystals belonged
to space group P2(1)2(1)2(1), with unit-cell parameters a = 42.66, b = 52, c =
99.78 A, and diffracted to a resolution of 2.2 A.

PMCID: PMC2802875
PMID: 20054123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. BMC Cancer. 2009 Dec 6;9:424. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-424.

Long term survival following the detection of circulating tumour cells in head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Winter SC(1), Stephenson SA, Subramaniam SK, Paleri V, Ha K, Marnane C, Krishnan 
S, Rees G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Royal Adelaide Hospital, 
North Terrace, Adelaide, South Australia, 5000, Australia.
stuartcwinter@googlemail.com

BACKGROUND: Techniques for detecting circulating tumor cells in the peripheral
blood of patients with head and neck cancers may identify individuals likely to
benefit from early systemic treatment.
METHODS: Reconstruction experiments were used to optimise immunomagnetic
enrichment and RT-PCR detection of circulating tumor cells using four markers
(ELF3, CK19, EGFR and EphB4). This method was then tested in a pilot study using 
samples from 16 patients with advanced head and neck carcinomas.
RESULTS: Seven patients were positive for circulating tumour cells both prior to 
and after surgery, 4 patients were positive prior to but not after surgery, 3
patients were positive after but not prior to surgery and 2 patients were
negative. Two patients tested positive for circulating cells but there was no
other evidence of tumor spread. Given this patient cohort had mostly advanced
disease, as expected the detection of circulating tumour cells was not associated
with significant differences in overall or disease free survival.
CONCLUSION: For the first time, we show that almost all patients with advanced
head and neck cancers have circulating cells at the time of surgery. The clinical
application of techniques for detection of spreading disease, such as the
immunomagnetic enrichment RT-PCR analysis used in this study, should be explored 
further.

PMCID: PMC3087340
PMID: 19961621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Biol Chem. 2009 Nov 27;284(48):33634-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.059840. Epub
2009 Sep 28.

Essential role of CR6-interacting factor 1 (Crif1) in E74-like factor 3
(ELF3)-mediated intestinal development.

Kwon MC(1), Koo BK, Kim YY, Lee SH, Kim NS, Kim JH, Kong YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University, San 56-1, Silim-dong, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151-747, South Korea.

Although terminal differentiation of intestinal epithelium is essential for the
efficient digestion and absorption of nutrients, little is known about the
molecular mechanisms underlying this process. Recent studies have shown that Elf3
(E74-like factor 3), a member of the ETS transcription factor family, has an
essential role in the terminal differentiation of absorptive enterocytes and
mucus-secreting goblet cells. Here, we demonstrated that Crif1 (CR6-interacting
factor 1) functions as transcriptional coactivator of Elf3 in intestinal
epithelium differentiation. The intestinal epithelium-specific Crif1-deficient
mice died soon after birth and displayed severe alterations of tissue
architecture in the small intestine, including poor microvillus formation and
abnormal differentiation of absorptive enterocytes. Strikingly, these phenotypes 
are largely similar to that of Elf3-deficient mice, suggesting that Elf3
signaling in the intestinal epithelium depends on the Crif1 expression. We
dissected this relationship further and found that Crif1 indeed interacted with
Elf3 through its ETS DNA binding domain and enhanced the transcriptional activity
of Elf3 by regulating the DNA binding activity. Knockdown of Crif1 by RNA
interference conversely attenuated the transcriptional activity of Elf3.
Consistently, the expression level of Tgf-betaRII (transforming growth factor
beta type II receptor), a critical target gene of Elf3, was dramatically reduced 
in the Crif1-deficient mice. Our results reveal that Crif1 is a novel and
essential transcriptional coactivator of Elf3 for the terminal differentiation of
absorptive enterocytes.

PMCID: PMC2785205
PMID: 19801644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Plant Biol (Stuttg). 2009 Sep;11(5):751-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1438-8677.2008.00156.x.

OsEF3, a homologous gene of Arabidopsis ELF3, has pleiotropic effects in rice.

Fu C(1), Yang XO, Chen X, Chen W, Ma Y, Hu J, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)Rice Research Institute, Sichuan Agriculture University, Chengdu, China.

Heading date is an important agronomic trait in rice. A rice mutant with a late
heading date and no photoperiodic sensitivity in long or short day conditions was
obtained from rice T-DNA insertion mutants in Zhonghua11 (ZH11). Through
isolation and analysis of the flanking sequence of the T-NDA insertion site, the 
target sequence of insertion was obtained and found to locate in AP003296, the
sequence accession number of rice chromosome 1 of RGP
(http://rgp.dna.affrc.go.jp). The putative amino acid sequences of this target
gene are homologous to the Arabidopsis protein ELF3 encoded by an early flowering
gene. The rice target gene orthologous to Arabidopsis ELF3 is named OsEF3; this
encodes a putative nematode responsive protein-like protein. OsEF3 has
pleiotropic effects in rice that differ from the effects of Arabidopsis ELF3,
which only affects biological rhythms. OsEF3 regulates heading date by
influencing the BVG stage and does not affect photoperiodic sensitivity, which
suggests that the OsEF3 gene may be involved in an autonomous pathway in rice.
OsEF3 may affect root development and kilo-grain weight by delaying cell division
or cell elongation.

PMID: 19689783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Hematol Oncol. 2009 Jun 5;2:24. doi: 10.1186/1756-8722-2-24.

Identification of circulating tumour cells in early stage breast cancer patients 
using multi marker immunobead RT-PCR.

Raynor MP(1), Stephenson SA, Pittman KB, Walsh DC, Henderson MA, Dobrovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology/Oncology, The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Adelaide,
South Australia 5011, Australia. michael.raynor@adelaide.edu.au

INTRODUCTION: The ability to screen blood of early stage operable breast cancer
patients for circulating tumour cells is of potential importance for identifying 
patients at risk of developing distant relapse. We present the results of a study
of the efficacy of the immunobead RT-PCR method in identifying patients with
circulating tumour cells.
RESULTS: Immunomagnetic enrichment of circulating tumour cells followed by RT-PCR
(immunobead RT-PCR) with a panel of five epithelial specific markers (ELF3,
EPHB4, EGFR, MGB1 and TACSTD1) was used to screen for circulating tumour cells in
the peripheral blood of 56 breast cancer patients. Twenty patients were positive 
for two or more RT-PCR markers, including seven patients who were node negative
by conventional techniques. Significant increases in the frequency of marker
positivity was seen in lymph node positive patients, in patients with high grade 
tumours and in patients with lymphovascular invasion. A strong trend towards
improved disease free survival was seen for marker negative patients although it 
did not reach significance (p = 0.08).
CONCLUSION: Multi-marker immunobead RT-PCR analysis of peripheral blood is a
robust assay that is capable of detecting circulating tumour cells in early stage
breast cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC2712470
PMID: 19500345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. New Phytol. 2009 Jun;182(4):838-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2009.02809.x.

Possible role of early flowering 3 (ELF3) in clock-dependent floral regulation by
short vegetative phase (SVP) in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Yoshida R(1), Fekih R, Fujiwara S, Oda A, Miyata K, Tomozoe Y, Nakagawa M,
Niinuma K, Hayashi K, Ezura H, Coupland G, Mizoguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Research Center, University of Tsukuba, Tennodai 1-1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 
305-8572, Japan.

Circadian clock proteins play key roles in adaptations of plants to diurnal
environmental conditions. The photoperiodic flowering response is one of the
mechanisms of adaptation to seasonal changes in the lengths of day and night.
Double mutations in two clock genes, late elongated hypocotyl (LHY) and circadian
clock associated 1 (CCA1), accelerated flowering under short days (SDs) but
delayed flowering under continuous light (LL) in Arabidopsis thaliana. The
mechanism underlying the late flowering of lhy;cca1 mutants under LL was
investigated here. Late flowering of plants with overexpression of short
vegetative phase (SVP) was much more pronounced under SDs and enhanced by
constans 2 (co-2) under long days (LDs), suggesting that SVP and CO act
independently in the photoperiodic flowering pathway. However, how SVP and
flowering locus C (FLC) mediated the effects of LHY/CCA1 and thus influenced
flowering time was not completely clear. A mutant line lhy;cca1 in the Landsberg 
erecta (Ler) background was established, ethyl methanesulfonate (EMS)-mutagenized
and used to screen suppressors of late flowering of lhy;cca1 under LL. Mutations 
in the clock gene early flowering 3 (ELF3) were identified as suppressors.
Overexpression and loss-of-function of ELF3 influenced SVP protein accumulation. 
Therefore, we propose that, as well as the classical GIGANTEA (GI)-CO pathway,
LHY/CCA1 regulates a pathway negatively controlling flowering locus T (FT),
possibly via ELF3-SVP/FLC.

PMID: 19383102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 1;15(5):1527-33. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2459.
Epub 2009 Feb 17.

Meta-analysis of oncogenic protein kinase Ciota signaling in lung adenocarcinoma.

Erdogan E(1), Klee EW, Thompson EA, Fields AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Jacksonville,
Florida 32224, USA.

PURPOSE: Atypical protein kinase Ciota (PKCiota) is an oncogene in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Here, we identify four functional gene targets of PKCiota in
lung adenocarcinoma (LAC), the most prominent form of NSCLC.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Three independent public domain gene expression data sets
were interrogated to identify genes coordinately expressed with PKCiota in
primary LAC tumors. Results were validated by QPCR in an independent set of
primary LAC tumors. RNAi-mediated knockdown of PKCiota and the target genes was
used to determine whether expression of the identified genes was regulated by
PKCiota, and whether these target genes play a role in anchorage-independent
growth and invasion of LAC cells.
RESULTS: Meta-analysis identified seven genes whose expression correlated with
PKCiota in primary LAC. Subsequent QPCR analysis confirmed coordinate
overexpression of four genes (COPB2, ELF3, RFC4, and PLS1) in an independent set 
of LAC samples. RNAi-mediated knockdown showed that PKCiota regulates expression 
of all four genes in LAC cells, and that the four PKCiota target genes play an
important role in the anchorage-independent growth and invasion of LAC cells.
Meta-analysis of gene expression data sets from lung squamous cell, breast,
colon, prostate, and pancreas carcinomas, as well as glioblastoma, revealed that 
a subset of PKCiota target genes, particularly COPB2 and RFC4, correlate with
PKCiota expression in many tumor types.
CONCLUSION: Meta-analysis of public gene expression data are useful in
identifying novel gene targets of oncogenic PKCiota signaling. Our data indicate 
that both common and cell type-specific signaling mechanisms contribute to
PKCiota-dependent transformation.

PMCID: PMC3260476
PMID: 19223491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Plant J. 2009 May;58(4):629-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03811.x. Epub 2009 
Feb 2.

A complementary role for ELF3 and TFL1 in the regulation of flowering time by
ambient temperature.

Strasser B(1), Alvarez MJ, Califano A, Cerdán PD.

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Instituto Leloir, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Plants regulate their time to flowering by gathering information from the
environment. Photoperiod and temperature are among the most important
environmental variables. Sub-optimal, but not near-freezing, temperatures
regulate flowering through the thermosensory pathway, which overlaps with the
autonomous pathway. Here we show that ambient temperature regulates flowering by 
two genetically distinguishable pathways, one requiring TFL1 and another
requiring ELF3. The delay in flowering time observed at lower temperatures was
partially suppressed in single elf3 and tfl1 mutants, whereas double elf3 tfl1
mutants were insensitive to temperature. tfl1 mutations abolished the temperature
response in cryptochrome mutants that are deficient in photoperiod perception,
but not in phyB mutants, which have a constitutive photoperiodic response. In
contrast to tfl1, elf3 mutations were able to suppress the temperature response
in phyB mutants, but not in cryptochrome mutants. Gene expression profiles
revealed that the tfl1 and elf3 effects are due to the activation of different
sets of genes, and identified CCA1 and SOC1/AGL20 as being important cross-talk
points. Finally, genome-wide gene expression analysis strongly suggests a general
and complementary role for ELF3 and TFL1 in temperature signalling.

PMID: 19187043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Feb;189(1):37-42. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.08.018.

Array comparative genomic hybridization, expression array, and protein analysis
of critical regions on chromosome arms 1q, 7q, and 8p in adenocarcinomas of the
gastroesophageal junction.

van Dekken H(1), Tilanus HW, Hop WC, Dinjens WN, Wink JC, Vissers KJ, van Marion 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. h.vandekken@slaz.nl

Survival rates of adenocarcinomas of the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) are low,
because these tumors are generally in an advanced stage by the time they are
detected. Chromosomal regions 1q32, 7q21, and 8p22 display critical alterations
in GEJ cancers; however, the genes underlying alterations in these genomic areas 
are largely unknown. To delineate overexpressed genes, we performed array
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and mRNA expression analysis of 15 GEJ
adenocarcinoma samples using a fine-tiling cDNA array covering chromosome
segments 1q31.3~q41 (193.9-215.8 Mb: 21.9 Mb), 7q11.23~q22.1 (72.3-103.0 Mb: 30.7
Mb), and 8p23.1~p21.3 (11.1-20.7 Mb: 9.6 Mb). Based on a mRNA overexpression
criterion, 11 genes were selected: ELF3 and SLC45A3 on 1q; CLDN12, CDK6, SMURF1, 
ARPC1B, ZKSCAN1, MCM7, and COPS6 on 7q; and FDFT1 and CTSB on 8p. The protein
expression levels were subsequently determined by immunohistochemical analysis of
the cancer samples. There was a significant correlation between genomic
amplification, mRNA, and protein expression or overexpression for CDK6, a cell
cycle regulator on 7q21.2 (92.1 Mb; P<0.01); other genes showed less stringent
associations. In conclusion, using a straightforward approach we constructed a
targeted gene profile for GEJ adenocarcinomas.

PMID: 19167610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mol Carcinog. 2009 Jul;48(7):648-61. doi: 10.1002/mc.20511.

Reprogramming of the transcriptome in a novel chromosome 3 transfer tumor
suppressor ovarian cancer cell line model affected molecular networks that are
characteristic of ovarian cancer.

Quinn MC(1), Filali-Mouhim A, Provencher DM, Mes-Masson AM, Tonin PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, Canada.

Tumor suppression as a consequence of the transfer of chromosome 3p fragments was
previously observed in a novel epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) OV-90 cell line
model harboring loss of 3p. Microarray analysis revealed that tumor suppression
was associated with a modified transcriptome. To investigate the relevance of the
altered transcriptome, the differentially expressed genes identified by
Affymetrix analysis in the 3p transfer studies, were integrated with a
comparative microarray analysis of normal ovarian surface epithelial (NOSE) cells
and malignant ovarian (TOV) cancers. Data from 219 significantly differentially
expressed genes exhibited patterns in the direction predicted by the analysis of 
3p transfer study. The 30 genes with the highest statistically significant
differences (P < 1 x 10(-8)) in expression were found consistently differentially
expressed between NOSE and TOV samples. The investigation of these genes in
benign serous ovarian tumors and EOC cell lines also exhibited predictable
expression patterns. Within the group of differentially expressed genes were
SPARC, DAB2, CP, EVI1, ELF3, and EHD2, known to play a role in ovarian cancer,
genes implicated in other cancers, such as GREM1 and GLIPR1, as well as genes not
previously reported in a cancer context such as AKAP2 and ATAD4. A number of the 
differentially expressed genes are implicated in the TGF-beta signaling pathway. 
These findings suggest that the reprogramming of the transcriptome that occurred 
as a consequence of the chromosome 3 transfer and tumor suppression affected
molecular networks that are characteristic of ovarian carcinogenesis thus
validating our novel ovarian cancer cell line model.

PMID: 19123201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 Dec;7(12):3739-50. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0548.

ESE-1/EGR-1 pathway plays a role in tolfenamic acid-induced apoptosis in
colorectal cancer cells.

Lee SH(1), Bahn JH, Choi CK, Whitlock NC, English AE, Safe S, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Carcinogenesis, Department of Pathobiology,
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, 2407 River Drive,
Knoxville, TN 37996-4542, USA.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are known to prevent colorectal
tumorigenesis. Although antitumor effects of NSAIDs are mainly due to inhibition 
of cyclooxygenase activity, there is increasing evidence that
cyclooxygenase-independent mechanisms may also play an important role. The early 
growth response-1 (EGR-1) gene is a member of the immediate-early gene family and
has been identified as a tumor suppressor gene. Tolfenamic acid is a NSAID that
exhibits anticancer activity in a pancreatic cancer model. In the present study, 
we investigated the anticancer activity of tolfenamic acid in human colorectal
cancer cells. Tolfenamic acid treatment inhibited cell growth and induced
apoptosis as measured by caspase activity and bioelectric impedance. Tolfenamic
acid induced EGR-1 expression at the transcription level, and analysis of the
EGR-1 promoter showed that a putative ETS-binding site, located at -400 and -394 
bp, was required for activation by tolfenamic acid. The electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay confirmed that this sequence 
specifically bound to the ETS family protein epithelial-specific ETS-1 (ESE-1)
transcription factor. Tolfenamic acid also facilitated translocation of
endogenous and exogenous ESE-1 to the nucleus in colorectal cancer cells, and
gene silencing using ESE-1 small interfering RNA attenuated tolfenamic
acid-induced EGR-1 expression and apoptosis. Overexpression of EGR-1 increased
apoptosis and decreased bioelectrical impedance, and silencing of endogenous
EGR-1 prevented tolfenamic acid-induced apoptosis. These results show that
activation of ESE-1 via enhanced nuclear translocation mediates tolfenamic
acid-induced EGR-1 expression, which plays a critical role in the activation of
apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2643071
PMID: 19074849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell. 2008 Dec 5;32(5):617-30. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.09.026.

COP1 and ELF3 control circadian function and photoperiodic flowering by
regulating GI stability.

Yu JW(1), Rubio V, Lee NY, Bai S, Lee SY, Kim SS, Liu L, Zhang Y, Irigoyen ML,
Sullivan JA, Zhang Y, Lee I, Xie Q, Paek NC, Deng XW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Science and Research Institute for Agriculture and Life
Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-921, Korea.

Seasonal changes in day length are perceived by plant photoreceptors and
transmitted to the circadian clock to modulate developmental responses such as
flowering time. Blue-light-sensing cryptochromes, the E3 ubiquitin-ligase COP1,
and clock-associated proteins ELF3 and GI regulate this process, although the
regulatory link between them is unclear. Here we present data showing that COP1
acts with ELF3 to mediate day length signaling from CRY2 to GI within the
photoperiod flowering pathway. We found that COP1 and ELF3 interact in vivo and
show that ELF3 allows COP1 to interact with GI in vivo, leading to GI degradation
in planta. Accordingly, mutation of COP1 or ELF3 disturbs the pattern of GI
cyclic accumulation. We propose a model in which ELF3 acts as a substrate
adaptor, enabling COP1 to modulate light input signal to the circadian clock
through targeted destabilization of GI.

PMCID: PMC2651194
PMID: 19061637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Histol Histopathol. 2008 Nov;23(11):1417-24.

Ets transcription factors in intestinal morphogenesis, homeostasis and disease.

Jedlicka P(1), Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora CO 80045, USA. 
paul.jedlicka@uchsc.edu

Ets transcription factors comprise a large family of sequence-specific regulators
of gene expression with important and diverse roles in development and disease.
Most Ets family members are expressed in the developing and/or mature intestine, 
frequently in a compartment-specific and temporally dynamic manner. However, with
the exception of the highly expressed Elf3, involved in embryonic epithelial
differentiation, little is known about Ets functions in intestinal development
and homeostasis. Ets factors show altered expression in colon cancer, where they 
regulate pathways relevant to tumor progression. Ets factors also likely act as
important modifiers of non-neoplastic intestinal disease by regulating pathways
relevant to tissue injury and repair. Despite a large body of published work on
Ets biology, much remains to be learned about the precise functions of this large
and diverse gene family in intestinal morphogenesis, homeostasis, and both
neoplastic and non-neoplastic pathology.

PMCID: PMC2716142
PMID: 18785124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2009;44(2):211-8. doi: 10.1080/00365520802400867.

Gene expression profiles reflect sclerosing cholangitis activity in abcb4 (-/-)
mice.

Nakken KE(1), Nygard S, Haaland TK, Berge KE, Ødegaard A, Labori KJ, Raeder MG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Medical Research, Ullevål University Hospital and
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. k.e.nakken@medisin.uio.no

OBJECTIVE: Abcb4 (-/-) mice secrete phosphatidylcholine-deficient bile and
develop sclerosing cholangitis (SC), a condition that involves differential
hepatic transcription of genes governing inflammation, tissue remodelling and
fibrosis. The objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that genes
involved in the regulation of tissue inflammation and fibrosis display
transcription rates that parallel differences in abcb4 (-/-) SC activity. The
activity of abcb4 (-/-) SC can be altered through dietary intervention: abcb4
(-/-) mice fed cholic acid (CA) display high SC activity, whereas ursodeoxycholic
acid (UDCA)-fed mice display low SC activity.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Differential hepatic transcription of genes was measured in
abcb4 (-/-) mice maintained on CA- and UDCA-supplemented diets using cDNA
microarrays. Abcb4 (+/+) mice served as controls. Differential transcription of
selected genes was verified by real-time polymerase chain reaction. Liver tissue 
pathology was quantified by histopathology scoring.
RESULT: Histopathology score, reflecting increased inflammation and fibrosis, was
increased in CA-fed mice compared with UDCA-fed mice. cDNA microarray analysis
showed up-regulation of 1582 genes in livers of CA-fed mice in contrast to 573
genes in UDCA-fed mice. Differential transcription of Ccl2, Ccl20, Cxcl10,
Nfkappab1, Nfkappab2, Tgfbeta1, Tgfbeta2, Sparc, Ctgf, Lgals3, Elf3, Spp1, Pdgfa,
Pdgfrb, Col1a1, Col1a2 and Col4a1 genes paralleled the unequal SC activities of
CA- and UDCA-fed abcb4 (-/-) mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The numbers of differentially transcribed genes and the
transcriptional activity of genes relating to inflammation, tissue remodelling
and fibrosis parallel disease activity in CA- and UDCA-fed abcb4 (-/-) mice
harbouring SC. Data on their hepatic transcription can gauge SC disease activity.

PMID: 18785065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Cancer Res. 2008 Jun 15;68(12):4525-30. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-6735.

Snail up-regulates proinflammatory mediators and inhibits differentiation in oral
keratinocytes.

Lyons JG(1), Patel V, Roue NC, Fok SY, Soon LL, Halliday GM, Gutkind JS.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Research Laboratories, Central Clinical School, and Key Centre for
Microscopy, University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
glyons@med.usyd.edu.au

The transcriptional repressor Snail2 is overexpressed in head and neck squamous
cell carcinomas (HNSCC) relative to nonmalignant head and neck mucosal
epithelium, and in locally recurrent relative to nonrecurrent HNSCCs. We
investigated the mechanisms by which Snails might contribute to the pathogenesis 
of HNSCCs using cell biological and molecular analyses. Oral keratinocytes that
expressed Snails acquired an enhanced ability to attract monocytes and to invade 
a dense interstitial collagen matrix. They were also found to up-regulate
production of proinflammatory cytokines and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2), which have
previously been shown to correlate with malignancy. Induction of nuclear
factor-kappaB transcriptional activity by Snails was weak and not sufficient to
account for the elevated levels of COX2, interleukin (IL)-6, IL8, or CXCL1. In
addition, expression of Snails in oral keratinocytes impaired desquamation in
vitro and strongly repressed expression of both ELF3 and matriptase-1, which play
important roles in the terminal differentiation of keratinocytes. Reexpression of
matriptase-1 in Snail-expressing cells partially rescued desquamation. This
implicates Snails as contributing to malignancy both at the early stages, by
impeding terminal differentiation, and at later stages, when invasion and
inflammation are important.

PMCID: PMC2631428
PMID: 18559496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cell Res. 2008 Jun;18(6):649-63. doi: 10.1038/cr.2008.57.

Regulation of epithelium-specific Ets-like factors ESE-1 and ESE-3 in airway
epithelial cells: potential roles in airway inflammation.

Wu J(1), Duan R, Cao H, Field D, Newnham CM, Koehler DR, Zamel N, Pritchard MA,
Hertzog P, Post M, Tanswell AK, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Experimental Medicine and Canadian Institutes of 
Health Research Group in Lung Development, The Hospital for Sick Children, The
University of Toronto, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Airway inflammation is the hallmark of many respiratory disorders, such as asthma
and cystic fibrosis. Changes in airway gene expression triggered by inflammation 
play a key role in the pathogenesis of these diseases. Genetic linkage studies
suggest that ESE-2 and ESE-3, which encode epithelium-specific
Ets-domain-containing transcription factors, are candidate asthma susceptibility 
genes. We report here that the expression of another member of the Ets family
transcription factors ESE-1, as well as ESE-3, is upregulated by the inflammatory
cytokines interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha) in bronchial epithelial cell lines. Treatment of these cells with
IL-1beta and TNF-alpha resulted in a dramatic increase in mRNA expression for
both ESE-1 and ESE-3. We demonstrate that the induced expression is mediated by
activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB. We have characterized the ESE-1
and ESE-3 promoters and have identified the NF-kappaB binding sequences that are 
required for the cytokine-induced expression. In addition, we also demonstrate
that ESE-1 upregulates ESE-3 expression and downregulates its own induction by
cytokines. Finally, we have shown that in Elf3 (homologous to human ESE-1)
knockout mice, the expression of the inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6)
is downregulated. Our findings suggest that ESE-1 and ESE-3 play an important
role in airway inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4494831
PMID: 18475289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Oral Dis. 2008 Mar;14(2):144-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.2007.01360.x.

ESE-1 inhibits the invasion of oral squamous cell carcinoma in conjunction with
MMP-9 suppression.

Iwai S(1), Amekawa S, Yomogida K, Sumi T, Nakazawa M, Yura Y, Nishimune Y, Nozaki
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery II, Faculty of Dentistry, Osaka
University, Osaka, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) regulated by ets transcription
factors facilitate carcinoma cell invasion. An ets family member, ESE-1, is
expressed specifically in epithelial tissues, but its association with MMPs is
obscure. In this study, we investigated whether ESE-1 regulates invasion of oral 
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) via transcriptional activity of MMP-9.
METHODS: HSC-3 and KB were used as human oral SCC lines. The expression of ESE-1 
and MMP-9 was detected by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry.
Invasion assay, gelatin zymography and Northern blotting were used to detect the 
invasion activity, the gelatinolytic activity and the expression of MMP-9 in the 
ESE-1 transfectants. Luciferase assays and mutation analysis were used for the
transcriptional analysis of MMP-9 promoter region by ESE-1.
RESULTS: ESE-1 was expressed in the intermediate layer but not in the invasive
area, in which MMP-9 was expressed, in the oral SCC tissues. ESE-1 suppressed
invasion activity and 92 kDa gelatinolytic activity in HSC-3 as a result of
transfection. ESE-1 regulates MMP-9 expression in a negative manner and the ets
binding site on the MMP-9 promoter contributed to suppression by ESE-1.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that ESE-1 negatively regulates the invasion
of oral SCC via transcriptional suppression of MMP-9.

PMID: 18302674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Plant Physiol. 2008 Apr;146(4):1952-63. doi: 10.1104/pp.107.114611. Epub 2008 Feb
15.

Functional conservation of clock-related genes in flowering plants:
overexpression and RNA interference analyses of the circadian rhythm in the
monocotyledon Lemna gibba.

Serikawa M(1), Miwa K, Kondo T, Oyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya
University, Nagoya, Aichi 464-8602, Japan.

Circadian rhythms are found in organisms from cyanobacteria to plants and
animals. In flowering plants, the circadian clock is involved in the regulation
of various physiological phenomena, including growth, leaf movement, stomata
opening, and floral transitions. Molecular mechanisms underlying the circadian
clock have been identified using Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana); the
functions and genetic networks of a number of clock-related genes, including
CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED1, LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY), TIMING OF CAB
EXPRESSION1, GIGANTEA (GI), and EARLY FLOWERING3 (ELF3), have been analyzed. The 
degree to which clock systems are conserved among flowering plants, however, is
still unclear. We previously isolated homologs for Arabidopsis clock-related
genes from monocotyledon Lemna plants. Here, we report the physiological roles of
these Lemna gibba genes (LgLHYH1, LgLHYH2, LgGIH1, and LgELF3H1) in the circadian
system. We studied the effects of overexpression and RNA interference (RNAi) of
these genes on the rhythmic expression of morning- and evening-specific
reporters. Overexpression of each gene disrupted the rhythmicity of either or
both reporters, suggesting that these four homologs can be involved in the
circadian system. RNAi of each of the genes except LgLHYH2 affected the
bioluminescence rhythms of both reporters. These results indicated that these
homologs are involved in the circadian system of Lemna plants and that the
structure of the circadian clock is likely to be conserved between monocotyledons
and dicotyledons. Interestingly, RNAi of LgGIH1 almost completely abolished the
circadian rhythm; because this effect appeared to be much stronger than the
phenotype observed in an Arabidopsis gi loss-of-function mutant, the precise role
of each clock gene may have diverged in the clock systems of Lemna and
Arabidopsis.

PMCID: PMC2287362
PMID: 18281417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Cell Physiol. 2008 May;215(2):562-73.

ESE-1 is a potent repressor of type II collagen gene (COL2A1) transcription in
human chondrocytes.

Peng H(1), Tan L, Osaki M, Zhan Y, Ijiri K, Tsuchimochi K, Otero M, Wang H, Choy 
BK, Grall FT, Gu X, Libermann TA, Oettgen P, Goldring MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, New England
Baptist Bone and Joint Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The epithelium-specific ETS (ESE)-1 transcription factor is induced in
chondrocytes by interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta). We reported previously that early
activation of EGR-1 by IL-1beta results in suppression of the proximal COL2A1
promoter activity by displacement of Sp1 from GC boxes. Here we report that ESE-1
is a potent transcriptional suppressor of COL2A1 promoter activity in
chondrocytes and accounts for the sustained, NF-kappaB-dependent inhibition by
IL-1beta. Of the ETS factors tested, this response was specific to ESE-1, since
ESE-3, which was also induced by IL-1beta, suppressed COL2A1 promoter activity
only weakly. In contrast, overexpression of ETS-1 increased COL2A1 promoter
activity and blocked the inhibition by IL-1beta. These responses to ESE-1 and
ETS-1 were confirmed using siRNA-ESE1 and siRNA-ETS1. In transient
cotransfections, the inhibitory responses to ESE-1 and IL-1beta colocalized in
the -577/-132 bp promoter region, ESE-1 bound specifically to tandem ETS sites at
-403/-381 bp, and IL-1-induced binding of ESE-1 to the COL2A1 promoter was
confirmed in vivo by ChIP. Our results indicate that ESE-1 serves a potent
repressor function by interacting with at least two sites in the COL2A1 promoter.
However, the endogenous response may depend upon the balance of other ETS factors
such as ETS-1, and other IL-1-induced factors, including EGR-1 at any given time.
Intracellular ESE-1 staining in chondrocytes in cartilage from patients with
osteoarthritis (OA), but not in normal cartilage, further suggests a fundamental 
role for ESE-1 in cartilage degeneration and suppression of repair.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3937869
PMID: 18044710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2007 Nov;293(5):L1359-68. Epub 2007 Sep 28.

Transactivation of lung lysozyme expression by Ets family member ESE-1.

Lei W(1), Jaramillo RJ, Harrod KS.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Program, Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, 2425
Ridgecrest Dr. SE, Albuquerque, NM 87108, USA.

Epithelial-specific Ets (ESE) transcription factors, consisting of ESE-1, ESE-2, 
and ESE-3, are constitutively expressed in distinct epithelia of mucosal tissues,
including the lung. Each ESE member exhibits alternative splicing and yields at
least two isoforms (a and b) with transcriptional targets largely unidentified.
The studies described herein define a novel role for ESE transcription factors in
transactivation of the human lysozyme gene (LYZ), an essential component of
innate defense in lung epithelia. Of the six ESE isoforms, ESE-1a and ESE-1b
transactivated LYZ promoter in reporter gene assays, whereas only ESE-1b
dramatically upregulated transcription of endogenous LYZ in both nonpulmonary and
pulmonary epithelial cells. Importantly, ESE-1a and ESE-1b could transactivate
the LYZ promoter in cultured primary airway epithelial cells. ESE-2 and ESE-3
isoforms were unable to substantially transactivate the lysozyme promoter or
upregulate transcription of endogenous LYZ. Two functional consensus Ets sites
located in the proximal 130-bp LYZ promoter were responsive to ESE-1b as
identified by site-directed mutagenesis and DNA binding assays. Short hairpin RNA
attenuation of endogenous ESE-1b mRNA levels in lung epithelia resulted in
decreased LYZ transcription. Furthermore, ESE-1 antibody specifically enriched
the 130-bp proximal LYZ promoter in chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses. These
findings define a novel role for ESE transcription factors in regulating lung
innate defense and suggest distinct regulatory functions for ESE family members.

PMID: 17905856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2007 Oct;42(10):1245-55.

Multiple inflammatory-, tissue remodelling- and fibrosis genes are differentially
transcribed in the livers of Abcb4 (-/ - ) mice harbouring chronic cholangitis.

Nakken KE(1), Nygård S, Haaland T, Berge KE, Arnkvaern K, Ødegaard A, Labori KJ, 
Raeder MG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Medical Research, Ullevål University Hospital and
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. k.e.nakken@medisin.uio.no

OBJECTIVE: Abcb4 (-/-) mice secrete phosphatidylcholine-free, cytotoxic bile and 
develop chronic cholangitis. The aim of this study was to identify differentially
transcribed genes whose products contribute to the liver tissue pathology during 
this disease.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Hepatic gene transcription was measured in 3-, 6-, 9- and
20-week-old Abcb4 (-/-) mice (FVB.129P2-abcb4(tm1Bor)/J) using cDNA microarrays, 
with FVB/NJ Abcb4 (+/+) mice serving as controls. Focus was on inflammatory-,
remodelling- and fibrosis genes. Marked differential transcription of
inflammatory-, tissue remodelling- and fibrosis genes found by cDNA microarrays
was verified by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Liver pathology was
quantified by histopathology scoring.
RESULTS: Transcription of clade A3 Serpin genes showed early, marked
down-regulation. The chemokine genes Ccl2, Ccl20 and Cxcl10 were markedly
up-regulated. Tissue remodelling- and fibrosis genes exhibiting markedly
up-regulated transcription included: Ctgf, Elf3, Lgals3, Mmp12, Mmp15, Spp1,
Loxl2, Pdgfa, Pdgfrb, Sparc, Tgfb1, Tgfb2, Tgfbi, Tgfbr2 and Col1a1, Col1a2,
Col2a1, Col3a1, Col4a1 genes. Microarray-based recordings of differential gene
transcription of the majority of these genes harmonized with the liver
histopathology score. Thus, cDNA microarray-based analysis showed increasing
differential transcription of several inflammatory-, tissue remodelling- and
fibrosis genes during the first 9 weeks of disease and a tendency towards
differential transcription to stabilize at an elevated level from 9 to 20 weeks
of disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple genes regulating inflammation, tissue remodelling and
fibrosis not previously linked to Abcb4 (-/-) cholangitis are identified as being
differentially transcribed in Abcb4 (-/-) livers, where they contribute to the
pathogenesis of liver tissue pathology.

PMID: 17852852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2007 Aug;63(2):111-24. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

Gene expression profiling in sarcomas.

Tschoep K(1), Kohlmann A, Schlemmer M, Haferlach T, Issels RD.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik III, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Medical
Center-Grosshadern, Munich, Germany. Katharina.Tschoep@med.uni-muenchen.de

Sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of malignant mesenchymal tumors of difficult
classification. There is considerable variability in both histological appearance
and responsiveness to therapy. Their overall poor clinical prognosis is reflected
by the fact that >65% of patients suffering retroperitoneal soft tissue sarcoma
die within 5 years [Heslin MJ, et al. Prognostic factors associated with
long-term survival for retroperitoneal sarcoma: implications for management. J
Clin Oncol 1997;15(8):2832-9]. A greater understanding of the biology of sarcomas
is needed in order to increase the potential for identifying new therapeutic
targets and strategies. Microarray analysis permits a global approach to gene
expression analysis of thousands of genes at the same time and has proven to be
useful for further molecular characterization of tumor tissue and cell lines.
This article provides a comprehensive review of possible new biomarkers
identified in gene expression studies of sarcomas. These markers give new insight
into the pathogenesis of sarcomas, such as malignant fibrous histiocytoma [Lee
YF, et al. Molecular classification of synovial sarcomas, leiomyosarcomas and
malignant fibrous histiocytomas by gene expression profiling. Br J Cancer
2003;88(4):510-5], allow a further subclassifcation of tumors like
calponin-positive and calponin-negative leiomyosarcoma, or may help to predict
treatment responsiveness and prognosis in patients based on an individual gene
expression pattern. In some studies candidate targets for possible new treatment 
strategies were identified. For instance newly identified markers such as ERBB2
[Allander SV, et al. Expression profiling of synovial sarcoma by cDNA
microarrays: association of ERBB2, IGFBP2, and ELF3 with epithelial
differentiation. Am J Pathol 2002;161(5):1587-95] and EGFR [Nielsen TO, et al.
Molecular characterization of soft tissue tumours: a gene expression study.
Lancet 2002;359(9314):1301-7] might lead to the possible therapeutic use of
Trastuzumab, Gefitinib or Cetuximab in synovial sarcoma, comparable to the use of
tyrosine kinase inhibitor STI (Gleevec) that is the standard treatment today of
CD117-positive gastrointestinal stromal tumors.

PMID: 17555981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jul 6;282(27):19820-30. Epub 2007 May 9.

Phosphorylation-dependent regulation of stability and transforming potential of
ETS transcriptional factor ESE-1 by p21-activated kinase 1.

Manavathi B(1), Rayala SK, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Differential phosphorylation of transcription factors by signal transduction
pathways play an important role in regulation of gene expression and functions.
ESE-1 is an epithelium-specific ETS transcription factor that transforms human
breast epithelial cells through a serine- and aspartic acid-rich domain (SAR) by 
an unknown cytoplasmic mechanism. Here we found that a signaling kinase,
p21-activated kinase-1 (Pak1), interacts with and phosphorylates ESE-1.
Interestingly, Pak1 selectively phosphorylates ESE-1 at Ser(207), which is
located within the SAR domain. A S207A substitution in ESE-1 reduced its ability 
to transform breast cancer cells. We also found that ESE-1 is a labile protein
and by interacting with F-box-binding protein beta-TrCP, undergoes
ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis. Intriguingly, Pak1 phosphorylation inactive
mutant ESE1-S207A is more unstable than either wild-type ESE-1 or its Pak1
phosphorylation mimetic mutant, i.e. ESE1-S207E. These findings provide novel
insights into the mechanism of transformation potential of ESE-1 and discovered
that ESE-1 functions are coordinately regulated by Pak1 phosphorylation and
beta-TrCP-dependent ubiquitin-proteasome pathways.

PMID: 17491012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007 Apr 20;2:20.

Intestinal epithelial dysplasia (tufting enteropathy).

Goulet O(1), Salomon J, Ruemmele F, de Serres NP, Brousse N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology-Hepatology and Nutrition and
Reference Center for Rare Digestive Disease, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, 149,
Rue de Sèvres, Cédex 15, 75743 Paris, France. olivier.goulet@nck.ap-hop-paris.fr

Intestinal epithelial dysplasia (IED), also known as tufting enteropathy, is a
congenital enteropathy presenting with early-onset severe intractable diarrhea
causing sometimes irreversible intestinal failure. To date, no epidemiological
data are available, however, the prevalence can be estimated at around
1/50,000-100,000 live births in Western Europe. The prevalence seems higher in
areas with high degree of consanguinity and in patients of Arabic origin. Infants
develop within the first days after birth a watery diarrhea persistent in spite
of bowel rest and parenteral nutrition. Some infants are reported to have
associated choanal rectal or esophageal atresia. IED is thought to be related to 
abnormal enterocytes development and/or differentiation. Nonspecific punctuated
keratitis was reported in more than 60% of patients. Histology shows various
degree of villous atrophy, with low or without mononuclear cell infiltration of
the lamina propria but specific histological abnormalities involving the
epithelium with disorganization of surface enterocytes with focal crowding,
resembling tufts. Several associated specific features were reported, including
abnormal deposition of laminin and heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) in the
basement membrane, increased expression of desmoglein and ultrastructural changes
in the desmosomes, and abnormal distribution of alpha2beta1 integrin adhesion
molecules. One model of transgenic mice in which the gene encoding the
transcription factor Elf3 is disrupted have morphologic features resembling IED. 
Parental consanguinity and/or affected siblings suggest an autosomal recessive
transmission but the causative gene(s) have not been yet identified making
prenatal diagnosis unavailable. Some infants have a milder phenotype than others 
but in most patients, the severity of the intestinal malabsorption even with
enteral feeding make them totally dependent on daily long-term parenteral
nutrition with a subsequent risk of complications. IED becomes an indication for 
intestinal transplantation, while timing of referral for it is crucial before the
onset of severe complications.

PMCID: PMC1878471
PMID: 17448233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Gastroenterology. 2007 Apr;132(4):1410-9. Epub 2007 Feb 25.

TGF-betaRII rescues development of small intestinal epithelial cells in
Elf3-deficient mice.

Flentjar N(1), Chu PY, Ng AY, Johnstone CN, Heath JK, Ernst M, Hertzog PJ,
Pritchard MA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of Medical 
Research, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: ELF3, a member of the ETS transcription factor family, has
been shown to transactivate the transforming growth factor beta type II receptor 
(TGF-betaRII) promoter. Previously we showed that Elf3-null mice have a defect in
the small intestine caused by a failure of small intestinal epithelial cells to
differentiate and that these cells produced significantly lower levels of
Tgf-betaRII. To prove that the defect observed in Elf3-null mice resulted from
the lack of Elf3-dependent activation of Tgf-betaRII expression, we performed a
genetic rescue.
METHODS: We generated transgenic mice that express human TGF-betaRII specifically
in the intestinal epithelium under the control of the mouse A33 antigen promoter.
Mice expressing the A33-TGF-betaRII transgene were mated with Elf3(+/-) mice, and
double heterozygous offspring harboring both the transgene and one mutant Elf3
allele were intercrossed.
RESULTS: The resultant A33-TGF-betaRII transgenic Elf3(-/-) pups displayed normal
small intestinal morphology, while the characteristic abnormality was retained in
all Elf3(-/-) mice that did not express the transgene. This phenotypic rescue
shows for the first time in vivo that a single gene, Elf3, is the critical
upstream regulator of Tgf-betaRII in mouse small intestinal epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: This has important implications for our understanding of
tissue-specific gene regulation and further strengthens the potential clinical
connection between ELF3 and colorectal cancer involving transforming growth
factor beta insensitivity.

PMID: 17408644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Apr;6(4):494-503.

Profiling of selenomethionine responsive genes in colon cancer by microarray
analysis.

Goulet AC(1), Watts G, Lord JL, Nelson MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Arizona Cancer Center, University of Arizona, Tucson,
Arizona 85724, USA.

High-selenium containing yeast is being evaluated in clinical trials against
colon polyp recurrence. However, the molecular targets for the anticancer effects
of selenium remain unclear. Previous studies by our group demonstrated that
selenomethionine-induced growth arrest appears to be mediated by activation of
ERK and subsequent phosphorylation of RSK and histone H3. These results suggest
that selenomethionine can alter gene expression. In the present study, we have
used cDNA microarrays to determine whether gene expression differences exist in
HCT116 colon cancer cells treated with selenomethionine. These experiments reveal
statistically significant expression changes for 50 genes. Genes we found to
increase with selenomethionine treatment include KLK6, ATOX1, SGK, GJB2, DAP-1,
PLAU, VIM, DPYSL2, STC2 and PXN. Conversely, genes downregulated by
selenomethionine include PRKACB, LIM, DEPP, MYC, CDH5, ELF3, VSNL1, SAT and
EGLN3. Further analysis of those genes using chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments showed that phosphorylated histone H3 on serine 10 bound to the GJB2 
promoter (connexin 26) or the serum glucocorticoid kinase promoter is increased
with selenomethionine treatment. Cells overexpressing CX26 or DAP-1 displayed a
reduced number of colonies which suggests that these two genes could play a
functional role in the growth inhibitory effects of selenomethionine. These data 
support the notion that selenomethionine-induced growth inhibition is associated 
with global changes in gene expression. They also demonstrate that
selenomethionine can modify chromatin state to alter gene transcription. Finally,
our studies provide a practical foundation for the further development of
biomarkers to monitor the efficacy of selenomethionine in clinical trials.

PMID: 17374985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Jan;6(1):76-82.

Profile of Ets gene expression in human breast carcinoma.

He J(1), Pan Y, Hu J, Albarracin C, Wu Y, Dai JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Unit 951, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 25CR4.2026, 7435 Fannin St, Houston, Texas 77054, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Jan;6(1):83-4.

BACKGROUND: Ets genes encode a family of transcription factors that play key
roles in cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. Fusions of Ets genes 
with other targets have been described in Ewing's sarcoma, chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia and more recently prostate carcinoma. Ets expression in breast carcinoma
has not been comprehensively studied, and is the focus of this study.
METHODS: RT-Q-PCR was used to determine the expression of Ets genes in a panel of
ten common breast cancer cell lines, two immortalized normal breast epithelial
cell lines, and one primary culture of human mammary epithelial cells. Ets with
altered expression in cancer cell lines were verified in primary breast tumors.
RESULTS: Transcripts of 21 of the 27 Ets genes were detected in either normal or 
cancer cells. Of the 21 detectable genes, 14 were expressed at a similar level in
both normal and breast cancer cell lines. Four genes, Ehf, Elf3, Elf5 and Pdef,
were expressed at higher levels in breast cancer cells than normal epithelials.
Surprisingly, the expression of Elk3, Etsl and Flil was repressed in breast
cancer cells. The protein status of Ehf, Elf3, Pdef, Elk3, Etsl and Flil,
strongly correlated with the transcript data, suggesting that Ets expression is
regulated primarily at the transcriptional level. Similarly, Elf3, Pdef and Tel2 
were overexpressed, while Elk3, Etsl and Flil were under-expressed in primary
breast tumor specimens in comparison with normal mammary tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified a subset of Ets genes with altered expression
in breast carcinoma, implicating their roles in mammary tumorigenesis. While the 
Ets over-expression pattern is useful to uncover recurrent genetic alterations
involving Ets genes, the repressed expression of several Ets genes suggests that 
some Ets proteins may play suppressor roles during breast cancer progression. Our
results warrant detailed studies of individual Ets activity during mammary gland 
neoplasia.

PMID: 17172821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Biol Chem. 2007 Feb 2;282(5):3027-41. Epub 2006 Dec 5.

Different domains of the transcription factor ELF3 are required in a
promoter-specific manner and multiple domains control its binding to DNA.

Kopp JL(1), Wilder PJ, Desler M, Kinarsky L, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Nebraska 68198-6805, USA.

Elf3 is an epithelially restricted member of the ETS transcription factor family,
which is involved in a wide range of normal cellular processes. Elf3 is also
aberrantly expressed in several cancers, including breast cancer. To better
understand the molecular mechanisms by which Elf3 regulates these processes, we
created a large series of Elf3 mutant proteins with specific domains deleted or
targeted by point mutations. The modified forms of Elf3 were used to analyze the 
contribution of each domain to DNA binding and the activation of gene expression.
Our work demonstrates that three regions of Elf3, in addition to its DNA binding 
domain (ETS domain), influence Elf3 binding to DNA, including the transactivation
domain that behaves as an autoinhibitory domain. Interestingly, disruption of the
transactivation domain relieves the autoinhibition of Elf3 and enhances Elf3
binding to DNA. On the basis of these studies, we suggest a model for
autoinhibition of Elf3 involving intramolecular interactions. Importantly, this
model is consistent with our finding that the N-terminal region of Elf3, which
contains the transactivation domain, interacts with its C terminus, which
contains the ETS domain. In parallel studies, we demonstrate that residues
flanking the N- and C-terminal sides of the ETS domain of Elf3 are crucial for
its binding to DNA. Our studies also show that an AT-hook domain, as well as the 
serine- and aspartic acid-rich domain but not the pointed domain, is necessary
for Elf3 activation of promoter activity. Unexpectedly, we determined that one of
the AT-hook domains is required in a promoter-specific manner.

PMID: 17148437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Plant Cell Physiol. 2007 Jan;48(1):110-21. Epub 2006 Nov 27.

Comparative overviews of clock-associated genes of Arabidopsis thaliana and Oryza
sativa.

Murakami M(1), Tago Y, Yamashino T, Mizuno T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, School of Agriculture, Nagoya
University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan. t2706775@mbox.nagoya-u.ac.jp

In higher plants, circadian rhythms are highly relevant to a wide range of
biological processes. To such circadian rhythms, the clock (oscillator) is
central, and recent intensive studies on the model higher plant Arabidopsis
thaliana have begun to shed light on the molecular mechanisms underlying the
functions of the central clock. Such representative clock-associated genes of A. 
thaliana are the homologous CCA1 and LHY genes, and five PRR genes that belong to
a small family of pseudo-response regulators including TOC1. Others are GI, ZTL, 
ELF3, ELF4, LUX/PCL1, etc. In this context, a simple question arose as to whether
or not the molecular picture of the model Arabidopsis clock is conserved in other
higher plants. Here we made an effort to answer the question with special
reference to Oryza sativa, providing experimental evidence that this model
monocot also has a set of highly conserved clock-associated genes, such as those 
designated as OsCCA1, OsPRR-series including OsTOC1/OsPRR1, OsZTLs, OsPCL1 as
well as OsGI. These results will provide us with insight into the general roles
of plant circadian clocks, such as those for the photoperiodic control of
flowering time that has a strong impact on the reproduction and yield in many
higher plants.

PMID: 17132630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 15;281(50):38941-50. Epub 2006 Oct 23.

Expression of claudin7 is tightly associated with epithelial structures in
synovial sarcomas and regulated by an Ets family transcription factor, ELF3.

Kohno Y(1), Okamoto T, Ishibe T, Nagayama S, Shima Y, Nishijo K, Shibata KR,
Fukiage K, Otsuka S, Uejima D, Araki N, Naka N, Nakashima Y, Aoyama T, Nakayama
T, Nakamura T, Toguchida J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, 53 Kaweahara-cho,
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, USA.

Synovial sarcoma, a soft tissue sarcoma that develops in adults, is
pathologically subclassified into monophasic spindle synovial sarcoma and
biphasic synovial sarcoma with epithelial components. The molecular mechanism
building the epithelial components in biphasic synovial sarcoma is totally
unknown. Here we investigated claudins, critical molecules in the tight junction,
in biphasic synovial sarcoma. Expression profiles of 21 claudins in 17 synovial
sarcoma tumor samples, including 9 biphasic tumors, identified claudin4,
claudin7, and claudin10 as biphasic tumor-related claudins, and
immunohistochemical analyses demonstrated the localization of these claudins in
the epithelial component in biphasic tumors, with claudin7 the most closely
associated with the epithelial component. The mRNA expression and protein
localization of claudin7 coincided with those of the ELF3, an epithelia-specific 
member of the Ets family of transcription factors. Luciferase reporter assays
demonstrated that the presence of the Ets-binding site at -150 in the promoter
region of the claudin7 gene was critical for the transcriptional activity, and
gel shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed the binding of ELF3 
to the Ets site at -150. Inhibition of ELF3 expression by small interfering RNA
simultaneously down-regulated the mRNA expression of the claudin7 gene, and the
introduction of ELF3 expression in claudin7-negative cell lines induced mRNA
expression of the claudin7 gene. Therefore, the induction of claudin7 expression 
by ELF3 appears critical to the formation of the epithelial structures in
biphasic synovial sarcoma.

PMID: 17060315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Verh Dtsch Ges Pathol. 2004;88:207-13.

[Prediction of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in Barrett's carcinoma by
quantitative gene expression analysis].

[Article in German]

Langer R(1), Specht K, Becker K, Ewald P, Sarbia M, Busch R, Feith M, Stein HJ,
Siewert JR, Höfler H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie der TU München.

The potential of gene expression profiles to predict the response to neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy in patients with advanced adenocarcinoma of the esophagus was
analyzed. Paraffin-embedded endoscopic esophageal tumor biopsies of 38 patients
with advanced esophageal adenocarcinoma (Barrett's adenocarcinoma) were included.
All patients underwent two cycles of cisplatin and fluorouracil (5-FU) therapy
with or without additional paclitaxel (taxol) followed by abdominothoracal
esophagectomy. RNA expression levels of 5-FU-metabolism associated genes
thymidylate synthase (TS), thymidine phosphorylase (TP), dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase (DPD), methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), MAP7, ELF3, as 
well as of platinum and taxane associated related genes caldesmon, excision
cross-complementing genes (ERCC1 and ERCC4) HER2-neu, DNA damage-inducible gene
45 (GADD45) and multidrug resistance genes (MDR1, MRP1) were determined using
real-time RT-PCR. Expression levels were correlated with the histopathological
response to chemotherapy assessed in surgically resected specimens. Responding
patients showed significantly higher pretherapeutic expression levels of MTHFR (p
= 0.012), Caldesmon (p = 0.016), MRP1 (p = 0.007) and MDR1 (p = 0.025). In
addition, patients with high pretherapeutic MTHFR and MRP1 levels had a survival 
benefit after surgery (p = 0.013 and p = 0.015, respectively). Additionally,
intratumoral heterogeneity of gene expression of selected genes (TP, DPD, MTHFR, 
HER2-neu, Caldesmon, ERCC4, MRP1) was additionally verified in 9 untreated
Barrett's adenocarcinoma by examination of 5 distinct tumor areas and was
observed in 12.7% (5.6%-23.5%, CI 95%) of all cases analyzed. Our results
indicate that determination of mRNA levels of a few genes may be useful for the
prediction of the success of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in individual cancer
patients with advanced adenocarcinoma of the esophagus.

PMID: 16892554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Sep 22;348(2):768-74. Epub 2006 Jul 31.

Ets transcription factors regulate AIRE gene promoter.

Murumägi A(1), Silvennoinen O, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere and Tampere University 
Hospital, Tampere, Finland. ltasmu@uta.fi

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) directs the expression of self-antigens in thymus.
Defects in AIRE gene cause an organ-specific autoimmune disease called autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). AIRE protein is
mainly expressed in thymic medullary epithelial cells, thus implying a strict
control over its expression pattern. To date, only limited information is
available on mechanisms responsible for the regulation of AIRE gene. Here, we
show that Ets transcription factor family members Ets-1, Ets-2, and ESE-1 have
positive effect on AIRE transcription. Site-directed mutagenesis and transfection
studies revealed that two of the three Ets binding sites in AIRE promoter are
functional and this finding has been confirmed by the electrophoretic mobility
shift assay. The AIRE promoter activity could be stimulated by phorbol myristate 
acetate (PMA) and this activation was further enhanced by Ets transcription
factors. Our results demonstrate for the first time that AIRE gene is a
downstream target for the Ets family of transcription factors.

PMID: 16890195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 2;344(2):675-9. Epub 2006 Apr 17.

The role of ETS transcription factors in transcription and development of mouse
preimplantation embryos.

Kageyama S(1), Liu H, Nagata M, Aoki F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Biosciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences,
University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8571, Japan.

Embryonic transcription is a crucial process for the creation of new life. To
clarify the mechanism of embryonic transcription, we investigated the expression 
and function of the erythroblast transformation specific (ETS) domain containing 
transcription factors (TFs) during preimplantation development in mice. The
expression levels of several ETS TFs, i.e., etsrp71, elf3, and spic, increased
after fertilization and remained at a high level until the blastocyst stage. To
clarify the function of these TFs, we performed gene suppression using RNA
interference, which revealed that they were involved in regulating development to
the blastocyst stage. Furthermore, we found that suppression of ETS TFs affected 
the transcription of eIF-1A and oct3/4 genes whose expression is regulated by
TATA-less promoters in the embryos. These results suggest that ETS TFs function
in the regulation of transcription with TATA-less promoters in preimplantation
embryos, which is essential in preimplantation development.

PMID: 16630543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Plant Cell Physiol. 2006 May;47(5):601-12. Epub 2006 Mar 8.

Conserved expression profiles of circadian clock-related genes in two Lemna
species showing long-day and short-day photoperiodic flowering responses.

Miwa K(1), Serikawa M, Suzuki S, Kondo T, Oyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya
University and CREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation (JST), Furo-cho,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi, 464-8602 Japan.

The Lemna genus is a group of monocotyledonous plants with tiny, floating bodies.
Lemna gibba G3 and L. paucicostata 6746 were once intensively analyzed for
physiological timing systems of photoperiodic flowering and circadian rhythms
since they showed obligatory and sensitive photoperiodic responses of a long-day 
and a short-day plant, respectively. We attempted to approach the divergence of
biological timing systems at the molecular level using these plants. We first
employed molecular techniques to study their circadian clock systems. We
developed a convenient bioluminescent reporter system to monitor the circadian
rhythms of Lemna plants. As in Arabidopsis, the Arabidopsis CCA1 promoter
produced circadian expression in Lemna plants, though the phases and the
sustainability of bioluminescence rhythms were somewhat diverged between them.
Lemna homologs of the Arabidopsis clock-related genes LHY/CCA1, GI, ELF3 and PRRs
were then isolated as candidates for clock-related genes in these plants. These
genes showed rhythmic expression profiles that were basically similar to those of
Arabidopsis under light-dark conditions. Results from co-transfection assays
using the bioluminescence reporter and overexpression effectors suggested that
the LHY and GI homologs of Lemna can function in the circadian clock system like 
the counterparts of Arabidopsis. All these results suggested that the frame of
the circadian clock appeared to be conserved not only between the two Lemna
plants but also between monocotyledons and dicotyledons. However, divergence of
gene numbers and expression profiles for LHY/CCA1 homologs were found between
Lemna, rice and Arabidopsis, suggesting that some modification of clock-related
components occurred through their evolution.

PMID: 16524874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. FEBS Lett. 2006 Mar 20;580(7):1865-71. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

Identification of multiple nuclear localization signals in murine Elf3, an ETS
transcription factor.

Do HJ(1), Song H, Yang HM, Kim DK, Kim NH, Kim JH, Cha KY, Chung HM, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Chabiotech Co. Ltd., Seoul 135-907, South Korea.

We investigated nuclear localization signal (NLS) determinants within the AT-hook
and ETS DNA-binding domains of murine Elf3 (mElf3), a member of the subfamily of 
epithelium-specific ETS transcription factors. Deletion mutants containing the
AT-hook, ETS domain or both localized strictly in the nucleus, suggesting that
these individual domains contain independent NLS motif(s). Within the AT-hook
domain, four basic residues (244KRKR247) were critical for strong NLS activity,
and two potent bipartite NLS motifs (236-252 and 249-267) were sufficient for
nuclear import of mElf3, although less efficient than the full domain. In
addition, one stretch of basic residues (318KKK320) within the ETS domain appears
to be essential for mElf3 nuclear localization. Taken together, mElf3 contains
multiple NLS motifs, which may function cooperatively to effect efficient nuclear
transport.

PMID: 16516205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2005 Dec;14(4):224-9.

Real-time quantitative PCR analysis of regions involved in gene amplification
reveals gene overdose in low-grade astrocytic gliomas.

Arjona D(1), Bello MJ, Alonso ME, Isla A, De Campos JM, Vaquero J, Sarasa JL,
Gutierrez M, Rey JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Oncogenética Molecular, Unidad de Investigación, Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

We have studied gene amplification of genes located in 1q32 (GAC1, ELF3, MDM4,
and ren1), 4q11 (PDGFR-alpha), and in 12q13-14 (MDM2 and CDK4) using quantitative
real-time PCR in a group of 86 tumors consisting of 44 WHO grade IV glioblastomas
(GBM) (34 primary and 10 secondary tumors), 21 WHO grade III anaplastic
astrocytomas (AA), and 21 WHO grade II astrocytomas (AII). Gene amplification was
present in 56 of the 86 samples (65%) in at least 1 gene in our series. GAC1
(51%) and MDM4 (27%) were the most frequently amplified genes within the 1q32
amplicon, and their higher amplification frequency was statistically significant 
(P<0.05, chi) in the low-grade astrocytomas. Concordant co-amplification was
determined for ELF3 and ren1 or ren1 and MDM4 in the grade III-IV tumors. MDM2
amplification was significantly more frequent in primary GBM (16%) than was in
secondary GBM (0%). The present study shows that gene amplification in the
studied regions is already present in low-grade astrocytic tumors and that
amplification of some genes may represent another molecular marker to
differentiate primary from secondary GBM.

PMID: 16319692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Plant Physiol. 2005 Nov;139(3):1557-69. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

Independent roles for EARLY FLOWERING 3 and ZEITLUPE in the control of circadian 
timing, hypocotyl length, and flowering time.

Kim WY(1), Hicks KA, Somers DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Cellular and Molecular Biology, Plant Biotechnology
Center, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

The circadian clock regulates many aspects of plant development, including
hypocotyl elongation and photoperiodic induction of flowering. ZEITLUPE (ZTL) is 
a clock-related F-box protein, and altered ZTL expression causes fluence
rate-dependent circadian period effects, and altered hypocotyl elongation and
flowering time. EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3) is a novel protein of unknown
biochemical function. elf3 mutations cause light-dependent circadian dysfunction,
elongated hypocotyls, and early flowering. Although both genes affect similar
processes, their relationship is unclear. Here we show that the effects of ZTL
and ELF3 on circadian clock function and early photomorphogenesis are additive.
The long period of ztl mutations and ELF3 overexpressors are more severe than
either alone. Dark-release experiments showing additivity in phase advances
suggest that the arrthymicity caused by ZTL overexpression and that of the elf3-1
mutation arise through independent pathways. A similar additive effect on
hypocotyl elongation in red and blue light is also observed. In contrast, ELF3
and ZTL overexpressors act similarly to control flowering time in long days
through the CONSTANS/FLOWERING LOCUS T (CO/FT) pathway. ZTL overexpression does
not delay flowering through changes in GIGANTEA or FLAVIN-BINDING, KELCH REPEAT, 
F-BOX levels, but through a ZTL-mediated reduction in CO expression. In contrast,
ELF3 negatively regulates CO, FT, and GIGANTEA transcript levels, as the
expression of all three genes is increased in elf3-1. The elf3-1 co-1 double
mutant flowers much earlier in long days than co-1, although FT message levels
remain very low. These results show that elf3-1 can derepress late flowering
through a CO-independent mechanism. ELF3 may act at more than one juncture,
possibly posttranscriptionally.

PMCID: PMC1283789
PMID: 16258016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Oct 15;11(20):7462-9.

Association of pretherapeutic expression of chemotherapy-related genes with
response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in Barrett carcinoma.

Langer R(1), Specht K, Becker K, Ewald P, Bekesch M, Sarbia M, Busch R, Feith M, 
Stein HJ, Siewert JR, Höfler H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology and Medical Statistics, Klinikum Rechts der Isar,
Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.

PURPOSE: We analyzed pretherapeutic gene expression patterns of patients with
locally advanced adenocarcinomas of the esophagus with regard to response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Pretherapeutic, paraffin-embedded, formalin-fixed endoscopic
esophageal tumor biopsies of 38 patients with locally advanced esophageal
adenocarcinomas (Barrett adenocarcinoma) were included. All patients underwent
two cycles of cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) therapy with or without
additional paclitaxel followed by abdominothoracal esophagectomy. RNA expression 
levels of 5-FU metabolism-associated genes thymidylate synthase, thymidine
phosphorylase, dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase, MAP7, and ELF3, of platinum- and taxane-related genes caldesmon,
ERCC1, ERCC4, HER-2/neu, and GADD45, and of multidrug resistance gene MRP1 were
determined using real-time reverse transcriptase-PCR. Expression levels were
correlated with response to chemotherapy, histopathologically assessed in
surgically resected specimens.
RESULTS: Responding patients showed significantly higher pretherapeutic
expression levels of MTHFR (P = 0.012), caldesmon (P = 0.016), and MRP1 (P =
0.007). In addition, patients with high pretherapeutic MTHFR and MRP1 levels had 
a survival benefit after surgery (P = 0.013 and P = 0.015, respectively).
Additionally, investigation of intratumoral heterogeneity of gene expression of
relevant genes (MTHFR, caldesmon, HER-2/neu, ERCC4, and MRP1), verified in nine
untreated Barrett adenocarcinomas by examination of five distinct tumor areas,
revealed no significant heterogeneity in gene expression indicating that
expression profiles obtained from biopsy material may yield a representative
genetic expression profile of total tumor tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that determination of mRNA levels of few genes 
may be useful for the prediction of the success of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in
individual cancer patients with locally advanced Barrett adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 16243820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Seikagaku. 2005 Sep;77(9):1177-80.

[Small molecules that control gene expression].

[Article in Japanese]

Uesugi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Gokasho, Uji, Kyoto 611
0011, Japan.

PMID: 16241004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Plant J. 2005 Oct;44(2):300-13.

ELF4 is a phytochrome-regulated component of a negative-feedback loop involving
the central oscillator components CCA1 and LHY.

Kikis EA(1), Khanna R, Quail PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
CA 94720, USA.

Evidence has been presented that a negative transcriptional feedback loop formed 
by the genes CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED (CCA1), LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY)
and TIMING OF CAB (TOC1) constitutes the core of the central oscillator of the
circadian clock in Arabidopsis. Here we show that these genes are expressed at
constant, basal levels in dark-grown seedlings. Transfer to constant red light
(Rc) rapidly induces a biphasic pattern of CCA1 and LHY expression, and a
reciprocal TOC1 expression pattern over the first 24 h, consistent with initial
induction of this synchronous oscillation by the light signal. We have used this 
assay with wild-type and mutant seedlings to examine the role of these oscillator
components, and to determine the function of ELF3 and ELF4 in their
light-regulated expression. The data show that whereas TOC1 is necessary for
light-induced CCA1/LHY expression, the combined absence of CCA1 and LHY has
little effect on the pattern of light-induced TOC1 expression, indicating that
the negative regulatory arm of the proposed oscillator is not fully functional
during initial seedling de-etiolation. By contrast, ELF4 is necessary for
light-induced expression of both CCA1 and LHY, and conversely, CCA1 and LHY act
negatively on light-induced ELF4 expression. Together with the observation that
the temporal light-induced expression profile of ELF4 is counter-phased to that
of CCA1 and LHY and parallels that of TOC1, these data are consistent with a
previously unrecognized negative-feedback loop formed by CCA1/LHY and ELF4 in a
manner analogous to the proposed CCA1/LHY/TOC1 oscillator. ELF3 is also necessary
for light-induced CCA1/LHY expression, but it is neither light-induced nor
clock-regulated during de-etiolation. Taken together, the data suggest (a) that
ELF3, ELF4, and TOC1 all function in the primary, phytochrome-mediated
light-input pathway to the circadian oscillator in Arabidopsis; and (b) that this
oscillator consists of two or more interlocking transcriptional feedback loops
that may be differentially operative during initial light induction and under
steady-state circadian conditions in entrained green plants.

PMID: 16212608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005 Aug;16(8):2477-86. Epub 2005 Jun 23.

Coagulation cascade activation causes CC chemokine receptor-2 gene expression and
mononuclear cell activation in hemodialysis patients.

Pertosa G(1), Simone S, Soccio M, Marrone D, Gesualdo L, Schena FP, Grandaliano
G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Emergency and Transplantation,
University of Bari, Policlinico, Piazza Giulio Cesare 11, Bari 70124, Italy.

Erratum in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006 May;17(5):1489.
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006 Feb;17(2):591.

Priming of the coagulation cascade during hemodialysis (HD) leads to the release 
of activated factor X (FXa). The binding of FXa to its specific receptors,
effector protease receptor-1 (EPR-1) and protease-activated receptor-2 (PAR-2),
may induce the activation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and
promote a chronic inflammatory state that is responsible for several HD-related
morbidities. In the attempt to elucidate the mechanisms underlying the
coagulation-associated inflammation in HD, 10 HD patients were randomized to be
treated subsequently with a cellulose acetate membrane (CA) and
Ethylen-vinyl-alcohol (EVAL), a synthetic membrane that has been shown to reduce 
FXa generation. At the end of each experimental period, surface FXa and thrombin 
receptors (EPR-1 and PAR-1, -2, and -4) and CCR2 (monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1 receptor) gene expression in isolated PBMC were examined. the ability
of dialytic membranes to activate protein-tyrosine kinases and the
stress-activated kinase JNK and to modulate the generation of terminal complement
complex (TCC) was also investigated. EPR-1 and PAR-2 and -4 mRNA expression,
barely detectable in normal PBMC, were significantly upregulated in HD patients, 
particularly in those who were treated with CA. A striking increase of
tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins and JNK activation was observed at the end of HD
only in CA-treated patients. Simultaneously, an increased gene expression for
both splicing isoforms of CCR2, A and B, only in PBMC from CA-treated patients
was demonstrated. The increased CCR-2 mRNA abundance was followed by a
significant increase in its protein synthesis. The high expression of CCR2 was
associated with an increased generation of plasma TCC and a significant drop in
leukocyte and monocyte count. By contrast, EVAL treatment slightly lowered TCC
generation and normalized leukocyte count. In vitro FXa induced CCR2 A and B
expression and JNK activation in freshly isolated PBMC. FXa-induced CCR2 mRNA
expression was completely abolished by JNK and tyrosine kinase inhibition. In
conclusion, these data suggest that subclinical clotting activation may cause an 
increased CCR2 gene and protein expression on uremic PBMC, contributing to
HD-related chronic microinflammation. The use of the less coagulation-activating 
membrane, EVAL, may reduce PBMC activation through the modulation of the
stress-activated kinase JNK.

PMID: 15976001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Plant Cell Physiol. 2005 Aug;46(8):1423-7. Epub 2005 May 20.

Circadian rhythm of circumnutation in inflorescence stems of Arabidopsis.

Niinuma K(1), Someya N, Kimura M, Yamaguchi I, Hamamoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Science Center, RIKEN, 1-7-22 Suehiro, Tsurumi, Yokohama, Kanagawa,
230-0045 Japan. s0530163@ipe.tsukuba.ac.jp

We investigate the modulation of circumnutation in inflorescence stems of
Arabidopsis to determine the circadian regulation of circumnutation. Under
constant light conditions (LL), circumnutation speed in wild-type plants
fluctuates, with the phase of the highest speed at subjective dawn; the period
length is close to 24 h. toc1 appears to shorten the period and elf3 causes an
arrhythmic phenotype in circumnutation speed in LL, suggesting that a common
circadian clock may control both circumnutation speed and other circadian
outputs. These results highlight for the first time a role for a circadian clock 
in the regulation of circumnutation based on genetic analysis of Arabidopsis.

PMID: 15908440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Am J Clin Pathol. 2005 Jun;123(6):900-6.

Real-time quantitative PCR analysis of gene dosages reveals gene amplification in
low-grade oligodendrogliomas.

Alonso ME(1), Bello MJ, Arjona D, Martinez-Glez V, de Campos JM, Isla A, Kusak E,
Vaquero J, Gutierrez M, Sarasa JL, Rey JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Surgery, Molecular, Oncogenetics Laboratory,
Research Unit, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

Proto-oncogene amplification is an important alteration that is present in about 
45% to 50% of high-grade human gliomas. We studied this mechanism in 8 genes
(cyclin-dependent kinase-4 [CDK4], MDM2, MDM4, renin-angiotensin system-1, ELF3, 
GAC1, human epidermal growth factor receptor-2, and platelet-derived growth
factor receptor-A gene) in a series of 40 oligodendrogliomas (World Health
Organization (WHO) grade II, 21; WHO grade III, 13; and WHO grade II-III
oligoastrocytomas, 6) using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
Amplification of at least 1 of these genes was detected in 58% of samples
(23/40). By histopathologic grade, 67% of grade II oligodendrogliomas (14/21),
46% of grade III anaplastic oligodendrogliomas (6/13), and 50% of mixed
oligoastrocytomas (3/6) were positive for amplification of at least 1 gene. CDK4,
MDM2, and GAC1 were the most frequently involved genes (12/40 [30%], 12/40 [30%],
and 13/40 [33%], respectively). Our findings demonstrate gene amplification in
low-grade samples indicating that it is an important alteration in the early
steps of oligodendroglioma development and, therefore, might be considered a
molecular mechanism leading to malignant progression toward anaplastic forms.

PMID: 15899783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. FEBS J. 2005 Apr;272(7):1676-87.

The Ets transcription factor ESE-1 mediates induction of the COX-2 gene by LPS in
monocytes.

Grall FT(1), Prall WC, Wei W, Gu X, Cho JY, Choy BK, Zerbini LF, Inan MS,
Goldring SR, Gravallese EM, Goldring MB, Oettgen P, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)New England Baptist Bone and Joint Institute and BIDMC Genomics Center, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is a key enzyme in the production of prostaglandins that
are major inflammatory agents. COX-2 production is triggered by exposure to
various cytokines and to bacterial endotoxins. We present here a novel role for
the Ets transcription factor ESE-1 in regulating the COX-2 gene in response to
endotoxin and other pro-inflammatory stimuli. We report that the induction of
COX-2 expression by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and pro-inflammatory cytokines
correlates with ESE-1 induction in monocyte/macrophages. ESE-1, in turn, binds to
several E26 transformation specific (Ets) sites on the COX-2 promoter. In vitro
analysis demonstrates that ESE-1 binds to and activates the COX-2 promoter to
levels comparable to LPS-mediated induction. Moreover, we provide results showing
that the induction of COX-2 by LPS may require ESE-1, as the mutation of the Ets 
sites in the COX-2 promoter or overexpression of a dominant-negative form of
ESE-1 inhibits LPS-mediated COX-2 induction. The effect of ESE-1 on the COX-2
promoter is further enhanced by cooperation with other transcription factors such
as nuclear factor-kappa B and nuclear factor of activated T cells. Neutralization
of COX-2 is the goal of many anti-inflammatory drugs. As an activator of COX-2
induction, ESE-1 may become a target for such therapeutics as well. Together with
our previous reports of the role of ESE-1 as an inducer of nitric oxide synthase 
in endothelial cells and as a mediator of pro-inflammatory cytokines in vascular 
and connective tissue cells, these results establish ESE-1 as an important player
in the regulation of inflammation.

PMID: 15794755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Plant Physiol. 2005 Mar;137(3):969-82. Epub 2005 Feb 25.

Conservation and divergence of circadian clock operation in a stress-inducible
Crassulacean acid metabolism species reveals clock compensation against stress.

Boxall SF(1), Foster JM, Bohnert HJ, Cushman JC, Nimmo HG, Hartwell J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of York, York YO10 5YW, United Kingdom.

One of the best-characterized physiological rhythms in plants is the circadian
rhythm of CO(2) metabolism in Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) plants, which is
the focus here. The central components of the plant circadian clock have been
studied in detail only in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Full-length cDNAs
have been obtained encoding orthologs of CIRCADIAN CLOCK-ASSOCIATED1 (CCA1)/LATE 
ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY), TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION1 (TOC1), EARLY FLOWERING4
(ELF4), ZEITLUPE (ZTL), FLAVIN-BINDING KELCH REPEAT F-BOX1 (FKF1), EARLY
FLOWERING3 (ELF3), and a partial cDNA encoding GIGANTEA in the model
stress-inducible CAM plant, Mesembryanthemum crystallinum (Common Ice Plant).
TOC1 and LHY/CCA1 are under reciprocal circadian control in a manner similar to
their regulation in Arabidopsis. ELF4, FKF1, ZTL, GIGANTEA, and ELF3 are under
circadian control in C(3) and CAM leaves. ELF4 transcripts peak in the evening
and are unaffected by CAM induction. FKF1 shows an abrupt transcript peak 3 h
before subjective dusk. ELF3 transcripts appear in the evening, consistent with
their role in gating light input to the circadian clock. Intriguingly, ZTL
transcripts do not oscillate in Arabidopsis, but do in M. crystallinum. The
transcript abundance of the clock-associated genes in M. crystallinum is largely 
unaffected by development and salt stress, revealing compensation of the central 
circadian clock against development and abiotic stress in addition to the
well-known temperature compensation. Importantly, the clock in M. crystallinum is
very similar to that in Arabidopsis, indicating that such a clock could control
CAM without requiring additional components of the central oscillator or a novel 
CAM oscillator.

PMCID: PMC1065398
PMID: 15734916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Histochem Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;122(6):521-6. Epub 2004 Nov 3.

A major site of expression of the ets transcription factor Elf5 is epithelia of
exocrine glands.

Lapinskas EJ(1), Palmer J, Ricardo S, Hertzog PJ, Hammacher A, Pritchard MA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, 27-31 Wright Street, 3168,
Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

Elf5 belongs to the ets family of transcription factors and was cloned by
homology in the DNA binding domain to the related, epithelial-specific ets
factor, Elf3. Elf5 mRNA is expressed highly in normal tissue rich in secretory
epithelial cells, including mammary gland, lung, kidney, prostate, salivary gland
and stomach. The function of Elf5 and the cell types in which it is expressed
remain uncharacterised. The presence of Elf5 mRNA in normal tissues, but absence 
in cancer tissues, may suggest a role for Elf5 in differentiation and
development. We have generated a rabbit antiserum directed against a peptide in
the Elf5 DNA-binding domain that is conserved between murine and human sequences.
The antiserum specifically detects human and murine Elf5 proteins on western
blots and shows specific staining on paraffin-embedded sections obtained from
tissues including mammary gland, kidney, salivary gland and stomach. Epithelia
from the bladder lining, lung and prostate did not stain for the presence of
Elf5, though these organs express Elf5 mRNA. We show for the first time that Elf5
is primarily expressed in epithelial cells and is likely to be an
epithelial-specific protein. The antiserum should prove useful in further
analysis of the expression and function of Elf5.

PMID: 15655699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Gene. 2004 Sep 29;340(1):123-31.

Transcriptional regulation of the murine Elf3 gene in embryonal carcinoma cells
and their differentiated counterparts: requirement for a novel upstream
regulatory region.

Hou J(1), Wilder PJ, Bernadt CT, Boer B, Neve RM, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases at the University 
of Nebraska Medical Center, USA.

The transcription factor Elf3, which is one of over 25 Ets family members, is
expressed in a wide variety of carcinomas and has been shown to promote the
transcription of many genes implicated in cancer. To understand how the Elf3 gene
is regulated at the transcriptional level, we probed its 5'-flanking region, and 
we report here the identification of both proximal and distal regions that
regulate murine Elf3 promoter activity. In addition to mapping the transcription 
start site of the Elf3 gene, the work described in this study identifies four
cis-regulatory elements in the proximal promoter region of the gene. These
include a cis-regulatory element previously designated ESE, a kappaB site, a POU 
motif, and a CCAAT box. In addition, we demonstrate that a novel 94 bp region 2
kb upstream of the transcription start site significantly elevates Elf3 promoter 
activity in F9-differentiated cells, but not in the parental F9 embryonal
carcinoma (EC) cells. This region appears to be largely responsible for the
increase in Elf3 promoter activity that accompanies the differentiation of
embryonal carcinoma cells.

PMID: 15556300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Oncogene. 2004 Nov 11;23(53):8629-38.

E-cadherin mutation and Snail overexpression as alternative mechanisms of
E-cadherin inactivation in synovial sarcoma.

Saito T(1), Oda Y, Kawaguchi K, Sugimachi K, Yamamoto H, Tateishi N, Tanaka K,
Matsuda S, Iwamoto Y, Ladanyi M, Tsuneyoshi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan. saitot@mskcc.org

We have recently reported frequent E-cadherin gene mutations in synovial sarcoma 
(SS), suggesting mutational inactivation of E-cadherin as a potential mechanism
of spindle cell morphology in SS, a spindle cell sarcoma that shows areas of
glandular epithelial differentiaton in some cases (biphasic SS) and only pure
spindle cell morphology in most cases (monophasic SS). However, the mechanism of 
downregulation of E-cadherin in SS remains unknown. To further address this
issue, we analysed the mechanisms of E-cadherin silencing in 40 SS. Genetic and
epigenetic changes in the E-cadherin gene, and the expression level of its
transcriptional repressor Snail were examined by polymerase chain
reaction-single-strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP), methylation-specific
PCR, and real-time quantitative PCR, respectively. Expression of E-cadherin was
examined by RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. We also examined ELF3, a
transcription factor associated with epithelial differentiation in SS in a
previous cDNA microarray, by RT-PCR. E-cadherin and ELF3 transcripts were
detected, respectively, in 27/40 (67.5%) and in 25/40 (62.5%) of SS, and these
epithelial-related genes were almost always coexpressed. Hypermethylation of the 
promoter of the E-cadherin gene was detected in five cases (12.5%) in SS;
however, E-cadherin was silenced at mRNA level in only one of the five cases.
E-cadherin missense mutations were observed in five cases (12.5%) of SS. In SS,
all five cases with E-cadherin missense mutations had the SYT-SSX1 fusion and
were monophasic tumors, suggesting a relationship between the SYT-SSX fusion type
and E-cadherin missense mutation (P=0.07). E-cadherin mRNA expression in SS was
associated with reduced Snail expression level (P=0.03). E-cadherin membranous
expression was observed in 14/40 (35.0%) of SS, and was also correlated with
SYT-SSX1 fusion type and biphasic histology. ELF3 was confirmed to be more highly
expressed in biphasic than monophasic SS by real-time quantitative PCR. These
results suggest that in SS the loss of E-cadherin expression occurs either by
Snail trans-repression or by inactivating mutations. Thus, E-cadherin
downregulation is associated with the loss or absence of glandular epithelial
differentiation in certain SS.

PMID: 15467754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(12):5548-64.

The ETS transcription factor ESE-1 transforms MCF-12A human mammary epithelial
cells via a novel cytoplasmic mechanism.

Prescott JD(1), Koto KS, Singh M, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Scienctist Training Program, University of Colorado Health Sciences
Center, Denver, CO 80262, USA. jason.prescott@uchsc.edu

Several different transcription factors, including estrogen receptor,
progesterone receptor, and ETS family members, have been implicated in human
breast cancer, indicating that transcription factor-induced alterations in gene
expression underlie mammary cell transformation. ESE-1 is an epithelium-specific 
ETS transcription factor that contains two distinguishing domains, a serine- and 
aspartic acid-rich (SAR) domain and an AT hook domain. ESE-1 is abundantly
expressed in human breast cancer and trans-activates epithelium-specific gene
promoters in transient transfection assays. While it has been presumed that ETS
factors transform mammary epithelial cells via their nuclear transcriptional
functions, here we show (i) that ESE-1 protein is cytoplasmic in human breast
cancer cells; (ii) that stably expressed green fluorescent protein-ESE-1
transforms MCF-12A human mammary epithelial cells; and (iii) that the ESE-1 SAR
domain, acting in the cytoplasm, is necessary and sufficient to mediate this
transformation. Deletion of transcriptional regulatory or nuclear localization
domains does not impair ESE-1-mediated transformation, whereas fusing the simian 
virus 40 T-antigen nuclear localization signal to various ESE-1 constructs,
including the SAR domain alone, inhibits their transforming capacity. Finally, we
show that the nuclear localization of ESE-1 protein induces apoptosis in
nontransformed mammary epithelial cells via a transcription-dependent mechanism. 
Together, our studies reveal two distinct ESE-1 functions, apoptosis and
transformation, where the ESE-1 transcription activation domain contributes to
apoptosis and the SAR domain mediates transformation via a novel nonnuclear,
nontranscriptional mechanism. These studies not only describe a unique ETS factor
transformation mechanism but also establish a new paradigm for cell
transformation in general.

PMCID: PMC419891
PMID: 15169914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 11;279(24):25241-50. Epub 2004 Apr 8.

Positive and negative modulation of the transcriptional activity of the ETS
factor ESE-1 through interaction with p300, CREB-binding protein, and Ku 70/86.

Wang H(1), Fang R, Cho JY, Libermann TA, Oettgen P.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Epithelium-specific ETS (ESE)-1 is a prototypic member of a novel subset of the
ETS transcription factor family that is predominantly expressed in cells of
epithelial origin but can also be induced in other cell types including vascular 
endothelial and smooth muscle cells in response to inflammatory stimuli. To
further define the molecular mechanisms by which the transcriptional activity of 
ESE-1 is regulated, we have focused our attention on identifying proteins that
interact with ESE-1. We have determined that Ku70, Ku86, p300, and CREB-binding
protein (CBP) are ESE-1 interacting proteins. The Ku proteins have previously
been shown to bind to breaks in DNA where they function to recruit additional
proteins that promote DNA repair. Interestingly, Ku70 and Ku 86 negatively
regulate the transcriptional activity of ESE-1. Using a series of deletion
constructs, we have determined that the Ku proteins bind to the DNA-binding
domain of ESE-1. The Ku proteins inhibit the ability of ESE-1 to bind to
oligonucleotide probes in gel mobility shift assays. The finding that Ku proteins
can interact with other transcription factors and block their function has not
been previously demonstrated. In contrast, co-transfection of p300 and CBP with
ESE-1 enhances the transcriptional activity of ESE-1. Moreover, the induction of 
ESE-1 in response to inflammatory cytokine interleukin-1 is associated with a
parallel increase of the expression of p300 in vascular endothelial cells,
suggesting that in the setting of inflammation, the transcriptional activity of
ESE-1 is positively modulated by interaction with the transcriptional
co-activator p300. In summary, our results demonstrated that the activity of
ESE-1 is positively and negatively modulated by other interacting proteins
including Ku70, Ku86, p300, and CBP.

PMID: 15075319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cancer Res. 2004 Apr 1;64(7):2439-48.

Identification of retinoid-modulated proteins in squamous carcinoma cells using
high-throughput immunoblotting.

Kim HJ(1), Lotan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of
Texas, M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Retinoids have shown clinical efficacy in cancer chemoprevention and therapy
presumably by modulating the growth, differentiation, and apoptosis of normal,
premalignant, and malignant cells. To better understand the mechanisms by which
retinoids exert their effects, we used a high-throughput Western blotting method 
(Becton-Dickinson PowerBlot) to evaluate changes in the levels of cellular
signaling proteins in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells treated with
the cytostatic all-trans-retinoic acid or with the proapoptotic retinoids
6-[3-(1-adamantyl)-4-hydroxyphenyl]-2-naphthalene carboxylic acid or
N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide. Treatments of the head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma cells with these retinoids for 24 h resulted in increased levels of 14,
22, and 22 proteins and decreased levels of 5, 10, and 7 proteins, respectively. 
The changes in the levels of the following proteins were confirmed by
conventional western immunoblotting: all-trans-retinoic acid increased ELF3,
topoisomerase II alpha, RB2/p130, RIG-G, and EMAPII and decreased MEF2D and
cathepsin L. N-(4-Hydroxyphenyl)retinamide up-regulated ELF3, c-Jun, Rb2/p130,
JAK1, p67phox, Grb2, O(6)-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase, and Ercc-1.
6-[3-(1-Adamantyl)-4-hydroxyphenyl]-2-naphthalene carboxylic acid increased
Rb2/p130, c-Jun, Sp1, Sin, and tomosyn and decreased cathepsin L, Mre11, and
topoisomerase II alpha. Some of these proteins were also modulated by these
retinoids in other human cancer cell lines. A subset of the proteins were
modulated similarly by the different retinoids, whereas changes in other proteins
were unique for each retinoid. These results suggest that the mechanisms by which
these retinoids modulate proteins are distinct but may overlap. Some of the
retinoid-modulated proteins identified in this study may be novel candidates for 
mediating different responses to retinoids.

PMID: 15059897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Mar 24;126(11):3461-71.

A wrench-shaped synthetic molecule that modulates a transcription
factor-coactivator interaction.

Shimogawa H(1), Kwon Y, Mao Q, Kawazoe Y, Choi Y, Asada S, Kigoshi H, Uesugi M.

Author information: 
(1)The Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Development of synthetic molecules that provide external control over the
transcription of a given gene represents a challenge in medicinal and bioorganic 
chemistry. Here we report design and analysis of wrenchnolol, a wrench-shaped
synthetic molecule that impairs the transcription of the Her2 oncogene by
disrupting association of transcription factor ESX with its coactivator Sur-2.
The "jaw" part of the compound mimics the alpha-helical interface of the
activation domain of ESX, and the "handle" region accepts chemical modifications 
for a range of analysis. A water-soluble handle permitted NMR study in aqueous
solution; a biotinylated handle verified the selectivity of the interaction, and 
a fluorescent handle confirmed the cell permeability of the compound. The case
study of wrenchnolol foreshadows the promise and the challenge of targeting
protein-protein interactions in the nucleus and may lead to the development of
unique synthetic modulators of gene transcription.

PMID: 15025473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2004 Jan;83(2):171-87.

Partially unspliced and fully spliced ELF3 mRNA, including a new Alu element in
human breast cancer.

Kaplan MH(1), Wang XP, Xu HP, Dosik MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, North Shore University Hospital, Manhasset, NY 11030, 
USA. mkaplan@nshs.edu

Using modified representational difference analysis, a DNA fragment (GC3) was
isolated as a difference between a breast cancer and a normal cell line from the 
same patient. GC3 proved to be a fragment of intron 7 of the ELF3 gene, an ets
family transcription factor, amplified in the breast cancer cell line. Using
genomic walking technology, a new Alu (Alu(kwd)) was found downstream of GC3 in
an antisense position between nt 8762 and nt 8763 within intron 8 of the ELF3
gene. This ELF3 intron fragment(GC3) was expressed in human breast cancer cell
lines and four of six breast cancer tissues, but not in matched normal cell lines
and tissues. Similarly, Alu(kwd) was also found in the same breast cancer cell
lines and five of eight other breast cancer tissues, but not in matched normal
cell lines and tissue. This was confirmed by RNase and DNase digestion analysis. 
Moreover, GC3 and Alu(kwd) were detected in both the nuclear and cytoplasmic RNA 
fractions of breast cancer cell lines. The finding of cytoplasmic intron
retention was verified with northern blotting and the 5' and 3' rapid
amplification cDNA ends procedure (5' and 3'RACE) to search for cDNA sequences in
RNA from these cancer cell lines. Partially unspliced ELF3 mRNA and fully spliced
ELF3 mRNA was found in the same breast cancer cell line. Partially unspliced ELF3
mRNA contained introns 4-7 without any nucleotide mutation at intron/exon splice 
junction borders. Fully spliced 1959 bp ELF3 mRNA showed a different 5'UTR from
the published ELF3 mRNA, and was predicted to encode a 371 amino acid protein
sharing 98% homology with the ELF3 protein sequence. This is the first report of 
intron retention of ELF3 as well as the pathological appearance of both spliced
and unspliced cytoplasmic ELF3 mRNA in human breast cancer cells.

PMID: 14997048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 7;279(19):19407-20. Epub 2004 Feb 19.

Unique and selective effects of five Ets family members, Elf3, Ets1, Ets2, PEA3, 
and PU.1, on the promoter of the type II transforming growth factor-beta receptor
gene.

Kopp JL(1), Wilder PJ, Desler M, Kim JH, Hou J, Nowling T, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, 986805 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-6805,
USA.

Previous studies have shown that the promoter of the type II TGF-beta receptor
gene (TbetaR-II) is strongly stimulated by Elf3, a member of the Ets
transcription factor family. The TbetaR-II gene behaves as a tumor suppressor and
it is expressed in nearly all cell types, whereas Elf3 is expressed primarily in 
epithelial cells. Hence, the TbetaR-II gene is likely to be regulated by other
Ets proteins in nonepithelial cells. In this study, we examined the effects of
four other Ets family members (Ets1, Ets2, PEA3, and PU.1) on TbetaR-II
promoter/reporter constructs that contain the two essential ets sites of this
gene. These studies employed F9 embryonal carcinoma cells and their
differentiated cells, because transcription of the TbetaR-II gene increases after
F9 cells differentiate. Here we demonstrate that Ets2, which is expressed in
F9-differentiated cells along with Elf3, does not stimulate or bind to the
TbetaR-II promoter in these cells. In contrast, PEA3 stimulates the TbetaR-II
promoter in F9-differentiated cells, but it inhibits this promoter in F9 cells.
Thus, the effects of PEA3 on the TbetaR-II promoter are cell context-dependent.
We also show that the effects of Elf3 are cell context-dependent. Elf3 strongly
stimulates the TbetaR-II promoter in F9-differentiated cells, but not in F9
cells. In contrast to Elf3 and PEA3, Ets1 strongly stimulates this promoter in
both F9 cells and F9-differentiated cells. Finally, we show that PU.1 exerts
little or no effect on the activity of the TbetaR-II promoter. Together, our
findings indicate that Elf3 is not the only Ets protein capable of stimulating
the TbetaR-II promoter. Importantly, our findings also indicate that each of the 
five Ets proteins influences the TbetaR-II promoter in a unique manner because of
important differences in their biochemical properties or their patterns of
cellular expression.

PMID: 14976186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Oncogene. 2004 Mar 4;23(9):1766-79.

ESX induces transformation and functional epithelial to mesenchymal transition in
MCF-12A mammary epithelial cells.

Schedin PJ(1), Eckel-Mahan KL, McDaniel SM, Prescott JD, Brodsky KS, Tentler JJ, 
Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver,
CO 80262, USA. schedinp@amc.org

ESX is an epithelial-restricted member of a large family of transcription factors
known as the Ets family. ESX expression has been shown to be correlated with
Her2/neu proto-oncogene amplification in highly aggressive breast cancers and
induced by Her2/neu in breast cell lines, but its role in tumorigenesis is
unknown. Previously, we have shown that ESX enhances breast cell survival in
colony-formation assays. In order to determine whether ESX can act as a
transforming gene, we stably transfected MCF-12A human mammary epithelial cells
with the ESX expression vector, pCGN2-HA-ESX. The MCF-12A cell line is
immortalized, but nontransformed, and importantly, these cells fail to express
endogenous ESX protein. We used pCGN2-HA-Ets-2 and pSVRas expression vectors as
positive controls for transformation. Like HA-Ets-2 and V12-Ras, stable
expression of ESX induced EGF-independent proliferation, serum-independent MAPK
phosphorylation and growth in soft agar. Additionally, stable ESX expression
conferred increased cell adhesion, motility and invasion in two-dimensional and
transwell filter assays, and an epithelial to mesenchymal morphological
transition. In three-dimensional cultures, parental and vector control (pCGN2)
cells formed highly organized duct-like structures with evidence of cell
polarity, ECM adhesion-dependent proliferation and cell survival, and lack of
cellular invasion into surrounding matrix. Remarkably, the ESX stable cells
formed solid, disorganized structures, with lack of cell polarity, loss of
adhesion junctions and cytokeratin staining and loss of dependence on ECM
adhesion for cell proliferation and survival. In addition, ESX cells invaded the 
surrounding matrix, indicative of a transformed and metastatic phenotype. Taken
together, these data show that ESX expression alone confers a transformed and in 
vitro metastatic phenotype to otherwise normal MCF-12A cells.

PMID: 14767472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 26;279(13):12794-803. Epub 2004 Jan 8.

ESE-1 is a novel transcriptional mediator of angiopoietin-1 expression in the
setting of inflammation.

Brown C(1), Gaspar J, Pettit A, Lee R, Gu X, Wang H, Manning C, Voland C,
Goldring SR, Goldring MB, Libermann TA, Gravallese EM, Oettgen P.

Author information: 
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Department of Medicine, New England
Baptist Bone and Joint Institute, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, 4 Blackfan
Circle, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Angiogenesis is a critical component of the inflammatory response associated with
a number of conditions. Angiopoietin-1 (Ang-1) is an angiogenic growth factor
that promotes the chemotaxis of endothelial cells and facilitates the maturation 
of new blood vessels. Ang-1 expression is up-regulated in response to tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). To begin to elucidate the underlying molecular
mechanisms by which Ang-1 gene expression is regulated during inflammation, we
isolated 3.2 kb of the Ang-1 promoter that contain regulatory elements sufficient
to mediate induction of the promoter in response to TNF-alpha, interleukin-1beta,
and endotoxin. Surprisingly, sequence analysis of this promoter failed to reveal 
binding sites for transcription factors that are frequently associated with
mediating inflammatory responses, such as NF-kappaB, STAT, NFAT, or C/EBP.
However, putative binding sites for ETS and AP-1 transcription factor family
members were identified. Interestingly, among a panel of ETS factors tested in a 
transient transfection assay, only the ETS factor ESE-1 was capable of
transactivating the Ang-1 promoter. ESE-1 binds to specific ETS sites within the 
Ang-1 promoter that are functionally important for transactivation by ESE-1.
ESE-1 and Ang-1 are induced in synovial fibroblasts in response to inflammatory
cytokines, with ESE-1 induction slightly preceding that of Ang-1. Mutation of a
high-affinity ESE-1 binding site leads to a marked reduction in Ang-1
transactivation by ESE-1, inducibility by inflammatory cytokines, and DNA binding
to the ESE-1 protein. Transcriptional profiling of cells transiently transfected 
with an ESE-1 expression vector demonstrates that the endogenous Ang-1 gene is
directly inducible by ESE-1. Finally, Ang-1 and ESE-1 exhibit a similar and
strong expression pattern in the synovium of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. 
Our results support a novel paradigm for the ETS factor ESE-1 as a
transcriptional mediator of angiogenesis in the setting of inflammation.

PMID: 14715662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 19;279(12):11281-92. Epub 2003 Dec 8.

Changes in the expression of many Ets family transcription factors and of
potential target genes in normal mammary tissue and tumors.

Galang CK(1), Muller WJ, Foos G, Oshima RG, Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)Oncodevelopmental Biology Program, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Interfering with Ets transcription factor function reverses multiple aspects of
the transformed phenotype of mouse or human tumor cells. However, the unknown
number of individual Ets factors expressed in any cellular context and the
similar DNA binding specificities of Ets family members complicates the
identification of those that mediate transformation. By utilizing quantitative
PCR assays for 25 mouse Ets factors, we analyzed the expression of essentially
the entire Ets family in normal mammary tissue, mammary-related cell lines, and
mammary tumors. In normal mammary tissue, 24 Ets factors were expressed. Even
clonal derived cell lines expressed 14-20 Ets members. The most abundant Ets
factor mRNAs measured in normal mammary tissue were Elk4, Elf1, and Ets2.
Subtractive analysis of mammary tissue identified which Ets factors were
predominantly expressed in the myeloid/lymphoid or epithelial cell compartments. 
Comparison of Ets factor expression in normal mammary tissue and mammary tumors
identified significantly elevated expression of Pse/PDEF, Ese2/Elf5, Ese3/Ehf,
TEL/Etv6, and Elf2/NERF in mammary tumors and confirmed previously reported
alterations in expression of Ese1/Elf3 and the PEA3 subfamily. Expression of 13
Ets target genes, implicated in various aspects of tumor progression, was also
analyzed. Altered expression of particular Ets target genes was significantly
correlated with particular Ets factors (e.g. maspin and Ese2), suggesting
specific in vivo regulatory roles. Together, this comprehensive analysis revealed
unexpectedly diverse Ets family gene expression, characterized novel Ets factor
changes in mammary tumors, and implicated specific Ets factors in the regulation 
of multiple genes involved in mammary tumor progression.

PMID: 14662758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2003 Sep;22(3):477-80.

Effect of ets-related transcription factor (ERT) on transforming growth factor
(TGF)-beta type II receptor gene expression in human cancer cell lines.

Lee HJ(1), Chang JH, Kim YS, Kim SJ, Yang HK.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery and Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Transcriptional repression of the TGF-beta type II receptor (RII) is one of the
mechanisms leading to TGF-beta resistance. The newly identified
epithelium-specific ets transcription factor ERT/ESX/ESE-1 binds to the TGF-beta 
RII promoter and induces promoter activity. This study aims to investigate the
mechanisms underlying development of ERT-mediated TGF-beta resistance using
antisense ERT oligonucleotide. We performed Northern blot analysis of TGF-beta
RII expression in human colon cancer cell line, RKO, after transfecting these
cells with MFG-antisense-ERT retroviral construct. The plasmid containing the
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene alone was used as the control. The
amount of TGF-beta RII mRNA appears to be poor in RKO cells expressing antisense 
ERT compared with both parental RKO and control cells. In conclusion,
transfection of MFG-antisense-ERT construct into the colon cancer cell line could
result in lower levels of TGF-beta RII mRNA expression, which means that ERT
mediates the expression of TGF-beta RII and the transcriptional inhibition of ERT
could be a one of the mechanisms of colonic carcinogenesis. More in vitro and in 
vivo studies should be required to evaluate this treatment in clinical setting.

PMID: 14582709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Plant Cell. 2003 Nov;15(11):2719-29. Epub 2003 Oct 10.

The TIME FOR COFFEE gene maintains the amplitude and timing of Arabidopsis
circadian clocks.

Hall A(1), Bastow RM, Davis SJ, Hanano S, McWatters HG, Hibberd V, Doyle MR, Sung
S, Halliday KJ, Amasino RM, Millar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL,
United Kingdom.

Plants synchronize developmental and metabolic processes with the earth's 24-h
rotation through the integration of circadian rhythms and responses to light. We 
characterize the time for coffee (tic) mutant that disrupts circadian gating,
photoperiodism, and multiple circadian rhythms, with differential effects among
rhythms. TIC is distinct in physiological functions and genetic map position from
other rhythm mutants and their homologous loci. Detailed rhythm analysis shows
that the chlorophyll a/b-binding protein gene expression rhythm requires TIC
function in the mid to late subjective night, when human activity may require
coffee, in contrast to the function of EARLY-FLOWERING3 (ELF3) in the late day to
early night. tic mutants misexpress genes that are thought to be critical for
circadian timing, consistent with our functional analysis. Thus, we identify TIC 
as a regulator of the clock gene circuit. In contrast to tic and elf3 single
mutants, tic elf3 double mutants are completely arrhythmic. Even the robust
circadian clock of plants cannot function with defects at two different phases.

PMCID: PMC280574
PMID: 14555691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Eur J Biochem. 2003 Oct;270(20):4133-9.

Characterization of eIF3k: a newly discovered subunit of mammalian translation
initiation factor elF3.

Mayeur GL(1), Fraser CS, Peiretti F, Block KL, Hershey JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Mammalian translation initiation factor 3 (eIF3) is a multisubunit complex
containing at least 12 subunits with an apparent aggregate mass of approximately 
700 kDa. eIF3 binds to the 40S ribosomal subunit, promotes the binding of
methionyl-tRNAi and mRNA, and interacts with several other initiation factors to 
form the 40S initiation complex. Human cDNAs encoding 11 of the 12 subunits have 
been isolated previously; here we report the cloning and characterization of a
twelfth subunit, a 28-kDa protein named eIF3k. Evidence that eIF3k is present in 
the eIF3 complex was obtained. A monoclonal anti-eIF3a (p170) Ig
coimmunoprecipitates eIF3k with the eIF3 complex. Affinity purification of
histidine-tagged eIF3k from transiently transfected COS cells copurifies other
eIF3 subunits. eIF3k colocalizes with eIF3 on 40S ribosomal subunits. eIF3k
coexpressed with five other 'core' eIF3 subunits in baculovirus-infected insect
cells, forms a stable, immunoprecipitatable, complex with the 'core'. eIF3k
interacts directly with eIF3c, eIF3g and eIF3j by glutathione S-transferase
pull-down assays. Sequences homologous with eIF3k are found in the genomes of
Caenorhabitis elegans, Arabidopsis thaliana and Drosophila melanogaster, and a
homologous protein has been reported to be present in wheat eIF3. Its ubiquitous 
expression in human tissues, yet its apparent absence in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
and Schizosaccharomyces pombe, suggest a unique regulatory role for eIF3k in
higher organisms. The studies of eIF3k complete the characterization of mammalian
eIF3 subunits.

PMID: 14519125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Oncogene. 2003 Jul 31;22(31):4924-32.

Microarray analysis uncovers retinoid targets in human bronchial epithelial
cells.

Ma Y(1), Koza-Taylor PH, DiMattia DA, Hames L, Fu H, Dragnev KH, Turi T, Beebe
JS, Freemantle SJ, Dmitrovsky E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, 
NH 03755, USA.

Retinoids, the natural and synthetic derivatives of vitamin A, have a role in
cancer treatment and prevention. There is a need to reveal mechanisms that
account for retinoid response or resistance. This study identified candidate
all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) target genes linked to growth suppression in BEAS-2B
human bronchial epithelial cells. Microarray analyses were performed using
Affymetrix arrays. A total of 11 RA-induced species were validated by reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), Western or Northern analyses.
Three of these species were novel candidate RA-target genes in human bronchial
epithelial cells. These included: placental bone morphogenetic protein (PLAB),
polyamine oxidase isoform 1 (PAOh1) and E74-like factor 3 (ELF3). Expression
patterns were studied in RA-resistant BEAS-2B-R1 cells. In BEAS-2B-R1 cells, RA
dysregulated the expression of the putative lymphocyte G0/G1 switch gene (G0S2), 
heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1), tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced protein 2
(TNFAIP2), inhibitor of DNA binding 1(Id1), fos-like antigen 1 (FOSL1),
transglutaminase 2 (TGM2), asparagine synthetase (ASNS), PLAB, PAOh1 and ELF3,
while prominent induction of insulin-like growth-factor-binding protein 6
(IGFBP6) still occurred. In summary, this study identified 11 candidate RA-target
genes in human bronchial epithelial cells including three novel species.
Expression studies in BEAS-2B-R1 cells indicated that several were directly
implicated in RA signaling, since their aberrant expression was linked to RA
resistance of human bronchial epithelial cells.

PMID: 12894236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Aug;17(8):1454-69. Epub 2003 May 29.

Microarray analysis of uterine gene expression in mouse and human pregnancy.

Bethin KE(1), Nagai Y, Sladek R, Asada M, Sadovsky Y, Hudson TJ, Muglia LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

Improved care of infants born prematurely has increased their survival. However, 
the incidence of preterm labor has not changed. To understand the processes
involved in preterm labor, we used oligonucleotide microarrays to study gene
expression in murine and human uterus during pregnancy. The induction of enzymes 
for prostaglandin synthesis was used as a marker for important changes during
pregnancy because prostaglandins strongly contribute to both human and murine
labor. We identified 504 genes that changed at least 2-fold between d 13.5 and
19.0 in the gravid mouse uterus. In the pregnant human myometrium, we found 478
genes that changed at least 2-fold in either term or preterm labor compared with 
preterm nonlabor specimens and 77 genes that significantly varied in both preterm
and term labor. Patterns of gene regulation within functional groups comparing
human preterm and term labor were similar, although the magnitude of change often
varied. Surprisingly, few genes that changed significantly throughout pregnancy
were the same in the mouse and human. These data suggest that functional
progesterone withdrawal in human myometrium may not be the primary mechanism for 
labor induction, may implicate similar mechanisms for idiopathic preterm and term
labor in humans, and may identify novel targets for further study.

PMID: 12775764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Arthritis Rheum. 2003 May;48(5):1249-60.

Responses to the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis
factor alpha in cells derived from rheumatoid synovium and other joint tissues
involve nuclear factor kappaB-mediated induction of the Ets transcription factor 
ESE-1.

Grall F(1), Gu X, Tan L, Cho JY, Inan MS, Pettit AR, Thamrongsak U, Choy BK,
Manning C, Akbarali Y, Zerbini L, Rudders S, Goldring SR, Gravallese EM, Oettgen 
P, Goldring MB, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)New England Baptist Bone and Joint Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center and Harvard Medical School, and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
Genomics Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of the novel Ets transcription factor
ESE-1 in rheumatoid synovium and in cells derived from joint tissues, and to
analyze the role of nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) as one of the central
downstream targets in mediating the induction of ESE-1 by proinflammatory
cytokines.
METHODS: ESE-1 protein expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry using
antibodies in synovial tissues from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and
osteoarthritis (OA). ESE-1 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels were analyzed by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction or Northern blotting in human
chondrocytes, synovial fibroblasts, osteoblasts, and macrophages, before and
after exposure to interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNFalpha), or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) with or without prior infection with an
adenovirus encoding the inhibitor of nuclear factor kappaB (IkappaB). The
wild-type ESE-1 promoter and the ESE-1 promoter mutated in the NF-kappaB site
were cloned into a luciferase reporter vector and analyzed in transient
transfections. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) and supershift
assays with antibodies against members of the NF-kappaB family were conducted
using the NF-kappaB site from the ESE-1 promoter as a probe.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical analysis showed specific expression of ESE-1 in
cells of the synovial lining layer and in some mononuclear and endothelial cells 
in RA and OA synovial tissues. ESE-1 mRNA expression could be induced by IL-1beta
and TNFalpha in cells such as synovial fibroblasts, chondrocytes, osteoblasts,
and monocytes. Transient transfection experiments and EMSAs showed that induction
of ESE-1 gene expression by IL-1beta requires activation of NF-kappaB and binding
of p50 and p65 family members to the NF-kappaB site in the ESE-1 promoter.
Overexpression of IkappaB using an adenoviral vector blocked IL-1beta-induced
ESE-1 mRNA expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation further confirmed that
NF-kappaB binds to the ESE-1 promoter in vivo.
CONCLUSION: ESE-1 is expressed in synovial tissues in RA and, to a variable
extent, in OA, and is specifically induced in synovial fibroblasts, chondrocytes,
osteoblasts, and monocyte/macrophages by IL-1beta, TNFalpha, or LPS. This
induction relies on the translocation of the NF-kappaB family members p50 and p65
to the nucleus and transactivation of the ESE-1 promoter via a high-affinity
NF-kappaB binding site. ESE-1 may play a role in mediating some effects of
proinflammatory stimuli in cells at sites of inflammation.

PMID: 12746898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. DNA Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;22(2):79-94.

The epithelial-specific ETS transcription factor ESX/ESE-1/Elf-3 modulates breast
cancer-associated gene expression.

Eckel KL(1), Tentler JJ, Cappetta GJ, Diamond SE, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Program in Molecular Biology, and Colorado Cancer
Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado 80262,
USA.

Several members of the ETS family of transcription factors contribute to
tumorigenesis in many different tissues, including breast epithelium. The ESX
gene is an epithelial-specific Ets member that is particularly relevant to breast
cancer. ESX is amplified in early breast cancers, it is overexpressed in human
breast ductal carcinoma in situ, and there may be a positive feedback loop
between the HER2/neu proto-oncogene and ESX. Despite this progress in our
understanding of ESX, its ability to regulate tumor-related gene expression and
to modulate breast cell survival, remain unknown. Here we show that HA-ESX
stimulates the collagenase and HER2/neu promoters, but fails to activate an
intact stromelysin promoter. However, HA-ESX activates, in a dose-dependent
manner, a heterologous promoter containing eight copies of the Ets binding site
derived from the stromelysin gene (p8Xpal-CAT). Analysis of the ability of
constructs encoding nine Ets family members to activate the HER2/neu promoter
revealed three patterns of gene activation: (1) no effect or repressed promoter
activity (Elk-1 and NET); (2) intermediate activity (ER81, GABP, ESX, and
HA-Ets-2); and, (3) maximal activity (Ets-1, VP-16-Ets-1, and EHF). Based on
these observations, we also determined whether ESX is capable of conferring a
survival phenotype upon immortalized, but nontransformed and ESX negative MCF-12A
human breast cells. Using a colony formation assay, we found that HA-ESX and
HA-Ets-2, mediated MCF-12A cell survival rates that approached those generated by
oncogenic V12 Ras, whereas empty vector resulted in negligible colony formation. 
By contrast, in immortalized and transformed T47D breast cancer cells, which
express both HER2/neu and ESX, we found that antisense and dominant-negative
HA-ESX inhibited T47D colony formation, whereas control vector allowed formation 
of many colonies. These results are significant because they show that HA-ESX is 
able to differentially activate several malignancy-associated gene promoters, and
that ESX expression is required for cellular survival of nontransformed MCF-12A
and transformed T47D human mammary cells.

PMID: 12713734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Am Chem Soc. 2003 Apr 30;125(17):4992-3.

A gene-expression inhibitor that targets an alpha-helix-mediated protein
interaction.

Asada S(1), Choi Y, Uesugi M.

Author information: 
(1)The Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Protein-protein interactions are harder to target by small organic molecules than
by enzymes or nuclear hormone receptors. Here we report the discovery of an
organic compound that inhibits the expression of the Her2 oncogene by disrupting 
an alpha-helix-mediated protein interaction. The druglike molecule we named
adamanolol competitively inhibited the interaction between the two cancer-linked 
nuclear proteins, ESX (an epithelial-specific transcription factor) and
Sur-2/DRIP130 (a Ras-linked subunit of the human mediator complex), which is
important for the overexpression of Her2 gene in malignant breast cancer cells.
Adamanolol impaired Her2 expression and caused cell death selectively in
Her2-positive breast cancer cells. NMR signals of adamanolol suggest that its
rigid conformation plays a role in forming a helixlike surface for the
interaction.

PMID: 12708845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 13;278(24):21378-87. Epub 2003 Apr 7.

Interplay between proximal and distal promoter elements is required for squamous 
differentiation marker induction in the bronchial epithelium: role for ESE-1,
Sp1, and AP-1 proteins.

Reddy SP(1), Vuong H, Adiseshaiah P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Division of Physiology, The Johns
Hopkins University, 615 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
sreddy@jhsph.edu

Overexpression of SPRR1B in bronchial epithelial cells is a marker for early
metaplastic changes induced by various toxicants/carcinogens. Previously, we have
shown that the transcriptional stimulation of SPRR1B expression by phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) is mainly mediated by a -150/-94 bp enhancer
harboring two critical 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-responsive elements
(TREs) and by Jun.Fra-1 dimers. Here, we show that a region between -54 and -39
bp containing an ETS-binding site (EBS) and a GC box is essential for both basal 
and PMA-inducible SPRR1B transcription. In vivo footprinting demonstrated binding
of transcription factors to these elements. However, unlike enhancer TREs,
exposure of cells to PMA did not significantly alter the footprinting pattern at 
these elements. Mutations that crippled both the EBS and GC box suppressed both
basal and PMA-inducible SPRR1B transcription. Consistent with this,
overexpression of EBS-binding proteins ESE-1 and ESE-3 significantly stimulated
SPRR1B promoter activity. Furthermore, preceding SPRR1B transcription, PMA
up-regulated mRNA expression of ETS family members such as ESE-1 and ESE-3.
Although ESE-1 synergistically activated c-Jun- and PMA-enhanced SPRR1B
transcription, coexpression of Sp1 and ESE-1 showed no synergistic or additive
effect on promoter activity, indicating an obligatory role for AP-1 proteins in
such regulation. In support of this notion, deletion or mutation of two
functional TREs inhibited ESE-1- and Sp1-enhanced promoter activation. Thus, the 
interaction between ESE-1 and Sp1, and AP-1 proteins that bind to the proximal
and distal promoter regions, respectively, play a critical role in the induction 
of squamous differentiation marker expression in bronchial epithelial cells.

PMID: 12682075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 16;278(20):17792-9. Epub 2003 Mar 6.

Distinct functional interactions of human Skn-1 isoforms with Ese-1 during
keratinocyte terminal differentiation.

Cabral A(1), Fischer DF, Vermeij WP, Backendorf C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden
University, P. O. Box 9502, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands.

Among the three major POU proteins expressed in human skin, Oct-1, Tst-1/Oct-6,
and Skn-1/Oct-11, only the latter induced SPRR2A, a marker of keratinocyte
terminal differentiation. In this study, we have identified three Skn-1 isoforms,
which encode proteins with various N termini, generated by alternative promoter
usage. These isotypes showed distinct expression patterns in various skin
samples, internal squamous epithelia, and cultured human keratinocytes. Skn-1a
and Skn-1d1 bound the SPRR2A octamer site with comparable affinity and functioned
as transcriptional activators. Skn-1d2 did not affect SPRR2A expression. Skn-1a, 
the largest protein, functionally cooperated with Ese-1/Elf-3, an
epithelial-specific transcription factor, previously implicated in SPRR2A
induction. This cooperativity, which depended on an N-terminal pointed-like
domain in Skn-1a, was not found for Skn-1d1. Actually, Skn-1d1 counteracted the
cooperativity between Skn-1a and Ese-1. Apparently, the human Skn-1 locus encodes
multifunctional protein isotypes, subjected to biochemical cross-talk, which are 
likely to play a major role in the fine-tuning of keratinocyte terminal
differentiation.

PMID: 12624109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 10;278(2):875-84. Epub 2002 Oct 31.

ESE-1, an enterocyte-specific Ets transcription factor, regulates MIP-3alpha gene
expression in Caco-2 human colonic epithelial cells.

Kwon JH(1), Keates S, Simeonidis S, Grall F, Libermann TA, Keates AC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

We have previously shown that colonic epithelial cells are a major site of
MIP-3alpha production in human colon and that enterocyte MIP-3alpha protein
levels are elevated in inflammatory bowel disease. The aim of this study was to
determine the molecular mechanisms regulating MIP-3alpha gene transcription in
Caco-2 intestinal epithelial cells. We show that a kappaB element at nucleotides 
-82 to -93 of the MIP-3alpha promoter binds p50/p65 NF-kappaB heterodimers and is
a major regulator of basal and interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta)-mediated gene
activation. Scanning mutagenesis of the MIP-3alpha 5'-flanking region also
identified two additional binding elements: Site X (nucleotides -63 to -69) and
Site Y (nucleotides -143 to -154). Site X (CGCCTTC) bound Sp1 and regulated basal
MIP-3alpha gene transcription. Overexpression of Sp1 increased basal luciferase
activity, whereas, substitutions in the Sp1 element significantly reduced
reporter activity. In contrast, Site Y (AAGCAGGAAGTT) regulated both basal and
cytokine-induced gene activation and bound the Ets nuclear factor ESE-1.
Substitutions in the Site Y element markedly reduced inducible MIP-3alpha
reporter activity. Conversely, overexpression of ESE-1 significantly up-regulated
MIP-3alpha luciferase levels. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that
co-ordinate activation and binding of ESE-1, Sp1, and NF-kappaB to the MIP-3alpha
promoter is required for maximal gene expression by cytokine-stimulated Caco-2
human intestinal epithelial cells.

PMID: 12414801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Am J Pathol. 2002 Nov;161(5):1587-95.

Expression profiling of synovial sarcoma by cDNA microarrays: association of
ERBB2, IGFBP2, and ELF3 with epithelial differentiation.

Allander SV(1), Illei PB, Chen Y, Antonescu CR, Bittner M, Ladanyi M, Meltzer PS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. allands@war.wyeth.com

Comment in
    Am J Pathol. 2002 Nov;161(5):1531-4.

Synovial sarcoma is an aggressive spindle cell sarcoma with two major
histological subtypes, biphasic and monophasic, defined respectively by the
presence or absence of areas of glandular epithelial differentiation. It is
characterized by a specific chromosomal translocation, t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2),
which juxtaposes the SYT gene on chromosome 18 to either the SSX1 or the SSX2
gene on chromosome X. The chimeric SYT-SSX products are thought to function as
transcriptional proteins that deregulate gene expression, thereby providing a
putative oncogenic stimulus. We investigated the pattern of gene expression in
synovial sarcoma using cDNA microarrays containing 6548 sequence-verified human
cDNAs. A tissue microarray containing 37 synovial sarcoma samples verified to
bear the SYT-SSX fusion was constructed for complementary analyses. Gene
expression analyses were performed on individual tumor samples; 14 synovial
sarcomas, 4 malignant fibrous histiocytomas, and 1 fibrosarcoma. Statistical
analysis showed a distinct expression profile for the group of synovial sarcomas 
as compared to the other soft tissue sarcomas, which included variably high
expression of ERBB2, IGFBP2, and IGF2 in the synovial sarcomas.
Immunohistochemical analysis of protein expression in tissue microarrays of 37
synovial sarcomas demonstrated strong expression of ERBB2 and IGFBP2 in the
glandular epithelial component of biphasic tumors and in solid epithelioid areas 
of some monophasic tumors. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis indicated 
that the ERBB2 overexpression was not because of gene amplification.
Differentially expressed genes were also found in a comparison of the expression 
profiles of the biphasic and monophasic histological subgroups of synovial
sarcoma, notably several keratin genes, and ELF3, an epithelial-specific
transcription factor gene. Finally, we also noted differential overexpression of 
several neural- or neuroectodermal-associated genes in synovial sarcomas relative
to the comparison sarcoma group, including OLFM1, TLE2, CNTNAP1, and DRPLA. Our
high-throughput studies of gene expression patterns, complemented by tissue
microarray studies, confirm the distinctive expression profile of synovial
sarcoma, provide leads for the study of glandular morphogenesis in this tumor,
and identify a new potential therapeutic target, ERBB2, in a subset of cases.

PMCID: PMC1850795
PMID: 12414507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2002 Nov;43(11):3530-7.

Expression of the ETS transcription factor ELF3 in the retinal pigment
epithelium.

Jobling AI(1), Fang Z, Koleski D, Tymms MJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Vision Research Institute of Australia, Carlton, Victoria, Australia.
a.jobling@optometry@optometry.unimelb.edu.au

PURPOSE: The ETS family of transcription factors regulate several critical
cellular functions. They have also been implicated in invertebrate ocular
development. This work was undertaken to determine whether epithelium-specific
ETS transcription factors are expressed in the retinal pigment epithelium and to 
investigate the possible role of these factors in retinal diseases such as
age-related macular degeneration.
METHODS: The expression of the epithelial ETS transcription factors ELF5, ESE3,
and ELF3 was assessed by RT-PCR in the human RPE cell lines D407 and hTERT-RPE1. 
The full-length coding sequence of rat Elf3 was isolated with 3' rapid
amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) and degenerative primers, and its expression
was determined in various rat tissues, by RT-PCR and real-time PCR. A polyclonal 
ELF3 antibody produced from a C-terminal peptide was used to observe the
distribution of the transcription factor within the retina. To assess the
possible ELF3 regulation of the TIMP3 promoter, transient transfection assays
were performed. Promoter activity was determined with a firefly luciferase
reporter gene construct.
RESULTS: The epithelium-specific ETS transcription factor ELF3 was expressed in
the D407 and hTERT-RPE1 cell lines. Neither ESE3 nor ELF5 was detected in the
RPE. The cloning of rat Elf3 produced two splice variants, designated Elf3a (1786
bp) and Elf3b (1855 bp). The larger form, Elf3b, contained a 69-bp insert in the 
coding sequence, which showed high homology to a similar insert previously
identified in murine Elf3. Both splice variants were expressed in rat lung,
kidney, liver, and retina, but were absent in heart tissue. Real-time PCR
analysis showed the retina to contain high levels of Elf3, which was subsequently
localized to the RPE. Elf3 upregulated the TIMP3 promoter, with Elf3a and -3b
inducing an approximate sixfold increase in activity.
CONCLUSIONS: The ELF3 transcription factor is highly expressed in the RPE and can
regulate important ocular genes, such as TIMP3, in vitro. The specific expression
of ELF3 in the RPE may reflect an important role for this transcription factor in
retinal function. Furthermore, its regulation of TIMP3 may have implications for 
degenerative retinal diseases, such as age-related macular degeneration.

PMID: 12407165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Plant Cell Physiol. 2002 Aug;43(8):833-43.

Aberrant expression of the light-inducible and circadian-regulated APRR9 gene
belonging to the circadian-associated APRR1/TOC1 quintet results in the phenotype
of early flowering in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Matsushika A(1), Imamura A, Yamashino T, Mizuno T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, School of Agriculture, Nagoya
University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8601 Japan.

Several Arabidopsis genes have been proposed to encode potential clock-associated
components, including the Myb-related CCA1 and LHY transcription factors and a
member (APRR1/TOC1) of the family of pseudo-response regulators. We previously
showed that transcripts of the APRR1/TOC1 family genes each start accumulating
after dawn rhythmically and sequentially at intervals in the order of
APRR9-->APRR7-->APRR5-->APRR3-->APRR1/TOC1, under the conditions of continuous
light. Nevertheless, no evidence has been provided that each member of the
APRR1/TOC1 quintet, except for APRR1/TOC1, is indeed relevant to the mechanisms
underlying circadian rhythms. Here we attempt to provide such evidence by
characterizing transgenic plants that aberrantly (or constitutively) express the 
APRR9 gene in a manner independent of circadian rhythms. The resulting APRR9-ox
plants showed intriguing phenotypes with regard to circadian rhythms, in two
aspects. First, the aberrant expression of APRR9 resulted in a characteristic
phenotype with regard to transcriptional events, in which short-period rhythms
were commonly observed for certain circadian-regulated genes, including CCA1,
LHY, APRR1/TOC1, other APRR1/TOC1 members, ELF3, and CAB2. With regard to
biological consequences, such APRR9-ox plants flowered much earlier than
wild-type plants, in a manner independent of photoperiodicity (or under short-day
conditions). These results suggest that APRR9 (and perhaps other members of the
APRR1/TOC1 quintet) must also be taken into consideration for a better
understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying circadian rhythms, and also 
underlying control of the flowering time through the photoperiodic long-day
pathway.

PMID: 12198185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Oncogene. 2002 Aug 8;21(34):5255-67.

ELF a beta-spectrin is a neuronal precursor cell marker in developing mammalian
brain; structure and organization of the elf/beta-G spectrin gene.

Tang Y(1), Katuri V, Iqbal S, Narayan T, Wang Z, Lu RS, Mishra L, Mishra B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Development Molecular Biology, DVAMC, Washington, District of
Columbia, DC 20422, USA.

Spectrins play a pivotal role in axonal transport, neurite extension, the
organization of synaptic vesicles, as well as for protein sorting in the Golgi
apparatus and cell membrane. Among spectrins there is great variability in
sequence composition, tissue distribution, and function, with two known genes
encoding the alpha-chain, and at least five encoding the beta-chain. It remains
unclear as to whether novel beta-spectrins such as elf1-4 are distinct genes or
beta-G-spectrin isoforms. The role for ELF in the developing nervous system has
not been identified to date. In this study we demonstrate the genomic structure
of elf-3, as well as the expression of ELF in the developing mouse brain using a 
peptide specific antibody against its distinctive amino-terminal end. Full
genomic structural analyses reveal that elf-3 is composed of 31 exons spanning
approximately 67 kb, and confirm that elf and mouse brain beta-G-spectrin share
multiple exons, with a complex form of exon/intron usage. In embryonic stages,
E9-12, anti-ELF localized to the primary brain vesicular cells that also labeled 
strongly with anti-nestin but not anti-vimentin. At E12-14, anti-ELF localized to
axonal sprouts in the developing neuroblasts of cortex and purkinje cell layer of
the cerebellum, as well as in cell bodies in the diencephalon and metencephalon. 
Double labeling identified significant co-localization of anti-ELF, nestin and
dystrophin in sub ventricular zone cells and in stellate-like cells of the
developing forebrain. These studies define clearly the expression of ELF, a new
isoform of beta-G-spectrin in the developing brain. Based on its expression
pattern, ELF may have a role in neural stem cell development and is a marker of
axonal sprouting in mid stages of embryonic development.

PMID: 12149647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Gene. 2002 Jun 12;292(1-2):129-40.

Human aminopeptidase B (rnpep) on chromosome 1q32.2: complementary DNA, genomic
structure and expression.

Piesse C(1), Tymms M, Garrafa E, Gouzy C, Lacasa M, Cadel S, Cohen P, Foulon T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie des Signaux Régulateurs Cellulaires et Moléculaires, 
Unité Mixte de Recherche 7631 Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Centre National de
la Recherche Scientifique, 96 Boulevard Raspail, F-75006 Paris, France.

Aminopeptidase B (APB) is a Zn(2+)-metalloexopeptidase, which selectively removes
Arg and/or Lys residues from the N-terminus of several peptide substrates.
Several data strongly support the hypothesis that this enzyme could participate
in the final stages of precursor processing mechanisms and/or in particular
inflammatory processes and tumor developments. Therefore, we have cloned the
complementary DNA encoding the human APB, a 658-residues protein, containing the 
canonical "HEXXH(X(18))E", a signature allowing its classification in the M1
family of metallopeptidases. The genomic structure of the human APB gene (rnpep; 
1q32.1-q32.2) was also determined. rnpep is bracketed by pre-protein translocase 
of the inner mitochondrial membrane gene and ETS family transcription factor ELF3
gene. It spans more than 24 kbp and contains 11 exons ranging from 109 to 574 bp.
Finally, expression of the human APB messenger RNA (mRNA) was investigated using 
a pre-made dot-blot. This mRNA seems to be ubiquitous although its expression
level varies depending of the cells or tissues considered.

PMID: 12119107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Plant Physiol. 2002 Jun;129(2):576-84.

Circadian rhythms confer a higher level of fitness to Arabidopsis plants.

Green RM(1), Tingay S, Wang ZY, Tobin EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, P.O. Box 160606,
University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1606, USA.

Circadian rhythms have been demonstrated in organisms across the taxonomic
spectrum. In view of their widespread occurrence, the adaptive significance of
these rhythms is of interest. We have previously shown that constitutive
expression of the CCA1 (CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1) gene in Arabidopsis plants 
(CCA1-ox) results in loss of circadian rhythmicity. Here, we demonstrate that
these CCA1-ox plants retain the ability to respond to diurnal changes in light.
Thus, transcript levels of several circadian-regulated genes, as well as CCA1
itself and the closely related LHY, oscillate robustly if CCA1-ox plants are
grown under diurnal conditions. However, in contrast with wild-type plants in
which transcript levels change in anticipation of the dark/light transitions, the
CCA1-ox plants have lost the ability to anticipate this daily change in their
environment. We have used CCA1-ox lines to examine the effects of loss of
circadian regulation on the fitness of an organism. CCA1-ox plants flowered
later, especially under long-day conditions, and were less viable under very
short-day conditions than their wild-type counterparts. In addition, we
demonstrate that two other circadian rhythm mutants, LHY-ox and elf3, have
low-viability phenotypes. Our findings demonstrate the adaptive advantage of
circadian rhythms in Arabidopsis.

PMCID: PMC161679
PMID: 12068102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Oncogene. 2002 May 30;21(24):3934-8.

ErbB2 activation of ESX gene expression.

Neve RM(1), Ylstra B, Chang CH, Albertson DG, Benz CC.

Author information: 
(1)Buck Institute for Age Research, 8001 Redwood Boulevard, Novato, CA 94945,
USA.

Various members of the Ets multigene family exhibit diverse roles in development,
cell differentiation, tissue-specific gene expression and human malignancy. In
the search for Ets factors involved in mammary gland development and malignancy, 
ESX was found to be upregulated in a subset of breast tumours and cell lines. We 
report the transcriptional regulation of ESX in epithelial breast cancer cells.
Transient reporter assays using the ESX promoter show that ESX transcription is
regulated by ErbB receptor signalling. In cell lines and in 45 primary ductal
breast cancers we show that ESX transcript expression significantly correlates
with ErbB2 transcript levels. Moreover, expression of ErbB2 in cells upregulates 
ESX promoter activity while inhibition of ErbB2 or its downstream signaling
pathways decrease both ESX promoter activity and endogenous ESX protein levels.
These results indicate that the ESX promoter represents a transcriptional target 
of ErbB2, and ESX expression may represent a downstream mediator of ErbB2
signaling and ErbB2-induced gene expression.

PMID: 12032832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. BMC Cancer. 2002 May 24;2:14.

Optimisation of the RT-PCR detection of immunomagnetically enriched carcinoma
cells.

Raynor M(1), Stephenson SA, Walsh DC, Pittman KB, Dobrovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology/Oncology, University of Adelaide, South Australia
5011, Australia. michael.raynor@student.adelaide.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Immunomagnetic enrichment followed by RT-PCR (immunobead RT-PCR) is
an efficient methodology to identify disseminated carcinoma cells in the blood
and bone marrow. The RT-PCR assays must be both specific for the tumor cells and 
sufficiently sensitive to enable detection of single tumor cells. We have
developed a method to test RT-PCR assays for any cancer. This has been
investigated using a panel of RT-PCR markers suitable for the detection of breast
cancer cells.
METHODS: In the assay, a single cell line-derived tumor cell is added to 100
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMNCs) after which mRNA is isolated and
reverse transcribed for RT-PCR analysis. PBMNCs without added tumor cells are
used as specificity controls. The previously studied markers epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), mammaglobin 1 (MGB1), epithelial cell adhesion molecule
(EpCAM/TACSTD1), mucin 1 (MUC1), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were tested. Two 
new epithelial-specific markers ELF3 and EphB4 were also tested.
RESULTS: MUC1 was unsuitable as strong amplification was detected in 100 cell
PBMNC controls. Expression of ELF3, EphB4, EpCAM, EGFR, CEA and MGB1 was found to
be both specific for the tumor cell, as demonstrated by the absence of a signal
in most 100 cell PBMNC controls, and sensitive enough to detect a single tumor
cell in 100 PBMNCs using a single round of RT-PCR.
CONCLUSIONS: ELF3, EphB4, EpCAM, EGFR, CEA and MGB1 are appropriate RT-PCR
markers for use in a marker panel to detect disseminated breast cancer cells
after immunomagnetic enrichment.

PMCID: PMC115840
PMID: 12031094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Gastroenterology. 2002 May;122(5):1455-66.

Inactivation of the transcription factor Elf3 in mice results in dysmorphogenesis
and altered differentiation of intestinal epithelium.

Ng AY(1), Waring P, Ristevski S, Wang C, Wilson T, Pritchard M, Hertzog P, Kola
I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The mammalian small intestine is lined by a highly specialized
epithelium that functions in the digestion and absorption of nutrients. The
molecular mechanisms that direct intestinal epithelial cell morphogenesis and
terminal differentiation are poorly understood. We have previously identified
Elf3 (E74-like factor-3) as a member of the ETS transcription factor family
strongly expressed in small intestinal epithelium. The aim of this study is to
investigate the biological roles of Elf3 in vivo.
METHODS: Mice with a null mutation of Elf3 were generated through targeted gene
disruption. Characterization of intestinal development was performed by
histologic and immunohistochemical techniques.
RESULTS: Targeted disruption of Elf3 resulted in fetal lethality of about 30% at 
around embryonic day 11.5. Seventy percent of the Elf3-deficent progeny were born
and displayed severe alterations of tissue architecture in the small intestine,
manifested by poor villus formation and abnormal morphogenesis and terminal
differentiation of absorptive enterocytes and mucus-secreting goblet cells. Crypt
cell proliferation, however, appeared intact in Elf3-deficient
mice.Elf3-deficient enterocytes express markedly reduced levels of the
transforming growth factor beta type II receptor (TGF-beta RII), an inducer of
intestinal epithelial differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Elf3 is an important regulator of morphogenesis and terminal
differentiation of epithelial cell lineages in the small intestine.

PMID: 11984530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 17;277(20):17520-30. Epub 2002 Mar 13.

Activation of the murine type II transforming growth factor-beta receptor gene:
up-regulation and function of the transcription factor Elf-3/Ert/Esx/Ese-1.

Kim JH(1), Wilder PJ, Hou J, Nowling T, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-6805, USA.

Previous studies demonstrated that differentiation of mouse embryonal carcinoma
cells leads to transcriptional up-regulation of the mouse type II transforming
growth factor-beta receptor (mTbetaR-II) gene. To elucidate the molecular
mechanisms regulating transcription of this gene, we isolated the 5'-flanking
region of the mTbetaR-II gene and characterized its expression in
F9-differentiated cells. Analysis of mTbetaR-II promoter/reporter gene constructs
demonstrates that two conserved Ets-binding sites play an important role in the
activity of the mTbetaR-II promoter. Importantly, we present evidence that
mElf-3, a member of the Ets family, plays a key role in the activation of the
mTbetaR-II promoter. Northern blot analysis reveals that the steady-state levels 
of mTbetaR-II mRNA increase in parallel with those of mElf-3 mRNA during the
differentiation of F9 embryonal carcinoma cells. We also demonstrate that mElf-3 
contains one or more domains that influence its binding to DNA. Finally, we
report that a single amino acid substitution in the transactivation domain of
mElf-3 reduces its ability to transactivate and elevates its steady-state levels 
of expression. In conclusion, our data argue that mElf-3 plays a key role in the 
regulation of the mTbetaR-II gene, and Elf-3 itself is regulated at multiple
levels.

PMID: 11893733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Trends Plant Sci. 2002 Jan;7(1):4-6.

ELF3: a circadian safeguard to buffer effects of light.

Carré IA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, CV4 7AL, Coventry, UK.
icarre@bio.warwick.ac.uk

The EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3) gene of Arabidopsis regulates plant morphology,
flowering time and circadian rhythms. ELF3 was proposed to function as a
modulator of light signal transduction downstream of phytochromes, and, perhaps, 
other photoreceptors. Recent work indicates that ELF3 encodes a novel nuclear
protein that is expressed rhythmically and interacts with phytochrome B. How ELF3
mediates the circadian gating of light responses and regulates light input to the
clock is the subject of discussion.

PMID: 11804815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 1;277(9):7412-9. Epub 2001 Dec 13.

Molecular regulation of urothelial renewal and host defenses during infection
with uropathogenic Escherichia coli.

Mysorekar IU(1), Mulvey MA, Hultgren SJ, Gordon JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University School
of Medicine, 660 S Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC), the principal cause of urinary tract
infection in women, attaches to the superficial facet cell layer of the bladder
epithelium (urothelium) via its FimH adhesin. Attachment triggers exfoliation of 
bacteria-laden superficial facet cells, followed by rapid reconstitution of the
urothelium through differentiation of underlying basal and intermediate cells. We
have used DNA microarrays to define the molecular regulators of urothelial
renewal and host defense expressed in adult C57Bl/6 female mice during the early 
phases of infection with isogenic virulent (FimH+) or avirulent (FimH-) UPEC
strains. The temporal evolution and cellular origins of selected responses were
then characterized by real time quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR, in situ
hybridization, and immunohistochemical analyses. Well before exfoliation is
evident, FimH-mediated attachment suppresses transforming growth factor-beta
(Bmp4) and Wnt5a/Ca(2+) signaling to promote subsequent differentiation of
basal/intermediate cells. The early transcriptional responses to attachment also 
include induction of regulators of proliferation (e.g. epidermal growth factor
family members), induction of the ETS transcription factor Elf3, which
transactivates genes involved in epithelial differentiation and host defense
(inducible nitric-oxide synthase), induction of modulators, and mediators of
pro-inflammatory responses (e.g. Socs3, Cebp/delta, Bcl3, and CC/CXC chemokines),
induction of modulators of apoptotic responses (A20), and induction of
intermediate cell tight junction components (claudin-4). Both early and late
phases of the host response exhibit remarkable specificity for the FimH+ strain
and provide new insights about the molecular cascade mobilized to combat
UPEC-associated urinary tract infection.

PMID: 11744708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Plant Cell. 2001 Jun;13(6):1305-15.

ELF3 modulates resetting of the circadian clock in Arabidopsis.

Covington MF(1), Panda S, Liu XL, Strayer CA, Wagner DR, Kay SA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403,
USA.

The Arabidopsis early flowering 3 (elf3) mutation causes arrhythmic circadian
output in continuous light, but there is some evidence of clock function in
darkness. Here, we show conclusively that normal circadian function occurs with
no alteration of period length in elf3 mutants in dark conditions and that the
light-dependent arrhythmia observed in elf3 mutants is pleiotropic on multiple
outputs normally expressed at different times of day. Plants overexpressing ELF3 
have an increased period length in both constant blue and red light; furthermore,
etiolated ELF3-overexpressing seedlings exhibit a decreased acute CAB2 response
after a red light pulse, whereas the null mutant is hypersensitive to acute
induction. This finding suggests that ELF3 negatively regulates light input to
both the clock and its outputs. To determine whether ELF3's action is phase
dependent, we examined clock resetting by using light pulses and constructed
phase response curves. Absence of ELF3 activity causes a significant alteration
of the phase response curve during the subjective night, and constitutive
overexpression of ELF3 results in decreased sensitivity to the resetting
stimulus, suggesting that ELF3 antagonizes light input to the clock during the
night. The phase of ELF3 function correlates with its peak expression levels in
the subjective night. ELF3 action, therefore, represents a mechanism by which the
oscillator modulates light resetting.

PMCID: PMC135573
PMID: 11402162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Plant Cell. 2001 Jun;13(6):1293-304.

ELF3 encodes a circadian clock-regulated nuclear protein that functions in an
Arabidopsis PHYB signal transduction pathway.

Liu XL(1), Covington MF, Fankhauser C, Chory J, Wagner DR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403,
USA.

Many aspects of plant development are regulated by photoreceptor function and the
circadian clock. Loss-of-function mutations in the Arabidopsis EARLY FLOWERING 3 
(ELF3) and PHYTOCHROME B (PHYB) genes cause early flowering and influence the
activity of circadian clock-regulated processes. We demonstrate here that the
relative abundance of the ELF3 protein, which is a novel nucleus-localized
protein, displays circadian regulation that follows the pattern of circadian
accumulation of ELF3 transcript. Furthermore, the ELF3 protein interacts with
PHYB in the yeast two-hybrid assay and in vitro. Genetic analyses show that ELF3 
requires PHYB function in early morphogenesis but not for the regulation of
flowering time. This suggests that ELF3 is a component of a PHYB signaling
complex that controls early events in plant development but that ELF3 and PHYB
control flowering via independent signal transduction pathways.

PMCID: PMC135570
PMID: 11402161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Plant Cell. 2001 Jun;13(6):1281-92.

EARLY FLOWERING3 encodes a novel protein that regulates circadian clock function 
and flowering in Arabidopsis.

Hicks KA(1), Albertson TM, Wagner DR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403,
USA.

Higher plants use photoperiodic cues to regulate many aspects of development,
including the transition from vegetative to floral development. The EARLY
FLOWERING3 (ELF3) gene is required for photoperiodic flowering and normal
circadian regulation in Arabidopsis. We have cloned ELF3 by positional methods
and found that it encodes a novel 695-amino acid protein that may function as a
transcriptional regulator. ELF3 transcript level is regulated in a circadian
manner, as is expected of a zeitnehmer input pathway component. Overexpression of
the LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL gene, which has been proposed to function as a clock
component, did not abolish circadian regulation of ELF3 transcription, providing 
further evidence that ELF3 is a circadian clock input pathway component.

PMCID: PMC135582
PMID: 11402160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Oncogene. 2001 Mar 8;20(10):1235-45.

Sequence-specific enhancer binding protein is responsible for the differential
expression of ERT/ESX/ELF-3/ESE-1/jen gene in human gastric cancer cell lines:
Implication for the loss of TGF-beta type II receptor expression.

Park SH(1), Kim YS, Park BK, Hougaard S, Kim SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation and Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD 20892-5055, USA.

Transcriptional repression of the TGF-beta type II receptor (RII) is one of the
mechanisms leading to TGF-beta resistance. The newly identified
epithelium-specific ets transcription factor ERT/ESX/ELF-3/ESE-1/jen binds to the
TGF-beta RII promoter and induces promoter activity. The human gastric cancer
cell lines, which show undetectable level of TGF-beta RII mRNA, do not express
ERT mRNA. To study the molecular mechanisms of loss of ERT expression, we have
cloned and characterized the human ERT promoter. DNA transfection experiments and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays have revealed the existence of a distinct
enhancer element (-186 to -177) which we named ESE (ERT promoter specific
element). Deletion of the ESE markedly decreased expression of the target gene.
ESE interacts with two distinct nuclear protein complexes, at least one of which 
appears to be inactivated in a cell line which does not express the ERT mRNA,
compared to a cell line expressing the ERT mRNA. These results suggest the
possibility that inactivation of the sequence-specific DNA binding protein to the
region from -186 to -177 contributes to the loss of ERT expression, leading to
the loss of TGF-beta type II receptor mRNA in human gastric cancer cell lines.

PMID: 11313868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6490-502.

Ets regulation of the erbB2 promoter.

Scott GK(1), Chang CH, Erny KM, Xu F, Fredericks WJ, Rauscher FJ 3rd, Thor AD,
Benz CC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology-Hematology, Department of Medicine, University of
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California, CA 94143, USA.

Evaluating the chromatinized erbB2 gene in nuclei from breast cancer cells
expressing varying levels of ErbB2 transcripts, we identified a
nuclease-sensitive site within a 0.22 kb region of maximum enhancer activity
centered over a conserved 28 bp polypurine(GGA)-polypyrimidine(TCC) mirror-repeat
and an adjacent essential Ets binding site (EBS). Promoter footprinting with
nuclear extracts reveals an intense Ets hypersensitivity site at the EBS whose
degree of intensity correlates with the level of cellular ErbB2 expression. In
vitro mapping assays show that the supercoiled erbB2 promoter forms an internal
triplex structure (Hr-DNA) at the mirror-repeat element. Mutations preventing
Hr-DNA formation can enhance erbB2 promoter activity in human breast cancer
cells, a result consistent with previous demonstration that Ets-erbB2 promoter
complexes cannot form when the mirror-repeat is engaged in triplex binding, and
new results suggesting that Ets binding induces severe promoter bending that may 
restrict local triplex formation. In addition to previously described
erbB2-regulating breast cancer Ets factors (PEA3, ESX/Elf-3), Elf-1 is now shown 
to be another endogenously expressed Ets candidate capable of binding to and
upregulating the erbB2 promoter. Given current strategies to transcriptionally
inhibit ErbB2 overexpression, including development of novel erbB2
promoter-targeted therapeutics, an EBS-targeted approach is presented using
chimeric Ets proteins that strongly repress erbB2 promoter activity.

PMID: 11175365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Nature. 2000 Dec 7;408(6813):716-20.

The ELF3 zeitnehmer regulates light signalling to the circadian clock.

McWatters HG(1), Bastow RM, Hall A, Millar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Conventry, UK.

The circadian system regulates 24-hour biological rhythms and seasonal rhythms,
such as flowering. Long-day flowering plants like Arabidopsis thaliana, measure
day length with a rhythm that is not reset at lights-off, whereas short-day
plants measure night length on the basis of circadian rhythm of light sensitivity
that is set from dusk, early flowering 3 (elf3) mutants of Arabidopsis are
aphotoperiodic and exhibit light-conditional arrhythmias. Here we show that the
elf3-7 mutant retains oscillator function in the light but blunts circadian
gating of CAB gene activation, indicating that deregulated phototransduction may 
mask rhythmicity. Furthermore, elf3 mutations confer the resetting pattern of
short-day photoperiodism, indicating that gating of phototransduction may control
resetting. Temperature entrainment can bypass the requirement for normal ELF3
function for the oscillator and partially restore rhythmic CAB expression.
Therefore, ELF3 specifically affects light input to the oscillator, similar to
its function in gating CAB activation, allowing oscillator progression past a
light-sensitive phase in the subjective evening. ELF3 provides experimental
demonstration of the zeitnehmer ('time-taker') concept.

PMID: 11130072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Am J Pathol. 2000 Nov;157(5):1597-604.

Eukaryotic initiation factor 3 p110 mRNA is overexpressed in testicular
seminomas.

Rothe M(1), Ko Y, Albers P, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology and the Departments of Internal Medicine and Urology,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Testicular germ cell tumors are important neoplasms and seminoma accounts for 40 
to 50% of these tumors. Little is known concerning the molecular events
underlying the development of these malignancies. In the present study we used a 
modified differential display approach to compare gene expression between
seminoma and normal testicular parenchyma, both of which are mixed tissues. We
first analyzed mRNA (cDNA) expression by differential display and then directly
used differentially expressed cDNAs for the synthesis of radiolabeled riboprobes 
to attribute differential expression to specific cell types in tissue sections by
in situ hybridization. Using this approach along with real-time quantitative
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis we found an
overexpression of eukaryotic initiation factor 3 p110 mRNA (EIF3S8) in seminoma
cells compared to normal germ cells of testicular tubules. The elF3-p110 subunit 
may promote seminoma development by generally increasing translation leading to
enhanced cellular growth and division rates.

PMCID: PMC1885734
PMID: 11073819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 2;276(5):3302-9. Epub 2000 Oct 17.

ESE-1 is a novel transcriptional mediator of inflammation that interacts with
NF-kappa B to regulate the inducible nitric-oxide synthase gene.

Rudders S(1), Gaspar J, Madore R, Voland C, Grall F, Patel A, Pellacani A,
Perrella MA, Libermann TA, Oettgen P.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Inflammation is a hallmark of several vascular diseases. The nuclear factor
kappaB (NF-kappaB) transcription factors are dimeric proteins involved in the
activation of a large number of genes in response to inflammatory stimuli. We
report the involvement of a novel member of the ETS transcription factor, ESE-1, 
in mediating vascular inflammation. ESE-1 is induced in response to inflammatory 
cytokines and lipopolysaccharide in vascular smooth muscle cells, endothelial
cells, and cells of the monocyte-macrophage lineage. This induction occurs within
hours of stimulation and is mediated by NF-kappaB transactivation of the ESE-1
promoter. We have identified the inducible form of nitric-oxide synthase (NOS2)
as a putative target for ESE-1. ESE-1 can bind to the p50 subunit of NF-kappaB,
and cotransfection of ESE-1 with the p50 and p65 subunits of NF-kappaB
synergistically enhances transactivation of the NOS2 promoter by ESE-1. An
ESE-1-binding site within the NOS2 promoter has been identified, the
site-directed mutagenesis of which completely abolishes the ability of ESE-1 to
transactivate the NOS2 promoter. Finally, in a mouse model of endotoxemia,
associated with acute vascular inflammation, ESE-1 is strongly expressed in
vascular endothelium and smooth muscle cells. In summary, ESE-1 represents a
novel mediator of vascular inflammation.

PMID: 11036073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Mech Dev. 2000 Oct;97(1-2):27-34.

Ets family transcription factor ESE-1 is expressed in corneal epithelial cells
and is involved in their differentiation.

Yoshida N(1), Yoshida S, Araie M, Handa H, Nabeshima Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, 606-8501, Kyoto, Japan.

Involvement of an epithelium-specific transcription factor ESE-1/ESX/ELF3/jen
(ESE-1) in corneal epithelial cell differentiation was investigated. ESE-1 was
reported to be induced during terminal differentiation of the epidermis and
primary keratinocytes and to transactivate target genes through ets binding
sites. However, its expression and function in corneal epithelium have not been
examined. We report here that ESE-1 is upregulated upon differentiation in mouse 
corneal epithelium and in immortalized human corneal epithelial cells (HCE).
ESE-1 transactivates through the regulatory element of cornea-specific K12
keratin. Moreover, introduction of ESE-1 antisense RNA in HCE cells affect their 
differentiation. These data suggest the involvement of ESE-1 in differentiation
of corneal epithelial cells.

PMID: 11025204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2000;480:123-8.

The Elf group of Ets-related transcription factors. ELF3 and ELF5.

Thomas RS(1), Ng AN, Zhou J, Tymms MJ, Doppler W, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash University,
Melbourne, Australia.

PMID: 10959418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Int J Oncol. 2000 Aug;17(2):265-70.

Expression analysis and mutational screening of the epithelium-specific ets
gene-1 (ESE-1) in patients with squamous anal cancer.

Zucchini C(1), Strippoli P, Rosati G, Del Governatore M, Milano E, Ugolini G,
Solmi R, Mattei G, Caira A, Zanotti S, Carinci P, Valvassori L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Histology and Embriology, University of Bologna, Fondazione
CARISBO Center for Research into Molecular Genetics, 40126 Bologna, Italy.

To investigate whether ESE-1 gene abnormalities are involved in alterations of
epithelial cell differentiation in squamous anal cancer ESE-1 expression and
structure were screened in six patients by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) and automated sequence analysis. The complete cDNA of isoform
ESE-1b was always expressed and correctly spliced, with single nucleotide
polymorphism being observed in two cases. Presence of ESE-1b point mutations was 
excluded. Expression of SPRR2A and ENDOA/CK8, two epithelium-specific ESE-1
target genes, were revealed by RT-PCR in all cases. This first report of
expression of ESE-1, and of SPRR2A and ENDOA/CK8 (both related to terminal
differentiation in different types of epithelia lining) in anal cancer excludes
the hypothesis that these genes influenced carcinogenesis in our patients.
Despite selecting of patients without clinical evidence of HPV infection, PCR
consistently revealed HPV-16 DNA, highlighting the importance of HPV infection in
anal cancer.

PMID: 10891534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Blood. 2000 Jul 15;96(2):747-53.

Protein 4.1R binding to eIF3-p44 suggests an interaction between the cytoskeletal
network and the translation apparatus.

Hou CL(1), Tang Cj, Roffler SR, Tang TK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Science, National Defense Medical Center, and the Institute 
of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Erythroid protein 4.1 (4.1R) is an 80-kd cytoskeletal protein that stabilizes the
membrane-skeletal network structure underlying the lipid bilayer. Using the
carboxyl terminal domain (22/24 kd) of 4.1R as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen,
we isolated cDNA clones encoding a polypeptide of eIF3-p44, which represents a
subunit of a eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 (eIF3) complex. The eIF3 
complex consists of at least 10 subunits that play an essential role in the
pathway of protein translation initiation. Northern blot analysis revealed that
eIF3-p44 (approximately 1.35 kb) is constitutively expressed in many tissues. The
essential sequence for this interaction was mapped to the carboxyl-terminus of
4.1R (residues 525-622) and a region (residues 54-321) of eIF3-p44. The direct
association between 4.1R and eIF3-p44 was further confirmed by in vitro binding
assays and coimmunoprecipitation studies. To characterize the functions of
eIF3-p44, we depleted eIF3-p44 from rabbit reticulocyte lysates either by
anti-eIF3-p44 antibody or by GST/4.1R-80 fusion protein. Our results show that
the eIF3-p44 depleted cell-free translation system was unable to synthesize
proteins efficiently. The direct association between 4.1R and elF3-p44 suggests
that 4.1R may act as an anchor protein that links the cytoskeleton network to the
translation apparatus. (Blood. 2000;96:747-753)

PMID: 10887144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Oncogene. 2000 Apr 6;19(15):1941-9.

Dual function of the epithelial specific ets transcription factor, ELF3, in
modulating differentiation.

Brembeck FH(1), Opitz OG, Libermann TA, Rustgi AK.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Division, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, PA 19014, USA.

The ets family of transcription factors comprises many members which contribute
to diverse cellular functions that vary depending upon the cell- and tissue-type 
context. Recently, different groups have identified a novel member of the ets
family that is epithelial-specific. Variably called ESE-1, ERT, jen, ESX, this
gene is designated currently as ELF3. In order to understand transcriptional
regulatory mechanisms mediated by ELF3, we investigated its effect on the human
keratin 4 gene promoter based upon the role of keratin 4 in early differentiation
of the esophageal squamous epithelium. Interestingly, ELF3 suppressed basal
keratin 4 promoter activity in both esophageal and cervical epithelial cancer
cell lines, a novel result, while simultaneously activating the
late-differentiation linked SPRR2A promoter. Furthermore, serial deletion
constructs of the keratin 4 promoter continued to be suppressed by ELF3, a
phenomenon that was only partially rescued by ELF3 ets domain mutants, but
completely abrogated by deletion of the ELF3 pointed domain. These results
suggest that ELF3 may have dual functions in the transcriptional regulation of
genes involved in squamous epithelial differentiation. One of these functions may
not be exclusively mediated through DNA binding in the context of transcriptional
suppression of the keratin 4 promoter.

PMID: 10773884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Plant Physiol. 2000 Apr;122(4):1149-60.

Independent action of ELF3 and phyB to control hypocotyl elongation and flowering
time.

Reed JW(1), Nagpal P, Bastow RM, Solomon KS, Dowson-Day MJ, Elumalai RP, Millar
AJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina, Biology Department, CB #3280, Coker Hall, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599-3280, USA. jreed@email.unc.edu

Light regulates various aspects of plant growth, and the photoreceptor
phytochrome B (phyB) mediates many responses to red light. In a screen for
Arabidopsis mutants with phenotypes similar to those of phyB mutants, we isolated
two new elf3 mutants. One has weaker morphological phenotypes than previously
identified elf3 alleles, but still abolishes circadian rhythms under continuous
light. Like phyB mutants, elf3 mutants have elongated hypocotyls and petioles,
flower early, and have defects in the red light response. However, we found that 
elf3 mutations have an additive interaction with a phyB null mutation, with phyA 
or hy4 null mutations, or with a PHYB overexpression construct, and that an elf3 
mutation does not prevent nuclear localization of phyB. These results suggest
that either there is substantial redundancy in phyB and elf3 function, or the two
genes regulate distinct signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC58949
PMID: 10759510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Mol Neurosci. 1999 Aug-Oct;13(1-2):141-58.

Activity-dependent interaction of the intracellular domain of rat trkA with
intermediate filament proteins, the beta-6 proteasomal subunit, Ras-GRF1, and the
p162 subunit of eIF3.

MacDonald JI(1), Verdi JM, Meakin SO.

Author information: 
(1)The John P. Robarts Research Institute, Neurodegeneration Group, London,
Ontario, Canada.

Many responses to nerve growth factor (NGF) are regulated through the receptor
tyrosine kinase trkA. To understand more fully the functions of trkA in NGF
responsive cells, we have expressed the intracellular domain of rat trkA as a
fusion protein with the yeast gal4 transcription factor, and used the fusion
protein to probe rat and mouse cDNA libraries by the yeast two-hybrid system. We 
have identified a direct interaction between the intracellular domain of trkA and
two members of the intermediate filament (IF) family of proteins, the
guanine-nucleotide exchange protein Ras-GRF1, the p162 subunit of eIF3, and the
beta-6 proteasome subunit. The interactions are dependent on an active trkA
kinase, and RasGRF1, the beta-6 proteasomal subunit, and peripherin are directly 
phosphorylated by trkA. The interaction with trkA is not affected by mutations at
either Tyr499 or Tyr794, the two major phosphotyrosine residues essential to the 
activation and receptor binding of Shc, FRS-2/SNT, and phospholipase Cgamma-1,
and it is highly specific in vitro for trkA, with little or no binding observed
with trkB and/or trkC. The results show that trkA may play a regulatory role in a
variety of cellular functions in addition to neuritogenesis, including regulated 
protein degradation and transcriptional activation.

PMID: 10691301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Oncogene. 2000 Jan 6;19(1):151-4.

Over-expression of ERT(ESX/ESE-1/ELF3), an ets-related transcription factor,
induces endogenous TGF-beta type II receptor expression and restores the TGF-beta
signaling pathway in Hs578t human breast cancer cells.

Chang J(1), Lee C, Hahm KB, Yi Y, Choi SG, Kim SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland, MD 20892-5055, USA.

The epithelium-specific transcription factor, ERT/ESX/ESE-1/ELF3, binds to the
TGF-beta RII promoter in a sequence specific manner and regulates its expression.
In this study, we investigated whether ERT could regulate endogenous TGF-beta RII
expression in Hs578t breast cancer cells. Analyses of the Hs578t parental cell
line revealed low RII mRNA expression and resistance to the growth inhibitory
effects of TGF-beta. Infection of this cell line with a retroviral construct
expressing ERT induced higher levels of endogenous RII mRNA expression and
protein expression relative to cells infected with chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CATneo) as a control. Relative to control cells, the
ERTneo-expressing Hs578t cells show approximately a 50% reduction in cell growth 
in the presence of exogenous TGF-beta1, as well as a fourfold higher induction of
activation in transient transfection assays using the 3TP-luciferase reporter
construct. When transplanted into athymic mice, ERT-expressing Hs578t cells
showed decreased and delayed tumorigenicity compared with control cells. This
data strongly suggests that ERT plays an important role as a transcriptional
activator of TGF-beta RII expression, and that deregulated ERT expression may
play a critical role in rendering Hs578t human breast cancer cells insensitive to
TGF-beta's growth inhibitory effects.

PMID: 10644990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 8;274(41):29439-52.

Characterization of ESE-2, a novel ESE-1-related Ets transcription factor that is
restricted to glandular epithelium and differentiated keratinocytes.

Oettgen P(1), Kas K, Dube A, Gu X, Grall F, Thamrongsak U, Akbarali Y, Finger E, 
Boltax J, Endress G, Munger K, Kunsch C, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)New England Baptist Bone and Joint Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Epithelial cell differentiation is tightly controlled by distinct sets of
transcription factors that regulate the expression of stage-specific genes. We
recently isolated the first epithelium-specific Ets transcription factor (ESE-1).
Here we describe the characterization of ESE-2, a second epithelium-restricted
ESE-1-related Ets factor. Like ESE-1, ESE-2 is induced during keratinocyte
differentiation. However, whereas ESE-1 is expressed in the majority of
epithelial cell types, ESE-2 expression is restricted to differentiated
keratinocytes and glandular epithelium such as salivary gland, prostate, mammary 
gland, and kidney. In contrast to ESE-1, full-length ESE-2 binds poorly to DNA
due to the presence of a negative regulatory domain at the amino terminus.
Furthermore, although ESE-1 and the amino-terminally deleted ESE-2 bind with
similar affinity to the canonical E74 Ets site, ESE-2 and ESE-1 differ strikingly
in their relative affinity toward binding sites in the c-MET and PSMA promoters. 
Similarly, ESE-1 and ESE-2 drastically differ in their ability to transactivate
epithelium-specific promoters. Thus, ESE-2, but not ESE-1, transactivates the
parotid gland-specific PSP promoter and the prostate-specific PSA promoter. In
contrast, ESE-1 transactivates the keratinocyte-specific SPRR2A promoter Ets site
and the prostate-specific PSMA promoter significantly better than ESE-2. Our
results demonstrate the existence of a unique class of related
epithelium-specific Ets factors with distinct functions in epithelial cell gene
regulation.

PMID: 10506207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Plant Cell Physiol. 1999 Jul;40(7):702-8.

Late-flowering genes interact with early-flowering genes to regulate flowering
time in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Chou ML(1), Yang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology, National Chung Hsing
University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC.

To investigate the genetic mechanisms regulating the transition from the
vegetative to reproductive growth in Arabidopsis, double mutants between three
different early-flowering mutants, early flowering 1-1, 2-1, 3-1, (elf 1-1, 2-1, 
3-1) and five different late-flowering mutants, gi-1, ft-1, fwa-1, ld-1, and
fca-9, were constructed and phenotypes analyzed. Double mutants in all
combinations displayed the late-flowering phenotypes which resembled their
respective late-flowering parents in both flowering time and the number of
vegetative leaves produced. The results indicate that five late-flowering mutants
are epistatic to all three early-flowering mutants tested here. This epistatic
relationship suggests that ELF1, ELF2, and ELF3 genes function upstream of these 
five late-flowering genes no matter if they are functioning in autonomous or
photoperiod pathways. These three early-flowering genes may negatively modify the
activity of most late-flowering genes to influence the time of the
vegetative-to-reproductive transition in Arabidopsis.

PMID: 10501030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. EMBO J. 1999 Sep 1;18(17):4679-88.

GIGANTEA: a circadian clock-controlled gene that regulates photoperiodic
flowering in Arabidopsis and encodes a protein with several possible
membrane-spanning domains.

Fowler S(1), Lee K, Onouchi H, Samach A, Richardson K, Morris B, Coupland G,
Putterill J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, New Zealand.

Flowering of Arabidopsis is promoted by long days and delayed by short days.
Mutations in the GIGANTEA (GI) gene delay flowering under long days but have
little or no effect under short days. We have now isolated the GI gene and show
that it encodes a novel, putative membrane protein. By comparing the sequence of 
the Arabidopsis gene with that of a likely rice orthologue and by sequencing
mutant alleles, we identify regions of the GI protein that are likely to be
important for its function. We show that GI expression is regulated by the
circadian clock with a peak in transcript levels 8-10 h after dawn. The timing,
height and duration of this peak are influenced by daylength. We analysed the
interactions between GI and the LHY, CCA1 and ELF3 genes, previously shown to
affect daylength responses; we show that the rhythmic pattern of GI expression is
altered in the elf3, CCA1-OX and lhy genotypes, and that CCA1 and LHY expression 
are reduced by gi mutations. Our results are consistent with the idea that GI
plays an important role in regulating the expression of flowering time genes
during the promotion of flowering by photoperiod.

PMCID: PMC1171541
PMID: 10469647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Plant Physiol. 1999 Jul;120(3):675-84.

EAF1 regulates vegetative-phase change and flowering time in Arabidopsis.

Scott DB(1), Jin W, Ledford HK, Jung HS, Honma MA.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental, Cell, and Molecular Biology Group/Department of Botany, Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina 27708-1000, USA.

We have identified a new locus that regulates vegetative phase change and
flowering time in Arabidopsis. An early-flowering mutant, eaf1 (early flowering
1) was isolated and characterized. eaf1 plants flowered earlier than the wild
type under either short-day or long-day conditions, and showed a reduction in the
juvenile and adult vegetative phases. When grown under short-day conditions, eaf1
plants were slightly pale green and had elongated petioles, phenotypes that are
observed in mutants altered in either phytochrome or the gibberellin (GA)
response. eaf1 seed showed increased resistance to the GA biosynthesis inhibitor 
paclobutrazol, suggesting that GA metabolism and/or response had been altered.
Comparison of eaf1 to other early-flowering mutants revealed that eaf1 shifts to 
the adult phase early and flowers early, similarly to the phyB (phytochrome B)
and spy (spindly) mutants. eaf1 maps to chromosome 2, but defines a locus
distinct from phyB, clf (curly leaf), and elf3 (early-flowering 3). These results
demonstrate that eaf1 defines a new locus involved in an autonomous pathway and
may affect GA regulation of flowering.

PMCID: PMC59305
PMID: 10398702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Oncogene. 1999 Jun 24;18(25):3682-95.

Exon 4-encoded acidic domain in the epithelium-restricted Ets factor, ESX,
confers potent transactivating capacity and binds to TATA-binding protein (TBP).

Chang CH(1), Scott GK, Baldwin MA, Benz CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco 94143-1270,
USA.

The Ets gene family has a complex evolutionary history with many family members
known to regulate genetic programs essential for differentiation and development,
and some known for their involvement in human tumorigenesis. To understand the
biological properties associated with a recently described epithelium-restricted 
Ets factor ESX, an 11 kb fragment from the 1q32.2 genomically localized human
gene was cloned and analysed. Upstream of the ESX promoter region in this genomic
fragment lies the terminal exon of a newly identified gene that encodes a
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme variant, UEV-1. Tissues expressing ESX produce a
primary 2.2 kb transcript along with a 4.1 kb secondary transcript arising by
alternate poly(A) site selection and uniquely recognized by a genomic probe from 
the 3' terminal region of the 11 kb clone. Endogenous expression of ESX results
in a 42 kDa nuclear protein having fivefold greater affinity for the
chromatin-nuclear matrix compartment as compared to other endogenous
transcription factors like AP-2 and the homologous Ets factor, ELF-1. Exon
mapping of the modular structure inferred from ESX cDNA and construction of
GAL4(DBD)-ESX expression constructs were used to identify a transactivating
domain encoded by exon 4 having comparable potency to the acidic transactivation 
domain of the viral transcription factor, VP16. This exon 4-encoded 31 amino acid
domain in ESX was shown by mutation and deletion analysis to possess a 13 residue
acidic transactivation core which, based on modeling and circular dichroism
analysis, is predicted to form an amphipathic alpha-helical secondary structure. 
Using recombinant GST-ESX (exon 4) fusion proteins in an in vitro pull-down
assay, this ESX transactivation domain was shown to bind specifically to one
component of the general transcription machinery, TATA-binding protein (TBP).
Transient transfection experiments confirmed the ability of this TBP-binding
transactivation domain in ESX to squelch heterologous promoters independent of
any promoter binding as efficiently as the transactivation domain from VP16.

PMID: 10391676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Plant J. 1999 Jan;17(1):63-71.

Circadian dysfunction causes aberrant hypocotyl elongation patterns in
Arabidopsis.

Dowson-Day MJ(1), Millar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.

Many endogenous and environmental signals control seedling growth, including
several phototransduction pathways. We demonstrate that the circadian clock
controls the elongation of the Arabidopsis hypocotyl immediately upon
germination. The pattern of hypocotyl elongation in constant light includes a
daily growth arrest spanning subjective dawn and an interval of rapid growth at
subjective dusk. Maximal hypocotyl growth coincides with the phase during which
the cotyledons are raised, in the previously described rhythm of cotyledon
movement. The rhythm of hypocotyl elongation was entrained by light-dark cycles
applied to the imbibed seed and its period was shortened in the toc1-1 mutant,
indicating that it is controlled by a similar circadian system to other rhythmic 
markers. The daily groth arrest is abolished by the early flowering 3 (elf3)
mutation, suggesting that this defect may cause its long-hypocotyl phenotype.
Mutations that affect the circadian system can therefore cause gross
morphological phenotypes, not because the wild-type gene functions
pleiotropically in several signalling pathways, but rather because the circadian 
clock exerts wide-spread control over plant physiology.

PMID: 10069068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Genomics. 1999 Feb 1;55(3):358-62.

Genomic organization of the human ELF3 (ESE-1/ESX) gene, a member of the Ets
transcription factor family, and identification of a functional promoter.

Oettgen P(1), Barcinski M, Boltax J, Stolt P, Akbarali Y, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)New England Baptist Bone and Joint Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

We recently isolated a novel member of the Ets transcription factor/oncogene
family, ESE-1/ESX/ELF3, with features distinct from any other Ets-related factor.
ELF3 is the prototype of a new subclass of Ets factors, contains two DNA-binding 
domains, and, in contrast to any known Ets factor, is expressed exclusively in
epithelial cells. ELF3 expression is induced during differentiation of the
epidermis, indicating a role in the regulation of terminal differentiation genes 
in the epidermis. Due to the important role that other Ets factors play in
cellular differentiation, ELF3 is expected to be a critical regulator of
epithelial gene expression. We report here the cloning and the structural
organization of the human ELF3 gene. The human ELF3 gene contains nine exons,
which span approximately 5.8 kb of genomic DNA. Intron/exon borders and number of
exons are almost identical to those in the mouse ELF3 gene. Comparison of the
immediate promoter regions of the human and mouse ELF3 genes demonstrates the
presence of TATA and CCAAT boxes as well as potential binding sites for Ets
factors and NF-kappaB. Transfection experiments demonstrate that a 1.5-kb
fragment of the 5' upstream region acts as a strong promoter in two epithelial
cell lines.

PMID: 10049594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Oncogene. 1999 Jan 14;18(2):353-64.

Elf3 encodes a novel 200-kD beta-spectrin: role in liver development.

Mishra L(1), Cai T, Yu P, Monga SP, Mishra B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Molecular Biology, Department of Veterans Affairs,
Washington, DC 20422, USA.

beta-spectrins are crucial for the maintenance of cell shape, the establishment
of cell polarity, and the formation of distinct membrane domains. Our strategy
for identifying genes important for hepatocyte polarity has been to utilize
subtractive hybridization of early embryonic mouse cDNA liver libraries. As a
result, we have cloned three isoforms of a novel beta-spectrin elf (embryonic
liver beta-fodrin), and here we report the analysis of elf3, the longest isoform 
(8172 nt). ELF3 comprises 2154 residues with an overall similarity of 89.0% and
95.3% to mouse beta-spectrin (betaSpIIsigma1) at the nucleotide and amino acid
level, respectively. ELF3 is characterized by an actin-binding domain, a long
repeat domain, and a short regulatory domain remarkable for the absence of a PH
domain. Linkage analysis reveals that elf3 maps to mouse chromosome 11 between
D11Bir6 and D11Xrf477, a different chromosomal locus from that of the other four 
spectrin genes. Northern blot analysis utilizing an elf3 3'-UTR probe
demonstrates an abundant 9.0-kb transcript in brain, liver, and heart tissues.
Western blot with a polyclonal antibody against ELF identifies a 200 kD protein
in mouse liver, brain, kidney, and heart tissues. Immunohistochemical studies
demonstrate ELF labeling of the basolateral or sinusoidal membranes surface as
well as a granular cytoplasmic pattern in hepatocytes. Antisense studies
utilizing cultured liver explants show a vital role of elf3 in hepatocyte
differentiation and intrahepatic bile duct formation. The differential
expression, tissue localization, and functional studies demonstrate the
importance of elf3 in modulating interactions between various components of the
cytoskeleton proteins controlling liver and bile duct development.

PMID: 9927192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Genomics. 1999 Jan 1;55(1):88-99.

Structure and evolution of the human SPRR3 gene: implications for function and
regulation.

Fischer DF(1), Sark MW, Lehtola MM, Gibbs S, van de Putte P, Backendorf C.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, Leiden, 2300 RA, The
Netherlands.

SPRR3, a member of the SPRR family of cornified envelope precursor proteins, is
expressed in oral and esophageal epithelia, where it is strictly linked to
keratinocyte terminal differentiation. This gene is characterized by intragenic
duplications that have created the characteristic proline-rich repeats in the
coding sequence, an alternative noncoding exon, and a 200-bp polypyrimidine tract
in the promoter region. Mutational analysis of the promoter region and transient 
transfection in normal human keratinocytes showed that in addition to the
polypyrimidine tract, multiple regulatory elements are involved in
differentiation-specific expression. These elements include a high-affinity Ets
binding site bound by ESE-1, an AP-1 site (TRE) recognized by the Jun/Fos family 
of transcription factors, and an ATF/CRE bound by Jun/Fos and ATF factors. The
repositioning of the SPRR3 Ets binding site during evolution has a major effect
on the relative contribution of this site to promoter activity.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9889002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. FEBS Lett. 1998 Nov 13;439(1-2):173-9.

The Arabidopsis homologue of an eIF3 complex subunit associates with the COP9
complex.

Karniol B(1), Yahalom A, Kwok S, Tsuge T, Matsui M, Deng XW, Chamovitz DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Israel.

The Arabidopsis COP9 complex is a multi-subunit repressor of photomorphogenesis
which is conserved among multicellular organisms. Approximately 12 proteins
copurify with the COP9 complex. Seven of these proteins are orthologues of
subunits of the recently published mammalian COP9 complex. Four of the proteins
show amino acid similarity to various subunits of the COP9 complex, eIF3 complex 
and 19S cap of the proteasome. We have studied one of these proteins in order to 
determine if it is a component of the COP9 complex. Arabidopsis p105 is highly
similar to the p110 subunit of the human elF3. The p105 gene is induced during
photomorphogenesis, and RNA and protein analysis reveal different tissue
accumulation patterns. p105 is found in a large protein complex. p105 interacts
in yeast with both COP9 and FUS6, two known components of the COP9 complex. Our
results indicate that p105 is not a component of the COP9 core complex, though it
may interact with components of the complex.

PMID: 9849901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Oncogene. 1998 Nov 26;17(21):2719-32.

A novel transcription factor, ELF5, belongs to the ELF subfamily of ETS genes and
maps to human chromosome 11p13-15, a region subject to LOH and rearrangement in
human carcinoma cell lines.

Zhou J(1), Ng AY, Tymms MJ, Jermiin LS, Seth AK, Thomas RS, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Development Group, Institute of Reproduction and
Development, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The ETS transcription factors are a large family implicated in the control of
cellular proliferation and tumorigenesis. In addition, chromosomal translocations
involving ETS family members are associated with a range of different human
cancers. Given the extensive involvement of ETS factors in tumorigenesis, it
becomes important to identify any additional ETS genes that may also play
oncogenic roles. We identify a novel gene, ELF5, that appears to belong to the
ELF (E74-like-factor) subfamily of the ETS transcription factor family, based
upon similarity within the 'ETS domain'. ELF5 displays a similar, but more
restricted, expression pattern to that of the newly isolated epithelium-specific 
ETS gene, ELF3. Unlike most other ETS family members, ELF5 is not expressed in
hematopoietic compartments, but is restricted to organs such as lung, stomach,
kidney, prostate, bladder and mammary gland. ELF5 is localized to human
chromosome 11p13-15, a region that frequently undergoes loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) in several types of carcinoma, including those of breast, kidney and
prostate. We find that ELF5 expression is not detectable in a number of carcinoma
cell lines, some of which display loss or rearrangement of an ELF5 allele.
Similar to other ETS family members, ELF5 displays specific binding to DNA
sequences containing a GGAA-core. In addition, ELF5 is able to transactivate
through these ETS sequences, present upstream from a minimal promoter. Our data
suggest that ELF5 may play roles in mammary, lung, prostate and/or kidney
function, and possibly also in tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9840936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. FASEB J. 1998 Nov;12(14):1541-50.

The epithelium-specific ets transcription factor ESX is associated with mammary
gland development and involution.

Neve R(1), Chang CH, Scott GK, Wong A, Friis RR, Hynes NE, Benz CC.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel CH-4058, Switzerland.

To study mammary gland expression of the epithelium-restricted Ets factor, ESX,
mouse cDNA and genomic sequences were cloned and a approximately 350 bp proximal 
promoter region with >80% mouse-human homology was identified that mediates ESX
induction by serum, heregulin (HRG), or epidermal growth factor (EGF). ESX mRNA
expression progressively increases during embryonic mouse development from day 7 
and is detectable in virgin mammary glands; it shows little if any change during 
pregnancy, then declines to barely detectable levels after 3 days of lactation.
Similarly, cultured HC11 cells from midpregnant mouse mammary epithelium show an 
increase in ESX expression upon reaching lactogenic competency (in the presence
of EGF or HRG), with a decline to barely detectable levels upon exposure to
lactogenic hormones that induce milk protein (beta-casein) expression. In
contrast, involuting mouse and rat mammary glands show maximal ESX expression.
High ESX levels are also seen in the involuting ventral prostate gland of rats.
These findings, including the persistence of up-regulated ESX in fully regressed 
mammary glands, suggest that ESX expression can be induced by soluble growth
factors and is maximally up-regulated in those partially committed epithelial
cells destined to survive both the apoptotic and remodeling phases of glandular
involution.

PMID: 9806763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Cell. 1998 Sep 4;94(5):615-23.

A subcomplex of the proteasome regulatory particle required for
ubiquitin-conjugate degradation and related to the COP9-signalosome and eIF3.

Glickman MH(1), Rubin DM, Coux O, Wefes I, Pfeifer G, Cjeka Z, Baumeister W,
Fried VA, Finley D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

The proteasome consists of a 20S proteolytic core particle (CP) and a 19S
regulatory particle (RP), which selects ubiquitinated substrates for
translocation into the CP. An eight-subunit subcomplex of the RP, the lid, can be
dissociated from proteasomes prepared from a deletion mutant for Rpn10, an RP
subunit. A second subcomplex, the base, contains all six proteasomal ATPases and 
links the RP to the CP. The base is sufficient to activate the CP for degradation
of peptides or a nonubiquitinated protein, whereas the lid is required for
ubiquitin-dependent degradation. By electron microscopy, the base and the lid
correspond to the proximal and distal masses of the RP, respectively. The lid
subunits share sequence motifs with components of the COP9/signalosome complex
and eIF3, suggesting that these functionally diverse particles have a common
evolutionary ancestry.

PMID: 9741626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Plant J. 1998 Jul;15(2):231-42.

FLD interacts with genes that affect different developmental phase transitions to
regulate Arabidopsis shoot development.

Chou ML(1), Yang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology, National Chung Hsing
University, Taichung, Taiwan, R.O.C.

A new fld mutant allele, fld-2, which significantly delayed flowering, was
isolated and characterized in Arabidopsis thaliana. Even under long-day
conditions after more than 100 days in the greenhouse, the majority of fld-2
mutant plants had not bolted. In addition, mutant inflorescences produced more
than 10 co-florescences that were subtended by a high number of rosette-like
leaves before giving rise to flowers. The late-flowering phenotype of the fld-2
mutation could be partially overcome by both vernalization and GA treatment but
it was not influenced by 5-azaC treatment. Phenotypic analyses of double mutants 
indicated that fld-2 is epistatic to early flowering mutants elf1, elf2 and elf3.
In addition, fld-2 could enhance vegetative characteristics in embryonic flower 1
(emf1) mutants by causing many small sessile leaves in fld-2 emf1 double mutants.
The relief of the terminal flower 1 (tfl1) mutant phenotype in fld-2 tfl1 double 
mutants, and the enhancement of leafy (lfy) and apetala1 (ap1) mutant phenotypes 
in fld-2 lfy and fld-2 ap1 double mutants, suggest that FLD is also likely to be 
involved in the floral transition. Our results strongly suggest that the FLD gene
plays a key role in regulating the reproductive competence of the shoot and
results in different developmental phase transitions in Arabidopsis.

PMID: 9721681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Cell. 1998 Jun 26;93(7):1219-29.

The late elongated hypocotyl mutation of Arabidopsis disrupts circadian rhythms
and the photoperiodic control of flowering.

Schaffer R(1), Ramsay N, Samach A, Corden S, Putterill J, Carré IA, Coupland G.

Author information: 
(1)John Innes Centre, Norwich, United Kingdom.

The dominant late elongated hypocotyl (lhy) mutation of Arabidopsis disrupted
circadian clock regulation of gene expression and leaf movements and caused
flowering to occur independently of photoperiod. LHY was shown to encode a MYB
DNA-binding protein. In wild-type plants, the LHY mRNA showed a circadian pattern
of expression with a peak around dawn but in the mutant was expressed constantly 
at high levels. Increased LHY expression from a transgene caused the endogenous
gene to be expressed at a constant level, suggesting that LHY was part of a
feedback circuit that regulated its own expression. Thus, constant expression of 
LHY disrupts several distinct circadian rhythms in Arabidopsis, and LHY may be
closely associated with the central oscillator of the circadian clock.

PMID: 9657154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 May 8;246(1):176-81.

Molecular cloning and expression of Ehf, a new member of the ets transcription
factor/oncoprotein gene family.

Bochert MA(1), Kleinbaum LA, Sun LY, Burton FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455-0347,
USA.

The ets family is a large multigene family of transcription factors that share a 
conserved DNA-binding "ETS" domain and include several oncoproteins that induce
tumorigenesis when overexpressed. Here we report the cDNA cloning from mouse
pituitary somatotroph tumors, sequence characterization and tissue-specific
expression pattern in mice of a novel ets family gene, "Ehf" ("ets homologous
factor"). The putative 300 amino acid Ehf protein is a highly divergent ets
family member, but is most related to the recently identified oncoprotein ESX
(36% overall and 84% ETS domain amino acid identity). Thus, Ehf and ESX comprise 
a new ets subfamily. Ehf is a single-copy gene, but produces four distinct mRNA
transcripts. Ehf transcripts are abundant in mouse kidney and lung, less so in
muscle and liver, and not detected in brain, spleen or testes. Because of its
presence in somatotroph tumors and its relationship to ESX, Ehf may represent a
new oncoprotein.

PMID: 9600089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Genomics. 1997 Oct 15;45(2):456-7.

The novel epithelial-specific Ets transcription factor gene ESX maps to human
chromosome 1q32.1.

Oettgen P(1), Carter KC, Augustus M, Barcinski M, Boltax J, Kunsch C, Libermann
TA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

PMID: 9463090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Oncogene. 1997 Nov 13;15(20):2449-62.

A novel epithelial-expressed ETS gene, ELF3: human and murine cDNA sequences,
murine genomic organization, human mapping to 1q32.2 and expression in tissues
and cancer.

Tymms MJ(1), Ng AY, Thomas RS, Schutte BC, Zhou J, Eyre HJ, Sutherland GR, Seth
A, Rosenberg M, Papas T, Debouck C, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Development Group, Institute of Reproduction and
Development, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The ETS family of genes are implicated in cancers such as Ewings sarcoma, acute
myeloid leukemia and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. Further, they have
important functions in embryonic development. Hence, identification and
characterization of members of this family are important. We identify a novel ETS
family member, ELF3, and report its human and murine cDNA sequences. The mouse
cDNA has an alternatively spliced transcript with an extra 60 bp inserted. Hence 
we present the organization of the murine Elf3 gene together with its exon/intron
structure. This gene consists of 9 exons and 8 introns spanning 4.8 kb. ELF3
binds and transactivates ETS sequences and interestingly also shows the ability
to bind a GGAT-like purine core, a preferential ETS1/ETS2 type binding site. The 
expression of ELF3, unlike most other ETS family members, is absent in
hematopoietic cells and hematopoietic organs in humans and mice. Intriguingly,
the gene is specifically expressed in cell lines of epithelial origin and in
organs such as lung, stomach, intestine, kidney that have specialized epithelial 
cells. We localize the human gene to 1q32.2, a region that is amplified in
epithelial tumors of the breast, lung and prostate. Finally, we show that ELF3
expression is increased in a lung carcinoma and adenocarcinoma, as compared to
normal tissue. ELF3 is also expressed in cell lines derived from lung cancers.
These results suggest that this novel ETS gene may be involved in lung
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9395241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Nov 1;25(21):4287-95.

The expression of a novel, epithelium-specific ets transcription factor is
restricted to the most differentiated layers in the epidermis.

Andreoli JM(1), Jang SI, Chung E, Coticchia CM, Steinert PM, Markova NG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Skin Biology, NIAMS, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-2752, USA.

Ets proteins have been implicated in the regulation of gene expression during a
variety of biological processes, including growth control, differentiation,
development and transformation. More than 35 related proteins containing the 'ets
domain' have now been found which specifically interact with DNA sequences
encompassing the core tetranucleotide GGAA. Although ets responsive genes have
been identified in the epidermis, little is known about their distribution and
function in this tissue. We have now demonstrated that epidermis and cultured
epidermal keratinocytes synthesize numerous ets proteins. The expression of some 
of these proteins is regulated as a function of differentiation. Among these is a
novel ets transcription factor with a dual DNA-binding specificity, which we have
called jen. The expression of jen is not only epithelial specific, but it is the 
only ets protein so far described, and one of the very few transcription factors 
whose expression is restricted to the most differentiated epidermal layers. We
show that two epidermal marker genes whose expression coincides with that of jen 
are transregulated by this protein in a complex mode which involves interactions 
with other transcriptional regulators such as Sp1 and AP1.

PMCID: PMC147045
PMID: 9336459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Aug;17(8):4419-33.

Isolation and characterization of a novel epithelium-specific transcription
factor, ESE-1, a member of the ets family.

Oettgen P(1), Alani RM, Barcinski MA, Brown L, Akbarali Y, Boltax J, Kunsch C,
Munger K, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

We report here the isolation of a novel, highly tissue-restricted member of the
ets transcription factor/oncogene family, ESE-1 (for epithelium-specific Ets),
which has features distinct from those of any other ets-related factor. ESE-1
contains two putative DNA binding domains: an ETS domain, which is unique in that
the 5' half shows relatively weak homology to known ets factors, and an A/T hook 
domain, found in HMG proteins and various other nuclear factors. In contrast to
any known ets factors, ESE-1 is expressed exclusively in epithelial cells. ESE-1 
expression is induced during terminal differentiation of the epidermis and in a
primary human keratinocyte differentiation system. The keratinocyte terminal
differentiation marker gene, SPRR2A, is a putative target for ESE-1, since SPRR2A
expression during keratinocyte differentiation correlates with induction of ESE-1
expression, and ESE-1 binds with high affinity to and transactivates the ets
binding site in the SPRR2A promoter. ESE-1 also binds to and transactivates the
enhancer of the Endo A gene, a potential target for ESE-1 in simple epithelia.
Due to the important role that other ets factors play in cellular
differentiation, ESE-1 is expected to be a critical regulator of epithelial cell 
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC232296
PMID: 9234700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Oncogene. 1997 Apr 3;14(13):1617-22.

ESX: a structurally unique Ets overexpressed early during human breast
tumorigenesis.

Chang CH(1), Scott GK, Kuo WL, Xiong X, Suzdaltseva Y, Park JW, Sayre P, Erny K, 
Collins C, Gray JW, Benz CC.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute and Division of Oncology-Hematology, University of
California at San Francisco, 94143, USA.

The >30 known members of the Ets multigene family of transcriptional regulators
are increasingly being recognized for their involvement in early embryonic
development and late tissue maturation, directing stage-specific and
tissue-restricted programs of target gene expression. Identifiable primarily by
their 85 amino acid ETS DNA-binding domain and dispersed across all metazoan
lineages into distinct subfamilies, Ets genes also produce malignancies in humans
and other vertebrates when overexpressed or rearranged into chimeras retaining
the ETS domain, suggesting that their oncogenic potential is determined by the
program of target genes they regulate. Searching for Ets factors that regulate
expression of the HER2/neu (c-erbB2) oncogene in human breast cancer, we
identified a new epithelium-restricted Ets encoding an ETS domain homologous to
the Drosophila E74/human Elf-1 subfamily, an amino-terminal region (A-region or
Pointed domain) homologous to the distantly related Ets-1 subfamily, and a
serine-rich box homologous to the transactivating domain of the
lymphocyte-restricted High Mobility Group (HMG) protein, SOX4. Recombinant
protein encoded by ESX (for epithelial-restricted with serine box) exhibits
Ets-like DNA binding specificity in electrophoretic mobility shift assays and, in
transient transfection assays, transactivates Ets-responsive promoter elements
including that found in the HER2/neu oncogene. ESX is located at chromosome 1q32 
in a region known to be amplified in 50% of early breast cancers, is
heregulin-inducible and overexpressed in HER2/neu activated breast cancer cells. 
Tissue hybridization suggests that ESX becomes overexpressed at an early stage of
human breast cancer development known as ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS).

PMID: 9129154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1997 Apr;7(2):233-41.

Translational controls impinging on the 5'-untranslated region and initiation
factor proteins.

Jackson RJ(1), Wickens M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge, CB2 1QW, UK. rjj@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

Translation of eukaryotic mRNAs is generally initiated by the scanning ribosome
mechanism. This can be downregulated by high affinity protein binding to
cap-proximal RNA motifs. Translation can also be regulated by short open reading 
frames within the 5' -untranslated region. A key factor for initiation is elF4F, 
in which one of the polypeptide chains, elF4G, seems to have a bridging function 
and binds three other factors at separate sites: elF4E (the cap-binding factor), 
the helicase elF4A, and elF3, which also interacts with 40S ribosomal subunits.
Initiation is regulated by the MAP kinase and rapamycin-sensitive signalling
pathways, which control phosphorylation of elF4E and 4E-BP1, a protein which in
the dephosphorylated form binds and sequesters elF4E.

PMID: 9115426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Science. 1996 Nov 1;274(5288):790-2.

Conditional circadian dysfunction of the Arabidopsis early-flowering 3 mutant.

Hicks KA(1), Millar AJ, Carré IA, Somers DE, Straume M, Meeks-Wagner DR, Kay SA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.

Photoperiodic responses, such as the daylength-dependent control of reproductive 
development, are associated with a circadian biological clock. The
photoperiod-insensitive early-flowering 3 (elf3) mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana
lacks rhythmicity in two distinct circadian-regulated processes. This defect was 
apparent only when plants were assayed under constant light conditions. elf3
mutants retain rhythmicity in constant dark and anticipate light/dark transitions
under most light/dark regimes. The conditional arrhythmic phenotype suggests that
the circadian pacemaker is intact in darkness in elf3 mutant plants, but the
transduction of light signals to the circadian clock is impaired.

PMID: 8864121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Plant J. 1996 Oct;10(4):691-702.

The Arabidopsis ELF3 gene regulates vegetative photomorphogenesis and the
photoperiodic induction of flowering.

Zagotta MT(1), Hicks KA, Jacobs CI, Young JC, Hangarter RP, Meeks-Wagner DR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene 97403, USA.

Flowering in Arabidopsis thaliana is promoted by longday (LD) photoperiods such
that plants grown in LD flower earlier, and after the production of fewer leaves,
than plants grown in short-day (SD) photoperiods. The early-flowering 3 (elf3)
mutant of Arabidopsis, which is insensitive to photoperiod with regard to floral 
initiation has been characterized elf3 mutants are also altered in several
aspects of vegetative photomorphogenesis, including hypocotyl elongation. When
inhibition of hypocotyl elongation was measured, elf3 mutant seedlings were less 
responsive than wild-type to all wavelengths of light, and most notably defective
in blue and green light-mediated inhibition. When analyzed for the flowering-time
phenotype, elf3 was epistatic to mutant alleles of the blue-light receptor
encoding gene, HY4. However, when elf3 mutants were made deficient for functional
phytochrome by the introduction of hy2 mutant alleles, the elf3 hy2 double
mutants displayed the novel phenotype of flowering earlier than either single
mutant while still exhibiting photoperiod insensitivity, indicating that a
phytochrome-mediated pathway regulating floral initiation remains functional in
elf3 single mutants. In addition, the inflorescences of one allelic combination
of elf3 hy2 double mutants form a terminal flower similar to the structure
produced by tfk1 single mutants. These results suggest that one of the signal
transduction pathways controlling photoperiodism in Arabidopsis is regulated, at 
least in part, by photoreceptors other than phytochrome, and that the activity of
the Arabidopsis inflorescence and floral meristem identity genes may be regulated
by this same pathway.

PMID: 8893545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1996 Aug;8(2/3):199-209.

Similarities and Differences in the Way Transmembrane-Type Ligands Interact with 
the Elk Subclass of Eph Receptors

Brambilla R(1), Br&uuml;ckner K, Orioli D, Bergemann AD, Flanagan JG, Klein R.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Meyerhofstrasse 1, Heidelberg, 69117,
Germany

The Eph family of receptor tyrosine kinases and their cell surface bound ligands 
have been implicated in a number of developmental processes, including axon
pathfinding and fasciculation, as well as patterning in the central nervous
system. To better understand the complex signaling events taking place, we have
undertaken a comparative analysis of ligand-receptor interactions between a
subset of ligands, those that are tethered to the cell surface via a
transmembrane domain, and a subset of Eph receptors, the so-called Elk subclass. 
Based on binding characteristics, receptor autophosphorylation, and cellular
transformation assays, we find that the transmembrane-type ligands Lerk2 and Elf2
have common and specific receptors within the Elk subclass of receptors. The
common receptors Cek10 and Elk bind and signal in response to Lerk2 and Elf2,
whereas the Myk1 receptor is specific for Elf2. Elf2, however, fails to signal
through Cek5 in a cellular transformation assay, suggesting that Lerk2 may be the
preferred Cek5 ligand in vivo. A recently identified third transmembrane-type
ligand, Elf3, specifically, but weakly, binds Cek10 and only induces focus
formation when activated by C-terminal truncation. This suggests that the
physiological Elf3 receptor may have yet to be identified. Knowledge regarding
functional ligand-receptor interactions as presented in this study will be
important for the design and interpretation of in vivo experiments, e.g.,
loss-of-function studies in transgenic mice.

PMID: 8954633  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


233. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1996;8(2-3):199-209.

Similarities and differences in the way transmembrane-type ligands interact with 
the Elk subclass of Eph receptors.

Brambilla R(1), Brückner K, Orioli D, Bergemann AD, Flanagan JG, Klein R.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.

The Eph family of receptor tyrosine kinases and their cell surface bound ligands 
have been implicated in a number of developmental processes, including axon
pathfinding and fasciculation, as well as patterning in the central nervous
system. To better understand the complex signaling events taking place, we have
undertaken a comparative analysis of ligand-receptor interactions between a
subset of ligands, those that are tethered to the cell surface via a
transmembrane domain, and a subset of Eph receptors, the so-called Elk subclass. 
Based on binding characteristics, receptor autophosphorylation, and cellular
transformation assays, we find that the transmembrane-type ligands Lerk2 and Elf2
have common and specific receptors within the Elk subclass of receptors. The
common receptors Cek10 and Elk bind and signal in response to Lerk2 and Elf2,
whereas the Myk1 receptor is specific for Elf2. Elf2, however, fails to signal
through Cek5 in a cellular transformation assay, suggesting that Lerk2 may be the
preferred Cek5 ligand in vivo. A recently identified third transmembrane-type
ligand, Elf3, specifically, but weakly, binds Cek10 and only induces focus
formation when activated by C-terminal truncation. This suggests that the
physiological Elf3 receptor may have yet to be identified. Knowledge regarding
functional ligand-receptor interactions as presented in this study will be
important for the design and interpretation of in vivo experiments, e.g.,
loss-of-function studies in transgenic mice.

PMID: 8918835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Dev Biol. 1995 Jun;169(2):421-35.

Genetic regulation of shoot development in Arabidopsis: role of the EMF genes.

Yang CH(1), Chen LJ, Sung ZR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, University of California at Berkeley 94720, USA.

To investigate the genetic mechanism regulating Arabidopsis shoot maturation and 
development, we characterized eight emf mutants that bypassed the vegetative
phase of the life cycle. Genetic complementation studies identified two EMF loci;
both mapped to chromosome five. Double mutant analysis showed that the early- and
late-flowering mutants, co, fb, elf1, elf2, and elf3, could not rescue vegetative
development in the emf mutants, confirming the need for both EMF gene activities 
for rosette development. A series of phenotypes involving successive loss of
reproductive organs was also observed in emf single mutants, in emf1-1/emf1-2
transheterozygotes, and in emf1 emf2 double mutants, suggesting that the EMF
genes not only specify the rosette (vegetative) but also are involved in
inflorescence and flower (reproductive) development. Phenotypic analysis of
double mutants between emf and tfl1, lfy, and ag indicated interactions between
EMF and genes regulating inflorescence meristem development and floral organ
identity. A model depicting the role of the EMF genes in regulating shoot
maturation and their interaction with genes that affect phase transitions is
presented.

PMID: 7781888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


