
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 10;6:22760. doi: 10.1038/srep22760.

Generation of a novel, multi-stage, progressive, and transplantable model of
plasma cell neoplasms.

Asai T(1), Hatlen MA(2), Lossos C(1), Ndiaye-Lobry D(2), Deblasio A(2), Murata
K(3), Fleisher M(3), Cortizas EM(4), Verdun RE(1,)(4,)(5), Petrini J(6), Nimer
SD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miller School of Medicine, University
of Miami, FL 33136 Miami, USA. (2)Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan-Kettering
Institute, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 10065 New York, USA.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sloan-Kettering Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 10065 New York, USA. (4)Division of
Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, Department of Medicine, Miller School of
Medicine, University of Miami, FL 33136 Miami, USA. (5)Geriatric Research
Education and Clinical Center, Miami Veterans Affairs Healthcare System, FL 33125
Miami, USA. (6)Molecular Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 10065 New York, USA.

Multiple myeloma is a plasma cell neoplasm with an extremely variable clinical
course. Animal models are needed to better understand its pathophysiology and for
preclinical testing of potential therapeutic agents. Hematopoietic cells
expressing the hypermorphic Rad50(s) allele show hematopoietic failure, which can
be mitigated by the lack of a transcription factor, Mef/Elf4. However, we find
that 70% of Mef(-/-)Rad50(s/s) mice die from multiple myeloma or other plasma
cell neoplasms. These mice initially show an abnormal plasma cell proliferation
and monoclonal protein production, and then develop anemia and a decreased bone
mineral density. Tumor cells can be serially transplanted and according to array 
CGH and whole exome sequencing, the pathogenesis of plasma cell neoplasms in
these mice is not linked to activation of a specific oncogene, or inactivation of
a specific tumor suppressor. This model recapitulates the systemic manifestations
of human plasma cell neoplasms, and implicates cooperativity between the Rad50(s)
and Mef/Elf4 pathways in initiating myelomagenic mutations that promote plasma
cell transformation.

PMCID: PMC4785351
PMID: 26961797  [PubMed - in process]


2. Front Plant Sci. 2016 Feb 22;7:175. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2016.00175. eCollection
2016.

FHY3 and FAR1 Act Downstream of Light Stable Phytochromes.

Siddiqui H(1), Khan S(1), Rhodes BM(1), Devlin PF(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway University of London Egham, UK.

FHY3 and FAR1 are positively acting transcription factors that directly regulate 
expression of a number of target genes in Arabidopsis thaliana. Here, we looked
at the regulation of one specific target gene, ELF4. We demonstrate that the
action of FHY3 and FAR1 in upregulation of ELF4 is light dependent. Furthermore, 
although FHY3 and FAR1 have been exclusively characterized as components of the
phytochrome A signaling pathway because of their importance in regulating
expression of phyA nuclear importers, we show that, as transcription factors in
their own right, FHY3 and FAR1 act downstream of light stable phytochromes, phyB,
phyD, and phyE. We demonstrate that light stable phytochrome acts in a
red/far-red reversible manner to regulate the level of FHY3 protein. We also
observed that ELF4 shows specific FHY3 and FAR1-mediated light induction in the
evening and we show that regulation by light stable phytochromes at this time is 
important as it allows the plant to maintain normal ELF4 expression beyond dusk
when the day length shortens, something which would not be possible through light
labile phytochrome action. Without FHY3 and FAR1, ELF4 expression falls rapidly
at dusk and in short days this results in an early drop in ELF4 expression,
accompanied by a de-repression of an ELF4 target gene later in the night. Our
results, therefore, demonstrate an important role for FHY3 and FAR1 as mediators 
of light stable phytochrome signaling.

PMCID: PMC4761848
PMID: 26941752  [PubMed]


3. Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 26. [Epub ahead of print]

Mutational Landscape and Antiproliferative Functions of ELF Transcription Factors
in Human Cancer.

Ando M(1), Kawazu M(2), Ueno T(3), Koinuma D(4), Ando K(5), Koya J(6), Kataoka
K(6), Yasuda T(3), Yamaguchi H(3), Fukumura K(3), Yamato A(3), Soda M(3), Sai
E(2), Yamashita Y(3), Asakage T(7), Miyazaki Y(5), Kurokawa M(6), Miyazono K(4), 
Nimer SD(8), Yamasoba T(7), Mano H(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Signaling, Graduate School of Medicine, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery,
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department
of Medical Genomics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan. (3)Department of Cellular Signaling, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate
School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of
Hematology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki,
Japan. (6)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and
Neck Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami, Florida.
(9)Department of Cellular Signaling, Graduate School of Medicine, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Strategic Basic Research Program, Japan Science and
Technology Agency, Saitama, Japan. hmano@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

ELF4 (also known as MEF) is a member of the ETS family of transcription factors. 
An oncogenic role for ELF4 has been demonstrated in hematopoietic malignancies,
but its function in epithelial tumors remains unclear. Here, we show that ELF4
can function as a tumor suppressor and is somatically inactivated in a wide range
of human tumors. We identified a missense mutation affecting the transactivation 
potential of ELF4 in oral squamous cell carcinoma cells. Restoration of the
transactivation activity through introduction of wild-type ELF4 significantly
inhibited cell proliferationin vitroand tumor xenograft growth. Furthermore, we
found that ELF1 and ELF2, closely related transcription factors to ELF4, also
exerted antiproliferative effects in multiple cancer cell lines. Mutations in
ELF1 and ELF2, as in ELF4, were widespread across human cancers, but were almost 
all mutually exclusive. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with
high-throughput sequencing revealed ELF4-binding sites in genomic regions
adjacent to genes related to cell-cycle regulation and apoptosis. Finally, we
provide mechanistic evidence that the antiproliferative effects of ELF4 were
mediated through the induction of HRK, an activator of apoptosis, and DLX3, an
inhibitor of cell growth. Collectively, our findings reveal a novel subtype of
human cancer characterized by inactivating mutations in the ELF subfamily of
proteins, and warrant further investigation of the specific settings where ELF
restoration may be therapeutically beneficial.Cancer Res; 76(7); 1-11. ©2016
AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26921333  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Genomics. 2016 Jan 7. pii: S0888-7543(16)30003-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ygeno.2016.01.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Evolution of DUF1313 family members across plant species and their association
with maize photoperiod sensitivity.

Li J(1), Hu E(1), Chen X(1), Xu J(1), Lan H(1), Li C(1), Hu Y(2), Lu Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Maize Research Institute, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130,
Sichuan, China; Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Maize in
Southwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture, China. (2)Institute of Animal Genetics
and Breeding, College of Animal Science and Technology, Sichuan Agricultural
University, Chengdu 611130, Sichuan, China. (3)Maize Research Institute, Sichuan 
Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, Sichuan, China; Key Laboratory of
Biology and Genetic Improvement of Maize in Southwest Region, Ministry of
Agriculture, China. Electronic address: yanli.lu82@hotmail.com.

Proteins of the DUF1313 family contain a highly conserved domain and are only
found in plants; they play important roles in most plant functions. In this
study, 269 DUF1313 genes from 81 photoautotrophic species were identified; they
were classified into three major types based on the amino acid substitutions in
the conserved region: IARV, I(S/T/F)(K/R)V, and IRRV. Phylogenic tree constructed
from 51 DUF1313 genes from graminoids revealed three clades: A, B1, and B2. Clade
B1 was found to have undergone episodic positive selection after a gene
duplication event and included four amino acid sites under positive selection.
The association between DUF1313 family members and traits investigated in maize
indicated that three of four genes (GRMZM2G025646, GRMZM5G877647, GRMZM2G359322, 
and GRMZM2G382774) were associated with the target traits such as days to
silking, days to tasselling, and plant height. The nucleotide diversity of the
most primitive and highly conserved DUF1313 gene, ELF4-like4, was the highest in 
Tripsacum and the lowest in maize. Tajima's D and Fu and Li's D tests revealed
that significant purifying selection had occurred in the coding sequence region
of this DUF1313 gene in teosinte and maize. No significant signal was detected in
the 5'-untranslated region of this gene in each of the three species (maize,
teosinte, and Tripsacum) or in any gene regions of Tripsacum. Phylogenetic
analyses revealed that the 103 accessions of maize, teosinte, and Tripsacum can
be grouped into four clades based on the ELF4-like4 gene sequence similarity.
Thus, this gene can be used to determine the relationships between maize and its 
relatives, and the DUF1313 family members and alleles identified in this study
might be valuable genetic resources for molecular marker-assisted breeding in
maize.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26772990  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Jan;15(1):201-17. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.054064. Epub
2015 Nov 6.

Identification of Evening Complex Associated Proteins in Arabidopsis by Affinity 
Purification and Mass Spectrometry.

Huang H(1), Alvarez S(1), Bindbeutel R(1), Shen Z(2), Naldrett MJ(1), Evans
BS(1), Briggs SP(2), Hicks LM(3), Kay SA(4), Nusinow DA(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, 975 N. Warson Road, St. Louis,
Missouri, 63132; (2)§University of California San Diego, Division of Biological
Sciences, Cell and Developmental Biology Section, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla,
California 92093-0116; (3)¶The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Department of Chemistry, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599; (4)<U+2016>University of
Southern California, Molecular and Computational Biology Section, Los Angeles,
California 90089. (5)From the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, 975 N.
Warson Road, St. Louis, Missouri, 63132; meter@danforthcenter.org.

Many species possess an endogenous circadian clock to synchronize internal
physiology with an oscillating external environment. In plants, the circadian
clock coordinates growth, metabolism and development over daily and seasonal time
scales. Many proteins in the circadian network form oscillating complexes that
temporally regulate myriad processes, including signal transduction,
transcription, protein degradation and post-translational modification. In
Arabidopsis thaliana, a tripartite complex composed of EARLY FLOWERING 4 (ELF4), 
EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3), and LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX), named the evening complex,
modulates daily rhythms in gene expression and growth through transcriptional
regulation. However, little is known about the physical interactions that connect
the circadian system to other pathways. We used affinity purification and mass
spectrometry (AP-MS) methods to identify proteins that associate with the evening
complex in A. thaliana. New connections within the circadian network as well as
to light signaling pathways were identified, including linkages between the
evening complex, TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION1 (TOC1), TIME FOR COFFEE (TIC), all
phytochromes and TANDEM ZINC KNUCKLE/PLUS3 (TZP). Coupling genetic mutation with 
affinity purifications tested the roles of phytochrome B (phyB), EARLY FLOWERING 
4, and EARLY FLOWERING 3 as nodes connecting the evening complex to clock and
light signaling pathways. These experiments establish a hierarchical association 
between pathways and indicate direct and indirect interactions. Specifically, the
results suggested that EARLY FLOWERING 3 and phytochrome B act as hubs connecting
the clock and red light signaling pathways. Finally, we characterized a clade of 
associated nuclear kinases that regulate circadian rhythms, growth, and flowering
in A. thaliana. Coupling mass spectrometry and genetics is a powerful method to
rapidly and directly identify novel components and connections within and between
complex signaling pathways.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4762519
PMID: 26545401  [PubMed - in process]


6. Open Biol. 2015 Oct;5(10). pii: 150042. doi: 10.1098/rsob.150042.

Defining the robust behaviour of the plant clock gene circuit with absolute RNA
timeseries and open infrastructure.

Flis A(1), Fernández AP(2), Zielinski T(2), Mengin V(1), Sulpice R(1), Stratford 
K(3), Hume A(4), Pokhilko A(5), Southern MM(6), Seaton DD(2), McWatters HG(2),
Stitt M(7), Halliday KJ(8), Millar AJ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Am Muehlenberg 1, 14476
Potsdam-Golm, Germany. (2)SynthSys and School of Biological Sciences, University 
of Edinburgh, C.H. Waddington Building, Edinburgh EH9 3JD, UK. (3)EPCC,
University of Edinburgh, James Clerk Maxwell Building, Edinburgh EH9 3JZ, UK.
(4)SynthSys and School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, C.H.
Waddington Building, Edinburgh EH9 3JD, UK EPCC, University of Edinburgh, James
Clerk Maxwell Building, Edinburgh EH9 3JZ, UK. (5)SynthSys and School of
Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, C.H. Waddington Building, Edinburgh
EH9 3JD, UK Institute of Molecular Cell and Systems Biology, University of
Glasgow, Bower Building, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK. (6)Department of Biological
Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK. (7)Max Planck Institute of
Molecular Plant Physiology, Am Muehlenberg 1, 14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany
mstitt@mpimp-golm.mpg.de. (8)SynthSys and School of Biological Sciences,
University of Edinburgh, C.H. Waddington Building, Edinburgh EH9 3JD, UK
karen.halliday@ed.ac.uk. (9)SynthSys and School of Biological Sciences,
University of Edinburgh, C.H. Waddington Building, Edinburgh EH9 3JD, UK
andrew.millar@ed.ac.uk.

Our understanding of the complex, transcriptional feedback loops in the circadian
clock mechanism has depended upon quantitative, timeseries data from disparate
sources. We measure clock gene RNA profiles in Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings,
grown with or without exogenous sucrose, or in soil-grown plants and in wild-type
and mutant backgrounds. The RNA profiles were strikingly robust across the
experimental conditions, so current mathematical models are likely to be broadly 
applicable in leaf tissue. In addition to providing reference data, unexpected
behaviours included co-expression of PRR9 and ELF4, and regulation of PRR5 by GI.
Absolute RNA quantification revealed low levels of PRR9 transcripts (peak approx.
50 copies cell(-1)) compared with other clock genes, and threefold higher levels 
of LHY RNA (more than 1500 copies cell(-1)) than of its close relative CCA1. The 
data are disseminated from BioDare, an online repository for focused timeseries
data, which is expected to benefit mechanistic modelling. One data subset
successfully constrained clock gene expression in a complex model, using publicly
available software on parallel computers, without expert tuning or programming.
We outline the empirical and mathematical justification for data aggregation in
understanding highly interconnected, dynamic networks such as the clock, and the 
observed design constraints on the resources required to make this approach
widely accessible.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4632509
PMID: 26468131  [PubMed - in process]


7. Plant Signal Behav. 2015 Dec 2;10(12):e1087630. doi:
10.1080/15592324.2015.1087630.

The plant circadian clock looks like a traditional Japanese clock rather than a
modern Western clock.

Mizuno T(1), Yamashino T(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Laboratory of Molecular and Functional Genomics; School of Agriculture;
Nagoya University ; Nagoya , Japan.

Life cycle adaptation to seasonal changes in photoperiod and ambient temperature 
is a major determinant of the ecological success behind the widespread
domestication of flowering plants. The circadian clock plays a role in the
underlying mechanism for adaptation through generating endogenous rhythms that
allow plants to adapt and adjust to both the 24 h diurnal rotation and 365 d
seasonal revolution. Nevertheless, the mechanism by which the circadian clock
tracks seasonal changes in photoperiod and temperature is a longstanding subject 
in the field. Recently, we have begun to understand the question of how the light
and ambient temperature signals feed into the circadian clock transcriptional
circuitry in day-night cycles in order to track seasonal changes in photoperiod
and ambient temperature. (1-4) Our results collectively indicate that the evening
complex (EC) nighttime repressor consisting of LUX-ELF3-ELF4 plays a crucial role
in this respect. Here, we discuss about these recent studies to add further
implications.

PMID: 26382718  [PubMed - in process]


8. Plant Cell Rep. 2015 Dec;34(12):2027-41. doi: 10.1007/s00299-015-1848-z. Epub
2015 Jul 24.

DhEFL2, 3 and 4, the three EARLY FLOWERING4-like genes in a Doritaenopsis hybrid 
regulate floral transition.

Chen W(1,)(2), Qin Q(3), Zhang C(4), Zheng Y(5,)(6), Wang C(7,)(8), Zhou M(9),
Cui Y(10).

Author information: 
(1)The Nurturing Station for the State Key Laboratory of Subtropical
Silviculture, Zhejiang Agriculture and Forestry University, Lin'an, Hangzhou,
311300, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China. yihonglou123@gmail.com. (2)School
of Agriculture and Food Science, Zhejiang Agriculture and Forestry University, 88
Huancheng Street, Lin'an, Hangzhou, 311300, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.
yihonglou123@gmail.com. (3)School of Agriculture and Food Science, Zhejiang
Agriculture and Forestry University, 88 Huancheng Street, Lin'an, Hangzhou,
311300, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China. doctorqinhz@yahoo.com.cn. (4)School
of Agriculture and Food Science, Zhejiang Agriculture and Forestry University, 88
Huancheng Street, Lin'an, Hangzhou, 311300, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.
zhangchi1978@zafu.edu.cn. (5)Zhejiang Senhe Seed Co., Ltd.,, Hangzhou, 310012,
Zhejiang, People's Republic of China. paul5099@aliyun.com. (6)Oceanwide
International Center, 19th Floor, Building A, No. 2 Xiangzhang Road, Qianjiang
CBD, Hangzhou, 310007, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China. paul5099@aliyun.com.
(7)Zhejiang Senhe Seed Co., Ltd.,, Hangzhou, 310012, Zhejiang, People's Republic 
of China. 714652809@qq.com. (8)Oceanwide International Center, 19th Floor,
Building A, No. 2 Xiangzhang Road, Qianjiang CBD, Hangzhou, 310007, Zhejiang,
People's Republic of China. 714652809@qq.com. (9)The Nurturing Station for the
State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Silviculture, Zhejiang Agriculture and
Forestry University, Lin'an, Hangzhou, 311300, Zhejiang, People's Republic of
China. zhoumingbing@zafu.edu.cn. (10)School of Agriculture and Food Science,
Zhejiang Agriculture and Forestry University, 88 Huancheng Street, Lin'an,
Hangzhou, 311300, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China. yongyicui6@gmail.com.

KEY MESSAGE: DhEFL2, 3 and 4 regulate the flowering of Doritaenopsis . These
genes could rescue elf4-1 phenotype in Arabidopsis while its overexpression
delayed flowering. Phalaenopsis are popular floral plants, and studies on orchid 
flowering genes could help develop off-season cultivars. Early flowering 4 (ELF4)
of A. thaliana has been shown to be involved in photoperiod perception and
circadian regulation. We isolated two members of the ELF4 family from
Doritaenopsis hybrid (Doritaenopsis 'Tinny Tender' (Doritaenopsis Happy Smile ×
Happy Valentine)), namely, DhEFL2 and DhEFL3 (DhEFL4 has been previously cloned).
Multiple alignment analysis of the deduced amino acid sequences of the three
DhEFL homologs showed that DhEFL4 and DhEFL2 are similar with 72% identical amino
acids, whereas DhEFL3 is divergent with 72% similarity with DhEFL2 and 68%
similarity with DhEFL4. DhEFL3 forms a separate phylogenetic subgroup and is far 
away from DhEFL2 and DhEFL4. The diurnal expression patterns of DhEFL2, 3, and 4 
are similar in the long-day photoperiod conditions; however, in the short-day
conditions, DhEFL3 is different from DhEFL2 and 4. For the DhEFL2, 3, and 4
genes, the strongest audience expression organs are the stem, petal and bud,
respectively. The ectopic expression of DhEFL2, 3, or 4 in transgenic A. thaliana
plants (Ws-2 ecotype) showed novel phenotypes by late flowering and more rosette 
leaves. The ectopic expression of DhEFL2, 3, or 4 could complement the elf4-1
flowering time and hypocotyl length defects in transgenic A. thaliana elf4-1
mutant plants. These results strongly suggest that DhEFL2, 3, and 4 may be
involved in regulation of flower formation and floral induction in Doritaenopsis.

PMID: 26205509  [PubMed - in process]


9. Plant Cell Physiol. 2015 Sep;56(9):1738-47. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcv094. Epub 2015
Jun 24.

Insight into a Physiological Role for the EC Night-Time Repressor in the
Arabidopsis Circadian Clock.

Mizuno T(1), Kitayama M(1), Takayama C(1), Yamashino T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Functional Genomics, School of Agriculture, Nagoya
University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8601 Japan. (2)Laboratory of
Molecular and Functional Genomics, School of Agriculture, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8601 Japan yamasino@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

Life cycle adaptation to seasonal variation in photoperiod and temperature is a
major determinant of ecological success of widespread domestication of
Arabidopsis thaliana. The circadian clock plays a role in the underlying
mechanism for adaptation. Nevertheless, the mechanism by which the circadian
clock tracks seasonal changes in photoperiod and temperature is a longstanding
subject of research in the field. We previously showed that a set of the target
genes (i.e. GI, LNK1. PRR9 and PRR7) of the Evening Complex (EC) consisting of
LUX-ELF3-ELF4 is synergistically induced in response to both warm-night and
night-light signals. Here, we further show that the responses occur within a wide
range of growth-compatible temperatures (16-28°C) in response to a small change
in temperature (<U+0394>4°C). A dim light pulse (<1 µmol m(-2) s(-1)) causes the
enhanced effect on the transcription of EC targets. The night-light pulse
antagonizes against a positive effect of the cool-night signal on the EC
activity. The mechanism of double-checking external temperature and light signals
through the EC nighttime repressor might enable plants to ignore (or tolerate)
daily fluctuation of ambient temperature within a short time interval in their
natural habitats. Taken together, the EC night-time repressor might play a
physiological role in tracking seasonal variation in photoperiod and temperature 
by conservatively double-checking both the light and temperature conditions.
Another EC target output gene PIF4 regulating plant morphologies is also
regulated by both the temperature and light stimuli during the night. Hence, the 
EC night-time repressor is also implicated in a physiological output of the
PIF4-mediated regulation of morphologies in response to seasonal variation in
photoperiod and ambient temperature.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Japanese
Society of Plant Physiologists. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26108788  [PubMed - in process]


10. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2015 Aug;14(8):2243-60. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.047183. Epub
2015 Jun 19.

Quantitative Circadian Phosphoproteomic Analysis of Arabidopsis Reveals Extensive
Clock Control of Key Components in Physiological, Metabolic, and Signaling
Pathways.

Choudhary MK(1), Nomura Y(2), Wang L(3), Nakagami H(2), Somers DE(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Integrative Biosciences and Biotechnology, POSTECH,
Hyojadong, Pohang, Kyungbuk, 790-784, Republic of Korea. (2)¶Plant Proteomics
Research Unit, RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science (CSRS), Yokohama,
Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan; (3)From the Division of Integrative Biosciences and
Biotechnology, POSTECH, Hyojadong, Pohang, Kyungbuk, 790-784, Republic of Korea
§Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
43210; <U+2016>Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Physiology, Institute of Botany,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China. (4)From the Division of
Integrative Biosciences and Biotechnology, POSTECH, Hyojadong, Pohang, Kyungbuk, 
790-784, Republic of Korea §Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio 43210; somers.24@osu.edu.

The circadian clock provides adaptive advantages to an organism, resulting in
increased fitness and survival. The phosphorylation events that regulate
circadian-dependent signaling and the processes which post-translationally
respond to clock-gated signals are largely unknown. To better elucidate
post-translational events tied to the circadian system we carried out a survey of
circadian-regulated protein phosphorylation events in Arabidopsis seedlings. A
large-scale mass spectrometry-based quantitative phosphoproteomics approach
employing TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment techniques identified and
quantified 1586 phosphopeptides on 1080 protein groups. A total of 102
phosphopeptides displayed significant changes in abundance, enabling the
identification of specific patterns of response to circadian rhythms. Our
approach was sensitive enough to quantitate oscillations in the phosphorylation
of low abundance clock proteins (early flowering4; ELF4 and pseudoresponse
regulator3; PRR3) as well as other transcription factors and kinases. During
constant light, extensive cyclic changes in phosphorylation status occurred in
critical regulators, implicating direct or indirect regulation by the circadian
system. These included proteins influencing transcriptional regulation,
translation, metabolism, stress and phytohormones-mediated responses. We
validated our analysis using the elf4-211 allele, in which an S45L transition
removes the phosphorylation herein identified. We show that removal of this
phosphorylatable site diminishes interaction with early flowering3 (ELF3), a key 
partner in a tripartite evening complex required for circadian cycling. elf4-211 
lengthens period, which increases with increasing temperature, relative to the
wild type, resulting in a more stable temperature compensation of circadian
period over a wider temperature range.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4528250 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26091701  [PubMed - in process]


11. Plant Signal Behav. 2015;10(5):e1000164. doi: 10.1080/15592324.2014.1000164.

The regulation of UV-B responses by the circadian clock.

Horak E(1), Farré EM.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Plant Biology; Michigan State University ; East Lansing , MI
USA.

The circadian clock modulates plant responses to environmental stimuli. In a
recent study we showed that light and the circadian clock regulate daily changes 
in sensitivity to short treatments of high UV-B. Here we demonstrate that these
time dependent changes in UV-B stress sensitivity are not mediated by the UV-B
receptor UV resistantce locus 8. We also discuss the potential mechanisms
involved in this process and the role of the circadian clock in the acclimation
to UV-B.

PMCID: PMC4623035
PMID: 26039469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Vet Parasitol. 2015 Jul 30;211(3-4):241-50. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2015.05.010.
Epub 2015 May 18.

Splice variants and regulatory networks associated with host resistance to the
intestinal worm Cooperia oncophora in cattle.

Li RW(1), Wu S(2), Li CJ(3), Li W(4), Schroeder SG(3).

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture, Agriculture Research Service, Animal 
Genomics and Improvement Laboratory, Beltsville, MD 20705, USA. Electronic
address: Robert.Li@ars.usda.gov. (2)Center for Research in Biological Systems,
University of California, La Jolla, San Diego, CA 92093, USA. (3)United States
Department of Agriculture, Agriculture Research Service, Animal Genomics and
Improvement Laboratory, Beltsville, MD 20705, USA. (4)Center for Research in
Biological Systems, University of California, La Jolla, San Diego, CA 92093, USA;
J. Craig Venter Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

To elucidate the molecular mechanism of host resistance, we characterized the
jejunal transcriptome of Angus cattle selected for parasite resistance for over
20 years in response to infection caused by the intestinal worm Cooperia
oncophora. The transcript abundance of 56 genes, such as that of mucin 12 (MUC12)
and intestinal alkaline phosphatase (ALPI), was significantly higher in resistant
cattle. Novel splicing variants, exon skipping events, and gene fusion events,
were also detected. An algorithm for the reconstruction of accurate cellular
networks (ARACNE) was used to infer de novo regulatory molecular networks in the 
interactome between the parasite and host. Under a combined cutoff of an error
tolerance (<U+03F5> = 0.10) and a stringent P-value threshold of mutual information (1.0
× 10(-5)), a total of 229,100 direct interactions controlled by 20,288 hub genes 
were identified. Among these hub genes, 7651 genes had = 100 direct neighbors
while the top 9778 hub genes controlled more than 50% of total direct
interactions. Three lysozyme genes (LYZ1, LYZ2, and LYZ3), which are co-located
in bovine chromosome 5 in tandem and are strongly upregulated in resistant
cattle, shared a common regulatory network of 55 genes. These ancient
antimicrobials were likely involved in regulating host-parasite interactions by
affecting host gut microbiome. Notably, ALPI, known as a gut mucosal defense
factor, controlled a molecular network consisting 410 genes, including 14
transcription factors (TF) and 10 genes that were significantly regulated in
resistant cattle. Several large regulatory networks were controlled by TF, such
as STAT6, SREBF1, and ELF4. Gene ontology (GO) processes significantly enriched
in the regulatory network controlled by STAT6 included lipid metabolism. Our
findings provide insights into the immune regulation of host-parasite
interactions and the molecular mechanisms of host resistance in cattle.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26025321  [PubMed - in process]


13. Mol Genet Genomics. 2015 Oct;290(5):1833-47. doi: 10.1007/s00438-015-1041-7. Epub
2015 Apr 10.

Comparative transcriptome analysis of the petal degeneration mutant pdm in
Chinese cabbage (Brassica campestris ssp. pekinensis) using RNA-Seq.

Huang S(1), Liu Z(1), Yao R(1), Li D(1), Feng H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Horticulture, Shenyang Agricultural University, 120 Dongling
Road, Shenyang, 110866, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of
Horticulture, Shenyang Agricultural University, 120 Dongling Road, Shenyang,
110866, People's Republic of China. fenghuiaaa@263.net.

Flowering, which plays a crucial role in the growth and development of flowering 
plants, is a crucial point from vegetative growth to reproductive growth. The
goal of this study was to examine the differences between the transcriptomes of
the Chinese cabbage mutant pdm and the corresponding wild-type line 'FT'. We
performed transcriptome analysis on mRNA isolated from flower buds of pdm and
'FT' using Illumina RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) data. A total of 117 differentially 
expressed genes (DEGs) were detected. Among the DEGs, we identified a number of
genes involved in floral development and flowering, including an F-box protein
gene, EARLY FLOWERING 4 (ELF4), and transcription factors BIGPETAL (BPE) and
MYB21 (v-myb avian myeloblastosis viral oncogene homolog); differential
expression of these genes could potentially explain the difference in the flowers
between pdm and 'FT'. In addition, the expression patterns of 20 DEGs, including 
12 floral development and flowering-related genes and eight randomly selected
genes, were validated by qRT-PCR, and the results were highly concordant with the
RNA-Seq results. Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
pathway enrichment analyses were performed to better understand the functions of 
these DEGs. We also identified a large number of single nucleotide polymorphism
and insertion/deletion markers, which will be a rich resource for future marker
development and breeding research in Chinese cabbage. Also, our analysis revealed
numerous novel transcripts and alternative splicing events. The transcriptome
analysis provides valuable information for furthering our understanding of the
molecular mechanisms that regulate the flowering process, and establishes a solid
foundation for future genetic and functional genomic studies in Chinese cabbage.

PMID: 25860116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Br J Haematol. 2015 May;169(3):391-400. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13305. Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Nature and nurture: a case of transcending haematological pre-malignancies in a
pair of monozygotic twins adding possible clues on the pathogenesis of B-cell
proliferations.

Hansen MC(1), Nyvold CG, Roug AS, Kjeldsen E, Villesen P, Nederby L, Hokland P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

We describe a comprehensive molecular analysis of a pair of monozygotic twins,
who came to our attention when one experienced amaurosis fugax and was diagnosed 
with JAK2+ polycythaemia vera. He (Twin A) was also found to have an asymptomatic
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (B-CLL). Although JAK2-, Twin B was
subsequently shown to have a benign monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis (MBL). Flow
cytometric and molecular analyses of the B-cell compartments revealed different
immunoglobulin light and heavy chain usage in each twin. We hypothesized that
whole exome sequencing could help delineating the pattern of germline B-cell
disorder susceptibility and reveal somatic mutations potentially contributing to 
the differential patterns of pre-malignancy. Comparing bone marrow cells and T
cells and employing in-house engineered integrative analysis, we found
aberrations in Twin A consistent with a myeloid neoplasm, i.e. in TET2, RUNX1,
PLCB1 and ELF4. Employing the method for detecting high-ranking variants by
extensive annotation and relevance scoring, we also identified shared germline
variants in genes of proteins interacting with B-cell receptor signalling
mediators and the WNT-pathway, including IRF8, PTPRO, BCL9L, SIT1 and SIRPB1, all
with possible implications in B-cell proliferation. Similar patterns of IGHV-gene
usage to those demonstrated here have been observed in inherited acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia. Collectively, these findings may help in facilitating
identification of putative master gene(s) involved in B-cell proliferations in
general and MBL and B-CLL in particular.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25752595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Plant Signal Behav. 2015;10(3):e992707. doi: 10.4161/15592324.2014.992707.

Gibberellin driven growth in elf3 mutants requires PIF4 and PIF5.

Filo J(1), Wu A, Eliason E, Richardson T, Thines BC, Harmon FG.

Author information: 
(1)a Keck Science Department ; Pitzer College ; Claremont , CA USA.

The regulatory connections between the circadian clock and hormone signaling are 
essential to understand, as these two regulatory processes work together to time 
growth processes relative to predictable environmental events. Gibberellins (GAs)
are phytohormones that control many growth processes throughout all stages of the
plant life cycle, including germination and flowering. An increasing number of
examples demonstrate that the circadian clock directly influences GA biosynthesis
and signaling. EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3) participates in a tripartite
transcriptional complex known as the Evening Complex (EC). In this capacity, ELF3
is fundamental to core circadian clock activity, as well as time-of-day specific 
regulation of genes directly responsible for growth control, namely the
PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR 4 (PIF4) and PIF5 genes. Here we show that the GA 
biosynthesis inhibitor paclobutrazol substantially reduces the long hypocotyl and
petiole phenotypes of Arabidopsis elf3 mutants. In addition, loss of ELF3
activity causes upregulation of the key GA biosynthesis genes GA20ox1 and
GA20ox2. Moreover, GA20ox1 and GA20ox2 expression depends strongly on the
redundant activities of PIF4 and PIF5. These findings indicate that the defining 
growth phenotypes of elf3 mutants arise from altered GA biosynthesis due to
misregulation of PIF4 and PIF5. These observations agree with recent work linking
increased GA production with the elongated growth phenotypes of the barley elf3
mutant. Thus, the role of the EC in regulation of GA biosynthesis and signaling
in eudicots is shared with monocots and, therefore, is a highly conserved
mechanism for growth control.

PMCID: PMC4622946
PMID: 25738547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Curr Biol. 2015 Jan 19;25(2):187-93. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.10.070. Epub 2014
Dec 31.

ELF3-PIF4 interaction regulates plant growth independently of the Evening
Complex.

Nieto C(1), López-Salmerón V(1), Davière JM(1), Prat S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento Genética Molecular de Plantas, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología
(CSIC), Campus de Cantoblanco, Darwin 3, 28049 Madrid, Spain. (2)Departamento
Genética Molecular de Plantas, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CSIC), Campus de
Cantoblanco, Darwin 3, 28049 Madrid, Spain. Electronic address:
sprat@cnb.csic.es.

The circadian clock plays a pivotal role in the control of Arabidopsis hypocotyl 
elongation by regulating rhythmic expression of the bHLH factors PHYTOCHROME
INTERACTING FACTOR 4 and 5 (PIF4 and 5). Coincidence of increased PIF4/PIF5
transcript levels with the dark period allows nuclear accumulation of these
factors, and in short days it phases maximal hypocotyl growth at dawn. During
early night, PIF4 and PIF5 transcription is repressed by the Evening Complex (EC)
proteins EARLY FLOWERING3 (ELF3), EARLY FLOWERING4 (ELF4), and LUX ARRHYTHMO
(LUX). While ELF3 has an essential role in EC complex assembly, several lines of 
evidence indicate that this protein controls plant growth via other mechanisms
that are presently unknown. Here, we show that the ELF3 and PIF4 proteins
interact in an EC-independent manner, and that this interaction prevents PIF4
from activating its transcriptional targets. We also show that PIF4
overexpression leads to ELF3 protein destabilization, and that this effect is
mediated indirectly by negative feedback regulation of photoactive PHYTOCHROME B 
(phyB). Physical interaction of the phyB photoreceptor with ELF3 has been
reported, but its functional relevance remains poorly understood. Our findings
establish that phyB is needed for ELF3 accumulation in the light, most likely by 
competing for CONSTITUTIVELY PHOTOMORPHOGENIC1 (COP1)-mediated ubiquitination and
the proteasomal degradation of ELF3. Our results explain the short hypocotyl
phenotype of ELF3 overexpressors, despite their normal clock function, and
provide a molecular framework for understanding how warm temperatures promote
hypocotyl elongation and affect the endogenous clock.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25557667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Oncol Rep. 2015 Mar;33(3):1459-64. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3675. Epub 2014 Dec 18.

NRSF/REST regulates the mTOR signaling pathway in oral cancer cells.

Cho E(1), Moon SM(1), Park BR(1), Kim do K(1), Lee BK(2), Kim CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oral Biology Research Institute, Chosun University, Gwangju 501-759, Republic 
of Korea. (2)Department of Microbiology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN
37996, USA.

The neuron-restrictive silencer factor/repressor element 1-silencing
transcription factor (NRSF/REST) was originally discovered as a transcriptional
repressor of neuronal genes in non-neuronal cells. However, it was recently
reported to be abundantly expressed in several types of aggressive cancer cells, 
as well as in mature neurons. In the present study, the role of NRSF/REST in the 
human oral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) KB cell line was evaluated. NRSF/REST
was expressed at a higher level in KB cells when compared with that in normal
human oral keratinocytes (NHOKs). Knockdown of NRSF/REST by siRNA reduced cell
viability only in KB cells in a time-dependent manner, and this effect was due to
the activation of apoptosis components and DNA fragmentation. In addition,
knockdown of NRSF/REST disrupted the mTOR signaling pathway which is a key
survival factor in many types of cancer cells. For example, the phosphorylation
of elF4G, elF4E and 4E-BP1 was significantly reduced in the K<U+0392> cells upon
NRSF/REST knockdown. These results imply that NRSF/REST plays an important role
in the survival of oral cancer cells by regulating the mTOR signaling pathway.

PMID: 25524378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Mar;1849(3):300-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.12.001. 
Epub 2014 Dec 5.

The transcriptional regulator BCL6 participates in the secondary gene regulatory 
response to vitamin D.

Nurminen V(1), Neme A(1), Ryynänen J(1), Heikkinen S(1), Seuter S(1), Carlberg
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland,
FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland. (2)School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Eastern Finland, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland. Electronic address:
carsten.carlberg@uef.fi.

The vitamin D metabolite 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3) is the high
affinity ligand of the transcription factor vitamin D receptor (VDR) and
therefore a direct regulator of transcription. Transcriptome-wide analysis of
THP-1 human monocytes had indicated more than 600 genes to be significantly
(p<0.05) stimulated after 4h incubation with 1,25(OH)2D3, but only 67 of them
where more than 1.5-fold up-regulated. These include the genes encoding for the
transcription factors BCL6, NFE2, POU4F2 and ELF4, which are controlled by one or
two VDR binding sites within their chromosomal domains. The latter are defined
via DNA loop formation mediated by the transcription factor CTCF that is highly
conserved in its genome-wide loci. We found BCL6 being most responsive to
1,25(OH)2D3 and selected it for further analysis. An incubation of THP-1 cells
with 1,25(OH)2D3 for 24 h resulted in a significant (p<0.001) change in the mRNA 
expression of more than 1600 genes, of which 132 were at least 2-fold
up-regulated. About half of the latter genes are secondary 1,25(OH)2D3 targets,
since they do not carry any VDR binding site within their chromosomal domain.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing datasets indicated that the majority of 
these domains contain a BCL6 binding site. We followed the secondary
transcriptional response to 1,25(OH)2D3 for eight representative gene examples
and confirmed the binding of CTCF and BCL6 to their respective chromosomal
domains. In conclusion, our study indicated that in monocytes most of the
physiological responses to 1,25(OH)2D3 involve the action of the transcription
factor BCL6.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25482012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 5;9(12):e114568. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114568.
eCollection 2014.

Identification of regulatory genes implicated in continuous flowering of longan
(Dimocarpus longan L.).

Jia T(1), Wei D(1), Meng S(1), Allan AC(2), Zeng L(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Horticulture, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou,
Fujian, P. R. China. (2)The New Zealand Institute for Plant & Food Research
Limited (Plant & Food Research), Mt Albert, Auckland, New Zealand.

Longan (Dimocarpus longan L.) is a tropical/subtropical fruit tree of significant
economic importance in Southeast Asia. However, a lack of transcriptomic and
genomic information hinders research on longan traits, such as the control of
flowering. In this study, high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) was used to
investigate differentially expressed genes between a unique longan cultivar
'Sijimi'(S) which flowers throughout the year and a more typical cultivar
'Lidongben'(L) which flowers only once in the season, with the aim of identifying
candidate genes associated with continuous flowering. 36,527 and 40,982 unigenes 
were obtained by de novo assembly of the clean reads from cDNA libraries of L and
S cultivars. Additionally 40,513 unigenes were assembled from combined reads of
these libraries. A total of 32,475 unigenes were annotated by BLAST search to
NCBI non-redundant protein (NR), Swiss-Prot, Clusters of Orthologous Groups
(COGs) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) databases. Of these,
almost fifteen thousand unigenes were identified as significantly differentially 
expressed genes (DEGs) by using Reads Per kb per Million reads (RPKM) method. A
total of 6,415 DEGs were mapped to 128 KEGG pathways, and 8,743 DEGs were
assigned to 54 Gene Ontology categories. After blasting the DEGs to public
sequence databases, 539 potential flowering-related DEGs were identified. In
addition, 107 flowering-time genes were identified in longan, their expression
levels between two longan samples were compared by RPKM method, of which the
expression levels of 15 were confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR. Our results
suggest longan homologues of SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE (SVP), GIGANTEA (GI), F-BOX 1
(FKF1) and EARLY FLOWERING 4 (ELF4) may be involved this flowering trait and ELF4
may be a key gene. The identification of candidate genes related to continuous
flowering will provide new insight into the molecular process of regulating
flowering time in woody plants.

PMCID: PMC4257721
PMID: 25479005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Exp Bot. 2014 Nov;65(20):6003-12. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eru339. Epub 2014 Aug 21.

Light and the circadian clock mediate time-specific changes in sensitivity to
UV-B stress under light/dark cycles.

Takeuchi T(1), Newton L(1), Burkhardt A(1), Mason S(1), Farré EM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
48824, USA. (2)Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI 48824, USA farre@msu.edu.

In Arabidopsis, the circadian clock regulates UV-B-mediated changes in gene
expression. Here it is shown that circadian clock components are able to inhibit 
UV-B-induced gene expression in a gene-by-gene-specific manner and act downstream
of the initial UV-B sensing by COP1 (CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1) and UVR8
(UV RESISTANCE LOCUS 8). For example, the UV-B induction of ELIP1 (EARLY LIGHT
INDUCIBLE PROTEIN 1) and PRR9 (PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR 9) is directly regulated
by LUX (LUX ARRYTHMO), ELF4 (EARLY FLOWERING 4), and ELF3. Moreover,
time-dependent changes in plant sensitivity to UV-B damage were observed.
Wild-type Arabidopsis plants, but not circadian clock mutants, were more
sensitive to UV-B treatment during the night periods than during the light
periods under diel cycles. Experiments performed under short cycles of 6h light
and 6h darkness showed that the increased stress sensitivity of plants to UV-B in
the dark only occurred during the subjective night and not during the subjective 
day in wild-type seedlings. In contrast, the stress sensitivity of Arabidopsis
mutants with a compromised circadian clock was still influenced by the light
condition during the subjective day. Taken together, the results show that the
clock and light modulate plant sensitivity to UV-B stress at different times of
the day.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

PMCID: PMC4203133
PMID: 25147271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 19;289(38):26143-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.580209. Epub
2014 Jul 31.

The transcription factor MEF/Elf4 is dually modulated by p53-MDM2 axis and
MEF-MDM2 autoregulatory mechanism.

Suico MA(1), Fukuda R(2), Miyakita R(2), Koyama K(2), Taura M(2), Shuto T(2), Kai
H(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan
mann@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp. (2)From the Department of Molecular Medicine, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.
(3)From the Department of Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan
hirokai@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

Myeloid Elf-1-like factor (MEF) or Elf4 is an ETS transcription factor that
activates innate immunity-associated genes such as lysozyme (LYZ), human
ß-defensin 2 (HßD2), and interleukin-8 (IL-8) in epithelial cells and is also
known to influence cell cycle progression. MEF is transcriptionally activated by 
E2F1, but the E2F1-mediated transcriptional activation is inhibited by p53
through E2F1-p53 protein interaction. Although the transcriptional activation of 
MEF has been investigated in depth, its post-translational regulation is not well
explored. By overexpressing MEF cDNA in human cell lines, here we show that MEF
protein expression is suppressed by p53. By screening a number of E3 ligases
regulated by p53, we found that MDM2 is involved in the effect of p53 on MEF.
MDM2 is transcriptionally activated by p53 and interacts with MEF protein to
enhance MEF degradation. MDM2 reduces MEF protein expression, as well as
stability and function of MEF as transcriptional activator. Furthermore, MDM2 was
able to down-regulate MEF in the absence of p53, indicating a p53-independent
effect on MEF. Notably, MEF transcriptionally activates MDM2, which was
previously demonstrated to be the mechanism by which MEF suppresses the p53
protein. These results reveal that in addition to the potential of MEF to
down-regulate p53 by transcriptionally activating E3 ligase MDM2, MEF
participates with MDM2 in a novel autoregulatory feedback loop to regulate
itself. Taken together with the findings on the effect of p53 on MEF, these data 
provide evidence that the p53-MDM2-MEF axis is a feedback mechanism that
exquisitely controls the balance of these transcriptional regulators.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4176203
PMID: 25081543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Plant Signal Behav. 2014;9(3):e28505. Epub 2014 Jan 1.

The LNK1 night light-inducible and clock-regulated gene is induced also in
response to warm-night through the circadian clock nighttime repressor in
Arabidopsis thaliana.

Mizuno T(1), Takeuchi A(1), Nomoto Y(1), Nakamichi N(2), Yamashino T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Functional Genomics; School of Agriculture; Nagoya
University; Furocho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Molecular and
Functional Genomics; School of Agriculture; Nagoya University; Furocho,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan; Institute of Transformative Bio-Molecules; Nagoya
University; Furocho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan.

Ambient temperature has two fundamental impacts on the Arabidopsis circadian
clock system in the processes referred to as temperature compensation and
entrainment, respectively. These temperature-related longstanding problems have
not yet been fully clarified. Recently, we provided evidence that temperature
signals feed into the clock transcriptional circuitry through the evening complex
(EC) nighttime repressor composed of LUX-ELF3-ELF4, and that the transcription of
PRR9, PRR7, GI and LUX is commonly regulated through the nighttime repressor in
response to both moderate changes in temperature (<U+2206>6 °C) and differences in
steady-state growth-compatible temperature (16 °C to 28 °C). These
temperature-associated characteristics of the core clock genes might be relevant 
to the fundamental oscillator functions. Here, we further show that the recently 
identified LNK1 night light-inducible and clock-controlled gene, which actually
has a robust peak at daytime, is induced also by warm-night through the EC
nighttime repressor in a manner very similar to PRR7, which is also night
light-inducible daytime gene. Based on these findings, a hypothetical view is
proposed with regard to the temperature entrainment of the central oscillator.

PMCID: PMC4091318
PMID: 24690904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cell Mol Immunol. 2014 May;11(3):218-20. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2014.1. Epub 2014 Mar
24.

Finding a fairy in the forest: ELF4, a novel and critical element of type I
interferon responses.

Szabo A(1), Rajnavolgyi E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Medical and Health Science Centre, University of
Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Dec;14(12):1237-46.

PMCID: PMC4085491
PMID: 24658434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Apr;12(4):479-84. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0596. Epub
2014 Feb 10.

Clarifying the impact of polycomb complex component disruption in human cancers.

Yamamoto Y(1), Abe A, Emi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Fujita Health University, 1-98 Dengakugakubo,
Kutsukake-cho, Toyoake, Aichi 470-1192, Japan. yyukiya@fujita-hu.ac.jp.

The dysregulation of proper transcriptional control is a major cause of
developmental diseases and cancers. Polycomb proteins form chromatin-modifying
complexes that transcriptionally silence genome regions in higher eukaryotes. The
BCL6 corepressor (BCOR) complex comprises ring finger protein 1B (RNF2/RING1B),
polycomb group ring finger 1 (PCGF1), and lysine-specific demethylase 2B (KDM2B) 
and is uniquely recruited to nonmethylated CpG islands, where it removes histone 
H3K36me2 and induces repressive histone H2A monoubiquitylation. Germline BCOR
mutations have been detected in patients with oculofaciocardiodental and Lenz
microphthalmia syndromes, which are inherited conditions. Recently, several
variants of BCOR and BCOR-like 1 (BCORL1) chimeric fusion transcripts were
reported in human cancers, including acute promyelocytic leukemia, bone sarcoma, 
and hepatocellular carcinoma. In addition, massively parallel sequencing has
identified inactivating somatic BCOR and BCORL1 mutations in patients with acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia, medulloblastoma, and retinoblastoma. More importantly, patients with
AML and MDS with BCOR mutations exhibit poor prognosis. This perspective
highlights the detection of BCOR mutations and fusion transcripts of BCOR and
BCORL1 and discusses their importance for diagnosing cancer subtypes and
estimating the treatment responses of patients. Furthermore, this perspective
proposes the need for additional functional studies to clarify the oncogenic
mechanism by which BCOR and BCORL1 are disrupted in cancers, and how this may
lead to the development of novel therapeutics.

Mol Cancer Res; 12(4); 479-84. ©2014 AACR.

PMID: 24515802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Plant Cell Physiol. 2014 May;55(5):958-76. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcu030. Epub 2014 Feb
4.

Ambient temperature signal feeds into the circadian clock transcriptional
circuitry through the EC night-time repressor in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Mizuno T(1), Nomoto Y, Oka H, Kitayama M, Takeuchi A, Tsubouchi M, Yamashino T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Functional Genomics, School of Agriculture, Nagoya
University, Furocho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8601 Japan.

An interlocking multiloop model has been generally accepted to describe the
transcriptional circuitry of core clock genes, through which robust circadian
rhythms are generated in Arabidopsis thaliana. The circadian clock must have the 
ability to integrate ambient temperature signals into the clock transcriptional
circuitry to regulate clock function properly. Clarification of the underlying
mechanism is a longstanding subject in the field. Here, we provide evidence that 
temperature signals feed into the clock transcriptional circuitry through the
evening complex (EC) night-time repressor consisting of EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3, 
ELF4) and LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX; also known as PCL1). Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assays showed that PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR7 (PRR7), GIGANTEA (GI) and LUX are
direct targets of the night-time repressor. Consequently, transcription of
PRR9/PRR7, GI and LUX is commonly regulated through the night-time repressor in
response to both moderate changes in temperature (<U+0394>6°C) and differences in the
steady-state growth-compatible temperature (16-28°C). A warmer temperature
inhibits EC function more, whereas a cooler temperature stimulates it more.
Consequently, the expression of these target genes is up-regulated in response to
a warm temperature specifically during the dark period, whereas they are
reversibly down-regulated in response to a cool temperature. Transcription of
another EC target, the PIF4 (PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTOR 4) gene, is modulated
through the same thermoregulatory mechanism. The last finding revealed the
sophisticated physiological mechanism underlying the clock-controlled output
pathway, which leads to the PIF4-mediated temperature-adaptive regulation of
hypocotyl elongation.

PMID: 24500967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Mar;44(3):715-27. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343775. Epub 2014 Jan
13.

Transcription factor ELF4 promotes development and function of memory CD8(+) T
cells in Listeria monocytogenes infection.

Mamonkin M(1), Puppi M, Lacorazza HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas
Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.

Most differentiated CD8(+) T cells die off at the end of an infection, revealing 
two main subsets of memory T cells - central and effector memory - which can be
found in lymphoid tissues or circulating through nonlymphoid organs,
respectively. The cell intrinsic regulation of the differentiation of CD8(+) T
cells to effector and central memory remains poorly studied. Herein, we describe 
a novel role of the ETS transcription factor ELF4 in the development and function
of memory CD8(+) T cells following infection with Listeria monocytogenes.
Adoptively transferred Elf4(-/-) naïve CD8(+) T cells produced lower numbers of
effector memory CD8(+) T cells despite a normal pool of central memory. This was 
caused by suboptimal priming and decreased survival of CD8(+) T cells at the peak
of response while enhanced Notch1 signaling and upregulation of eomesodermin
correlated with "normal" development of Elf4(-/-) central memory. Finally, loss
of ELF4 impaired the expansion of both central and effector memory CD8(+) T cells
in a recall response by also activating Notch1 signaling. Altogether, ELF4
emerges as a novel transcriptional regulator of CD8(+) T-cell differentiation in 
response to infection.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24338897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. BMC Bioinformatics. 2013;14 Suppl 10:S3. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-S10-S3. Epub
2013 Aug 12.

A Bayesian approach for parameter estimation in the extended clock gene circuit
of Arabidopsis thaliana.

Higham CF, Husmeier D.

The circadian clock is an important molecular mechanism that enables many
organisms to anticipate and adapt to environmental change. Pokhilko et al.
recently built a deterministic ODE mathematical model of the plant circadian
clock in order to understand the behaviour, mechanisms and properties of the
system. The model comprises 30 molecular species (genes, mRNAs and proteins) and 
over 100 parameters. The parameters have been fitted heuristically to available
gene expression time series data and the calibrated model has been shown to
reproduce the behaviour of the clock components. Ongoing work is extending the
clock model to cover downstream effects, in particular metabolism, necessitating 
further parameter estimation and model selection. This work investigates the
challenges facing a full Bayesian treatment of parameter estimation. Using an
efficient adaptive MCMC proposed by Haario et al. and working in a high
performance computing setting, we quantify the posterior distribution around the 
proposed parameter values and explore the basin of attraction. We investigate if 
Bayesian inference is feasible in this high dimensional setting and thoroughly
assess convergence and mixing with different statistical diagnostics, to prevent 
apparent convergence in some domains masking poor mixing in others.

PMCID: PMC3750527
PMID: 24267177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Immunol. 2014 Jan 1;192(1):178-88. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301372. Epub 2013 Nov
20.

The transcription factor E74-like factor 4 suppresses differentiation of
proliferating CD4+ T cells to the Th17 lineage.

Lee PH(1), Puppi M, Schluns KS, Yu-Lee LY, Dong C, Lacorazza HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030;

The differentiation of CD4(+) T cells into different Th lineages is driven by
cytokine milieu in the priming site and the underlying transcriptional circuitry.
Even though many positive regulators have been identified, it is not clear how
this process is inhibited at transcriptional level. In this study, we report that
the E-twenty six (ETS) transcription factor E74-like factor 4 (ELF4) suppresses
the differentiation of Th17 cells both in vitro and in vivo. Culture of naive
Elf4(-/-) CD4(+) T cells in the presence of IL-6 and TGF-ß (or IL-6, IL-23, and
IL-1ß) resulted in increased numbers of IL-17A-positive cells compared with
wild-type controls. In contrast, the differentiation to Th1, Th2, or regulatory T
cells was largely unaffected by loss of ELF4. The increased expression of genes
involved in Th17 differentiation observed in Elf4(-/-) CD4(+) T cells suggested
that ELF4 controls their programming into the Th17 lineage rather than only
IL-17A gene expression. Despite normal proliferation of naive CD4(+) T cells,
loss of ELF4 lowered the requirement of IL-6 and TGF-ß signaling for IL-17A
induction in each cell division. ELF4 did not inhibit Th17 differentiation by
promoting IL-2 production as proposed for another ETS transcription factor, ETS1.
Elf4(-/-) mice showed increased numbers of Th17 cells in the lamina propria at
steady state, in lymph nodes after immunization, and, most importantly, in the
CNS following experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis induction, contributing
to the increased disease severity. Collectively, our findings suggest that ELF4
restrains Th17 differentiation in dividing CD4(+) T cells by regulating
commitment to the Th17 differentiation program.

PMCID: PMC3872250
PMID: 24259505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Nat Immunol. 2013 Dec;14(12):1237-46. doi: 10.1038/ni.2756. Epub 2013 Nov 3.

ELF4 is critical for induction of type I interferon and the host antiviral
response.

You F(1), Wang P, Yang L, Yang G, Zhao YO, Qian F, Walker W, Sutton R, Montgomery
R, Lin R, Iwasaki A, Fikrig E.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Mol Immunol. 2014 May;11(3):218-20.

Induction of type I interferon is a central event of innate immunity, essential
for host defense. Here we report that the transcription factor ELF4 is induced by
type I interferon and upregulates interferon expression in a feed-forward loop.
ELF4 deficiency leads to reduced interferon production, resulting in enhanced
susceptibility to West Nile virus encephalitis in mice. After viral infection,
ELF4 is recruited by STING, interacts with and is activated by the MAVS-TBK1
complex, and translocates into the nucleus to bind interferon promoters.
Cooperative binding with ELF4 increases the binding affinity of interferon
regulatory factors IRF3 and IRF7, which is mediated by EICE elements. Thus, in
addition to identifying a regulator of innate immune signaling, we uncovered a
role for EICE elements in interferon transactivation.

PMCID: PMC3939855
PMID: 24185615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Immunol Lett. 2013 Nov-Dec;156(1-2):94-101. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2013.09.008.
Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Differential roles of KLF4 in the development and differentiation of CD8+ T
cells.

Mamonkin M(1), Shen Y, Lee PH, Puppi M, Park CS, Lacorazza HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas
Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, United States.

The transcription factor Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) can activate or repress
gene expression in a cell-context dependent manner. We have previously shown that
KLF4 inhibits the proliferation of naïve CD8(+) T cells in vitro downstream of
the transcription factor ELF4. In this work, we describe a novel role of KLF4 in 
the differentiation of CD8(+) T cells upon infection. Loss of KLF4 had minimal
effect on thymic T cell development and distribution of mature T cells in the
spleen, blood, and lymph nodes. KLF4-deficient naïve CD8(+) T cells also
displayed normal homeostatic proliferation upon adoptive transfer into
lymphopenic hosts. However, activation of KLF4-deficient naïve CD8(+) T cells by 
in vitro TCR crosslink and co-stimulation resulted in increased proliferation.
Furthermore, naïve KLF4-deficient OT-I CD8(+) T cells generated increased numbers
of functional memory CD8(+) T cells compared to wild type OT-I CD8(+) T cells
co-injected in the same recipient in both primary and recall responses to
Listeria monocytogenes-OVA. Collectively, our data demonstrate that KLF4
regulates differentiation of functional memory CD8(+) T cells while sparing
development and homeostasis of naïve CD8(+) T cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3851948
PMID: 24075846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Neuron. 2013 Sep 18;79(6):1169-82. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.06.039.

CYFIP1 coordinates mRNA translation and cytoskeleton remodeling to ensure proper 
dendritic spine formation.

De Rubeis S(1), Pasciuto E, Li KW, Fernández E, Di Marino D, Buzzi A, Ostroff LE,
Klann E, Zwartkruis FJ, Komiyama NH, Grant SG, Poujol C, Choquet D, Achsel T,
Posthuma D, Smit AB, Bagni C.

Author information: 
(1)VIB Center for Biology of Disease, KULeuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Center for 
Human Genetics and Leuven Institute for Neuroscience and Disease (LIND),
KULeuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.

The CYFIP1/SRA1 gene is located in a chromosomal region linked to various
neurological disorders, including intellectual disability, autism, and
schizophrenia. CYFIP1 plays a dual role in two apparently unrelated processes,
inhibiting local protein synthesis and favoring actin remodeling. Here, we show
that brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)-driven synaptic signaling releases 
CYFIP1 from the translational inhibitory complex, triggering translation of
target mRNAs and shifting CYFIP1 into the WAVE regulatory complex. Active Rac1
alters the CYFIP1 conformation, as demonstrated by intramolecular FRET, and is
key in changing the equilibrium of the two complexes. CYFIP1 thus orchestrates
the two molecular cascades, protein translation and actin polymerization, each of
which is necessary for correct spine morphology in neurons. The CYFIP1
interactome reveals many interactors associated with brain disorders, opening new
perspectives to define regulatory pathways shared by neurological disabilities
characterized by spine dysmorphogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3781321
PMID: 24050404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Cell Sci. 2013 Jun 1;126(Pt 11):2525-33. doi: 10.1242/jcs.122911. Epub 2013 Apr
2.

During post-natal human myogenesis, normal myotube size requires TRPC1- and
TRPC4-mediated Ca²<U+207A> entry.

Antigny F(1), Koenig S, Bernheim L, Frieden M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Neurosciences, Geneva Medical Center, 1, Rue Michel
Servet, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Myogenesis involves expression of muscle-specific transcription factors such as
myogenin and myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2), and is essentially regulated by
fluctuations of cytosolic Ca(2+) concentration. Recently we demonstrated that
molecular players of store-operated Ca(2+) entry (SOCE), stromal interacting
molecule (STIM) and Orai, were fundamental in the differentiation process of
post-natal human myoblasts. Besides STIM and Orai proteins, the family of
transient receptor potential canonical (TRPC) channels was shown to be part of
SOCE in several cellular systems. In the present study, we investigated the role 
of TRPC channels in the human myogenesis process. We demonstrate, using an siRNA 
strategy or dominant negative TRPC overexpression, that TRPC1 and TRPC4
participate in SOCE, are necessary for MEF2 expression, and allow the fusion
process to generate myotubes of normal size. Conversely, the overexpression of
STIM1 with TRPC4 or TRPC1 increased SOCE, accelerated myoblast fusion, and
produced hypertrophic myotubes. Interestingly, in cells depleted of TRPC1 or
TRPC4, the normalization of SOCE by increasing the extracellular calcium
concentration or by overexpressing STIM1 or Orai1 was not sufficient to restore
normal fusion process. A normal differentiation occurred only when TRPC channel
was re-expressed. These findings indicate that Ca(2+) entry mediated specifically
by TRPC1 and TRPC4 allow the formation of normal-sized myotubes.

PMID: 23549783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cell Rep. 2013 Mar 28;3(3):671-7. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.02.021. Epub 2013
Mar 21.

ELF4 regulates GIGANTEA chromatin access through subnuclear sequestration.

Kim Y(1), Lim J, Yeom M, Kim H, Kim J, Wang L, Kim WY, Somers DE, Nam HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of New Biology, DGIST, Daegu 711-873, Republic of Korea.

Many organisms, including plants, use the circadian clock to measure the duration
of day and night. Daily rhythms in the plant circadian system are generated by
multiple interlocked transcriptional/translational loops and also by spatial
regulations such as nuclear translocation. GIGANTEA (GI), one of the key clock
components in Arabidopsis, makes distinctive nuclear bodies like other
nuclear-localized circadian regulators. However, little is known about the
dynamics or roles of GI subnuclear localization. Here, we characterize GI
subnuclear compartmentalization and identify unexpected dynamic changes under
diurnal conditions. We further identify EARLY FLOWERING 4 (ELF4) as a regulator
of GI nuclear distribution through a physical interaction. ELF4 sequesters GI
from the nucleoplasm, where GI binds the promoter of CONSTANS (CO), to discrete
nuclear bodies. We suggest that the subnuclear compartmentalization of GI by ELF4
contributes to the regulation of photoperiodic flowering.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3917306
PMID: 23523352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 29;288(13):9457-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.415703. Epub 2013
Feb 7.

Mutations in the nucleolar phosphoprotein, nucleophosmin, promote the expression 
of the oncogenic transcription factor MEF/ELF4 in leukemia cells and potentiates 
transformation.

Ando K(1), Tsushima H, Matsuo E, Horio K, Tominaga-Sato S, Imanishi D, Imaizumi
Y, Iwanaga M, Itonaga H, Yoshida S, Hata T, Moriuchi R, Kiyoi H, Nimer S, Mano H,
Naoe T, Tomonaga M, Miyazaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Atomic Bomb Disease and Hibakusha Medicine Unit,
Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-12-4 Sakamoto,
Nagasaki, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

Myeloid ELF1-like factor (MEF/ELF4), a member of the ETS transcription factors,
can function as an oncogene in murine cancer models and is overexpressed in
various human cancers. Here, we report a mechanism by which MEF/ELF4 may be
activated by a common leukemia-associated mutation in the nucleophosmin gene. By 
using a tandem affinity purification assay, we found that MEF/ELF4 interacts with
multifactorial protein nucleophosmin (NPM1). Coimmunoprecipitation and GST
pull-down experiments demonstrated that MEF/ELF4 directly forms a complex with
NPM1 and also identified the region of NPM1 that is responsible for this
interaction. Functional analyses showed that wild-type NPM1 inhibited the DNA
binding and transcriptional activity of MEF/ELF4 on the HDM2 promoter, whereas
NPM1 mutant protein (Mt-NPM1) enhanced these activities of MEF/ELF4. Induction of
Mt-NPM1 into MEF/ELF4-overexpressing NIH3T3 cells facilitated malignant
transformation. In addition, clinical leukemia samples with NPM1 mutations had
higher human MDM2 (HDM2) mRNA expression. Our data suggest that enhanced HDM2
expression induced by mutant NPM1 may have a role in MEF/ELF4-dependent
leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3611015
PMID: 23393136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Dec 7;11(6):836-44. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.09.012.

MEF promotes stemness in the pathogenesis of gliomas.

Bazzoli E(1), Pulvirenti T, Oberstadt MC, Perna F, Wee B, Schultz N, Huse JT,
Fomchenko EI, Voza F, Tabar V, Brennan CW, DeAngelis LM, Nimer SD, Holland EC,
Squatrito M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria
Integrata, 37134 Verona, Italy.

High-grade gliomas are aggressive and uniformly fatal tumors, composed of a
heterogeneous population of cells that include many with stem-cell-like
properties. The acquisition of stem-like traits might contribute to glioma
initiation, growth, and recurrence. Here we investigated the role of the
transcription factor myeloid Elf-1 like factor (MEF, also known as ELF4) in
gliomas. We found that MEF is highly expressed in both human and mouse
glioblastomas and its absence impairs gliomagenesis in a PDGF-driven glioma mouse
model. We show that modulation of MEF levels in both mouse neural stem cells and 
human glioblastoma cells has a significant impact on neurosphere formation.
Moreover, we identify Sox2 as a direct downstream target of MEF. Taken together, 
our studies implicate MEF as a previously unrecognized gatekeeper gene in
gliomagenesis that promotes stem cell characteristics through Sox2 activation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3812924
PMID: 23217424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Neuroscience. 2012 Dec 6;225:22-34. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.08.057. Epub
2012 Sep 6.

Parkin prevents cortical atrophy and Aß-induced alterations of brain metabolism: 
¹³C NMR and magnetic resonance imaging studies in AD models.

Algarzae N(1), Hebron M, Miessau M, Moussa CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Laboratory for Dementia and Parkinsonism,
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative aging disorder characterized by
extracellular Aß plaques and intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles. We conducted 
longitudinal studies to examine the effects of Aß on brain amino acid metabolism 
in lentiviral Aß(1-42) gene transfer animals and transgenic AD mice. We also
performed lentiviral parkin gene delivery to determine the effects of Aß
clearance in AD models. Aß(1-42) activated mTOR signaling, and increased 4E-BP
phosphorylation. Aß(1-42) increased the synthesis of glutamate and aspartate, but
not glutamine, leucine and isoleucine, but an increase in leucine and isoleucine 
levels was concurrent with diminution of neurotransmitters. Additionally,
Aß(1-42) attenuated mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle activity and
decreased synthesis of its by-products. Glutamate levels increased prior to
lactate accumulation, suggesting oxidative stress. Importantly, parkin reversed
the effects of Aß(1-42) on amino acid levels, prevented TCA cycle impairment and 
protected against glutamate toxicity. Cortical atrophy was observed in aged
3xTg-AD mice, while parkin expression was associated with reduced atrophy.
Similarly, Aß(1-42) resulted in significant cell loss, pronounced astrogliosis
and cortical atrophy and parkin reduced astrogliosis and reversed Aß(1-42)
effects on cell loss and cortical atrophy. Taken together these data suggest that
parkin prevents amyloid-induced alteration of brain metabolism and may be used as
a therapeutic target to limit neuronal loss in AD.

Copyright © 2012 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3479335
PMID: 22960314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Gen Virol. 2012 Nov;93(Pt 11):2346-56. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.044255-0. Epub 2012
Aug 15.

Respiratory syncytial virus modifies microRNAs regulating host genes that affect 
virus replication.

Bakre A(1), Mitchell P, Coleman JK, Jones LP, Saavedra G, Teng M, Tompkins SM,
Tripp RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602,
USA.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) causes substantial morbidity and
life-threatening lower respiratory tract disease in infants, young children and
the elderly. Understanding the host response to RSV infection is critical for
developing disease-intervention approaches. The role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in
post-transcriptional regulation of host genes responding to RSV infection is not 
well understood. In this study, it was shown that RSV infection of a human
alveolar epithelial cell line (A549) induced five miRNAs (let-7f, miR-24,
miR-337-3p, miR-26b and miR-520a-5p) and repressed two miRNAs (miR-198 and
miR-595), and showed that RSV G protein triggered let-7f expression.
Luciferase-untranslated region reporters and miRNA mimics and inhibitors
validated the predicted targets, which included cell-cycle genes (CCND1, DYRK2
and ELF4), a chemokine gene (CCL7) and the suppressor of cytokine signalling 3
gene (SOCS3). Modulating let-7 family miRNA levels with miRNA mimics and
inhibitors affected RSV replication, indicating that RSV modulates host miRNA
expression to affect the outcome of the antiviral host response, and this was
mediated in part through RSV G protein expression.

PMCID: PMC3542124
PMID: 22894925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nat Immunol. 2012 May 20;13(7):642-50. doi: 10.1038/ni.2304.

Notch-RBP-J signaling regulates the transcription factor IRF8 to promote
inflammatory macrophage polarization.

Xu H(1), Zhu J, Smith S, Foldi J, Zhao B, Chung AY, Outtz H, Kitajewski J, Shi C,
Weber S, Saftig P, Li Y, Ozato K, Blobel CP, Ivashkiv LB, Hu X.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Tissue Degeneration Program, Hospital for Special Surgery, New
York, New York, USA.

Emerging concepts suggest that the functional phenotype of macrophages is
regulated by transcription factors that define alternative activation states. We 
found that RBP-J, the main nuclear transducer of signaling via Notch receptors,
augmented Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)-induced expression of key mediators of
classically activated M1 macrophages and thus of innate immune responses to
Listeria monocytogenes. Notch-RBP-J signaling controlled expression of the
transcription factor IRF8 that induced downstream M1 macrophage-associated genes.
RBP-J promoted the synthesis of IRF8 protein by selectively augmenting kinase
IRAK2-dependent signaling via TLR4 to the kinase MNK1 and downstream
translation-initiation control through eIF4E. Our results define a signaling
network in which signaling via Notch-RBP-J and TLRs is integrated at the level of
synthesis of IRF8 protein and identify a mechanism by which heterologous
signaling pathways can regulate the TLR-induced inflammatory polarization of
macrophages.

PMCID: PMC3513378
PMID: 22610140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. EMBO Mol Med. 2012 Jul;4(7):594-602. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201200233. Epub 2012 Mar
21.

Translation-dependent mechanisms lead to PML upregulation and mediate oncogenic
K-RAS-induced cellular senescence.

Scaglioni PP(1), Rabellino A, Yung TM, Bernardi R, Choi S, Konstantinidou G,
Nardella C, Cheng K, Pandolfi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
pier.scaglioni@utsouthwestern.edu

Expression of oncogenic K-RAS in primary cells elicits oncogene-induced cellular 
senescence (OIS), a form of growth arrest that potently opposes tumourigenesis.
This effect has been largely attributed to transcriptional mechanisms that depend
on the p53 tumour suppressor protein. The PML tumour suppressor was initially
identified as a component of the PML-RARa oncoprotein of acute promyelocytic
leukaemia (APL). PML, a critical OIS mediator, is upregulated by oncogenic K-RAS 
in vivo and in vitro. We demonstrate here that oncogenic K-RAS induces PML
protein upregulation by activating the RAS/MEK1/mTOR/eIF4E pathway even in the
absence of p53. Under these circumstances, PML mRNA is selectively associated to 
polysomes. Importantly, we find that the PML 5' untranslated mRNA region plays a 
key role in mediating PML protein upregulation and that its presence is essential
for an efficient OIS response. These findings demonstrate that upregulation of
PML translation plays a central role in oncogenic K-RAS-induced OIS. Thus,
selective translation initiation plays a critical role in tumour suppression with
important therapeutic implications for the treatment of solid tumours and APL.

Copyright © 2012 EMBO Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC3407947
PMID: 22359342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Chin Med J (Engl). 2011 Nov;124(22):3613-7.

Gene expression changes in patients with fulminant type 1 diabetes.

Wang Z(1), Zheng C, Tan YY, Li YJ, Yang L, Huang G, Lin J, Zhou ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, Second Xiangya Hospital, and Institute of Metabolism and
Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Diabetes Immunology, Ministry of Education,
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China.

BACKGROUND: Fulminant type 1 diabetes (F1D) is a complex disease. Microarray
analysis was used to identify gene expression changes and obtain understanding of
the underlying mechanisms.
METHODS: Microarray analysis was performed on peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
from six F1D patients and six matched healthy subjects. Real-time polymerase
chain reaction was used to verify the differentially expressed genes. NK cell
activity was detected by methyl thiazoleterazolium assay.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis identified 759 genes differing in expression between
F1D patients and controls at a false discovery rate of 0.05. Expression of TLR9, 
ELF4 and IL1RAP were verified and consistent with changes in microarray results. 
NK cell activity was decreased in F1D. With use of a knowledge base,
differentially expressed genes could be placed within different pathways with
predicted functions including interleukin-1, and tumor necrosis factor-a
signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: These results identify several genes indicating possible mechanisms 
in F1D. NK cell dysfunction resulting from changes in expression of TLR9, ELF4
and IL1RAP, and pathways of interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor-a signaling
might be involved in F1D through inducing ß-cell dysfunction.

PMID: 22340212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Plant. 2012 May;5(3):678-87. doi: 10.1093/mp/sss005. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

GIGANTEA and EARLY FLOWERING 4 in Arabidopsis exhibit differential phase-specific
genetic influences over a diurnal cycle.

Kim Y(1), Yeom M, Kim H, Lim J, Koo HJ, Hwang D, Somers D, Nam HG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Life Sciences, POSTECH, Hyojadong, Pohang, Kyungbuk,
790-784, Republic of Korea.

The endogenous circadian clock regulates many physiological processes related to 
plant survival and adaptability. GIGANTEA (GI), a clock-associated protein,
contributes to the maintenance of circadian period length and amplitude, and also
regulates flowering time and hypocotyl growth in response to day length.
Similarly, EARLY FLOWERING 4 (ELF4), another clock regulator, also contributes to
these processes. However, little is known about either the genetic or molecular
interactions between GI and ELF4 in Arabidopsis. In this study, we investigated
the genetic interactions between GI and ELF4 in the regulation of circadian
clock-controlled outputs. Our mutant analysis shows that GI is epistatic to ELF4 
in flowering time determination, while ELF4 is epistatic to GI in hypocotyl
growth regulation. Moreover, GI and ELF4 have a synergistic or additive effect on
endogenous clock regulation. Gene expression profiling of gi, elf4, and gi elf4
mutants further established that GI and ELF4 have differentially dominant
influences on circadian physiological outputs at dusk and dawn, respectively.
This phasing of GI and ELF4 influences provides a potential means to achieve
diversity in the regulation of circadian physiological outputs, including
flowering time and hypocotyl growth.

PMCID: PMC3355345
PMID: 22328721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Plant Cell. 2012 Feb;24(2):428-43. doi: 10.1105/tpc.111.093807. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

EARLY FLOWERING4 recruitment of EARLY FLOWERING3 in the nucleus sustains the
Arabidopsis circadian clock.

Herrero E(1), Kolmos E, Bujdoso N, Yuan Y, Wang M, Berns MC, Uhlworm H, Coupland 
G, Saini R, Jaskolski M, Webb A, Gonçalves J, Davis SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, D-50829 Cologne, Germany.

The plant circadian clock is proposed to be a network of several interconnected
feedback loops, and loss of any component leads to changes in oscillator speed.
We previously reported that Arabidopsis thaliana EARLY FLOWERING4 (ELF4) is
required to sustain this oscillator and that the elf4 mutant is arrhythmic. This 
phenotype is shared with both elf3 and lux. Here, we show that overexpression of 
either ELF3 or LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX) complements the elf4 mutant phenotype.
Furthermore, ELF4 causes ELF3 to form foci in the nucleus. We used expression
data to direct a mathematical position of ELF3 in the clock network. This
revealed direct effects on the morning clock gene PRR9, and we determined
association of ELF3 to a conserved region of the PRR9 promoter. A cis-element in 
this region was suggestive of ELF3 recruitment by the transcription factor LUX,
consistent with both ELF3 and LUX acting genetically downstream of ELF4. Taken
together, using integrated approaches, we identified ELF4/ELF3 together with LUX 
to be pivotal for sustenance of plant circadian rhythms.

PMCID: PMC3315225
PMID: 22327739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Mol Plant. 2012 May;5(3):619-28. doi: 10.1093/mp/ssr122. Epub 2012 Feb 6.

Diurnal dependence of growth responses to shade in Arabidopsis: role of hormone, 
clock, and light signaling.

Sellaro R(1), Pacín M, Casal JJ.

Author information: 
(1)IFEVA, Facultad de Agronomía, Universidad de Buenos Aires and Consejo Nacional
de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Av. San Martín 4453, 1417 Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

We investigated the diurnal dependence of the hypocotyl-growth responses to shade
under sunlight-night cycles in Arabidopsis thaliana. Afternoon shade events
promoted hypocotyl growth, while morning shade was ineffective. The lhy-D, elf3, 
lux, pif4 pif5, toc1, and quadruple della mutants retained the response to
afternoon shade and the lack of response to morning shade while the lhy cca1
mutant responded to both morning and afternoon shade. The phyB mutant, plants
overexpressing the multidrug resistance-like membrane protein ABCB19, and the
iaa17/axr3 loss-of-function mutant failed to respond to shade. Transient exposure
of sunlight-grown seedlings to synthetic auxin in the afternoon caused a stronger
promotion of hypocotyl growth than morning treatments. The promotion of hypocotyl
growth by afternoon shade or afternoon auxin required light perceived by
phytochrome A or cryptochromes during the previous hours of the photoperiod.
Although the ELF4-ELF3-LUX complex, PIF4, PIF5, and DELLA are key players in the 
generation of diurnal hypocotyl-growth patterns, they exert a minor role in the
control of the diurnal pattern of growth responses to shade. We conclude that the
strong diurnal dependency of hypocotyl-growth responses to shade relates to the
balance between the antagonistic actions of LHY-CCA1 and a light-derived signal.

PMID: 22311777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Nov;227(11):3603-12. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24064.

Myeloid Elf-1-like factor stimulates adipogenic differentiation through the
induction of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> expression in bone
marrow.

Baek K(1), Cho JY, Hwang HR, Kwon A, Lee HL, Park HJ, Qadir AS, Ryoo HM, Woo KM, 
Baek JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, School of Dentistry and Dental Research
Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Myeloid Elf-1 like factor (MEF) is one of the Ets transcription factors known to 
regulate cell proliferation and differentiation. A previous report has shown that
osteoblast-specific MEF transgenic mice (Col1a1-MEF TG mice) have low bone mass
but high bone marrow adiposity. In the present study, we explored a previously
unappreciated mechanism whereby MEF promotes adipogenesis in bone marrow. An
adipogenic colony-forming unit assay showed that bone marrow cells derived from
Col1a1-MEF TG mice had a higher adipogenic differentiation potential compared to 
those from wild-type. The levels of adipogenic marker genes expression in 3T3L1
cells were higher when co-cultured with Col1a1-MEF TG bone marrow cells than with
wild-type cells. MC3T3-E1 preosteoblasts transfected with MEF secreted higher
levels of 15-deoxy-delta (12, 14)-prostaglandin J(2), a potent endogenous ligand 
of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>), under adipogenic
conditions. MEF overexpression increased the adipogenic marker genes expression
including PPAR<U+03B3> and lipid droplet accumulation in MC3T3-E1 preosteoblasts and
3T3L1 preadipocytes. Endogenous MEF expression levels increased as adipocyte
differentiation proceeded. Knockdown of MEF by siRNA suppressed expression levels
of adipogenic marker genes including PPAR<U+03B3>. MEF directly bound to the MEF binding
element on the mouse PPAR<U+03B3> promoter, transactivating promoter activity.
Immunohistochemical staining of tibia sections demonstrated that bone lining
cells and bone marrow cells express higher levels of PPAR<U+03B3> protein in Col1a1-MEF 
TG mice than in wild-type mice. These results suggest that MEF transactivates
PPAR<U+03B3> expression, which, in turn, enhances adipogenic differentiation.
Furthermore, MEF overexpressing osteoblasts secrete higher levels of adipogenic
factors, creating a marrow microenvironment that favors adipogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22307523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Plant Signal Behav. 2012 Feb;7(2):170-3. doi: 10.4161/psb.18766. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

ELF3 recruitment to the PRR9 promoter requires other Evening Complex members in
the Arabidopsis circadian clock.

Chow BY(1), Helfer A, Nusinow DA, Kay SA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell & Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences,
Center for Chronobiology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

Biological timekeeping is essential for proper growth and development. Organisms 
such as the model plant Arabidopsis use the circadian clock to coordinate
biological processes with the environment so that changes in conditions are
anticipated and processes favorably phased. Despite the identification of
numerous clock genes, knowledge of their molecular connectivity and influence on 
output programs remains limited. We recently showed LUX encodes a
sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that directly regulates expression of the
morning clock gene PRR9. We also showed that LUX interacts with the
evening-phased proteins ELF3 and ELF4 to form a complex called the Evening
Complex (EC). The EC binds the PIF4 and PIF5 promoters to control hypocotyl
growth as a clock output. Here we provide evidence that LUX also recruits ELF3 to
the PRR9 promoter. As with the PIF4 and PIF5 promoters, both LUX and its close
homolog NOX are required for recruitment. Hence the entire EC likely functions
together as part of the core clock oscillator to optimize plant fitness.

PMCID: PMC3405715
PMID: 22307044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Plant Sci. 2012 Mar;184:141-7. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2011.12.014. Epub 2012 Jan
3.

Light at night resynchronizes the evening-phased rhythms of TOC1 and ELF4 in
Phaseolus vulgaris.

Galeou A(1), Prombona A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, Chronobiology Laboratory, NCSR Demokritos, 15310 Aghia
Paraskevi, Attiki, Greece.

Circadian clocks regulate the adaptation of the organisms' physiology to the
environmental light-dark cycles. Photic resetting of the clock differs among
plant species. In Arabidopsis thaliana, morning-phased genes are not responsive
to light signals at night, while in Phaseolus vulgaris, morning-phased genes are 
responsive to light at trough phases that are reached during the night. In order 
to explore this further, in this work we investigated the light-responsiveness at
night of two P. vulgaris evening phased genes, the orthologs of TOC1 and ELF4.
Our results demonstrate that the oscillation of their expression is symphasic
under all applied photic conditions. Thus, under photoperiod peak phases are
obtained in the evening (LD 12:12) or early at night (LD 6:18). Light application
at the beginning of the night under LD 6:18 results in a phase shift of the
PvTOC1 and PvELF4 oscillation, while at the end of the night the phase remains
unchanged. Moreover, when light is applied at the narrow time window of the peak 
phase, a significant transient increase in the expression of both PvTOC1 and
PvELF4 is caused. These results indicate that, depending on the plant species,
evening-phased genes may also participate in the resetting of the circadian clock
machinery by light.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22284718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Cancer Biol Ther. 2012 Mar;13(5):272-80. doi: 10.4161/cbt.18923. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Elevated expression of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E is associated 
with proliferation, invasion and acquired resistance to erlotinib in lung cancer.

Li Y(1), Fan S, Koo J, Yue P, Chen ZG, Owonikoko TK, Ramalingam SS, Khuri FR, Sun
SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University School of
Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) is the rate-limiting factor
for cap-dependent translation initiation, which is known to regulate oncogenesis.
Elevated eIF4E and its negative impact on prognosis in human non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) have been reported previously. However, its potential as a
therapeutic target and role in regulation of sensitivity to EGFR inhibitors is an
area of ongoing investigations. In this study, we detected increased levels of
eIF4E in 16 human NSCLC cell lines compared with their normal bronchial
epithelial cells. Consistently, human tissue array analysis showed that eIF4E
expression was significantly higher in human NSCLC tissues than normal tissues.
Inhibition of eIF4E using eIF4E siRNA inhibited the growth and invasion of NSCLC 
cells. These data suggest that eIF4E overexpression plays a crucial role in
positive regulation of the growth and invasion of NSCLC cells. By proteomics, we 
found that eIF4E levels were elevated in erlotinib-resistant cell lines compared 
with the sensitive parental cell line. In agreement, assembly of the eIF4F cap
complex and several oncogenic proteins regulated by the cap-dependent translation
mechanism, were also increased in erlotinib-resistant cells. Thus,
erlotinib-resistant cells exhibit elevated eIF4E expression and cap-dependent
translation. Inhibition of eIF4F with different means (e.g., gene knockdown)
downregulated c-Met expression and partially restored cell sensitivity to
erlotinib, suggesting that elevated eIF4E contributes to development of erlotinib
resistance, likely through positive regulation of c-Met expression. Taken
together, we suggest that elevated eIF4E in NSCLC cells is associated with
proliferation, invasion and acquired erlotinib resistance.

PMCID: PMC3679095
PMID: 22236867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Mol Biol. 2012 Feb 3;415(5):781-92. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.12.002. Epub 2011
Dec 9.

Structural insights into the allosteric effects of 4EBP1 on the eukaryotic
translation initiation factor eIF4E.

Siddiqui N(1), Tempel W, Nedyalkova L, Volpon L, Wernimont AK, Osborne MJ, Park
HW, Borden KL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal,
Montréal, QC, Canada H3T 1J4.

The eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF4E plays key roles in
cap-dependent translation and mRNA export. These functions rely on binding the
7-methyl-guanosine moiety (5'cap) on the 5'-end of all mRNAs. eIF4E is regulated 
by proteins such as eIF4G and eIF4E binding proteins (4EBPs) that bind the dorsal
surface of eIF4E, distal to the cap binding site, and modulate cap binding
activity. Both proteins increase the affinity of eIF4E for 5'cap. Our
understanding of the allosteric effects and structural underpinnings of 4EBP1 or 
eIF4G binding can be advanced by obtaining structural data on cap-free eIF4E
bound to one of these proteins. Here, we report the crystal structure of
apo-eIF4E and cap-free eIF4E in complex with a 4EBP1 peptide. We also monitored
4EBP1 binding to cap-free eIF4E in solution using NMR. Together, these studies
suggest that 4EBP1 transforms eIF4E into a cap-receptive state. NMR methods were 
also used to compare the allosteric routes activated by 4EBP1, eIF4G, and the
arenavirus Z protein, a negative regulator of cap binding. We observed chemical
shift perturbation at the dorsal binding site leading to alterations in the core 
of the protein, which were ultimately communicated to the unoccupied cap binding 
site of eIF4E. There were notable similarities between the routes taken by 4EBP1 
and eIF4G and differences from the negative regulator Z. Thus, binding of 4EBP1
or eIF4G allosterically drives alterations throughout the protein that increase
the affinity of eIF4E for the 5'cap.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3269305
PMID: 22178476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Feb;32(4):763-73. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05745-11. Epub 2011 Dec
12.

Integration of Elf-4 into stem/progenitor and erythroid regulatory networks
through locus-wide chromatin studies coupled with in vivo functional validation.

Smith AM(1), Calero-Nieto FJ, Schütte J, Kinston S, Timms RT, Wilson NK, Hannah
RL, Landry JR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom. as646@cam.ac.uk

The ETS transcription factor Elf-4 is an important regulator of hematopoietic
stem cell (HSC) and T cell homeostasis. To gain insights into the transcriptional
circuitry within which Elf-4 operates, we used comparative sequence analysis
coupled with chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with microarray technology
(ChIP-chip) assays for specific chromatin marks to identify three promoters and
two enhancers active in hematopoietic and endothelial cell lines. Comprehensive
functional validation of each of these regulatory regions in transgenic mouse
embryos identified a tissue-specific enhancer (-10E) that displayed activity in
fetal liver, dorsal aorta, vitelline vessels, yolk sac, and heart. Integration of
a ChIP-sequencing (ChIP-Seq) data set for 10 key stem cell transcription factors 
showed Pu.1, Fli-1, and Erg were bound to the -10E element, and mutation of three
highly conserved ETS sites within the enhancer abolished its activity. Finally,
the transcriptional repressor Gfi1b was found to bind to and repress one of the
Elf-4 promoters (-30P), and we show that this repression of Elf-4 is important
for the maturation of primary fetal liver erythroid cells. Taken together, our
results provide a comprehensive overview of the transcriptional control of Elf-4 
within the hematopoietic system and, thus, integrate Elf-4 into the wider
transcriptional regulatory networks that govern hematopoietic development.

PMCID: PMC3272979
PMID: 22158964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Cell Biol. 2011 Nov 28;195(5):751-64. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201108103.

Identification of host cell factors required for intoxication through use of
modified cholera toxin.

Guimaraes CP(1), Carette JE, Varadarajan M, Antos J, Popp MW, Spooner E,
Brummelkamp TR, Ploegh HL.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

We describe a novel labeling strategy to site-specifically attach fluorophores,
biotin, and proteins to the C terminus of the A1 subunit (CTA1) of cholera toxin 
(CTx) in an otherwise correctly assembled and active CTx complex. Using a
biotinylated N-linked glycosylation reporter peptide attached to CTA1, we provide
direct evidence that ~12% of the internalized CTA1 pool reaches the ER. We also
explored the sortase labeling method to attach the catalytic subunit of
diphtheria toxin as a toxic warhead to CTA1, thus converting CTx into a
cytolethal toxin. This new toxin conjugate enabled us to conduct a genetic screen
in human cells, which identified ST3GAL5, SLC35A2, B3GALT4, UGCG, and ELF4 as
genes essential for CTx intoxication. The first four encode proteins involved in 
the synthesis of gangliosides, which are known receptors for CTx. Identification 
and isolation of the ST3GAL5 and SLC35A2 mutant clonal cells uncover a previously
unappreciated differential contribution of gangliosides to intoxication by CTx.

PMCID: PMC3257576
PMID: 22123862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Oct 15;17(20):6369-72. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-2013. 
Epub 2011 Aug 23.

Therapeutic oligonucleotides: the road not taken.

Stein CA(1), Goel S.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, New
York, USA. cstein@montefiore.org

Comment on
    Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Oct 15;17(20):6582-91.

Antisense oligonucleotide therapeutics have been in development for almost 25
years without a single U.S. Food and Drug Administration-approved product in
cancer. The reasons for this absence stem, in part, from a deep lack of
understanding about how to deliver these molecules to cancer cells in vivo.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21862637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Oct 15;17(20):6582-91. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0430. 
Epub 2011 Aug 10.

A phase 1 dose escalation, pharmacokinetic, and pharmacodynamic evaluation of
eIF-4E antisense oligonucleotide LY2275796 in patients with advanced cancer.

Hong DS(1), Kurzrock R, Oh Y, Wheler J, Naing A, Brail L, Callies S, André V,
Kadam SK, Nasir A, Holzer TR, Meric-Bernstam F, Fishman M, Simon G.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Center for Targeted Therapy, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. dshong@mdanderson.org

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Oct 15;17(20):6369-72.

PURPOSE: The antisense oligonucleotide LY2275796 blocks expression of cap-binding
protein eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF-4E), an mRNA translation regulator
upregulated in tumors. This phase I study sought an appropriate LY2275796 dose in
patients with advanced tumors.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A 3-day loading dose, then weekly maintenance doses, were
given to 1 to 3 patient cohorts, beginning with 100 mg and escalating. Plasma
samples were collected to determine LY2275796 concentrations and tumor biopsies
to quantify eIF-4E mRNA/protein.
RESULTS: Thirty patients with stage 4 disease received 1 or more LY2275796 dose. 
A dose-limiting toxicity was observed at 1,200 mg, with 1,000 mg the
maximum-tolerated dose. Across all dose levels, most patients (87%) had only
grade 1 to 2 toxicities. LY2275796 pharmacokinetics supported the dosing regimen.
Comparison of pre- and postdose biopsies showed eIF-4E decreased in most
patients. Fifteen patients had progressive disease, and 7 patients achieved
stable disease (minimum of 6 weeks) as best response, with 2 patients on therapy 
for more than 3 months (one with melanoma, one with cystadenocarcinoma of the
head/neck).
CONCLUSIONS: LY2275796 was well tolerated up to 1,000 mg. Because tumor eIF-4E
expression was decreased, but no tumor response observed, LY2275796 should be
studied combined with other treatment modalities.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21831956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nature. 2011 Jul 13;475(7356):398-402. doi: 10.1038/nature10182.

The ELF4-ELF3-LUX complex links the circadian clock to diurnal control of
hypocotyl growth.

Nusinow DA(1), Helfer A, Hamilton EE, King JJ, Imaizumi T, Schultz TF, Farré EM, 
Kay SA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell & Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences,
University of California San Diego 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California
92093-0130, USA.

The circadian clock is required for adaptive responses to daily and seasonal
changes in environmental conditions. Light and the circadian clock interact to
consolidate the phase of hypocotyl cell elongation to peak at dawn under diurnal 
cycles in Arabidopsis thaliana. Here we identify a protein complex (called the
evening complex)--composed of the proteins encoded by EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3),
ELF4 and the transcription-factor-encoding gene LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX; also known as
PHYTOCLOCK 1)--that directly regulates plant growth. ELF3 is both necessary and
sufficient to form a complex between ELF4 and LUX, and the complex is diurnally
regulated, peaking at dusk. ELF3, ELF4 and LUX are required for the proper
expression of the growth-promoting transcription factors encoded by PHYTOCHROME
INTERACTING FACTOR 4 (PIF4) and PIF5 (also known as PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING
FACTOR 3-LIKE 6) under diurnal conditions. LUX targets the complex to the
promoters of PIF4 and PIF5 in vivo. Mutations in PIF4 and/or PIF5 are epistatic
to the loss of the ELF4-ELF3-LUX complex, suggesting that regulation of PIF4 and 
PIF5 is a crucial function of the complex. Therefore, the evening complex
underlies the molecular basis for circadian gating of hypocotyl growth in the
early evening.

PMCID: PMC3155984
PMID: 21753751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 15;71(14):4857-65. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0455. Epub 
2011 May 26.

The mef/elf4 transcription factor fine tunes the DNA damage response.

Sashida G(1), Bae N, Di Giandomenico S, Asai T, Gurvich N, Bazzoli E, Liu Y,
Huang G, Zhao X, Menendez S, Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology and Chemistry Program of the Sloan-Kettering Institute,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.

The ATM kinase plays a critical role in initiating the DNA damage response that
is triggered by genotoxic stresses capable of inducing DNA double-strand breaks. 
Here, we show that ELF4/MEF, a member of the ETS family of transcription factors,
contributes to the persistence of <U+03B3>H2AX DNA damage foci and promotes the DNA
damage response leading to the induction of apoptosis. Conversely, the absence of
ELF4 promotes the faster repair of damaged DNA and more rapid disappearance of
<U+03B3>H2AX foci in response to <U+03B3>-irradiation, leading to a radio-resistant phenotype
despite normal ATM phosphorylation. Following <U+03B3>-irradiation, ATM phosphorylates
ELF4, leading to its degradation; a mutant form of ELF4 that cannot be
phosphorylated by ATM persists following <U+03B3>-irradiation, delaying the resolution
of <U+03B3>H2AX foci and triggering an excessive DNA damage response. Thus, although
ELF4 promotes the phosphorylation of H2AX by ATM, its activity must be dampened
by ATM-dependent phosphorylation and degradation to avoid an excessive DNA damage
response.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4073677
PMID: 21616937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Nat Cell Biol. 2011 May;13(5):616-22. doi: 10.1038/ncb2219. Epub 2011 Apr 17.

Coordinated transcriptional regulation underlying the circadian clock in
Arabidopsis.

Li G(1), Siddiqui H, Teng Y, Lin R, Wan XY, Li J, Lau OS, Ouyang X, Dai M, Wan J,
Devlin PF, Deng XW, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

The circadian clock controls many metabolic, developmental and physiological
processes in a time-of-day-specific manner in both plants and animals. The
photoreceptors involved in the perception of light and entrainment of the
circadian clock have been well characterized in plants. However, how light
signals are transduced from the photoreceptors to the central circadian
oscillator, and how the rhythmic expression pattern of a clock gene is generated 
and maintained by diurnal light signals remain unclear. Here, we show that in
Arabidopsis thaliana, FHY3, FAR1 and HY5, three positive regulators of the
phytochrome A signalling pathway, directly bind to the promoter of ELF4, a
proposed component of the central oscillator, and activate its expression during 
the day, whereas the circadian-controlled CCA1 and LHY proteins directly suppress
ELF4 expression periodically at dawn through physical interactions with these
transcription-promoting factors. Our findings provide evidence that a set of
light- and circadian-regulated transcription factors act directly and
coordinately at the ELF4 promoter to regulate its cyclic expression, and
establish a potential molecular link connecting the environmental light-dark
cycle to the central oscillator.

PMID: 21499259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Nat Genet. 2011 May;43(5):464-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.804. Epub 2011 Apr 17.

High-resolution characterization of a hepatocellular carcinoma genome.

Totoki Y(1), Tatsuno K, Yamamoto S, Arai Y, Hosoda F, Ishikawa S, Tsutsumi S,
Sonoda K, Totsuka H, Shirakihara T, Sakamoto H, Wang L, Ojima H, Shimada K,
Kosuge T, Okusaka T, Kato K, Kusuda J, Yoshida T, Aburatani H, Shibata T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute,
Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2011 Nov;141(5):1943-5.

Hepatocellular carcinoma, one of the most common virus-associated cancers, is the
third most frequent cause of cancer-related death worldwide. By massively
parallel sequencing of a primary hepatitis C virus-positive hepatocellular
carcinoma (36× coverage) and matched lymphocytes (>28× coverage) from the same
individual, we identified more than 11,000 somatic substitutions of the tumor
genome that showed predominance of T>C/A>G transition and a decrease of the T>C
substitution on the transcribed strand, suggesting preferential DNA repair. Gene 
annotation enrichment analysis of 63 validated non-synonymous substitutions
revealed enrichment of phosphoproteins. We further validated 22 chromosomal
rearrangements, generating four fusion transcripts that had altered
transcriptional regulation (BCORL1-ELF4) or promoter activity. Whole-exome
sequencing at a higher sequence depth (>76× coverage) revealed a TSC1 nonsense
substitution in a subpopulation of the tumor cells. This first high-resolution
characterization of a virus-associated cancer genome identified previously
uncharacterized mutation patterns, intra-chromosomal rearrangements and fusion
genes, as well as genetic heterogeneity within the tumor.

PMID: 21499249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Aug;112(8):2051-61. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23124.

PTH regulates myleoid ELF-1-like factor (MEF)-induced MAB-21-like-1 (MAB21L1)
expression through the JNK1 pathway.

Kim BG(1), Park YJ, Libermann TA, Cho JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National
University, Korea.

Continuous treatment with parathyroid hormone (PTH) or excess endogenous PTH due 
to primary hyperparathyroidism causes increased bone resorption and,
subsequently, decreased bone volume. Our previous studies showed that myeloid
Elf-1-like factor (MEF) not only suppresses osteoblast differentiation through
inhibition of Runx2 activity and other osteogenesis-related genes but also
specifically increases the expression of Mab21, a potential transcriptional
repressor of osteoblast differentiation. Here we show that the JNK1 pathway is
involved in the MEF-mediated up-regulation of Mab21 expression due to PTH
stimulation. PTH increased the transcription level of Mab21 in MG63 human
osteoblastic cells, in contrast to the suppressive effect of TGFß1. PTH
phosphorylates serine residues of MEF as well as c-Jun, a known substrate of
JNK1. By in vitro kinase assay, we confirmed that MEF is phosphorylated by JNK1, 
but not by ERK. Co-transfection of MEF with both MKK4 and JNK1 increased the
promoter activity of Mab21 in CV1<U+2009>cells significantly more than MEF alone. We
also identified the phosphorylation of MEF serine 641 by in vitro and in vivo
JNK1 kinase assays combined with a proteomics approach. In conclusion, our
findings indicate that MEF is involved in PTH suppression of osteoblasts through 
activating the MKK4/JNK1 pathway and subsequently up-regulating Mab21 expression.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21465527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Plant J. 2011 Jul;67(1):37-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04573.x. Epub 2011
Apr 26.

Functional interaction of the circadian clock and UV RESISTANCE
LOCUS 8-controlled UV-B signaling pathways in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Fehér B(1), Kozma-Bognár L, Kevei E, Hajdu A, Binkert M, Davis SJ, Schäfer E, Ulm
R, Nagy F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Biology, Biological Research Centre of the Hungarian
Academy of Sciences, H-6726 Szeged, Hungary.

Circadian clocks regulate many molecular and physiological processes in
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), allowing the timing of these processes to
occur at the most appropriate time of the day in a 24-h period. The accuracy of
timing relies on the synchrony of the clock and the environmental day/night
cycle. Visible light is the most potent signal for such synchronization, but
light-induced responses are also rhythmically attenuated (gated) by the clock.
Here, we report a similar mutual interaction of the circadian clock and
non-damaging photomorphogenic UV-B light. We show that low-intensity UV-B
radiation acts as entraining signal for the clock. UV RESISTANCE LOCUS 8 (UVR8)
and CONSTITUTIVELY PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1 (COP1) are required, but ELONGATED
HYPOCOTYL 5 (HY5) and HY5 HOMOLOG (HYH) are dispensable for this process. UV-B
responsiveness of clock gene expression suggests that photomorphogenic UV-B
entrains the plant clock through transcriptional activation. We also demonstrate 
that UV-B induction of gene expression under these conditions is gated by the
clock in a HY5/HYH-independent manner. The arrhythmic early flowering 3-4 mutant 
showed non-gated, high-level gene induction by UV-B, yet displayed no increased
tolerance to UV-B stress. Thus, the temporal restriction of UV-B responsiveness
by the circadian clock can be considered as saving resources during acclimation
without losing fitness.

© 2011 The Authors. The Plant Journal © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21395889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 May;31(5):1185-91. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.224436. Epub 2011 Feb 24.

The transcription factor E74-like factor controls quiescence of endothelial cells
and their resistance to myeloablative treatments in bone marrow.

Sivina M(1), Yamada T, Park CS, Puppi M, Coskun S, Hirschi K, Lacorazza HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas
Children's Hospital, 1102 Bates St, Ste 830, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The regeneration of the hematopoietic system in bone marrow after
chemotherapy depends on a balance between the quiescence and proliferation of
lineage-specific progenitor cells. Even though the vascular network in bone is
damaged by cytoablation, the transcriptional control of quiescence in endothelial
cells is not well known. In this study, we investigated the role of the
transcription factor E74-like factor (ELF4) in the proliferation of endothelial
cells in bone marrow.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Loss-of-function models were used to study the role of ELF4 
in human and murine endothelial cells. ELF4 promotes cell cycle entry by
activating cyclin-dependent kinase-4 in human umbilical vein endothelial cells.
Elf4-null mice exhibited enhanced recovery of bone marrow CD45- CD31+ endothelial
cells and sinusoidal blood vessels following administration of 5-fluorouracil.
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of ELF4 leads to increased quiescence in bone marrow
endothelial cells by the deregulation of cyclin-dependent kinase-4 expression and
to enhanced regeneration of sinusoidal blood vessels.

PMCID: PMC3100289
PMID: 21350194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Hum Pathol. 2011 Sep;42(9):1319-28. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.11.022. Epub 2011
Feb 16.

Transcription factors engaged in development of NK cells are commonly expressed
in nasal NK/T-cell lymphomas.

Zhang S(1), Li T, Zhang B, Nong L, Aozasa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 100034,
China.

Extranodal natural killer/T (NK/T)-cell lymphoma, nasal type, is a prevailing
tumor in Asia with distinct clinical, pathologic, and immunophenotypic features. 
Previous study revealed amplification and overexpression of T-bet in extranodal
NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type. As a transcription factor, T-bet functionally
cooperates with its family member eomesodermin (EOMES) or ETS family members
(ETS-1 and MEF) and positively regulates the development and cytotoxic function
of natural killer (NK) cells. To evaluate their role in extranodal NK/T-cell
lymphoma, nasal type, the expression status and clinical relevance of these genes
were analyzed in 40 cases of this tumor by in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry. Tumor cells in all 40 cases expressed cytotoxic granule
proteins, of which 39 contained the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) genome. Two (8.7%)
of 23 cases showed T-cell receptor (TCR) <U+03B3> gene clonal rearrangement, confirming 
cytotoxic T lineage of cell derivation. The expression level of T-bet as revealed
by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry was high in extranodal
NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, (82.5% and 100%) and peripheral T-cell lymphomas 
(94.4% and 72.2%) but not in mature B-cell lymphomas in our control group (0% and
0%). By in situ hybridization, high expression of EOMES (80.0%), ETS-1 (82.5%),
and MEF (62.5%) was observed in cases of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal
type, but none of the control groups and cases expressed these molecules.
Coexpression of T-bet and EOMES, ETS-1, or MEF was found in 30 (75%), 25 (62.5%),
and 21 cases (52.5%), respectively. The frequency of coexpression of T-bet and
EOMES was significantly higher than that of other genes. Transcription factors
engaged in NK-cell development are highly expressed in extranodal NK/T-cell
lymphoma, nasal type, suggesting a role in the biologic behavior of this tumor.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21329961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Plant J. 2011 May;66(3):480-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04505.x. Epub 2011 
Mar 4.

Light inputs shape the Arabidopsis circadian system.

Wenden B(1), Kozma-Bognár L, Edwards KD, Hall AJ, Locke JC, Millar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Mayfield Road,
Edinburgh EH93JH, UK.

The circadian clock is a fundamental feature of eukaryotic gene regulation that
is emerging as an exemplar genetic sub-network for systems biology. The circadian
system in Arabidopsis plants is complex, in part due to its phototransduction
pathways, which are themselves under circadian control. We therefore analysed two
simpler experimental systems. Etiolated seedlings entrained by temperature cycles
showed circadian rhythms in the expression of genes that are important for the
clock mechanism, but only a restricted set of downstream target genes were
rhythmic in microarray assays. Clock control of phototransduction pathways
remained robust across a range of light inputs, despite the arrhythmic
transcription of light-signalling genes. Circadian interactions with light
signalling were then analysed using a single active photoreceptor. Phytochrome A 
(phyA) is expected to be the only active photoreceptor that can mediate far-red
(FR) light input to the circadian clock. Surprisingly, rhythmic gene expression
was profoundly altered under constant FR light, in a phyA-dependent manner,
resulting in high expression of evening genes and low expression of morning
genes. Dark intervals were required to allow high-amplitude rhythms across the
transcriptome. Clock genes involved in this response were identified by mutant
analysis, showing that the EARLY FLOWERING 4 gene is a likely target and mediator
of the FR effects. Both experimental systems illustrate how profoundly the light 
input pathways affect the plant circadian clock, and provide strong experimental 
manipulations to understand critical steps in the plant clock mechanism.

© 2011 The Authors. The Plant Journal © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21255161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Feb 11;405(2):186-91. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.01.006. Epub 2011 Jan 7.

Autophagy is involved in anti-viral activity of pentagalloylglucose (PGG) against
Herpes simplex virus type 1 infection in vitro.

Pei Y(1), Chen ZP, Ju HQ, Komatsu M, Ji YH, Liu G, Guo CW, Zhang YJ, Yang CR,
Wang YF, Kitazato K.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedicine Research and Development Center of Jinan University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510632, China. peiying-19802@163.com

Pentagalloylglucose (PGG) is a natural polyphenolic compound with broad-spectrum 
anti-viral activity, however, the mechanisms underlying anti-viral activity
remain undefined. In this study, we investigated the effects of PGG on anti-viral
activity against Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) associated with autophagy.
We found that the PGG anti-HSV-1 activity was impaired significantly in
MEF-atg7-/- cells (autophagy-defective cells) derived from an atg7-/- knockout
mouse. Transmission electron microscopy revealed that PGG-induced autophagosomes 
engulfed HSV-1 virions. The mTOR signaling pathway, an essential pathway for the 
regulation of autophagy, was found to be suppressed following PGG treatment. Data
presented in this report demonstrated for the first time that autophagy induced
following PGG treatment contributed to its anti-HSV activity in vitro.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21216235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. BMC Genomics. 2011 Jan 5;12:8. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-8.

Genic SNP markers and legume synteny reveal candidate genes underlying QTL for
Macrophomina phaseolina resistance and maturity in cowpea [Vigna unguiculata (L) 
Walp.].

Muchero W(1), Ehlers JD, Close TJ, Roberts PA.

Author information: 
(1)Nematology Dep., University of California-Riverside, 3401 Watkins Drive,
Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

BACKGROUND: Macrophomina phaseolina is an emerging and devastating fungal
pathogen that causes significant losses in crop production under high
temperatures and drought stress. An increasing number of disease incidence
reports highlight the wide prevalence of the pathogen around the world and its
contribution toward crop yield suppression. In cowpea [Vigna unguiculata (L)
Walp.], limited sources of low-level host resistance have been identified, the
genetic basis of which is unknown. In this study we report on the identification 
of strong sources of host resistance to M. phaseolina and the genetic mapping of 
putative resistance loci on a cowpea genetic map comprised of gene-derived single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and amplified fragment length polymorphisms
(AFLPs).
RESULTS: Nine quantitative trait loci (QTLs), accounting for between 6.1 and
40.0% of the phenotypic variance (R2), were identified using plant mortality data
taken over three years in field experiments and disease severity scores taken
from two greenhouse experiments. Based on annotated genic SNPs as well as synteny
with soybean (Glycine max) and Medicago truncatula, candidate resistance genes
were found within mapped QTL intervals. QTL Mac-2 explained the largest percent
R2 and was identified in three field and one greenhouse experiments where the QTL
peak co-located with a SNP marker derived from a pectin esterase inhibitor
encoding gene. Maturity effects on the expression of resistance were indicated by
the co-location of Mac-6 and Mac-7 QTLs with maturity-related senescence QTLs
Mat-2 and Mat-1, respectively. Homologs of the ELF4 and FLK flowering genes were 
found in corresponding syntenic soybean regions. Only three Macrophomina
resistance QTLs co-located with delayed drought-induced premature senescence QTLs
previously mapped in the same population, suggesting that largely different
genetic mechanisms mediate cowpea response to drought stress and Macrophomina
infection.
CONCLUSION: Effective sources of host resistance were identified in this study.
QTL mapping and synteny analysis identified genomic loci harboring resistance
factors and revealed candidate genes with potential for further functional
genomics analysis.

PMCID: PMC3025960
PMID: 21208448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Blood. 2011 Feb 10;117(6):1880-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-09-309468. Epub 2010
Dec 10.

Differential requirements for the Ets transcription factor Elf-1 in the
development of NKT cells and NK cells.

Choi HJ(1), Geng Y, Cho H, Li S, Giri PK, Felio K, Wang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University, Chicago,
IL 60611, USA.

E26 Transformation specific (Ets) family transcription factors control the
expression of a large number of genes regulating hematopoietic cell development
and function. Two such transcription factors, Ets-1 and myeloid Elf-1-like factor
(MEF), have been shown to play critical roles in both natural killer (NK)- and
NKT-cell development, but not in the development of conventional T cells. In this
study, we address the role of E74-like factor 1 (Elf-1), another Ets family
transcription factor that is closely related to MEF but divergent from Ets-1, in 
NK- and NKT-cell development using Elf-1-deficient (Elf-1(-/-)) mice. Whereas the
proportion of NK cells in Elf-1(-/-) mice was normal, the proportion of NKT cells
was significantly reduced in the thymus and periphery of Elf-1(-/-) mice compared
with wild-type (WT) mice. Although Ets-1-deficient mice lack NKT cells
altogether, Elf-1(-/-) mice exhibited only a partial block in NKT-cell
development caused by a cell-intrinsic defect in the selection, survival, and
maturation of NKT cells. In addition, residual NKT cells found in Elf-1(-/-) mice
produced less cytokine upon antigen stimulation compared with WT NKT cells. Our
data demonstrate that Elf-1 plays an important and nonredundant role in the
development and function of NKT cells, but is not involved in NK-cell
development.

PMCID: PMC3056637
PMID: 21148815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Jun;39(6):366-71.

[Expression of natural killer cell development-associated transcription factors
in nasal NK/T-cell lymphomas occurring in Chinese population].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang S(1), Nong L, Zhang Y, Wang Y, Li T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the expression and prognostic significance of T-bet and
its cofactors EOMES, ETS-1 and MEF [which are transcription factors and
responsible for development of natural killer (NK) cells] in the extranodal
NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type (EN-NK/T-NT).
METHODS: The expression status of T-bet, EOMES, ETS-1 and MEF in 40 cases of
EN-NK/T-NT occurring in Chinese population was studied by immunohistochemistry
and in-situ hybridization (ISH). The clinical relevance was also evaluated. The
control cases included 18 cases of peripheral T-cell lymphoma, 10 cases of B-cell
lymphoma, 5 cases of normal spleen, 5 cases of normal thymus and 10 cases of
nasal mucosal tissues affected by chronic inflammation.
RESULTS: The expression levels of T-bet mRNA and protein were high in EN-NK/T-NT 
(82.5% and 100%, respectively) and in peripheral T cell lymphoma (17/18 and
72.2%, respectively). There was no expression in B-cell lymphoma. The expression 
of EOMES (80.0% by ISH), ETS-1 (82.5% by ISH) and MEF (62.5% by ISH) was high in 
EN-NK/T-NT, but not in the control group. The frequency of co-expression of T-bet
and EOMES (75%, 30/40) was significantly higher than that of the other genes.
Follow-up study showed that the mean and median survival of the 19 cases of
EN-NK/ T-NT was 33 months and 10 months, respectively. The five-year survival
rate was 10.5%. Statistical analysis showed that only treatment modalities
significantly affected the patients' overall survival; and none of the four
transcription factors had significant impact on survival. The expression rates of
T-bet, EOMES, ETS-1 or MEF had no significant difference between the 9 alive and 
the 10 dead cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of T-bet correlates with the lymphoma types. It is
mainly expressed in peripheral NK and T-cell lymphomas. The important functional 
gene engaged in NK cells development is highly expressed in EN-NK/T-NT. They may 
play a crucial role in pathogenesis and aggressive biologic behavior.

PMID: 21055151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cell Cycle. 2010 Sep 1;9(17):3457-9. Epub 2010 Sep 13.

The oncogenic role of the ETS transcription factors MEF and ERG.

Sashida G(1), Bazzoli E, Menendez S, Liu Y, Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology and Chemistry Program of the Sloan-Kettering Institute,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, NY, USA.

Several ETS transcription factors, including MEF/ELF4 and ERG, can function as
oncogenes and are overexpressed in human cancer. MEF cooperates in tumorigenesis 
in retroviral insertional mutagenesis-based mouse models of cancer and MEF is
overexpressed in human lymphoma and ovarian cancer tissues via unknown
mechanisms. ERG (Ets related gene) overexpression or increased activity has been 
found in various human cancers, including sarcomas, acute myeloid leukemia and
prostate cancer, where the ERG gene is rearranged due to chromosomal
translocations. We have been examining how MEF functions as an oncogene and
recently showed that MEF can cooperate with H-Ras(G12V) and can inhibit both p53 
and p16 expression thereby promoting transformation. In fact, in cells lacking
p53, the absence of Mef abrogates H-Ras(G12V)-induced transformation of mouse
embryonic fibroblasts, at least in part due to increased p16 expression. We
discuss the known mechanisms by which the ETS transcription factors MEF and ERG
contribute to the malignant transformation of cells.

PMCID: PMC3230474
PMID: 20814243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Jan;39(1):76-88. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq762. Epub 2010 Aug
30.

MEF/ELF4 transactivation by E2F1 is inhibited by p53.

Taura M(1), Suico MA, Fukuda R, Koga T, Shuto T, Sato T, Morino-Koga S, Okada S, 
Kai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Global COE 'Cell Fate Regulation Research and Education Unit', Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

Myeloid elf-1-like factor (MEF) or Elf4 is an E-twenty-six (ETS)-related
transcription factor with strong transcriptional activity that influences
cellular senescence by affecting tumor suppressor p53. MEF downregulates p53
expression and inhibits p53-mediated cellular senescence by transcriptionally
activating MDM2. However, whether p53 reciprocally opposes MEF remains
unexplored. Here, we show that MEF is modulated by p53 in human cells and mice
tissues. MEF expression and promoter activity were suppressed by p53. While we
found that MEF promoter does not contain p53 response elements, intriguingly, it 
contains E2F consensus sites. Subsequently, we determined that E2F1 specifically 
binds to MEF promoter and transactivates MEF. Nevertheless, E2F1 DNA binding and 
transactivation of MEF promoter was inhibited by p53 through the association
between p53 and E2F1. Furthermore, we showed that activation of p53 in
doxorubicin-induced senescent cells increased E2F1 and p53 interaction,
diminished E2F1 recruitment to MEF promoter and reduced MEF expression. These
observations suggest that p53 downregulates MEF by associating with and
inhibiting the binding activity of E2F1, a novel transcriptional activator of
MEF. Together with previous findings, our present results indicate that a
negative regulatory mechanism exists between p53 and MEF.

PMCID: PMC3017608
PMID: 20805247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Immunol. 2010 Oct 1;185(7):3824-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000718. Epub 2010 Aug
27.

Cutting edge: Expression of the transcription factor E74-like factor 4 is
regulated by the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway in CD8+ T cells.

Yamada T(1), Gierach K, Lee PH, Wang X, Lacorazza HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
TX 77030, USA.

T cell receptor activation inhibits expression of the E74-like factor (ELF) 4 and
Krüppel-like factor 4 genes to release naive CD8(+) T cells from their quiescent 
state. In this study, we show that ELF4 controls the ERK-mediated proliferative
response by maintaining normal levels of dual-specificity phosphatases 1 and 5 in
CD8(+) T cells. In activated CD8(+) T cells, the mammalian target of rapamycin
pathway inhibits ELF4 and Krüppel-like factor 4 expression downstream of ERK and 
PI3K signaling. Our findings demonstrate that rapamycin could be used to modulate
expression of this transcriptional network involved in cell-cycle regulation.

PMCID: PMC2943983
PMID: 20802152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Bone Miner Res. 2011 Feb;26(2):341-50. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.208.

Osteoblast-specific expression of MEF induces osteopenia through downregulation
of osteoblastogenesis and upregulation of osteoclastogenesis.

Seul KJ(1), Cho HS, Heo SH, Baek WY, Kim JE, Park EK, Choi JY, Ryoo HM, Cho JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, Korea.

In bone remodeling, various transcriptional factors are involved, and the
deficiency or overexpression of some of these factors results in bone defects.
Myeloid elf-1-like factor (MEF) is one of the Ets transcription factors that
control the expression of genes that are critical for biologic processes such as 
cell proliferation, differentiation, and death. Previously, we reported that MEF 
promotes cell proliferation and functions as a negative regulator of osteogenic
differentiation by interacting directly with Runx2 and suppressing its
transcriptional activity. To investigate the in vivo function of MEF in bone
formation and bone remodeling in vivo, we generated transgenic mice that
overexpress MEF in osteoblasts under the control of the 2.3-kb Col1a1 promoter,
named Col1a1-MEF. Femoral bone in Col1a1-MEF transgenic mice exhibited low bone
mass with fewer trabecular bones and thinner and less developed cortical bones.
The mineralized volume fraction (BV/TV) and bone-forming rate (BFR) were
remarkably decreased to about 63% and 40%, respectively, in 6-week-old MEF
transgenic mice compared with wild-type mice. In addition, reduced bone mineral
density was observed in lumbar vertebrae of Col1a1-MEF transgenic mice. The
number of TRACP(+) osteoclasts was increased in Col1a1-MEF transgenic mice and
MEF-overexpressing MC3T3-E1 cells. All these in vivo results suggest that MEF
suppresses bone formation by osteoblasts and facilitates bone resorption by
activating osteoclasts indirectly.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 20715187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. BMC Genomics. 2010 May 25;11:324. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-324.

Genomic profiling of tumor initiating prostatospheres.

Duhagon MA(1), Hurt EM, Sotelo-Silveira JR, Zhang X, Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Stem Cell Section, Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer
Institute at Frederick, 1050 Boyles Street, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
mduhagon@fcien.edu.uy

BACKGROUND: The cancer stem cell (CSC) hypothesis proposes that a population of
tumor cells bearing stem cell properties is responsible for the origin and
maintenance of tumors. Normal and cancer stem cells possess the ability to grow
in vitro as self-renewing spheres, but the molecular basis of this phenotype
remains largely unknown. We intended to establish a comprehensive culture system 
to grow prostatospheres (PSs) from both cancer cell lines and patient tumors. We 
then used gene expression microarrays to gain insight on the molecular pathways
that sustain the PS tumor initiating cell (TIC) phenotype.
RESULTS: Traditional stem cell medium (SCM) supplemented with KnockoutSR (KO)
allows the propagation of monoclonal PSs from cell lines and primary cells. PSs
display gene expression and tumorigenicity hallmarks of TICs. Gene expression
analysis defined a gene signature composed of 66 genes that characterize LNCaP
and patient PSs. This set includes novel prostate TIC growth factors (NRP1, GDF1,
JAG1), proteins implicated in cell adhesion and cytoskeletal maintenance,
transcriptional regulators (MYCBP, MYBL1, ID1, ID3, FOS, ELF3, ELF4, KLF2, KLF5) 
and factors involved in protein biosynthesis and metabolism. Meta-analysis in
Oncomine reveals that some of these genes correlate with prostate cancer status
and/or progression. Reporter genes and inhibitors indicate that the Notch pathway
contributes to prostatosphere growth.
CONCLUSIONS: We have developed a model for the culture of PSs, and provide a
genomic profile that support CSCs identity. This signature identifies novel
markers and pathways that are predicted to correlate with prostate cancer
evolution.

PMCID: PMC2900264
PMID: 20500816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Ann Surg. 2010 Jun;251(6):1098-106. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e3181dbb75a.

Angiosarcoma: clinical and molecular insights.

Lahat G(1), Dhuka AR, Hallevi H, Xiao L, Zou C, Smith KD, Phung TL, Pollock RE,
Benjamin R, Hunt KK, Lazar AJ, Lev D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Angiosarcoma (AS) is a rare understudied soft tissue sarcoma
exhibiting endothelial cell differentiation. We sought to evaluate AS natural
history in the largest patient cohort reported to date and further unravel
commonly deregulated molecular events of potential therapeutic utility.
METHODS: Medical records of AS patients (n = 222) treated at our institution from
1993 to 2007 were reviewed. Univariable and multivariable analyses were used to
identify independent outcome prognosticators. An AS tissue microarray (n = 68
human specimens) was constructed for immunohistochemical analysis of multiple
potential drugable kinase-related molecular markers.
RESULTS: Forty-three (19.4%) metastatic AS patients and 179 patients (80.6%) with
localized disease were included. Median survival of localized versus metastatic
AS was 49 (range, 2-188) versus 10 (range, 1-69) months (P < 0.0001). Patients
with localized AS who underwent complete surgical resection (n = 136; 76%)
demonstrated significantly better outcome compared with those with unresectable
tumors (n = 43; 24%; P < 0.0001). Of several factors identified on univariable
analysis as significantly adverse for disease-specific survival, tumor size (>5
cm vs. < or = 5 cm, P = 0.01) and epithelioid histologic component (P = 0.008)
remained significant on multivariable analysis as independent adverse
prognosticators in complete resection patients. Immunohistochemistry identified
significant overexpression of vascular endothelial growth factor-A and C as well 
as p-AKT, p-4EBP1, and eIF4E in human AS.
CONCLUSIONS: AS harbors a dismal outcome and even patients with disease amenable 
to complete surgical resection exhibit a 5-year disease-specific survival of only
53%. There is a crucial need for better therapies. Data presented here support
further study of the AKT/mTOR pathway as novel molecular targets for AS therapy.

PMID: 20485141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. HFSP J. 2009 Oct;3(5):350-66. doi: 10.2976/1.3218766. Epub 2009 Oct 22.

Integrating ELF4 into the circadian system through combined structural and
functional studies.

Kolmos E, Nowak M, Werner M, Fischer K, Schwarz G, Mathews S, Schoof H, Nagy F,
Bujnicki JM, Davis SJ.

The circadian clock is a timekeeping mechanism that enables anticipation of daily
environmental changes. In the plant Arabidopsis thaliana, the circadian system is
a multiloop series of interlocked transcription-translation feedbacks. Several
genes have been arranged in these oscillation loops, but the position of the
core-clock gene ELF4 in this network was previously undetermined. ELF4 lacks
sequence similarity to known domains, and functional homologs have not yet been
identified. Here we show that ELF4 is functionally conserved within a subclade of
related sequences, and forms an alpha-helical homodimer with a likely
electrostatic interface that could be structurally modeled. We support this
hypothesis by expression analysis of new elf4 hypomorphic alleles. These weak
mutants were found to have expression level phenotypes of both morning and
evening clock genes, implicating multiple entry points of ELF4 within the
multiloop network. This could be mathematically modeled. Furthermore,
morning-expression defects were particular to some elf4 alleles, suggesting
predominant ELF4 action just preceding dawn. We provide a new hypothesis about
ELF4 in the oscillator-it acts as a homodimer to integrate two arms of the
circadian clock.

PMCID: PMC2801535
PMID: 20357892  [PubMed]


73. Plant Mol Biol. 2010 May;73(1-2):191-205. doi: 10.1007/s11103-010-9611-x. Epub
2010 Feb 12.

Differential floral development and gene expression in grapevines during long and
short photoperiods suggests a role for floral genes in dormancy transitioning.

Sreekantan L(1), Mathiason K, Grimplet J, Schlauch K, Dickerson JA, Fennell AY.

Author information: 
(1)Horticulture, Forestry, Landscape and Parks Department, South Dakota State
University, Brookings, SD 57007, USA.

Daylength is an important environmental cue for synchronizing growth, flowering, 
and dormancy with seasonality. As many floral development genes are photoperiod
regulated, it has been suggested that they could have a regulatory role in bud
endodormancy. Therefore, the influence of photoperiod was studied on
inflorescence primordia differentiation and floral pathway related gene
expression during the development of overwintering buds in Vitis riparia and V.
spp. 'Seyval'. Photoperiod treatments were imposed 35 days after budbreak, and
histological and transcriptomic analyses were conducted during the subsequent 42 
days of bud development. Long day (LD, 15 h) and short day (SD, 13 h) buds were
floral competent by 21 days of photoperiod treatment (56 days after budbreak);
however, the floral meristem developed faster in LD than in SD buds. Analysis of 
132 floral pathway related genes represented on the Affymetrix Grape Genome array
indicated 60 were significantly differentially expressed between photoperiod
treatments. Genes predominantly related to floral transition or floral meristem
development were identified by their association with distinct grape floral
meristem development and an expression pattern in LD consistent with their
previously identified roles in flowering literature. Genes with a potential dual 
role in floral development and dormancy transitioning were identified using
photoperiod induced differences in floral development between LD and SD buds and 
uncharacteristic gene expression trends in relation to floral development.
Candidate genes with the potential to play a dual role in SD dormancy induction
include circadian rhythm or flowering transition related genes: AP2, BT1, COL-13,
EIN3, ELF4, DDTR, GAI and HY5.

PMID: 20151315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Genetics. 2010 Mar;184(3):799-812. doi: 10.1534/genetics.109.110304. Epub 2009
Dec 14.

Genetic control of photoperiod sensitivity in maize revealed by joint multiple
population analysis.

Coles ND(1), McMullen MD, Balint-Kurti PJ, Pratt RC, Holland JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crop Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina 27695, USA.

Variation in maize for response to photoperiod is related to geographical
adaptation in the species. Maize possesses homologs of many genes identified as
regulators of flowering time in other species, but their relation to the natural 
variation for photoperiod response in maize is unknown. Candidate gene sequences 
were mapped in four populations created by crossing two temperate inbred lines to
two photoperiod-sensitive tropical inbreds. Whole-genome scans were conducted by 
high-density genotyping of the populations, which were phenotyped over 3 years in
both short- and long-day environments. Joint multiple population analysis
identified genomic regions controlling photoperiod responses in flowering time,
plant height, and total leaf number. Four key genome regions controlling
photoperiod response across populations were identified, referred to as ZmPR1-4. 
Functional allelic differences within these regions among phenotypically similar 
founders suggest distinct evolutionary trajectories for photoperiod adaptation in
maize. These regions encompass candidate genes CCA/LHY, CONZ1, CRY2, ELF4, GHD7, 
VGT1, HY1/SE5, TOC1/PRR7/PPD-1, PIF3, ZCN8, and ZCN19.

PMCID: PMC2845347
PMID: 20008571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010 Jan;298(1):R198-210. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00325.2009. Epub 2009 Nov 11.

Calcineurin activates interleukin-6 transcription in mouse skeletal muscle in
vivo and in C2C12 myotubes in vitro.

Allen DL(1), Uyenishi JJ, Cleary AS, Mehan RS, Lindsay SF, Reed JM.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Integrative Physiology, Univ. of Colorado, Boulder, Campus Box 354,
Boulder, CO 80309, USA. allendl@colorado.edu

Expression of the cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) by skeletal muscle is hugely
increased in response to a single bout of endurance exercise, and this appears to
be mediated by increases in intracellular calcium. We examined the effects of
endurance exercise on IL-6 mRNA levels and promoter activity in skeletal muscle
in vivo, and the role of the calcium-activated calcineurin signaling pathway on
muscle IL-6 expression in vivo and in vitro. IL-6 mRNA levels in the mouse
tibialis anterior (TA) were increased 2-10-fold by a single bout of treadmill
exercise or by 3 days of voluntary wheel running. Moreover, an IL-6
promoter-driven luciferase transgene was activated in TA by both treadmill and
wheel-running exercise and by injection with a calcineurin plasmid. Exercise also
increased muscle mRNA expression of the calcineurin regulatory gene MCIP1, as did
treatment of C(2)C(12) myotubes with the calcium ionophore A23187. Cotransfection
of C(2)C(12) myotubes with a constitutively active calcineurin construct
significantly increased while cotransfection with the calcineurin inhibitor CAIN 
inhibited activity of a mouse IL-6 promoter-reporter construct. Cotransfection
with a myocyte enhancer-factor-2 (MEF-2) expression construct increased basal
IL-6 promoter activity and augmented the effects of calcineurin cotransfection,
while cotransfection with the MEF-2 antagonist MITR repressed
calcineurin-activated IL-6 promoter activity in vitro. Surprisingly,
cotransfection with a dominant-negative form of another calcineurin-activated
transcription factor, nuclear factor activator of T cells (NFAT), greatly
potentiated both basal and calcineurin-stimulated IL-6 promoter activity in
C(2)C(12) myotubes. Mutation of the MEF-2 DNA binding sites attenuated, while
mutation of the NFAT DNA binding sites potentiated basal and
calcineurin-activated IL-6 promoter activity. Finally, CREB and C/EBP were
necessary for basal IL-6 promoter activity and sufficient to increase IL-6
promoter activity but had minimal roles in calcineurin-activated IL-6 promoter
activity. Together, these results suggest that IL-6 transcription in skeletal
muscle cells can be activated by a calcineurin-MEF-2 axis which is antagonized by
NFAT.

PMCID: PMC2806210
PMID: 19907005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Plant Cell. 2009 Oct;21(10):3198-211. doi: 10.1105/tpc.109.067223. Epub 2009 Oct 
20.

DIE NEUTRALIS and LATE BLOOMER 1 contribute to regulation of the pea circadian
clock.

Liew LC(1), Hecht V, Laurie RE, Knowles CL, Vander Schoor JK, Macknight RC,
Weller JL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Plant Science, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania 7001,
Australia.

The DIE NEUTRALIS (DNE) locus in garden pea (Pisum sativum) was previously shown 
to inhibit flowering under noninductive short-day conditions and to affect a
graft-transmissible flowering signal. In this study, we establish that DNE has a 
role in diurnal and/or circadian regulation of several clock genes, including the
pea GIGANTEA (GI) ortholog LATE BLOOMER 1 (LATE1) and orthologs of the
Arabidopsis thaliana genes LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL and TIMING OF CHLOROPHYLL A/B
BINDING PROTEIN EXPRESSION 1. We also confirm that LATE1 participates in the
clock and provide evidence that DNE is the ortholog of Arabidopsis EARLY
FLOWERING4 (ELF4). Circadian rhythms of clock gene expression in wild-type plants
under constant light were weaker in pea than in Arabidopsis, and a number of
differences were also seen in the effects of both DNE/ELF4 and LATE1/GI on clock 
gene expression. Grafting studies suggest that DNE controls flowering at least in
part through a LATE1-dependent mobile stimulus, and dne mutants show elevated
expression of a FLOWERING LOCUS T homolog under short-day conditions. However,
the early flowering of the dne mutant is not associated with altered expression
of a previously described CONSTANS-like gene. Collectively, our results
characterize the clock system and reveal its importance for photoperiod
responsiveness in a model legume.

PMCID: PMC2782296
PMID: 19843842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Cancer Lett. 2009 Nov 1;284(2):149-56. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.04.017. Epub
2009 May 19.

Cancer-related transcriptional targets of the circadian gene NPAS2 identified by 
genome-wide ChIP-on-chip analysis.

Yi CH(1), Zheng T, Leaderer D, Hoffman A, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, United States.

The transcription factor NPAS2 is one of nine human core circadian genes that
influence a variety of biological processes by regulating the 24-h circadian
rhythm. Recently, it has been shown that NPAS2 is a risk biomarker in human
cancers and plays a role in tumorigenesis by affecting cancer-related gene
expression, and relevant biological pathways. However, it is difficult to study
the biological involvement of NPAS2 in cancer development, as little is known
about its direct transcriptional targets. The aim of the current study is to
create a transcriptional profile of genes regulated by NPAS2, using a human
binding ChIP-on-chip analysis of NPAS2 in MCF-7 cells. This genome-wide mapping
approach identified 26 genes that contain potential NPAS2 binding regions.
Subsequent real-time PCR assays confirmed 16 of these targets, and 9 of these
genes (ARHGAP29, CDC25A, CDKN2AIP, CX3CL1, ELF4, GNAL, KDELR1, POU4F2, and THRA) 
have a known role in tumorigenesis. In addition, a networking analysis of these
validated NPAS2 targets revealed that all nine genes, together with REN, are
involved in a "Cancer, Cell cycle, Neurological Disease" network. These results
report the first list of direct transcriptional targets of NPAS2 and will shed
light on the role of circadian genes in tumorigenesis.

2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3182267
PMID: 19457610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 May;8(5):1157-68. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-1008. Epub 
2009 May 5.

Dual targeting of AKT and mammalian target of rapamycin: a potential therapeutic 
approach for malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor.

Zou CY(1), Smith KD, Zhu QS, Liu J, McCutcheon IE, Slopis JM, Meric-Bernstam F,
Peng Z, Bornmann WG, Mills GB, Lazar AJ, Pollock RE, Lev D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. AndersonCancer 
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway may constitute a potential
target for the treatment of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST).
However, investigations of other cancers suggest that mTOR blockade can
paradoxically induce activation of prosurvival, protumorigenic signaling
molecules, especially upstream AKT. Consequently, we hypothesized that dual
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT-mTOR blockade might be applicable for
MPNST treatment. Expression of activated mTOR downstream targets (p4EBP1 and
pS6RP) and pAKT was evaluated immunohistochemically in a tissue microarray of
human MPNSTs (n = 96) and benign neurofibromas (n = 31). Results were analyzed by
Wilcoxon rank-sum tests. mTOR and AKT pathways in human MPNST cell lines, and the
effects of rapamycin (mTOR inhibitor), LY294002 (dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor), and
PI-103 (potent dual PI3K/AKT-mTOR inhibitor) on pathway activation were evaluated
by Western blot. Effects on cell growth were evaluated via MTS and colony
formation assays. Cell cycle progression and apoptosis were assessed by propidium
iodide/fluorescence-activated cell sorting staining and Annexin V assays.
Acridine orange staining/fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis, electron
microscopy, and Western blot evaluated autophagy induction. p4EBP1, pS6Rp, and
pAKT levels were found to be significantly higher in MPNST versus neurofibroma (P
< 0.05 for all markers). mTOR and AKT pathways were found to be highly activated 
in MPNST cell lines. MPNST cells were sensitive to rapamycin; however, rapamycin 
enhanced pAKT and peIF4E expression. PI-103 abrogated MPNST cell growth and
induced G(1) cell cycle arrest potentially through repression of cyclin D1.
PI-103 did not elicit apoptosis but significantly induced autophagy in MPNST
cells. These results suggest further study of combined PI3K/AKT and mTOR
inhibition as a novel therapy for patients harboring MPNST.

PMID: 19417153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 May;8(5):1340-9. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-1136. Epub
2009 May 5.

Amino acid containing thapsigargin analogues deplete androgen receptor protein
via synthesis inhibition and induce the death of prostate cancer cells.

Vander Griend DJ(1), Antony L, Dalrymple SL, Xu Y, Christensen SB, Denmeade SR,
Isaacs JT.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, the Brady Urological Institute,
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

There are quantitative and/or qualitative mechanisms allowing androgen receptor
(AR) growth signaling in androgen ablation refractory prostate cancer cells.
Regardless of the mechanism, agents that deplete AR protein expression prevent
such AR growth signaling. Thapsigargin (TG) is a highly cell-penetrant
sequiterpene-lactone that once inside cells inhibits (IC(50), ~ 10 nmol/L)
critically important housekeeping SERCA 2b calcium pumps in the endoplasmic
reticulum. Using a series of five genetically diverse androgen ablation
refractory human prostate cancer lines (LNCaP, LAPC-4, VCaP, MDA-PCa-2b, and
CWR22Rv1), TG inhibition of SERCA pumps consistently results in depletion of the 
endoplasmic reticulum Ca(+2) coupled with µmol/L elevation in the intracellular
free Ca(+2) initiating a molecular cascade that: (a) inhibits Cap-dependent AR
protein synthesis resulting in 90% depletion of AR protein by 24 hours of TG
exposure, (b) arrests the cells in G(0), and (c) induces their apoptotic death.
Unfortunately, due to its highly lipophilic nature, TG is not deliverable as a
systemic agent without host toxicity. Therefore, TG analogues containing amino
acids were developed, which retain ability to deplete AR protein and induce cell 
death and which can be covalently linked to peptide carriers producing water
soluble prodrugs for systemic delivery. Specific amino acid sequences are used to
restrict the liberation of cytotoxic amino acid containing TG analogues from the 
peptide prodrug by prostate-specific proteases, such as prostate-specific antigen
and prostate-specific membrane antigen, or cancer-specific proteases, such as
fibroblast activation protein, so that toxicity of these prodrugs is selectively 
targeted to metastatic sites of prostate cancer. Based on these results, these
prodrugs are undergoing clinical development.

PMCID: PMC3383025
PMID: 19417145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Exp Bot. 2009;60(9):2493-9. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erp120. Epub 2009 May 4.

Update on the genetic control of flowering in garden pea.

Weller JL(1), Hecht V, Liew LC, Sussmilch FC, Wenden B, Knowles CL, Vander Schoor
JK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Plant Science, University of Tasmania, Private Bag 55, Hobart,
Tasmania 7001, Australia. jim.weller@utas.edu.au

The garden pea has been a model for the genetics of flowering for several decades
and numerous flowering loci have been identified, but until recently little was
known about the molecular nature of these loci. This paper presents an update on 
recent work on the molecular genetics of flowering in pea, outlining progress in 
gene and mutant isolation, expression analyses, grafting and other physiological 
studies, and candidate gene assessment. Work so far has led to the identification
of the LATE1 and DNE loci as orthologues of Arabidopsis GIGANTEA and ELF4,
respectively, and candidate genes for several other loci are being evaluated.
Expression analysis of an expanded FT-like gene family suggests a more complex
role for this group of genes. These results provide the first insight into the
circadian clock, photoperiod response mechanism, and mobile signals in pea, and
identify both conserved and divergent features in comparison with Arabidopsis.

PMID: 19414500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Nat Immunol. 2009 Jun;10(6):618-26. doi: 10.1038/ni.1730. Epub 2009 May 3.

Transcription factor ELF4 controls the proliferation and homing of CD8+ T cells
via the Krüppel-like factors KLF4 and KLF2.

Yamada T(1), Park CS, Mamonkin M, Lacorazza HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas Children's
Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.

Transcription factors that regulate the quiescence, proliferation and homing of
lymphocytes are critical for effective immune system function. Here we
demonstrate that the transcription factor ELF4 directly activated the tumor
suppressor KLF4 'downstream' of T cell antigen receptor signaling to induce cell 
cycle arrest in naive CD8(+) T cells. Elf4- and Klf4-deficient mice accumulated
CD8(+)CD44(hi) T cells during steady-state conditions and generated more memory T
cells after immunization. The homeostatic population expansion of CD8(+)CD44(hi) 
T cells in Elf4-null mice resulted in a redistribution of cells to nonlymphoid
tissue because of lower expression of the transcription factor KLF2 and the
surface proteins CCR7 and CD62L. Our work describes the combinatorial effect of
lymphocyte-intrinsic factors on the homeostasis, activation and homing of T
cells.

PMCID: PMC2774797
PMID: 19412182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jul;29(13):3687-99. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01551-08. Epub 2009 Apr 
20.

ELF4/MEF activates MDM2 expression and blocks oncogene-induced p16 activation to 
promote transformation.

Sashida G(1), Liu Y, Elf S, Miyata Y, Ohyashiki K, Izumi M, Menendez S, Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Sloan-Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Ave., New York, NY 10021, USA.

Several ETS transcription factors, including ELF4/MEF, can function as oncogenes 
in murine cancer models and are overexpressed in human cancer. We found that
Elf4/Mef activates Mdm2 expression; thus, lack of or knockdown of Elf4/Mef
reduces Mdm2 levels in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (mef's), leading to enhanced
p53 protein accumulation and p53-dependent senescence. Even though p53 is absent 
in Elf4(-/-) p53(-/-) mef's, neither oncogenic H-Ras(V12) nor c-myc can induce
transformation of these cells. This appears to relate to the INK4a/ARF locus;
both p19(ARF) and p16 are increased in Elf4(-/-) p53(-/-) mef's, and expression
of Bmi-1 or knockdown of p16 in this context restores H-Ras(V12)-induced
transformation. Thus, ELF4/MEF promotes tumorigenesis by inhibiting both the p53 
and p16/Rb pathways.

PMCID: PMC2698769
PMID: 19380490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009;16(2):271-5. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-0978.

Translation initiation of the human tau mRNA through an internal ribosomal entry 
site.

Veo BL(1), Krushel LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado
Denver School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Neurofibrillary tangles are a pathological phenotype in Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
and are caused by the hyperphosphorylation of the microtubule associated protein 
tau. In mouse models of AD, decreasing tau protein expression limits the severity
of symptoms and inhibits progression of AD. We now report that the 5' leader in
the human tau mRNA contains an internal ribosomal entry site (IRES) and that
IRES-dependent translation plays a role in the synthesis of tau protein.
Consequently, targeting the tau IRES provides a novel target for regulating tau
expression in AD and other tauopathies.

PMID: 19221416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Jan 9;4(1):37-48. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.11.006.

p53 regulates hematopoietic stem cell quiescence.

Liu Y(1), Elf SE, Miyata Y, Sashida G, Liu Y, Huang G, Di Giandomenico S, Lee JM,
Deblasio A, Menendez S, Antipin J, Reva B, Koff A, Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Phamacology and Chemistry Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Jan 9;4(1):7-8.

The importance of the p53 protein in the cellular response to DNA damage is well 
known, but its function during steady-state hematopoiesis has not been
established. We have defined a critical role of p53 in regulating hematopoietic
stem cell quiescence, especially in promoting the enhanced quiescence seen in
HSCs that lack the MEF/ELF4 transcription factor. Transcription profiling of HSCs
isolated from wild-type and p53 null mice identified Gfi-1 and Necdin as p53
target genes, and using lentiviral vectors to upregulate or knockdown the
expression of these genes, we show their importance in regulating HSC quiescence.
Establishing the role of p53 (and its target genes) in controlling the cell-cycle
entry of HSCs may lead to therapeutic strategies capable of eliminating quiescent
cancer (stem) cells.

PMCID: PMC2839936
PMID: 19128791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Jan 9;4(1):7-8. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.12.007.

Hematopoietic stem cell quiescence: yet another role for p53.

van Os R(1), de Haan G, Dykstra BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Section Stem Cell Biology, University Medical
Center Groningen, 9713 AV Groningen, the Netherlands.

Comment on
    Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Jan 9;4(1):37-48.

p53, sometimes referred to as the "guardian of the genome," helps regulate
cell-cycle arrest, DNA-damage repair, apoptosis, and senescence. Adding to this
list, in this issue of Cell Stem Cell, Liu et al. (2009) show that p53 also plays
a role in regulating hematopoietic stem cell quiescence.

PMID: 19128788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Hypertension. 2008 Nov;52(5):918-24. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.108.114702.
Epub 2008 Oct 6.

AMP activated protein kinase-alpha2 deficiency exacerbates
pressure-overload-induced left ventricular hypertrophy and dysfunction in mice.

Zhang P(1), Hu X, Xu X, Fassett J, Zhu G, Viollet B, Xu W, Wiczer B, Bernlohr DA,
Bache RJ, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Comment in
    Hypertension. 2008 Nov;52(5):813-5.

AMP activated protein kinase (AMPK) plays an important role in regulating
myocardial metabolism and protein synthesis. Activation of AMPK attenuates
hypertrophy in cultured cardiac myocytes, but the role of AMPK in regulating the 
development of myocardial hypertrophy in response to chronic pressure overload is
not known. To test the hypothesis that AMPKalpha2 protects the heart against
systolic overload-induced ventricular hypertrophy and dysfunction, we studied the
response of AMPKalpha2 gene deficient (knockout [KO]) mice and wild-type mice
subjected to 3 weeks of transverse aortic constriction (TAC). Although AMPKalpha2
KO had no effect on ventricular structure or function under control conditions,
AMPKalpha2 KO significantly increased TAC-induced ventricular hypertrophy
(ventricular mass increased 46% in wild-type mice compared with 65% in KO mice)
while decreased left ventricular ejection fraction (ejection fraction decreased
14% in wild-type mice compared with a 43% decrease in KO mice). AMPKalpha2 KO
also significantly exacerbated the TAC-induced increases of atrial natriuretic
peptide, myocardial fibrosis, and cardiac myocyte size. AMPKalpha2 KO had no
effect on total S6 ribosomal protein (S6), p70 S6 kinase, eukaryotic initiation
factor 4E, and 4E binding protein-1 or their phosphorylation under basal
conditions but significantly augmented the TAC-induced increases of p-p70 S6
kinase(Thr389), p-S6(Ser235), and p-eukaryotic initiation factor 4E(Ser209).
AMPKalpha2 KO also enhanced the TAC-induced increase of p-4E binding
protein-1(Thr46) to a small degree and augmented the TAC-induced increase of
p-Akt(Ser473). These data indicate that AMPKalpha2 exerts a cardiac protective
effect against pressure-overload-induced ventricular hypertrophy and dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC2760829
PMID: 18838626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Plant Biol (Stuttg). 2008 Sep;10(5):548-62. doi:
10.1111/j.1438-8677.2008.00072.x.

The plant WNK gene family and regulation of flowering time in Arabidopsis.

Wang Y(1), Liu K, Liao H, Zhuang C, Ma H, Yan X.

Author information: 
(1)Root Biology Center, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China.

The WNK (with no lysine kinase) protein kinase gene family may be involved in
regulating ion homeostasis and other physiological processes in mammals. WNK-like
genes have also been identified in plants, including nine in Arabidopsis,
designated AtWNK1-AtWNK9. However, it is not clear if there are further plant WNK
genes, and what the evolutionary relationships are among these genes, nor if
these genes have functions other than their roles in regulating circadian rhythms
and vacuolar H(+)-ATPase. In the present study, we found a tenth Arabidopsis WNK 
gene, designated AtWNK10. Further phylogenetic analysis of Arabidopsis and rice
WNK genes suggests that the most recent common ancestor of monocots and eudicots 
had 4-8 WNK genes, and that the WNK gene family has experienced duplication
events and possible gene losses. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR revealed that all
Arabidopsis WNK genes except AtWNK6 are expressed in organs from the seedling to 
the flowering plant. T-DNA knockout mutations in the AtWNK2, AtWNK5 and AtWNK8
genes in different phylogenetic clades caused early flowering. In contrast, a
T-DNA knockout wnk1 mutant had a much delayed flowering time. In addition, the
transcript levels of several genes in the photoperiod pathway for flowering, such
as ELF4, TOC1, CO and FT, were altered in atwnk mutants. Taken together, our
results suggest that the Arabidopsis WNK gene family regulates flowering time by 
modulating the photoperiod pathway.

PMID: 18761494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Plant Physiol. 2008 Oct;148(2):948-59. doi: 10.1104/pp.108.124917. Epub 2008 Aug 
1.

Two new clock proteins, LWD1 and LWD2, regulate Arabidopsis photoperiodic
flowering.

Wu JF(1), Wang Y, Wu SH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

The "light" signal from the environment sets the circadian clock to regulate
multiple physiological processes for optimal rhythmic growth and development. One
such process is the control of flowering time by photoperiod perception in
plants. In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), the flowering time is determined
by the correct interconnection of light input and signal output by the circadian 
clock. The identification of additional clock proteins will help to better
dissect the complex nature of the circadian clock in Arabidopsis. Here, we show
LIGHT-REGULATED WD1 (LWD1)/LWD2 as new clock proteins involved in photoperiod
control. The lwd1lwd2 double mutant has an early-flowering phenotype, contributed
by the significant phase shift of CONSTANS (CO), and, therefore, an increased
expression of FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) before dusk. Under entrainment conditions,
the expression phase of oscillator (CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED1 [CCA1], LATE
ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL [LHY], TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION1 [TOC1], and EARLY FLOWERING4
[ELF4]) and output (GIGANTEA, FLAVIN-BINDING, KELCH REPEAT, F-BOX1, CYCLING DOF
FACTOR1, CO, and FT) genes in the photoperiod pathway shifts approximately 3 h
forward in the lwd1lwd2 double mutant. Both the oscillator (CCA1, LHY, TOC1, and 
ELF4) and output (COLD, CIRCADIAN RHYTHM, AND RNA BINDING2 and CHLOROPHYLL
A/B-BINDING PROTEIN2) genes have a short period length in the lwd1lwd2 double
mutant. Our data imply that LWD1/LWD2 proteins function in close proximity to or 
within the circadian clock for photoperiodic flowering control.

PMCID: PMC2556813
PMID: 18676661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 1;68(7):2186-93. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2355.

DNA damage signaling in hematopoietic cells: a role for Mre11 complex repair of
topoisomerase lesions.

Morales M(1), Liu Y, Laiakis EC, Morgan WF, Nimer SD, Petrini JH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center and Cornell University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, New
York, NY 10021, USA.

The Mre11 complex promotes DNA double-strand break repair and regulates DNA
damage signaling via activation of the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM)
kinase. The hypermorphic Rad50(S) allele encodes a variant of Rad50, a member of 
the Mre11 complex. Cells expressing Rad50(S) experience constitutive ATM
activation, which leads to precipitous apoptotic attrition in hematopoietic
cells. In this study, we show that ATM activation by the Rad50S-containing Mre11 
complex enhances the proliferation of LSK cells, a population consisting of
hematopoietic stem cells and multipotent progenitor cells. In Rad50(S/S) mice,
enhanced LSK proliferation triggers apoptotic attrition. This phenotype is
mitigated when Rad50(S/S) is combined with mutations that alter either LSK cell
quiescence (myeloid elf-1-like factor/ELF4-deficient mice) or hematopoietic
differentiation (p21- and p27-deficient mice), indicating that the LSK population
is a primary target of Rad50(S) pathology. We show that cells from Rad50(S/S)
mice are hypersensitive to camptothecin, a topoisomerase I inhibitor that causes 
DNA damage primarily during DNA replication. On this basis, we propose that
apoptotic attrition of Rad50(S/S) hematopoietic cells results from enhanced
proliferation in the context of topoisomerase-associated DNA damage. Impairment
of apoptosis in Rad50(S/S) mice promotes hematopoietic malignancy, suggesting
that primitive hematopoietic cells serve as a reservoir of potentially oncogenic 
lesions in Rad50(S/S) mice. These data provide compelling evidence that the Mre11
complex plays a role in the metabolism of topoisomerase lesions in mammals, and
further suggest that such lesions can accumulate in primitive hematopoietic cells
and confer significant oncogenic potential.

PMCID: PMC2996041
PMID: 18381424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Immunol Res. 2008;40(3):262-70. doi: 10.1007/s12026-007-0028-9.

X-linked hypogammaglobulinemia and isolated growth hormone deficiency: an update.

Stewart DM(1), Tian L, Notarangelo LD, Nelson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Immunophysiology Section, Metabolism Branch, CCR, NCI, National Institute of
Health, Bldg. 10, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

X-linked hypogammaglobulinemia and isolated growth hormone deficiency (XLH-GHD,
OMIM # 307200) is a primary immunodeficiency disorder characterized by
pan-hypogammaglobulinemia and isolated growth hormone deficiency. The disease,
which is only known to occur in a single family, shares many features with
X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA, OMIM # 300300). The current review summarizes
the clinical, laboratory, and genetic features of the disease as they have
unfolded over the past quarter-century since its description.

PMID: 18180883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Immunol Res. 2007;38(1-3):391-9.

X-linked hypogammaglobulinemia and isolated growth hormone deficiency: an update.

Stewart DM(1), Tian L, Notarangelo LD, Nelson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Immunophysiology Section, Metabolism Branch, NCI, NIH, National Institutes of 
Health, Bldg. 10, Rm. 4N115, MSC 1374, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

X-linked hypogammaglobulinemia and isolated growth hormone deficiency (XLH-GHD,
OMIM # 307200) is a primary immunodeficiency disorder characterized by
pan-hypogammaglobulinemia and isolated growth hormone deficiency. The disease,
which is only known to occur in a single family, shares many features with
X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA, OMIM # 300300). The current review summarizes
the clinical, laboratory and genetic features of the disease as they have
unfolded over the past quarter century since its description.

PMID: 17917049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Plant Signal Behav. 2007 Sep;2(5):370-2.

ELF4 as a Central Gene in the Circadian Clock.

Kolmos E(1), Davis SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Developmental Biology; Max Planck Institute for Plant
Breeding Research; Cologne, Germany.

The light-dark cycle of the environment serves as one of the major Zeitgebers in 
entrainment of the circadian clock. The circadian system consists of
interconnected feedback loops in which the CCA1/LHY-TOC1 loop has a central
position. Genetic analyses of the elf4 mutant suggested that it is a positive
regulator of CCA1 and LHY expression. Recently, we refined the mode-of-action of 
ELF4 in entrainment of the clock, and here hypothesize that ELF4 expression is
interlocked with the CCA1/LHY-TOC1 loop.

PMCID: PMC2634215
PMID: 19704602  [PubMed]


93. EMBO J. 2007 May 2;26(9):2327-38. Epub 2007 Apr 19.

Translation of nonSTOP mRNA is repressed post-initiation in mammalian cells.

Akimitsu N(1), Tanaka J, Pelletier J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biological Resources and Functions, National Institute of
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Higashi, Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki,
Japan. nobu.akimitsu@aist.go.jp

We investigated the fate of aberrant mRNAs lacking in-frame termination codons
(called nonSTOP mRNA) in mammalian cells. We found that translation of nonSTOP
mRNA was considerably repressed although a corresponding reduction of mRNA was
not observed. The repression appears to be post-initiation since (i) repressed
nonSTOP mRNAs were associated with polysomes, (ii) translation of IRES-initiated 
and uncapped nonSTOP mRNA were repressed, and (iii) protein production from
nonSTOP mRNA associating with polysomes was significantly reduced when used to
program an in vitro run-off translation assay. NonSTOP mRNAs distributed into
lighter polysome fractions compared to control mRNAs encoding a stop codon, and a
significant amount of heterogeneous polypeptides were produced during in vitro
translation of nonSTOP RNAs, suggesting premature termination of ribosomes
translating nonSTOP mRNA. Moreover, a run-off translation assay using
hippuristanol and RNAse protection assays suggested the presence of a ribosome
stalled at the 3' end of nonSTOP mRNAs. Taken together, these data indicate that 
ribosome stalling at the 3' end of nonSTOP mRNAs can block translation by
preventing upstream translation events.

PMCID: PMC1864977
PMID: 17446866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Plant Physiol. 2007 May;144(1):391-401. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

ELF4 is required for oscillatory properties of the circadian clock.

McWatters HG(1), Kolmos E, Hall A, Doyle MR, Amasino RM, Gyula P, Nagy F, Millar 
AJ, Davis SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3RB, United
Kingdom.

Circadian clocks are required to coordinate metabolism and physiology with daily 
changes in the environment. Such clocks have several distinctive features,
including a free-running rhythm of approximately 24 h and the ability to entrain 
to both light or temperature cycles (zeitgebers). We have previously
characterized the EARLY FLOWERING4 (ELF4) locus of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis
thaliana) as being important for robust rhythms. Here, it is shown that ELF4 is
necessary for at least two core clock functions: entrainment to an environmental 
cycle and rhythm sustainability under constant conditions. We show that elf4
demonstrates clock input defects in light responsiveness and in circadian gating.
Rhythmicity in elf4 could be driven by an environmental cycle, but an increased
sensitivity to light means the circadian system of elf4 plants does not entrain
normally. Expression of putative core clock genes and outputs were characterized 
in various ELF4 backgrounds to establish the molecular network of action. ELF4
was found to be intimately associated with the CIRCADIAN CLOCK-ASSOCIATED1
(CCA1)/LONG ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY)-TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION1 (TOC1) feedback
loop because, under free run, ELF4 is required to regulate the expression of CCA1
and TOC1 and, further, elf4 is locked in the evening phase of this feedback loop.
ELF4, therefore, can be considered a component of the central CCA1/LHY-TOC1
feedback loop in the plant circadian clock.

PMCID: PMC1913775
PMID: 17384164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Oncogene. 2007 Jun 7;26(27):4032-7. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

Tumor promoting properties of the ETS protein MEF in ovarian cancer.

Yao JJ(1), Liu Y, Lacorazza HD, Soslow RA, Scandura JM, Nimer SD, Hedvat CV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA.

We have previously shown that MEF (myeloid ELF1-like factor, also known as ELF4) 
functions as a transcriptional activator of the interleukin (IL)-8, perforin,
granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and IL-3 genes in
hematopoietic cells. MEF is also expressed in non-hematopoietic tissues including
certain ovarian cancer cells. To define the function of MEF in these cells, we
examined primary human ovarian epithelial tumors and found that MEF is expressed 
in a significant proportion of ovarian carcinomas, and in the CAOV3 and SKOV3
ovarian cancer cell lines, but not in normal ovarian surface epithelium.
Manipulating MEF levels in these cell lines altered their behavior; reducing MEF 
levels, using short hairpin RNA expressing vectors, significantly inhibited the
proliferation of SKOV3 and CAOV3 cells in culture, and impaired the
anchorage-independent growth of CAOV3 cells. Overexpression of MEF in SKOV3 cells
(via retroviral transduction) significantly increased their growth rate, enhanced
colony formation in soft agar and promoted tumor formation in nude mice. The
oncogenic activity of MEF was further shown by the ability of MEF to transform
NIH3T3 cells, and induce their tumor formation in nude mice. MEF is an important 
regulator of the tumorigenic properties of ovarian cancer cells and could be used
a therapeutic target in ovarian cancer.

PMID: 17213815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Apr;211(1):253-60.

The suppressive effect of myeloid Elf-1-like factor (MEF) in osteogenic
differentiation.

Kim YJ(1), Kim BG, Lee SJ, Lee HK, Lee SH, Ryoo HM, Cho JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and BK 21 Program, Kyungpook National University,
Daegu, Korea.

Myeloid Elf-1 like factor (MEF) is a member of the Ets transcription factor
family. Ets family proteins control the expression of genes that are critical for
biological processes such as proliferation, differentiation, and cell death. Some
of Ets factors are also known to regulate bone development. In this study, we
investigated the role of MEF in osteoblast differentiation. MEF expression was
highest early in the differentiation of MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts and was reduced by
treatment with BMP-2. The expression of MEF suppressed the alkaline phosphatase
activity and expression induced by BMP-2 stimulation and mediated by Runx2. The
expression of MEF also reduces osteocalcin mRNA levels, and mineralization in
MC3T3-E1 cells. We found that the MEF-mediated suppression of osteogenic
differentiation was critically related to Runx2 regulation. The MEF and Runx2
proteins physically interact to form a complex, and this interaction interferes
with Runx2 binding to the cis-acting element OSE2 derived from the osteocalcin
promoter. Co-transfection of MEF inhibited the 6xOSE2-luciferase reporter
activity induced by Runx2. In addition, MEF stimulated the transcription of a
negative mediator Msx2, and a transcriptional repressor, Mab21L1, and suppressed 
the transcription of a positive mediator, Dlx5 in osteoblast differentiation. MEF
overexpression stimulated C2C12 cell proliferation. Together, our findings
suggest that MEF promotes cell proliferation and functions as a negative
regulator of osteogenic differentiation by directly interacting with Runx2 and
suppressing its transcriptional activity.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17167770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Plant Cell Physiol. 2007 Jan;48(1):110-21. Epub 2006 Nov 27.

Comparative overviews of clock-associated genes of Arabidopsis thaliana and Oryza
sativa.

Murakami M(1), Tago Y, Yamashino T, Mizuno T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, School of Agriculture, Nagoya
University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan. t2706775@mbox.nagoya-u.ac.jp

In higher plants, circadian rhythms are highly relevant to a wide range of
biological processes. To such circadian rhythms, the clock (oscillator) is
central, and recent intensive studies on the model higher plant Arabidopsis
thaliana have begun to shed light on the molecular mechanisms underlying the
functions of the central clock. Such representative clock-associated genes of A. 
thaliana are the homologous CCA1 and LHY genes, and five PRR genes that belong to
a small family of pseudo-response regulators including TOC1. Others are GI, ZTL, 
ELF3, ELF4, LUX/PCL1, etc. In this context, a simple question arose as to whether
or not the molecular picture of the model Arabidopsis clock is conserved in other
higher plants. Here we made an effort to answer the question with special
reference to Oryza sativa, providing experimental evidence that this model
monocot also has a set of highly conserved clock-associated genes, such as those 
designated as OsCCA1, OsPRR-series including OsTOC1/OsPRR1, OsZTLs, OsPCL1 as
well as OsGI. These results will provide us with insight into the general roles
of plant circadian clocks, such as those for the photoperiodic control of
flowering time that has a strong impact on the reproduction and yield in many
higher plants.

PMID: 17132630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Exp Bot. 2006;57(12):3217-29. Epub 2006 Aug 14.

Gene profiling of the red light signalling pathways in roots.

Molas ML(1), Kiss JZ, Correll MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany, Miami University, Oxford, OH 45056, USA.

Red light, acting through the phytochromes, controls numerous aspects of plant
development. Many of the signal transduction elements downstream of the
phytochromes have been identified in the aerial portions of the plant; however,
very few elements in red-light signalling have been identified specifically for
roots. Gene profiling studies using microarrays and quantitative Real-Time PCR
were performed to characterize gene expression changes in roots of Arabidopsis
seedlings exposed to 1 h of red light. Several factors acting downstream of
phytochromes in red-light signalling in roots were identified. Some of the genes 
found to be differentially expressed in this study have already been
characterized in the red-light-signalling pathway for whole plants. For example, 
PHYTOCHROME KINASE 1 (PKS1), LONG HYPOCOTYL 5 (HY5), EARLY FLOWERING 4 (ELF4),
and GIGANTEA (GI) were all significantly up-regulated in roots of seedlings
exposed to 1 h of red light. The up-regulation of SUPPRESSOR OF PHYTOCHROME A
RESPONSES 1 (SPA1) and CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1-like (COP1-like) genes
suggests that the PHYA-mediated pathway was attenuated by red light. In addition,
genes involved in lateral root and root hair formation, root plastid development,
phenylpropanoid metabolism, and hormone signalling were also regulated by
exposure to red light. Interestingly, members of the RPT2/NPH3 (ROOT PHOTOTROPIC 
2/NON PHOTOTROPIC HYPOCOTYL 3) family, which have been shown to mediate
blue-light-induced phototropism, were also differentially regulated in roots in
red light. Therefore, these results suggest that red and blue light pathways
interact in roots of seedlings and that many elements involved in
red-light-signalling found in the aerial portions of the plant are differentially
expressed in roots within 1 h of red light exposure.

PMID: 16908503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Sep 29;348(3):880-8. Epub 2006 Aug 1.

SUMO down-regulates the activity of Elf4/myeloid Elf-1-like factor.

Suico MA(1), Nakamura H, Lu Z, Saitoh H, Shuto T, Nakao M, Kai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medical and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

Myeloid elf-1-like factor (MEF) or Elf4 is an ETS protein known to regulate the
basal expression of the anti-microbial peptides, lysozyme and human
beta-defensin-2, in epithelial cells and activate the transcription of perforin
in natural killer cells. The numerous target genes of MEF and its biological
functions signify the importance of this Ets transcription factor. Here we show
that MEF is modified by conjugation with SUMO-1/-2 (small ubiquitin-related
modifier) both in mammalian cells and in Escherichia coli overexpressing human
SUMO-1/-2. We identified by point mutation that lysine 657 of MEF is the site for
sumoylation. This modification down-regulated MEF activity on lysozyme and
perforin promoters, and decreased the lysozyme mRNA expression. Chromatin
immuno-precipitation analysis revealed that SUMO-conjugation diminished the
recruitment of MEF to the lysozyme promoter, which partly explains the
down-regulation of MEF activity by SUMO. These findings contribute to our
understanding of the regulation of the ETS factor MEF.

PMID: 16904644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mol Cell. 2006 Aug 4;23(3):401-12.

Polypyrimidine tract binding protein regulates IRES-mediated gene expression
during apoptosis.

Bushell M(1), Stoneley M, Kong YW, Hamilton TL, Spriggs KA, Dobbyn HC, Qin X,
Sarnow P, Willis AE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham NG7 
2RD, United Kingdom. martin.bushell@nottingham.ac.uk

During apoptosis there is a substantial reduction in the rate of protein
synthesis, and yet some mRNAs avoid this translational inhibition. To determine
the impact that receptor-mediated cell death has on the translational efficiency 
of a large number of mRNAs, translational profiling was performed on MCF7 cells
treated with the apoptosis-inducing ligand TRAIL. Our data indicate that
approximately 3% of mRNAs remain associated with the polysomes in apoptotic
cells, and genes that are involved in transcription, chromatin
modification/remodeling, and the Notch signaling pathway are particularly
prevalent among the mRNAs that evade translational inhibition. Internal ribosome 
entry segments (IRESs) were identified in several of the mRNAs that remained
associated with the polysomes during apoptosis, and, importantly, these IRESs
functioned efficiently in apoptotic cells. Finally, the data showed that
polypyrimidine tract binding protein (PTB, a known IRES trans-acting factor or
ITAF) is pivotal in regulating the apoptotic process by controlling IRES
function.

PMID: 16885029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Nutr. 2006 Jul;136(7):1792-9.

Leucine activates pancreatic translational machinery in rats and mice through
mTOR independently of CCK and insulin.

Sans MD(1), Tashiro M, Vogel NL, Kimball SR, D'Alecy LG, Williams JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Penn State College of
Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA.

Feeding stimulates pancreatic digestive enzyme synthesis at the translational
level, and this is thought to be mediated by hormones and neurotransmitters.
However, BCAAs, particularly leucine, stimulate protein synthesis in several
tissues. We investigated whether BCAA stimulated the translational machinery in
murine pancreas and whether their effects were independent of hormones. Rats and 
mice were administered (i.g. gavage) individual BCAA at 1.35 mg/g (body weight)
and rat isolated pancreatic acini were incubated with BCAA under different
conditions. Activation of translation initiation factors and total protein
synthesis were analyzed. BCAA gavage stimulated the phosphorylation of the
initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) binding protein 1 (4E-BP1) and the ribosomal protein
S6 kinase (S6K), with leucine being the most effective. Leucine also increased
the association of the initiation factors eIF4E and eIF4G, but did not affect the
activity of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor eIF2B, nor total protein
synthesis. BCAA acted independently of insulin signaling on isolated pancreatic
acini from diabetic rats. The ability of leucine to promote phosphorylation of
4E-BP1 and S6K as well as enhance the assembly of the eIF4F complex was
unimpaired in CCK-deficient mice. Finally, rapamycin (0.75 mg/kg) administered to
rats 2 h before leucine gavage inhibited the phosphorylation of S6 and 4E-BP1
induced by leucine. We conclude that leucine may participate, as a signal as well
as a substrate, in activating the translational machinery in pancreatic acinar
cells independently of hormonal effects and that this action is through the mTOR 
pathway.

PMID: 16772439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(8):3114-23.

The ETS protein MEF is regulated by phosphorylation-dependent proteolysis via the
protein-ubiquitin ligase SCFSkp2.

Liu Y(1), Hedvat CV, Mao S, Zhu XH, Yao J, Nguyen H, Koff A, Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematologic Oncology, Department of Medicine, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, Box 575, New York, NY 10021,
USA.

MEF is an ETS-related transcription factor with strong transcriptional activating
activity that affects hematopoietic stem cell behavior and is required for normal
NK cell and NK T-cell development. The MEF (also known as ELF4) gene is repressed
by several leukemia-associated fusion transcription factor proteins (PML-retinoic
acid receptor alpha and AML1-ETO), but it is also activated by retroviral
insertion in several cancer models. We have previously shown that cyclin
A-dependent phosphorylation of MEF largely restricts its activity to the G(1)
phase of the cell cycle; we now show that MEF is a short-lived protein whose
expression level also peaks during late G(1) phase. Mutagenesis studies show that
the rapid turnover of MEF in S phase is dependent on the specific phosphorylation
of threonine 643 and serine 648 at the C terminus of MEF by cdk2 and on the
Skp1/Cul1/F-box (SCF) E3 ubiquitin ligase complex SCF(Skp2), which targets MEF
for ubiquitination and proteolysis. Overexpression of MEF drives cells through
the G(1)/S transition, thereby promoting cell proliferation. The tight regulation
of MEF levels during the cell cycle contributes to its effects on regulating cell
cycle entry and cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC1446966
PMID: 16581786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Dev Cell. 2006 Apr;10(4):415-7.

Regulating quiescence: new insights into hematopoietic stem cell biology.

Passegué E(1), Wagers AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Program, University of California, San
Francisco, 94143, USA.

Blood-forming hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) ensure production of all mature
blood cells during homeostatic and regenerative hematopoiesis. Proliferation,
cell cycle regulation, and quiescence are key processes involved in this
function, and in a recent issue of Cancer Cell, show that HSC quiescence is
actively regulated by specific molecular mechanisms that appear to distinguish
normal HSC maintenance from HSC responses to hematologic injury.

PMID: 16580989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Neurochem. 2006 May;97(3):857-71. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Translational event mediates differential production of tumor necrosis
factor-alpha in hyaluronan-stimulated microglia and macrophages.

Wang MJ(1), Kuo JS, Lee WW, Huang HY, Chen WF, Lin SZ.

Author information: 
(1)Neuro-Medical Scientific Center, Buddhist Tzu-Chi General Hospital, Tzu-Chi
College of Technology, Hualien, Taiwan.

Recent evidence has demonstrated that hyaluronan synthase 2 mRNA is up-regulated 
after brain ischemia. After a cerebral ischemic event, microglia and macrophages 
are the major inflammatory cells and are activated by hyaluronan (HA). However,
it is unclear how these cells compare with regard to HA responsiveness. We show
here that peritoneal macrophages and RAW 264.7 macrophages produced more than
five- and 10-fold more tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) than primary
microglia and BV-2 microglia, respectively. Antibody blockade study showed that
CD44, Toll-like receptor-4 receptor and the receptor for HA-mediated motility
were responsible for HA-induced TNF-alpha release. Furthermore, HA induced higher
levels of phosphorylated MAPK in RAW 264.7 cells when compared with BV-2 cells.
HA-mediated TNF-alpha production required p38 MAPK, extracellular-regulated
kinase and c-Jun N-terminal kinase phosphorylation in both cell types. The levels
of HA-induced TNF-alpha mRNA expression in BV-2 cells were only twofold lower
compared with RAW 264.7 cells, suggesting that a translational event is involved 
in the differential production of TNF-alpha. Western blot analysis revealed that 
HA treatment resulted in more rapid phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation
factor 4E-binding protein 1 (4E-BP1) and more effective dissociation of 4E-BP1
from eukaryotic initiation factor 4E in RAW 264.7 cells than in BV-2 cells.
Additionally, HA-induced phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 was dependent on MAPK
signaling, indicating that RAW 264.7 cells exhibited higher levels of
hyperphosphorylated 4E-BP1 possibly due to the overactivation of MAPK. The
results suggest that resident microglia and blood-derived monocytes/macrophages
exhibit differential sensitivities in response to extracellular mediators after
brain ischemia.

PMID: 16573652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Cancer Cell. 2006 Mar;9(3):175-87.

The transcription factor MEF/ELF4 regulates the quiescence of primitive
hematopoietic cells.

Lacorazza HD(1), Yamada T, Liu Y, Miyata Y, Sivina M, Nunes J, Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology and Chemistry Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, New York
10021, USA. hdl@bcm.tmc.edu

The transcriptional circuitry that regulates the quiescence of hematopoietic stem
cells is largely unknown. We report that the transcription factor known as MEF
(or ELF4), which is targeted by the t(X;21)(q26;q22) in acute myelogenous
leukemia, regulates the proliferation of primitive hematopoietic progenitor cells
at steady state, controlling their quiescence. Mef null HSCs display increased
residence in G0 with reduced 5-bromodeoxyuridine incorporation in vivo and
impaired cytokine-driven proliferation in vitro. Due to their increased HSC
quiescence, Mef null mice are relatively resistant to the myelosuppressive
effects of chemotherapy and radiation. Thus, MEF plays an important role in the
decision of stem/primitive progenitor cells to divide or remain quiescent by
regulating their entry to the cell cycle.

PMID: 16530702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Neurochem. 2006 Apr;97(1):79-91. Epub 2006 Mar 3.

Mnk is a negative regulator of cap-dependent translation in Aplysia neurons.

Ross G(1), Dyer JR, Castellucci VF, Sossin WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

To investigate the mechanisms underlying regulation of eukaryotic initiation
factor 4E (eIF4E) phosphorylation in Aplysia neurons, we have cloned the Aplysia 
homolog of the vertebrate eIF4E kinases, Mnk1 and -2. Aplysia Mnk shares many
conserved regions with vertebrate Mnk, including putative eukaryotic initiation
factor 4G binding regions, activation loop phosphorylation sites, and a
carboxy-terminal anchoring site for MAP kinases. As expected, purified Aplysia
Mnk phosphorylated Aplysia eIF4E at a conserved carboxy-terminal serine and
over-expression of Aplysia Mnk in sensory neurons led to increased
phosphorylation of endogenous eIF4E. Over-expression of Aplysia Mnk led to strong
decreases in cap-dependent translation, while generally sparing internal
ribosomal entry site (IRES)-dependent translation. However, decreases in
cap-dependent translation seen after expression of Aplysia Mnk could only be
partly explained by increases in eIF4E phosphorylation. In Aplysia sensory
neurons, phosphorylation of eIF4E is reduced during intermediate memory
formation. However, we found that this physiological regulation of eIF4E
phosphorylation was independent of changes in Aplysia Mnk phosphorylation. We
propose that changes in eIF4E phosphorylation in Aplysia neurons are a
consequence of changes in cap-dependent translation that are independent of
regulation of Aplysia Mnk.

PMID: 16515558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Genes Cells. 2005 Dec;10(12):1127-37.

The role of transcriptional coactivator TRAP220 in myelomonocytic
differentiation.

Urahama N(1), Ito M, Sada A, Yakushijin K, Yamamoto K, Okamura A, Minagawa K,
Hato A, Chihara K, Roeder RG, Matsui T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Kobe University
School of Medicine, Japan.

The TRAP220 subunit of the thyroid hormone receptor-associated polypeptide
transcription coactivator complex (TRAP/Mediator complex), mammalian counterpart 
of the yeast Mediator complex, is proposed to act on a variety of major and
specific biological events through physical interactions with nuclear receptors. 
The vitamin D receptor (VDR) and retinoic acid receptor (RAR), coupled with
retinoid X receptor (RXR), are nuclear receptors which have important roles for
monopoiesis and granulopoiesis, respectively. In this study, we present the
functional role of TRAP220 in nuclear receptor-mediated monopoiesis and
granulopoiesis. The mouse Trap220(-/-) yolk sac hematopoietic progenitor cells
were resistant to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3)-stimulated differentiation into
monocytes/macrophages. Furthermore, flow cytometric analyses showed that HL-60
cells, human promyelocytic leukemia cell line, wherein TRAP220 was
down-regulated, did not differentiate efficiently into monocytes and granulocytes
by stimulation with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) and all-trans retinoic acid,
correspondingly. The expression of direct target genes of VDR or RAR, as well as 
the differentiation marker genes, was low in the knockdown cells. These results
indicated a crucial role of TRAP220 in the optimal VDR- and RAR-mediated
myelomonocytic differentiation processes in mammalian hematopoiesis.

PMID: 16324150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Dec;25(24):10853-62.

The ternary complex factor Net regulates cell migration through inhibition of
PAI-1 expression.

Buchwalter G(1), Gross C, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS, INSERM,
ULP, Illkirch, France.

Net, Elk-1, and Sap-1 are members of the ternary complex factor (TCF) subfamily
of Ets transcription factors. They form ternary complexes with serum response
factor (SRF) on serum response elements of immediate early genes such as c-fos
and egr-1 and mediate responses to growth factors and mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling. Although the TCFs have been extensively studied as
intermediates in signaling cascades, surprisingly little is known about their
different target genes and physiological functions. We report that Net homozygous
mutant mouse embryonic fibroblasts have a defect in cell migration. This defect
results at least in part from increased expression of plasminogen activator
inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1), a serine protease inhibitor (serpin) that controls
extracellular proteolysis and cell matrix adhesion. The defect in cell migration 
can be reverted by the addition of a PAI-1 blocking antibody. Net represses PAI-1
promoter activity and binds to a specific region of the promoter containing Ets
binding sites in the absence of SRF. We conclude that Net is a negative regulator
of PAI-1 expression and is thereby involved in cell migration.

PMCID: PMC1316955
PMID: 16314510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Leuk Res. 2006 Aug;30(8):1037-42. Epub 2005 Nov 21.

ELF4 is fused to ERG in a case of acute myeloid leukemia with a
t(X;21)(q25-26;q22).

Moore SD(1), Offor O, Ferry JA, Amrein PC, Morton CC, Dal Cin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We report a novel chromosomal translocation in AML, t(X;21)(q25-26;q22),
resulting in a fusion transcript between two ETS domain family members, ELF4 (at 
Xq25) and ERG (at 21q22). ERG has been associated previously with other fusion
partners, specifically FUS and EWSR1, and implicated in both AML and Ewing's
sarcoma. RT-PCR analysis of RNA isolated from bone marrow samples from the
patient demonstrates that the translocation occurs within intron 1 of ERG isoform
1 (ERG-1) and intron 2 of ELF4 resulting in an in-frame fusion joining exon 2
from ELF4 with exon 2 of ERG. This is the first reported case of an ELF4-ERG
fusion and identification of the specific ERG exon involved in the fusion that
differentiates ERG isoforms. In addition, this case also directly implicates a
new role for ELF4 in cancer.

PMID: 16303180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Plant J. 2005 Oct;44(2):300-13.

ELF4 is a phytochrome-regulated component of a negative-feedback loop involving
the central oscillator components CCA1 and LHY.

Kikis EA(1), Khanna R, Quail PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
CA 94720, USA.

Evidence has been presented that a negative transcriptional feedback loop formed 
by the genes CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED (CCA1), LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY)
and TIMING OF CAB (TOC1) constitutes the core of the central oscillator of the
circadian clock in Arabidopsis. Here we show that these genes are expressed at
constant, basal levels in dark-grown seedlings. Transfer to constant red light
(Rc) rapidly induces a biphasic pattern of CCA1 and LHY expression, and a
reciprocal TOC1 expression pattern over the first 24 h, consistent with initial
induction of this synchronous oscillation by the light signal. We have used this 
assay with wild-type and mutant seedlings to examine the role of these oscillator
components, and to determine the function of ELF3 and ELF4 in their
light-regulated expression. The data show that whereas TOC1 is necessary for
light-induced CCA1/LHY expression, the combined absence of CCA1 and LHY has
little effect on the pattern of light-induced TOC1 expression, indicating that
the negative regulatory arm of the proposed oscillator is not fully functional
during initial seedling de-etiolation. By contrast, ELF4 is necessary for
light-induced expression of both CCA1 and LHY, and conversely, CCA1 and LHY act
negatively on light-induced ELF4 expression. Together with the observation that
the temporal light-induced expression profile of ELF4 is counter-phased to that
of CCA1 and LHY and parallels that of TOC1, these data are consistent with a
previously unrecognized negative-feedback loop formed by CCA1/LHY and ELF4 in a
manner analogous to the proposed CCA1/LHY/TOC1 oscillator. ELF3 is also necessary
for light-induced CCA1/LHY expression, but it is neither light-induced nor
clock-regulated during de-etiolation. Taken together, the data suggest (a) that
ELF3, ELF4, and TOC1 all function in the primary, phytochrome-mediated
light-input pathway to the circadian oscillator in Arabidopsis; and (b) that this
oscillator consists of two or more interlocking transcriptional feedback loops
that may be differentially operative during initial light induction and under
steady-state circadian conditions in entrained green plants.

PMID: 16212608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Neurosci. 2005 Apr 27;25(17):4420-34.

A novel RNA-binding protein in neuronal RNA granules: regulatory machinery for
local translation.

Shiina N(1), Shinkura K, Tokunaga M.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Center, National Institute of Genetics, School of Life
Science, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, Mishima, Shizuoka
411-8540, Japan. nshiina@lab.nig.ac.jp

Local translation in neuronal dendrites is an important basis for long-term
synaptic plasticity, and RNA granules in the dendrites are involved in the local 
translation. Here, we identify RNG105 (RNA granule protein 105), a novel
RNA-binding protein, as a component of the RNA granules in dendrites of
hippocampal neurons. The RNG105-localizing RNA granules contain mRNAs, the
translational products of which play key roles in synaptic plasticity. RNG105 has
an ability to repress translation both in vitro and in vivo, consistent with the 
finding that the RNA granule is translationally arrested in the basal conditions.
Dissociation of RNG105 from the RNA granules is induced by BDNF, a growth factor 
responsible for synaptic plasticity. The RNG105 dissociation is coincident with
the induction of local translation near the granules. These findings suggest that
RNG105 is a translational repressor in the RNA granules and provide insight into 
the link between RNG105 dynamics and local translational regulation.

PMID: 15858068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Plant Physiol. 2005 Mar;137(3):969-82. Epub 2005 Feb 25.

Conservation and divergence of circadian clock operation in a stress-inducible
Crassulacean acid metabolism species reveals clock compensation against stress.

Boxall SF(1), Foster JM, Bohnert HJ, Cushman JC, Nimmo HG, Hartwell J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of York, York YO10 5YW, United Kingdom.

One of the best-characterized physiological rhythms in plants is the circadian
rhythm of CO(2) metabolism in Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) plants, which is
the focus here. The central components of the plant circadian clock have been
studied in detail only in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Full-length cDNAs
have been obtained encoding orthologs of CIRCADIAN CLOCK-ASSOCIATED1 (CCA1)/LATE 
ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY), TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION1 (TOC1), EARLY FLOWERING4
(ELF4), ZEITLUPE (ZTL), FLAVIN-BINDING KELCH REPEAT F-BOX1 (FKF1), EARLY
FLOWERING3 (ELF3), and a partial cDNA encoding GIGANTEA in the model
stress-inducible CAM plant, Mesembryanthemum crystallinum (Common Ice Plant).
TOC1 and LHY/CCA1 are under reciprocal circadian control in a manner similar to
their regulation in Arabidopsis. ELF4, FKF1, ZTL, GIGANTEA, and ELF3 are under
circadian control in C(3) and CAM leaves. ELF4 transcripts peak in the evening
and are unaffected by CAM induction. FKF1 shows an abrupt transcript peak 3 h
before subjective dusk. ELF3 transcripts appear in the evening, consistent with
their role in gating light input to the circadian clock. Intriguingly, ZTL
transcripts do not oscillate in Arabidopsis, but do in M. crystallinum. The
transcript abundance of the clock-associated genes in M. crystallinum is largely 
unaffected by development and salt stress, revealing compensation of the central 
circadian clock against development and abiotic stress in addition to the
well-known temperature compensation. Importantly, the clock in M. crystallinum is
very similar to that in Arabidopsis, indicating that such a clock could control
CAM without requiring additional components of the central oscillator or a novel 
CAM oscillator.

PMCID: PMC1065398
PMID: 15734916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Neuron. 2005 Feb 17;45(4):525-38.

The Rac1-GEF Tiam1 couples the NMDA receptor to the activity-dependent
development of dendritic arbors and spines.

Tolias KF(1), Bikoff JB, Burette A, Paradis S, Harrar D, Tavazoie S, Weinberg RJ,
Greenberg ME.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology Program, Children's Hospital, Department of Neurology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

NMDA-type glutamate receptors play a critical role in the activity-dependent
development and structural remodeling of dendritic arbors and spines. However,
the molecular mechanisms that link NMDA receptor activation to changes in
dendritic morphology remain unclear. We report that the Rac1-GEF Tiam1 is present
in dendrites and spines and is required for their development. Tiam1 interacts
with the NMDA receptor and is phosphorylated in a calcium-dependent manner in
response to NMDA receptor stimulation. Blockade of Tiam1 function with RNAi and
dominant interfering mutants of Tiam1 suggests that Tiam1 mediates effects of the
NMDA receptor on dendritic development by inducing Rac1-dependent actin
remodeling and protein synthesis. Taken together, these findings define a
molecular mechanism by which NMDA receptor signaling controls the growth and
morphology of dendritic arbors and spines.

PMID: 15721239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Plant J. 2005 Feb;41(3):376-85.

HUA2 is required for the expression of floral repressors in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Doyle MR(1), Bizzell CM, Keller MR, Michaels SD, Song J, Noh YS, Amasino RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Agricultural and Life Sciences,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706-1544, USA.

The HUA2 gene acts as a repressor of floral transition. Lesions in hua2 were
identified through a study of natural variation and through two mutant screens.
An allele of HUA2 from Landsberg erecta (Ler) contains a premature stop codon and
acts as an enhancer of early flowering 4 (elf4) mutants. hua2 single mutants, in 
the absence of the elf4 lesion, flower earlier than wild type under short days.
hua2 mutations partially suppress late flowering in FRIGIDA (FRI )-containing
lines, autonomous pathway mutants, and a photoperiod pathway mutant. hua2
mutations suppress late flowering by reducing the expression of several MADS
genes that act as floral repressors including FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC ) and
FLOWERING LOCUS M (FLM ).

PMID: 15659097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Pharmacol Sci. 2004 Aug;95(4):466-70. Epub 2004 Jul 31.

The regulation of human beta-defensin 2 by the ETS transcription factor MEF
(myeloid Elf-1-like factor) is enhanced by promyelocytic leukemia protein.

Suico MA(1), Lu Z, Shuto T, Koga T, Uchikawa T, Yoshida H, Matsuzaki K, Nakao M, 
Li JD, Kai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medical and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

The human beta-defensin 2 (HBD 2) is a potent anti-bacterial peptide with a wide 
spectrum of activity. MEF (myeloid elf-1-like factor) or Elf4, a member of the
ETS transcription factor family, has been shown to up-regulate the basal
expression of the HBD 2 gene in epithelial cells. The mammalian cell nucleus is
organized into distinct nuclear domains, one of which is the PML (promyelocytic
leukemia) nuclear body involved in the regulation of transcription. Here, we show
that PML stimulated MEF transcriptional activity, resulting in the up-regulation 
of endogenous HBD 2 expression.

PMID: 15286431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Learn Mem. 2004 Jul-Aug;11(4):365-72. Epub 2004 Jul 14.

Synaptic plasticity and translation initiation.

Klann E(1), Antion MD, Banko JL, Hou L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. eklann@bcm.tmc.edu

It is widely accepted that protein synthesis, including local protein synthesis
at synapses, is required for several forms of synaptic plasticity. Local protein 
synthesis enables synapses to control synaptic strength independent of the cell
body via rapid protein production from pre-existing mRNA. Therefore, regulation
of translation initiation is likely to be intimately involved in modulating
synaptic strength. Our understanding of the translation-initiation process has
expanded greatly in recent years. In this review, we discuss various aspects of
translation initiation, as well as signaling pathways that might be involved in
coupling neurotransmitter and neurotrophin receptors to the translation machinery
during various forms of synaptic plasticity.

PMID: 15254214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2004 Jun;48(6):2298-301.

Genetic basis of erythromycin resistance in oral bacteria.

Villedieu A(1), Diaz-Torres ML, Roberts AP, Hunt N, McNab R, Spratt DA, Wilson M,
Mullany P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, Eastman Dental Institute for Oral Health
Care Sciences, University College London, 256 Gray's Inn Rd., London WC1X 8LD,
United Kingdom.

We determined the prevalence of erythromycin-resistant bacteria in the oral
cavity and identified mef and erm(B) as the most common resistance determinants. 
In addition, we demonstrate the genetic linkage, on various Tn1545-like
conjugative transposons, between erythromycin and tetracycline resistance in a
number of isolates.

PMCID: PMC415603
PMID: 15155239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Apr;24(7):2890-904.

Translocation products in acute myeloid leukemia activate the Wnt signaling
pathway in hematopoietic cells.

Müller-Tidow C(1), Steffen B, Cauvet T, Tickenbrock L, Ji P, Diederichs S, Sargin
B, Köhler G, Stelljes M, Puccetti E, Ruthardt M, deVos S, Hiebert SW, Koeffler
HP, Berdel WE, Serve H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Gerhard Domagk Institute of Pathology, University of
Münster, Münster, Germany. muellerc@uni-muenster.de

The acute myeloid leukemia (AML)-associated translocation products AML1-ETO,
PML-retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARalpha), and PLZF-RARalpha encode aberrant
transcription factors. Several lines of evidence suggest similar pathogenetic
mechanisms for these fusion proteins. We used high-density oligonucleotide arrays
to identify shared target genes in inducibly transfected U937 cells expressing
AML1-ETO, PML-RARalpha, or PLZF-RARalpha. All three fusion proteins significantly
repressed the expression of 38 genes and induced the expression of 14 genes.
Several of the regulated genes were associated with Wnt signaling. One of these, 
plakoglobin (gamma-catenin), was induced on the mRNA and protein level by all
three fusion proteins. In addition, primary AML blasts carrying one of the fusion
proteins significantly overexpressed plakoglobin. The plakoglobin promoter was
cloned and shown to be induced by AML1-ETO, with promoter activation depending on
the corepressor and histone deacetylase binding domains. The induction of
plakoglobin by AML fusion proteins led to downstream signaling and
transactivation of TCF- and LEF-dependent promoters, including the c-myc
promoter, which was found to be bound by plakoglobin in vivo after AML1-ETO
expression. beta-Catenin protein levels and TCF and LEF target genes such as
c-myc and cyclin D1 were found to be induced by the fusion proteins. On the
functional level, a dominant negative TCF inhibited colony growth of
AML1-ETO-positive Kasumi cells, whereas plakoglobin transfection into myeloid 32D
cells enhanced proliferation and clonal growth. Injection of
plakoglobin-expressing 32D cells into syngeneic mice accelerated the development 
of leukemia. Transduction of plakoglobin into primitive murine hematopoietic
progenitor cells preserved the immature phenotype during colony growth,
suggesting enhanced self-renewal. These data provide evidence that activation of 
Wnt signaling is a common feature of several balanced translocations in AML.

PMCID: PMC371102
PMID: 15024077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. FEBS Lett. 2004 Mar 12;561(1-3):117-21.

MEF up-regulates human beta-defensin 2 expression in epithelial cells.

Lu Z(1), Kim KA, Suico MA, Shuto T, Li JD, Kai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Kumamoto University, 5-1 Oe-honmachi, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

Human beta-defensin 2 (HBD2), an antimicrobial peptide, is widely expressed in
epithelial tissues and displays a potent killing activity in response to the
invasiveness of a wide range of microorganisms and the stimulation of various
molecules. Myeloid ELF-1-like factor (MEF) has been reported to be involved in
innate immunity responses, such as activation of perforin and lysozyme
transcription. The role of MEF in the transcription regulation of HBD2, however, 
is unknown. Here, we show that MEF not only activated HBD2 promoter activity, but
also increased the endogenous HBD2 transcription level. Moreover, the activated
HBD2 promoter activity was attenuated by the antisense MEF RNA input and the loss
of the ETS binding site (EBS: GGAA core sequence) in the HBD2 promoter. The
interaction between the EBS and MEF protein was further confirmed by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Thus, our data indicate that MEF may play
an important role in regulating HBD2 expression in epithelial cells.

PMID: 15013761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 30;279(18):19091-8. Epub 2004 Feb 19.

Myeloid Elf-1-like factor, an ETS transcription factor, up-regulates lysozyme
transcription in epithelial cells through interaction with promyelocytic leukemia
protein.

Suico MA(1), Yoshida H, Seki Y, Uchikawa T, Lu Z, Shuto T, Matsuzaki K, Nakao M, 
Li JD, Kai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medical and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

Myeloid elf-1-like factor (MEF) or Elf4, which is a member of the ETS
transcription factor family, up-regulates the basal expression of lysozyme gene
in epithelial cells and is constitutively localized in the nucleus. The mammalian
cell nucleus is organized into distinct nuclear domains or compartments that are 
essential for diverse physiological processes. Promyelocytic leukemia (PML)
nuclear body or nuclear domain 10 is one of the nuclear domains and is involved
in tumor suppression and regulation of transcription. Here, we investigate the
role of PML nuclear body in MEF transactivation. We show that PML, but not Sp100,
induced the accumulation of MEF in PML nuclear bodies and that MEF and PML
physically interacted. This interaction stimulated MEF transcriptional activity, 
resulting in the up-regulation of endogenous lysozyme expression. Amino acids
348-517 of MEF were required for the accumulation of MEF in PML nuclear bodies
and up-regulation of lysozyme transcription, which is enhanced by PML. Moreover, 
the C-terminal region of MEF spanning amino acids 477-517 was the putative region
required for interaction between MEF and PML as determined with the use of the
mammalian two-hybrid system. In addition, heat-shock treatment induced the
accumulation of MEF in endogenous PML nuclear bodies and enhanced MEF
transactivation of lysozyme gene. Thus, the recruitment of MEF to PML nuclear
bodies may partly regulate lysozyme transcription in epithelial cells.

PMID: 14976184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Methods Mol Biol. 2004;257:135-54.

Using the lambdaN peptide to tether proteins to RNAs.

Baron-Benhamou J(1), Gehring NH, Kulozik AE, Hentze MW.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.

Proteins interacting with messenger RNAs (mRNAs) affect their nuclear processing,
export, translation efficiency, stability, or cytoplasmic localization. Such
RNA-binding proteins are often modular, containing RNA-binding domain(s) and
other functional modules. To analyze the function of such proteins independent of
their normal RNA-binding domains or to introduce effector modules to defined
RNA-binding regions, a number of tethering approaches have been developed, often 
based on the use of large proteins and their specifically interacting RNA
sequences. Here we report the use of a versatile system to tether proteins to
mRNAs. The 22 amino acid RNA-binding domain of the lambda bacteriophage
antiterminator protein N (lambdaN-(1-22) or lambdaN peptide) is used to tag the
protein of interest, and its specific 19 nt binding site (boxB) is inserted into 
the target RNA recruiting the properties of the fusion protein to the RNA. The
major advantage of this system derives from the small size of the peptide and its
target sequence, which facilitates cloning and its use for biochemical
experiments and diminishes possible interferences with the fused protein. The
chapter illustrates the use of this system to create dedicated mRNA-specific
factors involved in processes, such as mRNA translation and nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay.

PMID: 14770003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2003 Nov-Dec;31(3):342-50.

The emerging role of the myeloid Elf-1 like transcription factor in
hematopoiesis.

Lacorazza HD(1), Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Aspects of Hematopoiesis, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.
d-lacorazza@ski.mskcc.org

MEF (myeloid Elf-1 like factor) is a member of the ETS family of transcription
factors (TF) with transcriptional activating properties. ETS proteins have been
implicated in widely divergent physiological and pathological processes (such as 
development and oncogenesis). MEF is expressed in non-hematopoietic and
hematopoietic (lymphoid and myeloid) tissues, and after generating MEF-deficient 
mice by homologous recombination, we have studied its role in lymphopoiesis
(Immunity 17 (2002), 437). MEF plays a critical role in NK and NK-T cell
development and the constitutive expression of perforin by NK cells. MEF
interacts with other TFs such as AML1 (Runx1) and with the cyclin A/cdk2 kinase
complex. In this review, we discuss the biology of MEF in the context of the
other members of this family of transcriptional regulators.

PMID: 14636650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 20;279(8):6395-400. Epub 2003 Nov 17.

Myeloid ELF1-like factor is a potent activator of interleukin-8 expression in
hematopoietic cells.

Hedvat CV(1), Yao J, Sokolic RA, Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Aspects of Hematopoiesis, Department of Pathology,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.
hedvatc@mskcc.org

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 31;281(13):8996.

Myeloid ELF1-like factor (MEF), also known as ELF4, is a member of the ETS family
of transcription factors which is expressed in hematopoietic cells. MEF-deficient
mice have defects in natural killer cell and natural killer T cell development,
suggesting a role for MEF in regulating innate immunity. MEF also functions in
myeloid cells, where it can transactivate target genes. To identify MEF target
genes in a "myeloid" environment, we created an inducible expression system and
used oligonucleotide microarrays to examine the transcript profile of HEL cells
after induction of MEF expression. Sixteen genes were reproducibly turned on or
off more than 2-fold, 8 h after induction of MEF expression, and we examined one 
of the genes, interleukin-8 (IL-8), in greater detail. IL-8 is a CXC chemokine
involved in neutrophil chemoattraction, angiogenesis, and stem cell mobilization.
It is expressed by several tumor types, and its expression is regulated primarily
transcriptionally. The IL-8 promoter contains three ETS binding sites, and we
identified the specific site that binds MEF and is required for MEF
responsiveness. MEF, but not the closely related ETS factors PEA3, ETS1, ETS2,
ELF1, or PU.1, strongly activates the IL-8 promoter. MEF overexpression is
sufficient to induce IL-8 protein expression, and reduction in MEF expression
(using RNA interference) results in decreased IL-8 levels. These data
demonstrates that MEF is an important regulator of IL-8 expression.

PMID: 14625302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Plant Physiol. 2003 Dec;133(4):1530-8. Epub 2003 Nov 6.

EARLY FLOWERING 4 functions in phytochrome B-regulated seedling de-etiolation.

Khanna R(1), Kikis EA, Quail PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
California 94720, USA.

To define the functions of genes previously identified by expression profiling as
being rapidly light induced under phytochrome (phy) control, we are investigating
the seedling de-etiolation phenotypes of mutants carrying T-DNA insertional
disruptions at these loci. Mutants at one such locus displayed reduced
responsiveness to continuous red, but not continuous far-red light, suggesting a 
role in phyB signaling but not phyA signaling. Consistent with such a role,
expression of this gene is induced by continuous red light in wild-type
seedlings, but the level of induction is strongly reduced in phyB-null mutants.
The locus encodes a novel protein that we show localizes to the nucleus, thus
suggesting a function in light-regulated gene expression. Recently, this locus
was identified as EARLY FLOWERING 4, a gene implicated in floral induction and
regulating the expression of the gene CIRCADIAN CLOCK-ASSOCIATED 1. Together with
these previous data, our findings suggest that EARLY FLOWERING 4 functions as a
signaling intermediate in phy-regulated gene expression involved in promotion of 
seedling de-etiolation, circadian clock function, and photoperiod perception.

PMCID: PMC300710
PMID: 14605220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Prog Cell Cycle Res. 2003;5:469-75.

Cap-dependent translation and control of the cell cycle.

Cormier P(1), Pyronnet S, Salaün P, Mulner-Lorillon O, Sonenberg N.

Author information: 
(1)Station Biologique de Roscoff, Université Pierre et Marie Curie (EI 37),
CNRS-UMR 7127, (INSU), BP 74, 29682 Roscoff, France.

The control of gene expression at the translational level has emerged in the past
decade as an important aspect of cell growth, proliferation and malignant
transformation. Translation is primarily regulated at the initiation step, and
mitogen-dependent signaling pathways converge to modulate the activity of
translation initiation factors. In most tumors tested, at least one translation
initiation factor is overexpressed and overexpression of translation initiation
factors often provokes transformation. Malignant transformation could be caused
by the increased translation of a subset of mRNAs encoding important proteins
which are required for cell growth and proliferation. These mRNAs usually possess
regulatory sequences that render their translation more sensitive to changes in
the activity of translation initiation factors. In this chapter, we describe
recent advances illustrating the importance of translation in cell cycle
progression and cell transformation. Control of translation initiation may
represent an excellent target for antitumor drugs.

PMID: 14593742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Curr Biol. 2003 Aug 5;13(15):1259-68.

Tuberous sclerosis complex gene products, Tuberin and Hamartin, control mTOR
signaling by acting as a GTPase-activating protein complex toward Rheb.

Tee AR(1), Manning BD, Roux PP, Cantley LC, Blenis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC) is a genetic disorder that occurs
through the loss of heterozygosity of either TSC1 or TSC2, which encode Hamartin 
or Tuberin, respectively. Tuberin and Hamartin form a tumor suppressor
heterodimer that inhibits the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) nutrient
signaling input, but how this occurs is unclear.
RESULTS: We show that the small G protein Rheb (Ras homolog enriched in brain) is
a molecular target of TSC1/TSC2 that regulates mTOR signaling. Overexpression of 
Rheb activates 40S ribosomal protein S6 kinase 1 (S6K1) but not p90 ribosomal S6 
kinase 1 (RSK1) or Akt. Furthermore, Rheb induces phosphorylation of eukaryotic
initiation factor 4E binding protein 1 (4E-BP1) and causes 4E-BP1 to dissociate
from eIF4E. This dissociation is completely sensitive to rapamycin (an mTOR
inhibitor) but not wortmannin (a phosphoinositide 3-kinase [PI3K] inhibitor).
Rheb also activates S6K1 during amino acid insufficiency via a
rapamycin-sensitive mechanism, suggesting that Rheb participates in nutrient
signaling through mTOR. Moreover, Rheb does not activate a S6K1 mutant that is
unresponsive to mTOR-mediated signals, confirming that Rheb functions upstream of
mTOR. Overexpression of the Tuberin-Hamartin heterodimer inhibits Rheb-mediated
S6K1 activation, suggesting that Tuberin functions as a Rheb GTPase activating
protein (GAP). Supporting this notion, TSC patient-derived Tuberin GAP domain
mutants were unable to inactivate Rheb in vivo. Moreover, in vitro studies reveal
that Tuberin, when associated with Hamartin, acts as a Rheb GTPase-activating
protein. Finally, we show that membrane localization of Rheb is important for its
biological activity because a farnesylation-defective mutant of Rheb stimulated
S6K1 activation less efficiently.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that Rheb acts as a novel mediator of the nutrient signaling
input to mTOR and is the molecular target of TSC1 and TSC2 within mammalian
cells.

PMID: 12906785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Blood. 2003 Nov 15;102(10):3727-36. Epub 2003 Jul 31.

Comparative analysis of genes regulated by PML/RAR alpha and PLZF/RAR alpha in
response to retinoic acid using oligonucleotide arrays.

Park DJ(1), Vuong PT, de Vos S, Douer D, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University of
California, Los Angeles School of Medicine, 8700 Beverly Blvd, Rm 5433, Los
Angeles, CA 90048, USA. parkd@cshs.org

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is associated with chromosomal translocations 
involving retinoic acid receptor alpha (RAR alpha) and its fusion partners
including promyelocytic leukemia (PML) and promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger
(PLZF). Using oligonucleotide arrays, we examined changes in global gene
expression mediated by the ectopic expression of either PML/RAR alpha
(retinoid-sensitive) or PLZF/RAR alpha (retinoid-resistant) in U937 cells. Of
more than 5000 genes analyzed, 16 genes were commonly up-regulated, and 57 genes 
were down-regulated by both fusion proteins suggesting their role in the APL
phenotype. In our APL model, for example, TNFAIP2, TNFR2, ELF4, RAR gamma, and
HoxA1 were down-regulated by both fusion proteins in the absence of retinoic acid
(RA). RA strongly up-regulated these genes in PML/RAR alpha, but not in PLZF/RAR 
alpha expressing U937 cells. Expression studies in NB4, retinoid-resistant
NB4-R2, normal human CD34+ cells, and APL patient samples strongly suggest their 
role in the regulation of granulocytic differentiation. Furthermore, combined
treatment with tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF alpha) and RA synergistically
enhanced granulocytic differentiation in NB4 cells but not in NB4-R2 cells. Our
data indicate that APL pathogenesis and retinoid-induced granulocytic
differentiation of APL cells involve genes in the cell death pathway, and that
cooperation between the RA and TNFalpha signaling pathways exists. Targeting both
the retinoid-dependent differentiation and the cell death pathways may improve
leukemic therapy, especially in retinoid-resistant acute myeloid leukemia.

PMID: 12893766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jul 8;100(14):8448-53. Epub 2003 Jun 20.

Specific protein redirection as a transcriptional therapy approach for t(8;21)
leukemia.

Steffen B(1), Serve H, Berdel WE, Agrawal S, Linggi B, Büchner T, Hiebert SW,
Müller-Tidow C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology/Oncology, University of Münster, 48129
Münster, Germany.

Important progress has been achieved in the knowledge about the pathogenesis of
cancer. However, despite these advances, the therapeutic strategies are still
limited. Leukemias are often characterized by specific balanced translocations,
with the t(8;21) balanced translocation being the most frequent chromosomal
aberration in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). This translocation produces the
AML1-ETO fusion protein, which binds to AML1 target promoter sequences.
Transcriptional repression of AML1-dependent genes by AML1-ETO and associated
corepressors represents the pathogenetic mechanisms of t(8;21). Here, we show
that targeting of AML1-ETO to essential, MYB-dependent gene promoters induces
t(8;21)-restricted cell death. We constructed a chimeric protein that contained
the MYB DNA-binding domain and the AML1-binding domain of myeloid Elf-1-like
factor (MEF). This protein associated with AML1-ETO and directed the complex to
MYB-responsive promoters in vitro and in vivo. In the presence of AML1-ETO, the
chimeric protein repressed the activity of MYB-responsive promoters, rapidly
induced apoptosis, and specifically inhibited colony growth. All these effects
occurred only in AML1-ETO-positive cells, whereas no adverse effects were
observed in cells not expressing AML1-ETO. Taken together, this study
demonstrates that redirection of oncogenic proteins can be used as a strategy to 
dramatically influence their cellular effects, with the ultimate goal to design
highly specific therapies for cancer.

PMCID: PMC166249
PMID: 12819347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Leuk Res. 2003 May;27(5):387-92.

The level of MEF but not ELF-1 correlates with FAB subtype of acute myeloid
leukemia and is low in good prognosis cases.

Fukushima T(1), Miyazaki Y, Tsushima H, Tsutsumi C, Taguchi J, Yoshida S,
Kuriyama K, Scadden D, Nimer S, Tomonaga M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Molecular Medicine Unit, Atomic Bomb Disease
Institute, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, Nagasaki, Japan.

ETS proteins (such as PU.1, Fli-1 and ETS-1) have been shown to play important
roles in normal and abnormal hematopoiesis. We examined the expression of the ELF
subfamily of ETS genes (ELF-1, MEF and NERF) in acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
cells using Northern blot analysis. ELF-1 and MEF were expressed in all samples, 
whereas NERF was not. The relative expression (RE) of MEF, but not ELF-1, was
significantly lower (P<0.0001) in AML with t(8;21) and t(15;17) compared with AML
with normal karyotype. The pattern of MEF expression was not uniform among cells 
with CD34(+)/CD33(+). It is suggested that the low RE of MEF might be part of a
gene expression profile characterizing AML with a good prognosis.

PMID: 12620289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cancer Res. 2002 Nov 15;62(22):6579-86.

The ETS transcription factor MEF is a candidate tumor suppressor gene on the X
chromosome.

Seki Y(1), Suico MA, Uto A, Hisatsune A, Shuto T, Isohama Y, Kai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

Although X chromosome transfer experiments indicated that tumor suppressor genes 
are present on the X chromosome, they have not been previously identified. In
this report, we show that the ETS transcription factor MEF (ELF4), which is
located on chromosome Xq26.1, possesses tumor suppressive capability. MEF
expression was up-regulated by 5-azacytidine in some cancer cell lines. MEF
overexpression induced morphological changes, such as the conversion of normally 
loose cell-cell contacts to strong interactions similar to those seen in the
presence of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) inhibitor BB94. In the colony
formation assay, A549 cells, but not MEF-overexpressing cells, formed colonies in
soft agar culture. Furthermore, MEF-overexpressing cells s.c. injected in the
nude mice did not grow, whereas the control cells did. The A549 tumors were
poorly differentiated, whereas the MEF-overexpressing tumors were well
differentiated. By immunostaining with CD31, a marker on vascular endothelial
cells, we found that tumor angiogenesis was significantly suppressed in the
tumors formed from MEF-overexpressing cells. In addition, the conditioned media
from A549 cell cultures stimulated the migration of human umbilical vein
endothelial cells, whereas conditioned media from MEF-overexpressing cell
cultures had less of an effect. By gelatin zymography, Western blotting analysis,
and immunohistochemistry, we found that the expression levels of MMP-9 and MMP-2 
were significantly reduced in MEF-overexpressing tumors. Immunohistochemical
analyses showed that interleukin (IL)-8 expression was reduced in the
MEF-overexpressing tumors in nude mice. Furthermore, IL-8 mRNA expression in
vitro was significantly down-regulated in MEF-overexpressing cells, compared with
A549 cells. MEF suppressed the transcription and promoter activities of the genes
encoding MMP-9 and IL-8, whereas ETS-2 up-regulated these activities. Therefore, 
we propose that MEF is a candidate tumor suppressor gene on the X chromosome with
activities that are opposite to those of ETS-2.

PMID: 12438253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Immunity. 2002 Oct;17(4):437-49.

The ETS protein MEF plays a critical role in perforin gene expression and the
development of natural killer and NK-T cells.

Lacorazza HD(1), Miyazaki Y, Di Cristofano A, Deblasio A, Hedvat C, Zhang J,
Cordon-Cardo C, Mao S, Pandolfi PP, Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Aspects of Hematopoiesis, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

We utilized gene targeting by homologous recombination to define the role that
MEF, a transcriptional activating member of the ETS family of transcription
factors, plays in lymphopoiesis. MEF-/- mice have a profound reduction in the
number of NK-T and NK cells. Purified MEF-/- NK cells cannot lyse tumor cell
targets and secrete only minimal amounts of IFNgamma. Perforin protein expression
is severely impaired in MEF-deficient NK cells, likely accounting for the lack of
tumor cell cytotoxicity. Promoter studies and chromatin immunoprecipitation
analyses demonstrate that MEF and not ETS-1 directly regulates transcription of
the perforin gene in NK cells. Our results uncover a specific role of MEF in the 
development and function of NK cells and in innate immunity.

PMID: 12387738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Plant Physiol. 2002 Oct;130(2):639-48.

Transcription factor CBF4 is a regulator of drought adaptation in Arabidopsis.

Haake V(1), Cook D, Riechmann JL, Pineda O, Thomashow MF, Zhang JZ.

Author information: 
(1)Mendel Biotechnology, 21375 Cabot Boulevard, Hayward, CA 94545, USA.

In plants, low temperature and dehydration activate a set of genes containing
C-repeat/dehydration-responsive elements in their promoter. It has been shown
previously that the Arabidopsis CBF/DREB1 transcription activators are critical
regulators of gene expression in the signal transduction of cold acclimation.
Here, we report the isolation of an apparent homolog of the CBF/DREB1 proteins
(CBF4) that plays the equivalent role during drought adaptation. In contrast to
the three already identified CBF/DREB1 homologs, which are induced under cold
stress, CBF4 gene expression is up-regulated by drought stress, but not by low
temperature. Overexpression of CBF4 in transgenic Arabidopsis plants results in
the activation of C-repeat/dehydration-responsive element containing downstream
genes that are involved in cold acclimation and drought adaptation. As a result, 
the transgenic plants are more tolerant to freezing and drought stress. Because
of the physiological similarity between freezing and drought stress, and the
sequence and structural similarity of the CBF/DREB1 and the CBF4 proteins, we
propose that the plant's response to cold and drought evolved from a common
CBF-like transcription factor, first through gene duplication and then through
promoter evolution.

PMCID: PMC166593
PMID: 12376631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 22;277(47):45323-30. Epub 2002 Sep 15.

Intracellular calcium and myosin isoform transitions. Calcineurin and
calcium-calmodulin kinase pathways regulate preferential activation of the IIa
myosin heavy chain promoter.

Allen DL(1), Leinwand LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA. allendl@stripe.colorado.edu

Intracellular calcium levels can have profound effects on muscle biology via
alterations in gene expression. In particular, intracellular calcium levels
increase during muscle activation and are thought to underlie fast-to-slow shifts
in muscle gene expression. In the present work, we determined that increased
intracellular calcium has a significant effect on the activity of the adult fast 
myosin heavy chain (MyHC) promoters in the order of MyHC IIa>> IId/x > IIb. We
have identified the pathways by which the calcium signal mediates increased
activation of the MyHC IIa promoter. Inhibition of calcineurin or
calcium-calmodulin kinase greatly attenuates ionophore-induced activation of the 
MyHC IIa promoter, whereas protein kinase C inhibitors have no effect. Inhibition
and overexpression studies with members of the mitogen-activated protein kinase
family reveal roles for MEK1/MEK2 and MEKK1, but not p38 or phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase. Downstream mediators of these effects are the activities of the MEF-2
and NFAT transcription factors, whose binding sites in the MyHC IIa promoter are 
required for calcium-induced activation of the MyHC IIa promoter.

PMID: 12235157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Nature. 2002 Sep 5;419(6902):74-7.

The ELF4 gene controls circadian rhythms and flowering time in Arabidopsis
thaliana.

Doyle MR(1), Davis SJ, Bastow RM, McWatters HG, Kozma-Bognár L, Nagy F, Millar
AJ, Amasino RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Many plants use day length as an environmental cue to ensure proper timing of the
switch from vegetative to reproductive growth. Day-length sensing involves an
interaction between the relative length of day and night, and endogenous rhythms 
that are controlled by the plant circadian clock. Thus, plants with defects in
circadian regulation cannot properly regulate the timing of the floral
transition. Here we describe the gene EARLY FLOWERING 4 (ELF4), which is involved
in photoperiod perception and circadian regulation. ELF4 promotes clock accuracy 
and is required for sustained rhythms in the absence of daily light/dark cycles. 
elf4 mutants show attenuated expression of CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1 (CCA1), a
gene that is thought to function as a central oscillator component. In addition, 
elf4 plants transiently show output rhythms with highly variable period lengths
before becoming arrhythmic. Mutations in elf4 result in early flowering in
non-inductive photoperiods, which is probably caused by elevated amounts of
CONSTANS (CO), a gene that promotes floral induction.

PMID: 12214234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Aug 19;1577(1):113-20.

Functional dissection of the ETS transcription factor MEF.

Suico MA(1), Koyanagi T, Ise S, Lu Z, Hisatsune A, Seki Y, Shuto T, Isohama Y,
Miyata T, Kai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Kumamoto University, 5-1 Oe-honmachi, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

We previously indicated that myeloid elf-1-like factor (MEF) but not elf-1,
specifically activated lysozyme gene expression in epithelial cells. MEF is
highly homologous at the nucleotide and amino acid level, with elf-1 especially
in the ETS domain. Here, we report the functional analysis of the nuclear
localization and transactivation properties of MEF. To investigate the
intracellular localization of MEF, we transiently transfected MEF-green
fluorescence protein (GFP) fusion protein expression vector into HeLa cells. A
region spanning residues 177-291 is required for nuclear localization. We
produced deletion mutants of MEF to determine the transactivation domain. The
data showed that the N-terminal region, encompassing amino acids 1-52 is a potent
transactivation domain. The C-terminal region spanning residues 477-663 can also 
mediate transactivation but not as strongly as the N-terminal region. The
activity of the amino acid residues 1-52 was confirmed by experiments with fused 
constructs of MEF to the DNA binding-domain of the yeast GAL4 protein. These
results, which determined the localization of the functional domains of MEF, will
provide us with new clues to its transactivation mechanisms to regulate lysozyme 
gene expression in epithelial cells.

PMID: 12151102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 9;276(45):42462-7. Epub 2001 Sep 24.

ATM phosphorylates histone H2AX in response to DNA double-strand breaks.

Burma S(1), Chen BP, Murphy M, Kurimasa A, Chen DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley,
California 94720, USA.

A very early step in the response of mammalian cells to DNA double-strand breaks 
is the phosphorylation of histone H2AX at serine 139 at the sites of DNA damage. 
Although the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases, DNA-PK (DNA-dependent protein
kinase), ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated), and ATR (ATM and Rad3-related),
have all been implicated in H2AX phosphorylation, the specific kinase involved
has not yet been identified. To definitively identify the specific kinase(s) that
phosphorylates H2AX in vivo, we have utilized DNA-PKcs-/- and Atm-/- cell lines
and mouse embryonic fibroblasts. We find that H2AX phosphorylation and nuclear
focus formation are normal in DNA-PKcs-/- cells and severely compromised in
Atm-/- cells. We also find that ATM can phosphorylate H2AX in vitro and that
ectopic expression of ATM in Atm-/- fibroblasts restores H2AX phosphorylation in 
vivo. The minimal H2AX phosphorylation in Atm-/- fibroblasts can be abolished by 
low concentrations of wortmannin suggesting that DNA-PK, rather than ATR, is
responsible for low levels of H2AX phosphorylation in the absence of ATM. Our
results clearly establish ATM as the major kinase involved in the phosphorylation
of H2AX and suggest that ATM is one of the earliest kinases to be activated in
the cellular response to double-strand breaks.

PMID: 11571274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2000 Sep;44(9):2503-6.

Identification of the conjugative mef gene in clinical Acinetobacter junii and
Neisseria gonorrhoeae isolates.

Luna VA(1), Cousin S Jr, Whittington WL, Roberts MC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathobiology, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, USA.

The mef gene, originally described for gram-positive organisms and coding for an 
efflux pump, has been identified in clinical isolates of Acinetobacter junii and 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae. These strains could transfer the mef gene at frequencies
ranging from 10(-6) to 10(-9) into one or more of the following recipients:
gram-negative Moraxella catarrhalis, Neisseria perflava/sicca and Neisseria
mucosa and gram-positive Enterococcus faecalis. Three Streptococcus pneumoniae
strains could transfer the mef gene into Eikenella corrodens, Haemophilus
influenzae, Kingella denitrificans, M. catarrhalis, Neisseria meningitidis, N.
perflava/sicca, and N. mucosa at similar frequencies. The mef gene can thus be
transferred to and expressed in a variety of gram-negative recipients.

PMCID: PMC90092
PMID: 10952602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 May 23;97(11):5818-23.

Scaffold proteins may biphasically affect the levels of mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling and reduce its threshold properties.

Levchenko A(1), Bruck J, Sternberg PW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Engineering and Applied Science and Division of Biology and Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA. andre@paradise.caltech.edu

In addition to preventing crosstalk among related signaling pathways, scaffold
proteins might facilitate signal transduction by preforming multimolecular
complexes that can be rapidly activated by incoming signal. In many cases, such
as mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades, scaffold proteins are
necessary for full activation of a signaling pathway. To date, however, no
detailed biochemical model of scaffold action has been suggested. Here we
describe a quantitative computer model of MAPK cascade with a generic scaffold
protein. Analysis of this model reveals that formation of scaffold-kinase
complexes can be used effectively to regulate the specificity, efficiency, and
amplitude of signal propagation. In particular, for any generic scaffold there
exists a concentration value optimal for signal amplitude. The location of the
optimum is determined by the concentrations of the kinases rather than their
binding constants and in this way is scaffold independent. This effect and the
alteration of threshold properties of the signal propagation at high scaffold
concentrations might alter local signaling properties at different subcellular
compartments. Different scaffold levels and types might then confer specialized
properties to tune evolutionarily conserved signaling modules to specific
cellular contexts.

PMCID: PMC18517
PMID: 10823939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 1999 Oct;13(2):137-40.

Macrolide resistance phenotypes and mechanisms of resistance in Streptococcus
pyogenes in La Rioja, Spain.

Portillo A(1), Lantero M, Gastañares MJ, Ruiz-Larrea F, Torres C.

Author information: 
(1)Area de bioquímica y Biologia Molecular, Universidad de La Rioja, Logroño,
Spain.

One hundred and thirty seven consecutive clinical Streptococcus pyogenes isolates
were evaluated for macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin resistance (MLS). Forty of
these isolates were resistant to erythromycin (29.2%), 36 of them showed the new 
M resistance phenotype (erythromycin resistant and clindamycin susceptible) and
four isolates had the MLS(B) resistance phenotype (erythromycin and clindamycin
resistant). In all 36 isolates with the M resistance phenotype, the mef gene was 
identified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In two of the four S. pyogenes
isolates with the MLS(B) phenotype, both ermB and ermTR genes were found;
negative results were obtained with the other two isolates which might possess a 
new mechanism of high level resistance against erythromycin not previously
described. In summary, a high rate of erythromycin resistance was found in S.
pyogenes isolates and the active efflux pump mediated by the mef gene was the
mechanism most frequently involved.

PMID: 10595574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1999 Sep;43(9):2335-6.

Incidence of mefA and mefE genes in viridans group streptococci.

Arpin C, Canron MH, Maugein J, Quentin C.

PMCID: PMC89477
PMID: 10577352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Clin Infect Dis. 1999 Nov;29(5):1186-8.

Prevalence of macrolide resistance mechanisms in Streptococcus pneumoniae
isolates from a multicenter antibiotic resistance surveillance study conducted in
the United States in 1994-1995.

Shortridge VD(1), Doern GV, Brueggemann AB, Beyer JM, Flamm RK.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Microbiology, Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, Illinois
60064-3537, USA. dee.shortridge@abbott.com

Two main mechanisms of macrolide resistance have been described in
erythromycin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae (ERSP): a ribosomal methylase,
ErmAM, and a macrolide efflux pump, MefE. In this study, we examined the
prevalence of these mechanisms in 114 clinical isolates of ERSP from a 30-center 
study conducted in the United States between November 1994 and April 1995. The
isolates were screened by polymerase chain reaction for the presence of known
macrolide resistance genes. Seventy (61%) ERSP contained the macrolide efflux
gene (mefE), whereas 36 isolates (32%) contained the biosomal methylase gene
(ermAM). Isolates that were ermAM-positive had constitutive macrolide resistance.
The minimum inhibitory concentrations (for which 90% of isolates were
susceptible) of clarithromycin for the efflux-positive strains were much lower
than those for the ermAM-positive strains (4 microg/mL vs. >128 microg/mL,
respectively). The efflux mechanism is the predominant form of macrolide
resistance in the United States.

PMID: 10524961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jun;19(6):4289-301.

A network of mitogen-activated protein kinases links G protein-coupled receptors 
to the c-jun promoter: a role for c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase, p38s, and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 5.

Marinissen MJ(1), Chiariello M, Pallante M, Gutkind JS.

Author information: 
(1)Oral and Pharyngeal Cancer Branch, National Institute of Dental and
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-4330, USA.

The expression of the c-jun proto-oncogene is rapidly induced in response to
mitogens acting on a large variety of cell surface receptors. The resulting
functional activity of c-Jun proteins appears to be critical for cell
proliferation. Recently, we have shown that a large family of G protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs), represented by the m1 muscarinic receptor, can initiate
intracellular signaling cascades that result in the activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinases (JNK) and
that the activation of JNK but not of MAPK correlated with a remarkable increase 
in the expression of c-jun mRNA. Subsequently, however, we obtained evidence that
GPCRs can potently stimulate the activity of the c-jun promoter through MEF2
transcription factors, which do not act downstream from JNK. In view of these
observations, we set out to investigate further the nature of the signaling
pathway linking GPCRs to the c-jun promoter. Utilizing NIH 3T3 cells, we found
that GPCRs can activate the c-jun promoter in a JNK-independent manner.
Additionally, we demonstrated that these GPCRs can elevate the activity of novel 
members of the MAPK family, including ERK5, p38alpha, p38gamma, and p38delta, and
that the activation of certain kinases acting downstream from MEK5 (ERK5) and
MKK6 (p38alpha and p38gamma) is necessary to fully activate the c-jun promoter.
Moreover, in addition to JNK, ERK5, p38alpha, and p38gamma were found to
stimulate the c-jun promoter by acting on distinct responsive elements. Taken
together, these results suggest that the pathway linking GPCRs to the c-jun
promoter involves the integration of numerous signals transduced by a highly
complex network of MAPK, rather than resulting from the stimulation of a single
linear protein kinase cascade. Furthermore, our findings suggest that each
signaling pathway affects one or more regulatory elements on the c-jun promoter
and that the transcriptional response most likely results from the temporal
integration of each of these biochemical routes.

PMCID: PMC104389
PMID: 10330170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 May;19(5):3635-44.

Functional and physical interactions between AML1 proteins and an ETS protein,
MEF: implications for the pathogenesis of t(8;21)-positive leukemias.

Mao S(1), Frank RC, Zhang J, Miyazaki Y, Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Aspects of Hematopoiesis, Department of Medicine,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

The AML1 and ETS families of transcription factors play critical roles in
hematopoiesis; AML1, and its non-DNA-binding heterodimer partner CBFbeta, are
essential for the development of definitive hematopoiesis in mice, whereas the
absence of certain ETS proteins creates specific defects in lymphopoiesis or
myelopoiesis. The promoter activities of numerous genes expressed in
hematopoietic cells are regulated by AML1 proteins or ETS proteins. MEF (for
myeloid ELF-1-like factor) is a recently cloned ETS family member that, like
AML1B, can strongly transactivate several of these promoters, which led us to
examine whether MEF functionally or physically interacts with AML1 proteins. In
this study, we demonstrate direct interactions between MEF and AML1 proteins,
including the AML1/ETO fusion protein, in t(8;21)-positive acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) cells. Using mutational analysis, we identified a novel ETS-interacting
subdomain (EID) in the C-terminal portion of the Runt homology domain (RHD) in
AML1 proteins and determined that the N-terminal region of MEF was responsible
for its interaction with AML1. MEF and AML1B synergistically transactivated an
interleukin 3 promoter reporter gene construct, yet the activating activity of
MEF was abolished when MEF was coexpressed with AML1/ETO. The repression by
AML1/ETO was independent of DNA binding but depended on its ability to interact
with MEF, suggesting that AML1/ETO can repress genes not normally regulated by
AML1 via protein-protein interactions. Interference with MEF function by AML1/ETO
may lead to dysregulation of genes important for myeloid differentiation, thereby
contributing to the pathogenesis of t(8;21) AML.

PMCID: PMC84165
PMID: 10207087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Virology. 1998 Jun 5;245(2):229-40.

The predominant elF4G-specific cleavage activity in poliovirus-infected HeLa
cells is distinct from 2A protease.

Bovee ML(1), Marissen WE, Zamora M, Lloyd RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City 73190, USA.

Human enteroviruses and rhinoviruses rapidly and selectively abolish translation 
from cellular mRNA upon infection of susceptible cells. Expression of the
poliovirus 2A protease (PV 2Apro) is sufficient to cause host translation shutoff
through cleavage of elF4G (formerly p220, elF4 gamma) either directly or
indirectly through activation of a cellular factor. Evidence exists for both
direct and indirect cleavage mechanisms; however, factors presumed to participate
in an indirect mechanism have not yet been purified or defined. Here we show that
the dominant elF4G cleavage activity in lysates from infected HeLa cells was
separable from PV 2Apro by size exclusion chromatography. 2Apro separated into
two peak fractions which contained activity which cleaved a peptide substrate
derived from the poliovirus polyprotein. These peak 2Apro fractions did not
cleave elF4G or an elF4G-derived peptide, as expected, due to the poor efficiency
of direct cleavage reactions. Conversely, fractions which contained peak elF4G
cleavage activity and only trace amounts of 2Apro efficiently cleaved a peptide
substrate derived from the previously mapped elF4G cleavage site and also cleaved
a peptide derived from the poliovirus 1D2A region. The dominant elF4G cleavage
activity was highly purified through four chromatography steps and found to be
devoid of all traces of 2Apro or its precursors. Quantitation of 2Apro from
lysates of infected cells showed that during infections in HeLa cells, 2Apro does
not reach molar excess over elF4G, as previously shown to be required for direct 
elF4G cleavage in vitro. Further, infection of HeLa cells in the presence of 2 mM
guanidine-HCl, a potent inhibitor of viral RNA replication, suppressed
accumulation of 2Apro and its precursor 2ABC below detectable levels but was
unable to delay the onset of elF4G proteolysis in vivo. The elF4G cleavage
activity was still easily detectable in in vitro assays using fractions from
guanidine-treated cells. Thus, the data suggest that poliovirus utilizes two
catalytic activities to ensure rapid cleavage of elF4G in vivo. Although it was
not directly measurable here, 2Apro likely does cleave a portion of elF4G in
cells. However, the data suggest that a cellular factor which can be activated by
small quantities of 2Apro constitutes the bulk of the elF4G-specific cleavage
activity in infected cells and is responsible for the rapid and efficient elF4G
cleavage activity observed in vivo.

PMID: 9636362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Gene. 1998 Mar 27;210(1):71-8.

Cloning of a novel human ELF-1-related ETS transcription factor, ELFR, its
characterization and chromosomal assignment relative to ELF-1.

Aryee DN(1), Petermann R, Kos K, Henn T, Haas OA, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute (CCRI), St. Anna Kinderspital,
Kinderspitalgasse 6, A-1090, Vienna, Austria.

The ETS gene family encodes a group of proteins that function as transcription
factors under physiological conditions and, if aberrantly expressed, can lead to 
cellular transformation. ETS transcription factors are characterized by a unique 
conserved DNA binding domain. A subset of these proteins is rearranged with EWS
in Ewing tumors (ET). We recently described a spectrum of ETS genes coexpressed
with EWS-FLI1 in an ETcell line to define proteins that potentially compete in
target site selection. We now report on the cloning and characterization of a
novel ETS family member, ELFR, displaying 92% homology to ELF-1 in its DNA
binding domain while diverging in the rest of the protein. ELFR expression was
found in a very tissue restricted pattern with the highest abundancy in placenta.
We also report the chromosomal assignment of ELFR and ELF-1 to Xq26 and 13q13,
respectively, by means of fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH).

PMID: 9524226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Feb;17(2):656-66.

A combination of MEF3 and NFI proteins activates transcription in a subset of
fast-twitch muscles.

Spitz F(1), Salminen M, Demignon J, Kahn A, Daegelen D, Maire P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, INSERM U129, Université René
Descartes, Paris, France.

The human aldolase A pM promoter is active in fast-twitch muscles. To understand 
the role of the different transcription factors which bind to this promoter and
determine which ones are responsible for its restricted pattern of expression, we
analyzed several transgenic lines harboring different combinations of pM
regulatory elements. We show that muscle-specific expression can be achieved
without any binding sites for the myogenic factors MyoD and MEF2 and that a 64-bp
fragment comprising a MEF3 motif and an NFI binding site is sufficient to drive
reporter gene expression in some but, interestingly, not all fast-twitch muscles.
A result related to this pattern of expression is that some isoforms of NFI
proteins accumulate differentially in fast- and slow-twitch muscles and in
distinct fast-twitch muscles. We propose that these isoforms of NFI proteins
might provide a molecular basis for skeletal muscle diversity.

PMCID: PMC231791
PMID: 9001219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Oncogene. 1996 Oct 17;13(8):1721-9.

MEF, a novel transcription factor with an Elf-1 like DNA binding domain but
distinct transcriptional activating properties.

Miyazaki Y(1), Sun X, Uchida H, Zhang J, Nimer S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Aspects of Hematopoiesis, Sloan-Kettering Institute
for Cancer Research, New York, NY 10021, USA.

To isolate novel ETS genes expressed in hematopoietic cells we used a nested,
degenerate oligonucleotide PCR based technique to obtain a cDNA fragment that
encodes an ETS domain from a human megakaryocytic cell line. This fragment was
used to isolate a full length, 4.2 kb cDNA that encodes a 663 amino acid protein 
which we call MEF (myeloid elf-1-like factor). MEF contains a central ETS domain 
and is expressed in a variety of myeloid leukemia cell lines and in normal adult 
hematopoietic tissue such as spleen, thymus and peripheral blood, as well as
non-hematopoietic tissue such as ovary, placenta and colon. Using an
oligonucleotide binding selection assay, and bacterially expressed MEF, we
demonstrated that MEF recognizes a consensus DNA binding sequence nearly
identical to elf-1 (..WGGA..) and then showed that MEF specifically bound to
known elf-1 binding sites in the human GM-CSF and IL-3 promoters. To characterize
the functional effect of MEF on transcription, we performed co-transfection
experiments in myeloid cells, and T cells, and demonstrated transactivation of
both promoters by MEF, but not by elf-1. MEF is a new member of the elf-1/E74
family of ETS proteins, that has DNA binding properties similar to elf-1 but
distinct transcriptional activating effects in several hematopoietic cell
lineages.

PMID: 8895518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Somat Cell Mol Genet. 1996 Sep;22(5):349-61.

Defective myogenesis in NFB-s mutant associated with a saturable suppression of
MYF5 activity.

Rohrer DK(1), Blau HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University Medical Center,
California 94305-5332, USA.

Myogenic cell lines have proved to be useful tools for investigating the
molecular mechanisms that control cellular differentiation. NFB-s is a mutant
myogenic cell line which fails to differentiate in vitro, and can repress
differentiation in normal myogenic cells when fused to form heterokaryons. The
NFB-s cell line was used here to study the molecular mechanisms underlying such
myogenic repression. Using muscle-specific reporter genes, we show that NFB-s
cells fail to activate fully the muscle differentiation program at a
transcriptional level, although muscle-specific transcription can be enhanced by 
regulators of differentiation such as pertussis toxin. Paradoxically we find that
the myogenic regulator myf5 is expressed at constitutively high levels in NFB-s
cells, and retains DNA binding activity. Expression plasmids encoding NFB-derived
myf5 cDNA can rescue the myogenic phenotype in NFB-s cells, demonstrating that a 
threshold level of positive regulators must be reached before the myogenic
program is activated. Thus, the dominant negative phenotype does not appear to
result from defective myf5, but is due to a dosage-dependent saturable mechanism 
that interferes with myf5 function. These studies demonstrate that the
stoichiometric ratio of positive and negative regulators is critical for
determining the myogenic differentiation state.

PMID: 9039845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


