
1. Cancer Cell Int. 2016 Feb 16;16:8. doi: 10.1186/s12935-016-0282-9. eCollection
2016.

ELF5 and DOK7 regulation in anti-estrogen treated cells and tumors.

Fitzgerald LM(1), Browne EP(2), Christie KD(3), Punska EC(2), Simmons LO(3),
Williams KE(4), Pentecost BT(5), M Jawale R(6), Otis CN(6), Arcaro KF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Science, University of Massachusetts Amherst,
Amherst, MA USA. (2)Department of Veterinary and Animal Science, University of
Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Amherst, MA USA. (5)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health, Albany, NY USA. (6)Pathology Department, Baystate Medical Center,
Springfield, MA USA.

BACKGROUND: Most women with primary breast cancers that express estrogen receptor
alpha (ER or ESR1) are treated with endocrine therapies including the
anti-estrogen tamoxifen, but resistance to these anti-endocrine therapies often
develops. This study characterizes the expression of hormone receptors, and the
mRNA and DNA methylation levels of docking protein 7 (DOK7), and E74-like factor 
5 (ELF5), in 21 novel tamoxifen-resistant cell lines and extends the findings to 
primary and recurrent human breast tumors.
METHODS: Twenty-one tamoxifen-selected cell lines were developed through cloning 
by limiting dilution of an MCF-7 cell culture treated with 1 µM tamoxifen for
6 months. The parent (MCF-7) and tamoxifen-selected cell lines were characterized
for protein expression of ER, progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) using immunohistochemistry (IHC). The mRNA levels
of ER, DOK7, and ELF5 were assessed using quantitative RT-PCR. Promoter
methylation levels of DOK7 and ELF5 were determined by pyrosequencing of
bisulfite-modified DNA. The relationship between hormone receptor status and
promoter methylation of DOK7 and ELF5 was further examined using available
methylation array data (Illumina HM450) from a set of paired primary and second
breast tumors from 24 women.
RESULTS: All 21 of the novel tamoxifen-selected cell lines are ER-positive, and
HER2-negative, and 18 of the cell lines are PR-negative while the MCF-7 cells
were scored as ER-positive, modestly PR-positive and HER2 negative. Expression of
DOK7 and ELF5 is significantly up-regulated in half of the tamoxifen-selected
cell lines as compared to the parental MCF-7. In contrast, the previously
established ER-negative TMX2-28 cell line has decreased expression of both DOK7
and ELF5 and increased DNA methylation in the transcriptional start site region
of these genes. ELF5 methylation was lower in second versus primary tumors in
women who received anti-estrogen treatment, in PR-negative versus PR-positive
tumors, and in the subset of PR-positive first tumors from the group of women who
had second PR-negative tumors as compared to those who had second PR-positive
tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: The distinct ELF5 methylation of PR-positive primary tumors from
women who had a PR-negative recurrence indicates the possibility of
stratification of women for tailored treatment in the early stages of disease.

PMCID: PMC4754800
PMID: 26884724  [PubMed]


2. Stem Cell Reports. 2016 Feb 9;6(2):257-72. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2016.01.006.

What Is Trophoblast? A Combination of Criteria Define Human First-Trimester
Trophoblast.

Lee CQ(1), Gardner L(2), Turco M(2), Zhao N(3), Murray MJ(3), Coleman N(3),
Rossant J(4), Hemberger M(5), Moffett A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QP, UK;
Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK; 
Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto M5G 0A4, Canada. Electronic address: qecl2@cam.ac.uk. (2)Department of
Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QP, UK; Centre for Trophoblast
Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK. (3)Department of
Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QP, UK. (4)Program in
Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto M5G 0A4,
Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto M5G 0A4,
Canada. (5)Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
CB2 3EG, UK; Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT,
UK. (6)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QP, UK;
Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK. 
Electronic address: am485@cam.ac.uk.

Controversy surrounds reports describing the derivation of human trophoblast
cells from placentas and embryonic stem cells (ESC), partly due to the difficulty
in identifying markers that define cells as belonging to the trophoblast lineage.
We have selected criteria that are characteristic of primary first-trimester
trophoblast: a set of protein markers, HLA class I profile, methylation of ELF5, 
and expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) from the chromosome 19 miRNA cluster
(C19MC). We tested these criteria on cells previously reported to show some
phenotypic characteristics of trophoblast: bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP)-treated human ESC and 2102Ep, an embryonal carcinoma cell line. Both cell
types only show some, but not all, of the four trophoblast criteria. Thus,
BMP-treated human ESC have not fully differentiated to trophoblast. Our study
identifies a robust panel, including both protein and non-protein-coding markers 
that, in combination, can be used to reliably define cells as characteristic of
early trophoblast.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4750161
PMID: 26862703  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Reprod Dev. 2016 Feb 6. [Epub ahead of print]

Selection of accurate reference genes in mouse trophoblast stem cells for reverse
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction.

Motomura K(1), Inoue K, Ogura A.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN BioResource Center, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

Mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) form colonies of different sizes and
morphologies, which might reflect their degrees of differentiation. Therefore,
each colony type can have a characteristic gene expression profile; however, the 
expression levels of internal reference genes may also change, causing
fluctuations in their estimated gene expression levels. In this study, we
validated seven housekeeping genes by using a geometric averaging method and
identified Gapdh as the most stable gene across different colony types. Indeed,
when Gapdh was used as the reference, expression levels of Elf5, a TSC marker
gene, stringently classified TSC colonies into two groups: a high expression
groups consisting of type 1 and 2 colonies, and a lower expression group
consisting of type 3 and 4 colonies. This clustering was consistent with our
putative classification of undifferentiated/differentiated colonies based on
their time-dependent colony transitions. By contrast, use of an unstable
reference gene (Rn18s) allowed no such clear classification. Cdx2, another TSC
marker, did not show any significant colony type-specific expression pattern
irrespective of the reference gene. Selection of stable reference genes for
quantitative gene expression analysis might be critical, especially when cell
lines consisting of heterogeneous cell populations are used.

PMID: 26853688  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Genet Sel Evol. 2016 Feb 1;48(1):9. doi: 10.1186/s12711-016-0189-x.

Revealing new candidate genes for reproductive traits in pigs: combining Bayesian
GWAS and functional pathways.

Verardo LL(1,)(2), Silva FF(3), Lopes MS(4,)(5), Madsen O(6), Bastiaansen JW(7), 
Knol EF(8), Kelly M(9), Varona L(10), Lopes PS(11), Guimarães SE(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa,
36570000, Brazil. lucas_verardo@yahoo.com.br. (2)Animal Breeding and Genomics
Centre, Wageningen University, 6700 AH, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
lucas_verardo@yahoo.com.br. (3)Department of Animal Science, Universidade Federal
de Viçosa, Viçosa, 36570000, Brazil. fabyanofonseca@ufv.br. (4)Animal Breeding
and Genomics Centre, Wageningen University, 6700 AH, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Marcos.Lopes@topigsnorsvin.com. (5)Topigs Norsvin, Research Center, 6641 SZ,
Beuningen, The Netherlands. Marcos.Lopes@topigsnorsvin.com. (6)Animal Breeding
and Genomics Centre, Wageningen University, 6700 AH, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
ole.madsen@wur.nl. (7)Animal Breeding and Genomics Centre, Wageningen University,
6700 AH, Wageningen, The Netherlands. john.bastiaansen@wur.nl. (8)Topigs Norsvin,
Research Center, 6641 SZ, Beuningen, The Netherlands.
egbert.knol@topigsnorsvin.com. (9)Queensland Alliance for Agriculture and Food
Innovation, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD, 4072, Australia.
m.kelly7@uq.edu.au. (10)Departamento de Anatomía, Embriología y Genética,
Universidad de Zaragoza, 50013, Saragossa, Spain. lvarona@unizar.es.
(11)Department of Animal Science, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa,
36570000, Brazil. plopes@ufv.br. (12)Department of Animal Science, Universidade
Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, 36570000, Brazil. sfacioni@ufv.br.

BACKGROUND: Reproductive traits such as number of stillborn piglets (SB) and
number of teats (NT) have been evaluated in many genome-wide association studies 
(GWAS). Most of these GWAS were performed under the assumption that these traits 
were normally distributed. However, both SB and NT are discrete (e.g. count)
variables. Therefore, it is necessary to test for better fit of other appropriate
statistical models based on discrete distributions. In addition, although many
GWAS have been performed, the biological meaning of the identified candidate
genes, as well as their functional relationships still need to be better
understood. Here, we performed and tested a Bayesian treatment of a GWAS model
assuming a Poisson distribution for SB and NT in a commercial pig line. To
explore the biological role of the genes that underlie SB and NT and identify the
most likely candidate genes, we used the most significant single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), to collect related genes and generated gene-transcription
factor (TF) networks.
RESULTS: Comparisons of the Poisson and Gaussian distributions showed that the
Poisson model was appropriate for SB, while the Gaussian was appropriate for NT. 
The fitted GWAS models indicated 18 and 65 significant SNPs with one and nine
quantitative trait locus (QTL) regions within which 18 and 57 related genes were 
identified for SB and NT, respectively. Based on the related TF, we selected the 
most representative TF for each trait and constructed a gene-TF network of
gene-gene interactions and identified new candidate genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our comparative analyses showed that the Poisson model presented the
best fit for SB. Thus, to increase the accuracy of GWAS, counting models should
be considered for this kind of trait. We identified multiple candidate genes
(e.g. PTP4A2, NPHP1, and CYP24A1 for SB and YLPM1, SYNDIG1L, TGFB3, and VRTN for 
NT) and TF (e.g. NF-<U+03BA>B and KLF4 for SB and SOX9 and ELF5 for NT), which were
consistent with known newborn survival traits (e.g. congenital heart disease in
fetuses and kidney diseases and diabetes in the mother) and mammary gland biology
(e.g. mammary gland development and body length).

PMCID: PMC4736284
PMID: 26830357  [PubMed - in process]


5. Stem Cells Int. 2015;2015:218518. doi: 10.1155/2015/218518. Epub 2015 Dec 14.

A Resource for the Transcriptional Signature of Bona Fide Trophoblast Stem Cells 
and Analysis of Their Embryonic Persistence.

Kuales G(1), Weiss M(1), Sedelmeier O(1), Pfeifer D(2), Arnold SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Renal Department, Centre for Clinical Research, University Medical Centre,
Breisacher Strasse 66, 79106 Freiburg, Germany. (2)Department of Hematology,
Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, University Medical Centre, Freiburg,
Germany. (3)Renal Department, Centre for Clinical Research, University Medical
Centre, Breisacher Strasse 66, 79106 Freiburg, Germany; Institute of Experimental
and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany; BIOSS, Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, Albert Ludwigs
University, Freiburg, Germany.

Trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) represent the multipotent progenitors that give
rise to the different cells of the embryonic portion of the placenta. Here, we
analysed the expression of key TSC transcription factors Cdx2, Eomes, and Elf5 in
the early developing placenta of mouse embryos and in cultured TSCs and reveal
surprising heterogeneity in protein levels. We analysed persistence of TSCs in
the early placenta and find that TSCs remain in the chorionic hinge until E9.5
and are lost shortly afterwards. To define the transcriptional signature of bona 
fide TSCs, we used inducible gain- and loss-of-function alleles of Eomes or Cdx2,
and Eomes (GFP), to manipulate and monitor the core maintenance factors of TSCs, 
followed by genome-wide expression profiling. Combinatorial analysis of resulting
expression profiles allowed for defining novel TSC marker genes that might
functionally contribute to the maintenance of the TSC state. Analyses by qRT-PCR 
and in situ hybridisation validated novel TSC- and chorion-specific marker genes,
such as Bok/Mtd, Cldn26, Duox2, Duoxa2, Nr0b1, and Sox21. Thus, these expression 
data provide a valuable resource for the transcriptional signature of bona fide
and early differentiating TSCs and may contribute to an increased understanding
of the transcriptional circuitries that maintain and/or establish stemness of
TSCs.

PMCID: PMC4691490
PMID: 26783396  [PubMed]


6. Breast Cancer Res. 2016 Jan 7;18(1):4. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0666-0.

ELF5 isoform expression is tissue-specific and significantly altered in cancer.

Piggin CL(1), Roden DL(2), Gallego-Ortega D(3), Lee HJ(4,)(5), Oakes SR(6),
Ormandy CJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Division, Garvan Institute of Medical Research/The Kinghorn Cancer
Centre, Sydney, NSW, 2010, Australia. c.piggin@garvan.org.au. (2)Cancer Division,
Garvan Institute of Medical Research/The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Sydney, NSW,
2010, Australia. d.roden@garvan.org.au. (3)Cancer Division, Garvan Institute of
Medical Research/The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Sydney, NSW, 2010, Australia.
d.gallego@garvan.org.au. (4)Cancer Division, Garvan Institute of Medical
Research/The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Sydney, NSW, 2010, Australia.
heather.lee@babraham.ac.uk. (5)Babraham Institute, Cambridge, CB22 3AT, UK.
heather.lee@babraham.ac.uk. (6)Cancer Division, Garvan Institute of Medical
Research/The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Sydney, NSW, 2010, Australia.
s.oakes@garvan.org.au. (7)Cancer Division, Garvan Institute of Medical
Research/The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Sydney, NSW, 2010, Australia.
c.ormandy@garvan.org.au.

BACKGROUND: E74-like factor 5 (ELF5) is an epithelial-specific member of the E26 
transforming sequence (ETS) transcription factor family and a critical regulator 
of cell fate in the placenta, pulmonary bronchi, and milk-producing alveoli of
the mammary gland. ELF5 also plays key roles in malignancy, particularly in
basal-like and endocrine-resistant forms of breast cancer. Almost all genes
undergo alternative transcription or splicing, which increases the diversity of
protein structure and function. Although ELF5 has multiple isoforms, this has not
been considered in previous studies of ELF5 function.
METHODS: RNA-sequencing data for 6757 samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas were
analyzed to characterize ELF5 isoform expression in multiple normal tissues and
cancers. Extensive in vitro analysis of ELF5 isoforms, including a 116-gene
quantitative polymerase chain reaction panel, was performed in breast cancer cell
lines.
RESULTS: ELF5 isoform expression was found to be tissue-specific due to
alternative promoter use but altered in multiple cancer types. The normal breast 
expressed one main isoform, while in breast cancer there were subtype-specific
alterations in expression. Expression of other ETS factors was also significantly
altered in breast cancer, with the basal-like subtype demonstrating a distinct
ETS expression profile. In vitro inducible expression of the full-length isoforms
1 and 2, as well as isoform 3 (lacking the Pointed domain) had similar phenotypic
and transcriptional effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Alternative promoter use, conferring differential regulatory
responses, is the main mechanism governing ELF5 action rather than differential
transcriptional activity of the isoforms. This understanding of expression and
function at the isoform level is a vital first step in realizing the potential of
transcription factors such as ELF5 as prognostic markers or therapeutic targets
in cancer.

PMCID: PMC4704400
PMID: 26738740  [PubMed - in process]


7. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Dec 21;9:21-30. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S93305. eCollection
2016.

Dendrobium candidum inhibits MCF-7 cells proliferation by inducing cell cycle
arrest at G2/M phase and regulating key biomarkers.

Sun J(1), Guo Y(1), Fu X(2), Wang Y(1), Liu Y(1), Huo B(1), Sheng J(3), Hu X(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic of
China. (2)School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic
of China; Key Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology and Engineering of Ministry of 
Education, Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic of China; National
Engineering Laboratory of AIDS Vaccine, School of Life Sciences, Jilin
University, Changchun, People's Republic of China. (3)Yunnan Research Centre for 
Advance Tea Processing, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming, People's
Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is one of the most frequently occurring cancers in
women. In recent years, Dendrobium candidum has played a part in
antihyperthyroidism and anticancer drugs. This study aims to examine the
antitumor effect of D. candidum on breast cancer.
METHODS: Human breast cancer cell line MCF-7 and normal breast epithelial cell
line MCF10A were used to observe the effects of D. candidum treatment on human
breast cancer. 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT)
assay was employed to examine the cell proliferation of the MCF-7 and MCF10A
cells. Western blot analysis and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction 
were used to detect the key molecules and biomarkers in breast cancer pathology. 
Cell cycle was analyzed by using Becton Dickinson FACScan cytofluorometer.
RESULTS: The results indicated that D. candidum significantly decreased cell
viability at different concentrations compared to the control group (P<0.05). D. 
candidum-treated MCF-7 cells in the G2/M phase was significantly increased
compared to the control group (P<0.05). The messenger RNA levels of estrogen
receptor alpha, IGFBP2, IGFBP4, and GATA3 were significantly decreased, and the
messenger RNA and protein levels of ELF5, p53, p21, p18, CDH1, CDH2, and p12 were
significantly increased, compared to the control group (P<0.05). The protein
levels of estrogen receptor alpha, PGR, GATA3, and Ki67 were significantly
decreased and the protein levels of p53 and ELF5 were significantly increased
compared to the control group (P<0.05). The general apoptosis biomarker, Bcl-2,
was significantly decreased and the Bax was significantly increased compared to
the control group (P<0.05). In contrast to that in MCF-7, D. candidum does not
affect cell proliferation at any concentration and any time points in normal
breast epithelial cells, MCF10A cells.
CONCLUSION: D. candidum could decrease the cell viability of MCF-7 cells by
inducing cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase and regulating the key biomarkers in
breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4694679
PMID: 26730200  [PubMed]


8. Chem Biol Interact. 2016 Jan 25;244:204-14. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2015.12.007. Epub 
2015 Dec 23.

The stabilization of hypoxia inducible factor modulates differentiation status
and inhibits the proliferation of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Binó L(1), Kucera J(2), tefková K(2), vihálková indlerová L(3), Lánová M(2),
Kudová J(4), Kubala L(5), Pacherník J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic v. v. i.,
Královopolská 135, 612 65 Brno, Czech Republic; Institute of Experimental
Biology, Department of Physiology and Immunology of Animals, Faculty of Science, 
Masaryk University, Kotlárská 2, 611 37 Brno, Czech Republic; Department of
Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech
Republic. (2)Institute of Experimental Biology, Department of Physiology and
Immunology of Animals, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kotlárská 2, 611
37 Brno, Czech Republic. (3)Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the
Czech Republic v. v. i., Královopolská 135, 612 65 Brno, Czech Republic;
International Clinical Research Center - Center of Biomolecular and Cellular
Engineering, St. Anne's University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic.
(4)Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic v. v. i.,
Královopolská 135, 612 65 Brno, Czech Republic; Institute of Experimental
Biology, Department of Physiology and Immunology of Animals, Faculty of Science, 
Masaryk University, Kotlárská 2, 611 37 Brno, Czech Republic. (5)Institute of
Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic v. v. i., Královopolská
135, 612 65 Brno, Czech Republic; International Clinical Research Center - Center
of Biomolecular and Cellular Engineering, St. Anne's University Hospital Brno,
Brno, Czech Republic. Electronic address: kubalal@ibp.cz. (6)Institute of
Experimental Biology, Department of Physiology and Immunology of Animals, Faculty
of Science, Masaryk University, Kotlárská 2, 611 37 Brno, Czech Republic;
International Clinical Research Center - Center of Biomolecular and Cellular
Engineering, St. Anne's University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic.

Hypoxic conditions are suggested to affect the differentiation status of stem
cells (SC), including embryonic stem cells (ESC). Hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) 
is one of the main intracellular molecules responsible for the cellular response 
to hypoxia. Hypoxia stabilizes HIF by inhibiting the activity of HIF
prolyl-hydroxylases (PHD), which are responsible for targeting HIF-alpha subunits
for proteosomal degradation. To address the impact of HIF stabilization on the
maintenance of the stemness signature of mouse ESC (mESC), we tested the
influence of the inhibition of PHDs and hypoxia (1% O2 and 5% O2) on spontaneous 
ESC differentiation triggered by leukemia inhibitory factor withdrawal for 24 and
48 h. The widely used panhydroxylase inhibitor dimethyloxaloylglycine (DMOG) and 
PHD inhibitor JNJ-42041935 (JNJ) with suggested higher specificity towards PHDs
were employed. Both inhibitors and both levels of hypoxia significantly increased
HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha protein levels and HIF transcriptional activity in
spontaneously differentiating mESC. This was accompanied by significant
downregulation of cell proliferation manifested by the complete inhibition of DNA
synthesis and partial arrest in the S phase after 48 h. Further, HIF
stabilization enhanced downregulation of the expressions of some pluripotency
markers (OCT-4, NANOG, ZFP-42, TNAP) in spontaneously differentiating mESC.
However, at the same time, there was also a significant decrease in the
expression of some genes selected as markers of cell differentiation (e.g. SOX1, 
BRACH T, ELF5). In conclusion, the short term stabilization of HIF mediated by
the PHD inhibitors JNJ and DMOG and hypoxia did not prevent the spontaneous loss 
of pluripotency markers in mESC. However, it significantly downregulated the
proliferation of these cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26723917  [PubMed - in process]


9. PLoS Biol. 2015 Dec 30;13(12):e1002330. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002330.
eCollection 2015.

ELF5 Drives Lung Metastasis in Luminal Breast Cancer through Recruitment of Gr1+ 
CD11b+ Myeloid-Derived Suppressor Cells.

Gallego-Ortega D(1,)(2), Ledger A(1), Roden DL(1,)(2), Law AM(1), Magenau
A(1,)(2), Kikhtyak Z(1), Cho C(1), Allerdice SL(1), Lee HJ(1), Valdes-Mora
F(1,)(2), Herrmann D(1,)(2), Salomon R(1), Young AI(1), Lee BY(1), Sergio CM(1), 
Kaplan W(3), Piggin C(1), Conway JR(1), Rabinovich B(4), Millar EK(1,)(5,)(6),
Oakes SR(1,)(2), Chtanova T(1), Swarbrick A(1,)(2), Naylor MJ(1,)(7), O'Toole
S(1,)(7), Green AR(8), Timpson P(1,)(2), Gee JM(9), Ellis IO(8), Clark SJ(1,)(2),
Ormandy CJ(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Garvan Institute of Medical Research and The Kinghorn Cancer Centre,
Darlinghurst, New South Wales, Australia. (2)St. Vincent's Clinical School of
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Darlinghurst, New
South Wales, Australia. (3)Peter Wills Bioinformatic Center, Garvan Institute of 
Medical Research, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, Australia. (4)The University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(5)Department of Anatomical Pathology SEALS, St. George Hospital, Kogarah, New
South Wales, Australia. (6)School of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of 
Western Sydney, Campbelltown, New South Wales, Australia. (7)Sydney Medical
School, University of Sydney, Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia.
(8)Department of Histopathology, Nottingham City Hospital and Nottingham
University, Nottingham, United Kingdom. (9)Cardiff School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.

During pregnancy, the ETS transcription factor ELF5 establishes the
milk-secreting alveolar cell lineage by driving a cell fate decision of the
mammary luminal progenitor cell. In breast cancer, ELF5 is a key transcriptional 
determinant of tumor subtype and has been implicated in the development of
insensitivity to anti-estrogen therapy. In the mouse mammary tumor virus-Polyoma 
Middle T (MMTV-PyMT) model of luminal breast cancer, induction of ELF5 levels
increased leukocyte infiltration, angiogenesis, and blood vessel permeability in 
primary tumors and greatly increased the size and number of lung metastasis.
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells, a group of immature neutrophils recently
identified as mediators of vasculogenesis and metastasis, were recruited to the
tumor in response to ELF5. Depletion of these cells using specific Ly6G
antibodies prevented ELF5 from driving vasculogenesis and metastasis. Expression 
signatures in luminal A breast cancers indicated that increased myeloid cell
invasion and inflammation were correlated with ELF5 expression, and increased
ELF5 immunohistochemical staining predicted much shorter metastasis-free and
overall survival of luminal A patients, defining a group who experienced
unexpectedly early disease progression. Thus, in the MMTV-PyMT mouse mammary
model, increased ELF5 levels drive metastasis by co-opting the innate immune
system. As ELF5 has been previously implicated in the development of antiestrogen
resistance, this finding implicates ELF5 as a defining factor in the acquisition 
of the key aspects of the lethal phenotype in luminal A breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4696735
PMID: 26717410  [PubMed - in process]


10. J Urol. 2016 Jan;195(1):221. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2015.10.012. Epub 2015 Nov 21.

Re: Elf5 Inhibits TGF-ß-Driven Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition in Prostate
Cancer by Repressing SMAD3 Activation.

Atala A.

PMID: 26699995  [PubMed - in process]


11. Stem Cells. 2015 Dec 23. doi: 10.1002/stem.2271. [Epub ahead of print]

Rankl Impairs Lactogenic Differentiation Through Inhibition of the
Prolactin/Stat5 Pathway at Midgestation.

Cordero A(1), Pellegrini P(1), Sanz-Moreno A(1), Trinidad EM(1), Serra-Musach
J(2), Deshpande C(3), Dougall WC(4), Pujana MA(2), González-Suárez E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program, Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Breast Cancer and Systems Biology Unit, ICO,
IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain. (3)Department of Molecular Sciences and Computational 
Biology, Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, California, USA. (4)Therapeutic Innovation
Unit, Amgen, Inc., Seattle, Washington, USA.

Prolactin and áprogesterone both orchestrate the proliferation and
differentiation of the mammary gland during gestation. Differentiation of milk
secreting alveoli depends on the presence of prolactin receptor, the downstream
Jak2-Stat5 pathway and the transcription factor Elf5. A strict regulation of Rank
signaling is essential for the differentiation of the mammary gland and in
particular for alveolar commitment. Impaired alveologenesis and lactation failure
are observed in both, knockout and Rank overexpressing mice; however, the
underlying molecular mechanism responsible for these phenotypes remains largely
unknown. Using genome-wide expression analyses and functional studies, we show
here that Rankl (RL) exposure leads to impaired secretory differentiation of
alveolar cells not only in MMTV-RANK but also in wild-type (WT) mammary acini.
Conversely, pharmacological blockage of Rank signaling at midgestation in WT mice
leads to precocious and exacerbated lactogenesis. Mechanistically, RL negatively 
regulates Stat5 phosphorylation and Elf5 expression at the onset of lactogenesis.
Continuous RL exposure leads to the expansion of basal and bipotent cells in WT
and MMTV-RANK acini. Overall, we demonstrate that enhanced Rank signaling impairs
secretory differentiation during pregnancy by inhibition of the prolactin/p-Stat5
pathway. Stem Cells 2016.

© 2016 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26695351  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Dec 18;15:49. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0096-3.

Transcriptome profiling of bovine inner cell mass and trophectoderm derived from 
in vivo generated blastocysts.

Hosseini SM(1,)(2), Dufort I(3), Caballero J(4), Moulavi F(5), Ghanaei HR(6),
Sirard MA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biotechnology, Reproductive Biomedicine Research
Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan, Iran.
smhosseini@royaninstitute.org. (2)Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la
Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture et de l'Alimentation,
Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF, Université Laval, Québec, QC,
G1V 0A6, Canada. smhosseini@royaninstitute.org. (3)Centre de Recherche en
Biologie de la Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture et de
l'Alimentation, Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF, Université
Laval, Québec, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada. Isabelle.dufort@fsaa.ulaval.ca. (4)Centre de 
Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture
et de l'Alimentation, Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF,
Université Laval, Québec, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada. Julieta.caballero.1@ulaval.ca.
(5)Department of Reproductive Biotechnology, Reproductive Biomedicine Research
Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan, Iran.
f_moulavi@yahoo.com. (6)Department of Reproductive Biotechnology, Reproductive
Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan,
Iran. hamidghanai@yahoo.co.uk. (7)Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la
Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture et de l'Alimentation,
Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF, Université Laval, Québec, QC,
G1V 0A6, Canada. Marc-Andre.Sirard@fsaa.ulaval.ca.

BACKGROUND: This study describes the generation and analysis of the
transcriptional profile of bovine inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE),
obtained from in vivo developed embryos by using a bovine-embryo specific array
(EmbryoGENE) containing 37,238 probes.
RESULTS: A total of 4,689 probes were differentially expressed between ICM and
TE, among these, 2,380 and 2,309 probes were upregulated in ICM and TE tissues,
respectively (P = 0.01, FC = 2.0, FDR: 2.0). Ontological classification of the
genes predominantly expressed in ICM emerged a range of functional categories
with a preponderance of genes involved in basal and developmental signaling
pathways including P53, TGFß, IL8, mTOR, integrin, ILK, and ELF2 signalings.
Cross-referencing of microarray data with two available in vitro studies
indicated a marked reduction in ICM vs. TE transcriptional difference following
in vitro culture of bovine embryos. Moreover, a great majority of genes that were
found to be misregulated following in vitro culture of bovine embryos were known 
genes involved in epigenetic regulation of pluripotency and cell differentiation 
including DNMT1, GADD45, CARM1, ELF5 HDAC8, CCNB1, KDM6A, PRDM9, CDX2, ARID3A,
IL6, GADD45A, FGFR2, PPP2R2B, and SMARCA2. Cross-species referencing of
microarray data revealed substantial divergence between bovine and mouse and
human in signaling pathways involved in early lineage specification.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptional changes occur during ICM and TE lineages
specification in bovine is greater than previously understood. Therefore, this
array data establishes a standard to evaluate the in vitro imprint on the
transcriptome and to hypothesize the cross-species differences that allow in
vitro acquisition of pluripotent ICM in human and mice but hinder that process in
bovine.

PMCID: PMC4683974
PMID: 26681441  [PubMed - in process]


13. Genes Dev. 2015 Dec 1;29(23):2435-48. doi: 10.1101/gad.268821.115. Epub 2015 Nov 
19.

Elf5-centered transcription factor hub controls trophoblast stem cell
self-renewal and differentiation through stoichiometry-sensitive shifts in target
gene networks.

Latos PA(1), Sienerth AR(1), Murray A(1), Senner CE(1), Muto M(2), Ikawa M(2),
Oxley D(3), Burge S(4), Cox BJ(5), Hemberger M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, United
Kingdom; Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 
3EG, United Kingdom; (2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Animal
Resource Center for Infectious Diseases, Research Institute for Microbial
Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; (3)Proteomics Group,
The Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, United Kingdom; (4)Epigenetics
Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, United Kingdom;
(5)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada; Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1E2, Canada.

Elf5 is a transcription factor with pivotal roles in the trophoblast compartment,
where it reinforces a trophoblast stem cell (TSC)-specific transcriptional
circuit. However, Elf5 is also present in differentiating trophoblast cells that 
have ceased to express other TSC genes such as Cdx2 and Eomes. In the present
study, we aimed to elucidate the context-dependent role of Elf5 at the interface 
between TSC self-renewal and the onset of differentiation. We demonstrate that
precise levels of Elf5 are critical for normal expansion of the TSC compartment
and embryonic survival, as Elf5 overexpression triggers precocious trophoblast
differentiation. Through integration of protein interactome, transcriptome, and
genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation data, we reveal that this
abundance-dependent function is mediated through a shift in preferred
Elf5-binding partners; in TSCs, Elf5 interaction with Eomes recruits Tfap2c to
triply occupied sites at TSC-specific genes, driving their expression. In
contrast, the Elf5 and Tfap2c interaction becomes predominant as their protein
levels increase. This triggers binding to double- and single-occupancy sites that
harbor the cognate Tfap2c motif, causing activation of the associated
differentiation-promoting genes. These data place Elf5 at the center of a
stoichiometry-sensitive transcriptional network, where it acts as a molecular
switch governing the balance between TSC proliferation and differentiation.

© 2015 Latos et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4691948
PMID: 26584622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 10;10(11):e0142442. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142442.
eCollection 2015.

The Efficient Derivation of Trophoblast Cells from Porcine In Vitro Fertilized
and Parthenogenetic Blastocysts and Culture with ROCK Inhibitor Y-27632.

Hou D(1), Su M(1), Li X(1), Li Z(1), Yun T(1), Zhao Y(1), Zhang M(2,)(3), Zhao
L(2,)(3), Li R(2,)(3), Yu H(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive
Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia, P. 
R. China. (2)State Key Laboratories of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China. (3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Xenotransplantation,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Trophoblasts (TR) are specialized cells of the placenta and play an important
role in embryo implantation. The in vitro culture of trophoblasts provided an
important tool to investigate the mechanisms of implantation. In the present
study, porcine trophoblast cells were derived from pig in vitro fertilized (IVF) 
and parthenogenetically activated (PA) blastocysts via culturing in medium
supplemented with KnockOut serum replacement (KOSR) and basic fibroblast growth
factor (bFGF) on STO feeder layers, and the effect of ROCK (Rho-associated
coiled-coil protein kinases) inhibiter Y-27632 on the cell lines culture was
tested. 5 PA blastocyst derived cell lines and 2 IVF blastocyst derived cell
lines have been cultured more than 20 passages; one PA cell lines reached 110
passages without obvious morphological alteration. The derived trophoblast cells 
exhibited epithelium-like morphology, rich in lipid droplets, and had obvious
defined boundaries with the feeder cells. The cells were histochemically stained 
positive for alkaline phosphatase. The expression of TR lineage markers, such as 
CDX2, KRT7, KRT18, TEAD4, ELF5 and HAND1, imprinted genes such as IGF2, PEG1 and 
PEG10, and telomerase activity related genes TERC and TERF2 were detected by
immunofluorescence staining, reverse transcription PCR and quantitative real-time
PCR analyses. Both PA and IVF blastocysts derived trophoblast cells possessed the
ability to differentiate into mature trophoblast cells in vitro. The addition of 
Y-27632 improved the growth of both PA and IVF blastocyst derived cell lines and 
increased the expression of trophoblast genes. This study has provided an
alternative highly efficient method to establish trophoblast for research focused
on peri-implantation and placenta development in IVF and PA embryos.

PMCID: PMC4640852
PMID: 26555939  [PubMed - in process]


15. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Feb 18;44(3):1052-63. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv999. Epub 2015 
Oct 7.

An autoregulatory enhancer controls mammary-specific STAT5 functions.

Metser G(1), Shin HY(1), Wang C(1), Yoo KH(1), Oh S(2), Villarino AV(3), O'Shea
JJ(3), Kang K(4), Hennighausen L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. (2)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA Department of Microbiology, Dankook University, Cheonan, Chungnam 330-714,
Republic of Korea. (3)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, NIAMS,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)Department of
Microbiology, Dankook University, Cheonan, Chungnam 330-714, Republic of Korea.
(5)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA lotharh@mail.nih.gov.

Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription (STATs) are principal
transcription factors downstream of cytokine receptors. Although STAT5A is
expressed in most tissues it remains to be understood why its premier,
non-redundant functions are restricted to prolactin-induced mammary gland
development and function. We report that the ubiquitously expressed Stat5a/b
locus is subject to additional lineage-specific transcriptional control in
mammary epithelium. Genome-wide surveys of epigenetic status and transcription
factor occupancy uncovered a putative mammary-specific enhancer within the
intergenic sequences separating the two Stat5 genes. This region exhibited
several hallmarks of genomic enhancers, including DNaseI hypersensitivity, H3K27 
acetylation and binding by GR, NFIB, ELF5 and MED1. Mammary-specific STAT5
binding was obtained at two canonical STAT5 binding motifs. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated 
genome editing was used to delete these sites in mice and determine their
biological function. Mutant animals exhibited an 80% reduction of Stat5 levels in
mammary epithelium and a concomitant reduction of STAT5-dependent gene
expression. Transcriptome analysis identified a class of mammary-restricted genes
that was particularly dependent on high STAT5 levels as a result of the
intergenic enhancer. Taken together, the mammary-specific enhancer enables a
positive feedback circuit that contributes to the remarkable abundance of STAT5
and, in turn, to the efficacy of STAT5-dependent mammary physiology.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research 2015.
This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain
in the US.

PMCID: PMC4756855
PMID: 26446995  [PubMed - in process]


16. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 13;6(31):31569-92. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5035.

Decoding c-Myc networks of cell cycle and apoptosis regulated genes in a
transgenic mouse model of papillary lung adenocarcinomas.

Ciribilli Y(1), Singh P(2), Spanel R(2,)(3), Inga A(1), Borlak J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of Trento, 38123
Mattarello, Italy. (2)Centre for Pharmacology and Toxicology, Hannover Medical
School, 30625 Hannover, Germany. (3)Institute of Pathology, 41747 Viersen,
Germany.

The c-Myc gene codes for a basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper transcription
factor protein and is reported to be frequently over-expressed in human cancers. 
Given that c-Myc plays an essential role in neoplastic transformation we wished
to define its activity in lung cancer and therefore studied its targeted
expression to respiratory epithelium in a transgenic mouse disease model. Using
histological well-defined tumors, transcriptome analysis identified novel c-Myc
responsive cell cycle and apoptosis genes that were validated as direct c-Myc
targets using EMSA, Western blotting, gene reporter and ChIP assays.Through
computational analyses c-Myc cooperating transcription factors emerged for
repressed and up-regulated genes in cancer samples, namely Klf7, Gata3, Sox18,
p53 and Elf5 and Cebpa, respectively. Conversely, at promoters of genes regulated
in transgenic but non-carcinomatous lung tissue enriched binding sites for c-Myc,
Hbp1, Hif1 were observed. Bioinformatic analysis of tumor transcriptomic data
revealed regulatory gene networks and highlighted mortalin and moesin as master
regulators while gene reporter and ChIP assays in the H1299 lung cancer cell line
as well as cross-examination of published ChIP-sequence data of 7 human and 2
mouse cell lines provided strong evidence for the identified genes to be c-Myc
targets. The clinical significance of findings was established by evaluating
expression of orthologous proteins in human lung cancer. Taken collectively, a
molecular circuit for c-Myc-dependent cellular transformation was identified and 
the network analysis broadened the perspective for molecularly targeted
therapies.

PMCID: PMC4741625
PMID: 26427040  [PubMed - in process]


17. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):33146-64. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5082.

Role of the short isoform of the progesterone receptor in breast cancer cell
invasiveness at estrogen and progesterone levels in the pre- and post-menopausal 
ranges.

McFall T(1), Patki M(1), Rosati R(1), Ratnam M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute and Department of Oncology, Wayne State 
University, Detroit, MI, USA.

Overexpression of the progesterone receptor (PR) isoform A (PR-A) is a negative
prognosticator for estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer but in vitro
studies have implicated PR-B in progestin-induced invasiveness. As estrogen is
known to suppress invasiveness and tumor progression and as the in vitro studies 
were conducted in models that either lacked ER or excluded estrogen, we examined 
the role of PR isoforms in the context of estrogen signaling. Estrogen (< 0.01nM)
strongly suppressed invasiveness in various ER+ model cell lines. At low (< 1nM) 
concentrations, progestins completely abrogated inhibition of invasiveness by
estrogen. It was only in a higher (5 nM - 50 nM) concentration range that
progestins induced invasiveness in the absence of estrogen. The ability of low
dose progestins to rescue invasiveness from estrogen regulation was exclusively
mediated by PR-A, whereas PR-B mediated the estrogen-independent component of
progestin-induced invasiveness. Overexpression of PR-A lowered the progestin
concentration needed to completely rescue invasiveness. Among estrogen-regulated 
genes, progestin/PR-A counter-regulated a distinctive subset, including breast
tumor progression genes (e.g., HES1, PRKCH, ELF5, TM4SF1), leading to
invasiveness. In this manner, at relatively low hormone concentrations
(corresponding to follicular stage and post-menopausal breast tissue or plasma
levels), progesterone influences breast cancer cell invasiveness by rescuing it
from estrogen regulation via PR-A, whereas at higher concentrations the hormone
also induces invasiveness independent of estrogen signaling, through PR-B. The
findings point to a direct functional link between PR-A and progression of
luminal breast cancer in the context of the entire range of pre- and
post-menopausal plasma and breast tissue hormone levels.

PMCID: PMC4741755
PMID: 26356672  [PubMed - in process]


18. Development. 2015 Sep 15;142(18):3151-65. doi: 10.1242/dev.123547. Epub 2015 Aug 
20.

Defining the three cell lineages of the human blastocyst by single-cell RNA-seq.

Blakeley P(1), Fogarty NM(1), del Valle I(1), Wamaitha SE(1), Hu TX(2), Elder
K(3), Snell P(3), Christie L(3), Robson P(4), Niakan KK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Human Embryology and Stem Cell Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, Mill
Hill Laboratory, London NW7 1AA, UK. (2)Genome Institute of Singapore, A-STAR,
Singapore 138672, Singapore MRC Functional Genomics Unit, Department of
Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK.
(3)Bourn Hall Clinic, Bourn, Cambridge CB23 2TN, UK. (4)Genome Institute of
Singapore, A-STAR, Singapore 138672, Singapore The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic
Medicine, Farmington, CT 06030, USA. (5)Human Embryology and Stem Cell
Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, London NW7 1AA, UK
kathy.niakan@crick.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Development. 2015 Oct 15;142(20):3613.

Here, we provide fundamental insights into early human development by single-cell
RNA-sequencing of human and mouse preimplantation embryos. We elucidate conserved
transcriptional programs along with those that are human specific. Importantly,
we validate our RNA-sequencing findings at the protein level, which further
reveals differences in human and mouse embryo gene expression. For example, we
identify several genes exclusively expressed in the human pluripotent epiblast,
including the transcription factor KLF17. Key components of the TGF-ß signalling 
pathway, including NODAL, GDF3, TGFBR1/ALK5, LEFTY1, SMAD2, SMAD4 and TDGF1, are 
also enriched in the human epiblast. Intriguingly, inhibition of TGF-ß signalling
abrogates NANOG expression in human epiblast cells, consistent with a requirement
for this pathway in pluripotency. Although the key trophectoderm factors Id2,
Elf5 and Eomes are exclusively localized to this lineage in the mouse, the human 
orthologues are either absent or expressed in alternative lineages. Importantly, 
we also identify genes with conserved expression dynamics, including Foxa2/FOXA2,
which we show is restricted to the primitive endoderm in both human and mouse
embryos. Comparison of the human epiblast to existing embryonic stem cells
(hESCs) reveals conservation of pluripotency but also additional pathways more
enriched in hESCs. Our analysis highlights significant differences in human
preimplantation development compared with mouse and provides a molecular
blueprint to understand human embryogenesis and its relationship to stem cells.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4582176
PMID: 26293300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Prostate Int. 2015 Mar;3(1):16-21. doi: 10.1016/j.prnil.2015.02.004. Epub 2015
Mar 10.

E74-like factor inhibition induces reacquisition of hormone sensitiveness
decreasing period circadian protein homolog 1 expression in prostate cancer
cells.

Koyama K(1), Takahara K(1), Inamoto T(1), Ibuki N(1), Minami K(1), Uehara H(1),
Komura K(1), Nishida T(1), Sakamoto T(1), Hirano H(1), Nomi H(1), Kiyama S(1),
Azuma H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Faculty of Medicine, Osaka Medical College, Osaka,
Japan.

PURPOSE: Initiating as an androgen-dependent adenocarcinoma, prostate cancer
(PCa) gradually progresses to a castrate-resistant disease following androgen
deprivation therapy with a propensity to metastasize.
METHODS: In order to resolve the mechanism of castrate-resistant PCa, we
performed a cDNA-microarray assay of two PCa cell lines, LNCaP (androgen
dependent) and C4-2 (androgen independent). Among them, we focused on a novel Ets
transcription factor, E74-like factor 5 (ELF5), the expression level of which was
extremely high in C4-2 in comparison with LNCaP both in the microarray analysis
and real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis, and investigated the biological
role in acquisition of androgen-refractory PCa growth.
RESULTS: Western blot analysis and morphological analysis using confocal
immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated that ELF5 was expressed mainly in
cytosol both in LNCaP and C4-2. Inhibition of ELF5 expression using ELF5-small
interfering RNA in C4-2 induced decreased expression of androgen receptor
corepressor, period circadian protein homolog 1, and MTT assay of C4-2 after ELF5
small interfering RNA transfection showed the same cell growth pattern of LNCaP.
CONCLUSIONS: Our in vitro experiments of cell growth and microarray analysis have
demonstrated for the first time that decreased expression of period circadian
protein homolog 1 due to ELF5 inhibition may induce the possibility of
reacquisition of hormone sensitiveness of PCa cells. We suggest that ELF5 could
be a novel potential target for the treatment of hormone-refractory PCa patients.

PMCID: PMC4495571
PMID: 26288799  [PubMed]


20. Nat Commun. 2015 Jul 24;6:7776. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8776.

Fgf and Esrrb integrate epigenetic and transcriptional networks that regulate
self-renewal of trophoblast stem cells.

Latos PA(1), Goncalves A(2), Oxley D(3), Mohammed H(4), Turro E(5), Hemberger
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK [2] Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of
Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK. (2)Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. (3)Proteomics Group, The Babraham Institute,
Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK. (4)Epigenetics Programme, The
Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK. (5)1]
Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, NHS Blood and Transplant,
Long Road, Cambridge CB2 0PT, UK [2] Medical Research Council Biostatistics Unit,
Cambridge Institute of Public Health, Robinson Way, Forvie Site, Cambridge CB2
0SR, UK.

Esrrb (oestrogen-related receptor beta) is a transcription factor implicated in
embryonic stem (ES) cell self-renewal, yet its knockout causes intrauterine
lethality due to defects in trophoblast development. Here we show that in
trophoblast stem (TS) cells, Esrrb is a downstream target of fibroblast growth
factor (Fgf) signalling and is critical to drive TS cell self-renewal. In
contrast to its occupancy of pluripotency-associated loci in ES cells, Esrrb
sustains the stemness of TS cells by direct binding and regulation of TS
cell-specific transcription factors including Elf5 and Eomes. To elucidate the
mechanisms whereby Esrrb controls the expression of its targets, we characterized
its TS cell-specific interactome using mass spectrometry. Unlike in ES cells,
Esrrb interacts in TS cells with the histone demethylase Lsd1 and with the RNA
Polymerase II-associated Integrator complex. Our findings provide new insights
into both the general and context-dependent wiring of transcription factor
networks in stem cells by master transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4525203
PMID: 26206133  [PubMed - in process]


21. Elife. 2015 Jul 13;4. doi: 10.7554/eLife.06104.

Paracrine Met signaling triggers epithelial-mesenchymal transition in mammary
luminal progenitors, affecting their fate.

Di-Cicco A(1), Petit V(1), Chiche A(1), Bresson L(1), Romagnoli M(1),
Orian-Rousseau V(2), Vivanco Md(3), Medina D(4), Faraldo MM(1), Glukhova MA(1),
Deugnier MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Paris Sciences et Lettres Research University, Paris, France. 
(2)Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany. (3)Cell Biology and
Stem Cells Unit, CIC bioGUNE, Derio, Spain. (4)Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, United States.

HGF/Met signaling has recently been associated with basal-type breast cancers,
which are thought to originate from progenitor cells residing in the luminal
compartment of the mammary epithelium. We found that ICAM-1 efficiently marks
mammary luminal progenitors comprising hormone receptor-positive and
receptor-negative cells, presumably ductal and alveolar progenitors. Both cell
populations strongly express Met, while HGF is produced by stromal and basal
myoepithelial cells. We show that persistent HGF treatment stimulates the
clonogenic activity of ICAM1-positive luminal progenitors, controlling their
survival and proliferation, and leads to the expression of basal cell
characteristics, including stem cell potential. This is accompanied by the
induction of Snai1 and Snai2, two major transcription factors triggering
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, the repression of the luminal-regulatory genes
Elf5 and Hey1, and claudin down-regulation. Our data strongly indicate that
paracrine Met signaling can control the function of luminal progenitors and
modulate their fate during mammary development and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4498445
PMID: 26165517  [PubMed - in process]


22. Prostate. 2015 Jun;75(8):872-82. doi: 10.1002/pros.22970. Epub 2015 Mar 1.

Elf5 inhibits TGF-ß-driven epithelial-mesenchymal transition in prostate cancer
by repressing SMAD3 activation.

Yao B(1), Zhao J, Li Y, Li H, Hu Z, Pan P, Zhang Y, Du E, Liu R, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tianjin Institute of Urology, The Second Hospital of
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.

BACKGROUND: The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been associated with 
the acquisition of migration, invasiveness, and metastasis traits. During tumor
progression, EMT can be induced by transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) signal
that epithelial cells receive from their microenvironment. However, the master
regulatory controls on TGF-ß-EMT axis are not understood.
METHODS: The protein expression in human specimens was measured by
immunohistochemical staining. E74-like factor 5 (Elf5) was silenced by short
interfering RNAs in LNCaP cells and stably overexpressed by HA-tagged Elf5 cDNAs 
in 22Rv1 cells. These cells were used to study migration and
anchorage-independent growth.
RESULTS: Our data reveal that Elf5 results in the failure of mesenchymal
morphogenesis, upregulation of EMT markers, spheres formation, and migration in
the presence of TGF-ß. Furthermore, Elf5 blocks TGF-ß signaling, through
decreasing drosophila mothers against decapentaplegic protein (SMAD3) activation 
by binding to it, one of the major effector of TGF-ß-induced EMT. Moreover, Elf5 
can serve as a prognostic marker of metastasis-free survival in patients with
TGF-ß-positive prostate cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: Elf5 expression is inversely correlated with EMT. Elf5 inhibits
TGF-ß-driven EMT via repressing SMAD3 phosphorylation in prostate cancer cells.
In addition, Elf5 can be used as a biomarker of metastasis-free survival in
patients with TGF-ß-positive prostate cancer.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25728398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 3;290(14):8834-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.620641. Epub 2015 
Feb 10.

Activin/nodal signaling switches the terminal fate of human embryonic stem
cell-derived trophoblasts.

Sarkar P(1), Randall SM(2), Collier TS(2), Nero A(1), Russell TA(3), Muddiman
DC(2), Rao BM(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering. (2)the W. M.
Keck FT-ICR Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, and. (3)the
Department of Biochemistry, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina 27695. (4)From the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, 
bmrao@ncsu.edu.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have been routinely treated with bone
morphogenetic protein and/or inhibitors of activin/nodal signaling to obtain
cells that express trophoblast markers. Trophoblasts can terminally differentiate
to either extravillous trophoblasts or syncytiotrophoblasts. The signaling
pathways that govern the terminal fate of these trophoblasts are not understood. 
We show that activin/nodal signaling switches the terminal fate of these
hESC-derived trophoblasts. Inhibition of activin/nodal signaling leads to
formation of extravillous trophoblast, whereas loss of activin/nodal inhibition
leads to the formation of syncytiotrophoblasts. Also, the ability of hESCs to
form bona fide trophoblasts has been intensely debated. We have examined
hESC-derived trophoblasts in the light of stringent criteria that were proposed
recently, such as hypomethylation of the ELF5-2b promoter region and
down-regulation of HLA class I antigens. We report that trophoblasts that possess
these properties can indeed be obtained from hESCs.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4423675 [Available on 2016-04-03]
PMID: 25670856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Med Oncol. 2015 Mar;32(3):60. doi: 10.1007/s12032-015-0483-4. Epub 2015 Feb 7.

Whole genome expression profiling in chewing-tobacco-associated oral cancers: a
pilot study.

Chakrabarti S(1), Multani S, Dabholkar J, Saranath D.

Author information: 
(1)Reliance Life Sciences Pvt. Ltd, DhirubhaiAmbani Life Sciences Center, Rabale,
Navi Mumbai, 400701, India.

The current study was undertaken with a view to identify differential biomarkers 
in chewing-tobacco-associated oral cancer tissues in patients of Indian
ethnicity. The gene expression profile was analyzed in oral cancer tissues as
compared to clinically normal oral buccal mucosa. We examined 30 oral cancer
tissues and 27 normal oral tissues with 16 paired samples from contralateral site
of the patient and 14 unpaired samples from different oral cancer patients, for
whole genome expression using high-throughput IlluminaSentrix Human Ref-8 v2
Expression BeadChip array. The cDNA microarray analysis identified 425
differentially expressed genes with >1.5-fold expression in the oral cancer
tissues as compared to normal tissues in the oral cancer patients. Overexpression
of 255 genes and downregulation of 170 genes (p < 0.01) were observed. Further, a
minimum twofold overexpression was observed in 32 genes and downregulation in 12 
genes, in 30-83% of oral cancer patients. Biological pathway analysis using Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genome Pathway database revealed that the
differentially regulated genes were associated with critical biological
functions. The biological functions and representative deregulated genes include 
cell proliferation (AIM2, FAP, TNFSF13B, TMPRSS11A); signal transduction (FOLR2, 
MME, HTR3B); invasion and metastasis (SPP1, TNFAIP6, EPHB6); differentiation
(CLEC4A, ELF5); angiogenesis (CXCL1); apoptosis (GLIPR1, WISP1, DAPL1); and
immune responses (CD300A, IFIT2, TREM2); and metabolism (NNMT; ALDH3A1). Besides,
several of the genes have been differentially expressed in human cancers
including oral cancer. Our data indicated differentially expressed genes in oral 
cancer tissues and may identify prognostic and therapeutic biomarkers in oral
cancers, postvalidation in larger numbers and varied population samples.

PMID: 25663065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Sep;230(9):2152-63. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24944.

Epigenetic Regulation of miR-29s Affects the Lactation Activity of Dairy Cow
Mammary Epithelial Cells.

Bian Y(1), Lei Y(1), Wang C(2), Wang J(2), Wang L(1), Liu L(2), Liu L(2), Gao
X(2), Li Q(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Department of Lactation Biology and Regulation of Mammary Gland
Function, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, 150030, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Dairy Science of Ministry of Education, Northeast Agricultural
University, Harbin, 150030, China.

Milk is important for human nutrition, and enhanced milk quality has become a
major selection criterion for the genetic improvement of livestock. Epigenetic
modifications have been shown to be involved in mammary gland development; but
the mechanisms underlying their effects remain unknown. MicroRNAs are involved in
the regulation of milk synthesis and in mammary gland development. Our study is
the first to investigate the roles of miR-29s and epigenetic regulation in dairy 
cow mammary epithelial cells (DCMECs). Our results show that miR-29s regulate the
DNA methylation level by inversely targeting both DNMT3A and DNMT3B in DCMECs.
The inhibition of miR-29s caused global DNA hypermethylation and increased the
methylation levels of the promoters of important lactation-related genes,
including casein alpha s1 (CSN1S1), E74-like factor 5 (ElF5), peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>), sterol regulatory element binding 
protein-1 (SREBP1), and glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1). The inhibition of miR-29s 
reduced the secretion of lactoprotein, triglycerides (TG) and lactose by DCMECs. 
Moreover, the treatment of DCMECs with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC)
decreased the methylation levels of the miR-29b promoter and increased the
expression of miR-29b. The link between miR-29s and DNMT3A/3B enhances our
understanding of the roles of miRNAs in mammary gland function, and our data will
inform more experimentally oriented studies to identify new mechanisms of
regulating lactation. We present new insights regarding the epigenetic regulation
of lactation performance. Improved understanding of the molecular basis of
lactation will aid in the development of strategies for optimizing milk quality
in dairy cows and modifying the lactation performance of offspring.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25656908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Microbiol Immunol Infect. 2014 Dec 11. pii: S1684-1182(14)00247-3. doi:
10.1016/j.jmii.2014.11.016. [Epub ahead of print]

Polymorphisms of EHF-ELF5 genomic region and its association with pediatric
asthma in the Taiwanese population.

Wang JY(1), Shyur SD(2), Lam FW(3), Wu LS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of
Medicine, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Division of Research
Development, Vita Genomics Inc., Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Medical
Sciences, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan. Electronic address:
lshwu@mail.tcu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: The EHF and ELF5 genes, located on chromosome 11p and linked to
asthma phenotypes, are high-potential candidate genes conferring asthma
susceptibility. The purpose of this study was to investigate the genetic
association among single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of EHF and ELF5, and
their relationship with asthma in the Taiwanese population.
METHODS: We selected and performed genotyping on 16 SNPs that encompass the
genomic region of EHF and ELF5 in Taiwanese children with or without asthma. A
total of 1983 children, 523 in the test group and 619 and 842 in two validation
groups, were recruited for this study.
RESULTS: The SNP rs3910901, located in the 5' upstream region of ELF5, was found 
to have a weak association (p = 0.043) with asthma in the odds ratio analysis.
The genotype distribution was similar in all comparison groups, but the CC
genotype was more frequent in asthma patients. Logistic regression adjusted
allergy comorbidity showed obviously diluted association.
CONCLUSION: The results indicated that SNP rs3910901 may have a minor impact on
pediatric asthma in the Taiwanese population.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25648666  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 28;10(1):e0117510. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117510.
eCollection 2015.

Epigenetic regulation of Elf5 is associated with epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in urothelial cancer.

Wu B(1), Cao X(1), Liang X(1), Zhang X(2), Zhang W(1), Sun G(3), Wang D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan,
China. (2)First Clinical Medical College, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan,
China. (3)Department of Urology, Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, China. (4)Department of Urology, First Hospital of Shanxi Medical
University, Taiyuan, China; First Clinical Medical College, Shanxi Medical
University, Taiyuan, China.

E74-like factor 5 (Elf5) has been associated with tumor suppression in breast
cancer. However, its role in urothelial cancer (UC) is completely unknown.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and methylation specific PCR (MSP) were done to detect
Elf5 expression level and its promoter methylation. Results revealed that low
expression of Elf5 on protein and mRNA levels were associated with tumor
progression, early relapse and poor survival. In vitro, down-regulation of Elf5
can increase epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Aberrant Elf5 methylation
was identified as major mechanism for Elf5 gene silence. Accordingly, restoration
of Elf5 by infection or demethylating treatment effectively reversed EMT
processes. In conclusion, we identified Elf5 as a novel biomarker of UC on
several biological levels and established a causative link between Elf5 and EMT
in UC.

PMCID: PMC4309403
PMID: 25629735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cancer Lett. 2015 Feb 28;357(2):502-9. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.12.002. Epub
2014 Dec 4.

Novel TNS3-MAP3K3 and ZFPM2-ELF5 fusion genes identified by RNA sequencing in
multicystic mesothelioma with t(7;17)(p12;q23) and t(8;11)(q23;p13).

Panagopoulos I(1), Gorunova L(2), Davidson B(3), Heim S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for Cancer Genetics and
Informatics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Montebello,
PO Box<U+2009>49534, Nydalen, NO-0424, Oslo 0310, Norway; Centre for Cancer Biomedicine,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Electronic address:
ioannis.panagopoulos@rr-research.no. (2)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics,
Institute for Cancer Genetics and Informatics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital,
Oslo University Hospital, Montebello, PO Box<U+2009>49534, Nydalen, NO-0424, Oslo 0310, 
Norway; Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway. (3)Department of Pathology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo,
Norway. (4)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for Cancer Genetics and
Informatics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Montebello,
PO Box<U+2009>49534, Nydalen, NO-0424, Oslo 0310, Norway; Centre for Cancer Biomedicine,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Faculty of Medicine,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Multicystic mesothelioma is a rare disease of unknown etiology and pathogenesis. 
Nothing has been known about the cytogenetic and molecular genetic features of
these tumors. Here we present the first cytogenetically analyzed multicystic
mesothelioma with the karyotype 46,XX,t(7;17)(p13;q23),t(8;11)(q23;p13).
RNA-sequencing showed that the t(7;17)(p13;q23) generated a chimeric TNS3-MAP3K3 
gene, which codes for a chimeric protein kinase, as well as the reciprocal
MAP3K3-TNS3 in which the region of TNS3 coding for the SH2_Tensin_like region and
the tensin phosphotyrosine-binding domain is under the control of the MAP3K3
promoter. The other translocation, t(8;11)(q23;p13), generated a chimeric
ZFPM2-ELF5 gene which codes for a chimeric transcription factor in which the
first 40 amino acids of ELF5 are replaced by the first 100 amino acids of ZFPM2. 
RT-PCR together with Sanger sequencing verified the presence of the
above-mentioned fusion transcripts. The finding of acquired clonal chromosome
abnormalities in cells cultured from the lesion and the presence of the
TNS3-MAP3K3 chimeric protein kinase and the ZFPM2-ELF5 chimeric transcription
factor confirm the neoplastic nature of multicystic mesothelioma.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25484136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Dev Biol. 2015 Jan 1;397(1):77-88. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.10.011. Epub 2014
Oct 23.

Elf5 and Ets2 maintain the mouse extraembryonic ectoderm in a dosage dependent
synergistic manner.

Donnison M(1), Broadhurst R(1), Pfeffer PL(2).

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand. (2)AgResearch 
Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand; School of Biological
Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, PO Box 600, Wellington 6140, New
Zealand. Electronic address: peter.pfeffer@vuw.ac.nz.

The ETS superfamily transcription factors Elf5 and Ets2 have both been implicated
in the maintenance of the extraembryonic ectoderm (ExE) of the mouse embryo.
While homozygous mutants of either gene result in various degrees of ExE tissue
loss, heterozygotes are without phenotype. We show here that compound
heterozygous mutants exhibit a phenotype intermediate to that of the more severe 
Elf5-/- and the milder Ets2-/- mutants. Functional redundancy is shown via
commonalities in expression patterns, in target gene expression, and by partial
rescue of Elf5-/- mutants through overexpressing Ets2 in an Elf5-like fashion. A 
model is presented suggesting the functional division of the ExE region into a
proximal and distal domain based on gene expression patterns and the proximal to 
distal increasing sensitivity to threshold levels of combined Elf5 and Ets2
activity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Elife. 2014 Nov 21;3:e03881. doi: 10.7554/eLife.03881.

RUNX1, a transcription factor mutated in breast cancer, controls the fate of
ER-positive mammary luminal cells.

van Bragt MP(1), Hu X(1), Xie Y(1), Li Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, United States.

RUNX1 encodes a RUNX family transcription factor (TF) and was recently identified
as a novel mutated gene in human luminal breast cancers. We found that Runx1 is
expressed in all subpopulations of murine mammary epithelial cells (MECs) except 
the secretory alveolar luminal cells. Conditional knockout of Runx1 in MECs by
MMTV-Cre led to a decrease in luminal MECs, largely due to a profound reduction
in the estrogen receptor (ER)-positive mature luminal subpopulation, a phenotype 
that could be rescued by the loss of either Trp53 or Rb1. Mechanistically RUNX1
represses Elf5, a master regulatory TF gene for alveolar cells, and regulates
mature luminal TF/co-factor genes (e.g., Foxa1 and Cited1) involved in the ER
program. Collectively, our data identified a key regulator of the ER<U+207A> luminal
lineage whose disruption may contribute to the development of ER<U+207A> luminal breast 
cancer when under the background of either TP53 or RB1 loss.

PMCID: PMC4381933
PMID: 25415051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Dev Biol. 2014 Nov 15;395(2):245-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.09.012. Epub 2014 
Sep 16.

The STAT5-regulated miR-193b locus restrains mammary stem and progenitor cell
activity and alveolar differentiation.

Yoo KH(1), Kang K(2), Feuermann Y(1), Jang SJ(1), Robinson GW(1), Hennighausen
L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. (2)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA; Department of Microbiology, Dankook University, Cheonan 330-714, Republic of
Korea. (3)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes, 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. Electronic address: lotharh@mail.nih.gov.

The transcription factor STAT5 mediates prolactin signaling and controls
functional development of mammary tissue during pregnancy. This study has
identified the miR-193b locus, also encoding miRNAs 365-1 and 6365, as a STAT5
target in mammary epithelium. While the locus was characterized by active histone
marks in mammary tissue, STAT5 binding and expression during pregnancy, it was
silent in most non-mammary cells. Inactivation of the miR-193b locus in mice
resulted in elevated mammary stem/progenitor cell activity as judged by limiting 
dilution transplantation experiments of primary mammary epithelial cells.
Colonies formed by mutant cells were larger and contained more Ki-67 positive
cells. Differentiation of mammary epithelium lacking the miR-193b locus was
accelerated during puberty and pregnancy, which coincided with the loss of Cav3
and elevated levels of Elf5. Normal colony development was partially obtained
upon ectopically expressing Cav3 or upon siRNA-mediated reduction of Elf5 in
miR-193b-null primary mammary epithelial cells. This study reveals a previously
unknown link between the mammary-defining transcription factor STAT5 and a
microRNA cluster in controlling mammary epithelial differentiation and the
activity of mammary stem and progenitor cells.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4252501
PMID: 25236432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 9;9(9):e107308. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107308. eCollection
2014.

Establishment of trophoblast stem cells under defined culture conditions in mice.

Ohinata Y(1), Tsukiyama T(2).

Author information: 
(1)PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Saitama, Japan; Life
Science Experimental Facility, Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Life and
Environmental Sciences, University of Yamanashi, Kofu, Yamanashi, Japan;
Laboratory for Pluripotent Stem Cell Studies, Center for Developmental Biology,
RIKEN Kobe institute, Kobe Chuo-ku, Hyogo, Japan. (2)Laboratory for Pluripotent
Stem Cell Studies, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN Kobe institute, Kobe
Chuo-ku, Hyogo, Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0121167.

The inner cell mass (ICM) and trophoblast cell lineages duet early embryonic
development in mammals. After implantation, the ICM forms the embryo proper as
well as some extraembryonic tissues, whereas the trophoectoderm (TE) exclusively 
forms the fetal portion of the placenta and the trophoblast giant cells. Although
embryonic stem (ES) cells can be derived from ICM in cultures of mouse
blastocysts in the presence of LIF and/or combinations of small-molecule chemical
compounds, and the undifferentiated pluripotent state can be stably maintained
without use of serum and feeder cells, defined culture conditions for derivation 
and maintenance of undifferentiated trophoblast stem (TS) cells have not been
established. Here, we report that addition of FGF2, activin A, XAV939, and Y27632
are necessary and sufficient for derivation of TS cells from both of E3.5
blastocysts and E6.5 early postimplantation extraembryonic ectoderm. Moreover,
the undifferentiated TS cell state can be stably maintained in chemically defined
culture conditions. Cells derived in this manner expressed TS cell marker genes, 
including Eomes, Elf5, Cdx2, Klf5, Cdh1, Esrrb, Sox2, and Tcfap2c; differentiated
into all trophoblast subtypes (trophoblast giant cells, spongiotrophoblast, and
labyrinthine trophoblast) in vitro; and exclusively contributed to trophoblast
lineages in chimeric animals. This delineation of minimal requirements for
derivation and self-renewal provides a defined platform for precise description
and dissection of the molecular state of TS cells.

PMCID: PMC4159327
PMID: 25203285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cancer Res. 2014 Oct 1;74(19):5668-79. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0970. Epub
2014 Aug 4.

IGF1R inhibition in mammary epithelia promotes canonical Wnt signaling and
Wnt1-driven tumors.

Rota LM(1), Albanito L(1), Shin ME(1), Goyeneche CL(1), Shushanov S(1), Gallagher
EJ(2), LeRoith D(2), Lazzarino DA(1), Wood TL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, New Jersey Medical School Cancer
Center, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, Newark, New Jersey. (2)Division
of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Bone Diseases, The Samuel Bronfman Department of
Medicine, Icahn Sinai School of Medicine at Mt. Sinai, New York, New York.
(3)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, New Jersey Medical School Cancer
Center, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, Newark, New Jersey.
terri.wood@rutgers.edu.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive disease subtype that,
unlike other subtypes, lacks an effective targeted therapy. Inhibitors of the
insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF1R) have been considered for use in
treating TNBC. Here, we provide genetic evidence that IGF1R inhibition promotes
development of Wnt1-mediated murine mammary tumors that offer a model of TNBC. We
found that in a double transgenic mouse model carrying activated Wnt1 and mutant 
Igf1r, a reduction in IGF1R signaling reduced tumor latency and promoted more
aggressive phenotypes. These tumors displayed a squamous phenotype with increased
expression of keratins 5/6 and ß-catenin. Notably, cell lineage analyses revealed
an increase in basal (CD29(hi)/CD24(+)) and luminal (CD24(+)/CD61+/CD29(lo))
progenitor cell populations, along with increased Nanog expression and decreased 
Elf5 expression. In these doubly transgenic mice, lung metastases developed with 
characteristics of the primary tumors, unlike MMTV-Wnt1 mice. Mechanistic
investigations showed that pharmacologic inhibition of the IGF1R in vitro was
sufficient to increase the tumorsphere-forming efficiency ofMMTV-Wnt1 tumor
cells. Tumors from doubly transgenic mice also exhibited an increase in the
expression ratio of the IGF-II-sensitive, A isoform of the insulin receptor
versus the IR-B isoform, which when stimulated in vitro resulted in enhanced
expression of ß-catenin. Overall, our results revealed that in Wnt-driven tumors,
an attenuation of IGF1R signaling accelerates tumorigenesis and promotes more
aggressive phenotypes with potential implications for understanding TNBC
pathobiology and treatment.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4782979
PMID: 25092896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Aug;42(14):8914-27. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku591. Epub 2014
Jul 17.

ADP-ribosyltransferases Parp1 and Parp7 safeguard pluripotency of ES cells.

Roper SJ(1), Chrysanthou S(1), Senner CE(1), Sienerth A(1), Gnan S(2), Murray
A(1), Masutani M(3), Latos P(1), Hemberger M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of Cambridge, 
Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK. (2)Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham
Institute, Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK. (3)Division of
Genome Stability Research, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1
Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. (4)Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham
Institute, Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK Centre for
Trophoblast Research, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EG,
UK myriam.hemberger@babraham.ac.uk.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells are in a dynamic equilibrium of distinct functional
states, characterized by the heterogeneous expression of critical pluripotency
factors and regulated by a spectrum of reversible histone modifications.
Maintenance of this equilibrium is a hallmark of pluripotency. Here we find that 
the ADP-ribosyltransferases Parp1 and Parp7 play a critical role in safeguarding 
this state by occupying key pluripotency genes, notably Nanog, Pou5f1, Sox2,
Stella, Tet1 and Zfp42, thereby protecting them from progressive epigenetic
repression. In the absence of either Parp1 or Parp7, or upon inhibition of the
ADP-ribosylating activity, ES cells exhibit a decrease in ground state
pluripotency as they cannot maintain the typical heterogeneity characteristic of 
the metastable state. As a consequence, they display a higher propensity to
differentiate. These findings place Parp1 and Parp7 at the genetic-epigenetic
interface of pluripotency networks, fine-tuning the transcriptional heterogeneity
and thereby determining the developmental plasticity of ES cells.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4132717
PMID: 25034692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Front Oncol. 2014 Jun 26;4:168. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00168. eCollection 2014.

Aberrant Proliferation of Differentiating Alveolar Cells Induces Hyperplasia in
Resting Mammary Glands of SV40-TAg Transgenic Mice.

Quante T(1), Wegwitz F(2), Abe J(1), Rossi A(1), Deppert W(2), Bohn W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology ,
Hamburg , Germany. (2)Institute for Tumor Biology, University Hospital Eppendorf 
, Hamburg , Germany.

WAP-T1 transgenic mice express SV40-TAg under control of the whey acidic protein 
(WAP) promoter, which directs activity of this strong viral oncogene to luminal
cells of the mammary gland. Resting uniparous WAP-T1 glands develop hyperplasia
composed of TAg positive cells prior to appearance of advanced tumor stages. We
show that cells in hyperplasia display markers of alveolar differentiation,
suggesting that TAg targets differentiating cells of the alveolar compartment.
The glands show significant expression of Elf5 and milk genes (Lalba, Csn2, and
Wap). TAg expressing cells largely co-stain with antibodies to Elf5, lack the
epithelial marker Sca1, and are hormone receptor negative. High expression levels
of Elf5 but not of milk genes are also seen in resting glands of normal BALB/c
mice. This indicates that expression of Elf5 in resting WAP-T1 glands is not
specifically induced by TAg. CK6a positive luminal cells lack TAg. These cells
co-express the markers prominin-1, CK6a, and Sca1, and are positive for hormone
receptors. These hormone sensitive cells localize to ducts and seem not to be
targeted by TAg. Despite reaching an advanced stage in alveolar differentiation, 
the cells in hyperplasia do not exit the cell cycle. Thus, expression of TAg in
conjunction with regular morphogenetic processes of alveologenesis seem to
provide the basis for a hormone independent, unscheduled proliferation of
differentiating cells in resting glands of WAP-T1 transgenic mice, leading to the
formation of hyperplastic lesions.

PMCID: PMC4071642
PMID: 25019062  [PubMed]


36. Genes Cells. 2014 Aug;19(8):637-49. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12163. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Identification and characterization of retinoic acid-responsive genes in mouse
kidney development.

Takayama M(1), Miyatake K, Nishida E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Biostudies,
Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8502, Japan.

Retinoic acid (RA) signaling regulates a variety of developmental processes
through controlling the expression of numerous genes. Here, we have identified
and characterized RA-responsive genes in mouse kidney development. Analysis of
isolated embryonic kidneys cultured in the presence and absence of RA identified 
33 candidates of RA-responsive genes. Most of these candidate genes were
down-regulated by treatment with the RA receptor antagonist. Many of them have
potential binding sites for Elf5, one of the RA-responsive genes, in their
promoter region. Whole-mount in situ hybridization showed that specific
expression of Elf5 in the ureteric trunk depends on RA. RA-dependent expression
in the ureteric trunk was also showed for the sodium channel subunit Scnn1b,
which has been shown to be the marker gene of the collecting duct. In contrast,
the expression of Ecm1, Tnfsf13b and IL-33 was detected in the stromal
mesenchymal cells. Both Tnfsf13b and IL-33 were previously shown to cause nuclear
factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) activation. We have showed that the inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling with specific inhibitors suppresses branching morphogenesis of the
ureteric bud. Our study thus identifies and characterizes RA-dependent
up-regulated genes in kidney development, and suggests an involvement of NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling in the branching morphogenesis.

© 2014 The Authors Genes to Cells © 2014 by the Molecular Biology Society of
Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24962468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Oncol Lett. 2014 Jul;8(1):426-430. Epub 2014 Apr 14.

Evaluation of the mechanism of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human ovarian
cancer stem cells transfected with a WW domain-containing oxidoreductase gene.

Yan H(1), Sun Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Shandong University School Of Medicine, Jinan,
Shandong 250012, P.R. China. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Jinan Central
Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250013, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the impact of the WW
domain-containing oxidoreductase (WWOX) gene on the mechanisms underlying
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human ovarian cancer stem cells.
Western blot analysis was performed to detect the differences in the expression
of the EMT markers, E-cadherin, ß-catenin, N-cadherin, vimentin and fibronectin, 
between human ovarian cancer stem cells and the human epithelial ovarian
carcinoma cell line, HO-8910. A pcDNA3.1-WWOX eukaryotic expression vector was
subsequently transfected into the ovarian cancer stem cells (recombinant plasmid 
group) or an empty plasmid (empty plasmid group) and non-transfected ovarian
cancer stem cells (blank control group) served as the controls. Following the
transfection of the WWOX gene, methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium cell viability and
Transwell(®) invasion assays, and western blot analysis were performed to detect 
changes in the proliferative capability and invasive capacity of ovarian cancer
stem cells, as well as the expression of EMT markers and regulatory factors, Elf5
and Snail. The expression levels of E-cadherin and ß-catenin in the ovarian
cancer stem cells were identified to be significantly lower than those in the
HO-8910 cells, whereas the expression levels of N-cadherin, vimentin and
fibronectin in the ovarian cancer stem cells were found to be significantly
higher than those in the HO-8910 cells. At each time point, the cellular
proliferative capacity of the recombinant plasmid group was observed to be
significantly lower than that of the empty plasmid or blank control groups
(P<0.05 vs. the controls). The number of penetrating cells in the recombinant
plasmid, empty plasmid and the blank control groups were 105.5±3.1, 199.7±3.4 and
191.4±4.1, respectively (mean ± standard error of the mean; P<0.05 vs. the
controls). In addition, the protein expression of E-cadherin, ß-catenin and Elf5 
in the recombinant plasmid group was found to be significantly higher than that
in the other two groups, whereas the protein expression of N-cadherin, vimentin, 
fibronectin and Snail in the recombinant plasmid group was significantly lower
than that in the other two groups. An EMT exists in ovarian cancer stem cells,
and the WWOX gene inhibits the cellular proliferation of ovarian cancer stem
cells and reduces their invasive capability. Therefore, the WWOX gene may reverse
the EMT in ovarian cancer stem cells by regulating the expression of the EMT
regulatory factors, Elf5 and Snail.

PMCID: PMC4063641
PMID: 24959289  [PubMed]


38. Stem Cells. 2014 Oct;32(10):2756-66. doi: 10.1002/stem.1756.

Molecular aspects of adipoepithelial transdifferentiation in mouse mammary gland.

Prokesch A(1), Smorlesi A, Perugini J, Manieri M, Ciarmela P, Mondini E,
Trajanoski Z, Kristiansen K, Giordano A, Bogner-Strauss JG, Cinti S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Graz University of Technology,
Petersgasse, Graz, Austria; Institute of Biochemistry, Graz University of
Technology, Petersgasse, Graz, Austria.

The circular, reversible conversion of the mammary gland during pregnancy and
involution is a paradigm of physiological tissue plasticity. The two most
prominent cell types in mammary gland, adipocytes and epithelial cells, interact 
in an orchestrated way to coordinate this process. Previously, we showed that
this conversion is at least partly achieved by reciprocal transdifferentiation
between mammary adipocytes and lobulo-alveolar epithelial cells. Here, we aim to 
shed more light on the regulators of mammary transdifferentiation. Using
immunohistochemistry with cell type-specific lipid droplet-coating markers
(Perilipin1 and 2), we show that cells with an intermediate adipoepithelial
phenotype exist during and after pregnancy. Nuclei of cells with similar
transitional structural characteristics are highly positive for Elf5, a master
regulator of alveologenesis. In cultured adipocytes, we could show that transient
and stable ectopic expression of Elf5 induces expression of the milk component
whey acidic protein, although the general adipocyte phenotype is not affected
suggesting that additional pioneering factors are necessary. Furthermore, the
lack of transdifferentiation of adipocytes during pregnancy after clearing of the
epithelial compartment indicates that transdifferentiation signals must emanate
from the epithelial part. To explore candidate genes potentially involved in the 
transdifferentiation process, we devised a high-throughput gene expression study 
to compare cleared mammary fat pads with developing, contralateral controls at
several time points during pregnancy. Incorporation of bioinformatic predictions 
of secretory proteins provides new insights into possible paracrine signaling
pathways and downstream transdifferentiation factors. We discuss a potential role
for osteopontin (secreted phosphoprotein 1 [Spp1]) signaling through integrins to
induce adipoepithelial transdifferentiation.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24898182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Dev Biol. 2014 Aug 15;392(2):344-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.05.012. Epub 2014 
May 22.

Elf5 counteracts precocious trophoblast differentiation by maintaining Sox2 and 3
and inhibiting Hand1 expression.

Pearton DJ(1), Smith CS(2), Redgate E(3), van Leeuwen J(4), Donnison M(5),
Pfeffer PL(6).

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand. Electronic
address: dpearton@gmail.com. (2)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton
3214, New Zealand. Electronic address: craig.smith@nd.edu.au. (3)AgResearch
Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand. Electronic address:
redgate.emma@gmail.com. (4)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New
Zealand; Department of Biological Sciences, University of Waikato, Hamilton 3214,
New Zealand. (5)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand.
(6)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand; School of
Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, PO Box 600, Wellington
6140, New Zealand. Electronic address: drplpepper@gmail.com.

In mice the transcription factor Elf5 is necessary for correct trophoblast
development. Upon knockdown of Elf5, TS cells display neither a decrease in
proliferation nor an increase in cell death but rather an increased propensity to
differentiate. Such cells rapidly lose Sox2 and 3 expression, while transiently
upregulating the giant cell differentiation determinant gene Hand1. Other genes
affected within 24h of Elf5 knock-down, many of which have not previously been
implicated in trophoblast development, exhibited in vivo expression domains and
in vitro expression responses consistent with Elf5 having a role in counteracting
trophoblast differentiation. In an ES to TS differentiation assay using Cdx2
overexpression with Elf5 loss of function cell lines, it was shown that Elf5 is
necessary to prevent terminal trophoblast differentiation. This data thus suggest
that Elf5 is a gatekeeper for the TS to differentiated trophoblast transition
thereby preventing the precocious differentiation of the undifferentiated
extraembryonic ectoderm.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24859262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Dis Model Mech. 2014 May;7(5):525-34. doi: 10.1242/dmm.015040. Epub 2014 Mar 13.

RUNX2 correlates with subtype-specific breast cancer in a human tissue
microarray, and ectopic expression of Runx2 perturbs differentiation in the mouse
mammary gland.

McDonald L(1), Ferrari N, Terry A, Bell M, Mohammed ZM, Orange C, Jenkins A,
Muller WJ, Gusterson BA, Neil JC, Edwards J, Morris JS, Cameron ER, Blyth K.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Bearsden, Glasgow, G61 
1BD, UK.

RUNX2, a master regulator of osteogenesis, is oncogenic in the lymphoid lineage; 
however, little is known about its role in epithelial cancers. Upregulation of
RUNX2 in cell lines correlates with increased invasiveness and the capacity to
form osteolytic disease in models of breast and prostate cancer. However, most
studies have analysed the effects of this gene in a limited number of cell lines 
and its role in primary breast cancer has not been resolved. Using a human tumour
tissue microarray, we show that high RUNX2 expression is significantly associated
with oestrogen receptor (ER)/progesterone receptor (PR)/HER2-negative breast
cancers and that patients with high RUNX2 expression have a poorer survival rate 
than those with negative or low expression. We confirm RUNX2 as a gene that has a
potentially important functional role in triple-negative breast cancer. To
investigate the role of this gene in breast cancer, we made a transgenic model in
which Runx2 is specifically expressed in murine mammary epithelium under the
control of the mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV) promoter. We show that ectopic
Runx2 perturbs normal development in pubertal and lactating animals, delaying
ductal elongation and inhibiting lobular alveolar differentiation. We also show
that the Runx2 transgene elicits age-related, pre-neoplastic changes in the
mammary epithelium of older transgenic animals, suggesting that elevated RUNX2
expression renders such tissue more susceptible to oncogenic changes and
providing further evidence that this gene might have an important,
context-dependent role in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4007404
PMID: 24626992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jul 1;23(13):1501-14. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0329. Epub 2014 
Apr 10.

Establishment of bovine trophoblast stem-like cells from in vitro-produced
blastocyst-stage embryos using two inhibitors.

Huang X(1), Han X, Uyunbilig B, Zhang M, Duo S, Zuo Y, Zhao Y, Yun T, Tai D, Wang
C, Li J, Li X, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)1 The Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive
Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University , Hohhot, China .

The trophoblast (TR) is the first to differentiate during mammalian embryogenesis
and play a pivotal role in the development of the placenta. We used a dual
inhibitor system (PD0325901 and CHIR99021) with mixed feeders to successfully
obtain bovine trophoblast stem-like (bTS) cells, which were similar in phenotype 
to mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSCs). The bTS cells that were generated using
this system continually proliferated, displayed a normal diploid karyotype, and
had no signs of altered morphology or differentiation even after 150 passages.
These cells exhibited alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity and expressed
pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, SSEA-1, SSEA-4, TRA-1-60, and
TRA-1-81, and TR lineage markers such as CDX2, as determined by both
immunofluorescence and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 
Additionally, these cells generated dome-like structures, formed teratomas when
injected into NOD-SCID mice, and differentiated into placenta TR cells in vitro. 
The microarray analysis of bTS cells showed high expression levels of many TR
markers, such as TEAD4, EOMES, GATA3, ETS2, TFAP2A, ELF5, SMARCA4 (BRG1), CDH3,
MASH2, HSD17B1, CYP11A1, PPARG, ID2, GCM1, HAND1, TDK, PAG, IFN-t, and THAP11.
The expression of many pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, and GDF3,
was lower in bTS cells compared with in vitro-produced blastocysts; however,
compared with bovine fetal fibroblasts, the expression of these pluripotency
markers was elevated in bTS cells. The DNA methylation status of the promoter
regions of OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2 was investigated, which were significantly
higher in bTS cells (OCT4 23.90%, NANOG 74.40%, and SOX2 8.50%) compared with
blastocysts (OCT4 8.90%, NANOG 34.4%, and SOX2 3.80%). In contrast, two promoter 
regions of CDX2 were hypomethylated in bTS cells (13.80% and 3.90%) compared with
blastocysts (18.80% and 9.10%). The TSC lines that were established in this study
may be used either for basic research that is focused on peri-implantation and
placenta development or as donor cells for transgenic animal production.

PMID: 24605918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Physiol Genomics. 2014 Apr 1;46(7):268-75. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00119.2013. Epub 2014 Jan 28.

Ratio of lysine to methionine alters expression of genes involved in milk protein
transcription and translation and mTOR phosphorylation in bovine mammary cells.

Nan X(1), Bu D, Li X, Wang J, Wei H, Hu H, Zhou L, Loor JJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Institute of Animal Science, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Haidian District, Beijing, Peoples Republic of 
China; and.

This study was conducted to determine the optimum ratio of lysine and methionine 
(Lys:Met) to enhance milk protein concentration in vitro, focusing on the
regulation of genes related to the JAK2-STAT5 and the mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathways. A preliminary dose response study revealed
that casein concentration peaked (2.5-2.7 ppm) at a supplemental Lys
concentration of 1.2 mM and Met at 0.5 mM. At the peak casein concentration cell 
proliferation rate also was higher. Furthermore, the expression of CSN1S1,
CSN1S2, CSN2, CSN3, LALBA, JAK2, STAT5, and MTOR was upregulated with both Lys
and Met compared with the control. A subsequent experiment was conducted as a 5 ×
3 factorial design with supplemental Lys plus Met at different ratios. When the
supplemental concentration of Lys was 1.2 mM and Met was 0.4 mM (~3:1), the
concentration of casein peaked. Therefore, we measured gene expression, mTOR
protein expression, and phosphorylated mTOR (p-mTOR) in cultures incubated with
3:1 Lys:Met (Lys&Met). Expression of CSN1S1 and LALBA were the most highly
expressed genes (P < 0.01). The upregulation of CSN2, CSN3, CSN1S2 isoforms (P < 
0.01) and JAK2, ELF5, mTOR (P < 0.05) was also observed. Total mTOR protein
expression was greater (P < 0.05) with Lys alone and also Lys&Met. However,
Lys&Met resulted in the greatest (P < 0.05) p-mTOR. Results suggest that peak
concentration of casein at a supplemental 3:1 Lys:Met is driven in part via
upregulation of the mRNA expression of components of the JAK-STAT and mTOR
pathways.

PMID: 24474444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nature. 2014 Feb 20;506(7488):322-7. doi: 10.1038/nature12948. Epub 2014 Jan 26.

In situ identification of bipotent stem cells in the mammary gland.

Rios AC(1), Fu NY(1), Lindeman GJ(2), Visvader JE(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Stem Cells and Cancer Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia [2] Department of Medical
Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia [3].
(2)1] Stem Cells and Cancer Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia [2] Department of Medicine,
The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia [3] Department
of Medical Oncology and Familial Cancer Centre, The Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia. (3)1] Stem Cells and Cancer Division, The
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052,
Australia [2] Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2014;16(6):480.

The mammary epithelium undergoes profound morphogenetic changes during
development. Architecturally, it comprises two primary lineages, the inner
luminal and outer myoepithelial cell layers. Two opposing concepts on the nature 
of mammary stem cells (MaSCs) in the postnatal gland have emerged. One model,
based on classical transplantation assays, postulates that bipotent MaSCs have a 
key role in coordinating ductal epithelial expansion and maintenance in the adult
gland, whereas the second model proposes that only unipotent MaSCs identified by 
lineage tracing contribute to these processes. Through clonal cell-fate mapping
studies using a stochastic multicolour cre reporter combined with a new
three-dimensional imaging strategy, we provide evidence for the existence of
bipotent MaSCs as well as distinct long-lived progenitor cells. The cellular
dynamics at different developmental stages support a model in which both stem and
progenitor cells drive morphogenesis during puberty, whereas bipotent MaSCs
coordinate ductal homeostasis and remodelling of the mouse adult gland.

PMID: 24463516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Dev Biol. 2014 Mar 1;387(1):15-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.01.008. Epub 2014
Jan 18.

Paracrine effects of embryo-derived FGF4 and BMP4 during pig trophoblast
elongation.

Valdez Magaña G(1), Rodríguez A(1), Zhang H(1), Webb R(1), Alberio R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Sciences, School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, 
College Rd, LE12 5RD, Loughborough, UK. (2)Division of Animal Sciences, School of
Biosciences, University of Nottingham, College Rd, LE12 5RD, Loughborough, UK.
Electronic address: ramiro.alberio@nottingham.ac.uk.

The crosstalk between the epiblast and the trophoblast is critical in supporting 
the early stages of conceptus development. FGF4 and BMP4 are inductive signals
that participate in the communication between the epiblast and the extraembryonic
ectoderm (ExE) of the developing mouse embryo. Importantly, however, it is
unknown whether a similar crosstalk operates in species that lack a discernible
ExE and develop a mammotypical embryonic disc (ED). Here we investigated the
crosstalk between the epiblast and the trophectoderm (TE) during pig embryo
elongation. FGF4 ligand and FGFR2 were detected primarily on the plasma membrane 
of TE cells of peri-elongation embryos. The binding of this growth factor to its 
receptor triggered a signal transduction response evidenced by an increase in
phosphorylated MAPK/ERK. Particular enrichment was detected in the periphery of
the ED in early ovoid embryos, indicating that active FGF signalling was
operating during this stage. Gene expression analysis shows that CDX2 and ELF5,
two genes expressed in the mouse ExE, are only co-expressed in the Rauber's
layer, but not in the pig mural TE. Interestingly, these genes were detected in
the nascent mesoderm of early gastrulating embryos. Analysis of BMP4 expression
by in situ hybridisation shows that this growth factor is produced by nascent
mesoderm cells. A functional test in differentiating epiblast shows that CDX2 and
ELF5 are activated in response to BMP4. Furthermore, the effects of BMP4 were
also demonstrated in the neighbouring TE cells, as demonstrated by an increase in
phosphorylated SMAD1/5/8. These results show that BMP4 produced in the
extraembryonic mesoderm is directly influencing the SMAD response in the TE of
elongating embryos. These results demonstrate that paracrine signals from the
embryo, represented by FGF4 and BMP4, induce a response in the TE prior to the
extensive elongation. The study also confirms that expression of CDX2 and ELF5 is
not conserved in the mural TE, indicating that although the signals that
coordinate conceptus growth are similar between rodents and pigs, the gene
regulatory network of the trophoblast lineage is not conserved in these species.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24445281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Gene. 2014 Mar 15;538(1):113-22. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.12.057. Epub 2014 Jan
7.

Selection and evaluation of novel reference genes for quantitative reverse
transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) based on genome and transcriptome data in Brassica
napus L.

Yang H(1), Liu J(1), Huang S(1), Guo T(2), Deng L(1), Hua W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Oil Crops Research Institute of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Oil Crops, Ministry of
Agriculture, Wuhan 430062, PR China. (2)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430072, PR China. (3)Oil Crops Research Institute of the
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic
Improvement of Oil Crops, Ministry of Agriculture, Wuhan 430062, PR China.
Electronic address: huawei@oilcrops.cn.

Selection of reference genes in Brassica napus, a tetraploid (4×) species, is a
very difficult task without information on genome and transcriptome. By now, only
several traditional reference genes which show significant expression
differentiation under different conditions are used in B. napus. In the present
study, based on genome and transcriptome data of the rapeseed Zhongshuang-11
cultivar, 14 candidate reference genes were screened for investigation in
different tissues, cultivars, and treated conditions of B. napus. These genes
were as follows: ELF5, ENTH, F-BOX7, F-BOX2, FYPP1, GDI1, GYF, MCP2d, OTP80, PPR,
SPOC, Unknown1, Unknown2 and UBA. Among them, excluding GYF and FYPP1, another 12
genes, were identified to perform better than traditional reference genes ACTIN7 
and GAPDH. To further validate the accuracy of the newly developed reference
genes in normalization, expression levels of BnCAT1 (B. napus catalase 1) in
different rapeseed tissues and seedlings under stress conditions were normalized 
by the three most stable reference genes PPR, GDI1, and ENTH and little
difference existed in normalization results. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first time B. napus reference genes have been provided with the help of
complete genome and transcriptome information. The new reference genes provided
in this study are more accurate than previously reported reference genes in
quantifying expression levels of B. napus genes.

Crown Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24406618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Jan 7;16(1):R1. doi: 10.1186/bcr3593.

New insights into lineage restriction of mammary gland epithelium using
parity-identified mammary epithelial cells.

Chang TH, Kunasegaran K, Tarulli GA, De Silva D, Voorhoeve PM, Pietersen AM.

INTRODUCTION: Parity-identified mammary epithelial cells (PI-MECs) are an
interesting cellular subset because they survive involution and are a presumptive
target for transformation by human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)/neu 
in mammary tumors. Depending on the type of assay, PI-MECs have been designated
lobule-restricted progenitors or multipotent stem/progenitor cells. PI-MECs were 
reported to be part of the basal population of mammary epithelium based on flow
cytometry. We investigated the cellular identity and lineage potential of PI-MECs
in intact mammary glands.
METHODS: We performed a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the contribution
of PI-MECs to mammary epithelial cell lineages in pregnant and involuted mammary 
glands by immunohistochemistry, fluorescence-activated cells sorting (FACS), and 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction. PI-MECs were labeled by the activation of
Whey Acidic Protein (WAP)-Cre during pregnancy that results in permanent
expression of yellow fluorescent protein.
RESULTS: After involution, PI-MECs are present exclusively in the luminal layer
of mammary ducts. During pregnancy, PI-MECs contribute to the luminal layer but
not the basal layer of alveolar lobules. Strikingly, whereas all luminal estrogen
receptor (ER)-negative cells in an alveolus can be derived from PI-MECs, the
alveolar ER-positive cells are unlabeled and reminiscent of Notch2-traced L
cells. Notably, we observed a significant population of unlabeled alveolar
progenitors that resemble PI-MECs based on transcriptional and histological
analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our demonstration that PI-MECs are luminal cells underscores that
not only basal cells display multi-lineage potential in transplantation assays.
However, the lineage potential of PI-MECs in unperturbed mammary glands is
remarkably restricted to luminal ER-negative cells of the secretory alveolar
lineage. The identification of an unlabeled but functionally similar population
of luminal alveolar progenitor cells raises the question of whether PI-MECs are a
unique population or the result of stochastic labeling. Interestingly, even when 
all luminal ER-negative cells of an alveolus are PI-MEC-derived, the basal cells 
and hormone-sensing cells are derived from a different source, indicating that
cooperative outgrowth of cells from different lineages is common in
alveologenesis.

PMCID: PMC3978646
PMID: 24398145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Nov 27;1(6):545-59. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.10.006.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of transcription factors for lineage-specific ESC differentiation.

Yamamizu K(1), Piao Y(1), Sharov AA(1), Zsiros V(2), Yu H(1), Nakazawa K(2),
Schlessinger D(1), Ko MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. (2)Unit on Genetics of Cognition and Behavior, 
National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA. (3)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA ; Department of Systems Medicine, 
Sakaguchi Laboratory, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan ;
Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST, Tokyo160-8582, Japan.

A network of transcription factors (TFs) determines cell identity, but identity
can be altered by overexpressing a combination of TFs. However, choosing and
verifying combinations of TFs for specific cell differentiation have been
daunting due to the large number of possible combinations of ~2,000 TFs. Here, we
report the identification of individual TFs for lineage-specific cell
differentiation based on the correlation matrix of global gene expression
profiles. The overexpression of identified TFs-Myod1, Mef2c, Esx1, Foxa1, Hnf4a, 
Gata2, Gata3, Myc, Elf5, Irf2, Elf1, Sfpi1, Ets1, Smad7, Nr2f1, Sox11, Dmrt1,
Sox9, Foxg1, Sox2, or Ascl1-can direct efficient, specific, and rapid
differentiation into myocytes, hepatocytes, blood cells, and neurons.
Furthermore, transfection of synthetic mRNAs of TFs generates their appropriate
target cells. These results demonstrate both the utility of this approach to
identify potent TFs for cell differentiation, and the unanticipated capacity of
single TFs directly guides differentiation to specific lineage fates.

PMCID: PMC3871400
PMID: 24371809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Dairy Sci. 2014 Feb;97(2):902-10. doi: 10.3168/jds.2012-6437. Epub 2013 Dec 15.

Technical note: Selection of suitable reference genes for studying gene
expression in milk somatic cell of yak (Bos grunniens) during the lactation
cycle.

Bai WL(1), Yin RH(2), Zhao SJ(3), Jiang WQ(1), Yin RL(4), Ma ZJ(5), Wang ZY(1),
Zhu YB(1), Luo GB(1), Yang RJ(6), Zhao ZH(7).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural
University, Shenyang 110866, China. (2)College of Animal Science and Veterinary
Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang 110866, China. Electronic
address: yinronghuan@163.com. (3)Institute of Biotechnology, Animal Science
Research Academy of Sichuan Province, Chengdu 610066, China. (4)Research Academy 
of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine Sciences of Jilin Province, Changchun
130062, China. (5)Academy of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Qinghai
University, Xining 810016, China. (6)College of Animal Science and Veterinary
Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun 130062, China. (7)College of Animal Science
and Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun 130062, China. Electronic
address: zhzhao@jlu.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    J Dairy Sci. 2014 Mar;97(3):1872.

Quantitative real-time PCR is the most sensitive technique for gene expression
analysis. Data normalization is essential to correct for potential errors
incurred in all steps from RNA isolation to PCR amplification. The commonly
accepted approach for normalization is the use of reference gene. Until now, no
suitable reference genes have been available for data normalization of gene
expression in milk somatic cells of lactating yaks across lactation. In the
present study, we evaluated the transcriptional stability of 10 candidate
reference genes in milk somatic cells of lactating yak, including ACTB, B2M,
GAPDH, GTP, MRPL39, PPP1R11, RPS9, RPS15, UXT, and RN18S1. Four genes, RPS9,
PPP1R11, UXT, and MRPL39, were identified as being the most stable genes in milk 
somatic cells of lactating yak. Using the combination of RPS9, PPP1R11, UXT, and 
MRPL39 as reference genes, we further assessed the relative expression of 4 genes
of interest in milk somatic cells of yak across lactation, including ELF5, ABCG2,
SREBF2, and DGAT1. Compared with expression in colostrum, the overall
transcription levels of ELF5, ABCG2, and SREBF2 in milk were found to be
significantly upregulated in early, peak, and late lactation, and significantly
downregulated thereafter, before the dry period. A similar pattern was observed
in the relative expression of DGAT1, but no significant difference was revealed
in its expression in milk from late lactation compared with colostrum. Based on
these results, we suggest that the geometric mean of RPS9, PPP1R11, UXT, and
MRPL39 can be used for normalization of real-time PCR data in milk somatic cells 
of lactating yak, if similar experiments are performed.

Copyright © 2014 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 24342693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Dev Biol. 2013 Nov 1;383(1):15-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.09.005. Epub 2013
Sep 11.

CTR9/PAF1c regulates molecular lineage identity, histone H3K36 trimethylation and
genomic imprinting during preimplantation development.

Zhang K(1), Haversat JM, Mager J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts at
Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Genome-wide epigenetic reprogramming is required for successful preimplantation
development. Inappropriate or deficient chromatin regulation can result in
defective lineage specification and loss of genomic imprinting, compromising
normal development. Here we report that two members of the RNA polymerase II
associated factor, homolog (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) complex (PAF1 complex)
components, Ctr9 and Rtf1, are required during mammalian preimplantation
development. We demonstrate that Ctr9-deficient embryos fail to correctly specify
lineages at the blastocyst stage. Expression of some lineage specific factors is 
markedly reduced in Ctr9 knockdown embryos, including Eomes, Elf5 and Sox2, while
others are inappropriately expressed (Oct4, Nanog, Gata6, Fgf4 and Sox17). We
also show that several imprinted genes (Mest, Peg3, Snrpn and Meg3) are
aberrantly expressed although allele specific DNA methylation is not altered. We 
document a loss of histone H3 lysine 36 trimethylation (H3K36me3) in
Ctr9-deficient embryos and confirm that knockdown of either Setd2 or Rtf1 results
in similar phenotypes. These findings show that the PAF1 complex is required for 
mammalian development, likely through regulation of H3K36me3, and indicate
functional conservation of the PAF1 complex from yeast to mammals in vivo.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24036311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Biol Reprod. 2013 Oct 31;89(4):104. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.110403. Print
2013 Oct.

A genome-wide analysis of open chromatin in human epididymis epithelial cells
reveals candidate regulatory elements for genes coordinating epididymal function.

Bischof JM(1), Gillen AE, Song L, Gosalia N, London D, Furey TS, Crawford GE,
Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center, and
Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine
Chicago, Illinois.

The epithelium lining the epididymis has a pivotal role in ensuring a luminal
environment that can support normal sperm maturation. Many of the individual
genes that encode proteins involved in establishing the epididymal luminal fluid 
are well characterized. They include ion channels, ion exchangers, transporters, 
and solute carriers. However, the molecular mechanisms that coordinate expression
of these genes and modulate their activities in response to biological stimuli
are less well understood. To identify cis-regulatory elements for genes expressed
in human epididymis epithelial cells, we generated genome-wide maps of open
chromatin by DNase-seq. This analysis identified 33,542 epididymis-selective
DNase I hypersensitive sites (DHS), which were not evident in five cell types of 
different lineages. Identification of genes with epididymis-selective DHS at
their promoters revealed gene pathways that are active in immature epididymis
epithelial cells. These include processes correlating with epithelial function
and also others with specific roles in the epididymis, including retinol
metabolism and ascorbate and aldarate metabolism. Peaks of epididymis-selective
chromatin were seen in the androgen receptor gene and the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene, which has a critical role in
regulating ion transport across the epididymis epithelium. In silico prediction
of transcription factor binding sites that were overrepresented in
epididymis-selective DHS identified epithelial transcription factors, including
ELF5 and ELF3, the androgen receptor, Pax2, and Sox9, as components of epididymis
transcriptional networks. Active genes, which are targets of each transcription
factor, reveal important biological processes in the epididymis epithelium.

PMCID: PMC4076396
PMID: 24006278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Reprod Dev. 2013 Oct;80(10):826-39. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22212. Epub 2013 Aug 30.

CDX2 regulates multiple trophoblast genes in bovine trophectoderm CT-1 cells.

Schiffmacher AT(1), Keefer CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
Maryland.

The bovine trophectoderm (TE) undergoes a dramatic morphogenetic transition prior
to uterine endometrial attachment. Many studies have documented
trophoblast-specific gene expression profiles at various pre-attachment stages,
yet genetic interactions within the transitioning TE gene regulatory network are 
not well characterized. During bovine embryogenesis, transcription factors OCT4
and CDX2 are co-expressed during early trophoblast elongation. In this study, the
bovine trophectoderm-derived CT-1 cell line was utilized as a genetic model to
examine the roles of CDX2 and OCT4 within the bovine trophoblast gene regulatory 
network. An RT-PCR screen for TE-lineage transcription factors identified
expression of CDX2, ERRB, ID2, SOX15, ELF5, HAND1, and ASCL2. CT-1 cells also
express a nuclear-localized, 360 amino acid OCT4 ortholog of the
pluripotency-specific human OCT4A. To delineate the roles of CDX2 and OCT4 within
the CT-1 gene network, CDX2 and OCT4 levels were manipulated via overexpression
and siRNA-mediated knockdown. An increase in CDX2 negatively regulated OCT4
expression, but increased expression of IFNT, HAND1, ASCL2, SOX15, and ELF5. A
reduction of CDX2 levels exhibited a reciprocal effect, resulting in decreased
expression of IFNT, HAND1, ASCL2, and SOX15. Both overexpression and knockdown of
CDX2 increased ETS2 transcription. In contrast to CDX2, manipulation of OCT4
levels only revealed a positive autoregulatory mechanism and upregulation of
ASCL2. Together, these results suggest that CDX2 is a core regulator of multiple 
trophoblast genes within CT-1 cells.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23836438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Stem Cells. 2013 Sep;31(9):1954-65. doi: 10.1002/stem.1454.

Constitutive activation of RANK disrupts mammary cell fate leading to
tumorigenesis.

Pellegrini P, Cordero A, Gallego MI, Dougall WC, Muñoz P, Pujana MA,
Gonzalez-Suarez E.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program, Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute, IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain.

Erratum in
    Stem Cells. 2014 Apr;32(4):1057. Purificación, Muñoz [corrected to Muñoz,
Purificación].
    Stem Cells. 2014 Feb;32(2):600. Pasquale, Pellegrini [corrected to Pellegrini,
Pasquale]; Alex, Cordero [corrected to Cordero, Alex]; Marta Ines, Gallego
[corrected to Gallego, Marta Ines ]; William, Dougall C [corrected to Dougall,
William C]; Miguel Angel, Pujana [corrected to Pujana, Miguel Angel]; Eva,
Gonzalez-Suarez [corrected to Gonzalez-Suarez, Eva].

Receptor Activator of NF-kappa B (RANK) pathway controls mammary gland
development in mice but its role in mammary stem cell fate remains undefined. We 
show that constitutive RANK signaling expands luminal and basal mammary
compartments including mammary stem and luminal progenitor cell pools and
interferes with the generation of CD61+ and Sca1+ luminal cells and Elf5
expression. Impaired mammary cell commitment upon RANK overexpression leads to
the accumulation of progenitors including K14+K8+ bipotent cells and the
formation of heterogeneous tumors containing hyperplastic basal, luminal, and
progenitor cells. RANK expression increases in wild-type mammary epithelia with
age and parity, and spontaneous preneoplastic lesions express RANK and accumulate
K14+K8+ cells. In human breast tumors, high RANK expression levels are also
associated with altered mammary differentiation. These results suggest that
increased RANK signaling interferes with mammary cell commitment, contributing to
breast carcinogenesis.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23766243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Anticancer Res. 2013 Apr;33(4):1525-36.

Normal mammary fibroblasts induce reversion of the malignant phenotype in human
primary breast cancer.

Römer AM(1), Lühr I, Klein A, Friedl A, Sebens S, Rösel F, Arnold N, Strauss A,
Jonat W, Bauer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Medical Center
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIM: The tumor microenvironment plays a major role in tumor growth and
progression. Its manipulation can lead to a reversion of the malignant phenotype.
Here we explored the ability of normal mammary fibroblasts (HMFs) to induce
reversion of the malignant phenotype of primary breast carcinoma cells (PBCs) in 
a three-dimensional (3D) context.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: PBCs were isolated from 13 primary breast carcinomas and
cultured in 3D collagen-I gels as mono- or co-culture with HMFs.
RESULTS: In five co-cultures, PBCs exhibited reversion of their malignant
phenotype, whereas PBCs in matched monocultures exhibited disorganized growth.
Reversion, defined as the restoration of the complete baso-apical polarity axis, 
was confirmed with established polarity markers. Secretion of the tissue-specific
glycoprotein MAM-6 into the acinar lumens and deposition of basement membrane
indicated functional differentiation. Gene expression analysis revealed a set of 
differentially regulated genes which possibly affect the reversion process. These
included MAL, ELF5, MAP6, ZMYND11 and SQLE.
CONCLUSION: These findings highlight the significant role of fibroblasts in
regulating the carcinoma phenotype.

PMID: 23564794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nat Commun. 2013;4:1658. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2646.

Ets2-dependent trophoblast signalling is required for gastrulation progression
after primitive streak initiation.

Polydorou C(1), Georgiades P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, University Campus, PO
Box 20537, Nicosia 1678, Cyprus.

Although extraembryonic ectoderm trophoblast signals the embryo for primitive
streak initiation, a prerequisite for gastrulation, it is unknown whether it also
signals for the progression of gastrulation after primitive streak initiation.
Here, using Ets2-/- mice, we show that trophoblast signalling is also required in
vivo for primitive streak elongation, completion of intraembryonic mesoderm
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and the development of anterior primitive
streak derivatives such as the node. We show that Ets2-dependent trophoblast
signalling is required for the maintenance of high levels of Nodal and Wnt3
expression in the epiblast and for the induction of Snail expression in the
primitive streak, between embryonic day 6.3 and 6.7. Within extraembryonic
ectoderm trophoblast, Ets2 maintains the expression of the transcription factors 
Elf5, Cdx2 and Eomes, and that of the signalling molecule Bmp4. We propose a
model that provides a genetic explanation as to how Ets2 in trophoblast mediates 
the progression of gastrulation within the epiblast.

PMID: 23552073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Breast Cancer Res. 2013 Mar 27;15(2):307. doi: 10.1186/bcr3397.

Elf5 - breast cancer's little helper.

Frend HT, Watson CJ.

A variety of transcription factors has been shown to regulate lineage commitment 
in the mammary gland and to be associated with different molecular subtypes of
breast cancer. E74-like factor 5 (Elf5) has now been identified as a marker of
oestrogen receptor status, and high expression correlates with more aggressive
basal cancers and resistance to anti-oestrogens. Manipulation of Elf5 transcript 
levels perturbs the molecular profiles of luminal and basal subtypes,
highlighting the possibility that targeting Elf5 could provide a new approach for
the treatment of basal cancers.

PMCID: PMC3672774
PMID: 23534926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Development. 2013 Apr;140(7):1397-401. doi: 10.1242/dev.088948. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Progesterone drives mammary secretory differentiation via RankL-mediated
induction of Elf5 in luminal progenitor cells.

Lee HJ(1), Gallego-Ortega D, Ledger A, Schramek D, Joshi P, Szwarc MM, Cho C,
Lydon JP, Khokha R, Penninger JM, Ormandy CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, 348 Victoria
Street, and St Vincent's Hospital Clinical School, University of New South Wales,
Darlinghurst NSW 2010, Australia.

Progesterone-RankL paracrine signaling has been proposed as a driver of stem cell
expansion in the mammary gland, and Elf5 is essential for the differentiation of 
mammary epithelial progenitor cells. We demonstrate that Elf5 expression is
induced by progesterone and that Elf5 and progesterone cooperate to promote
alveolar development. The progesterone receptor and Elf5 are expressed in a
mutually exclusive pattern, and we identify RankL as the paracrine mediator of
the effects of progesterone on Elf5 expression in CD61+ progenitor cells and
their consequent differentiation. Blockade of RankL action prevented
progesterone-induced side branching and the expansion of Elf5(+) mature luminal
cells. These findings describe a mechanism by which steroid hormones can produce 
the expansion of steroid hormone receptor-negative mammary epithelial cells.

PMID: 23462470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl). 2014 Feb;98(1):84-95. doi: 10.1111/jpn.12039.
Epub 2013 Feb 13.

Gene expression analysis of protein synthesis pathways in bovine mammary
epithelial cells purified from milk during lactation and short-term restricted
feeding.

Sigl T(1), Meyer HH, Wiedemann S.

Author information: 
(1)Physiology Weihenstephan, ZIEL, Technische Universitaet Muenchen, Freising,
Germany.

The objective of the study was to investigate selected key regulatory pathways of
milk protein biosynthesis in primary bovine mammary epithelial cells (MECs) of
dairy cows during the first 155 days of lactation. In addition, cows were exposed
to feed restriction for a short period (FR) during different stages of lactation 
(week 4 and 21 pp) to study adjustment processes of molecular protein
biosynthesis to metabolic challenge. Morning milk samples from twenty-four
Holstein-Friesian cows were collected throughout the experimental period (n = 10 
per animal). MEC from raw milk were purified using an immunomagnetic separation
technique and used for real-time quantitative PCR analyses. As was seen in
transcript abundances of all major milk proteins, mRNA levels of E74-like factor 
5 (ELF5), an enhancer of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 
action, concomitantly decreased towards mid-lactation. Expression of ELF5 as well
as of all milk protein genes showed a similar increase during FR in early
lactation. Occasional changes in expression could be seen in other Janus kinase
(JAK)/STAT factors and in mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway elements. 
Amino acid transfer and glucose transporter and the ß-casein expression were also
partially affected. In conclusion, our findings suggest a pivotal role of the
transcription factor ELF5 in milk protein mRNA expression with complementary
JAK/STAT and mTOR signalling for the regulation of protein biosynthesis in the
bovine mammary gland.

© 2013 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 23402545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Nat Genet. 2013 Mar;45(3):325-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.2553. Epub 2013 Feb 10.

Endogenous retroviruses function as species-specific enhancer elements in the
placenta.

Chuong EB(1), Rumi MA, Soares MJ, Baker JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, USA. echuong@stanford.edu

The mammalian placenta is remarkably distinct between species, suggesting a
history of rapid evolutionary diversification. To gain insight into the molecular
drivers of placental evolution, we compared biochemically predicted enhancers in 
mouse and rat trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) and found that species-specific
enhancers are highly enriched for endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) on a genome-wide
level. One of these ERV families, RLTR13D5, contributes hundreds of
mouse-specific histone H3 lysine 4 monomethylation (H3K4me1)- and histone H3
lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac)-defined enhancers that functionally bind Cdx2,
Eomes and Elf5-core factors that define the TSC regulatory network. Furthermore, 
we show that RLTR13D5 is capable of driving gene expression in rat placental
cells. Analysis in other tissues shows that species-specific ERV enhancer
activity is generally restricted to hypomethylated tissues, suggesting that
tissues permissive for ERV activity gain access to an otherwise silenced source
of regulatory variation. Overall, our results implicate ERV enhancer co-option as
a mechanism underlying the extensive evolutionary diversification of placental
development.

PMCID: PMC3789077
PMID: 23396136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 8;431(2):197-202. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.12.135. Epub 2013 Jan 8.

Roles of CDX2 and EOMES in human induced trophoblast progenitor cells.

Chen Y(1), Wang K, Gong YG, Khoo SK, Leach R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, College of
Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI 49503, USA.
ying.chen@hc.msu.edu

Abnormal trophoblast lineage proliferation and differentiation in early pregnancy
have been associated with the pathogenesis of placenta diseases of pregnancy.
However, there is still a gap in understanding the molecular mechanisms of early 
placental development due to the limited primary trophoblast cultures and
fidelity of immortalized trophoblast lines. Trophoblasts stem (TS) cells, an in
vitro model of trophectoderm that can differentiate into syncytiotrophoblasts and
extravillous trophoblasts, can be an attractive tool for early pregnancy
research. TS cells are well established in mouse but not in humans due to
insufficient knowledge of which trophoblast lineage-specific transcription
factors are involved in human trophectoderm (TE) proliferation and
differentiation. Here, we applied induced pluripotent stem cell technique to
investigate the human trophoblast lineage-specific transcription factors. We
established human induced trophoblast progenitor (iTP) cells by direct
reprogramming the fibroblasts with a pool of mouse trophoblast lineage-specific
transcription factors consisting of CDX2, EOMES, and ELF5. The human iTP cells
exhibit epithelial morphology and can be maintained in vitro for more than 2
months. Gene expression profile of these cells was tightly clustered with human
trophectoderm but not with human neuron progenitor cells, mesenchymal stem cells,
or endoderm cells. These cells are capable of differentiating into cells with an 
invasive capacity, suggesting extravillous trophoblasts. They also form
multi-nucleated cells which secrete human chorionic gonadotropin and estradiol,
consistent with a syncytiotrophoblast phenotype. Our results provide the evidence
that transcription factors CDX2 and EOMES may play critical roles in human iTP
cell generation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3570630
PMID: 23313847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. PLoS Biol. 2012;10(12):e1001461. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001461. Epub 2012 Dec
27.

ELF5 suppresses estrogen sensitivity and underpins the acquisition of
antiestrogen resistance in luminal breast cancer.

Kalyuga M(1), Gallego-Ortega D, Lee HJ, Roden DL, Cowley MJ, Caldon CE, Stone A, 
Allerdice SL, Valdes-Mora F, Launchbury R, Statham AL, Armstrong N, Alles MC,
Young A, Egger A, Au W, Piggin CL, Evans CJ, Ledger A, Brummer T, Oakes SR,
Kaplan W, Gee JM, Nicholson RI, Sutherland RL, Swarbrick A, Naylor MJ, Clark SJ, 
Carroll JS, Ormandy CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program and The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Garvan Institute of
Medical Research, Darlinghurst, NSW, Australia.

We have previously shown that during pregnancy the E-twenty-six (ETS)
transcription factor ELF5 directs the differentiation of mammary progenitor cells
toward the estrogen receptor (ER)-negative and milk producing cell lineage,
raising the possibility that ELF5 may suppress the estrogen sensitivity of breast
cancers. To test this we constructed inducible models of ELF5 expression in ER
positive luminal breast cancer cells and interrogated them using transcript
profiling and chromatin immunoprecipitation of DNA followed by DNA sequencing
(ChIP-Seq). ELF5 suppressed ER and FOXA1 expression and broadly suppressed
ER-driven patterns of gene expression including sets of genes distinguishing the 
luminal molecular subtype. Direct transcriptional targets of ELF5, which included
FOXA1, EGFR, and MYC, accurately classified a large cohort of breast cancers into
their intrinsic molecular subtypes, predicted ER status with high precision, and 
defined groups with differential prognosis. Knockdown of ELF5 in basal breast
cancer cell lines suppressed basal patterns of gene expression and produced a
shift in molecular subtype toward the claudin-low and normal-like groups. Luminal
breast cancer cells that acquired resistance to the antiestrogen Tamoxifen showed
greatly elevated levels of ELF5 and its transcriptional signature, and became
dependent on ELF5 for proliferation, compared to the parental cells. Thus ELF5
provides a key transcriptional determinant of breast cancer molecular subtype by 
suppression of estrogen sensitivity in luminal breast cancer cells and promotion 
of basal characteristics in basal breast cancer cells, an action that may be
utilised to acquire antiestrogen resistance.

PMCID: PMC3531499
PMID: 23300383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Thromb Haemost. 2013 Mar;11(3):521-8. doi: 10.1111/jth.12120.

Genetic determinants of plasma ß2-glycoprotein I levels: a genome-wide
association study in extended pedigrees from Spain.

Athanasiadis G(1), Sabater-Lleal M, Buil A, Souto JC, Borrell M, Lathrop M,
Watkins H, Almasy L, Hamsten A, Soria JM.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Genomics of Complex Diseases, Research Institute, Hospital de Santa
Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: ß2 -Glycoprotein I (ß2 -GPI), also designated apolipoprotein H, is a 
50-kDa protein that circulates in blood at high concentrations, playing important
roles in autoimmune diseases, hemostasis, atherogenesis, and angiogenesis, as
well as in host defense against bacteria and in protein/cellular waste removal.
Plasma ß2 -GPI levels have a significant genetic component (heritability of ~
80%).
OBJECTIVES: To present the results of a genome-wide association study for plasma 
ß2 -GPI levels in a set of extended pedigrees from the Genetic Analysis of
Idiopathic Thrombophilia (GAIT) Project.
PATIENTS/METHODS: A total of 306 individuals for whom ß2 -GPI plasma measurements
were available were typed for 307,984 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with
the Infinium 317k Beadchip (Illumina). Association with the ß2 -GPI phenotype was
investigated through variance component analysis, and the most significant
results were followed up for association with coronary artery disease (CAD) in an
independent in silico analysis involving 5765 CAD cases from the PROCARDIS
Project and 7264 controls from the PROCARDIS Project and the Wellcome Trust Case 
Control Consortium (WTCCC) collection.
RESULTS: After correction for multiple testing, three SNPs located in/around two 
genes (ELF5 and SCUBE2) reached genome-wide significance. Moreover, an SNP in the
APOH gene showed suggestive association with the ß2 -GPI phenotype. Some of the
identified genes are plausible biological candidates, as they are actually or
potentially involved in inflammatory processes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results represent a first step towards identifying common
variants reflecting the genetic architecture influencing plasma ß2 -GPI levels,
and warrant further validation by functional experiments, as the functions of
some of the discovered loci are still unknown.

© 2013 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

PMID: 23279374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Biol Open. 2012 Apr 15;1(4):341-52. doi: 10.1242/bio.2012513. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

NuRD-dependent DNA methylation prevents ES cells from accessing a trophectoderm
fate.

Latos PA(1), Helliwell C, Mosaku O, Dudzinska DA, Stubbs B, Berdasco M, Esteller 
M, Hendrich B.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Stem Cell Research, MRC Centre for Stem Cell Biology
and Regenerative Medicine, University of Cambridge , Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge, CB2 1QR , UK ; Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus ,
Cambridge, CB22 3AT , UK.

Embryonic Stem (ES) cells are able to give rise to the three germ layers of the
embryo but are prevented from contributing to the trophoblast. The molecular
nature of this barrier between embryonic and trophectodermal cell fates is not
clear, but is known to involve DNA methylation. Here we demonstrate that the
Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylation (NuRD) co-repressor complex maintains the
developmental barrier between embryonic and trophectodermal cell fates by
maintaining transcriptional silencing of trophectoderm determinant genes in ES
cells. We further show that NuRD activity facilitates DNA methylation of several 
of its target promoters, where it acts non-redundantly with DNA methylation to
enforce transcriptional silencing. NuRD-deficient ES cells fail to completely
silence expression of the trophectoderm determinant genes Elf5 and Eomes, but
this alone is not sufficient to induce transdifferentiation towards the
trophectoderm fate. Rather this leaves ES cells capable of activating expression 
of trophectoderm-specific genes in response to appropriate extracellular signals,
enabling them to commit to a trophectodermal cell fate. Our findings clarify the 
molecular nature of the developmental barrier between the embryonic and
trophoblast cell fates, and establish a role for NuRD activity in specifying
sites for de novo DNA methylation.

PMCID: PMC3509455
PMID: 23213424  [PubMed]


63. Int J Cancer. 2013 Mar 15;132(6):1311-22. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27941. Epub 2012 Dec
13.

Transcription factors link mouse WAP-T mammary tumors with human breast cancer.

Otto B(1), Streichert T, Wegwitz F, Gevensleben H, Klätschke K, Wagener C,
Deppert W, Tolstonog GV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Center for Diagnostic, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, D-20246 Hamburg, Germany. b.otto@uke.uni-hamburg.de

Mouse models are important tools to decipher the molecular mechanisms of mammary 
carcinogenesis and to mimic the respective human disease. Despite sharing common 
phenotypic and genetic features, the proper translation of murine models to human
breast cancer remains a challenging task. In a previous study we showed that in
the SV40 transgenic WAP-T mice an active Met-pathway and epithelial-mesenchymal
characteristics distinguish low- and high-grade mammary carcinoma. To assign
these murine tumors to corresponding human tumors we here incorporated the
analysis of expression of transcription factor (TF) coding genes and show that
thereby a more accurate interspecies translation can be achieved. We describe a
novel cross-species translation procedure and demonstrate that expression of
unsupervised selected TFs, such as ELF5, HOXA5 and TFCP2L1, can clearly
distinguish between the human molecular breast cancer subtypes--or as, for
example, expression of TFAP2B between yet unclassified subgroups. By integrating 
different levels of information like histology, gene set enrichment, expression
of differentiation markers and TFs we conclude that tumors in WAP-T mice exhibit 
similarities to both, human basal-like and non-basal-like subtypes. We
furthermore suggest that the low- and high-grade WAP-T tumor phenotypes might
arise from distinct cells of tumor origin. Our results underscore the importance 
of TFs as common cross-species denominators in the regulatory networks underlying
mammary carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 23161608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Endocrinol. 2013 Jan 18;216(2):245-63. doi: 10.1530/JOE-12-0395. Print 2013
Feb.

In utero and lactational exposure to vinclozolin and genistein induces genomic
changes in the rat mammary gland.

El Sheikh Saad H(1), Toullec A, Vacher S, Pocard M, Bieche I, Perrot-Applanat M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U965, UFR Médecine, Hôpital Lariboisière; Université Paris 7, 41 Bd de 
la chapelle, F-75475 Paris Cedex 10, France Laboratoire d'Oncogénétique, Institut
Curie Hôpital René Huguenin, St-Cloud F-92210, France.

Exposure to low doses of environmental estrogens such as bisphenol A and
genistein (G) alters mammary gland development. The effects of environmental
anti-androgens, such as the fungicide vinclozolin (V), on mammary gland
morphogenesis are unknown. We previously reported that perinatal exposure to G,
V, and the GV combination causes histological changes in the mammary gland during
the peripubertal period, suggesting alterations to the peripubertal hormone
response. We now investigate whether perinatal exposure to these compounds alters
the gene expression profiles of the developing glands to identify the
dysregulated signaling pathways and the underlying mechanisms. G, V, or GV
(1<U+200A>mg/kg body weight per day) was added to diet of Wistar rats, from conception
to weaning; female offspring mammary glands were collected at postnatal days
(PNDs) 35 and 50. Genes displaying differential expression and belonging to
different functional categories were validated by quantitative PCR and
immunocytochemistry. At PND35, G had little effect; the slight changes noted were
in genes related to morphogenesis. The changes following exposure to V concerned 
the functional categories associated with development (Cldn1, Krt17, and Sprr1a),
carbohydrate metabolism, and steroidogenesis. The GV mixture upregulated genes
(Krt17, Pvalb, and Tnni2) involved in muscle development, indicating effects on
myoepithelial cells during mammary gland morphogenesis. Importantly, at PND50,
cycling females exposed to GV showed an increase in the expression of genes
(Csn2, Wap, and Elf5) related to differentiation, consistent with the previously 
reported abnormal lobuloalveolar development previously described. Thus,
perinatal exposure to GV alters the mammary gland hormone response differently at
PND35 (puberty) and in animals with established cycles.

PMID: 23160963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Nat Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;14(11):1122-3. doi: 10.1038/ncb2616.

Setting Snail2's pace during EMT.

Mathsyaraja H(1), Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology Program, Ohio State University, 
and the OSU Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a fundamental process in both
development and cancer progression. The transcription factor Elf5 is now reported
as an upstream regulator of the key EMT inducer Snail2, and is shown to regulate 
the earliest known rewiring events required for tumour cell invasiveness and
metastasis.

PMID: 23131919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. BMC Dev Biol. 2012 Nov 6;12:33. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-12-33.

Global gene expression of the inner cell mass and trophectoderm of the bovine
blastocyst.

Ozawa M(1), Sakatani M, Yao J, Shanker S, Yu F, Yamashita R, Wakabayashi S, Nakai
K, Dobbs KB, Sudano MJ, Farmerie WG, Hansen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences and D,H, Barron Reproductive and Perinatal
Biology Research Program, PO Box 110910, Gainesville, FL 32611-0910, USA.

BACKGROUND: The first distinct differentiation event in mammals occurs at the
blastocyst stage when totipotent blastomeres differentiate into either
pluripotent inner cell mass (ICM) or multipotent trophectoderm (TE). Here we
determined, for the first time, global gene expression patterns in the ICM and TE
isolated from bovine blastocysts. The ICM and TE were isolated from blastocysts
harvested at day 8 after insemination by magnetic activated cell sorting, and
cDNA sequenced using the SOLiD 4.0 system.
RESULTS: A total of 870 genes were differentially expressed between ICM and TE.
Several genes characteristic of ICM (for example, NANOG, SOX2, and STAT3) and TE 
(ELF5, GATA3, and KRT18) in mouse and human showed similar patterns in bovine.
Other genes, however, showed differences in expression between ICM and TE that
deviates from the expected based on mouse and human.
CONCLUSION: Analysis of gene expression indicated that differentiation of
blastomeres of the morula-stage embryo into the ICM and TE of the blastocyst is
accompanied by differences between the two cell lineages in expression of genes
controlling metabolic processes, endocytosis, hatching from the zona pellucida,
paracrine and endocrine signaling with the mother, and genes supporting the
changes in cellular architecture, stemness, and hematopoiesis necessary for
development of the trophoblast.

PMCID: PMC3514149
PMID: 23126590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Dev Biol. 2013 Jan 15;373(2):359-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.10.026. Epub 2012 
Nov 1.

Depletion of Suds3 reveals an essential role in early lineage specification.

Zhang K(1), Dai X, Wallingford MC, Mager J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts at
Amherst, 455, 661 N. Pleasant Street, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Preimplantation development culminates with the emergence of three distinct
populations: the inner cell mass, primitive endoderm and trophectoderm. Here, we 
define the mechanisms underlying the requirement of Suds3 in
pre/peri-implantation development. Suds3 knockdown blastocysts exhibit a failure 
of both trophectoderm proliferation as well as a conspicuous lack of primitive
endoderm. Expression of essential lineage factors Nanog, Sox2, Cdx2, Eomes, Elf5 
and Sox17 are severely reduced in the absence of Suds3. Importantly, we document 
deficient FGF4/ERK signaling and show that exogenous FGF4 rescues primitive
endoderm formation and trophectoderm proliferation in Suds3 knockdown
blastocysts. We also show that Hdac1 knockdown reduces Sox2/FGF4/ERK signaling in
blastocysts. Collectively, these data define a role for Suds3 in activation of
FGF4/ERK signaling and determine an essential molecular role of Suds3/Sin3/HDAC
complexes in lineage specification in vivo.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23123966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Nat Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;14(11):1212-22. doi: 10.1038/ncb2607. Epub 2012 Oct 21.

Elf5 inhibits the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in mammary gland development 
and breast cancer metastasis by transcriptionally repressing Snail2.

Chakrabarti R(1), Hwang J, Andres Blanco M, Wei Y, Lukaciin M, Romano RA,
Smalley K, Liu S, Yang Q, Ibrahim T, Mercatali L, Amadori D, Haffty BG, Sinha S, 
Kang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
08540, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Dec;12(12):795.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a complex process that occurs
during organogenesis and in cancer metastasis. Despite recent progress, the
molecular pathways connecting the physiological and pathological functions of EMT
need to be better defined. Here we show that the transcription factor Elf5, a key
regulator of mammary gland alveologenesis, controls EMT in both mammary gland
development and metastasis. We uncovered this role for Elf5 through analyses of
Elf5 conditional knockout animals, various in vitro and in vivo models of EMT and
metastasis, an MMTV-neu transgenic model of mammary tumour progression and
clinical breast cancer samples. Furthermore, we demonstrate that Elf5 suppresses 
EMT by directly repressing the transcription of Snail2, a master regulator of
mammary stem cells and a known inducer of EMT. These findings establish Elf5 not 
only as a key cell lineage regulator during normal mammary gland development, but
also as a suppressor of EMT and metastasis in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3500637
PMID: 23086238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Dev Dyn. 2012 Nov;241(11):1651-64. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23851. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Ectopic expression of Fgf3 leads to aberrant lineage segregation in the mouse
parthenote preimplantation embryos.

Chen YH(1), Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Aerospace and Undersea Medicine, National Defense
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Parthenogenetic mammalian embryos were reported to die in utero no
later than the 25-somite stage due to abnormal development of both embryonic and 
extraembryonic lineages. Interestingly, it has been shown that parthenogenetic
ICM cells tend to differentiate more into primitive endoderm cells and less into 
epiblast and ES cells. Hence we are interested in studying the molecular
mechanisms underlying lineage defects of parthenotes.
RESULTS: We found that parthenote inner cell masses (ICMs) contained decreased
numbers of Sox2(+) /Nanog(+) epiblast cells but increased numbers of Gata4(+)
primitive endoderm cells, indicating an unusual lineage segregation. We
demonstrate for the first time that the increased Gata4 level in parthenotes may 
be explained by the strong up-regulation of Fgf3 and Fgfr2 phosphorylation.
Inhibition of Fgfr2 activation by SU5402 in parthenotes restored normal Nanog and
Gata4 levels without affecting Fgf3, indicating that Fgf3 is upstream of Fgfr2
activation. In parthenote trophectoderm, we detected normal Cdx2 but ectopic
Gata4 expression and reduced Elf5 and Tbr2(Eomes) levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our work provides for the first time the insight
into the molecular mechanisms of the developmental defects of parthenogenetic
embryos in both the trophectoderm and ICM.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22930543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Stem Cells. 2012 Jul;30(7):1496-508. doi: 10.1002/stem.1112.

Elf5 regulates mammary gland stem/progenitor cell fate by influencing notch
signaling.

Chakrabarti R(1), Wei Y, Romano RA, DeCoste C, Kang Y, Sinha S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08554,
USA. rchakrab@princeton.edu

The transcription factor E74-like factor 5 (Elf5) functions downstream of the
prolactin receptor signaling pathway and plays an important role in mammary gland
development. Using conditional mouse knockouts, we have previously shown that
Elf5-null mammary glands exhibit a complete failure of alveologenesis during
pregnancy. The Elf5-null developmental phenotype is mediated through alteration
in the expression of several critical genes involved in alveologenesis,
particularly those belonging to the JAK/STAT pathway. Here, we demonstrate that
in addition to regulating terminal differentiation of alveolar cells, Elf5 also
plays a critical role in determining cell fate and in regulating the
stem/progenitor function of the mammary epithelium. Targeted deletion of Elf5 in 
the mammary glands leads to accumulation of cell types with dual luminal/basal
properties such as coexpression of K8 and K14 and an increase in CD61(+) luminal 
progenitor population during pregnancy. Further interrogation suggests that the
abnormal increase in K14(+) K8(+) cells may represent the CD61(+) luminal
progenitors blocked in differentiation. Remarkably, Elf5 deficiency in mammary
epithelium also triggers an increase of adult mammary stem activity as evidenced 
by the accumulation of mammary stem cell (MaSC)-enriched cell population in both 
pregnant and virgin mice and further confirmed by mammosphere and transplantation
assays. Additional support for this phenotype comes from the enriched MaSC gene
signature based on transcriptomic analysis of the Elf5-null mammary gland.
Finally, our biochemical studies suggest that Elf5 loss leads to hyperactivation 
of the Notch signaling pathway, which might constitute in part, the underlying
molecular mechanism for the altered cell lineage decisions in Elf5-null mammary
epithelial cells.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 22523003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Jun;23(6):292-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2012.02.006.
Epub 2012 Mar 30.

Elf5, hormones and cell fate.

Lee HJ(1), Ormandy CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, 384 Victoria
St., Darlinghurst, NSW 2010, Australia.

Recent elucidation of the stem and progenitor cell hierarchies that operate
during normal tissue and organ development has provided a foundation for the
development of new insights into the disease process. These hierarchies are
established by genetic mechanisms, which specify and determine cell fate and act 
as cell-clade gatekeepers, upon which all multicellular organisms depend for
viability. Perturbation of this gatekeeper function characterizes developmentally
based diseases, such as cancer. Here, the emerging gatekeeper and master
regulatory roles of the ETS transcription factor Elf5 in several diverse
developmental scenarios is reviewed, and how this function intersects with
hormonal and growth factor mediated regulation of these processes is shown.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22464677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Epigenetics. 2012 Feb;7(2):173-82. doi: 10.4161/epi.7.2.18962.

Trophoblast-specific DNA methylation occurs after the segregation of the
trophectoderm and inner cell mass in the mouse periimplantation embryo.

Nakanishi MO(1), Hayakawa K, Nakabayashi K, Hata K, Shiota K, Tanaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Resource Sciences/Veterinary Medical Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The first cell differentiation in the mammalian development separates the
trophoblast and embryonic cell lineages, resulting in the formation of the
trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass (ICM) in blastocysts. Although a lower
level of global DNA methylation in the genome of the TE compared with ICM has
been suggested, the dynamics of the DNA methylation profile during TE/ICM
differentiation has not been elucidated. To address this issue, first we
identified tissue-dependent and differentially methylated regions (T-DMRs)
between trophoblast stem (TS) and embryonic stem (ES) cells. Most of these TS-ES 
T-DMRs were also methylated differentially between trophoblast and embryonic
tissues of embryonic day (E) 6.5 mouse embryos. Furthermore, we found that the
human genomic regions homologous to mouse TS-ES T-DMRs were methylated
differentially between human placental tissues and ES cells. Collectively, we
defined them as cell-lineage-based T-DMRs between trophoblast and embryonic cell 
lineages (T-E T-DMRs). Then, we examined TE and ICM cells isolated from mouse
E3.5 blastocysts. Interestingly, all T-DMRs examined, including the Elf5, Pou5f1 
and Nanog loci, were in the nearly unmethylated status in both TE and ICM and
exhibited no differences. The present results suggest that the establishment of
DNA methylation profiles specific to each cell lineage follows the first
morphological specification. Together with previous reports on asymmetry of
histone modifications between TE and ICM, the results of the current study imply 
that histone modifications function as landmarks for setting up
cell-lineage-specific differential DNA methylation profiles.

PMID: 22395467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Jun;133(2):617-34. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1811-9. 
Epub 2011 Oct 25.

Life stage differences in mammary gland gene expression profile in non-human
primates.

Stute P(1), Sielker S, Wood CE, Register TC, Lees CJ, Dewi FN, Williams JK,
Wagner JD, Stefenelli U, Cline JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Endocrinology and Reproductive Medicine, University 
Women's Hospital, Berne, Switzerland. petra.stute@insel.ch

Breast cancer (BC) is the most common malignancy of women in the developed world.
To better understand its pathogenesis, knowledge of normal breast development is 
crucial, as BC is the result of disregulation of physiologic processes. The aim
of this study was to investigate the impact of reproductive life stages on the
transcriptional profile of the mammary gland in a primate model. Comparative
transcriptomic analyses were carried out using breast tissues from 28 female
cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicularis) at the following life stages:
prepubertal (n = 5), adolescent (n = 4), adult luteal (n = 5), pregnant (n = 6), 
lactating (n = 3), and postmenopausal (n = 5). Mammary gland RNA was hybridized
to Affymetrix GeneChip(®) Rhesus Macaque Genome Arrays. Differential gene
expression was analyzed using ANOVA and cluster analysis. Hierarchical cluster
analysis revealed distinct separation of life stage groups. More than 2,225
differentially expressed mRNAs were identified. Gene families or pathways that
changed across life stages included those related to estrogen and androgen (ESR1,
PGR, TFF1, GREB1, AR, 17HSDB2, 17HSDB7, STS, HSD11B1, AKR1C4), prolactin (PRLR,
ELF5, STAT5, CSN1S1), insulin-like growth factor signaling (IGF1, IGFBP1,
IGFBP5), extracellular matrix (POSTN, TGFB1, COL5A2, COL12A1, FOXC1, LAMC1,
PDGFRA, TGFB2), and differentiation (CD24, CD29, CD44, CD61, ALDH1, BRCA1, FOXA1,
POSTN, DICER1, LIG4, KLF4, NOTCH2, RIF1, BMPR1A, TGFB2). Pregnancy and lactation 
displayed distinct patterns of gene expression. ESR1 and IGF1 were significantly 
higher in the adolescent compared to the adult animals, whereas differentiation
pathways were overrepresented in adult animals and pregnancy-associated life
stages. Few individual genes were distinctly different in postmenopausal animals.
Our data demonstrate characteristic patterns of gene expression during breast
development. Several of the pathways activated during pubertal development have
been implicated in cancer development and metastasis, supporting the idea that
other developmental markers may have application as biomarkers for BC.

PMCID: PMC3822905
PMID: 22037779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Dev Biol. 2011 Dec 15;360(2):343-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.007. Epub 2011 
Oct 12.

Elf5 regulation in the trophectoderm.

Pearton DJ(1), Broadhurst R, Donnison M, Pfeffer PL.

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch Crown Research Institute, Hamilton, 3214, New Zealand.

Mouse Elf5 is expressed exclusively in the trophectoderm from the late blastocyst
stage to postgastrulation. We demonstrate here that the proximal promoter is used
for trophectoderm expression but is not sufficient on its own. In transgenic
assays, deletion of a differentially methylated region (DMR) within the promoter 
has no effect on the activation and maintenance of trophectoderm expression and
does not result in ectopic activity. Two redundant enhancers drive Elf5
expression to the extraembryonic ectoderm and ectoplacental cone. The enhancers, 
located in the 5' half of intron 1 and 3' half of intron 2, require the presence 
of 1.8kbp, although not the DMR, of the endogenous proximal promoter for optimal 
activity. These trophectoderm enhancers are mouse specific. A cattle Elf5 BAC
reporter transgene is not expressed in mouse trophectoderm although it is
expressed in skin, a known foetal domain of mouse Elf5 expression. The
established importance of Elf5 for mouse trophectoderm at pre- and
perigastrulation stages is not a conserved mammalian feature as Elf5 expression
localises to embryonic as opposed to trophectodermal ectoderm in cattle.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22020251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Oct 12;13(5):220. doi: 10.1186/bcr2921.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 as a key signaling pathway in 
normal mammary gland developmental biology and breast cancer.

Furth PA(1), Nakles RE, Millman S, Diaz-Cruz ES, Cabrera MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, 3970 Reservoir Rd NW, Research Building, Room 520A, Washington DC
20057, USA. paf3@georgetown.edu

STAT5 consists of two proteins, STAT5A/B, that impact mammary cell
differentiation, proliferation, and survival. In normal development, STAT5
expression and activity are regulated by prolactin signaling with JAK2/ELF5, EGF 
signaling networks that include c-Src, and growth hormone, insulin growth factor,
estrogen, and progesterone signaling pathways. In cancer, erythropoietin
signaling can also regulate STAT5. Activation levels are influenced by AKT,
caveolin, PIKE-A, Pak1, c-Myb, Brk, beta-integrin, dystroglycan, other STATs, and
STAT pathway molecules JAK1, Shp2, and SOCS. TGF-ß and PTPN9 can downregulate
prolactin- and EGF-mediated STAT5 activation, respectively. IGF, AKT, RANKL,
cyclin D1, BCL6, and HSP90A lie downstream of STAT5.

PMCID: PMC3262193
PMID: 22018398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Epigenetics. 2011 Sep 1;6(9):1149-61. doi: 10.4161/epi.6.9.16954. Epub 2011 Sep
1.

Epigenetic regulation of gene expression in porcine epiblast, hypoblast,
trophectoderm and epiblast-derived neural progenitor cells.

Gao Y(1), Jammes H, Rasmussen MA, Oestrup O, Beaujean N, Hall V, Hyttel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Animal and Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. ygao000@gmail.com

After fertilization, lineage specification is governed by a complicated molecular
network in which permissiveness and repression of expression of pluripotency- and
differentiation-associated genes are regulated by epigenetic modifications. DNA
methylation operates as a very stable repressive mark in this process. In this
study, we investigated the relationship between DNA methylation and expression of
pluripotency-associated genes (OCT4, NANOG and SOX2), a trophectoderm
(TE)-specific gene (ELF5), and genes associated with neural differentiation (SOX2
and VIMENTIN) in porcine Day 10 (E10) epiblast, hypoblast, and TE as well as in
epiblast-derived neural progenitor cells (NPCs). We found that OCT4, NANOG, and
SOX2 were highly expressed in the epiblast and hypoblast, while VIMENTIN was only
highly expressed in the epiblast. Moreover, low expression of OCT4, NANOG, SOX2
and VIMENTIN was noted in the TE. Most CpG sites of OCT4, NANOG, SOX2 and
VIMENTIN displayed low methylation levels in the epiblast and hypoblast and,
strikingly, also in the TE. Hence, the expression patterns of these genes were
not directly related to levels of DNA methylation in the TE in contrast to the
situation in the mouse. In contrast, ELF5 was exclusively expressed in the TE and
was correspondingly hypomethylated in this tissue. In NPCs, we observed
down-regulation of NANOG and OCT4 expression, which correlated with
hypermethylation of their promoters, whereas VIMENTIN displayed up-regulation in 
accordance with hypomethylation of its promoter. In conclusion, DNA methylation
is an inconsistently operating epigenetic mechanism in porcine E10 blastocysts,
whereas in porcine epiblast-derived NPCs, expression of pluripotency-associated
and differentiation genes appear to be regulated by this modification.

PMID: 21975513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Stem Cells. 2011 Oct;29(10):1611-9. doi: 10.1002/stem.706.

Lineage specific methylation of the Elf5 promoter in mammary epithelial cells.

Lee HJ(1), Hinshelwood RA, Bouras T, Gallego-Ortega D, Valdés-Mora F, Blazek K,
Visvader JE, Clark SJ, Ormandy CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst,
New South Wales, Australia. heather.lee@garvan.org.au

Recent characterization of mammary stem and progenitor cells has improved our
understanding of the transcriptional network that coordinates mammary
development; however, little is known about the mechanisms that enforce lineage
commitment and prevent transdifferentiation in the mammary gland. The E-twenty
six transcription factor Elf5 forces the differentiation of mammary luminal
progenitor cells to establish the milk producing alveolar lineage. Methylation of
the Elf5 promoter has been proposed to act as a lineage gatekeeper during
embryonic development. We used bisulphite sequencing to investigate in detail
whether Elf5 promoter methylation plays a role in lineage commitment during
mammary development. An increase in Elf5 expression was associated with
decreasing Elf5 promoter methylation in differentiating HC11 mammary cells.
Similarly, purified mammary epithelial cells from mice had increased Elf5
expression and decreased promoter methylation during pregnancy. Finally, analysis
of epithelial subpopulations revealed that the Elf5 promoter is methylated and
silenced in the basal, stem cell-containing population relative to luminal cells.
These results demonstrate that Elf5 promoter methylation is lineage-specific and 
developmentally regulated in the mammary gland in vivo, and suggest that loss of 
Elf5 methylation specifies the mammary luminal lineage, while continued Elf5
methylation maintains the stem cell and myoepithelial lineages.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21823211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Twin Res Hum Genet. 2011 Aug;14(4):316-22. doi: 10.1375/twin.14.4.316.

The Ets transcription factor ELF5 functions as a tumor suppressor in the kidney.

Lapinskas EJ(1), Svobodova S, Davis ID, Cebon J, Hertzog PJ, Pritchard MA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of Medical 
Research, Monash University, Australia.

Renal cell carcinoma is an important clinical disease with poorly understood
etiology. ELF5 is an epithelial-specific member of the Ets family of
transcription factors, characterized by the 80 amino acid Ets domain that binds
the purine-rich GGAA/T Ets motif found in the promoter regions of a variety of
genes. Since ELF5 is highly expressed in kidney and has been postulated to
function as a tumor suppressor, at least in the context of the breast, we
investigated its role in kidney cancer. In renal cell carcinoma ELF5 expression
was consistently decreased in tumor samples versus normal. ELF5 mRNA was
decreased in 94% of lesions tested and ELF5 protein was undetectable in 40/40
kidney-derived carcinomas. Re-expression of the ELF5 gene in 786-O renal
carcinoma cells suppressed their tumorigenic capacity in vitro and in vivo. This 
work is the first to suggest that ELF5 has tumor suppressor activity in the
kidney.

PMID: 21787113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Biol Reprod. 2011 Oct;85(4):779-87. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.092809. Epub 2011
Jul 6.

Generation of colonies of induced trophoblast cells during standard reprogramming
of porcine fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells.

Ezashi T(1), Matsuyama H, Telugu BP, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Bond Life Sciences Center and Division of Animal Sciences, University of
Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.

During reprogramming of porcine mesenchymal cells with a four-factor
(POU5F1/SOX2/KLF4/MYC) mixture of vectors, a fraction of the colonies had an
atypical phenotype and arose earlier than the recognizable porcine induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cell colonies. Within days after each passage, patches of 
cells with an epithelial phenotype formed raised domes, particularly under 20%
O(2) conditions. Relative to gene expression of the iPS cells, there was
up-regulation of genes for transcription factors associated with trophoblast (TR)
lineage emergence, e.g., GATA2, PPARG, MSX2, DLX3, HAND1, GCM1, CDX2, ID2, ELF5, 
TCFAP2C, and TEAD4 and for genes required for synthesis of products more typical 
of differentiated TR, such as steroids (HSD17B1, CYP11A1, and STAR),
pregnancy-associated glycoproteins (PAG6), and select cytokines (IFND, IFNG, and 
IL1B). Although POU5F1 was down-regulated relative to that in iPS cells, it was
not silenced in the induced TR (iTR) cells over continued passage. Like iPS
cells, iTR cells did not senesce on extended passage and displayed high
telomerase activity. Upon xenografting into immunodeficient mice, iTR cells
formed nonhemorrhagic teratomas composed largely of layers of epithelium
expressing TR markers. When cultured under conditions that promoted embryoid body
formation, iTR cells formed floating spheres consisting of a single epithelial
sheet whose cells were tethered laterally by desmosome-like structures. In
conclusion, reprogramming of porcine fibroblasts to iPS cells generates, as a
by-product, colonies composed of self-renewing populations of TR cells, possibly 
containing TR stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3184293
PMID: 21734265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Bioinform Biol Insights. 2011;5:83-98. doi: 10.4137/BBI.S7003. Epub 2011 May 4.

Gene networks driving bovine mammary protein synthesis during the lactation
cycle.

Bionaz M(1), Loor JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian NutriPhysio Genomics, Department of Animal Sciences, University of
Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

A crucial role for both insulin and mTOR in the regulation of milk protein
synthesis is emerging. Bovine mammary biopsies harvested during late-pregnancy
through end of subsequent lactation were used to evaluate via quantitative PCR
the expression of 44 genes involved in pathways of insulin, mTOR, AMPK, and
Jak2-Stat5 signalling and also glucose and amino acid (AA) transporters. We
observed an increased expression during lactation of ELF5, AA and glucose
transporters, insulin signaling pathway components, MAPK14, FRAP1, EIF4EBP2,
GSK3A and TSC1 among mTOR signaling-related genes. Among ribosomal components
RPL22 was down-regulated. The overall data support a central role of AA and
glucose transporters and insulin signaling through mTOR for the regulation of
protein synthesis in bovine mammary gland. Furthermore, the existence of
translational competition favoring the translation of milk protein transcripts
was inferred from the combined dataset.

PMCID: PMC3118679
PMID: 21698073  [PubMed]


81. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 Nov;45(5):1028-35. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2011-0113OC.
Epub 2011 May 26.

Tanshinone IIA-induced attenuation of lung injury in endotoxemic mice is
associated with reduction of hypoxia-inducible factor 1a expression.

Xu M(1), Cao F, Liu L, Zhang B, Wang Y, Dong H, Cui Y, Dong M, Xu D, Liu Y, Zhao 
P, Niu W, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Xijing Hospital, Xian, PR China. xumin022@163.com

Inhibiting hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1a activity has been proposed as a
novel therapeutic target in LPS-induced sepsis syndrome. We have reported that
tanshinone IIA (TIIA) can reduce LPS-induced lethality and lung injury in mice,
but the precise mechanisms have not been fully described. Therefore, the present 
study investigated whether the protective effect of TIIA was related to the
inhibition of LPS-induced HIF-1a expression and what mechanisms accounted for it.
This study showed that TIIA pretreatment improved LPS-induced biochemical and
cellular changes and reduced the production of inflammatory cytokines.
Pretreatment with TIIA decreased LPS-induced HIF-1a expression in vivo and in
vitro. TIIA did not affect the LPS-induced HIF-1a mRNA level but inhibited HIF-1a
protein translation by the inhibition of the PI3K/AKT and MAPK pathways and
related protein translational regulators, such as p70S6K1, S6 ribosomal protein, 
4E-BP1, and eIF4E, and promoted HIF-1a protein degradation via the proteasomal
pathway in LPS-stimulated macrophages. These observations partially explain the
antiinflammatory effects of TIIA, which provides scientific basis for its
application for the treatment of acute lung injury/acute respiratory distress
syndrome or sepsis.

PMID: 21622293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Reprod Dev. 2011 Sep;57(4):518-25. Epub 2011 May 23.

Regulation of trophoblast-specific factors by GATA2 and GATA3 in bovine
trophoblast CT-1 cells.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Someya Y, Konno T, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.

Numerous transcription factors that regulate trophoblast developmental processes 
have been identified; however, the regulation of trophoblast-specific gene
expression has not been definitively characterized. While a new role of Gata3 in 
trophoblast development was being demonstrated in mice, we examined effects of
GATA transcription factors on conceptus interferon tau (IFNT), a major
trophectoderm factor in ruminants. In this study, expression patterns of
trophoblast ASCL2, CDX2, CSH1, ELF5, HAND1, IFNT, and TKDP1 mRNAs were initially 
examined, from which ASCL2, CDX2, IFNT, and TKDP1 mRNAs were found to be similar 
to those of GATA2 and GATA3 in days 17, 20, and 22 (day 0=day of estrus) bovine
conceptuses. A chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay revealed that
endogenous GATA2 and GATA3 occupied GATA binding sites on the upstream regions of
CSH1, IFNT, and TKDP1 genes and on the intron 1 region of CDX2 gene in bovine
trophoblast CT-1 cells. In transient transfection analyses of the upstream region
of bovine CSH1, and IFNT or the intron 1 region of CDX2 gene, over-expression of 
GATA2 induced transactivation of these trophoblast-specific genes in bovine
non-trophoblast ear fibroblast EF cells, but over-expression of GATA3 did not
substantially affect their transactivation. In CT-1 cells, endogenous CDX2 and
IFNT mRNAs were down-regulated by GATA2 siRNA, while endogenous ASCL2 and CDX2
mRNAs were down-regulated by GATA3 siRNA. Our results indicate that in addition
to trophectoderm lineage specification, GATA2 and/or GATA3 are involved in the
regulation of trophoblast-specific gene transcription in bovine trophoblast CT-1 
cells.

PMID: 21606631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Stem Cells. 2011 May;29(5):755-63. doi: 10.1002/stem.617.

Reprogramming of trophoblast stem cells into pluripotent stem cells by Oct4.

Wu T(1), Wang H, He J, Kang L, Jiang Y, Liu J, Zhang Y, Kou Z, Liu L, Zhang X,
Gao S.

Author information: 
(1)College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing,
People's Republic of China.

ESCs and trophoblast stem (TS) cells are both derived from early embryos, yet
these cells have distinct differentiation properties. ESCs can differentiate into
all three germ layer cell types, whereas TS cells can only differentiate into
placental cells. It has not been determined whether TS cells can be converted
into ES-like pluripotent stem (PS) cells. Here, we report that overexpression of 
a single transcription factor, Oct4, in TS cells is sufficient to reprogram TS
cells into a pluripotent state. These Oct4-induced PS (OiPS) cells have the
epigenetic characteristics of ESCs, including X chromosome reactivation, elevated
H3K27 me3 modifications, and hypomethylation of promoter regions in Oct4 and
Nanog genes. Meanwhile, methylation of promoter region in the Elf5 gene occurred 
during reprogramming of TS cells. The gene expression profile of OiPS cells was
very similar to ESCs. Moreover, OiPS cells can differentiate into the three germ 
layer cell types in vitro and in vivo. More importantly, chimeric mice with
germline transmission could be efficiently produced from OiPS cells. Our results 
demonstrate that one single transcription factor, Oct4, could reprogram the
nonembryonic TS cells into PS cells.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21305674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Feb 4;8(2):200-13. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2011.01.008.

Tet1 and Tet2 regulate 5-hydroxymethylcytosine production and cell lineage
specification in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Koh KP(1), Yabuuchi A, Rao S, Huang Y, Cunniff K, Nardone J, Laiho A, Tahiliani
M, Sommer CA, Mostoslavsky G, Lahesmaa R, Orkin SH, Rodig SJ, Daley GQ, Rao A.

Author information: 
(1)Immune Disease Institute and Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Feb 4;8(2):121-2.

TET family enzymes convert 5-methylcytosine (5mC) to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine
(5hmC) in DNA. Here, we show that Tet1 and Tet2 are Oct4-regulated enzymes that
together sustain 5hmC in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and are induced
concomitantly with 5hmC during reprogramming of fibroblasts to induced
pluripotent stem cells. ESCs depleted of Tet1 by RNAi show diminished expression 
of the Nodal antagonist Lefty1 and display hyperactive Nodal signaling and skewed
differentiation into the endoderm-mesoderm lineage in embryoid bodies in vitro.
In Fgf4- and heparin-supplemented culture conditions, Tet1-depleted ESCs activate
the trophoblast stem cell lineage determinant Elf5 and can colonize the placenta 
in midgestation embryo chimeras. Consistent with these findings, Tet1-depleted
ESCs form aggressive hemorrhagic teratomas with increased endoderm, reduced
neuroectoderm, and ectopic appearance of trophoblastic giant cells. Thus, 5hmC is
an epigenetic modification associated with the pluripotent state, and Tet1
functions to regulate the lineage differentiation potential of ESCs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3134318
PMID: 21295276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cell Reprogram. 2010 Dec;12(6):699-707. doi: 10.1089/cell.2010.0040. Epub 2010
Oct 25.

Nuclear transfer-specific defects are not apparent during the second week of
embryogenesis in cattle.

Smith CS(1), Berg DK, Berg M, Pfeffer PL.

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch, Ruakura Campus, Hamilton, New Zealand.

Somatic cell nuclear transfer (NT)-specific effects on postblastocyst early
cattle embryogenesis were investigated by comparison to in vitro-produced (IVP)
embryos grown under identical conditions to embryonic days (E) 14 and 15.
Recipient effects were excluded by transferring mixed batches of NT and IVP
embryos into each cow. Embryo recovery rates, proportions with an epiblast and
embryo, as well as epiblast dimensions did not differ between NT and IVP embryos.
A developmental expression profile was determined for nine trophoblast markers,
two inner cell mass (ICM)/epiblast markers, and E-cadherin at nine time points
between E7 and E26, providing a molecular gene signature assay for developmental 
progression. Gene expression levels for these genes (Cdx2, Elf5, Mash2, Ifn-tau, 
Furin, Kunitz1, Pag11, Gata3, Oct4 and Ifitm3) were equal in NT and IVP embryos
of equivalent length. Furthermore, the average residual deviation of all 10 genes
did not differ significantly suggesting an overall "normality" in gene expression
of E14/15 NT embryos. The absence of NT-specific defects during the second,
highly selective, week of cattle embryogenesis is interpreted as supportive for
the view that NT-associated defects are predominantly of an epigenetic nature.

PMID: 20973678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 7;5(10):e13150. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013150.

Transcript profiling of Elf5+/- mammary glands during pregnancy identifies novel 
targets of Elf5.

Rogers RL(1), Van Seuningen I, Gould J, Hertzog PJ, Naylor MJ, Pritchard MA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of Medical 
Research, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. r.rogers@garvan.org.au

BACKGROUND: Elf5, an epithelial specific Ets transcription factor, plays a
crucial role in the pregnancy-associated development of the mouse mammary gland. 
Elf5(-/-) embryos do not survive, however the Elf5(+/-) mammary gland displays a 
severe pregnancy-associated developmental defect. While it is known that Elf5 is 
crucial for correct mammary development and lactation, the molecular mechanisms
employed by Elf5 to exert its effects on the mammary gland are largely unknown.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Transcript profiling was used to investigate the
transcriptional changes that occur as a result of Elf5 haploinsufficiency in the 
Elf5(+/-) mouse model. We show that the development of the mouse Elf5(+/-)
mammary gland is delayed at a transcriptional and morphological level, due to the
delayed increase in Elf5 protein in these glands. We also identify a number of
potential Elf5 target genes, including Mucin 4, whose expression, is directly
regulated by the binding of Elf5 to an Ets binding site within its promoter.
CONCLUSION: We identify novel transcriptional targets of Elf5 and show that Muc4 
is a direct target of Elf5, further elucidating the mechanisms through which Elf5
regulates proliferation and differentiation in the mammary gland.

PMCID: PMC2951341
PMID: 20949099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Nov;24(11):2166-78. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0183. Epub 2010 Sep
29.

Glucocorticoid receptor regulates overlapping and differential gene subsets in
developing and adult skin.

Sevilla LM(1), Bayo P, Latorre V, Sanchis A, Pérez P.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas, Jaime Roig 11, E-46010-Valencia, Spain.

We have previously shown that the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is required for
skin homeostasis and epidermal barrier competence. To understand the
transcriptional program by which GR regulates skin development, we performed a
microarray analysis using the skin of GR(-/-) and GR(+/+) mice of embryonic d
18.5 and identified 442 differentially expressed genes. Functional clustering
demonstrated overrepresentation of genes involved in ectoderm/epidermis
development. We found strong repression of genes encoding proteins associated
with the later stages of epidermal differentiation, such as several small
proline-rich proteins (Sprrs) and corneodesmosin (Cdsn). This, together with the 
up-regulation of genes induced earlier during epidermal development, including
the epithelial-specific gene transcripts E74-like factor 5 (Elf5) and keratin 77 
(Krt77), fits with the phenotype of defective epidermal differentiation observed 
in the GR(-/-) mice. We also found down-regulation of the antimicrobial peptide
defensin ß 1 (Defb1) and FK506-binding protein 51 (Fkbp51). Skin developmental
expression profiling of these genes and studies in cultured keratinocytes from
GR(-/-) and wild type embryos demonstrated that gene regulation occurred in a
cell-autonomous manner. To investigate the consequences of GR loss in adult
epidermis, we generated mice with inducible inactivation of GR restricted to
keratinocytes (K14-cre-ER(T2)//GR(loxP/loxP) mice). K14-cre-ER(T2)//GR(loxP/loxP)
mice featured thickened skin with increased keratinocyte proliferation and
impaired differentiation. Whereas Krt77 and Elf5 expression remained unaffected
by loss of GR in adult epidermis, Fkbp51, Sprr2d, and Defb1 were strongly
repressed. Importantly, we have identified both Fkbp51 and Defb1 as direct
transcriptional targets of GR, and we have shown that GR-mediated regulation of
these genes occurs in both developing and adult epidermis. We conclude that both 
overlapping and differential GR targets are regulated in developing vs. adult
skin.

PMID: 20880987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Androl. 2011 Mar-Apr;32(2):170-82. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.109.008748. Epub 2010
Sep 23.

Analysis of differentially expressed genes in LNCaP prostate cancer progression
model.

Xie BX(1), Zhang H, Wang J, Pang B, Wu RQ, Qian XL, Yu L, Li SH, Shi QG, Huang
CF, Zhou JG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Beijing Institute of Biotechnology,
Beijing, China.

The LNCaP/C4-2 human prostate cancer progression model was established to mimic
phenotypic and genotypic changes during prostate cancer development from androgen
dependence to androgen independence, from nonmetastasis to metastasis. In this
study, cDNA microarrays were performed using a microarray chip from Affymetrix to
characterize and compare gene expression profiles in LNCaP and C4-2, which may
provide novel insight into the molecular mechanism mediating prostate cancer
progression. Three hundred eighteen genes consistently exhibited differential
expression in LNCaP and C4-2 in 2-time microarray data. Based on their function, 
the differentially expressed genes can be grouped into several subcategories,
including growth factors and signal transducers, oncogenes and tumor suppressors,
tumor-specific antigens, transcriptional factors, transporters, and factors
involved in invasion, metastasis, and metabolism. Some genes are novel and
unexplored in prostate cancer progression and are of potential interest for
follow-up investigation. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
and real-time RT-PCR were performed to corroborate the microarray results, and 76
differentially expressed genes were validated out of 104 candidates. Expression
pattern analyses were performed in these 76 differentially expressed genes, and a
series of genes was found to be positively or negatively correlated to prostate
cancer progression in the LNCaP prostate cancer progression model and to possess 
predominant prostate cell specificity. ELF5/ESE-2b and long-chain acyl coenzyme A
dehydrogenase (ACADL) expressions were found to be positively associated with
malignant progression in LNCaP, C4-2, and C4-2B, and predominantly expressed in
prostate cancer cells. Functional evaluation revealed that ELF5/ESE-2b and ACADL 
expressions contributed to the malignant phenotypes of prostate cancer cells.
Accordingly, our microarray data may provide clues for finding novel genes
involved in prostate cancer progression to androgen independent and metastasis,
and shed light on finding new targets for diagnosis and therapy of prostate
cancer.

PMID: 20864652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Sep 10;11:68. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-68.

Genome-wide search identifies Ccnd2 as a direct transcriptional target of Elf5 in
mouse mammary gland.

Escamilla-Hernandez R(1), Chakrabarti R, Romano RA, Smalley K, Zhu Q, Lai W,
Halfon MS, Buck MJ, Sinha S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, Center
for Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, Buffalo, NY 14203, USA.

BACKGROUND: The ETS transcription factor Elf5 (also known as ESE-2) is highly
expressed in the mammary gland and plays an important role in its development and
differentiation. Indeed studies in mice have illustrated an essential role for
Elf5 in directing alveologenesis during pregnancy. Although the molecular
mechanisms that underlie the developmental block in Elf5 null mammary glands are 
beginning to be unraveled, this investigation has been hampered by limited
information about the identity of Elf5-target genes. To address this shortcoming,
in this study we have performed ChIP-cloning experiments to identify the specific
genomic segments that are occupied by Elf5 in pregnant mouse mammary glands.
RESULTS: Sequencing and genomic localization of cis-regulatory regions bound by
Elf5 in vivo has identified several potential target genes covering broad
functional categories. A subset of these target genes demonstrates higher
expression levels in Elf5-null mammary glands suggesting a repressive functional 
role for this transcription factor. Here we focus on one putative target of Elf5,
the Ccnd2 gene that appeared in our screen. We identify a novel Elf5-binding
segment upstream of the Ccnd2 gene and demonstrate that Elf5 can
transcriptionally repress Ccnd2 by directly binding to the proximal promoter
region. Finally, using Elf5-null mammary epithelial cells and mammary glands, we 
show that loss of Elf5 in vivo leads to up regulation of Ccnd2 and an altered
expression pattern in luminal cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Identification of Elf5-targets is an essential first step in
elucidating the transcriptional landscape that is shaped by this important
regulator. Our studies offer new toolbox in examining the biological role of Elf5
in mammary gland development and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2949602
PMID: 20831799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Jul;24(7):1380-92. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0516. Epub 2010 Jun 
2.

The antiproliferative effects of progestins in T47D breast cancer cells are
tempered by progestin induction of the ETS transcription factor Elf5.

Hilton HN(1), Kalyuga M, Cowley MJ, Alles MC, Lee HJ, Caldon CE, Blazek K, Kaplan
W, Musgrove EA, Daly RJ, Naylor MJ, Graham JD, Clarke CL, Ormandy CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New
South Wales 2010, Australia.

Prolactin and progesterone act together to regulate mammary alveolar development,
and both hormones have been implicated in breast cancer initiation and
progression. Here we show that Elf5, a prolactin-induced ETS transcription factor
that specifies the mammary secretory cell lineage, is also induced by progestins 
in breast cancer cells via a direct mechanism. To define the transcriptional
response to progestin elicited via Elf5, we made an inducible Elf5 short
hairpin-RNA knock-down model in T47D breast cancer cells and used it to prevent
the progestin-induction of Elf5. Functional analysis of Affymetrix gene
expression data using Gene Ontologies and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis showed
enhancement of the progestin effects on cell cycle gene expression. Cell
proliferation assays showed a more efficacious progestin-induced growth arrest
when Elf5 was kept at baseline levels. These results showed that progestin
induction of Elf5 expression tempered the antiproliferative effects of progestins
in T47D cells, providing a further mechanistic link between prolactin and
progestin in the regulation of mammary cell phenotype.

PMID: 20519331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jul;30(13):3310-20. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01215-09. Epub 2010 Apr 
19.

The transcription factor TCFAP2C/AP-2gamma cooperates with CDX2 to maintain
trophectoderm formation.

Kuckenberg P(1), Buhl S, Woynecki T, van Fürden B, Tolkunova E, Seiffe F, Moser
M, Tomilin A, Winterhager E, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Bonn Medical School, Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, Bonn D-53127, Germany.

In mammals, cell lineage specification is established at the blastocyst stage. At
this stage, transcription factor Cdx2 represses pluripotency genes, thus
promoting extraembryonic trophoblast fate. Recently, transcription factor Gata3
was shown to act in a parallel pathway in promoting trophoblast cell fate,
suggesting that there are more factors working in the trophoblast lineage. Here, 
we report that the transcription factor Tcfap2c is expressed at a high level in
the trophectoderm and is able to induce trophoblast fate in embryonic stem cells.
Trophoblast fate induced by Tcfap2c does not require Cdx2 and vice versa,
suggesting that the molecules act in alternative pathways. However, both Tcfap2c 
and Cdx2 are required for the upregulation of Elf5, a marker of trophoblast stem 
cell maintenance, suggesting that both factors are required for stable
trophoblast induction. Tcfap2c-induced trophoblast-like cells are stable in
long-term culture, indicating that they are capable of self-renewal.
Tcfap2c-controlled trophoblast maintenance involves the induction of Cdx2 and the
repression of the pluripotency factor Nanog. Tcfap2c-induced trophoblast-like
cells differentiate to trophoblast derivatives in vitro and contribute to the
trophectoderm in blastocysts in vivo. Taken together, these observations suggest 
that Tcfap2c and Cdx2 cooperate to override the pluripotency program and
establish the extraembryonic trophoblast maintenance program in murine embryos.

PMCID: PMC2897582
PMID: 20404091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jun 15;19(12):2456-67. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq128. Epub 2010 Mar
30.

ELF5-enforced transcriptional networks define an epigenetically regulated
trophoblast stem cell compartment in the human placenta.

Hemberger M(1), Udayashankar R, Tesar P, Moore H, Burton GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Genetics & Imprinting, The Babraham Institute,
Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK. myriam.hemberger@bbsrc.ac.uk

The first definitive cell fate decision in development occurs at the blastocyst
stage with establishment of the trophoblast and embryonic cell lineages. In the
mouse, lineage commitment is achieved by epigenetic regulation of a critical
gatekeeper gene, the transcription factor Elf5, that reinforces placental cell
fate and is necessary for trophoblast stem (TS) cell self-renewal. In humans,
however, the epigenetic lineage boundary seems to be less stringent since human
embryonic stem (ES) cells, unlike their murine counterparts, harbour some
potential to differentiate into trophoblast derivatives. Here, we show that ELF5 
is expressed in the human placenta in villous cytotrophoblast cells but not in
post-mitotic syncytiotrophoblast and invasive extravillous cytotrophoblast cells.
ELF5 establishes a circuit of mutually interacting transcription factors with
CDX2 and EOMES, and the highly proliferative ELF5(+)/CDX2(+) double-positive
subset of cytotrophoblast cells demarcates a putative TS cell compartment in the 
early human placenta. In contrast to placental trophoblast, however, ELF5 is
hypermethylated and largely repressed in human ES cells and derived trophoblast
cell lines, as well as in induced pluripotent stem cells and murine epiblast stem
cells. Thus, these cells exhibit an embryonic lineage-specific epigenetic
signature and do not undergo an epigenetic reprogramming to reflect the
trophoblast lineage at key loci such as ELF5. Our identification of the
trophoblast-specific transcriptional circuit established by ELF5 will be
instrumental to derive human TS cell lines that truly reflect early placental
trophoblast and that will be most beneficial to gain insights into the aetiology 
of common pregnancy complications, including intra-uterine growth restriction and
pre-eclampsia.

PMID: 20354077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Biomark Cancer. 2010 Feb 11;2:1-15. doi: 10.4137/BIC.S3793. eCollection 2010.

Identification of gene expression signature in estrogen receptor positive breast 
carcinoma.

Thakkar AD(1), Raj H, Chakrabarti D, Ravishankar, Saravanan N, Muthuvelan B,
Balakrishnan A, Padigaru M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomarker Discovery, Piramal Life Sciences Limited, Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India.

A significant group of patient with estrogen receptor (ER) a positive breast
tumors fails to appreciably respond to endocrine therapy. An increased
understanding of the molecular basis of estrogen-mediated signal transduction and
resultant gene expression may lead to novel strategies for treating breast
cancer. In this study, we sought to identify the dysregulated genes in breast
tumors related to ERa status. Microarray analyses of 31 tumor samples showed 108 
genes differentially expressed in ERa (+) and ERa (-) primary breast tumors.
Further analyses of gene lists indicated that a significant number of
dysregulated genes were involved in mRNA transcription and cellular
differentiation. The majority of these genes were found to have promoter-binding 
sites for E74-like factor 5 (ELF5; 54.6% genes), E2F transcription factor 1
(E2F1; 22.2% genes), and nuclear transcription factor Y alpha (NFYA; 32.4%
genes). Six candidate genes (NTN4, SLC7A8, MLPH, ENPP1, LAMB2, and PLAT) with
differential expression were selected for further validation studies using
RT-qPCR (76 clinical specimen) and immunohistochemistry (48 clinical specimen).
Our studies indicate significant over-expression of all the six genes in ERa (+) 
breast tumors as compared to ERa (-) breast tumors. In vitro studies using T-47D 
breast cancer cell line confirmed the estrogen dependant expression of four of
the above six genes (SLC7A8, ENPP1, LAMB2, and PLAT). Collectively, our study
provides further insights into the molecular basis of estrogen-dependent breast
cancer and identifies "candidate biomarkers" that could be useful for predicting 
endocrine responsiveness.

PMCID: PMC3783308
PMID: 24179381  [PubMed]


94. Funct Integr Genomics. 2010 Mar;10(1):87-95. doi: 10.1007/s10142-009-0140-0. Epub
2009 Oct 15.

Insulin, a key regulator of hormone responsive milk protein synthesis during
lactogenesis in murine mammary explants.

Menzies KK(1), Lee HJ, Lefèvre C, Ormandy CJ, Macmillan KL, Nicholas KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
karensa.menzies@deakin.edu.au

Murine milk protein gene expression requires insulin, hydrocortisone, and
prolactin; however, the role of insulin is not well understood. This study,
therefore, examined the requirement of insulin for milk protein synthesis.
Mammary explants were cultured in various combinations of the lactogenic hormones
and global changes in gene expression analysed using Affymetrix microarray. The
expression of 164 genes was responsive to insulin, and 18 were involved in
protein synthesis at the level of transcription and posttranscription, as well as
amino acid uptake and metabolism. The folate receptor gene was increased by
fivefold, highlighting a potentially important role for the hormone in folate
metabolism, a process that is emerging to be central for protein synthesis.
Interestingly, gene expression of two milk protein transcription factors, Stat5a 
and Elf5, previously identified as key components of prolactin signalling, both
showed an essential requirement for insulin. Subsequent experiments in HCll cells
confirmed that Stat5a and Elf5 gene expression could be induced in the absence of
prolactin but in the presence of insulin. Whereas prolactin plays an essential
role in phosphorylating and activating Stat5a, gene expression is only induced
when insulin is present. This indicates insulin plays a crucial role in the
transcription of the milk protein genes.

PMID: 19830464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Aug;10(8):526-37. doi: 10.1038/nrm2727. Epub 2009 Jul
15.

Epigenetic dynamics of stem cells and cell lineage commitment: digging
Waddington's canal.

Hemberger M(1), Dean W, Reik W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics and Imprinting, The Babraham Institute,
Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge, UK. myriam.hemberger@bbsrc.ac.uk

Cells of the early mammalian embryo, including pluripotent embryonic stem (ES)
cells and primordial germ cells (PGCs), are epigenetically dynamic and
heterogeneous. During early development, this heterogeneity of epigenetic states 
is associated with stochastic expression of lineage-determining transcription
factors that establish an intimate crosstalk with epigenetic modifiers.
Lineage-specific epigenetic modification of crucial transcription factor loci
(for example, methylation of the Elf5 promoter) leads to the restriction of
transcriptional circuits and the fixation of lineage fate. The intersection of
major epigenetic reprogramming and programming events in the early embryo creates
plasticity followed by commitment to the principal cell lineages of the early
conceptus.

PMID: 19603040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cell Cycle. 2009 May 15;8(10):1515-25. Epub 2009 May 10.

Defining pathways that enforce cell lineage specification in early development
and stem cells.

Roper S(1), Hemberger M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics and Imprinting, The Babraham Institute,
Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge, UK.

The molecular processes that govern the first cell lineage decisions after
fertilization also dictate the developmental potency of stem cells derived from
the early mouse embryo. Our understanding of these mechanisms is therefore
instrumental for stem cell biology and regenerative medicine. A number of
transcription factors are known that determine a cell's fate towards either the
embryonic or extraembryonic trophoblast lineages. Recent insights have shown that
the definitive fixation of cell lineage fate is achieved by an epigenetic
restriction through DNA methylation of the transcription factor Elf5. Lineage
crossover can be induced, however, by manipulation of lineage determinants and
gatekeepers, or their epigenetic regulation. Here we summarize the accumulating
number of experimental conditions where such 'transdifferentiation' is observed
that shed light onto the genetic and epigenetic pathways involved in lineage
separation and the developmental potential of stem cells.

PMID: 19377304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4837. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004837. Epub 2009 Mar 16.

Association and haplotype analyses of positional candidate genes in five genomic 
regions linked to scrotal hernia in commercial pig lines.

Du ZQ(1), Zhao X, Vukasinovic N, Rodriguez F, Clutter AC, Rothschild MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Center for Integrated Animal Genomics, Iowa
State University, Ames, IA, USA.

Scrotal hernia in pigs is a complex trait likely affected by genetic and
environmental factors. A large-scale association analysis of positional and
functional candidate genes was conducted in four previously identified genomic
regions linked to hernia susceptibility on Sus scrofa chromosomes 2 and 12, as
well as the fifth region around 67 cM on chromosome 2, respectively. In total,
151 out of 416 SNPs discovered were genotyped successfully. Using a family-based 
analysis we found that four regions surrounding ELF5, KIF18A, COL23A1 on
chromosome 2, and NPTX1 on chromosome 12, respectively, may contain the genetic
variants important for the development of the scrotal hernia in pigs. These
findings were replicated in another case-control dataset. The SNPs around the
ELF5 region were in high linkage disequilibrium with each other, and a haplotype 
containing SNPs from ELF5 and CAT was highly significantly associated with hernia
development. Extensive re-sequencing work focused on the KIF18A gene did not
detect any further SNPs with extensive association signals. These genes may be
involved in the estrogen receptor signaling pathway (KIF18A and NPTX1), the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (ELF5) and the collagen metabolism pathway
(COL23A1), which are associated with the important molecular characteristics of
hernia pathophysiology. Further investigation on the molecular mechanisms of
these genes may provide more molecular clues on hernia development in pigs.

PMCID: PMC2654076
PMID: 19287495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Dev Biol. 2009 May 15;329(2):227-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.02.032. Epub 2009 
Mar 6.

Elf5 conditional knockout mice reveal its role as a master regulator in mammary
alveolar development: failure of Stat5 activation and functional differentiation 
in the absence of Elf5.

Choi YS(1), Chakrabarti R, Escamilla-Hernandez R, Sinha S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, Center of
Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, 701 Ellicott Street, Buffalo, NY 
14203, USA.

The transcription factor Elf5 plays an important role in mammary gland
development. However, because of the embryonic lethality of Elf5 straight
knockout mice, prior studies have been limited to experiments with Elf5
haploinsufficient animals, overexpression systems or transplants. Here, we have
utilized K14-Cre to generate mammary-gland specific Elf5 conditional knockout
mice. During pregnancy, Elf5-null mammary epithelium completely failed to
initiate alveologenesis, and a characteristic of virgin ductal epithelial cells
persisted postpartum. We demonstrate that the loss of Elf5 leads to the absence
of alveolar secretory markers confirming previous published data. Interestingly, 
the developmental block due to a lack of Elf5 could not be restored by multiple
gestations. Elf5-null mammary epithelial cells also display disorganized cell
structures as evident by altered cell polarities, which might be the cause for
collapsed lumina. We observe reduced levels of Stat5 and attenuated Stat5
activity as measured by p-Stat5 levels both in Elf5-null mammary glands as well
as cultured mammary epithelial cells. This data suggests that the failure of
alveolar and lactogenic differentiation due to the loss of Elf5 is mediated in
part due to impaired Stat5 activity. In support of this hypothesis, we show by
ChIP experiments that Stat5a promoter contains a conserved Elf5-binding site that
is occupied by Elf5 in mammary glands. Mammary epithelia lacking Elf5 exhibited
downregulation of several other critical genes involved in alveologenesis,
suggesting Elf5 as a master regulator in alveolar development. We propose a model
for Elf5-mediated alveolar development, in which Elf5 regulates the expression of
key mediators of the PrlR/Jak2/Stat5 signaling pathway.

PMID: 19269284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Am J Pathol. 2009 Feb;174(2):613-29. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.080653.

Loss of caveolin-3 induces a lactogenic microenvironment that is protective
against mammary tumor formation.

Sotgia F(1), Casimiro MC, Bonuccelli G, Liu M, Whitaker-Menezes D, Er O, Daumer
KM, Mercier I, Witkiewicz AK, Minetti C, Capozza F, Gormley M, Quong AA, Rui H,
Frank PG, Milliman JN, Knudsen ES, Zhou J, Wang C, Pestell RG, Lisanti MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA, 19107, USA. federica.sotgia@jefferson.edu

Here, we show that functional loss of a single gene is sufficient to confer
constitutive milk protein production and protection against mammary tumor
formation. Caveolin-3 (Cav-3), a muscle-specific caveolin-related gene, is highly
expressed in muscle cells. We demonstrate that Cav-3 is also expressed in
myoepithelial cells within the mammary gland. To determine whether genetic
ablation of Cav-3 expression affects adult mammary gland development, we studied 
the phenotype(s) of Cav-3(-/-)-null mice. Interestingly, Cav-3(-/-) virgin
mammary glands developed lobulo-alveolar hyperplasia, akin to the changes
normally observed during pregnancy and lactation. Genome-wide expression
profiling revealed up-regulation of gene transcripts associated with
pregnancy/lactation, mammary stem cells, and human breast cancers, consistent
with a constitutive lactogenic phenotype. Expression levels of three key
transcriptional regulators of lactation, namely Elf5, Stat5a, and c-Myc, were
also significantly elevated. Experiments with pregnant mice directly showed that 
Cav-3(-/-) mice underwent precocious lactation. Finally, using orthotopic tumor
cell implantation, we demonstrated that virgin Cav-3(-/-) mice were dramatically 
protected against mammary tumor formation. Thus, Cav-3(-/-) mice are a novel
preclinical model to study the protective effects of a lactogenic
microenvironment on mammary tumor onset and progression. Our current studies have
broad implications for using the lactogenic microenvironment as a paradigm to
discover new therapies for the prevention and/or treatment of human breast
cancers.

PMCID: PMC2630569
PMID: 19164602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Funct Integr Genomics. 2009 May;9(2):197-217. doi: 10.1007/s10142-008-0103-x.
Epub 2008 Dec 24.

Insulin regulates milk protein synthesis at multiple levels in the bovine mammary
gland.

Menzies KK(1), Lefèvre C, Macmillan KL, Nicholas KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
karensa.menzies@gmail.com

The role of insulin in milk protein synthesis is unresolved in the bovine mammary
gland. This study examined the potential role of insulin in the presence of two
lactogenic hormones, hydrocortisone and prolactin, in milk protein synthesis.
Insulin was shown to stimulate milk protein gene expression, casein synthesis and
(14)C-lysine uptake in mammary explants from late pregnant cows. A global
assessment of changes in gene expression in mammary explants in response to
insulin was undertaken using Affymetrix microarray. The resulting data provided
insight into the molecular mechanisms stimulated by insulin and showed that the
hormone stimulated the expression of 28 genes directly involved in protein
synthesis. These genes included the milk protein transcription factor, ELF5,
translation factors, the folate metabolism genes, FOLR1 and MTHFR, as well as
several genes encoding enzymes involved in catabolism of essential amino acids
and biosynthesis of non-essential amino acids. These data show that insulin is
not only essential for milk protein gene expression, but stimulates milk protein 
synthesis at multiple levels within bovine mammary epithelial cells.

PMID: 19107532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;10(11):1280-90. doi: 10.1038/ncb1786. Epub 2008 Oct 5.

Epigenetic restriction of embryonic cell lineage fate by methylation of Elf5.

Ng RK(1), Dean W, Dawson C, Lucifero D, Madeja Z, Reik W, Hemberger M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics and Imprinting, The Babraham Institute,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK.

Mouse ES cells can differentiate into all three germ layers of the embryo but are
generally excluded from the trophoblast lineage. Here we show that ES cells
deficient in DNA methylation can differentiate efficiently into trophoblast
derivatives. In a genome-wide screen we identified the transcription factor Elf5 
as methylated and repressed in ES cells, and hypomethylated and expressed in TS
and methylation-deficient ES cells. Elf5 creates a positive-feedback loop with
the TS cell determinants Cdx2 and Eomes that is restricted to the trophoblast
lineage by epigenetic regulation of Elf5. Importantly, the late-acting function
of Elf5 allows initial plasticity and regulation in the early blastocyst. Thus,
Elf5 functions as a gatekeeper, downstream of initial lineage determination, to
reinforce commitment to the trophoblast lineage or to abort this pathway in
epiblast cells. This epigenetic restriction of cell lineage fate provides a
molecular mechanism for Waddington's concept of canalization of developmental
pathways.

PMCID: PMC2635539
PMID: 18836439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Arch Oral Biol. 2008 Nov;53(11):1091-100. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2008.07.002.
Epub 2008 Aug 21.

Isolation and characterization of an immortalized oral keratinocyte cell line of 
mouse origin.

Parikh N(1), Nagarajan P, Sei-ichi M, Sinha S, Garrett-Sinha LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, 
NY 14214, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To establish an oral epithelial cell line of mouse origin for
molecular and biochemical assays.
DESIGN: Epithelial cells were isolated from the oral cavity of adult mice and
established as a spontaneously immortalized cell line in culture, designated
immortalized oral keratinocyte cells (IMOK cells). The cells were then
characterized for growth characteristics, differentiation potential, karyotype,
transfectability, susceptibility to viral infection and responses to siRNA.
RESULTS: The IMOK cells exhibit robust growth in both serum-containing and
serum-free medium for at least 100 population doublings. IMOK cells have a near
diploid karyotype, express keratinocyte marker proteins and can be induced to
undergo differentiation by the addition of high levels of calcium to the medium. 
The differentiation process is characterized by morphological changes and by the 
induction of oral epithelium specific differentiation marker proteins such as K4 
and K13. Transient transfection analyses reveal that IMOK cells are highly
transfectable and that several promoters of epithelial cells are active in these 
cells. Moreover, upon differentiation with calcium, there is an up-regulation of 
differentiation-specific K4 and Elf5 promoter activity. Finally, we show that the
oral keratinocytes are also amenable to infection with retroviruses and to
siRNA-based knockdown of gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study is the first to establish an immortalized oral
keratinocyte cell line of murine origin that can recapitulate the oral epithelium
differentiation program and thus could serve as a useful tool for toxicological
and molecular analyses of the oral tissue.

PMCID: PMC2573465
PMID: 18721915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Dev Biol. 2008 Aug 1;320(1):149-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.038. Epub 2008
May 10.

Misexpression of ELF5 disrupts lung branching and inhibits epithelial
differentiation.

Metzger DE(1), Stahlman MT, Shannon JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hosptial Medical Center, 
3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

ELF5, an Ets family transcription factor found exclusively in epithelial cells,
is expressed in the distal lung epithelium during embryogenesis, then becomes
restricted to proximal airways at the end of gestation and postnatally. To test
the hypothesis that ELF5 represses distal epithelial differentiation, we
generated a transgenic mouse model in which a doxycycline inducible HA-tagged
mouse Elf5 transgene was placed under the control of the lung epithelium-specific
human SFTPC promoter. We found that expressing high levels of ELF5 during early
lung development disrupted branching morphogenesis and produced a dilated
epithelium. The effects of ELF5 on morphogenesis were stage-dependent, since
inducing the transgene on E16.5 had no effect on branching. ELF5 reduced
expression of the distal lung epithelial differentiation markers Erm, Napsa and
Sftpc, and type II cell ultrastructural differentiation was immature. ELF5
overexpression did not induce the proximal airway epithelial markers Ccsp and
Foxj1, but did induce expression of p63, a marker of basal cells in the trachea
and esophagus. High ELF5 levels also induced the expression of genes found in
other endodermal epithelia but not normally associated with the lung. These
results suggest that precise levels of ELF5 regulate the specification and
differentiation of epithelial cells in the lung.

PMCID: PMC2586150
PMID: 18544451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Genes Dev. 2008 Mar 1;22(5):581-6. doi: 10.1101/gad.1614608.

The Ets transcription factor Elf5 specifies mammary alveolar cell fate.

Oakes SR(1), Naylor MJ, Asselin-Labat ML, Blazek KD, Gardiner-Garden M, Hilton
HN, Kazlauskas M, Pritchard MA, Chodosh LA, Pfeffer PL, Lindeman GJ, Visvader JE,
Ormandy CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst,
New South Wales 2010, Australia.

Hormonal cues regulate mammary development, but the consequent transcriptional
changes and cell fate decisions are largely undefined. We show that knockout of
the prolactin-regulated Ets transcription factor Elf5 prevented formation of the 
secretory epithelium during pregnancy. Conversely, overexpression of Elf5 in an
inducible transgenic model caused alveolar differentiation and milk secretion in 
virgin mice, disrupting ductal morphogenesis. CD61+ luminal progenitor cells
accumulated in Elf5-deficient mammary glands and were diminished in glands with
Elf5 overexpression. Thus Elf5 specifies the differentiation of CD61+ progenitors
to establish the secretory alveolar lineage during pregnancy, providing a link
between prolactin, transcriptional events, and alveolar development.

PMCID: PMC2259028
PMID: 18316476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jan 15;105(2):657-62. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0707486105. Epub 2008 Jan 7.

Promiscuous gene expression patterns in single medullary thymic epithelial cells 
argue for a stochastic mechanism.

Derbinski J(1), Pinto S, Rösch S, Hexel K, Kyewski B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Immunology, Tumor Immunology Program, German Cancer 
Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Promiscuous expression of tissue-restricted autoantigens in medullary thymic
epithelial cells (mTECs) imposes central T cell tolerance. The molecular
regulation of this unusual gene expression is not understood, in particular its
delineation from cell lineage-specific gene expression control remains unclear.
Here, we compared the expression profile of the casein gene locus in mTECs and
mammary gland epithelial cells by single cell PCR. Mammary gland cells showed
highly correlated intra- and interchromosomal coexpression of milk proteins (the 
casein genes, lactalbumin-alpha and whey acidic protein) and one of its
transcriptional regulators (Elf5). In contrast, coexpression of these genes in
mature CD80(hi) mTECs was rarely observed and no pattern of gene expression in
individual mTECs was discernible. The apparent stochastic expression pattern of
genes within the casein locus, the lower mRNA levels compared with mammary gland 
cells in conjunction with frequent coexpression of insulin in single mTECs
clearly delineates the molecular mechanism(s) of promiscuous gene expression from
cell lineage-specific gene control.

PMCID: PMC2206592
PMID: 18180458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Histochem Cell Biol. 2008 Jan;129(1):85-94. Epub 2007 Oct 16.

Generation and analysis of Elf5-LacZ mouse: unique and dynamic expression of Elf5
(ESE-2) in the inner root sheath of cycling hair follicles.

Choi YS(1), Cheng J, Segre J, Sinha S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, 
NY, 14214, USA.

The Elf5/ESE-2 transcription factor is a member of the Epithelium Specific Ets
subfamily of Ets transcription factors. Expression of Elf5 has been known to be
restricted to organs and tissues rich in glandular or secretory epithelial cells 
such as kidney and mammary gland as well as differentiated keratinocytes of the
skin. We have engineered an Elf5-LacZ mouse strain in which the bulk of the
coding region of the Elf5 gene has been replaced by the beta-galactosidase (LacZ)
reporter gene and the neomycin resistance cassette. We show here that LacZ gene
expression in Elf5-LacZ mice occurs in spatial and temporal patterns that mimic
endogenous Elf5 expression as observed by strong X-Gal staining in the mammary
luminal epithelial cells of heterozygous Elf5-LacZ animals. Our analysis also
reveals previously undiscovered expression site for Elf5 in the differentiated
cells of the inner root sheath of hair follicle. The generation of a novel Elf5
gene targeted mouse model harboring a LacZ reporter gene provides an advantage
for in vivo studies of Elf5 due to the highly sensitive and easy in situ
detection of LacZ gene expression through histochemical staining with X-Gal.
Taken together, this study brings new insights into novel patterns of Elf5
expression likely correlating with functionally important control in hair
follicle cycle.

PMID: 17938949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2007 Nov;293(5):L1359-68. Epub 2007 Sep 28.

Transactivation of lung lysozyme expression by Ets family member ESE-1.

Lei W(1), Jaramillo RJ, Harrod KS.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Program, Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, 2425
Ridgecrest Dr. SE, Albuquerque, NM 87108, USA.

Epithelial-specific Ets (ESE) transcription factors, consisting of ESE-1, ESE-2, 
and ESE-3, are constitutively expressed in distinct epithelia of mucosal tissues,
including the lung. Each ESE member exhibits alternative splicing and yields at
least two isoforms (a and b) with transcriptional targets largely unidentified.
The studies described herein define a novel role for ESE transcription factors in
transactivation of the human lysozyme gene (LYZ), an essential component of
innate defense in lung epithelia. Of the six ESE isoforms, ESE-1a and ESE-1b
transactivated LYZ promoter in reporter gene assays, whereas only ESE-1b
dramatically upregulated transcription of endogenous LYZ in both nonpulmonary and
pulmonary epithelial cells. Importantly, ESE-1a and ESE-1b could transactivate
the LYZ promoter in cultured primary airway epithelial cells. ESE-2 and ESE-3
isoforms were unable to substantially transactivate the lysozyme promoter or
upregulate transcription of endogenous LYZ. Two functional consensus Ets sites
located in the proximal 130-bp LYZ promoter were responsive to ESE-1b as
identified by site-directed mutagenesis and DNA binding assays. Short hairpin RNA
attenuation of endogenous ESE-1b mRNA levels in lung epithelia resulted in
decreased LYZ transcription. Furthermore, ESE-1 antibody specifically enriched
the 130-bp proximal LYZ promoter in chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses. These
findings define a novel role for ESE transcription factors in regulating lung
innate defense and suggest distinct regulatory functions for ESE family members.

PMID: 17905856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Dev Dyn. 2007 May;236(5):1175-92.

Elf5 is an epithelium-specific, fibroblast growth factor-sensitive transcription 
factor in the embryonic lung.

Metzger DE(1), Xu Y, Shannon JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA. david.metzger@cchmc.org

Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling has been shown to be essential for many 
aspects of normal lung development. To determine epithelial targets of FGF
signaling, we cultured embryonic day (E) 11.5 mouse lungs for 24 hr in the
presence or absence of the FGF receptor antagonist SU5402, which inhibited
branching morphogenesis. Affymetrix gene chip analysis of treated and control
epithelia identified several genes regulated by FGF signaling, including Elf5, a 
member of the Epithelial-specific Ets family of transcription factors. SU5402
reduced Elf5 expression in mesenchyme-free cultures of E12.5 epithelium,
demonstrating that the inhibition was direct. In situ hybridization revealed that
Elf5 had a dynamic pattern of expression during lung development. We found that
expression of Elf5 was induced by FGF7 and FGF10, ligands that primarily bind
FGFR2b. To further define the pathways by which FGFs activate Elf5 expression, we
cultured E11.5 lung tips in the presence of compounds to inhibit FGF receptors
(SU5402), PI3-Kinase/Akt-mediated signaling (LY294002), and MAP
Kinase/Erk-mediated signaling (U0126). We found that SU5402 and LY294002
significantly reduced Elf5 expression, whereas U0126 had no effect. LY294002 also
reduced Elf5 expression in cultures of purified epithelium. Finally, pAkt was
coexpressed with Elf5 in the proximal epithelial airways of E17.5 lungs. These
results demonstrate that Elf5 is an FGF-sensitive transcription factor in the
lung with a dynamic pattern of expression and that FGF regulation of Elf5 by
means of FGFR2b occurs through the PI3-Kinase/Akt pathway.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17394208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Jan;6(1):76-82.

Profile of Ets gene expression in human breast carcinoma.

He J(1), Pan Y, Hu J, Albarracin C, Wu Y, Dai JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Unit 951, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 25CR4.2026, 7435 Fannin St, Houston, Texas 77054, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Jan;6(1):83-4.

BACKGROUND: Ets genes encode a family of transcription factors that play key
roles in cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. Fusions of Ets genes 
with other targets have been described in Ewing's sarcoma, chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia and more recently prostate carcinoma. Ets expression in breast carcinoma
has not been comprehensively studied, and is the focus of this study.
METHODS: RT-Q-PCR was used to determine the expression of Ets genes in a panel of
ten common breast cancer cell lines, two immortalized normal breast epithelial
cell lines, and one primary culture of human mammary epithelial cells. Ets with
altered expression in cancer cell lines were verified in primary breast tumors.
RESULTS: Transcripts of 21 of the 27 Ets genes were detected in either normal or 
cancer cells. Of the 21 detectable genes, 14 were expressed at a similar level in
both normal and breast cancer cell lines. Four genes, Ehf, Elf3, Elf5 and Pdef,
were expressed at higher levels in breast cancer cells than normal epithelials.
Surprisingly, the expression of Elk3, Etsl and Flil was repressed in breast
cancer cells. The protein status of Ehf, Elf3, Pdef, Elk3, Etsl and Flil,
strongly correlated with the transcript data, suggesting that Ets expression is
regulated primarily at the transcriptional level. Similarly, Elf3, Pdef and Tel2 
were overexpressed, while Elk3, Etsl and Flil were under-expressed in primary
breast tumor specimens in comparison with normal mammary tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified a subset of Ets genes with altered expression
in breast carcinoma, implicating their roles in mammary tumorigenesis. While the 
Ets over-expression pattern is useful to uncover recurrent genetic alterations
involving Ets genes, the repressed expression of several Ets genes suggests that 
some Ets proteins may play suppressor roles during breast cancer progression. Our
results warrant detailed studies of individual Ets activity during mammary gland 
neoplasia.

PMID: 17172821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Biochem J. 2006 Sep 15;398(3):497-507.

Determination of the consensus DNA-binding sequence and a transcriptional
activation domain for ESE-2.

Choi YS(1), Sinha S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, 
NY 14214, USA.

The ESE (epithelium-specific Ets) subfamily of Ets transcription factors plays an
important role in regulating gene expression in a variety of epithelial cell
types. Although ESE proteins have been shown to bind to regulatory elements of
some epithelial genes, the optimal DNA-binding sequence has not been
experimentally ascertained for any member of the ESE subfamily of transcription
factors. This has made the identification and validation of their targets
difficult. We are studying ESE-2 (Elf5), which is highly expressed in epithelial 
cells of many tissues including skin keratinocytes. Here, we identify the
preferred DNA-binding site of ESE-2 by performing CASTing (cyclic amplification
and selection of targets) experiments. Our analysis shows that the optimal ESE-2 
consensus motif consists of a GGA core and an AT-rich 5'- and 3'-flanking
sequences. Mutational and competition experiments demonstrate that the flanking
sequences that confer high DNA-binding affinity for ESE-2 show considerable
differences from the known consensus DNA-binding sites of other Ets proteins,
thus reinforcing the idea that the flanking sequences may impart recognition
specificity for Ets proteins. In addition, we have identified a novel isoform of 
murine ESE-2, ESE-2L, that is generated by use of a hitherto unreported new exon 
and an alternate promoter. Interestingly, transient transfection assays with an
optimal ESE-2 responsive reporter show that both ESE-2 and ESE-2L are weak
transactivators. However, similar studies utilizing GAL4 chimaeras of ESE-2
demonstrate that while the DNA-binding ETS (E twenty-six) domain functions as a
repressor, the PNT (pointed domain) of ESE-2 can act as a potent transcriptional 
activation domain. This novel transactivating property of PNT is also shared by
ESE-3, another ESE family member. Identification of the ESE-2 consensus site and 
characterization of the transcriptional activation properties of ESE-2 shed new
light on its potential as a regulator of target genes.

PMCID: PMC1559455
PMID: 16704374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Breast Cancer Res. 2006;8(2):207. Epub 2006 Apr 25.

The alveolar switch: coordinating the proliferative cues and cell fate decisions 
that drive the formation of lobuloalveoli from ductal epithelium.

Oakes SR(1), Hilton HN, Ormandy CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, St Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst, NSW
2010, Australia.

Massive tissue remodelling occurs within the mammary gland during pregnancy,
resulting in the formation of lobuloalveoli that are capable of milk secretion.
Endocrine signals generated predominantly by prolactin and progesterone operate
the alveolar switch to initiate these developmental events. Here we review the
current understanding of the components of the alveolar switch and conclude with 
an examination of the role of the ets transcription factor Elf5. We propose that 
Elf5 is a key regulator of the alveolar switch.

PMCID: PMC1557712
PMID: 16677418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 May;20(5):1177-87. Epub 2006 Feb 9.

Socs2 and elf5 mediate prolactin-induced mammary gland development.

Harris J(1), Stanford PM, Sutherland K, Oakes SR, Naylor MJ, Robertson FG, Blazek
KD, Kazlauskas M, Hilton HN, Wittlin S, Alexander WS, Lindeman GJ, Visvader JE,
Ormandy CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, St. Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst,
New South Wales 2010, Australia.

The proliferative phase of mammary alveolar morphogenesis is initiated during
early pregnancy by rising levels of serum prolactin and progesterone,
establishing a program of gene expression that is ultimately responsible for the 
development of the lobuloalveoli and the onset of lactation. To explore this
largely unknown genetic program, we constructed transcript profiles derived from 
transplanted mammary glands formed by recombination of prolactin receptor (Prlr) 
knockout or wild-type mammary epithelium with wild-type mammary stroma.
Comparison with profiles derived from prolactin-treated Scp2 mammary epithelial
cells produced a small set of commonly prolactin-regulated genes that included
the negative regulator of cytokine signaling, Socs2 (suppressor of cytokine
signaling 2), and the ets transcription factor, E74-like factor 5 (Elf5).
Homozygous null mutation of Socs2 rescued the failure of lactation and reduction 
of mammary signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 phosphorylation
that characterizes Prlr heterozygous mice, demonstrating that mammary Socs2 is a 
key regulator of the prolactin-signaling pathway. Reexpression of Elf5 in Prlr
nullizygous mammary epithelium restored lobuloalveolar development and milk
production, demonstrating that Elf5 is a transcription factor capable of
substituting for prolactin signaling. Thus, Socs2 and Elf5 are key members of the
set of prolactin-regulated genes that mediate prolactin-driven mammary
development.

PMID: 16469767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Mar 1;97(4):766-81.

Differentiation-specific transcriptional regulation of the ESE-2 gene by a novel 
keratinocyte-restricted factor.

Tummala R(1), Sinha S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, 
New York 14214, USA.

Epithelium specific Ets-2 (ESE-2), an epithelium-specific ETS-domain
transcription factor, is highly expressed in differentiated keratinocytes. To
understand the molecular mechanisms that govern the cell-type and
differentiation-specific expression of ESE-2 in keratinocytes, we have focused
our studies on the identification and characterization of its cis-regulatory
elements. We first performed DNase I hypersensitive site mapping and demonstrated
that the promoter region of ESE-2 is in open chromatin conformation in
differentiated keratinocytes. Next, we performed transient transfection assays
with several 5' serially deleted constructs containing segments of the ESE-2
promoter. These experiments have led to the identification of a short fragment
that shows remarkable sequence conservation between several species and harbors
most of the transcriptional activity. Interestingly, a high level of
transcriptional activity was only observed when the transfected keratinocytes
were induced to differentiate by increasing the calcium concentration in the
cell-culture medium. To identify the factors that mediate the transcriptional
activity, we analyzed this segment by mutational and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays (EMSA) experiments. Our studies have identified a critical stretch
of nucleotides that is important for both basal as well as calcium responsive
reporter activity and that binds to a nuclear factor, keratinocyte restricted
factor (KRF). KRF is a novel transcription factor that is restricted to nuclear
extracts isolated from keratinocytes and that binds to unique DNA sequences,
which do not resemble any known consensus binding motif for transcription
factors. Our preliminary experiments shed light on the biochemical nature of KRF 
and set the stage for future studies in identification of KRF and testing its
role in governing ESE-2 gene expression in vivo.

2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16229011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Cell Res. 2005 Jun;15(6):423-9.

Epithelium-specific ets transcription factor 2 upregulates cytokeratin 18
expression in pulmonary epithelial cells through an interaction with cytokeratin 
18 intron 1.

Yaniw D(1), Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)Programme in Lung Biology Research and the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research Group in Lung Development, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada
M5G 1X8.

The role of Ese-2, an Ets family transcription factor, in gene regulation is not 
known. In this study, the interaction between Ese-2 and cytokeratin 18 (K18)
intron 1 was characterized in lung epithelial cells. Reporter gene assays showed 
Ese-2 was able to upregulate K18 intron 1 enhanced reporter gene expression by
approximately 2-fold. We found that full length Ese-2 did not bind DNA strongly, 
therefore truncated versions of the protein, containing the ETS domain or Pointed
domain, were created and tested in electrophoresis mobility shift assays.
Multiple interactions between the ETS domain and putative DNA binding sites
within K18 intron 1 were observed, which led to the determination of a possible
Ese-2 DNA binding consensus sequence. These experiments suggest that Ese-2 could 
play a role in the regulation of K18 expression in lung epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4494830
PMID: 15987600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Development. 2005 May;132(10):2299-308. Epub 2005 Apr 13.

Loss of the extraembryonic ectoderm in Elf5 mutants leads to defects in embryonic
patterning.

Donnison M(1), Beaton A, Davey HW, Broadhurst R, L'Huillier P, Pfeffer PL.

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch Crown Research Institute, Ruakura Campus, East Street, Hamilton
2001, New Zealand.

The extraembryonic ectoderm (ExE) is essential for mammalian placental formation 
and survival of the embryo in utero. We have obtained a mouse model lacking the
ExE, by targeted deletion of the transcription factor Elf5. Although Elf5 mutant 
embryos implant and form an ectoplacental cone, no trophoblast stem (TS) cells
can be derived, indicating that the absence of ExE is a result of the lack of TS 
cell maintenance. Embryos without ExE tissue are able to form the anterior
visceral endoderm but fail to undergo gastrulation, demonstrating an essential
role for the ExE in embryonic patterning during a defined window of development.

PMID: 15829518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Histochem Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;122(6):521-6. Epub 2004 Nov 3.

A major site of expression of the ets transcription factor Elf5 is epithelia of
exocrine glands.

Lapinskas EJ(1), Palmer J, Ricardo S, Hertzog PJ, Hammacher A, Pritchard MA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, 27-31 Wright Street, 3168,
Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

Elf5 belongs to the ets family of transcription factors and was cloned by
homology in the DNA binding domain to the related, epithelial-specific ets
factor, Elf3. Elf5 mRNA is expressed highly in normal tissue rich in secretory
epithelial cells, including mammary gland, lung, kidney, prostate, salivary gland
and stomach. The function of Elf5 and the cell types in which it is expressed
remain uncharacterised. The presence of Elf5 mRNA in normal tissues, but absence 
in cancer tissues, may suggest a role for Elf5 in differentiation and
development. We have generated a rabbit antiserum directed against a peptide in
the Elf5 DNA-binding domain that is conserved between murine and human sequences.
The antiserum specifically detects human and murine Elf5 proteins on western
blots and shows specific staining on paraffin-embedded sections obtained from
tissues including mammary gland, kidney, salivary gland and stomach. Epithelia
from the bladder lining, lung and prostate did not stain for the presence of
Elf5, though these organs express Elf5 mRNA. We show for the first time that Elf5
is primarily expressed in epithelial cells and is likely to be an
epithelial-specific protein. The antiserum should prove useful in further
analysis of the expression and function of Elf5.

PMID: 15655699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. EMBO J. 2005 Feb 9;24(3):635-44. Epub 2005 Jan 13.

Elf5 is essential for early embryogenesis and mammary gland development during
pregnancy and lactation.

Zhou J(1), Chehab R, Tkalcevic J, Naylor MJ, Harris J, Wilson TJ, Tsao S, Tellis 
I, Zavarsek S, Xu D, Lapinskas EJ, Visvader J, Lindeman GJ, Thomas R, Ormandy CJ,
Hertzog PJ, Kola I, Pritchard MA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Elf5 is an epithelial-specific ETS factor. Embryos with a null mutation in the
Elf5 gene died before embryonic day 7.5, indicating that Elf5 is essential during
mouse embryogenesis. Elf5 is also required for proliferation and differentiation 
of mouse mammary alveolar epithelial cells during pregnancy and lactation. The
loss of one functional allele led to complete developmental arrest of the mammary
gland in pregnant Elf5 heterozygous mice. A quantitative mRNA expression study
and Western blot analysis revealed that decreased expression of Elf5 correlated
with the downregulation of milk proteins in Elf5(+/-) mammary glands. Mammary
gland transplants into Rag(-/-) mice demonstrated that Elf5(+/-) mammary alveolar
buds failed to develop in an Elf5(+/+) mammary fat pad during pregnancy,
demonstrating an epithelial cell autonomous defect. Elf5 expression was reduced
in Prolactin receptor (Prlr) heterozygous mammary glands, which phenocopy
Elf5(+/-) glands, suggesting that Elf5 and Prlr are in the same pathway. Our data
demonstrate that Elf5 is essential for developmental processes in the embryo and 
in the mammary gland during pregnancy.

PMCID: PMC548648
PMID: 15650748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Plant J. 2004 May;38(4):664-72.

EARLY FLOWERING 5 acts as a floral repressor in Arabidopsis.

Noh YS(1), Bizzell CM, Noh B, Schomburg FM, Amasino RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Agricultural and Life Sciences,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706-1544, USA.

EARLY FLOWERING 5 (ELF5) is a single-copy gene involved in flowering time
regulation in Arabidopsis. ELF5 encodes a nuclear-targeted protein that is
related to the human nuclear protein containing a WW domain (Npw)38-binding
protein (NpwBP). Lesions in ELF5 cause early flowering in both long days and
short days. elf5 mutations partially suppress the late flowering of both
autonomous-pathway mutants and FRIGIDA (FRI)-containing lines by reducing the
expression of FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC), a floral repressor upon which many of the 
flowering pathways converge. elf5 mutations also partially suppress
photoperiod-pathway mutants, and this, along with the ability of elf5 mutations
to cause early flowering in short days, indicates that ELF5 also affects
flowering independently of FLC.

PMID: 15125772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 19;279(12):11281-92. Epub 2003 Dec 8.

Changes in the expression of many Ets family transcription factors and of
potential target genes in normal mammary tissue and tumors.

Galang CK(1), Muller WJ, Foos G, Oshima RG, Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)Oncodevelopmental Biology Program, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Interfering with Ets transcription factor function reverses multiple aspects of
the transformed phenotype of mouse or human tumor cells. However, the unknown
number of individual Ets factors expressed in any cellular context and the
similar DNA binding specificities of Ets family members complicates the
identification of those that mediate transformation. By utilizing quantitative
PCR assays for 25 mouse Ets factors, we analyzed the expression of essentially
the entire Ets family in normal mammary tissue, mammary-related cell lines, and
mammary tumors. In normal mammary tissue, 24 Ets factors were expressed. Even
clonal derived cell lines expressed 14-20 Ets members. The most abundant Ets
factor mRNAs measured in normal mammary tissue were Elk4, Elf1, and Ets2.
Subtractive analysis of mammary tissue identified which Ets factors were
predominantly expressed in the myeloid/lymphoid or epithelial cell compartments. 
Comparison of Ets factor expression in normal mammary tissue and mammary tumors
identified significantly elevated expression of Pse/PDEF, Ese2/Elf5, Ese3/Ehf,
TEL/Etv6, and Elf2/NERF in mammary tumors and confirmed previously reported
alterations in expression of Ese1/Elf3 and the PEA3 subfamily. Expression of 13
Ets target genes, implicated in various aspects of tumor progression, was also
analyzed. Altered expression of particular Ets target genes was significantly
correlated with particular Ets factors (e.g. maspin and Ese2), suggesting
specific in vivo regulatory roles. Together, this comprehensive analysis revealed
unexpectedly diverse Ets family gene expression, characterized novel Ets factor
changes in mammary tumors, and implicated specific Ets factors in the regulation 
of multiple genes involved in mammary tumor progression.

PMID: 14662758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2002 Dec;27(6):697-704.

Constitutive and cytokine-induced expression of the ETS transcription factor
ESE-3 in the lung.

Silverman ES(1), Baron RM, Palmer LJ, Le L, Hallock A, Subramaniam V, Riese RJ,
McKenna MD, Gu X, Libermann TA, Tugores A, Haley KJ, Shore S, Drazen JM, Weiss
ST.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine and Channing Laboratory,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston 02115, USA.
esilverm@hsph.harvard.edu

Family studies of asthma suggest that the genes ESE-2 and ESE-3 contain
polymorphisms that contribute to disease susceptibility. Each gene codes for an
ETS transcription factor that is characterized by epithelium-restricted
constitutive expression and may function as a context-dependent activator or
repressor of transcription; however, nothing is known about the role of these
genes in lung homeostasis or the pathogenesis of airway disease. In this study,
we show that ESE-3 mRNA and protein are constitutively expressed in bronchial and
mucous gland epithelial cells. Consistent with these findings, ESE-3 mRNA is
constitutively expressed in human bronchial epithelial cells grown in tissue
culture. In contrast, ESE-2 mRNA could not be detected in the lung or cultured
human bronchial epithelial cells. Human bronchial smooth muscle cells and
fibroblasts do not constitutively express ESE-3; however, after stimulation with 
interleukin-1beta or tumor necrosis factor-alpha, levels of ESE-3 mRNA and
protein increase dramatically by 24 h. This cytokine induction is dose-dependent 
and abrogated by specific inhibitors of the MEK1/2 (U0126) and p38 (SB03580)
signal transduction pathways. Overexpression of ESE-3 protein in 3T3 cells and
human bronchial smooth muscle cells inhibits MMP-1 promoter activity, suggesting 
that ESE-3 may function as a transcriptional repressor.

PMID: 12444029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2002 Nov;43(11):3530-7.

Expression of the ETS transcription factor ELF3 in the retinal pigment
epithelium.

Jobling AI(1), Fang Z, Koleski D, Tymms MJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Vision Research Institute of Australia, Carlton, Victoria, Australia.
a.jobling@optometry@optometry.unimelb.edu.au

PURPOSE: The ETS family of transcription factors regulate several critical
cellular functions. They have also been implicated in invertebrate ocular
development. This work was undertaken to determine whether epithelium-specific
ETS transcription factors are expressed in the retinal pigment epithelium and to 
investigate the possible role of these factors in retinal diseases such as
age-related macular degeneration.
METHODS: The expression of the epithelial ETS transcription factors ELF5, ESE3,
and ELF3 was assessed by RT-PCR in the human RPE cell lines D407 and hTERT-RPE1. 
The full-length coding sequence of rat Elf3 was isolated with 3' rapid
amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) and degenerative primers, and its expression
was determined in various rat tissues, by RT-PCR and real-time PCR. A polyclonal 
ELF3 antibody produced from a C-terminal peptide was used to observe the
distribution of the transcription factor within the retina. To assess the
possible ELF3 regulation of the TIMP3 promoter, transient transfection assays
were performed. Promoter activity was determined with a firefly luciferase
reporter gene construct.
RESULTS: The epithelium-specific ETS transcription factor ELF3 was expressed in
the D407 and hTERT-RPE1 cell lines. Neither ESE3 nor ELF5 was detected in the
RPE. The cloning of rat Elf3 produced two splice variants, designated Elf3a (1786
bp) and Elf3b (1855 bp). The larger form, Elf3b, contained a 69-bp insert in the 
coding sequence, which showed high homology to a similar insert previously
identified in murine Elf3. Both splice variants were expressed in rat lung,
kidney, liver, and retina, but were absent in heart tissue. Real-time PCR
analysis showed the retina to contain high levels of Elf3, which was subsequently
localized to the RPE. Elf3 upregulated the TIMP3 promoter, with Elf3a and -3b
inducing an approximate sixfold increase in activity.
CONCLUSIONS: The ELF3 transcription factor is highly expressed in the RPE and can
regulate important ocular genes, such as TIMP3, in vitro. The specific expression
of ELF3 in the RPE may reflect an important role for this transcription factor in
retinal function. Furthermore, its regulation of TIMP3 may have implications for 
degenerative retinal diseases, such as age-related macular degeneration.

PMID: 12407165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Oct 1;166(7):927-32.

DNA sequence variants in epithelium-specific ETS-2 and ETS-3 are not associated
with asthma.

Baron RM(1), Palmer LJ, Tantisira K, Gabriel S, Sonna LA, Le L, Hallock A,
Libermann TA, Drazen JM, Weiss ST, Silverman ES.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Epithelium-specific ETS-2 and ETS-3 are transcription factors that have been
proposed as asthma candidate genes. To investigate the association of sequence
variants in these genes with asthma, we conducted a case-control association
analysis in a sample of 311 white subjects with asthma and 177 white subjects
without asthma. Common polymorphisms in these genes were detected by sequencing
DNA from 32 cell lines obtained from Coriel (Camden, NJ). Seven noncoding or
synonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms were detected: three in
epithelium-specific ETS-2 and four in epithelium-specific ETS-3. Subjects were
genotyped at all loci by mass spectroscopy. To ensure the suitability of our
control subjects, we also genotyped subjects at 49 unlinked polymorphisms evenly 
distributed throughout the autosomes and found no evidence of population
stratification. Logistic regression adjusted for age and sex suggested a weak
association of one epithelium-specific ETS-2 polymorphism with asthma diagnosis
(odds ratio = 1.89, 95% confidence interval = 1.13-3.18, p = 0.02). Total serum
immunoglobulin E and FEV1 predicted levels were not associated with any of the
polymorphisms. Extended haplotyping indicated linkage disequilibrium in these
genes; however, no association or epistatic interaction was found. This study
suggests that epithelium-specific ETS-2 and ETS-3 genes are unlikely to contain
polymorphic loci that have a major impact on asthma susceptibility in our
population.

PMID: 12359648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. RNA. 2002 Mar;8(3):382-97.

Development and characterization of a reconstituted yeast translation initiation 
system.

Algire MA(1), Maag D, Savio P, Acker MG, Tarun SZ Jr, Sachs AB, Asano K, Nielsen 
KH, Olsen DS, Phan L, Hinnebusch AG, Lorsch JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205-2185, USA.

To provide a bridge between in vivo and in vitro studies of eukaryotic
translation initiation, we have developed a reconstituted translation initiation 
system using components from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We have purified
a minimal set of initiation factors (elFs) that, together with yeast 80S
ribosomes, GTP, and initiator methionyl-tRNA, are sufficient to assemble active
initiation complexes on a minimal mRNA template. The kinetics of various steps in
the pathway of initiation complex assembly and the formation of the first peptide
bond in vitro have been explored. The formation of active initiation complexes in
this system is dependent on ribosomes, mRNA, Met-tRNAi, GTP hydrolysis, elF1,
elF1A, elF2, elF5, and elF5B. Our data indicate that elF1 and elF1A both
facilitate the binding of the elF2 x GTP x Met-tRNAi complex to the 40S ribosomal
subunit to form the 43S complex. elF5 stimulates a step after 43S complex
formation, consistent with its proposed role in activating GTP hydrolysis by elF2
upon initiation codon recognition. The presence of elF5B is required for the
joining of the 40S and 60S subunits to form the 80S initiation complex. The step 
at which each of these factors acts in this reconstituted system is in agreement 
with previous data from in vivo studies and work using reconstituted mammalian
systems, indicating that the system recapitulates fundamental events in
translation initiation in eukaryotic cells. This system should allow us to couple
powerful yeast genetic and molecular biological experiments with in vitro kinetic
and biophysical experiments, yielding a better understanding of the molecular
mechanics of this central, complex process.

PMCID: PMC1370259
PMID: 12008673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2000;480:123-8.

The Elf group of Ets-related transcription factors. ELF3 and ELF5.

Thomas RS(1), Ng AN, Zhou J, Tymms MJ, Doppler W, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash University,
Melbourne, Australia.

PMID: 10959418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 8;274(41):29439-52.

Characterization of ESE-2, a novel ESE-1-related Ets transcription factor that is
restricted to glandular epithelium and differentiated keratinocytes.

Oettgen P(1), Kas K, Dube A, Gu X, Grall F, Thamrongsak U, Akbarali Y, Finger E, 
Boltax J, Endress G, Munger K, Kunsch C, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)New England Baptist Bone and Joint Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Epithelial cell differentiation is tightly controlled by distinct sets of
transcription factors that regulate the expression of stage-specific genes. We
recently isolated the first epithelium-specific Ets transcription factor (ESE-1).
Here we describe the characterization of ESE-2, a second epithelium-restricted
ESE-1-related Ets factor. Like ESE-1, ESE-2 is induced during keratinocyte
differentiation. However, whereas ESE-1 is expressed in the majority of
epithelial cell types, ESE-2 expression is restricted to differentiated
keratinocytes and glandular epithelium such as salivary gland, prostate, mammary 
gland, and kidney. In contrast to ESE-1, full-length ESE-2 binds poorly to DNA
due to the presence of a negative regulatory domain at the amino terminus.
Furthermore, although ESE-1 and the amino-terminally deleted ESE-2 bind with
similar affinity to the canonical E74 Ets site, ESE-2 and ESE-1 differ strikingly
in their relative affinity toward binding sites in the c-MET and PSMA promoters. 
Similarly, ESE-1 and ESE-2 drastically differ in their ability to transactivate
epithelium-specific promoters. Thus, ESE-2, but not ESE-1, transactivates the
parotid gland-specific PSP promoter and the prostate-specific PSA promoter. In
contrast, ESE-1 transactivates the keratinocyte-specific SPRR2A promoter Ets site
and the prostate-specific PSMA promoter significantly better than ESE-2. Our
results demonstrate the existence of a unique class of related
epithelium-specific Ets factors with distinct functions in epithelial cell gene
regulation.

PMID: 10506207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Oncogene. 1998 Nov 26;17(21):2719-32.

A novel transcription factor, ELF5, belongs to the ELF subfamily of ETS genes and
maps to human chromosome 11p13-15, a region subject to LOH and rearrangement in
human carcinoma cell lines.

Zhou J(1), Ng AY, Tymms MJ, Jermiin LS, Seth AK, Thomas RS, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Development Group, Institute of Reproduction and
Development, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The ETS transcription factors are a large family implicated in the control of
cellular proliferation and tumorigenesis. In addition, chromosomal translocations
involving ETS family members are associated with a range of different human
cancers. Given the extensive involvement of ETS factors in tumorigenesis, it
becomes important to identify any additional ETS genes that may also play
oncogenic roles. We identify a novel gene, ELF5, that appears to belong to the
ELF (E74-like-factor) subfamily of the ETS transcription factor family, based
upon similarity within the 'ETS domain'. ELF5 displays a similar, but more
restricted, expression pattern to that of the newly isolated epithelium-specific 
ETS gene, ELF3. Unlike most other ETS family members, ELF5 is not expressed in
hematopoietic compartments, but is restricted to organs such as lung, stomach,
kidney, prostate, bladder and mammary gland. ELF5 is localized to human
chromosome 11p13-15, a region that frequently undergoes loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) in several types of carcinoma, including those of breast, kidney and
prostate. We find that ELF5 expression is not detectable in a number of carcinoma
cell lines, some of which display loss or rearrangement of an ELF5 allele.
Similar to other ETS family members, ELF5 displays specific binding to DNA
sequences containing a GGAA-core. In addition, ELF5 is able to transactivate
through these ETS sequences, present upstream from a minimal promoter. Our data
suggest that ELF5 may play roles in mammary, lung, prostate and/or kidney
function, and possibly also in tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9840936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


