
1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2016 Mar 17. pii: S0022-2828(16)30054-2. doi:
10.1016/j.yjmcc.2016.03.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Mast cells promote proliferation and migration and inhibit differentiation of
mesenchymal stem cells through PDGF.

Nazari M(1), Ni NC(1), Ludke A(1), Li SH(1), Guo J(1), Weisel RD(1), Li RK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network, Division of
Cardiovascular Surgery, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Surgery, Division
of Cardiac Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Toronto
General Research Institute, University Health Network, Division of Cardiovascular
Surgery, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Surgery, Division of Cardiac
Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address:
renkeli@uhnres.utoronto.ca.

BACKGROUND: Mast cells (MCs) dynamically participate in wound healing after
myocardial infarction (MI) by releasing cytokines. Indeed, MC-deficient mice
undergo rapid left ventricular dilation post-MI. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
are recruited to the injured region following an MI and have potential for
cardiac repair. In the current study, we evaluate the effect of MCs on MSC
proliferation and myogenic differentiation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: MCs were cultured from mouse bone marrow and MC granulate
(MCG) was extracted from MCs via freeze-thaw cycles followed by filtration. a-SMA
(smooth muscle actin) expression was examined as an indicator of myogenic
differentiation. MSC/MC co-culture resulted in decreased MSC differentiation
indicated by a-SMA suppression in MSCs. MCG also suppressed a-SMA expression and 
increased MSC migration and proliferation in a dose-dependent manner. Removal of 
MCG rescued a-SMA expression and MSC differentiation. Platelet derived growth
factor (PDGF) receptor blockade using AG1296 also rescued MSC differentiation
even after MCG treatment. Real-time PCR and Western blot showed that MCG exerted 
its effects on MSCs via downregulation of miR-145 and miR-143, downregulation of 
myocardin, upregulation of Klf4, and increased Erk and Elk1 phosphorylation.
CONCLUSIONS: MCs promote MSC proliferation and migration by suppressing their
myogenic differentiation. MCs accomplish this via activation of the PDGF pathway,
downregulation of miR-145/143, and modulation of the myocardin-Klf4 axis. These
data suggest a potential role for MSC/MC interaction in the infarcted heart where
MCs may inhibit MSCs from differentiation and promote their proliferation whereby
increased cardiac MSC accumulation promotes eventual cardiac regeneration after
MCs cease activity.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26996757  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Prostate. 2016 Feb 11. doi: 10.1002/pros.23164. [Epub ahead of print]

Silodosin inhibits prostate cancer cell growth via ELK1 inactivation and enhances
the cytotoxic activity of gemcitabine.

Kawahara T(1,)(2,)(3), Aljarah AK(1,)(4), Shareef HK(1,)(5), Inoue S(1), Ide
H(1), Patterson JD(1), Kashiwagi E(1), Han B(1), Li Y(2), Zheng Y(1,)(2),
Miyamoto H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Urology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York.
(3)Department of Urology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine,
Yokohama, Japan. (4)Department of Biology, University of Baghdad College of
Science, Baghdad, Iraq. (5)Department of Biology, University of Babylon College
of Science for Women, Babylon, Iraq.

BACKGROUND: Biological significance of ELK1, a transcriptional factor whose
phosphorylation is necessary for c-fos proto-oncogene activation, in prostate
cancer remains far from fully understood. In this study, we aim to investigate
the role of ELK1 in tumor growth as well as the efficacy of a selective
a1A-adrenergic blocker, silodosin, in ELK1 activity in prostate cancer cells.
METHODS: We first immunohistochemically determined the levels of phospho-ELK1
(p-ELK1) expression in radical prostatectomy specimens. We then assessed the
effects of ELK1 knockdown via short hairpin RNA and silodosin on cell
proliferation, migration, and invasion in prostate cancer lines.
RESULTS: The levels of p-ELK1 expression were significantly higher in carcinoma
than in benign (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) or high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia
(HGPIN) (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002) as well as in HGPIN than in benign (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). Kaplan-Meier 
and log-rank tests revealed that moderate-strong positivity of p-ELK1 in
carcinomas tended to correlate with biochemical recurrence after radical
prostatectomy (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.098). In PC3 and DU145 expressing ELK1 (mRNA/protein) but no
androgen receptor (AR), ELK1 silencing resulted in considerable decreases in the 
expression of c-fos as well as in cell migration/invasion and matrix
metalloproteinase-2 expression, but not in cell viability. Silodosin treatment
reduced the expression/activity of ELK1 in these cells as well as the viability
of AR-positive LNCaP and C4-2 cells and the migration of both AR-positive and
AR-negative cells, but not the viability of AR-negative or ELK1-negative cells.
Interestingly, silodosin significantly increased sensitivity to gemcitabine, but 
not to cisplatin or docetaxel, even in AR-negative cells.
CONCLUSIONS: ELK1 is likely to be activated in prostate cancer cells and promote 
tumor progression. Furthermore, silodosin that inactivates ELK1 in prostate
cancer cells not only inhibits their growth but also enhances the cytotoxic
activity of gemcitabine. Thus, ELK1 inhibition has the potential of being a
therapeutic approach for prostate cancer. Prostate © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26864615  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Biol Chem. 2016 Feb 9. pii: jbc.M115.692368. [Epub ahead of print]

Reduced Ets domain-containing protein Elk1 Promotes Pulmonary Fibrosis via
Increased Integrin avﬂ6 Expression.

Tatler AL(1), Habgood A(2), Porte J(2), John AE(2), Stavrou A(2), Hodge E(2),
Kerama-Likoko C(2), Violette SM(3), Weinreb PH(3), Knox AJ(2), Laurent G(4),
Parfrey H(5), Wolters PJ(6), Wallace W(7), Alberti S(8), Nordheim A(8), Jenkins
G(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Nottingham, United Kingdom; amanda.tatler@nottingham.ac.uk.
(2)University of Nottingham, United Kingdom; (3)Biogen Idec, United States;
(4)University Western Australia, Australia; (5)University of Cambridge, United
Kingdom; (6)University of California San Francsico, United States; (7)University 
of Edinburgh, United Kingdom; (8)University of Tuebingen, Germany.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive fibrotic lung disease with
high mortality. Active Transforming Growth Factor-ﬂ1 (TGF-ﬂ1) is considered
central to the pathogenesis of IPF. A major mechanisms of TGF-ﬂ1 activation in
the lung involves the epithelially restricted avﬂ6 integrin. Expression of the
avﬂ6 integrin is dramatically increased in IPF. How avﬂ6 integrin expression is
regulated in pulmonary epithlium is unknown. Here we identified a region in the
ﬂ6 subunit gene (ITGB6) promoter acting to markedly repress basal gene
transcription, which responds to both the Ets domain-containing protein Elk1
(Elk1) and the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Both Elk1, and GR, can regulate avﬂ6
integrin expression in vitro. We demonstrate Elk1 binding to the ITGB6 promoter
basally, and that manipulation of Elk1, or Elk1 binding, alters ITGB6 promoter
activity, gene transcription and avﬂ6 integrin expression. Crucially, we find
that loss of Elk1 causes enhanced Itgb6 expression and exaggerated lung fibrosis 
in an in vivo model of fibrosis, whereas the GR agonist Dexamethasone inhibits
Itgb6 expression. Moreover Elk1 dysregulation is present in epithelium from
patients with IPF. These data reveal a novel role for Elk1 regulating ITGB6
expression and highlight how dysregulation of Elk1 can contribute to human
disease.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26861876  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Genome Res. 2016 Apr;26(4):541-53. doi: 10.1101/gr.193169.115. Epub 2016 Feb 9.

A network-based analysis of colon cancer splicing changes reveals a
tumorigenesis-favoring regulatory pathway emanating from ELK1.

Hollander D(1), Donyo M(1), Atias N(2), Mekahel K(1), Melamed Z(1), Yannai S(1), 
Lev-Maor G(1), Shilo A(3), Schwartz S(4), Barshack I(5), Sharan R(2), Ast G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv 69978, Israel; (2)Blavatnik School of
Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv 69978, Israel; (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute for Medical Research Israel-Canada,
The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel;
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute, Rehovot 76100, Israel;
(5)Department of Pathology, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan 52621, Israel;
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv 69978, Israel.

Splicing aberrations are prominent drivers of cancer, yet the regulatory pathways
controlling them are mostly unknown. Here we develop a method that integrates
physical interaction, gene expression, and alternative splicing data to construct
the largest map of transcriptomic and proteomic interactions leading to cancerous
splicing aberrations defined to date, and identify driver pathways therein. We
apply our method to colon adenocarcinoma and non-small-cell lung carcinoma. By
focusing on colon cancer, we reveal a novel tumor-favoring regulatory pathway
involving the induction of the transcription factorMYCby the transcription factor
ELK1, as well as the subsequent induction of the alternative splicing
factorPTBP1by both. We show that PTBP1 promotes specificRAC1,NUMB, andPKMsplicing
isoforms that are major triggers of colon tumorigenesis. By testing the pathway's
activity in patient tumor samples, we findELK1,MYC, andPTBP1to be overexpressed
in conjunction with oncogenicKRASmutations, and show that these mutations
increaseELK1levels via the RAS-MAPK pathway. We thus illuminate, for the first
time, a full regulatory pathway connecting prevalent cancerous mutations to
functional tumor-inducing splicing aberrations. Our results demonstrate our
method is applicable to different cancers to reveal regulatory pathways promoting
splicing aberrations.

© 2016 Hollander et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMID: 26860615  [PubMed - in process]


5. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 9;11(2):e0148465. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148465.
eCollection 2016.

Transcriptomics Modeling of the Late-Gestation Fetal Pituitary Response to
Transient Hypoxia.

Wood CE(1), Chang EI(1), Richards EM(2), Rabaglino MB(1), Keller-Wood M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Functional Genomics, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pharmacodynamics, University of Florida College of Pharmacy,
Gainesville, Florida 32610, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The late-gestation fetal sheep responds to hypoxia with
physiological, neuroendocrine, and cellular responses that aid in fetal survival.
The response of the fetus to hypoxia represents a coordinated effort to maximize 
oxygen transfer from the mother and minimize wasteful oxygen consumption by the
fetus. While there have been many studies aimed at investigating the coordinated 
physiological and endocrine responses to hypoxia, and while immunohistochemical
or in situ hybridization studies have revealed pathways supporting the endocrine 
function of the pituitary, there is little known about the coordinated cellular
response of the pituitary to the hypoxia.
RESULTS: Thirty min hypoxia (from 17.0±1.7 to 8.0±0.8 mm Hg, followed by 30 min
normoxia) upregulated 595 and downregulated 790 genes in fetal pituitary (123-132
days' gestation; term = 147 days). Network inference of up- and down- regulated
genes revealed a high degree of functional relatedness amongst the gene sets.
Gene ontology analysis revealed upregulation of cellular metabolic processes
(e.g., RNA synthesis, response to estrogens) and downregulation of protein
phosphorylation, protein metabolism, and mitosis. Genes found to be at the center
of the network of upregulated genes included genes important for purine binding
and signaling. At the center of the downregulated network were genes involved in 
mRNA processing, DNA repair, sumoylation, and vesicular trafficking.
Transcription factor analysis revealed that both up- and down-regulated gene sets
are enriched for control by several transcription factors (e.g., SP1, MAZ, LEF1, 
NRF1, ELK1, NFAT, E12, PAX4) but not for HIF-1, which is known to be an important
controller of genomic responses to hypoxia.
CONCLUSIONS: The multiple analytical approaches used in this study suggests that 
the acute response to 30 min of transient hypoxia in the late-gestation fetus
results in reduced cellular metabolism and a pattern of gene expression that is
consistent with cellular oxygen and ATP starvation. In this early time point, we 
see a vigorous gene response. But, like the hypothalamus, the transcriptomic
response is not consistent with mediation by HIF-1. If HIF-1 is a significant
controller of gene expression in the fetal pituitary after hypoxia, it must be at
a later time.

PMCID: PMC4747542
PMID: 26859870  [PubMed - in process]


6. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 1;6:20176. doi: 10.1038/srep20176.

miR-150 regulates obesity-associated insulin resistance by controlling B cell
functions.

Ying W(1), Tseng A(2), Chang RC(3), Wang H(3), Lin YL(3), Kanameni S(3), Brehm
T(4), Morin A(3), Jones B(5), Splawn T(6), Criscitiello M(7), Golding MC(2),
Bazer FW(1), Safe S(3), Zhou B(8).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Translational Medicine, East Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200120, China. (2)College of Medicine, Texas A&M
Health Science Center, College Station, TX, USA. (3)Department of Veterinary
Physiology &Pharmacology, College of Veterinary Medicine &Biomedical Sciences,
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA. (4)Department of Chemical
Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA. (5)Department of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA.
(6)Department of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX, USA. (7)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine &Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA.
(8)Department of Immunology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
CT, USA.

Adipose tissue resident B cells account for more than 20% of stromal cells within
visceral adipose tissues; however, their functions in the adipose tissue niche
are poorly elucidated. Here we report that miR-150 modulates adipose tissue
function by controlling activation of B cells and their interactions with other
immune cells. miR-150KO mice displayed exacerbated obesity-associated tissue
inflammation and systemic insulin resistance, which is recapitulated by adoptive 
transfer of B cells, but not purified immunoglobulin, into obese B(null) mice.
Using purified cell populations, we found that enhanced proinflammatory
activation of adipose tissue T cells and macrophages was due to miR-150KO B cells
action but not cell-autologous mechanisms. miR-150KO B cells displayed
significantly enhanced antigen presentation upon stimulation, ultimately leading 
to elevated inflammation and insulin resistance, compared to wild type B cells.
Knockdown of identified miR-150 target genes, Elk1, Etf1 or Myb attenuated B cell
action by altering B cell receptor pathways and MHCII cell surface presentation. 
Our results demonstrate a critical role for miR-150 in regulating B cell
functions in adipose tissue which ultimately regulate both metabolic and
immunologic homeostasis in the adipose tissue niche.

PMCID: PMC4735333
PMID: 26833392  [PubMed - in process]


7. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 27. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7035. [Epub ahead of print]

Lapatinib inhibits CIP2A/PP2A/p-Akt signaling and induces apoptosis in triple
negative breast cancer cells.

Liu CY(1,)(2), Hu MH(3,)(4), Hsu CJ(1), Huang CT(2,)(5), Wang DS(1), Tsai WC(1), 
Chen YT(1), Lee CH(1), Chu PY(6), Hsu CC(7), Chen MH(1,)(2), Shiau CW(8), Tseng
LM(2,)(9), Chen KF(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Oncology, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine,
Cardinal Tien Hospital, New Taipei City, Taiwan. (4)School of Medicine, Fu Jen
Catholic University, New Taipei City, Taiwan. (5)Division of Hematology &
Oncology, Department of Medicine, Yang-Ming Branch of Taipei City Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Department of Pathology, Show Chwan Memorial Hospital,
Changhua City. (7)Institute of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (8)Institute of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (9)Department of Surgery, Taipei Veterans General
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (10)Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (11)National Taiwan University College of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

We tested the efficacy of lapatinib, a dual tyrosine kinase inhibitor which
interrupts the HER2 and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathways, in a
panel of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells, and examined the drug
mechanism. Lapatinib showed an anti-proliferative effect in HCC 1937, MDA-MB-468,
and MDA-MB-231 cell lines. Lapatinib induced significant apoptosis and inhibited 
CIP2A and p-Akt in a dose and time-dependent manner in the three TNBC cell lines.
Overexpression of CIP2A reduced lapatinib-induced apoptosis in MDA-MB-468 cells. 
In addition, lapatinib increased PP2A activity (in relation to CIP2A inhibition).
Moreover, lapatinib-induced apoptosis and p-Akt downregulation was attenuated by 
PP2A antagonist okadaic acid. Furthermore, lapatinib indirectly decreased CIP2A
transcription by disturbing the binding of Elk1 to the CIP2A promoter.
Importantly, lapatinib showed anti-tumor activity in mice bearing MDA-MB-468
xenograft tumors, and suppressed CIP2A as well as p-Akt in these xenografted
tumors. In summary, inhibition of CIP2A determines the effects of
lapatinib-induced apoptosis in TNBC cells. In addition to being a dual tyrosine
kinase inhibitor of HER2 and EGFR, lapatinib also inhibits CIP2A/PP2A/p-Akt
signaling in TNBC cells.

PMID: 26824320  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Apr 1;25(7):1307-17. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw011. Epub 2016 Jan
13.

Phosphatidylserine enhances IKBKAP transcription by activating the MAPK/ERK
signaling pathway.

Donyo M(1), Hollander D(1), Abramovitch Z(1), Naftelberg S(1), Ast G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv 69978, Israel. (2)Department of Human
Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Ramat Aviv 69978, Israel gilast@post.tau.ac.il.

Familial dysautonomia (FD) is a genetic disorder manifested due to abnormal
development and progressive degeneration of the sensory and autonomic nervous
system. FD is caused by a point mutation in the IKBKAP gene encoding the IKAP
protein, resulting in decreased protein levels. A promising potential treatment
for FD is phosphatidylserine (PS); however, the manner by which PS elevates IKAP 
levels has yet to be identified. Analysis of ChIP-seq results of the IKBKAP
promoter region revealed binding of the transcription factors CREB and ELK1,
which are regulated by the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK)/extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling pathway. We show that PS
treatment enhanced ERK phosphorylation in cells derived from FD patients. ERK
activation resulted in elevated IKBKAP transcription and IKAP protein levels,
whereas pretreatment with the MAPK inhibitor U0126 blocked elevation of the IKAP 
protein level. Overexpression of either ELK1 or CREB activated the IKBKAP
promoter, whereas downregulation of these transcription factors resulted in a
decrease of the IKAP protein. Additionally, we show that PS improves cell
migration, known to be enhanced by MAPK/ERK activation and abrogated in FD cells.
In conclusion, our results demonstrate that PS activates the MAPK/ERK signaling
pathway, resulting in activation of transcription factors that bind the promoter 
region of IKBKAP and thus enhancing its transcription. Therefore, compounds that 
activate the MAPK/ERK signaling pathway could constitute potential treatments for
FD.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26769675  [PubMed - in process]


9. Mol Cancer Res. 2016 Mar;14(3):267-77. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-15-0456. Epub
2016 Jan 8.

Transcriptional Regulation of miR-31 by Oncogenic KRAS Mediates Metastatic
Phenotypes by Repressing RASA1.

Kent OA(1), Mendell JT(2), Rottapel R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto Medical
Discovery Tower, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
kent.uhn@gmail.com. (2)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.
Center for Regenerative Science and Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. (3)Princess Margaret Cancer
Centre, University Health Network, Toronto Medical Discovery Tower, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Department of Medicine, St. Michael's
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Department of Medical Biophysics, St.
Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Department of Immunology, St.
Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Division of Rheumatology, St.
Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Activating KRAS mutations are nearly ubiquitous in pancreatic cancer occurring in
more than 95% of clinical cases. miRNAs are small noncoding RNAs that regulate
gene expression by binding sequences within the 3'UTRs of target mRNAs. An
integral role for miRNAs in cancer pathogenesis is well established; however, the
role of miRNAs in KRAS-mediated tumorigenesis is poorly characterized. Here it is
demonstrated that expression of miR-31 is coupled to the expression of oncogenic 
KRAS and activity of the MAPK pathway. miR-31 is highly expressed in
patient-derived xenografts and a panel of pancreatic and colorectal cancer cells 
harboring activating KRAS mutations. The miR-31 host gene is a large noncoding
RNA that correlates with miR-31 expression and enabled identification of the
putative miR-31 promoter. Using luciferase reporters, a minimal RAS-responsive
miR-31 promoter was found to drive robust luciferase activity dependent on
expression of mutant KRAS and the transcription factor ELK1. Furthermore, ELK1
interacts directly with the endogenous miR-31 promoter in a MAPK-dependent
manner. Expression of enforced miR-31 significantly enhanced invasion and
migration of multiple pancreatic cancer cells resulting from the activation of
RhoA through regulation of the miR-31 target gene RASA1. Importantly, acute
knockdown of RASA1 phenocopied enforced miR-31 expression on the migratory
behavior of pancreatic cancer cells through increased RhoA
activation.IMPLICATIONS: Oncogenic KRAS can activate Rho through the
miR-31-mediated regulation of RASA1 indicating miR-31 acts as a KRAS effector to 
modulate invasion and migration in pancreatic cancer. Mol Cancer Res; 14(3);
267-77. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4794362 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26747707  [PubMed - in process]


10. Hum Genet. 2016 Feb;135(2):209-22. doi: 10.1007/s00439-015-1627-5. Epub 2015 Dec 
29.

Spectrum of mutations and genotype-phenotype analysis in Noonan syndrome patients
with RIT1 mutations.

Yaoita M(1), Niihori T(1), Mizuno S(2), Okamoto N(3), Hayashi S(4), Watanabe
A(5), Yokozawa M(6), Suzumura H(7), Nakahara A(8), Nakano Y(9), Hokosaki T(10),
Ohmori A(11), Sawada H(11), Migita O(12), Mima A(13), Lapunzina P(14),
Santos-Simarro F(14), GarcÌa-MiÒa˙r S(14), Ogata T(15), Kawame H(16), Kurosawa
K(17), Ohashi H(18), Inoue S(1), Matsubara Y(19), Kure S(20), Aoki Y(21).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, 
Japan. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Central Hospital, Aichi Human Service Center,
Kasugai, Japan. (3)Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Medical Center, Research
Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Izumi, Japan. (4)Department of
Neonatology, The Jikei University Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Division of Clinical
Genetics, Nippon Medical School Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of
Pediatric Cardiology, Hokkaido Medical Center for Child Health and
Rehabilitation, Sapporo, Japan. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Dokkyo Medical
University, Tochigi, Japan. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan. (9)Department of Cardiology, Nagano
Children's Hospital, Nagano, Japan. (10)Department of Pediatrics, Yokohama City
University Hospital, Yokohama, Japan. (11)Department of Pediatrics, Mie
University, Tsu, Japan. (12)Department of Pediatrics, St. Marianna University
School of Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan. (13)Department of Pediatrics, Yodogawa
Christian Hospital, Osaka, Japan. (14)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics
(INGEMM), La Paz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain. (15)Department of
Pediatrics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan.
(16)Division of Genomic Medicine Support and Genetic Counseling, Tohoku Medical
Megabank Organization, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. (17)Division of Medical 
Genetics, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan. (18)Division of
Medical Genetics, Saitama Children's Medical Center, Saitama, Japan. (19)National
Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. (20)Department
of Pediatrics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(21)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai,
Japan. aokiy@med.tohoku.ac.jp.

RASopathies are autosomal dominant disorders caused by mutations in more than 10 
known genes that regulate the RAS/MAPK pathway. Noonan syndrome (NS) is a
RASopathy characterized by a distinctive facial appearance, musculoskeletal
abnormalities, and congenital heart defects. We have recently identified
mutations in RIT1 in patients with NS. To delineate the clinical manifestations
in RIT1 mutation-positive patients, we further performed a RIT1 analysis in
RASopathy patients and identified 7 RIT1 mutations, including two novel
mutations, p.A77S and p.A77T, in 14 of 186 patients. Perinatal abnormalities,
including nuchal translucency, fetal hydrops, pleural effusion, or chylothorax
and congenital heart defects, are observed in all RIT1 mutation-positive
patients. Luciferase assays in NIH 3T3 cells demonstrated that the newly
identified RIT1 mutants, including p.A77S and p.A77T, and the previously
identified p.F82V, p.T83P, p.Y89H, and p.M90I, enhanced Elk1 transactivation.
Genotype-phenotype correlation analyses of previously reported NS patients
harboring RIT1, PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, and KRAS revealed that hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (56†%) was more frequent in patients harboring a RIT1 mutation
than in patients harboring PTPN11 (9†%) and SOS1 mutations (10†%). The rates of
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were similar between patients harboring RIT1
mutations and patients harboring RAF1 mutations (75†%). Short stature (52†%) was 
less prevalent in patients harboring RIT1 mutations than in patients harboring
PTPN11 (71†%) and RAF1 (83†%) mutations. These results delineate the clinical
manifestations of RIT1 mutation-positive NS patients: high frequencies of
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, atrial septal defects, and pulmonary stenosis; and
lower frequencies of ptosis and short stature.

PMID: 26714497  [PubMed - in process]


11. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 15;5(10):2959-68. eCollection 2015.

Silodosin inhibits the growth of bladder cancer cells and enhances the cytotoxic 
activity of cisplatin via ELK1 inactivation.

Kawahara T(1), Ide H(2), Kashiwagi E(2), Patterson JD(2), Inoue S(2), Shareef
HK(3), Aljarah AK(4), Zheng Y(2), Baras AS(2), Miyamoto H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Urology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine Baltimore, MD, USA ; Department of Urology, Yokohama City University
Graduate School of Medicine Yokohama, Japan. (2)Departments of Pathology and
Urology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Departments of Pathology and Urology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine Baltimore, MD, USA ; Department of Biology, University of Babylon
College of Science for Women Babylon, Iraq. (4)Departments of Pathology and
Urology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Baltimore, MD, USA ;
Department of Biology, University of Baghdad College of Science Baghdad, Iraq.

Silodosin, a selective a1A-adrenergic blocker prescribed for the symptomatic
treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia, was previously shown to decrease the
expression of ELK1, a c-fos proto-oncogene regulator and a well-described
downstream target of the PKC/Raf-1/ERK pathway, in human prostate smooth muscle
cells. PKC/Raf-1/ERK activation has also been implicated in drug resistance. In
the current study, we assessed the effects of silodosin on ELK1
expression/activity in bladder cancer cells as well as on their proliferation in 
the presence or absence of chemotherapeutic drugs, including cisplatin and
gemcitabine. In bladder cancer cell lines, silodosin reduced the expression of
ELK1 (mRNA/protein) and its downstream target, c-fos gene, as well as the
transcriptional activity of ELK1. While silodosin alone (up to 10 µM)
insignificantly affected the growth of bladder cancer cells cultured in androgen 
depleted conditions or those expressing ELK1-short hairpin RNA, it considerably
inhibited the viability of androgen receptor (AR)-positive/ELK1-positive cells in
the presence of androgens. Silodosin also inhibited the migration of
ELK1-positive cells with or without a functional AR, but not that of ELK1
knockdown cells. Interestingly, silodosin treatment or ELK1 silencing resulted in
increases in drug sensitivity to cisplatin, but not to gemcitabine, even in
AR-negative cells or AR-positive cells cultured in an androgen-depleted
condition. In addition, silodosin decreased the expression of NF-<U+03BA>B, a key
regulator of chemoresistance, and its transcriptional activity. Moreover,
immunohistochemistry in bladder cancer specimens from patients who received
neoadjuvant chemotherapy revealed that phospho-ELK1 positivity strongly
correlated with chemoresistance. Silodosin was thus found to not only inhibit
cell viability and migration but also enhance the cytotoxic activity of cisplatin
in bladder cancer lines via inactivating ELK1. Our results suggest that combined 
treatment with silodosin is useful for overcoming chemoresistance in patients
with ELK1-positive urothelial carcinoma receiving cisplatin.

PMCID: PMC4656723
PMID: 26693052  [PubMed]


12. Blood. 2016 Mar 3;127(9):1138-50. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-06-649970. Epub 2015
Dec 16.

Evidence for a role of the histone deacetylase SIRT6 in DNA damage response of
multiple myeloma cells.

Cea M(1), Cagnetta A(1), Adamia S(2), Acharya C(2), Tai YT(2), Fulciniti M(2),
Ohguchi H(2), Munshi A(2), Acharya P(2), Bhasin MK(3), Zhong L(4), Carrasco R(2),
Monacelli F(5), Ballestrero A(5), Richardson P(2), Gobbi M(5), Lemoli RM(5),
Munshi N(2), Hideshima T(2), Nencioni A(5), Chauhan D(2), Anderson KC(2).

Author information: 
(1)LeBow Institute for Myeloma Therapeutics and Jerome Lipper Center for Multiple
Myeloma Research, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA; Clinic of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genoa,
Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Scientifico Azienda
Ospedaliera Universitaria San Martino-Istituto Scientifico Tumori, Genoa, Italy; 
(2)LeBow Institute for Myeloma Therapeutics and Jerome Lipper Center for Multiple
Myeloma Research, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA; (3)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Genomics, Proteomics, Bioinformatics 
and Systems Biology Center, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA;
and. (4)The Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA. (5)Clinic of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Genoa, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Scientifico Azienda
Ospedaliera Universitaria San Martino-Istituto Scientifico Tumori, Genoa, Italy;

Multiple myeloma (MM) is characterized by a highly unstable genome, with
aneuploidy observed in nearly all patients. The mechanism causing this karyotypic
instability is largely unknown, but recent observations have correlated these
abnormalities with dysfunctional DNA damage response. Here, we show that the
NAD(+)-dependent deacetylase SIRT6 is highly expressed in MM cells, as an
adaptive response to genomic stability, and that high SIRT6 levels are associated
with adverse prognosis. Mechanistically, SIRT6 interacts with the transcription
factor ELK1 and with the ERK signaling-related gene. By binding to their
promoters and deacetylating H3K9 at these sites, SIRT6 downregulates the
expression of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway genes, MAPK
signaling, and proliferation. In addition, inactivation of ERK2/p90RSK signaling 
triggered by high SIRT6 levels increases DNA repair via Chk1 and confers
resistance to DNA damage. Using genetic and biochemical studies in vitro and in
human MM xenograft models, we show that SIRT6 depletion both enhances
proliferation and confers sensitization to DNA-damaging agents. Our findings
therefore provide insights into the functional interplay between SIRT6 and DNA
repair mechanisms, with implications for both tumorigenesis and the treatment of 
MM.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4778164 [Available on 2017-03-03]
PMID: 26675349  [PubMed - in process]


13. RNA. 2016 Feb;22(2):303-15. doi: 10.1261/rna.052571.115. Epub 2015 Dec 14.

Negative feedback regulation of AXL by miR-34a modulates apoptosis in lung cancer
cells.

Cho CY(1), Huang JS(2), Shiah SG(3), Chung SY(3), Lay JD(4), Yang YY(3), Lai
GM(5), Cheng AL(6), Chen LT(3), Chuang SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes,
Miaoli 35053, Taiwan Department of Life Sciences, National Central University,
Taoyuan 32001, Taiwan. (2)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health 
Research Institutes, Miaoli 35053, Taiwan Cancer Center, Wan Fang Hospital,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11696, Taiwan Health Examination Center, E-Da
Hospital, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung 82445, Taiwan School of Medicine, College 
of Medicine, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung 84001, Taiwan. (3)National Institute of
Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes, Miaoli 35053, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Nursing, National Taichung University of Science and Technology,
Taichung 40401, Taiwan. (5)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health
Research Institutes, Miaoli 35053, Taiwan Cancer Center, Wan Fang Hospital,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11696, Taiwan Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan. (6)National Institute of Cancer 
Research, National Health Research Institutes, Miaoli 35053, Taiwan Departments
of Internal Medicine and Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei
10002, Taiwan.

The AXL receptor tyrosine kinase is frequently overexpressed in cancers and is
important in cancer invasion/metastasis and chemoresistance. Here, we demonstrate
a regulatory feedback loop between AXL and microRNA (miRNA) at the
post-transcriptional level. Both the GAS6-binding domain and the kinase domain of
AXL, particularly the Y779 tyrosine phosphorylation site, are shown to be crucial
for this autoregulation. To clarify the role of miRNAs in this regulation loop,
approaches using bioinformatics and molecular techniques were applied, revealing 
that miR-34a may target the 3' UTR of AXL mRNA to inhibit AXL expression.
Interestingly and importantly, AXL overexpression may induce miR-34a expression
by activating the transcription factor ELK1 via the JNK signaling pathway. In
addition, ectopic overexpression of ELK1 promotes apoptosis through, in part,
down-regulation of AXL. Therefore, we propose that AXL is autoregulated by
miR-34a in a feedback loop; this may provide a novel opportunity for developing
AXL-targeted anticancer therapies.

© 2016 Cho et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the RNA
Society.

PMCID: PMC4712679 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26667302  [PubMed - in process]


14. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 14;10(12):e0144954. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144954.
eCollection 2015.

Brazilian Red Propolis Attenuates Inflammatory Signaling Cascade in LPS-Activated
Macrophages.

Bueno-Silva B(1), Kawamoto D(1), Ando-Suguimoto ES(1), Alencar SM(2), Rosalen
PL(3), Mayer MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
S„o Paulo, S„o Paulo, SP, Brazil. (2)College of Agriculture "Luiz de Queiroz"
(ESALQ/USP), Piracicaba, SP, Brazil. (3)Piracicaba Dental School, University of
Campinas-UNICAMP, Department of Physiologic Sciences, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.

Although previous studies suggested an anti-inflammatory property of Brazilian
red propolis (BRP), the mechanisms involved in the anti-inflammatory effects of
BRP and its activity on macrophages were still not elucidated. This study aimed
to evaluate whether BRP attenuates the inflammatory effect of LPS on macrophages 
and to investigate its underlying mechanisms. BRP was added to RAW 264.7 murine
macrophages after activation with LPS. NO production, cell viability, cytokines
profile were evaluated. Activation of inflammatory signaling pathways and
macrophage polarization were determined by RT-qPCR and Western blot. BRP at 50
µg/ml inhibited NO production by 78% without affecting cell viability. Cd80 and
Cd86 were upregulated whereas mrc1 was down regulated by BRP indicating
macrophage polarization at M1. BRP attenuated the production of pro-inflammatory 
mediators IL-12, GM-CSF, IFN-<U+0194>, IL-1ﬂ in cell supernatants although levels of
TNF- a and IL-6 were slightly increased after BRP treatment. Levels of IL-4,
IL-10 and TGF-ﬂ were also reduced by BRP. BRP significantly reduced the
up-regulation promoted by LPS of transcription of genes in inflammatory signaling
(Pdk1, Pak1, Nfkb1, Mtcp1, Gsk3b, Fos and Elk1) and of Il1ﬂ and Il1f9
(fold-change rate > 5), which were further confirmed by the inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B
and MAPK signaling pathways. Furthermore, the upstream adaptor MyD88 adaptor-like
(Mal), also known as TIRAP, involved in TLR2 and TLR4 signaling, was down-
regulated in BRP treated LPS-activated macrophages. Given that BRP inhibited
multiple signaling pathways in macrophages involved in the inflammatory process
activated by LPS, our data indicated that BRP is a noteworthy food-source for the
discovery of new bioactive compounds and a potential candidate to attenuate
exhacerbated inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC4684384
PMID: 26660901  [PubMed - in process]


15. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 7;5:17523. doi: 10.1038/srep17523.

Antibiotic monensin synergizes with EGFR inhibitors and oxaliplatin to suppress
the proliferation of human ovarian cancer cells.

Deng Y(1,)(2), Zhang J(1,)(2), Wang Z(2,)(3), Yan Z(2,)(3), Qiao M(2,)(3), Ye
J(2,)(4), Wei Q(2,)(3), Wang J(2,)(3), Wang X(2,)(5), Zhao L(2,)(6), Lu S(2,)(7),
Tang S(2,)(8), Mohammed MK(2), Liu H(2,)(3), Fan J(2,)(3), Zhang F(2,)(3), Zou
Y(2,)(3), Liao J(2,)(3), Qi H(1), Haydon RC(2), Luu HH(2), He TC(2,)(3), Tang
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, and Physical Examination, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400046, China.
(2)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and
Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL
60637, USA. (3)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Diagnostic Medicine, and
the Affiliated Hospitals of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016,
China. (4)School of Bioengineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044,
China. (5)Department of Surgery, West China Hospital of Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610041, China. (6)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, the Second
Affiliated Hospital of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, China.
(7)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Shandong Provincial Hospital and Shandong
University School of Medicine, Jinan 250012, China. (8)Departments of General
Surgery, the Affiliated Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071,
China.

Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy with an overall cure
rate of merely 30%. Most patients experience recurrence within 12-24 months of
cure and die of progressively chemotherapy-resistant disease. Thus, more
effective anti-ovarian cancer therapies are needed. Here, we investigate the
possibility of repurposing antibiotic monensin as an anti-ovarian cancer agent.
We demonstrate that monensin effectively inhibits cell proliferation, migration
and cell cycle progression, and induces apoptosis of human ovarian cancer cells. 
Monensin suppresses multiple cancer-related pathways including Elk1/SRF, AP1,
NF<U+03BA>B and STAT, and reduces EGFR expression in ovarian cancer cells. Monensin acts
synergistically with EGFR inhibitors and oxaliplatin to inhibit cell
proliferation and induce apoptosis of ovarian cancer cells. Xenograft studies
confirm that monensin effectively inhibits tumor growth by suppressing cell
proliferation through targeting EGFR signaling. Our results suggest monensin may 
be repurposed as an anti-ovarian cancer agent although further preclinical and
clinical studies are needed.

PMCID: PMC4671000
PMID: 26639992  [PubMed - in process]


16. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Feb 1;25(3):472-83. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv486. Epub 2015 Nov
26.

Functional characterization of a human POU1F1 mutation associated with isolated
growth hormone deficiency: a novel etiology for IGHD.

Sobrier ML(1), Tsai YC(2), PÈrez C(3), Leheup B(4), Bouceba T(5), Duquesnoy P(3),
Copin B(6), Sizova D(2), Penzo A(7), Stanger BZ(7), Cooke NE(2), Liebhaber SA(2),
Amselem S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm UMRS933, HÙpital Trousseau, Sorbonne UniversitÈs, UPMC Univ Paris, 26
Avenue du Dr Netter, Paris 75012, France, marie-laure.sobrier@inserm.fr.
(2)Department of Genetics. (3)Inserm UMRS933, HÙpital Trousseau, Sorbonne
UniversitÈs, UPMC Univ Paris, 26 Avenue du Dr Netter, Paris 75012, France.
(4)Service de GÈnÈtique Clinique PÈdiatrique, HÙpital d'enfants, CHU Nancy,
Vandoeuvre-LËs-Nancy, France. (5)Institut de Biologie Paris-Seine, Plateforme
d'IntÈractions MolÈculaires Fr 3631, UPMC, Paris, France and. (6)Service de
GÈnÈtique et d'Embryologie MÈdicales, Assistance Publique-HÙpitaux de Paris,
HÙpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France. (7)Gastroenterology Division, Department
of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, USA. (8)Inserm UMRS933, HÙpital Trousseau, Sorbonne UniversitÈs,
UPMC Univ Paris, 26 Avenue du Dr Netter, Paris 75012, France, Service de
GÈnÈtique et d'Embryologie MÈdicales, Assistance Publique-HÙpitaux de Paris,
HÙpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France.

POU1F1, a pituitary-specific POU-homeo domain transcription factor, plays an
essential role in the specification of the somatotroph, lactotroph and thyrotroph
lineages and in the activation of GH1, PRL and TSHﬂ transcription. Individuals
with mutations in POU1F1 present with combined deficiency of GH, PRL and TSH.
Here, we identified a heterozygous missense mutation with evidence of
pathogenicity, at the POU1F1 locus, in a large family in which an isolated growth
hormone deficiency segregates as an autosomal dominant trait. The corresponding
p.Pro76Leu mutation maps to a conserved site within the POU1F1 transactivation
domain. Bandshift assays revealed that the mutation alters wild-type POU1F1
binding to cognate sites within the hGH-LCR and hGH1 promoter, but not to sites
within the PRL promoter, and it selectively increases binding affinity to sites
within the hGH-LCR. Co-immunoprecipitation studies reveal that this substitution 
enhances interactions of POU1F1 with three of its cofactors, PITX1, LHX3a and
ELK1, and that residue 76 plays a critical role in these interactions. The
insertion of the mutation at the mouse Pou1f1 locus results in a dramatic loss of
protein expression despite normal mRNA concentrations. Mice heterozygous for the 
p.Pro76Leu mutation were phenotypically normal while homozygotes demonstrated a
dwarf phenotype. Overall, this study unveils the involvement of POU1F1 in
dominantly inherited isolated GH deficiency and demonstrates a significant impact
of the Pro76Leu mutation on DNA-binding activities, alterations in
transactivating functions and interactions with cofactors. Our data further
highlight difficulties in modeling human genetic disorders in the mouse despite
apparent conservation of gene expression pathways and physiologic functions.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26612202  [PubMed - in process]


17. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 15;6(40):42704-16. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5678.

Grifolin directly targets ERK1/2 to epigenetically suppress cancer cell
metastasis.

Luo X(1,)(2), Yang L(1,)(2), Xiao L(1), Xia X(3), Dong X(1), Zhong J(1), Liu
Y(1), Li N(1), Chen L(1), Li H(1), Li W(1), Liu W(1), Yu X(1), Chen H(4), Tang
M(1), Weng X(1), Yi W(1), Bode A(4), Dong Z(4), Liu J(5), Cao Y(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Key laboratory of Chinese Ministry of Education,
Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410078, PR 
China. (2)Molecular Imaging Center, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan 410078, PR China. (3)Department of Systems Medicine and
Bioengineering, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(4)The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, MN 55912, USA. (5)State
Key Laboratory of Phytochemistry and Plant Resource in West China, Kunming
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650204, PR
China.

Grifolin, a secondary metabolite isolated from the fresh fruiting bodies of the
mushroom Albatrellus confluens, has been reported by us and others to display
potent antitumor effects. However, the molecular target of grifolin has not been 
identified and the underlying mechanism of action is not fully understood. Here, 
we report that the ERK1/2 protein kinases are direct molecular targets of
grifolin. Molecular modeling, affinity chromatography and fluorescence quenching 
analyses showed that grifolin directly binds to ERK1/2. And in vitro and ex vivo 
kinase assay data further demonstrated that grifolin inhibited the kinase
activities of ERK1/2. We found that grifolin suppressed adhesion, migration and
invasion of high-metastatic cancer cells. The inhibitory effect of grifolin
against tumor metastasis was further confirmed in a metastatic mouse model. We
found that grifolin decreased phosphorylation of Elk1 at Ser383, and the protein 
as well as the mRNA level of DNMT1 was also down-regulated. By luciferase
reporter and ChIP assay analyses, we confirmed that grifolin inhibited the
transcription activity of Elk1 as well as its binding to the dnmt1 promoter
region. Moreover, we report that significant increases in the mRNA levels of
Timp2 and pten were induced by grifolin. Thus, our data suggest that grifolin
exerts its anti-tumor activity by epigenetic reactivation of metastasis
inhibitory-related genes through ERK1/2-Elk1-DNMT1 signaling. Grifolin may
represent a promising therapeutic lead compound for intervention of cancer
metastasis, and it may also be useful as an ERK1/2 kinase inhibitor as well as an
epigenetic agent to further our understanding of DNMT1 function.

PMCID: PMC4767464
PMID: 26516701  [PubMed - in process]


18. J Gen Physiol. 2015 Nov;146(5):357-74. doi: 10.1085/jgp.201511491.

Bimodal regulation of an Elk subfamily K+ channel by phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate.

Li X(1), Anishkin A(2), Liu H(3), van Rossum DB(1), Chintapalli SV(4), Sassic
JK(3), Gallegos D(3), Pivaroff-Ward K(5), Jegla T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania
State University, University Park, PA 16802 Department of Biology and Huck
Institutes of the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA 16802. (2)Department of Biology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD
20742. (3)Department of Biology and Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802. (4)Arkansas Children's 
Nutrition Center and Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72202 Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center and
Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little
Rock, AR 72202. (5)Department of Earth and Space Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195. (6)Department of Biology and Huck Institutes of
the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802
Department of Biology and Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania
State University, University Park, PA 16802 tjj3@psu.edu.

Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) regulates Shaker K+ channels and
voltage-gated Ca2+ channels in a bimodal fashion by inhibiting voltage activation
while stabilizing open channels. Bimodal regulation is conserved in
hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels, but voltage
activation is enhanced while the open channel state is destabilized. The proposed
sites of PIP2 regulation in these channels include the voltage-sensor domain
(VSD) and conserved regions of the proximal cytoplasmic C terminus. Relatively
little is known about PIP2 regulation of Ether-·-go-go (EAG) channels, a
metazoan-specific family of K+ channels that includes three gene subfamilies, Eag
(Kv10), Erg (Kv11), and Elk (Kv12). We examined PIP2 regulation of the Elk
subfamily potassium channel human Elk1 to determine whether bimodal regulation is
conserved within the EAG K+ channel family. Open-state stabilization by PIP2 has 
been observed in human Erg1, but the proposed site of regulation in the distal C 
terminus is not conserved among EAG family channels. We show that PIP2 strongly
inhibits voltage activation of Elk1 but also stabilizes the open state. This
stabilization produces slow deactivation and a mode shift in voltage gating after
activation. However, removal of PIP2 has the net effect of enhancing Elk1
activation. R347 in the linker between the VSD and pore (S4-S5 linker) and R479
near the S6 activation gate are required for PIP2 to inhibit voltage activation. 
The ability of PIP2 to stabilize the open state also requires these residues,
suggesting an overlap in sites central to the opposing effects of PIP2 on channel
gating. Open-state stabilization in Elk1 requires the N-terminal eag domain (PAS 
domain + Cap), and PIP2-dependent stabilization is enhanced by a conserved basic 
residue (K5) in the Cap. Our data shows that PIP2 can bimodally regulate voltage 
gating in EAG family channels, as has been proposed for Shaker and HCN channels. 
PIP2 regulation appears fundamentally different for Elk and KCNQ channels,
suggesting that, although both channel types can regulate action potential
threshold in neurons, they are not functionally redundant.

© 2015 Li et al.

PMCID: PMC4621751 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26503718  [PubMed - in process]


19. Spinal Cord. 2015 Oct 27. doi: 10.1038/sc.2015.171. [Epub ahead of print]

Comparative analysis of molecular mechanism of spinal cord injury with time based
on bioinformatics data.

Wen T(1,)(2), Hou J(2), Wang F(2), Zhang Y(2), Zhang T(2), Sun T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chinese PLA Medical College, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Orthopedics,
Beijing Army General Hospital, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVES: This study was designed to explore the molecular mechanisms of spinal
cord injury (SCI) with time.
METHODS: The gene expression profile (GSE45006) including four non-injured spinal
cord samples as sham-control group and 20 thoracic transected spinal cords
samples as experimental group at different times was downloaded from Gene
Expression Omnibus database. The time-course changes of the SCI-related
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified. In addition, time-series
expression profile clusters of DEGs were obtained, followed by gene ontology (GO)
and pathway enrichment analysis of the DEGs. Moreover, the transcriptional
regulatory network was constructed.
RESULTS: There were 1420, 492, 743, 568 and 533 DEGs respectively at d1, d3, w1, 
w2 and w8 compared with that of sham group. Importantly, 101 overlapped regulated
DEGs were identified at five time points and 370 collaboratively regulated genes 
were identified in cluster 6. Significant functions of overlapped regulated DEGs 
were obtained including response to wounding and developmental process. In
addition, the DEGs, such as CD14 molecule (CD14) and chemokine (C-C motif) ligand
2 (CCL2), were enriched mostly in the pathways related to tuberculosis, phagosome
and NF-kappa B signaling pathway. From the transcriptional regulatory network, we
identified some transription factors (TFs), including member of E26
transformation-specific (ETS) oncogene family (ELK1) and zinc finger and BTB
domain containing 7A (Zbtb7a).
CONCLUSION: The DEGs related to immune response during SCI may provide underlying
targets for treatment of SCI. Moreover, the TFs ZBTB7A and ELK1 and their target 
gene (dual specificity phosphatase 18 (DUSP18)) might be therapeutic targets for 
the treatment of SCI.Spinal Cord advance online publication, 27 October 2015;
doi:10.1038/sc.2015.171.

PMID: 26503224  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. Circ Res. 2016 Jan 8;118(1):38-47. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.307408. Epub 2015 
Oct 15.

VEGF-Induced Expression of miR-17-92 Cluster in Endothelial Cells Is Mediated by 
ERK/ELK1 Activation and Regulates Angiogenesis.

Chamorro-Jorganes A(1), Lee MY(1), Araldi E(1), Landskroner-Eiger S(1),
Fern·ndez-Fuertes M(1), Sahraei M(1), Quiles Del Rey M(1), van Solingen C(1), Yu 
J(1), Fern·ndez-Hernando C(1), Sessa WC(1), Su·rez Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Vascular Biology and Therapeutics Program (A.C.-J., M.Y.L., E.A.,
M.F.-F., M.S., J.Y., C.F.-H., W.C.S., Y.S.), Section of Comparative Medicine
(A.C.-J., E.A., M.F.-F., M.S., M.Q.R., C.F.-H., Y.S.), Departments of Pathology
(A.C.-J., E.A., M.F.-F., M.S., C.F.-H., Y.S.); Pharmacology (M.Y.L., S.L.-E.,
W.C.S.), and Internal Medicine, Section of Cardiovascular Medicine (J.Y.), Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT; and Department of Medicine, New
York University School of Medicine (C.S.). (2)From the Vascular Biology and
Therapeutics Program (A.C.-J., M.Y.L., E.A., M.F.-F., M.S., J.Y., C.F.-H.,
W.C.S., Y.S.), Section of Comparative Medicine (A.C.-J., E.A., M.F.-F., M.S.,
M.Q.R., C.F.-H., Y.S.), Departments of Pathology (A.C.-J., E.A., M.F.-F., M.S.,
C.F.-H., Y.S.); Pharmacology (M.Y.L., S.L.-E., W.C.S.), and Internal Medicine,
Section of Cardiovascular Medicine (J.Y.), Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT; and Department of Medicine, New York University School of Medicine
(C.S.). yajaira.suarez@yale.edu.

RATIONALE: Several lines of evidence indicate that the regulation of microRNA
(miRNA) levels by different stimuli may contribute to the modulation of
stimulus-induced responses. The miR-17-92 cluster has been linked to tumor
development and angiogenesis, but its role in vascular endothelial growth
factor-induced endothelial cell (EC) functions is unclear and its regulation is
unknown.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to elucidate the mechanism by which VEGF
regulates the expression of miR-17-92 cluster in ECs and determine its
contribution to the regulation of endothelial angiogenic functions, both in vitro
and in vivo. This was done by analyzing the effect of postnatal inactivation of
miR-17-92 cluster in the endothelium (miR-17-92 iEC-KO mice) on developmental
retinal angiogenesis, VEGF-induced ear angiogenesis, and tumor angiogenesis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we show that Erk/Elk1 activation on VEGF stimulation
of ECs is responsible for Elk-1-mediated transcription activation (chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis) of the miR-17-92 cluster. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that VEGF-mediated upregulation of the miR-17-92 cluster in vitro is 
necessary for EC proliferation and angiogenic sprouting. Finally, we provide
genetic evidence that miR-17-92 iEC-KO mice have blunted physiological retinal
angiogenesis during development and diminished VEGF-induced ear angiogenesis and 
tumor angiogenesis. Computational analysis and rescue experiments show that PTEN 
(phosphatase and tensin homolog) is a target of the miR-17-92 cluster and is a
crucial mediator of miR-17-92-induced EC proliferation. However, the angiogenic
transcriptional program is reduced when miR-17-92 is inhibited.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results indicate that VEGF-induced miR-17-92
cluster expression contributes to the angiogenic switch of ECs and participates
in the regulation of angiogenesis.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4703066
PMID: 26472816  [PubMed - in process]


21. BMC Genomics. 2015 Sep 15;16(1):691. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1883-8.

Transcriptome analysis of complex I-deficient patients reveals distinct
expression programs for subunits and assembly factors of the oxidative
phosphorylation system.

van der Lee R(1), Szklarczyk R(2,)(3), Smeitink J(4), Smeets HJ(5), Huynen MA(6),
Vogel R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Robin.vanderLee@radboudumc.nl. (2)Centre for Molecular
and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. radek.szklarczyk@maastrichtuniversity.nl. (3)Department of Clinical 
Genetics, Unit Clinical Genomics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, 6200 MD, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands. radek.szklarczyk@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(4)Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Radboud
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 
9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. jan.smeitink@radboudumc.nl. (5)Unit
Clinical Genomics, Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, School for Growth and
Development and for Cardiovascular Research, Maastricht University Medical
Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands. bert.smeets@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(6)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Martijn.Huijnen@radboudumc.nl. (7)Nijmegen Center for 
Mitochondrial Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. rutger.vogel@radboudumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Transcriptional control of mitochondrial metabolism is essential for 
cellular function. A better understanding of this process will aid the
elucidation of mitochondrial disorders, in particular of the many genetically
unsolved cases of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) deficiency. Yet, to date
only few studies have investigated nuclear gene regulation in the context of
OXPHOS deficiency. In this study we performed RNA sequencing of two control and
two complex I-deficient patient cell lines cultured in the presence of compounds 
that perturb mitochondrial metabolism: chloramphenicol, AICAR, or resveratrol. We
combined this with a comprehensive analysis of mitochondrial and nuclear gene
expression patterns, co-expression calculations and transcription factor binding 
sites.
RESULTS: Our analyses show that subsets of mitochondrial OXPHOS genes respond
opposingly to chloramphenicol and AICAR, whereas the response of nuclear OXPHOS
genes is less consistent between cell lines and treatments. Across all samples
nuclear OXPHOS genes have a significantly higher co-expression with each other
than with other genes, including those encoding mitochondrial proteins. We found 
no evidence for complex-specific mRNA expression regulation: subunits of
different OXPHOS complexes are similarly (co-)expressed and regulated by a common
set of transcription factors. However, we did observe significant differences
between the expression of nuclear genes for OXPHOS subunits versus assembly
factors, suggesting divergent transcription programs. Furthermore, complex I
co-expression calculations identified 684 genes with a likely role in OXPHOS
biogenesis and function. Analysis of evolutionarily conserved transcription
factor binding sites in the promoters of these genes revealed almost all known
OXPHOS regulators (including GABP, NRF1/2, SP1, YY1, E-box factors) and a set of 
novel candidates (ELK1, KLF7, SP4, EHF, ZNF143, and TEL2).
CONCLUSIONS: OXPHOS genes share an expression program distinct from other genes
encoding mitochondrial proteins, indicative of targeted nuclear regulation of a
mitochondrial sub-process. Within the subset of OXPHOS genes we established a
difference in expression between mitochondrial and nuclear genes, and between
nuclear genes encoding subunits and assembly factors. Most transcription
regulators of genes that co-express with complex I are well-established factors
for OXPHOS biogenesis. For the remaining six factors we here suggest for the
first time a link with transcription regulation in OXPHOS deficiency.

PMCID: PMC4570683
PMID: 26369791  [PubMed - in process]


22. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 6;6(30):29860-76. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5007.

ELK1 is up-regulated by androgen in bladder cancer cells and promotes tumor
progression.

Kawahara T(1,)(2,)(3), Shareef HK(1,)(4), Aljarah AK(1,)(5), Ide H(1), Li
Y(2,)(6), Kashiwagi E(1), Netto GJ(1), Zheng Y(1,)(2,)(6), Miyamoto H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Urology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA. (3)Department of
Urology, Yokohama City University School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Babylon College of Science for Women,
Babylon, Iraq. (5)Department of Biology, University of Baghdad College of
Science, Baghdad, Iraq. (6)Department of Urology, 2nd Affiliated Hospital of
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.

Little is known about biological significance of ELK1, a transcriptional factor
that activates downstream targets including c-fos proto-oncogene, in bladder
cancer. Recent preclinical evidence also suggests the involvement of androgen
receptor (AR) signaling in bladder cancer progression. In this study, we aim to
investigate the functions of ELK1 in bladder cancer growth and their regulation
by AR signals. Immunohistochemistry in bladder tumor specimens showed that the
levels of phospho-ELK1 (p-ELK1) expression were significantly elevated in
urothelial neoplasms, compared with non-neoplastic urothelium tissues, and were
also correlated with AR positivity. Patients with p-ELK1-positive
non-muscle-invasive and muscle-invasive tumors had significantly higher risks for
tumor recurrence and progression, respectively. In AR-positive bladder cancer
cell lines, dihydrotestosterone treatment increased ELK1 expression (mRNA,
protein) and its nuclear translocation, ELK1 transcriptional activity, and c-fos 
expression, which was restored by an anti-androgen hydroxyflutamide. ELK1
silencing via short hairpin RNA (shRNA) resulted in decreases in cell
viability/colony formation, and cell migration/invasion as well as an increase in
apoptosis. Importantly, ELK1 appears to require activated AR to regulate bladder 
cancer cell proliferation, but not cell migration. Androgen also failed to
significantly induce AR transactivation in ELK1-knockdown cells. In accordance
with our in vitro findings, ELK1-shRNA expression considerably retarded tumor
formation as well as its growth in xenograft-bearing male mice. Our results
suggest that ELK1 plays an important role in bladder tumorigenesis and cancer
progression, which is further induced by AR activation. Accordingly, ELK1
inhibition, together with AR inactivation, has the potential of being a
therapeutic approach for bladder cancer.

PMCID: PMC4745768
PMID: 26342199  [PubMed - in process]


23. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Dec;410(1-2):101-10. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2542-8. Epub 
2015 Aug 29.

MAPK/ERK signaling pathway-induced hyper-O-GlcNAcylation enhances cancer
malignancy.

Zhang X(1), Ma L(1), Qi J(1), Shan H(1), Yu W(1), Gu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Marine Drugs, Chinese Ministry of Education; Key Laboratory 
of Glycoscience & Glycotechnology of Shandong Province; School of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Ocean University of China, 5 Yushan Road, Qingdao, 266003, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Marine Drugs, Chinese Ministry of Education; Key Laboratory 
of Glycoscience & Glycotechnology of Shandong Province; School of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Ocean University of China, 5 Yushan Road, Qingdao, 266003, China.
guych@126.com.

Dysregulated MAPK/ERK signaling is implicated in one-third of human tumors and
represents an attractive target for the development of anticancer drugs.
Similarly, elevated protein O-GlcNAcylation and O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) are
detected in various cancers and serve as attractive novel cancer-specific
therapeutic targets. However, the potential connection between them remains
unexplored. Here, a positive correlation was found between the activated MAPK/ERK
signaling and hyper-O-GlcNAcylation in various cancer types and inhibition of the
MAPK/ERK signaling by 10 µM U0126 significantly decreased the expression of OGT
and O-GlcNAcylation in H1299, BPH-1 and DU145 cells; then, the pathway analysis
of the potential regulators of OGT obtained from the UCSC Genome Browser was
done, and ten downstream targets of ERK pathway were uncovered; the following
results showed that ELK1, one of the ten targets of ERK pathway, mediated ERK
signaling-induced OGT upregulation; finally, the MTT assay and the soft agar
assay showed that the inhibition of MAPK/ERK signaling reduced the promotion
effect of hyper-O-GlcNAcylation on cancer cell proliferation and
anchorage-independent growth. Taken together, our data originally provided
evidence for the regulatory mechanism of hyper-O-GlcNAcylation in tumors, which
will be helpful for the development of anticancer drugs targeting to
hyper-O-GlcNAcylation. This study also provided a new mechanism by which MAPK/ERK
signaling-enhanced cancer malignancy. Altogether, the recently discovered
oncogenic factor O-GlcNAc was linked to the classical MAPK/ERK signaling which is
essential for the maintenance of malignant phenotype of cancers.

PMID: 26318312  [PubMed - in process]


24. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 May 15;8(5):7125-33. eCollection 2015.

Icariin stimulates the proliferation of rat bone mesenchymal stem cells via ERK
and p38 MAPK signaling.

Qin S(1), Zhou W(2), Liu S(3), Chen P(4), Wu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Haidian Hospital, Haidian Section of Peking University Third Hospital 
29 Zhongguancun Dajie, Haidian District, Beijing 100080, China. (2)Department of 
Orthopedic Microsurgery, Taihe Hospital, Hubei University of Medicine 32 Renmin
Nan Road, Shiyan 442000, China. (3)Beijing Hospital of Integrated Traditional
Chinese and Western Medicine Beijing, China. (4)Department of Gynecology and
Obstetrics, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University 139 Renmin
Zhong Road, Changsha 410011, China.

Bone mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) are able to differentiate into multi types of
lineages, so they have been widely applied in the stem cell transplantation. The 
BMSCs are usually needed to be expanded before transplantation due to their
limited content in bone marrow. It has recently been reported that Icariin (ICA),
a major constituent of flavonoids from the Chinese medical herb Epimedium
brevicornum Maxim, promotes the proliferation of various types of differentiated 
cells. However, whether ICA can enhance BMSCs proliferation and the possible
underlying mechanisms are still unknown. After being isolated and purified from
rat bone marrow, cultured BMSCs are stimulated with different concentrations of
ICA. The cytotoxicity of ICA is evaluated by the Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8)
assay method and the ICA optimal concentration for BMSCs proliferation is
determined at 320 µg/L. Our work reveals that ICA induces an obvious
phosphorylation of ERK and p38 kinases in BMSCs, no matter serum exists or not.
Inhibition of ERK or p38 MAPK signaling by their specific inhibitors PD98059 or
SP600125, respectively, not only prevents the activation of these kinases, but
also attenuates cell proliferation induced by ICA. Furthermore, the downstream
transcription factors of MAPK pathway, Elk1, Stat3, c-Myc and Fos, are also
monitored by RT-PCR, and our results show that among them, Elk1 and c-Myc are
significantly upregulated after ICA treatment. Taken together, our results
demonstrate that ICA promotes the proliferation of rat BMSCs through activating
ERK and p38 MAPK signaling which further leads to upregulation of their
downstream transcription factors Elk1 and c-Myc. Our work provides a novel
effective way to expand the content of BMSCs in vitro, which casts light on
clinical applications of stem cell transplantation in the future.

PMCID: PMC4509195
PMID: 26221250  [PubMed]


25. BMC Genomics. 2015 Jul 7;16:501. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1642-x.

Reorganization of metastamiRs in the evolution of metastatic aggressive
neuroblastoma cells.

Khan FH(1), Pandian V(2), Ramraj S(3), Aravindan S(4), Herman TS(5,)(6),
Aravindan N(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center, 940, Stanton L. Young Boulevard, BMSB 737, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
Faizan-Khan@ouhsc.edu. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 940, Stanton L. Young Boulevard, BMSB 737,
Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. Vijayabaskar-Pandian@ouhsc.edu. (3)Department of
Radiation Oncology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 940, Stanton
L. Young Boulevard, BMSB 737, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
Satish-Ramraj@ouhsc.edu. (4)Stephenson Cancer Center, 975 NE 10th Street, BRC
1468, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. Sheeja-Aravindan@ouhsc.edu. (5)Department of
Radiation Oncology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 940, Stanton
L. Young Boulevard, BMSB 737, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
Terence-Herman@ouhsc.edu. (6)Stephenson Cancer Center, 975 NE 10th Street, BRC
1468, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. Terence-Herman@ouhsc.edu. (7)Department of
Radiation Oncology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 940, Stanton
L. Young Boulevard, BMSB 737, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. naravind@ouhsc.edu.

BACKGROUND: MetastamiRs have momentous clinical relevance and have been
correlated with disease progression in many tumors. In this study, we identified 
neuroblastoma metastamiRs exploiting unique mouse models of favorable and
high-risk metastatic human neuroblastoma. Further, we related their deregulation 
to the modulation of target proteins and established their association with
clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: Whole genome miRNA microarray analysis identified 74 metastamiRs across 
the manifold of metastatic tumors. RT-qPCR on select miRNAs validated profile
expression. Results from bio-informatics across the ingenuity pathway, miRCancer,
and literature data-mining endorsed the expression of these miRNAs in multiple
tumor systems and showed their role in metastasis, identifying them as
metastamiRs. Immunoblotting and TMA-IHC analyses revealed alterations in the
expression/phosphorylation of metastamiRs' targets, including ADAMTS-1, AKT1/2/3,
ASK1, AURKﬂ, Birc1, Birc2, Bric5, ﬂ-CATENIN, CASP8, CD54, CDK4, CREB, CTGF,
CXCR4, CYCLIN-D1, EGFR, ELK1, ESR1, CFOS, FOSB, FRA, GRB10, GSK3ﬂ, IL1a, JUND,
kRAS, KRTAP1, MCP1, MEGF10, MMP2, MMP3, MMP9, MMP10, MTA2, MYB, cMYC, NF2, NOS3, 
P21, pP38, PTPN3, CLEAVED PARP, PKC, SDF-1ﬂ, SEMA3D, SELE, STAT3, TLR3, TNFa,
TNFR1, and VEGF in aggressive cells ex vivo and in a manifold of metastatic
tumors in vivo. miRNA mimic (hsa-miR-125b, hsa-miR-27b, hsa-miR-93, hsa-miR-20a) 
and inhibitor (hsa-miR-1224-3p, hsa-miR-1260) approach for select miRNAs revealed
the direct influence of the altered metastamiRs in the regulation of identified
protein targets. Clinical outcome association analysis with the validated
metastamiRs' targets corresponded strongly with poor overall and relapse-free
survival.
CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, these results identified a comprehensive list of
neuroblastoma metastamiRs, related their deregulation to altered expression of
protein targets, and established their association with poor clinical outcomes.
The identified set of distinctive neuroblastoma metastamiRs could serve as
potential candidates for diagnostic markers for the switch from favorable to
high-risk metastatic disease.

PMCID: PMC4491873
PMID: 26148557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Oncol Lett. 2015 Jun;9(6):2795-2798. Epub 2015 Apr 14.

Analysis of AC3-33 gene expression in multiple organ cancer and adjacent normal
tissue by RNA in situ hybridization.

Hu F(1), Yang S(1), Lv S(1), Peng Y(1), Meng L(2), Gou L(1), Zhang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, College of Psychology, Hebei United University,
Tangshan, Hebei 063000, P.R. China. (2)Department of Environment and Chemical
Engineering, Tangshan College, Tangshan, Hebei 063000, P.R. China.

The AC3-33 gene encodes a secretory protein that can inhibit Elk1 transcriptional
activity via the ERK1/2 pathway. In the current study, in situ RNA hybridization 
was used to detect the AC3-33 gene expression in multiple organ cancer and
cancer-adjacent normal tissue. The results showed that the expression level of
AC3-33 varies across different tissues. AC3-33 exhibited positive expression in
squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus, adenocarcinoma of the rectum,
hepatocellular carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the lung,
cancer-adjacent normal hepatic tissue, clear cell carcinoma of the kidney,
invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast, SCC of the uterine cervix and
cancer-adjacent normal kidney tissue. Negative expression of AC3-33 was observed 
in adenocarcinoma of the stomach and colon, cancer-adjacent normal esophageal
tissue, cancer-adjacent normal gastric tissue, cancer-adjacent normal colon
tissue, cancer-adjacent normal rectal tissue, serous adenocarcinoma of the ovary 
and cancer-adjacent normal ovarian tissue. However, the expression of AC3-33 in
cancer adjacent normal breast tissue was partially positive. In conclusion, the
AC3-33 gene does exhibit positive expression in certain carcinomas, which may
indicate that AC3-33 has a significant involvement in the development and
progression of these carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC4473696
PMID: 26137149  [PubMed]


27. Front Pharmacol. 2015 Jun 3;6:119. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00119. eCollection
2015.

Biliverdin reductase: a target for cancer therapy?

Gibbs PE(1), Miralem T(1), Maines MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry , Rochester, NY, USA.

Biliverdin reductase (BVR) is a multifunctional protein that is the primary
source of the potent antioxidant, bilirubin. BVR regulates activities/functions
in the insulin/IGF-1/IRK/PI3K/MAPK pathways. Activation of certain kinases in
these pathways is/are hallmark(s) of cancerous cells. The protein is a
scaffold/bridge and intracellular transporter of kinases that regulate growth and
proliferation of cells, including PKCs, ERK and Akt, and their targets including 
NF-<U+03BA>B, Elk1, HO-1, and iNOS. The scaffold and transport functions enable
activated BVR to relocate from the cytosol to the nucleus or to the plasma
membrane, depending on the activating stimulus. This enables the reductase to
function in diverse signaling pathways. And, its expression at the transcript and
protein levels are increased in human tumors and the infiltrating T-cells,
monocytes and circulating lymphocytes, as well as the circulating and
infiltrating macrophages. These functions suggest that the cytoprotective role of
BVR may be permissive for cancer/tumor growth. In this review, we summarize the
recent developments that define the pro-growth activities of BVR, particularly
with respect to its input into the MAPK signaling pathway and present evidence
that BVR-based peptides inhibit activation of protein kinases, including MEK,
PKCd, and ERK as well as downstream targets including Elk1 and iNOS, and thus
offers a credible novel approach to reduce cancer cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC4452799
PMID: 26089799  [PubMed]


28. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Aug 7;463(4):1028-33. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.06.053. Epub 2015 Jun 12.

Overexpression of prohibitin-1 inhibits RANKL-induced activation of p38-Elk-1-SRE
signaling axis blocking MKK6 activity.

Lee CH(1), Choi SW(2), Kim JY(3), Kim SH(2), Yoon KH(4), Oh J(5), Lee MS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Wonkwang
University, Iksan, Jeonbuk 570-749, Republic of Korea; Imaging Science-based Lung
and Bone Diseases Research Center, Wonkwang University, Iksan, Jeonbuk 570-749,
Republic of Korea. (2)Laboratory of Translational Therapeutics, Pharmacology
Research Center, Bio-Organic Science Division, Korea Research Institute of
Chemical Technology, Daejeon 305-600, Republic of Korea. (3)Imaging Science-based
Lung and Bone Diseases Research Center, Wonkwang University, Iksan, Jeonbuk
570-749, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Radiology, School of Medicine,
Wonkwang University, Iksan, Jeonbuk 570-749, Republic of Korea. (5)Imaging
Science-based Lung and Bone Diseases Research Center, Wonkwang University, Iksan,
Jeonbuk 570-749, Republic of Korea; Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine,
Wonkwang University, Iksan, Jeonbuk 570-749, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: jmoh@wku.ac.kr. (6)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Wonkwang University, Iksan, Jeonbuk 570-749, Republic of Korea; Imaging
Science-based Lung and Bone Diseases Research Center, Wonkwang University, Iksan,
Jeonbuk 570-749, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: ckhlms@wku.ac.kr.

Prohibitin-1 (PHB) regulates diverse cellular processes by controlling several
signaling pathways. In this study, we investigated the functional involvement of 
PHB in osteoclast differentiation. PHB expression was time-dependently increased 
by RANKL in BMMs. However, the retroviral over-expression of PHB strongly
inhibited the expression of c-Fos and NFATc1, and activation of p38-Elk-1-SRE
signaling pathway. Anti-osteoclastogenic action of PHB was significantly
inhibited by constitutively active forms of MKK6, but not Elk-1. Collectively,
PHB negatively regulates the formation of mature osteoclasts via inhibition of
MKK6 activity that affects the activation of the p38-Elk-1 signaling axis
required for the expression of c-Fos and NFATc1.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26079882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2015 Aug 1;309(3):L211-25. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00232.2014. Epub 2015 Jun 12.

Endothelin-1 induces VCAM-1 expression-mediated inflammation via receptor
tyrosine kinases and Elk/p300 in human tracheal smooth muscle cells.

Lin CC(1), Lin WN(2), Hou WC(3), Hsiao LD(1), Yang CM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthetics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung
University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan; (2)Graduate Institute of Basic Medicine, Fu Jen
Catholic University, New Taipei City, Taiwan; and. (3)Department of Pharmacology 
and Health Aging Research Center, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University,
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. (4)Department of Pharmacology and Health Aging Research Center,
College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan
chuenmao@mail.cgu.edu.tw.

The elevated level of endothelin-1 (ET-1) has been detected in the
bronchoalveolar lavage of patients with severe asthma, acute lung injury, acute
respiratory distress syndrome, and sepsis. ET-1 may affect vessel tone together
with lung physiology and pathology. Vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) is
one kind of adhesion molecules participating in the process of polymorphonuclear 
leukocyte transmigration and regulating the occurrence and amplification of
tissue inflammation. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying ET-1-mediated
expression of VCAM-1 on human tracheal smooth muscle cells (HTSMCs) were largely 
unknown. Here we reported that ET-1 stimulated expression of VCAM-1 gene on
HTSMCs, which was blocked by pretreatment with the inhibitors of ET receptors,
Src, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR),
platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K), AKT, MEK1/2, and p300, suggesting the participation of these signaling
components in ET-1-regulated HTSMC responses. Furthermore, transfection with
small-interfering RNA (siRNA) of Src, AKT, p42 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK), or p300 downregulated the respective proteins and significantly
attenuated ET-1-induced VCAM-1 expression. ET-1 also stimulated phosphorylation
of Src, EGFR, PDGFR, AKT, p42/p44 MAPK, and Elk-1 and acetylation of histone H4
on HTSMCs. Immunoprecipitation assay showed the association between Elk-1 and
p300 in the nucleus. Adhesion assay revealed that the adhesion of THP-1 to HTSMCs
challenged with ET-1 was increased, which was attenuated by the inhibitors of ET 
receptors, Src, MMPs, EGFR, PDGFR, PI3K, AKT, p42/p44 MAPK, and p300. Taken
together, these data suggested that ET-1 promotes occurrence and amplification of
pathology-related airway inflammation via enhancing VCAM-1 expression in an ET
receptor/Src/MMP/EGFR, PDGFR/PI3K/AKT/p42/p44 MAPK/Elk-1/p300 pathway in HTSMCs.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 26071554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Jun;54(3):339-49. doi: 10.1530/JME-15-0086.

Estrogen receptor ESR1 mediates activation of ERK1/2, CREB, and ELK1 in the
corpus of the epididymis.

Cavalcanti FN(1), Lucas TF(1), Lazari MF(1), Porto CS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental EndocrinologyDepartment of Pharmacology, Escola
Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de S„o Paulo, Rua TrÍs de maio 100,
INFAR, Vila Clementino, S„o Paulo, S„o Paulo 04044-020, Brazil. (2)Section of
Experimental EndocrinologyDepartment of Pharmacology, Escola Paulista de
Medicina, Universidade Federal de S„o Paulo, Rua TrÍs de maio 100, INFAR, Vila
Clementino, S„o Paulo, S„o Paulo 04044-020, Brazil csporto@unifesp.br
csegretiporto@gmail.com.

Expression of the estrogen receptor ESR1 is higher in the corpus than it is in
the initial segment/caput and cauda of the epididymis. ESR1 immunostaining in the
corpus has been localized not only in the nuclei but also in the cytoplasm and
apical membrane, which indicates that ESR1 plays a role in membrane-initiated
signaling. The present study investigated whether ESR1 mediates the activation of
rapid signaling pathways by estradiol (E2) in the epididymis. We investigated the
effect of E2 and the ESR1-selective agonist
(4,4',4''-(4-propyl-(1H)-pyrazole-1,3,5-triyl)trisphenol (PPT) on the activation 
of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases (ERK1/2), CREB protein, and ETS
oncogene-related protein (ELK1). Treatment with PPT did not affect ERK1/2
phosphorylation in the cauda, but it rapidly increased ERK1/2 phosphorylation in 
the initial segment/caput and corpus of the epididymis. PPT also activated CREB
and ELK1 in the corpus of the epididymis. The PPT-induced phosphorylation of
ERK1/2, CREB, and ELK1 was blocked by the ESR1-selective antagonist MPP and by
pretreatment with a non-receptor tyrosine kinase SRC inhibitor, an EGFR kinase
inhibitor, an MEK1/2 inhibitor, and a phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase inhibitor. In
conclusion, these results indicate that the corpus, which is a region with high
expression of the estrogen receptor ESR1, is a major target in the epididymis for
the activation of rapid signaling by E2. The sequence of events that follow E2
interaction with ESR1 includes the SRC-mediated transactivation of EGFR and the
phosphorylation of ERK1/2, CREB, and ELK1. This rapid estrogen signaling may
modulate gene expression in the corpus of the epididymis, and it may play a role 
in the dynamic microenvironment of the epididymal lumen.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 26069273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 30;6(18):16573-87.

Estrogenic gper signaling regulates mir144 expression in cancer cells and
cancer-associated fibroblasts (cafs).

Vivacqua A(1), De Marco P(1), Santolla MF(1), Cirillo F(1), Pellegrino M(1),
Panno ML(1), Abonante S(2), Maggiolini M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Health and Nutrition Sciences, University of
Calabria, Rende, Italy. (2)Regional Hospital, Cosenza, Italy.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non coding RNA molecules that play a crucial role in
several pathophysiological conditions, including cancer. The stimulation of
hormone-sensitive tumors by estrogens are mediated by estrogen receptor (ER)a and
G protein estrogen receptor (GPER). Previous studies have reported that ERa
regulates miRNA expression, while this ability of GPER remains to be elucidated. 
Here, we demonstrate that in SkBr3 breast cancer and HepG2 hepatocarcinoma cells,
17ﬂ-estradiol (E2) and the selective GPER ligand G-1 induce miR144 expression
through GPER and the involvement of the PI3K/ERK1/2/Elk1 transduction pathway.
Moreover, we show that E2 and G-1 down-regulate through miR144 the
onco-suppressor Runx1 and increase cell cycle progression. The capability of E2
and G-1 in triggering the induction of miR144 and the down-regulation of Runx1
was also confirmed in cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) that are main
components of the tumor microenvironment driving cancer progression. Further
confirming these results, Runx1 protein levels were found decreased in tumor
xenografts upon G-1 treatment. On the basis of our findings miR144 and Runx1 may 
be included among the oncotargets of GPER action. Moreover, the present data
provide new insights regarding the ability of estrogens to trigger the
GPER/miR144/Runx1 transduction pathway toward the stimulation of cancer
progression.

PMCID: PMC4599290
PMID: 26030000  [PubMed - in process]


32. Clin Ter. 2015;166(2):e81-90. doi: 10.7417/T.2015.1825.

Tocotrienol-rich fraction prevents cellular aging by modulating cell
proliferation signaling pathways.

Khor SC(1), Mohd Yusof YA(1), Wan Ngah WZ(1), Makpol S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Level 17, Pre-Clinical Building, Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Center, Jalan Yaacob Latif, Bandar Tun Razak, Cheras,
56000 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Vitamin E has been suggested as nutritional
intervention for the prevention of degenerative and age-related diseases. In this
study, we aimed to elucidate the underlying mechanism of tocotrienol-rich
fraction (TRF) in delaying cellular aging by targeting the proliferation
signaling pathways in human diploid fibroblasts (HDFs).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Tocotrienol-rich fraction was used to treat different
stages of cellular aging of primary human diploid fibroblasts viz. young (passage
6), pre-senescent (passage 15) and senescent (passage 30). Several selected
targets involved in the downstream of PI3K/AKT and RAF/MEK/ERK pathways were
compared in total RNA and protein.
RESULTS: Different transcriptional profiles were observed in young, pre-senescent
and senescent HDFs, in which cellular aging increased AKT, FOXO3, CDKN1A and RSK1
mRNA expression level, but decreased ELK1, FOS and SIRT1 mRNA expression level.
With tocotrienol-rich fraction treatment, gene expression of AKT, FOXO3, ERK and 
RSK1 mRNA was decreased in senescent cells, but not in young cells. The three
down-regulated mRNA in cellular aging, ELK1, FOS and SIRT1, were increased with
tocotrienol-rich fraction treatment. Expression of FOXO3 and P21Cip1 proteins
showed up-regulation in senescent cells but tocotrienol-rich fraction only
decreased P21Cip1 protein expression in senescent cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Tocotrienol-rich fraction exerts gene modulating properties that
might be responsible in promoting cell cycle progression during cellular aging.

PMID: 25945449  [PubMed - in process]


33. Atherosclerosis. 2015 Jun;240(2):453-61. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.04.008. Epub 2015 Apr 9.

Effects of estrogen on growth and smooth muscle differentiation of vascular
wall-resident CD34(+) stem/progenitor cells.

Wu Y(1), Shen Y(2), Kang K(1), Zhang Y(1), Ao F(1), Wan Y(3), Song J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Wuhan University School of Basic Medical
Sciences, 135 Donghu Road, Wuhan 430071, Hubei, PR China. (2)Department of
Physiology, Wuhan University School of Basic Medical Sciences, 135 Donghu Road,
Wuhan 430071, Hubei, PR China. (3)Department of Physiology, Wuhan University
School of Basic Medical Sciences, 135 Donghu Road, Wuhan 430071, Hubei, PR China.
Electronic address: wanyu@whu.edu.cn. (4)Department of Anatomy and Embryology,
Wuhan University School of Basic Medical Sciences, 135 Donghu Road, Wuhan 430071,
Hubei, PR China. Electronic address: s664184@163.com.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the effects of estrogen on growth and smooth muscle
cell (SMC)-differentiation of vascular wall-resident CD34(+) stem/progenitor
cells (VRS/Pcs).
METHODS AND RESULTS: The existence of CD34(+) VRS/Pcs was confirmed by
immunohistochemistry in the adventitia of arteries of young (2-month-old) and old
(24-month-old) female SD rats with less CD34(+) adventitial cells detected in the
old. The VRS/Pcs isolated from young animals were grown in Stem cell growth
medium or induced to differentiate into SMC with PDGF-BB in the presence or
absence of 17ﬂ-estrodiol (E2). Flow cytometry, RT-qPCR and Western blot showed
that E2 promoted Brdu incorporation of the CD34(+) VRS/Pcs growing in Stem cell
growth medium; but when the cells were incubated in PDGF-BB, the hormone enhanced
their expression of SMC marker SM22. ChIP and IP assays showed that E2
significantly promoted the binding of pELK1-SRF complex to the promoter of c-fos 
gene in CD34(+) VRS/Pcs growing in the Stem cell growth medium; but when the
cells were stimulated with PDGF-BB, an E2-enhanced binding of myocardin-SRF to
the promoter of SM22 gene was found with enhanced expression of SRC3 and its
binding to myocardin. The effects of E2 above could be blocked by the estrogen
receptor antagonist ICI 182,780 or inhibited by SRF-siRNA.
CONCLUSION: Estrogen has dual effects on CD34(+) VRS/Pcs. For the
undifferentiated VRS/Pcs, it accelerates their proliferation by enhancing binding
of pELK1-SRF complex to c-fos gene; while for the differentiating VRS/Pcs, it
promotes their differentiation to SMC through a mechanism of SRC3-mediated
interaction of myocardin-SRF complex with SM22 gene.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25898000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Mol Med. 2015 Apr 3;21:323-36. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2015.00018.

A Human-Specific a7-Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor Gene in Human Leukocytes:
Identification, Regulation and the Consequences of CHRFAM7A Expression.

Costantini TW(1), Dang X(1,)(2), Yurchyshyna MV(1), Coimbra R(1), Eliceiri BP(1),
Baird A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California San Diego Health Sciences, San
Diego, California, United States of America. (2)Cardiovascular Research Center,
Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou, Sichuan, China.

The human genome contains a variant form of the a7-nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor (a7nAChR) gene that is uniquely human. This CHRFAM7A gene arose during
human speciation and recent data suggests that its expression alters ligand
tropism of the normally homopentameric human a7-AChR ligand-gated cell surface
ion channel that is found on the surface of many different cell types. To
understand its possible significance in regulating inflammation in humans, we
investigated its expression in normal human leukocytes and leukocyte cell lines, 
compared CHRFAM7A expression to that of the CHRNA7 gene, mapped its promoter and 
characterized the effects of stable CHRFAM7A overexpression. We report here that 
CHRFAM7A is highly expressed in human leukocytes but that the levels of both
CHRFAM7A and CHRNA7 mRNAs were independent and varied widely. To this end,
mapping of the CHRFAM7A promoter in its 5'-untranslated region (UTR) identified a
unique 1-kb sequence that independently regulates CHRFAM7A gene expression.
Because overexpression of CHRFAM7A in THP1 cells altered the cell phenotype and
modified the expression of genes associated with focal adhesion (for example,
FAK, P13K, Akt, rho, GEF, Elk1, CycD), leukocyte transepithelial migration (Nox, 
ITG, MMPs, PKC) and cancer (kit, kitL, ras, cFos cyclinD1, Frizzled and GPCR), we
conclude that CHRFAM7A is biologically active. Most surprisingly however, stable 
CHRFAM7A overexpression in THP1 cells upregulated CHRNA7, which, in turn, led to 
increased binding of the specific a7nAChR ligand, bungarotoxin, on the THP1 cell 
surface. Taken together, these data confirm the close association between
CHRFAM7A and CHRNA7 expression, establish a biological consequence to CHRFAM7A
expression in human leukocytes and support the possibility that this
human-specific gene might contribute to, and/or gauge, a human-specific response 
to inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4534468
PMID: 25860877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015 Apr 8;107(6):djv077. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv077. Print
2015 Jun.

Role of cannabinoid receptor CB2 in HER2 pro-oncogenic signaling in breast
cancer.

PÈrez-GÛmez E(1), Andradas C(1), Blasco-Benito S(1), Caffarel MM(1),
GarcÌa-Taboada E(1), Villa-Morales M(1), Moreno E(1), Hamann S(1), MartÌn-Villar 
E(1), Flores JM(1), Wenners A(1), Alkatout I(1), Klapper W(1), Rˆcken C(1),
Bronsert P(1), Stickeler E(1), Staebler A(1), Bauer M(1), Arnold N(1), Soriano
J(1), PÈrez-MartÌnez M(1), MegÌas D(1), Moreno-Bueno G(1), Ortega-GutiÈrrez S(1),
Artola M(1), V·zquez-Villa H(1), Quintanilla M(1), Fern·ndez-Piqueras J(1),
Canela EI(1), McCormick PJ(1), Guzm·n M(1), S·nchez C(1).

Author information: 
(1): Dept. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology I, School of Biology, Complutense
University, Madrid, Spain (EPG, CA, MMC, SBB, EGT, MG, CS); Instituto de
InvestigaciÛn Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain (EPG, CA, SBB, CS);
Biodonostia, San Sebastian, Spain and IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, 
Bilbao, Spain (MMC); Centro de BiologÌa Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior 
de Investigaciones CientÌficas-Universidad AutÛnoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
(MVM, JFP); Centro de InvestigaciÛn BiomÈdica en Red de Enfermedades Raras,
Madrid, Spain (MVM, JFP); Instituto de InvestigaciÛn Sanitaria FundaciÛn JimÈnez 
DÌaz, Madrid, Spain (MVM, JFP); Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain (EM, EIC, PJM); Centro de InvestigaciÛn
BiomÈdica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas, Madrid, Spain (EM, EIC, PJM,
MG); Institute of Biomedicine of the University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
(EM, EIC, PJM); Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany (SH, AW, IA, MB, NA); Department of Animal
Surgery and Medicine, School of Veterinary, Complutense University, Madrid, Spain
(JMF); Instituto de Investigaciones BiomÈdicas Alberto Sols, Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones CientÌficas-Universidad AutÛnoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain (EMV,
GMB, MQ); Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel,
Germany (WK, CR); Institute of Pathology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany (PB); Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University of Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany (ES); Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology, University
Hospital of T¸bingen, T¸bingen, Germany (AS); Spanish National Cancer Research
Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain (JS, MPM, DM); FundaciÛn MD Anderson Internacional, 
Madrid, Spain (GMB); Department of Organic Chemistry, School of Chemistry,
Complutense University, Madrid, Spain (SOG, MA, HVV); School of Pharmacy,
University of East A

BACKGROUND: Pharmacological activation of cannabinoid receptors elicits
antitumoral responses in different cancer models. However, the biological role of
these receptors in tumor physio-pathology is still unknown.
METHODS: We analyzed CB2 cannabinoid receptor protein expression in two series of
166 and 483 breast tumor samples operated in the University Hospitals of Kiel,
T¸bingen, and Freiburg between 1997 and 2010 and CB2 mRNA expression in
previously published DNA microarray datasets. The role of CB2 in oncogenesis was 
studied by generating a mouse line that expresses the human V-Erb-B2 Avian
Erythroblastic Leukemia Viral Oncogene Homolog 2 (HER2) rat ortholog (neu) and
lacks CB2 and by a variety of biochemical and cell biology approaches in human
breast cancer cells in culture and in vivo, upon modulation of CB2 expression by 
si/shRNAs and overexpression plasmids. CB2-HER2 molecular interaction was studied
by colocalization, coimmunoprecipitation, and proximity ligation assays.
Statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: We show an association between elevated CB2 expression in HER2+ breast
tumors and poor patient prognosis (decreased overall survival, hazard ratio [HR] 
= 0.29, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.09 to 0.71, P = .009) and higher
probability to suffer local recurrence (HR = 0.09, 95% CI = 0.049 to 0.54, P =
.003) and to develop distant metastases (HR = 0.33, 95% CI = 0.13 to 0.75, P =
.009). We also demonstrate that genetic inactivation of CB2 impairs tumor
generation and progression in MMTV-neu mice. Moreover, we show that HER2
upregulates CB2 expression by activating the transcription factor ELK1 via the
ERK cascade and that an increased CB2 expression activates the HER2 pro-oncogenic
signaling at the level of the tyrosine kinase c-SRC. Finally, we show HER2 and
CB2 form heteromers in cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings reveal an unprecedented role of CB2 as a pivotal
regulator of HER2 pro-oncogenic signaling in breast cancer, and they suggest that
CB2 may be a biomarker with prognostic value in these tumors.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25855725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):981-7. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3514. Epub 2015 Mar 19.

Gene expression changes in human mesenchymal stem cells from patients with
osteoporosis.

Liu L(1), Zhu Q(2), Wang J(1), Xi Q(1), Zhu H(1), Gu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Shanghai Pudong Gongli Hospital, Shanghai 200135,
P.R. China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai Pudong Gongli Hospital,
Shanghai 200135, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the underlying molecular
mechanisms of osteoporosis and to identify novel candidate genes involved in this
disease. The gene expression profile of GSE35958 was downloaded from Gene
Expression Omnibus, including five samples of human mesenchymal stem cells from
patients with osteoporosis and four control samples. Differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) were initially identified following an analysis using Student's
t-test. Subsequently, a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of the
significant pathways was constructed, based on the Human Protein Reference
Database. In the significant pathways, DEGs were screened using cut-off criteria 
of FDR<0.1 and |log(2)FC|>1.5. A co-change network for pathways was also
constructed using the method of cumulative hypergeometric probability
distribution. Finally, the transcriptional regulatory network for DEGs was
constructed based on the TRANSFAC database. In total, 1,127 DEGs, including 554
upregulated and 573 downregulated DEGs, were screened. The constructed PPI
network for the DEGs involved in the two significant pathways, including focal
adhesion and lysosome, demonstrated that the five DEGs with a high degree (>60)
were ﬂ-catenin, SHC-transforming protein 1, RAC-a serine/threonine-protein
kinase, caveolin 1 and filamin A, with degrees of 135, 117, 117, 73 and 63,
respectively. The pathway with the degree of 22 in the constructed co-change
network was neuroactive ligand receptor interaction. The nine genes with a high
(= 9) degree in the constructed transcriptional regulatory network were
REL-associated protein, upstream stimulatory factor 1, specificity protein 1,
Fos-related antigen 1, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A, upstream stimulatory
factor 2, ETS domain-containing protein Elk1, JUND and retinoic acid receptor a, 
with degrees of 29, 27, 19, 18, 17, 13, 11, 11 and 9, respectively. The DEGs with
high degree in the PPI and transcriptional regulatory networks may be candidate
target molecules, which may be used to monitor, diagnose and treat osteoporosis.

PMCID: PMC4438949
PMID: 25815782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 27;10(3):e0119366. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119366.
eCollection 2015.

The ubiquitin ligase UBE3A dampens ERK pathway signalling in HPV E6 transformed
HeLa cells.

Aguilar-Martinez E(1), Morrisroe C(1), Sharrocks AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building,
Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, United Kingdom.

Signalling through the ERK MAP kinase pathway plays an important role in many
biological processes and it is often deregulated in disease states such as
cancer. One major effect of MAP kinase signalling is to promote gene expression
through the phosphorylation and activation of transcription factors like ELK1.
ELK1 in turn controls the activity of immediate-early genes such as FOS. Here we 
have used ELK1 activation in HeLa cells as a read out to conduct a genome-wide
siRNA screen to identify negative regulators of ERK-mediated immediate-early gene
activation. One of the candidates that we identified was the E3 ubiquitin ligase 
UBE3A/E6-AP. Reductions in UBE3A levels cause increased basal levels of ERK
activity, a loss of growth factor-mediated ERK activation and concomitant defects
in immediate-early gene expression. Thus, UBE3A acts to dampen down basal level
ERK activation and to prime the pathway for growth factor-mediated activation.
Mechanistically, we demonstrate that UBE3A functions in HeLa cells through its
binding partner, HPV18 E6 protein and the E6 target protein p53. Loss of either
E6 or p53 blocks the effect of UBE3A depletion on ERK pathway signalling,
indicating that in the context of oncogenic viral protein expression, UBE3A plays
an important role in negating the consequences of p53 activation on ERK pathway
signalling.

PMCID: PMC4376912
PMID: 25815718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Bone Miner Metab. 2016 Mar;34(2):132-9. doi: 10.1007/s00774-015-0651-9. Epub
2015 Mar 21.

Phosphate enhances Fgf23 expression through reactive oxygen species in UMR-106
cells.

Hori M(1), Kinoshita Y(1), Taguchi M(1), Fukumoto S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University
of Tokyo Hospital, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan. (2)Division of
Nephrology and Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of Tokyo
Hospital, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.
fukumoto-tky@umin.ac.jp.

Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) has been shown to work as a phosphotropic
hormone. Although FGF23 reduces the serum phosphate level, it has not been
established that phosphate directly regulates FGF23 production. In this study, we
investigated whether phosphate can enhance Fgf23 expression using the rat
osteoblastic cell line UMR-106, which has been shown to express Fgf23 in response
to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D [1,25(OH)2D]. Phosphate increased Fgf23 expression in 
a dose- and time-dependent manner in the presence of 1,25(OH)2D. Phosphate also
increased Fgf23 promoter activity, but showed no effect on the half-life of Fgf23
messenger RNA. Phosphonoformic acid and PD98059, an inhibitor of MEK, inhibited
the effects of phosphate on Fgf23 expression and promoter activity. In addition, 
phosphate enhanced production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in UMR-106 cells, 
and hydrogen peroxide enhanced FGF23 production in a dose- and time-dependent
manner. Hydrogen peroxide also enhanced Elk1 reporter activity, a target of the
MEK-extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway. Furthermore, the effect 
of phosphate on ROS production and Fgf23 expression was inhibited by apocynin, an
inhibitor of NADPH oxidase. These results indicate that phosphate directly
enhances Fgf23 transcription without affecting the stability of Fgf23 messenger
RNA by stimulating NADPH-induced ROS production and the MEK-ERK pathway in
UMR-106 cells.

PMID: 25792238  [PubMed - in process]


39. Mutat Res. 2014 Oct;768:6-15. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2014.06.005. Epub 2014 Jun
24.

15-Deoxy-<U+0394>12,14-prostaglandin J2 induces expression of 15-hydroxyprostaglandin
dehydrogenase through Elk-1 activation in human breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells.

Kim HR(1), Lee HN(1), Lim K(2), Surh YJ(1), Na HK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Seoul
National University, Seoul 151-742, South Korea. (2)Department of Biochemistry,
College of Medicine, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, South Korea.
(3)Department of Food and Nutrition, College of Human Ecology, Sungshin Women's
University, Seoul 142-732, South Korea. Electronic address: nhkdec28@gmail.com.

Overproduction of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has been reported to be implicated in
carcinogenesis. The intracellular level of PGE2 is maintained not only by its
biosynthesis, but also by inactivation/degradation. 15-Hydroxyprostaglandin
dehydrogenase (15-PGDH) is the key enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of
oncogenic PGE2 to a biologically inactive keto metabolite. In the present study, 
we demonstrate that 15-deoxy-<U+0394>(12,14)-prostaglandin J2 (15 d-PGJ2), one of the
terminal products of cyclooxygenase-2, updregulates the expression and the
activity of 15-PGDH in human breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells. By using deletion
constructs of the 15-PGDH promoter, we have found that E-twenty six (Ets) is the 
most essential determinant for 15-PGDH induction. 15 d-PGJ2 induced
phosphorylation of Elk-1, one of Ets transcription factor family members, in the 
nucleus. Knockdown of Elk-1 abolished the ability of 15 d-PGJ2 to upregulate
15-PGDH expression. Furthermore, 15 d-PGJ2-mediated activation of Elk-1 was found
to be dependent on activation of extracellular-signal related kinase (ERK) 1/2.
Treatment of U0126, a pharmacological inhibitor of MEK1/2-ERK, abolished
phosphorylation and DNA binding of Elk-1 as well as 15-PGDH induction in 15
d-PGJ2-treated MDA-MB-231 cells. Moreover, 15 d-PGJ2 generated reactive oxygen
species (ROS), which contribute to the expression of 15-PGDH as well as
phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Elk-1. 15 d-PGJ2 inhibited the migration of
MDA-MB-231 cells, which was attenuated by transient transfection with 15-PGDH
siRNA. Taken together, these findings suggest that 15 d-PGJ2 induces the
expression of 15-PGDH through ROS-mediated activation of ERK1/2 and subsequently 
Elk-1 in the MDA-MB-231 cells, which may contribute to tumor suppressive activity
of this cyclopentenone prostaglandin.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25773924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Med Oncol. 2015 Apr;32(4):87. doi: 10.1007/s12032-015-0522-1. Epub 2015 Feb 24.

GATA2 promotes glioma progression through EGFR/ERK/Elk-1 pathway.

Wang Z(1), Yuan H, Sun C, Xu L, Chen Y, Zhu Q, Zhao H, Huang Q, Dong J, Lan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 
1055 Sanxiang Road, Suzhou, 215004, China.

Among the gliomas, glioblastoma (GBM) is the highest grade and the most malignant
glioma tumor. GATA2 is a hematopoietic factor that has been intensely studied in 
hematopoietic malignancies. Recently, the functions of GATA2 as an oncogene in
other types of human cancer have been reported. However, no role for GATA2 in the
development and progression of glioma has been reported to date. In the present
study, we found that the expression level of GATA2 is upregulated in GBM and is
correlated with GBM outcome. Ectopic expression of GATA2 or RNAi-mediated
knockdown of GATA2 significantly enhanced or inhibited proliferation, migration
and invasion of glioma cells. Moreover, we found that epidermal growth factor
receptor and extracellular signal-regulated kinase, as upstream components of the
signaling pathway, upregulate GATA2 expression; moreover, GATA2 promotes Elk-1
expression. Therefore, a genetic approach or pharmacological intervention
targeting GATA2 could potentially serve as an effective strategy for treating
glioma patients.

PMID: 25707769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. FEBS J. 2015 Mar;282(6):1017-30. doi: 10.1111/febs.13197. Epub 2015 Feb 3.

Active ERK2 is sufficient to mediate growth arrest and differentiation signaling.

Wu PK(1), Hong SK, Yoon SH, Park JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.

Although extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK1/2) have been shown to be
required in Raf/MEK/ERK pathway signaling, its sufficiency for mediating the
pathway signaling has not been firmly established. In an effort to address this, 
we evaluated previously described ERK2 mutants that exhibit enhanced
autophosphorylation of TEY sites in the activation loop in terms of their ability
to induce growth arrest and differentiation in LNCaP and PC12 cells. We
demonstrate that expression of ERK2-L73P/S151D, containing Lys73Pro and Ser151Asp
substitutions that synergistically promote ERK autophosphorylation, is sufficient
to induce growth arrest and differentiation, whereas expression of ERK2-I84A and 
ERK2-R65S/D319N is not as effective. When compared to the constitutively active
MEK1-<U+0394>N3/S218E/S222D, expression of ERK2-L73P/S151D only mildly increased ERK
kinase activity in cells, as assessed using the ERK substrates p90(RSK) and ETS
domain-containing protein (ELK1). However, ERK2-L73P/S151D expression effectively
induced down-regulation of androgen receptors, Retinoblastoma (Rb) protein and
E2F1 transcription factor, and up-regulation of p16(INK4A) and p21(CIP1),
accompanied by cell-cycle arrest and morphological differentiation in LNCaP cells
and neurite-like processes in PC12 cells. These effects and the TEY site
phosphorylation of ERK2-L73P/S151D were abrogated upon introduction of the active
site-disabling Lys52Arg mutation, suggesting that its autoactivation drives this 
signaling. Moreover, introduction of mutations Asp316/319Ala or Asp319Asn, which 
impair the common docking site/D-domain-based physical interaction of ERK, did
not significantly affect ERK2-L73P/S151D signaling, suggesting that ERK2 mediates
growth arrest and differentiation independently of the conventional ERK-target
interaction mechanism. Thus, our study presents convincing evidence of ERK
sufficiency for Raf/MEK/ERK signaling.

© 2015 FEBS.

PMCID: PMC4368470
PMID: 25639353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Toxicol Lett. 2015 Mar 4;233(2):68-77. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2015.01.013. Epub
2015 Jan 24.

Chrysin, baicalein and galangin are indirect activators of the human constitutive
androstane receptor (CAR).

Carazo Fern·ndez A(1), Smutny T(1), Hyrsov· L(1), Berka K(2), Pavek P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Charles
University in Prague, HeyrovskÈho 1203, Hradec Kralove CZ500 05, Czech Republic. 
(2)Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, Department of Physical
Chemistry Palacky University in Olomouc, 17. listopadu 1131, Olomouc CZ779 00,
Czech Republic. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of
Pharmacy, Charles University in Prague, HeyrovskÈho 1203, Hradec Kralove CZ500
05, Czech Republic. Electronic address: petr.pavek@faf.cuni.cz.

The constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) is a crucial transcriptional regulator
of key xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes such as cytochrome P450 CYP3A4, CYP2C9 and
CYP2B6. The flavonoids chrysin, baicalein and galangin have been reported to
activate CAR and interfere with EGFR signaling. Nevertheless, it is not known if 
these flavonoids are direct CAR ligands or indirect phenobarbital-like CAR
activators via the inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
signaling. We analyze the interactions of chrysin, galangin and baicalein and its
glycoside baicalin with human CAR. We have employed and validated methods that
can study direct interaction with the CAR ligand binding pocket. Secondly, we
determined if the compounds affect human EGFR signaling and interact with EGFR.
Employing a TR-FRET coactivator assay with recombinant CAR or CAR assembly assay,
a consistent activation of CAR with flavonoids and phenobarbital was not
observed. It was determined, however, that galangin, chrysin, and baicalein may
slightly repress EGFR-Tyr1068 autophosphorylation after EGF treatment,
phosphorylation of downstream transcription factor ELK1 and stimulate EGFP-CAR
nuclear translocation in primary human hepatocytes. These data suggest that
flavonoids chrysin, galangin and baicalein are indirect human CAR activators.
This study also demonstrates new approach how to test the direct CAR interaction 
with its ligands.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25625231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Dev Biol. 2015 Mar 15;399(2):218-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.12.032. Epub 2015 
Jan 7.

Diverse ETS transcription factors mediate FGF signaling in the Ciona anterior
neural plate.

Gainous TB(1), Wagner E(1), Levine M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Genomics, Division of Genetics, Genomics and
Development, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. (2)Center for Integrative Genomics, Division of
Genetics, Genomics and Development, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. Electronic address:
mlevine@berkeley.edu.

The ascidian Ciona intestinalis is a marine invertebrate belonging to the sister 
group of the vertebrates, the tunicates. Its compact genome and simple,
experimentally tractable embryos make Ciona well-suited for the study of
cell-fate specification in chordates. Tunicate larvae possess a characteristic
chordate body plan, and many developmental pathways are conserved between
tunicates and vertebrates. Previous studies have shown that FGF signals are
essential for neural induction and patterning at sequential steps of Ciona
embryogenesis. Here we show that two different ETS family transcription factors, 
Ets1/2 and Elk1/3/4, have partially redundant activities in the anterior neural
plate of gastrulating embryos. Whereas Ets1/2 promotes pigment cell formation in 
lateral lineages, both Ets1/2 and Elk1/3/4 are involved in the activation of
Myt1L in medial lineages and the restriction of Six3/6 expression to the
anterior-most regions of the neural tube. We also provide evidence that
photoreceptor cells arise from posterior regions of the presumptive sensory
vesicle, and do not depend on FGF signaling. Cells previously identified as
photoreceptor progenitors instead form ependymal cells and neurons of the larval 
brain. Our results extend recent findings on FGF-dependent patterning of
anterior-posterior compartments in the Ciona central nervous system.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25576927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Virol J. 2014 Dec 30;11:227. doi: 10.1186/s12985-014-0227-7.

MEK/ERK signaling pathway is required for enterovirus 71 replication in immature 
dendritic cells.

Shi W(1), Hou X(2), Peng H(3), Zhang L(4), Li Y(5), Gu Z(6), Jiang Q(7), Shi
M(8), Ji Y(9), Jiang J(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 185 Juqian Street, Changzhou, Jiangsu, 213003, PR China.
shiweifeng67@163.com. (2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Third Affiliated 
Hospital of Soochow University, 185 Juqian Street, Changzhou, Jiangsu, 213003, PR
China. houxueling6139692@126.com. (3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Third
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 185 Juqian Street, Changzhou, Jiangsu,
213003, PR China. muyiqing881023@126.com. (4)Department of Clinical Laboratory,
The Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 185 Juqian Street,
Changzhou, Jiangsu, 213003, PR China. 894834663@qq.com. (5)Department of Clinical
Laboratory, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 185 Juqian
Street, Changzhou, Jiangsu, 213003, PR China. lyy841477151@163.com. (6)Department
of Clinical Laboratory, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 185 
Juqian Street, Changzhou, Jiangsu, 213003, PR China. 448246916@qq.com.
(7)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 185 Juqian Street, Changzhou, Jiangsu, 213003, PR China.
jiangqb68@163.com. (8)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Third Affiliated
Hospital of Soochow University, 185 Juqian Street, Changzhou, Jiangsu, 213003, PR
China. shimeim2002@yahoo.com.cn. (9)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Third 
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 185 Juqian Street, Changzhou, Jiangsu,
213003, PR China. kegebo123@163.com. (10)Department of Tumor Biological
Treatment, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 185 Juqian
Street, Changzhou, 213003, China. jjtnew@163.com.

BACKGROUND: The mitogen-activated protein kinase
kinase/extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (MEK/ERK) signaling pathway is
involved in viral life cycle. However, the effect of MEK/ERK pathway in
enterovirus 71(EV71)-infected immature dendritic cells (iDCs) is still unclear.
METHODS: Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated and
induced to generate iDCs. Unifected iDCs and EV71-infected iDCs with a
multiplicity of infection (MOI<U+2009>=<U+2009>5) were analyzed by flow cytometry. Differential
gene expressions of MEK/ERK signaling pathway molecules in EV71-infected iDCs
were performed by PCR arrays. The phosphorylation of MEK/ERK pathway molecules in
EV71-infected iDCs preincubated without or with U0126 (20 µM) at indicated times 
was detected by Western blot. The concentrations of IL-1a, IL-2, IL-6, IL-12,
TNF-a, IFN-a1, IFN-ﬂ and IFN-<U+03B3> in culture supernatant were analyzed by the
luminex fluorescent technique.
RESULTS: When iDCs were infected with EV71 for 24 h, the percentage of CD80,
CD83, CD86 and HLA-DR expressed on iDCs significantly increased. PCR arrays
showed that gene expressions of molecules in MEK/ERK signaling pathway were
remarkably upregulated in EV71-infected iDCs. EV71 infection activated both
MEK1/2 and ERK1/2, which phosphorylated their downstream transcription factor
c-Fos, c-Jun, c-myc and Elk1. Importantly, the treatment of U0126 significantly
inhibited MEK/ERK signaling pathway molecules and severely impaired virus
replication., Additionally, EV71 infection promoted the expression of son of
sevenless (SOS1) and increased the secretion of IL-1a, IL-2, IL-6, IL-12,
TNF-a,IFN-ﬂ and IFN-<U+03B3>. Furthermore,the release of IL-1a, IL-2,IL-6 and TNF-a
could be effectively suppressed by inhibitor U0126.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the MEK/ERK signaling pathway plays an
important role in EV71-infected iDCs and these molecules may be potential targets
for the development of new anti-EV71 drugs.

PMCID: PMC4304142
PMID: 25548009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Mar;1853(3):539-48. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.12.013.
Epub 2014 Dec 16.

MAPK signaling triggers transcriptional induction of cFOS during amino acid
limitation of HepG2 cells.

Shan J(1), Donelan W(1), Hayner JN(1), Zhang F(1), Dudenhausen EE(1), Kilberg
MS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610. (2)Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville,
Florida 32610. Electronic address: mkilberg@ufl.edu.

Amino acid (AA) deprivation in mammalian cells activates a collection of
signaling cascades known as the AA response (AAR), which is characterized by
transcriptional induction of stress-related genes, including FBJ murine
osteosarcoma viral oncogene homolog (cFOS). The present study established that
the signaling mechanism underlying the AA-dependent transcriptional regulation of
the cFOS gene in HepG2 human hepatocellular carcinoma cells is independent of the
classic GCN2-eIF2-ATF4 pathway. Instead, a RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK cascade mediates AAR
signaling to the cFOS gene. Increased cFOS transcription is observed from 4-24 h 
after AAR-activation, exhibiting little or no overlap with the rapid and
transient increase triggered by the well-known serum response. Furthermore, serum
is not required for the AA-responsiveness of the cFOS gene and no phosphorylation
of promoter-bound serum response factor (SRF) is observed. The ERK-phosphorylated
transcription factor E-twenty six-like (p-ELK1) is increased in its association
with the cFOS promoter after activation of the AAR. This research identified cFOS
as a target of the AAR and further highlights the importance of AA-responsive
MAPK signaling in HepG2 cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4315773
PMID: 25523140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Oncotarget. 2014 Dec 30;5(24):12646-64.

PRK1/PKN1 controls migration and metastasis of androgen-independent prostate
cancer cells.

Jilg CA(1), Ketscher A(2), Metzger E(1), Hummel B(1), Willmann D(1), R¸sseler
V(3), Drendel V(4), Imhof A(5), Jung M(6), Franz H(1), Hˆlz S(2), Krˆnig M(1),
M¸ller JM(1), Sch¸le R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Urologische Klinik und Zentrale Klinische Forschung, Klinikum der Universit‰t 
Freiburg, Freiburg 79106, Germany. (2)Urologische Klinik und Zentrale Klinische
Forschung, Klinikum der Universit‰t Freiburg, Freiburg 79106, Germany. University
of Freiburg, Faculty of Biology, Freiburg 79104, Germany. (3)Urologische Klinik
und Zentrale Klinische Forschung, Klinikum der Universit‰t Freiburg, Freiburg
79106, Germany. Universit‰tsklinikum Kˆln, Institut f¸r Pathologie, Kˆln 50937,
Germany. (4)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center, Freiburg,
Germany. (5)Adolf-Butenandt Institute and Munich Center of Integrated Protein
Science (CIPS), Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Munich 80336, Germany.
(6)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Freiburg, Freiburg 79104, 
Germany. (7)Urologische Klinik und Zentrale Klinische Forschung, Klinikum der
Universit‰t Freiburg, Freiburg 79106, Germany. BIOSS Centre of Biological
Signalling Studies, Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Germany. Deutsches
Konsortium f¸r Translationale Krebsforschung (DKTK), Standort Freiburg, Germany.

The major threat in prostate cancer is the occurrence of metastases in
androgen-independent tumor stage, for which no causative cure is available. Here 
we show that metastatic behavior of androgen-independent prostate tumor cells
requires the protein-kinase-C-related kinase (PRK1/PKN1) in vitro and in vivo.
PRK1 regulates cell migration and gene expression through its kinase activity,
but does not affect cell proliferation. Transcriptome and interactome analyses
uncover that PRK1 regulates expression of migration-relevant genes by interacting
with the scaffold protein sperm-associated antigen 9 (SPAG9/JIP4). SPAG9 and PRK1
colocalize in human cancer tissue and are required for p38-phosphorylation and
cell migration. Accordingly, depletion of either ETS domain-containing protein
Elk-1 (ELK1), an effector of p38-signalling or p38 depletion hinders cell
migration and changes expression of migration-relevant genes as observed upon
PRK1-depletion. Importantly, a PRK1 inhibitor prevents metastases in mice,
showing that the PRK1-pathway is a promising target to hamper prostate cancer
metastases in vivo. Here we describe a novel mechanism controlling the metastatic
behavior of PCa cells and identify PRK1 as a promising therapeutic target to
treat androgen-independent metastatic prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC4350344
PMID: 25504435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Epigenetics. 2015;10(1):6-18. doi: 10.4161/15592294.2014.988035. Epub 2015 Jan
27.

ARHGEF3 controls HDACi-induced differentiation via RhoA-dependent pathways in
acute myeloid leukemias.

D'Amato L(1), Dell'Aversana C, Conte M, Ciotta A, Scisciola L, Carissimo A,
Nebbioso A, Altucci L.

Author information: 
(1)a Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Patologia Generale ; Seconda
Universit‡ di Napoli ; Napoli , Italy.

Altered expression and activity of histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been
correlated with tumorigenesis. Inhibitors of HDACs (HDACi) induce acetylation of 
histone and non-histone proteins affecting gene expression, cell cycle
progression, cell migration, terminal differentiation and cell death. Here, we
analyzed the regulation of ARHGEF3, a RhoA-specific guanine nucleotide exchange
factor, by the HDACi MS275 (entinostat). MS275 is a well-known benzamide-based
HDACi, which induces differentiation of the monoblastic-like human histiocytic
lymphoma cell line U937 to monocytes/macrophages. Incubation of U937 cells with
MS275 resulted in an up regulation of ARHGEF3, followed by a significant
enhancement of the marker of macrophage differentiation CD68. ARHGEF3 protein is 
primarily nuclear, but MS275 treatment rapidly induced its translocation into the
cytoplasm. ARHGEF3 cytoplasmic localization is associated with activation of the 
RhoA/Rho-associated Kinase (ROCK) pathway. In addition to cytoskeletal
rearrangements orchestrated by RhoA, we showed that ARHGEF3/RhoA-dependent
signals involve activation of SAPK/JNK and then Elk1 transcription factor.
Importantly, MS275-induced CD68 expression was blocked by exposure of U937 cells 
to exoenzyme C3 transferase and Y27632, inhibitors of Rho and ROCK respectively. 
Moreover, ARHGEF3 silencing prevented RhoA activation leading to a reduction in
SAPK/JNK phosphorylation, Elk1 activation and CD68 expression, suggesting a
crucial role for ARHGEF3 in myeloid differentiation. Taken together, our results 
demonstrate that ARHGEF3 modulates acute myeloid leukemia differentiation through
activation of RhoA and pathways directly controlled by small GTPase family
proteins. The finding that GEF protein modulation by HDAC inhibition impacts on
cell differentiation may be important for understanding the antitumor
mechanism(s) by which HDACi treatment stimulates differentiation in cancer.

PMCID: PMC4622697
PMID: 25494542  [PubMed - in process]


48. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jan 9;456(2):580-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.11.107. Epub 2014 Dec 4.

Cooperative induction of transmembrane prostate androgen induced protein
TMEPAI/PMEPA1 by transforming growth factor-ﬂ and epidermal growth factor
signaling.

Azami S(1), Vo Nguyen TT(1), Watanabe Y(2), Kato M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences and Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan. (2)Department of Experimental Pathology, Graduate School
of Comprehensive Human Sciences and Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan. Electronic address:
y-watanabe@md.tsukuba.ac.jp. (3)Department of Experimental Pathology, Graduate
School of Comprehensive Human Sciences and Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan. Electronic address:
mit-kato@md.tsukuba.ac.jp.

TMEPAI/PMEPA1 (transmembrane prostate androgen induced-RNA/prostate transmembrane
protein, androgen induced 1) is a pro-tumorigenic factor induced by TGF-ﬂ
signaling and constitutive TMEPAI expression in lung cancer cells depends on
activated autocrine TGF-ﬂ signaling. Here we demonstrate a novel mechanism of
TMEPAI transcriptional co-regulation by EGF signaling. Interestingly, we found
that ELK-1, downstream of EGFR/Ras/MAPK pathway, modulates TMEPAI expression.
ELK-1 binds to the first intron (+1037 to +1294) of the TMEPAI gene together with
TGF-ﬂ activated Smad3 and enhances the transcription of TMEPAI. Furthermore,
TMEPAI gene activation by EGF and TGF-ﬂ signaling was reduced by the MEK
inhibitor U0126. Together, EGF signaling collaboratively regulates TGF-ﬂ-induced 
TMEPAI expression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25482449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 29;5:5202. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6202.

Hypoxia-mediated downregulation of miRNA biogenesis promotes tumour progression.

Rupaimoole R(1), Wu SY(2), Pradeep S(2), Ivan C(3), Pecot CV(4), Gharpure KM(1), 
Nagaraja AS(1), Armaiz-Pena GN(2), McGuire M(2), Zand B(2), Dalton HJ(2), Filant 
J(2), Miller JB(2), Lu C(2), Sadaoui NC(1), Mangala LS(3), Taylor M(2), van den
Beucken T(5), Koch E(6), Rodriguez-Aguayo C(7), Huang L(8), Bar-Eli M(8), Wouters
BG(6), Radovich M(9), Ivan M(10), Calin GA(7), Zhang W(11), Lopez-Berestein G(7),
Sood AK(12).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Gynecologic Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (2)Department of Gynecologic 
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (3)1] Department of Gynecologic Oncology,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Center for RNA Interference and Non-Coding RNA, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, 
Texas 77030, USA. (4)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, University of North
Carolina Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, 101 Manning Drive, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina 27599, USA. (5)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7. (6)1] Department of Medical
Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7 [2] Princess 
Margaret Cancer Centre and Campbell Family Institute for Cancer Research,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7. (7)1] Center for RNA
Interference and Non-Coding RNA, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Department of
Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (8)Department of Cancer
Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (9)Department of Surgery, Microbiology and 
Immunology, Indiana University, 980W Walnut Street, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, 
USA. (10)Department of Medicine, Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University,
980W Walnut Street, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA. (11)Department of
Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (12)1] Department of Gynecologic Oncology, 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Center for RNA Interference and Non-Coding RNA, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, 
Texas 77030, USA [3] Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Cancer-related deregulation of miRNA biogenesis has been suggested, but the
underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Here we report a previously unrecognized
effect of hypoxia in the downregulation of Drosha and Dicer in cancer cells that 
leads to dysregulation of miRNA biogenesis and increased tumour progression. We
show that hypoxia-mediated downregulation of Drosha is dependent on ETS1/ELK1
transcription factors. Moreover, mature miRNA array and deep sequencing studies
reveal altered miRNA maturation in cells under hypoxic conditions. At a
functional level, this phenomenon results in increased cancer progression in
vitro and in vivo, and data from patient samples are suggestive of miRNA
biogenesis downregulation in hypoxic tumours. Rescue of Drosha by siRNAs
targeting ETS1/ELK1 in vivo results in significant tumour regression. These
findings provide a new link in the mechanistic understanding of global miRNA
downregulation in the tumour microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC4215647
PMID: 25351346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Oct 23;5:e1485. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.453.

CTGF increases vascular endothelial growth factor-dependent angiogenesis in human
synovial fibroblasts by increasing miR-210 expression.

Liu SC(1), Chuang SM(2), Hsu CJ(3), Tsai CH(4), Wang SW(5), Tang CH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University,
Taichung, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Chung Hsing
University, Taichung, Taiwan. (3)1] School of Chinese Medicine, College of
Chinese Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan [2] Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (4)1]
Department of Orthopedic Surgery, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan [2] Department of Medicine, Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical
Science, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (5)Department of Medicine,
Mackay Medical College, New Taipei, Taiwan. (6)1] Graduate Institute of Basic
Medical Science, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan [2] Department of
Pharmacology, School of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan [3] 
Department of Biotechnology, College of Health Science, Asia University,
Taichung, Taiwan.

Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF, a.k.a. CCN2) is inflammatory mediator and 
abundantly expressed in osteoarthritis (OA). Angiogenesis is essential for OA
progression. Here, we investigated the role of CTGF in vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) production and angiogenesis in OA synovial fibroblasts
(OASFs). We showed that expression of CTGF and VEGF in synovial fluid were higher
in OA patients than in controls. Directly applying CTGF to OASFs increased VEGF
production then promoted endothelial progenitor cells tube formation and
migration. CTGF induced VEGF by raising miR-210 expression via PI3K, AKT, ERK,
and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B)/ELK1 pathways. CTGF-mediating miR-210 upregulation 
repressed glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 1-like (GPD1L) expression and PHD
activity and subsequently promoted hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1a-dependent
VEGF expression. Knockdown of CTGF decreased VEGF expression and abolished
OASF-conditional medium-mediated angiogenesis in vitro as well as angiogenesis in
chick chorioallantoic membrane and Matrigel-plug nude mice model in vivo. Taken
together, our results suggest CTGF activates PI3K, AKT, ERK, and NF-<U+03BA>B/ELK1
pathway, leading to the upregulation of miR-210, contributing to inhibit GPD1L
expression and prolyl hydroxylases 2 activity, promoting HIF-1a-dependent VEGF
expression and angiogenesis in human synovial fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC4649533
PMID: 25341039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 28;289(48):33215-30. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.608927. Epub
2014 Oct 15.

A single mechanism can explain network-wide insulin resistance in adipocytes from
obese patients with type 2 diabetes.

Nyman E(1), Rajan MR(1), Fagerholm S(1), Br‰nnmark C(1), Cedersund G(2),
StrÂlfors P(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine and. (2)From the
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine and the Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Linkˆping University, SE58185 Linkˆping, Sweden. (3)From the
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine and peter.stralfors@liu.se.

The response to insulin is impaired in type 2 diabetes. Much information is
available about insulin signaling, but understanding of the cellular mechanisms
causing impaired signaling and insulin resistance is hampered by fragmented data,
mainly obtained from different cell lines and animals. We have collected
quantitative and systems-wide dynamic data on insulin signaling in primary
adipocytes and compared cells isolated from healthy and diabetic individuals.
Mathematical modeling and experimental verification identified mechanisms of
insulin control of the MAPKs ERK1/2. We found that in human adipocytes, insulin
stimulates phosphorylation of the ribosomal protein S6 and hence protein
synthesis about equally via ERK1/2 and mTORC1. Using mathematical modeling, we
examined the signaling network as a whole and show that a single mechanism can
explain the insulin resistance of type 2 diabetes throughout the network,
involving signaling both through IRS1, PKB, and mTOR and via ERK1/2 to the
nuclear transcription factor Elk1. The most important part of the insulin
resistance mechanism is an attenuated feedback from the protein kinase mTORC1 to 
IRS1, which spreads signal attenuation to all parts of the insulin signaling
network. Experimental inhibition of mTORC1 using rapamycin in adipocytes from
non-diabetic individuals induced and thus confirmed the predicted network-wide
insulin resistance.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4246081
PMID: 25320095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Chem Biol. 2014 Oct 23;21(10):1370-80. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2014.07.019. Epub 
2014 Sep 11.

Targeted suppression of EVI1 oncogene expression by sequence-specific
pyrrole-imidazole polyamide.

Syed J(1), Pandian GN(2), Sato S(2), Taniguchi J(1), Chandran A(1), Hashiya K(1),
Bando T(1), Sugiyama H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo, 
Kyoto 606-8502, Japan. (2)Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences
(iCeMS), Kyoto University, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (3)Department of
Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8502,
Japan; Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (iCeMS), Kyoto University,
Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. Electronic address: hs@kuchem.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Human ectopic viral integration site 1 (EVI1) is an oncogenic transcription
factor known to play a critical role in many aggressive forms of cancer. Its
selective modulation is thought to alter the cancer-specific gene regulatory
networks. Pyrrole-imidazole polyamides (PIPs) are a class of small DNA binders
that can be designed to target any destined DNA sequence. Herein, we report a
sequence-specific pyrrole-imidazole polyamide, PIP1, which can target specific
base pairs of the REL/ELK1 binding site in the EVI1 minimal promoter. The
designed PIP1 significantly inhibited EVI1 in MDA-MB-231 cells.
Whole-transcriptome analysis confirmed that PIP1 affected a fraction of
EVI1-mediated gene regulation. In vitro assays suggested that this polyamide can 
also effectively inhibit breast cancer cell migration. Taken together, these
results suggest that EVI1-targeted PIP1 is an effective transcriptional regulator
in cancer cells.

PMID: 25219965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 9;9(9):e107048. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107048. eCollection
2014.

Elk3 deficiency causes transient impairment in post-natal retinal vascular
development and formation of tortuous arteries in adult murine retinae.

Weinl C(1), Wasylyk C(2), Garcia Garrido M(3), Sothilingam V(3), Beck SC(3),
Riehle H(1), Stritt C(1), Roux MJ(2), Seeliger MW(3), Wasylyk B(2), Nordheim
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology,
University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. (2)Institut de GÈnÈtique et de
Biologie MolÈculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch, France; Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Illkirch, France; Institut National de la SantÈ et de la 
Recherche MÈdicale, Illkirch, France; UniversitÈ de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.
(3)Division of Ocular Neurodegeneration, Centre for Ophthalmology, Institute for 
Ophthalmic Research, University of T¸bingen, T¸bingen, Germany.

Serum Response Factor (SRF) fulfills essential roles in post-natal retinal
angiogenesis and adult neovascularization. These functions have been attributed
to the recruitment by SRF of the cofactors Myocardin-Related Transcription
Factors MRTF-A and -B, but not the Ternary Complex Factors (TCFs) Elk1 and Elk4. 
The role of the third TCF, Elk3, remained unknown. We generated a new Elk3
knockout mouse line and showed that Elk3 had specific, non-redundant functions in
the retinal vasculature. In Elk3(-/-) mice, post-natal retinal angiogenesis was
transiently delayed until P8, after which it proceeded normally. Interestingly,
tortuous arteries developed in Elk3(-/-) mice from the age of four weeks, and
persisted into late adulthood. Tortuous vessels have been observed in human
pathologies, e.g. in ROP and FEVR. These human disorders were linked to altered
activities of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in the affected eyes.
However, in Elk3(-/-) mice, we did not observe any changes in VEGF or several
other potential confounding factors, including mural cell coverage and blood
pressure. Instead, concurrent with the post-natal transient delay of radial
outgrowth and the formation of adult tortuous arteries, Elk3-dependent effects on
the expression of Angiopoietin/Tie-signalling components were observed. Moreover,
in vitro microvessel sprouting and microtube formation from P10 and adult aortic 
ring explants were reduced. Collectively, these results indicate that Elk3 has
distinct roles in maintaining retinal artery integrity. The Elk3 knockout mouse
is presented as a new animal model to study retinal artery tortuousity in mice
and human patients.

PMCID: PMC4159304
PMID: 25203538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Molecules. 2014 Aug 25;19(9):12909-24. doi: 10.3390/molecules190912909.

Effects of egg yolk-derived peptide on osteogenic gene expression and MAPK
activation.

Kim HK(1), Kim MG(2), Leem KH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food & Biotechnology, Hanseo University, Seosan, Chungnam
356-706, Korea. hkkim111@dreamwiz.com. (2)College of Korean Medicine, Semyung
University, Chungbuk 390-711, Korea. hkkim111@hanseo.ac.kr. (3)College of Korean 
Medicine, Semyung University, Chungbuk 390-711, Korea. heavenok@dreamwiz.com.

The present study investigated the effects of egg yolk-derived peptide (YPEP) on 
osteogenic activities and MAPK-regulation of osteogenic gene expressions. The
effects of YPEP on cell proliferation, alkaline phosphatase activity, collagen
synthesis, and mineralization were measured in human osteoblastic MG-63 cells.
Activation of MAPKs and downstream transcription factors such as
extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1/2
(JNK1/2), p38, ELK1, and cJUN were examined using western blot analysis. YPEP
dose-dependently increased MG-63 cell proliferation, ALP activity, collagen
synthesis, and calcium deposition. YPEP activated ERK1/2, p38, and ELK1
phosphorylation whereas JNK and cJUN were not affected by YPEP. The COL1A1
(collagen, type I, alpha 1), ALPL (alkaline phosphatase), and SPP1 (secreted
phosphoprotein 1, osteopontin) gene expressions were increased while BGLAP
(osteocalcin) was not affected by YPEP. The ERK1/2 inhibitor (PD98509) blocked
the YPEP-induced COL1A1 and ALPL gene expressions as well as ELK1
phosphorylation. The p38 inhibitor (SB203580) blocked YPEP-induced COL1A1 and
ALPL gene expressions. SPP1 gene expression was not affected by these MAPK
inhibitors. In conclusion, YPEP treatment stimulates the osteogenic
differentiation via the MAPK/ELK1 signaling pathway. These results could provide 
a mechanistic explanation for the bone-strengthening effects of YPEP.

PMID: 25157462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2014 Aug 4;14:285. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-14-285.

Electroacupuncture mediates extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 pathways in
the spinal cord of rats with inflammatory pain.

Fang JQ(1), Fang JF, Liang Y, Du JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology & Acupuncture Research, the Third Clinical College,
Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, 548 Binwen Road, Binjiang District,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province 310053, China. fangjianqiao7532@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase1/2 (ERK1/2) in
dorsal horn of the spinal cord by peripheral inflammation is contributed to
inflammatory pain hypersensitivity. Although electroacupuncture (EA) has been
widely used to alleviate various kinds of pain, the underlying mechanism of EA
analgesia requires further investigation. This study investigated the
relationship between EA-induced analgesia and ERK signaling involved in pain
hypersensitivity.
METHODS: The rats were randomly divided into control, model, EA and sham EA
groups. Inflammatory pain model was induced by injecting of 100 µl Complete
Freund's adjuvant (CFA) into the plantar surface of a hind paw. Rats in the EA
group were treatment with EA (constant aquare wave, 2 Hz and 100 Hz alternating
frequencies, intensities ranging from 1-2 mA) at 5.5 h, 24.5 h and 48.5 h. Paw
withdrawal thresholds (PWTs) were measured before modeling and at 5 h, 6 h, 25 h 
and 49 h after CFA injection. Rats were killed and ipsilateral side of the lumbar
spinal cords were harvested for detecting the expressions of p-ERK1/2, Elk1,
COX-2, NK-1 and CREB by immunohistochemistry, real-time PCR, western blot
analysis and EMSA. Finally, the analgesic effect of EA plus U0126, a MEK (ERK
kinase) inhibitor, on CFA rats was examined.
RESULTS: Inflammatory pain was induced in rats by hindpaw injection of CFA and
significantly increased phospho-ERK1/2 positive cells and protein levels of
p-ERK1/2 in the ipsilateral spinal cord dorsal horn (SCDH). CFA up-regulated of
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) mRNA and protein expression at 6 h after injection and
neurokinin-1 receptor (NK-1) expression at 49 h post-injection, in the SCDH. EA, 
applied to Zusanli (ST36) and Kunlun (BL60), remarkably increased the pain
thresholds of CFA injected rats, significantly suppressed ERK1/2 activation and
COX-2 protein expression after a single treatment, and decreased NK-1 mRNA and
protein expression at 49 h. EA decreased the DNA binding activity of cAMP
response element binding protein (CREB), a downstream transcription factor of
ERK1/2, at 49 h after CFA injection. Moreover, EA and U0126 synergistically
inhibited CFA-induced allodynia.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that EA produces analgesic effect by
preventing the activation of ERK1/2-COX-2 pathway and ERK1/2-CREB-NK-1 pathway in
CFA rats.

PMCID: PMC4131029
PMID: 25091495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 18;9(7):e102890. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102890.
eCollection 2014.

An AUG codon conserved for protein function rather than translational initiation:
the story of the protein sElk1.

Legrand N(1), Araud T(1), Conne B(2), Kuijpers O(1), Jaquier-Gubler P(1), Curran 
J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Geneva
Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. (2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular 
Medicine, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland; Department of
Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva,
Switzerland. (3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, University of 
Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland; Institute of Genetics and Genomics in
Geneva (iGE3), University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

Elk1 belongs to the ternary complex (TCF) subfamily of the ETS-domain
transcription factors. Several studies have implicated an important function for 
Elk1 in the CNS including synaptic plasticity and cell differentiation. Whilst
studying ELK1 gene expression in rat brain a 54 aa N-terminally truncated isoform
lacking the DBD was observed on immunoblots. A similar protein was also detected 
in NGF differentiated PC12 cells. It was proposed that this protein, referred to 
as sElk1, arose due to a de-novo initiation event at the second AUG codon on the 
Elk1 ORF. Transient over-expression of sElk1 potentiated neurite growth in the
PC12 model and induced differentiation in the absence of NGF, leading to the
proposition that it may have a specific function in the CNS. Here we report on
the translational expression from the mouse and rat transcript and compare it
with our earlier published work on human. Results demonstrate that the previously
observed sElk1 protein is a non-specific band arising from the antibody employed.
The tight conservation of the internal AUG reported to drive sElk1 expression is 
in fact coupled to Elk1 protein function, a result consistent with the Elk1-SRE
crystal structure. It is also supported by the observed conservation of this
methionine in the DBD of all ETS transcription factors independent of the N- or
C-terminal positioning of this domain. Reporter assays demonstrate that elements 
both within the 5'UTR and downstream of the AUGElk1 serve to limit 40S access to 
the AUGsElk1 codon.

PMCID: PMC4103894
PMID: 25036748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 29;289(35):24665-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.565028. Epub
2014 Jul 15.

A mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase
(MEK)-dependent transcriptional program controls activation of the early growth
response 1 (EGR1) gene during amino acid limitation.

Shan J(1), Balasubramanian MN(1), Donelan W(1), Fu L(1), Hayner J(1), Lopez
MC(2), Baker HV(2), Kilberg MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shands Cancer
Center and Center for Nutritional Sciences and. (2)the Department of Molecular
Genetics and Microbiology, Genetics Institute, University of Florida College of
Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610. (3)From the Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Shands Cancer Center and Center for Nutritional Sciences and
mkilberg@ufl.edu.

Amino acid (AA) limitation in mammalian cells triggers a collection of signaling 
cascades jointly referred to as the AA response (AAR). In human HepG2
hepatocellular carcinoma, the early growth response 1 (EGR1) gene was induced by 
either AA deprivation or endoplasmic reticulum stress. AAR-dependent EGR1
activation was discovered to be independent of the well characterized GCN2-ATF4
pathway and instead dependent on MEK-ERK signaling, one of the MAPK pathways.
ChIP showed that constitutively bound ELK1 at the EGR1 proximal promoter region
was phosphorylated after AAR activation. Increased p-ELK1 binding was associated 
with increased de novo recruitment of RNA polymerase II to the EGR1 promoter.
EGR1 transcription was not induced in HEK293T cells lacking endogenous MEK
activity, but overexpression of exogenous constitutively active MEK in HEK293T
cells resulted in increased basal and AAR-induced EGR1 expression. ChIP analysis 
of the human vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) gene, a known
EGR1-responsive gene, revealed moderate increases in AAR-induced EGR1 binding
within the proximal promoter and highly inducible binding to a site within the
first intron. Collectively, these data document a novel AA-activated MEK-ERK-ELK1
signaling mechanism.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4148889
PMID: 25028509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 1;20(17):4598-612. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-3380. 
Epub 2014 Jul 9.

Large-scale characterization of DNA methylation changes in human gastric
carcinomas with and without metastasis.

Liu Z(1), Zhang J(2), Gao Y(1), Pei L(3), Zhou J(1), Gu L(1), Zhang L(4), Zhu
B(5), Hattori N(6), Ji J(4), Yuasa Y(7), Kim W(8), Ushijima T(6), Shi H(9), Deng 
D(10).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Division of Etiology, Peking University Cancer Hospital and
Institute, Fu-Cheng-Lu, Beijing, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Division of Etiology, Peking
University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Fu-Cheng-Lu, Beijing, China. Shihezi
University School of Medicine, Shihezi, China. (3)GRU Cancer Center, Georgia
Regents University, Augusta, Georgia. (4)Department of Surgery, Peking University
Cancer Hospital and Institute, Fu-Cheng-Lu, Beijing, China. (5)Department of
Oncology, Peking University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Fu-Cheng-Lu, Beijing, 
China. (6)Division of Epigenetics, National Cancer Center Research Institute,
Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Molecular Oncology, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (8)Department of Pathology, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Jongno-gu, Seoul, Korea. (9)GRU Cancer
Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia. dengdajun@bjmu.edu.cn
hshi@gru.edu. (10)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research
(Ministry of Education), Division of Etiology, Peking University Cancer Hospital 
and Institute, Fu-Cheng-Lu, Beijing, China. dengdajun@bjmu.edu.cn hshi@gru.edu.

PURPOSE: Metastasis is the leading cause of death for gastric carcinoma. An
epigenetic biomarker panel for predicting gastric carcinoma metastasis could have
significant clinical impact on the care of patients with gastric carcinoma. The
main purpose of this study is to characterize the methylation differences between
gastric carcinomas with and without metastasis.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Genome-wide DNA methylation profiles between 4 metastatic
and 4 nonmetastatic gastric carcinomas and their surgical margins (SM) were
analyzed using methylated-CpG island amplification with microarray. The
methylation states of 73 candidate genes were further analyzed in patients with
gastric carcinoma in a discovery cohort (n=108) using denatured high performance 
liquid chromatography, bisulfite-sequencing, and MethyLight. The predictive
values of potential metastasis-methylation biomarkers were validated in cohorts
of patients with gastric carcinoma in China (n=330), Japan (n=129), and Korea
(n=153).
RESULTS: The gastric carcinoma genome showed significantly higher proportions of 
hypomethylation in the promoter and exon-1 regions, as well as increased
hypermethylation of intragenic fragments when compared with SMs. Significant
differential methylation was validated in the CpG islands of 15 genes (P<0.05)
and confirmed using bisulfite sequencing. These genes included BMP3, BNIP3,
CDKN2A, ECEL1, ELK1, GFRA1, HOXD10, KCNH1, PSMD10, PTPRT, SIGIRR, SRF, TBX5,
TFPI2, and ZNF382. Methylation changes of GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 resulted in up- 
or downregulation of their transcription. Most importantly, the prevalence of
GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 methylation alterations was consistently and coordinately 
associated with gastric carcinoma metastasis and the patients' overall survival
throughout discovery and validation cohorts in China, Japan, and Korea.
CONCLUSION: Methylation changes of GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 may be a potential
biomarker set for prediction of gastric carcinoma metastasis.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4309661
PMID: 25009298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Apr;51(2):696-717. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8776-8. Epub 2014 
Jun 18.

Transcriptional and epigenetic substrates of methamphetamine addiction and
withdrawal: evidence from a long-access self-administration model in the rat.

Cadet JL(1), Brannock C, Jayanthi S, Krasnova IN.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, Intramural Research Program,
National Institute on Drug Abuse, NIH, DHHS, 251 Bayview Boulevard, Baltimore,
MD, 21224, USA, JCADET@intra.nida.nih.gov.

Methamphetamine use disorder is a chronic neuropsychiatric disorder characterized
by recurrent binge episodes, intervals of abstinence, and relapses to drug use.
Humans addicted to methamphetamine experience various degrees of cognitive
deficits and other neurological abnormalities that complicate their activities of
daily living and their participation in treatment programs. Importantly, models
of methamphetamine addiction in rodents have shown that animals will readily
learn to give themselves methamphetamine. Rats also accelerate their intake over 
time. Microarray studies have also shown that methamphetamine taking is
associated with major transcriptional changes in the striatum measured within a
short or longer time after cessation of drug taking. After a 2-h withdrawal time,
there was increased expression of genes that participate in transcription
regulation. These included cyclic AMP response element binding (CREB), ETS
domain-containing protein (ELK1), and members of the FOS family of transcription 
factors. Other genes of interest include brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF), tyrosine kinase receptor, type 2 (TrkB), and synaptophysin.
Methamphetamine-induced transcription was found to be regulated via
phosphorylated CREB-dependent events. After a 30-day withdrawal from
methamphetamine self-administration, however, there was mostly decreased
expression of transcription factors including junD. There was also downregulation
of genes whose protein products are constituents of chromatin-remodeling
complexes. Altogether, these genome-wide results show that methamphetamine abuse 
might be associated with altered regulation of a diversity of gene networks that 
impact cellular and synaptic functions. These transcriptional changes might serve
as triggers for the neuropsychiatric presentations of humans who abuse this drug.
Better understanding of the way that gene products interact to cause
methamphetamine addiction will help to develop better pharmacological treatment
of methamphetamine addicts.

PMCID: PMC4359351
PMID: 24939695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Br J Pharmacol. 2014 May;171(10):2645-58.

Activation and inhibition of transient receptor potential TRPM3-induced gene
transcription.

Lesch A, Rubil S, Thiel G.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Transient receptor potential-3 (TRPM3) channels function 
as Ca2+ permeable cation channels. While the natural ligands for these channels
are still unknown, several compounds have been described that either activate or 
inhibit TRPM3 channel activity. experimental approach: We assessed TRPM3-mediated
gene transcription, which relies on the induction of intracellular signalling to 
the nucleus following activation of TRPM3 channels. Activator protein-1 (AP-1)
and Egr-1-responsive reporter genes were integrated into the chromatin of the
cells. This strategy enabled us to analyse gene transcription of the AP-1 and
Egr-1-responsive reporter genes that were packed into an ordered chromatin
structure.
KEY RESULTS: The neurosteroid pregnenolone sulfate strikingly up-regulated AP-1
and Egr-1 transcriptional activity, while nifedipine and D-erythro-sphingosine,
also putative activators of TRPM3 channels, exhibited either no or
TRPM3-independent effects on gene transcription. In addition, pregnenolone
sulfate robustly enhanced the transcriptional activation potential of the ternary
complex factor Elk-1. Pregnenolone sulfate-induced activation of gene
transcription was blocked by treatment with mefenamic acid and, to a lesser
extent, by the polyphenol naringenin. In contrast, progesterone, pregnenolone and
rosiglitazone reduced AP-1 activity in the cells, but had no inhibitory effect on
Egr-1 activity in pregnenolone sulfate-stimulated cells.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: Pregnenolone sulfate is a powerful activator of
TRPM3-mediated gene transcription, while transcription is completely inhibited by
mefenamic acid in cells expressing activated TRPM3 channels. Both compounds are
valuable tools for further investigating the biological functions of TRPM3
channels.

PMCID: PMC4009006
PMID: 24895737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 2;9(6):e97080. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097080. eCollection 
2014.

Transcription factors involved in prostate gland adaptation to androgen
deprivation.

Rosa-Ribeiro R(1), Nishan U(1), Vidal RO(2), Barbosa GO(1), Reis LO(3), Cesar
CL(4), Carvalho HF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Functional Biology, State University of Campinas,
Campinas, S„o Paulo, Brazil. (2)Laboratory of Bioinformatics, National Center for
Research on Energy and Materials, Campinas, S„o Paulo, Brazil. (3)Division of
Urology, State University of Campinas, Campinas, S„o Paulo, Brazil. (4)Department
of Quantum Physics, State University of Campinas, Campinas, S„o Paulo, Brazil;
National Institute of Photonics Applied to Cell Biology (INFABiC), State
University of Campinas, Campinas, S„o Paulo, Brazil. (5)Department of Structural 
and Functional Biology, State University of Campinas, Campinas, S„o Paulo,
Brazil; National Institute of Photonics Applied to Cell Biology (INFABiC), State 
University of Campinas, Campinas, S„o Paulo, Brazil.

Androgens regulate prostate physiology, and exert their effects through the
androgen receptor. We hypothesized that androgen deprivation needs additional
transcription factors to orchestrate the changes taking place in the gland after 
castration and for the adaptation of the epithelial cells to the
androgen-deprived environment, ultimately contributing to the origin of
castration-resistant prostate cancer. This study was undertaken to identify
transcription factors that regulate gene expression after androgen deprivation by
castration (Cas). For the sake of comparison, we extended the analysis to the
effects of administration of a high dose of 17ﬂ-estradiol (E2) and a combination 
of both (Cas+E2). We approached this by (i) identifying gene expression profiles 
and enrichment terms, and by searching for transcription factors in the derived
regulatory pathways; and (ii) by determining the density of putative
transcription factor binding sites in the proximal promoter of the 10 most up- or
down-regulated genes in each experimental group in comparison to the controls
Gapdh and Tbp7. Filtering and validation confirmed the expression and localized
EVI1 (Mecom), NFY, ELK1, GATA2, MYBL1, MYBL2, and NFkB family members (NFkB1,
NFkB2, REL, RELA and RELB) in the epithelial and/or stromal cells. These
transcription factors represent major regulators of epithelial cell survival and 
immaturity as well as an adaptation of the gland as an immune barrier in the
absence of functional stimulation by androgens. Elk1 was expressed in smooth
muscle cells and was up-regulated after day 4. Evi1 and Nfy genes are expressed
in both epithelium and stroma, but were apparently not affected by androgen
deprivation.

PMCID: PMC4041569
PMID: 24886974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Biomed Sci. 2014 May 1;21:36. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-21-36.

Phospholipase A/Acyltransferase enzyme activity of H-rev107 inhibits the H-RAS
signaling pathway.

Wang CH, Shyu RY, Wu CC, Tsai TC, Wang LK, Chen ML, Jiang SY, Tsai FM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Taipei Tzuchi Hospital, The Buddhist Tzuchi Medical
Foundation, New Taipei City, Taiwan. afu2215@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: H-rev107, also called HRASLS3 or PLA2G16, is a member of the HREV107 
type II tumor suppressor gene family. Previous studies showed that H-rev107
exhibits phospholipase A/acyltransferase (PLA/AT) activity and downregulates
H-RAS expression. However, the mode of action and the site of inhibition of H-RAS
by H-rev107 are still unknown.
RESULTS: Our results indicate that H-rev107 was co-precipitated with H-RAS and
downregulated the levels of activated RAS (RAS-GTP) and ELK1-mediated
transactivation in epidermal growth factor-stimulated and H-RAS-cotransfected
HtTA cervical cancer cells. Furthermore, an acyl-biotin exchange assay
demonstrated that H-rev107 reduced H-RAS palmitoylation. H-rev107 has been shown 
to be a PLA/AT that is involved in phospholipid metabolism. Treating cells with
the PLA/AT inhibitor arachidonyl trifluoromethyl ketone (AACOCF3) or methyl
arachidonyl fluorophosphate (MAFP) alleviated H-rev107-induced downregulation of 
the levels of acylated H-RAS. AACOCF3 and MAFP also increased activated RAS and
ELK1-mediated transactivation in H-rev107-expressing HtTA cells following their
treatment with epidermal growth factor. In contrast, treating cells with the
acyl-protein thioesterase inhibitor palmostatin B enhanced H-rev107-mediated
downregulation of acylated H-RAS in H-rev107-expressing cells. Palmostatin B had 
no effect on H-rev107-induced suppression of RAS-GTP levels or ELK1-mediated
transactivation. These results suggest that H-rev107 decreases H-RAS activity
through its PLA/AT activity to modulate H-RAS acylation.
CONCLUSIONS: We made the novel observation that H-rev107 decrease in the steady
state levels of H-RAS palmitoylation through the phospholipase A/acyltransferase 
activity. H-rev107 is likely to suppress activation of the RAS signaling pathway 
by reducing the levels of palmitoylated H-RAS, which decreases the levels of
GTP-bound H-RAS and also the activation of downstream molecules. Our study
further suggests that the PLA/AT activity of H-rev107 may play an important role 
in H-rev107-mediated RAS suppression.

PMCID: PMC4012743
PMID: 24884338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Int J Oncol. 2014 Aug;45(2):675-82. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2463. Epub 2014 May 26.

Nutlin-3 induces BCL2A1 expression by activating ELK1 through the mitochondrial
p53-ROS-ERK1/2 pathway.

Lee SY(1), Choi HC(1), Choe YJ(1), Shin SJ(2), Lee SH(3), Kim HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine,
College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of
Korea. (3)Cancer Evolution Research Center, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea.

Nutlin-3 which occupies the p53 binding pocket in HDM2, has been reported to
activate apoptosis through both the transcriptional activity-dependent and
-independent programs of p53. Transcription-independent apoptosis by nutlin-3 is 
triggered by p53 which is translocated to mitochondria. However, we previously
demonstrated that the nutlin-3-induced mitochondrial translocation of p53
stimulates ERK1/2 activation, an anti-apoptosis signal, via mitochondrial ROS
generation. We report on how nutlin-3-stimulated ERK1/2 activity inhibits
p53-induced apoptosis. Among the anti-apoptotic BCL2 family proteins, BCL2A1
expression was increased by nutlin-3 at both the mRNA and protein levels, and
this increase was prevented by the inhibition of ERK1/2. TEMPO, a ROS scavenger, 
and PFT-µ , a blocker of the mitochondrial translocation of p53, also inhibited
BCL2A1 expression as well as ERK1/2 phosphorylation. In addition, nutlin-3
stimulated phosphorylation of ELK1, which was prevented by all compounds that
inhibited nutlin-3-induced ERK1/2 such as U0126, PFT-µ and TEMPO. Moreover, an
increase in BCL2A1 expression was weakened by the knockdown of ELK1. Finally,
nutlin-3-induced apoptosis was found to be potentiated by the knockdown of
BCL2A1, as demonstrated by an increase of in hypo-diploidic cells and Annexin
V-positive cells. Parallel to the increase in apoptotic cells, the knockdown of
BCL2A1 augmented the cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1. It is noteworthy 
that the augmented levels of apoptosis induced by the knockdown of BCL2A1 were
comparable to those of apoptosis induced by U0126. Collectively, these results
suggest that nutlin-3-activated ERK1/2 may stimulate the transcription of BCL2A1 
via the activation of ELK1, and BCL2A1 expression may contribute to the
inhibitory effect of ERK1/2 on nutlin-3-induced apoptosis, thereby constituting a
negative feedback loop of p53-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 24867259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Int J Med Sci. 2014 Apr 7;11(6):564-77. doi: 10.7150/ijms.7704. eCollection 2014.

Inhibition of MAPKs, Myc/Max, NF<U+03BA>B, and hypoxia pathways by Phyllanthus prevents 
proliferation, metastasis and angiogenesis in human melanoma (MeWo) cancer cell
line.

Tang YQ(1), Jaganath IB(2), Manikam R(3), Sekaran SD(1).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (2)2. Biotechnology Centre, Malaysia Agricultural
Research and Development Institute (MARDI), Serdang, Malaysia. (3)3. Department
of Trauma and Emergency Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Melanoma is the most fatal form of skin cancer. Different signalling 
pathways and proteins will be differentially expressed to pace with the tumour
growth. Thus, these signalling molecules and proteins are become potential
targets to halt the progression of cancer. The present works were attempted to
investigate the underlying molecular mechanisms of anticancer effects of
Phyllanthus (P.amarus, P.niruri, P.urinaria and P.watsonii) on skin melanoma,
MeWo cells.
METHODS: The ten cancer-related pathways reporter array was performed by
transfection of plasmid construct of transcription factor-responsive reporter of 
each pathway in MeWo cells. The affected pathways in MeWo cells after treatment
of Phyllanthus extracts were determined using luciferase assay. Western blot, 2D 
gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry analysis were performed to identity and
confirm the affected proteins and signalling molecules in treated cells.
RESULTS: The ten-pathway reporter array revealed five different cancer-related
signalling pathways were altered by Phyllanthus species in MeWo cells; NF<U+03BA>B,
Myc/Max, Hypoxia, MAPK/ERK and MAPK/JNK (p<0.05). Western blot revealed that
their intracellular signalling molecules including pan-Ras, c-Raf, RSK,
phospho-Elk1, c-myc, Akt, HIF-1a, Bcl-2, and VEGF were down-regulated with
concurrent of up-regulation; Bax, phospho-JNK-1/2 and phospho-GSK3ﬂ, in MeWo
cells upon Phyllanthus treatment (p<0.05). Proteomics-based approach was
performed and MS/MS results revealed that 52 differential expressed proteins were
identified (p<0.05) and involved in tumour growth, metastasis, apoptosis,
glycogenesis and glycolysis, angiogenesis, protein synthesis and energy
metabolism.
CONCLUSION: This study provides insight into the regulation on multiple survival 
signalling pathways by Phyllanthus in melanoma and might be a therapeutic target 
for cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC4003541
PMID: 24782645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cancer Res. 2014 May 1;74(9):2617-29. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2081. Epub
2014 Apr 14.

Mechanistic elucidation of the antitumor properties of withaferin a in breast
cancer.

Nagalingam A(1), Kuppusamy P, Singh SV, Sharma D, Saxena NK.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine and the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins;
Department of Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore
Maryland; and Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of
Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

Withaferin A (WFA) is a steroidal lactone with antitumor effects manifested at
multiple levels that are mechanistically obscure. Using a phospho-kinase
screening array, we discovered that WFA activated phosphorylation of the S6
kinase RSK (ribosomal S6 kinase) in breast cancer cells. Pursuing this
observation, we defined activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK)-RSK and ETS-like transcription factor 1 (Elk1)-CHOP (C-EBP homologous
protein) kinase pathways in upregulating transcription of the death receptor 5
(DR5). Through this route, WFA acted as an effective DR5 activator capable of
potentiating the biologic effects of celecoxib, etoposide, and TRAIL.
Accordingly, WFA treatment inhibited breast tumor formation in xenograft and
mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)-neu mouse models in a manner associated with
activation of the ERK/RSK axis, DR5 upregulation, and elevated nuclear
accumulation of Elk1 and CHOP. Together, our results offer mechanistic insight
into how WFA inhibits breast tumor growth.

©2014 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4009451
PMID: 24732433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Gut. 2015 Jan;64(1):37-48. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2013-306584. Epub 2014 Apr 9.

OCT1 is a determinant of synbindin-related ERK signalling with independent
prognostic significance in gastric cancer.

Qian J(1), Kong X(1), Deng N(2), Tan P(3), Chen H(1), Wang J(1), Li Z(4), Hu
Y(1), Zou W(5), Xu J(1), Fang JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Shanghai Institute of Digestive 
Disease, Shanghai, China. (2)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology Program, Duke-NUS
Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore. (3)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology
Program, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore Cancer
Therapeutics and Stratified Oncology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore. (4)Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, China. (5)Department of Surgery, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Octamer transcription factor 1 (OCT1) was found to be expressed in
intestinal metaplasia and gastric cancer (GC), but the exact roles of OCT1 in GC 
remain unclear. The objective of this study was to determine the functional and
prognostic implications of OCT1 in GC.
DESIGN: Expression of OCT1 was examined in paired normal and cancerous gastric
tissues and the prognostic significance of OCT1 was analysed by univariate and
multivariate survival analyses. The functions of OCT1 on synbindin expression and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylation were studied in vitro
and in xenograft mouse models.
RESULTS: The OCT1 gene is recurrently amplified and upregulated in GC. OCT1
overexpression and amplification are associated with poor survival in patients
with GC and the prognostic significance was confirmed by independent patient
cohorts. Combining OCT1 overexpression with American Joint Committee on Cancer
staging improved the prediction of survival in patients with GC. High expression 
of OCT1 associates with activation of the ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase
signalling pathway in GC tissues. OCT1 functions by transactivating synbindin,
which binds to ERK DEF domain and facilitates ERK phosphorylation by MEK.
OCT1-synbindin signalling results in the activation of ERK substrates ELK1 and
RSK, leading to increased cell proliferation and invasion. Immunofluorescent
study of human GC tissue samples revealed strong association between OCT1 protein
level and synbindin expression/ERK phosphorylation. Upregulation of OCT1 in mouse
xenograft models induced synbindin expression and ERK activation, leading to
accelerated tumour growth in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: OCT1 is a driver of synbindin-mediated ERK signalling and a
promising marker for the prognosis and molecular subtyping of GC.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4283676
PMID: 24717932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Stem Cell Res. 2014 May;12(3):599-609. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2014.02.003. Epub 2014 
Feb 13.

Serotonin augments smooth muscle differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells.

Hirota N(1), McCuaig S(1), O'Sullivan MJ(1), Martin JG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Meakins-Christie Laboratories, Department of Medicine, McGill University, 3626
St.-Urbain, MontrÈal, QuÈbec, H2X 2P2, Canada. (2)Meakins-Christie Laboratories, 
Department of Medicine, McGill University, 3626 St.-Urbain, MontrÈal, QuÈbec, H2X
2P2, Canada. Electronic address: james.martin@mcgill.ca.

Bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) contain a subset of multipotent stem cells.
Here, we demonstrate that serotonin, a biogenic amine released by platelets and
mast cells, can induce the smooth muscle differentiation of BMSCs. Brown Norway
rat BMSCs stimulated with serotonin had increased expression of the smooth muscle
markers smooth muscle myosin heavy chain (MHC) and a actin (a-SMA) by qPCR and
Western blot, indicating smooth muscle differentiation. This was accompanied by a
concomitant down-regulation of the microRNA miR-25-5p, which was found to
negatively regulate smooth muscle differentiation. Serotonin upregulated serum
response factor (SRF) and myocardin, transcription factors known to induce
contractile protein expression in smooth muscle cells, while it down-regulated
Elk1 and Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), known to induce proliferation. Serotonin
increased SRF binding to promoter regions of the MHC and a-SMA genes, assessed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Induction of smooth muscle differentiation
by serotonin was blocked by the knock-down of SRF and myocardin. Transforming
growth factor (TGF)-ﬂ1 was constitutively expressed by BMSCs and serotonin
triggered its release. Inhibition of miR-25-5p augmented TGF-ﬂ1 expression,
however the differentiation of BMSCs was not mediated by TGF-ﬂ1. These findings
demonstrate that serotonin promotes a smooth muscle-like phenotype in BMSCs by
altering the balance of SRF, myocardin, Elk1 and KLF4 and miR-25-5p is involved
in modulating this balance. Therefore, serotonin potentially contributes to the
pathogenesis of diseases characterized by tissue remodeling with increased smooth
muscle mass.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24595007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2014;21(5):402-13. Epub 2014 Mar 26.

Role of Kr¸ppel-like factor 4 and its binding proteins in vascular disease.

Yoshida T(1), Hayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Apheresis and Dialysis Center, School of Medicine, Keio University.

Kr¸ppel-like factor 4(KLF4) is a zinc-finger transcription factor that plays a
key role in cellular differentiation and proliferation during normal development 
and in various diseases, such as cancer. The results of recent studies have
revealed that KLF4 is expressed in multiple vascular cell types, including
phenotypically modulated smooth muscle cells(SMCs), endothelial cells and
monocytes/macrophages and contributes to the progression of vascular diseases by 
activating or repressing the transcription of multiple genes via its associations
with a variety of partner proteins. For example, KLF4 decreases the expression of
markers of SMC differentiation by interacting with serum response factor, ELK1
and histone deacetylases. KLF4 also suppresses SMC proliferation by associating
with p53. In addition, KLF4 enhances arterial medial calcification in concert
with RUNX2. Furthermore, endothelial KLF4 represses arterial inflammation by
binding to nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B. This article summarizes the role of KLF4 in
vascular disease with a particular focus on in vivo studies and reviews recent
progress in our understanding of the regulatory mechanisms involved in KLF4-
mediated gene transcription.

PMID: 24573018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 4;289(14):10029-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.528406. Epub 2014
Feb 18.

The endothelin-integrin axis is involved in macrophage-induced breast cancer cell
chemotactic interactions with endothelial cells.

Chen CC(1), Chen LL, Hsu YT, Liu KJ, Fan CS, Huang TS.

Author information: 
(1)From the National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research
Institutes, No. 35, Keyan Road, Zhunan Town, Miaoli 350, Taiwan.

Elevated macrophage infiltration in tumor tissues is associated with breast
cancer metastasis. Cancer cell migration/invasion toward angiogenic
microvasculature is a key step in metastatic spread. We therefore studied how
macrophages stimulated breast cancer cell interactions with endothelial cells.
Macrophages produced cytokines, such as interleukin-8 and tumor necrosis
factor-a, to stimulate endothelin (ET) and ET receptor (ETR) expression in breast
cancer cells and human umbilical vascular endothelial cells (HUVECs). ET-1 was
induced to a greater extent from HUVECs than from breast cancer cells, resulting 
in a density difference that facilitated cancer cell chemotaxis toward HUVECs.
Macrophages also stimulated breast cancer cell adhesion to HUVECs and
transendothelial migration, which were repressed by ET-1 antibody or ETR
inhibitors. The ET axis induced integrins, such as aV and ﬂ1, and their
counterligands, such as intercellular adhesion molecule-2 and P-selectin, in
breast cancer cells and HUVECs, and antibodies against these integrins
efficiently suppressed macrophage-stimulated breast cancer cell interactions with
HUVECs. ET-1 induced Ets-like kinase-1 (Elk-1), signal transducer and activator
of transcription-3 (STAT-3), and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) phosphorylation in
breast cancer cells. The use of inhibitors to prevent their phosphorylation or
ectopic overexpression of dominant-negative I<U+03BA>Ba perturbed ET-1-induced integrin 
aV and integrin ﬂ1 expression. The physical associations of these three
transcriptional factors with the gene promoters of the two integrins were
furthermore evidenced by a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Finally, our
mouse orthotopic tumor model revealed an ET axis-mediated lung metastasis of
macrophage-stimulated breast cancer cells, suggesting that the ET axis was
involved in macrophage-enhanced breast cancer cell endothelial interactions.

PMCID: PMC3974975
PMID: 24550382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Jul;72:9-19. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2014.02.001. Epub 2014
Feb 15.

Inhibition of Egr1 expression underlies the anti-mitogenic effects of cAMP in
vascular smooth muscle cells.

Kimura TE(1), Duggirala A(1), Hindmarch CC(2), Hewer RC(1), Cui MZ(3), Newby
AC(1), Bond M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bristol Heart Institute, University of Bristol, Bristol BS2 8HW, UK.
(2)Laboratory for Integrative Neuroscience & Endocrinology, University of
Bristol, Bristol BS2 8HW, UK; University of Malaya, Department of Physiology,
Faculty of Medicine, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (3)Department of Pathobiology,
College of Veterinary Medicine, The University of Tennessee, USA. (4)Bristol
Heart Institute, University of Bristol, Bristol BS2 8HW, UK. Electronic address: 
mark.bond@bris.ac.uk.

AIMS: Cyclic AMP inhibits vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation which 
is important in the aetiology of numerous vascular diseases. The anti-mitogenic
properties of cAMP in VSMC are dependent on activation of protein kinase A (PKA) 
and exchange protein activated by cAMP (EPAC), but the mechanisms are unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Selective agonists of PKA and EPAC synergistically inhibited
Egr1 expression, which was essential for VSMC proliferation. Forskolin,
adenosine, A2B receptor agonist BAY60-6583 and Cicaprost also inhibited Egr1
expression in VSMC but not in endothelial cells. Inhibition of Egr1 by cAMP was
independent of cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) activity but
dependent on inhibition of serum response element (SRE) activity. SRF binding to 
the Egr1 promoter was not modulated by cAMP stimulation. However, Egr1 expression
was dependent on the SRF co-factors Elk1 and 4 but independent of MAL. Inhibition
of SRE-dependent Egr1 expression was due to synergistic inhibition of Rac1
activity by PKA and EPAC, resulting in rapid cytoskeleton remodelling and nuclear
export of ERK1/2. This was associated with de-phosphorylation of the SRF
co-factor Elk1.
CONCLUSION: cAMP inhibits VSMC proliferation by rapidly inhibiting Egr1
expression. This occurs, at least in part, via inhibition of Rac1 activity
leading to rapid actin-cytoskeleton remodelling, nuclear export of ERK1/2,
impaired Elk1-phosphorylation and inhibition of SRE activity. This identifies one
of the earliest mechanisms underlying the anti-mitogenic effects of cAMP in VSMC 
but not in endothelial cells, making it an attractive target for selective
inhibition of VSMC proliferation.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4051994
PMID: 24534707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Food Funct. 2014 Mar;5(3):573-8. doi: 10.1039/c3fo60509d.

Collagen hydrolysates increased osteogenic gene expressions via a MAPK signaling 
pathway in MG-63 human osteoblasts.

Kim HK(1), Kim MG, Leem KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food & Biotechnology, Hanseo University, Seosan, Chungnam
356-706, South Korea.

The present study investigated the effects of CHs on osteogenic activities and
MAPK-regulation on bone matrix gene expressions. The effects of CHs on cell
proliferation, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, collagen synthesis, and
mineralization were measured in human osteoblastic MG-63 cells. Activation of
MAPKs and downstream transcription factors such as extracellular-signal-regulated
kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1/2 (JNK1/2), p38, ELK1, and cJUN
was examined using Western blot analysis. The expressions of osteogenic genes
were measured by quantitative real-time PCR. CHs dose-dependently increased MG-63
cell proliferation, ALP activity, collagen synthesis, and calcium deposition. CHs
activated ERK1/2, JNK1/2, p38, and ELK1 phosphorylation except cJUN. The COL1A1
(collagen, type I, alpha 1), ALPL (alkaline phosphatase), BGLAP (osteocalcin),
and SPP1 (secreted phosphoprotein 1, osteopontin) gene expressions were increased
by CH treatment. The ERK1/2 inhibitor (PD98509) blocked the CH-induced COL1A1 and
ALPL gene expression, as well as ELK1 phosphorylation. The JNK1/2 inhibitor
(SP600125) abolished CH-induced COL1A1 expression. The p38 inhibitor (SB203580)
blocked CH-induced COL1A1 and SPP1 gene expression. In conclusion, CH treatment
stimulates the osteogenic activities and increases bone matrix gene expressions
via the MAPK/ELK1 signaling pathway. These results could provide a mechanistic
explanation for the bone-strengthening effects of CHs.

PMID: 24496382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cell Biol Int. 2014 May;38(5):553-62. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10246. Epub 2014 Feb 5.

Cellular and molecular stimulation of adipose-derived stem cells under hypoxia.

Kang S(1), Kim SM, Sung JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Bioscience, CHA University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Cultivation under hypoxia has beneficial effects on adipose-derived stem cells
(ASCs). Despite a history of extensive research on the responses of ASCs to
hypoxia, investigations have focused on functional alterations of ASCs.
Therefore, we provide novel insight in this review into the cellular and
molecular changes that occur in ASCs under hypoxic conditions. Hypoxia increases 
the proliferation and migration of ASCs by the generation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and downstream phosphorylation of platelet-derived growth factor
receptor-beta, ERK1/2, and Akt. Chronically, activation of these signaling
pathways upregulates miR-210 via phosphorylation of NF-<U+03BA>B and Elk1. Protein
tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 2 (PTPN2) is a direct miR-210 target, and
downregulation of PTPN2 mediates the proliferation and migration of ASCs during
hypoxia. In addition, the paracrine effect of ASCs is enhanced under hypoxic
conditions, irrespective of whether ROS are generated. Hypoxic preconditioning
stabilizes hypoxia inducible factor-1a under hypoxic conditions and increases
secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor, thereby improving the
regenerative potential of ASCs. Therefore, understanding the cellular and
molecular changes that occur during hypoxia is highly relevant for the
development of novel ASC therapies.

© 2014 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 24446066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 30;8(12):e84062. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084062.
eCollection 2013.

Regulation of c-Fos gene expression by NF-<U+03BA>B: a p65 homodimer binding site in
mouse embryonic fibroblasts but not human HEK293 cells.

Tu YC(1), Huang DY(1), Shiah SG(2), Wang JS(1), Lin WW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (2)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health
Research Institutes, Zhunan, Miaoli County, Taiwan. (3)Department of
Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan ;
Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
Taiwan.

The immediate early gene c-Fos is reported to be regulated by Elk-1 and cAMP
response element-binding protein (CREB), but whether nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B is
also required for controlling c-Fos expression is unclear. In this study, we
determined how NF-<U+03BA>B's coordination with Elk/serum response factor (SRF)
regulates c-fos transcription. We report that PMA strongly induced c-Fos
expression, but tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a did not. In mouse embryonic
fibroblasts, the PMA induction of c-Fos was suppressed by a deficiency in IKKa,
IKKﬂ, IKK<U+03B3>, or p65. By contrast, in human embryonic kidney 293 cells, PMA induced
c-Fos independently of p65. In accordance with these results, we identified an
NF-<U+03BA>B binding site in the mouse but not human c-fos promoter. Under PMA
stimulation, IKKa/ﬂ mediated p65 phosphorylation and the binding of the p65
homodimer to the NF-<U+03BA>B site in the mouse c-fos promoter. Furthermore, our studies
demonstrated independent but coordinated functions of the IKKa/ﬂ-p65 and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-Elk-1 pathways in the PMA induction
of c-Fos. Collectively, these results reveal the distinct requirement of NF-<U+03BA>B
for mouse and human c-fos regulation. Binding of the p65 homodimer to the <U+03BA>B site
was indispensable for mouse c-fos expression, whereas the <U+03BA>B binding site was not
present in the human c-fos promoter. Because of an inability to evoke sufficient 
ERK activation and Elk-1 phosphorylation, TNF-a induces c-Fos more weakly than
PMA does in both mouse and human cells.

PMCID: PMC3875526
PMID: 24386331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 17;8(12):e84002. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084002.
eCollection 2013.

Whole blood gene expression profiles in insulin resistant Latinos with the
metabolic syndrome.

Tangen SE(1), Tsinajinnie D(1), NuÒez M(1), Shaibi GQ(2), Mandarino LJ(3),
Coletta DK(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United
States of America. (2)College of Nursing & Health Innovation, Arizona State
University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America ; Mayo Clinic in Arizona,
Scottsdale, Arizona, United States of America. (3)School of Life Sciences,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America ; Mayo Clinic 
in Arizona, Scottsdale, Arizona, United States of America. (4)School of Life
Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America ;
Mayo Clinic in Arizona, Scottsdale, Arizona, United States of America ;
Department of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Arizona College of Medicine -
Phoenix, Phoenix, Arizona.

Although insulin resistance in skeletal muscle is well-characterized, the role of
circulating whole blood in the metabolic syndrome phenotype is not well
understood. We set out to test the hypothesis that genes involved in
inflammation, insulin signaling and mitochondrial function would be altered in
expression in the whole blood of individuals with metabolic syndrome. We further 
wanted to examine whether similar relationships that we have found previously in 
skeletal muscle exist in peripheral whole blood cells. All subjects (n=184) were 
Latino descent from the Arizona Insulin Resistance registry. Subjects were
classified based on the metabolic syndrome phenotype according to the National
Cholesterol Education Program's Adult Treatment Panel III. Of the 184 Latino
subjects in the study, 74 were classified with the metabolic syndrome and 110
were without. Whole blood gene expression profiling was performed using the
Agilent 4x44K Whole Human Genome Microarray. Whole blood microarray analysis
identified 1,432 probes that were altered in expression = 1.2 fold and P<0.05
after Benjamini-Hochberg in the metabolic syndrome subjects. KEGG pathway
analysis revealed significant enrichment for pathways including ribosome,
oxidative phosphorylation and MAPK signaling (all Benjamini-Hochberg P<0.05).
Whole blood mRNA expression changes observed in the microarray data were
confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR. Transcription factor binding motif enrichment
analysis revealed E2F1, ELK1, NF-kappaB, STAT1 and STAT3 significantly enriched
after Bonferroni correction (all P<0.05). The results of the present study
demonstrate that whole blood is a useful tissue for studying the metabolic
syndrome and its underlying insulin resistance although the relationship between 
blood and skeletal muscle differs.

PMCID: PMC3866261
PMID: 24358323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 11;8(11):e78695. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078695.
eCollection 2013.

NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB are required for angiotensin II type 1 receptor upregulation in
neurons.

Haack KK(1), Mitra AK, Zucker IH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, United States of America.

Nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and the Ets like gene-1 (Elk-1) are two
transcription factors that have been previously established to contribute to the 
Angiotensin II mediated upregulation of Angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) in 
neurons. The cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) is another
transcription factor that has also been implicated in AT1R gene transcription.
The goal of the current study was to determine if NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB association was 
required for AT1R upregulation. We hypothesized that the transcription of the
AT1R gene occurs via an orchestration of transcription factor interactions
including NF-<U+03BA>B, CREB, and Elk-1. The synergistic role of CREB and NF<U+03BA>B in
promoting AT1R gene expression was determined using siRNA-mediated silencing of
CREB. Electrophorectic Mobility Shift Assay studies employing CREB and NF-<U+03BA>B
demonstrated increased protein - DNA binding as a result of Ang II stimulation
which was blunted by siRNA silencing of CREB. Upstream inhibition of p38 mitogen 
activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) with SB203580 or inhibition of the calmodulin
kinase (CAMK) pathway using KN-62 blunted changes in CREB and NF-<U+03BA>B expression.
These findings suggest that Ang II may activate multiple signaling pathways
involving p38 MAPK leading to the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB, which feed back
to upregulate the AT1R gene. This study provides insight into the molecular
mechanisms involving multiple transcription factor activation in a coordinated
fashion which may be partially responsible for sympathoexcitation in clinical
conditions associated with increased activation of the renin angiotensin system.

PMCID: PMC3823855
PMID: 24244341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Life Sci. 2014 Jan 14;94(1):45-53. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2013.11.002. Epub 2013 Nov 
14.

Involvement of MAPK signaling pathway in the osteogenic gene expressions of Cervi
Pantotrichum Cornu in MG-63 human osteoblast-like cells.

Kim JH(1), Jung TY(2), Seo J(3), Lee S(4), Kim MG(4), Leem KH(5), Lim SC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Acupuncture & Moxibustion, College of Korean Medicine, Daegu Haany
University, Kyeongbuk 712-715, Republic of Korea. (2)Dept. of Diagnostics,
College of Korean Medicine, Daegu Haany University, Kyeongbuk 712-715, Republic
of Korea. (3)Comprehensive and Integrative Medicine Institute, Daegu 705-718,
Republic of Korea. (4)College of Korean Medicine, Semyung University, Chungbuk
390-711, Republic of Korea. (5)College of Korean Medicine, Semyung University,
Chungbuk 390-711, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: heavenok@dreamwiz.com.
(6)Dept. of Acupuncture & Moxibustion, College of Korean Medicine, Daegu Haany
University, Kyeongbuk 712-715, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
now123@dreamwiz.com.

AIMS: The purposes of this study were to determine whether Cervi Pantotrichum
Cornu (CPC) has osteogenic activities in human osteoblastic MG-63 cells and to
investigate the underlying molecular mechanism.
MAIN METHODS: The effects of CPC on alkaline phosphatase activity, collagen
synthesis, and calcium deposits were measured. The COL1A1, ALPL, BGLAP, and SPP1 
expressions were measured by real-time PCR. Phosphorylated MAP kinases (ERK1/2,
JNK1/2, p38, ELK1, and cJUN) were studied by western blot analysis. The
involvement of MAPK pathway in osteogenic gene expressions was determined by
using each selective MAPK inhibitor (PD98059, SP600125, and SB203580).
KEY FINDINGS: CPC increased alkaline phosphatase activity, collagen synthesis,
and calcium deposits. CPC activated ERK1/2, JNK1/2, p38, and ELK1 phosphorylation
except cJUN. CPC increased the COL1A1, ALPL, BGLAP, and SPP1 gene expressions.
The elevated COL1A1 and BGLAP expressions were inhibited by PD98059, SP600125 or 
SB203580. The elevated ALPL expression was blocked by SB203580. The elevated SPP1
expression was inhibited by SP600125 or SB203580. CPC increased COL1A1 and BGLAP 
expressions via ERK1/2, JNK1/2, and p38 MAPKs pathways and SPP1 expression via
JNK1/2 and p38 pathways. p38 pathway is needed for ALPL expression.
SIGNIFICANCE: These results imply that MAPK signaling pathway is an indispensable
factor for bone matrix genes expression of CPC in MG-63 human osteoblast-like
cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24239640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Am J Pathol. 2013 Dec;183(6):1700-2. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.10.001. Epub 2013
Oct 30.

Silence Please!: siRNA approaches to tighten the intestinal barrier in vivo.

Bakirtzi K(1), Hoffman JM, Pothoulakis C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive Diseases, Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California.

Comment on
    Am J Pathol. 2013 Dec;183(6):1871-84.

PMID: 24183845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biol Reprod. 2013 Dec 19;89(6):143. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.112953. Print
2013 Dec.

Transcriptome analysis of the dihydrotestosterone-exposed fetal rat gubernaculum 
identifies common androgen and insulin-like 3 targets.

Barthold JS(1), Wang Y, Robbins A, Pike J, McDowell E, Johnson KJ, McCahan SM.

Author information: 
(1)Nemours Biomedical Research/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children,
Wilmington, Delaware.

Androgens and insulin-like 3 (INSL3) are required for development of the fetal
gubernaculum and testicular descent. Previous studies suggested that the
INSL3-exposed fetal gubernacular transcriptome is enriched for genes involved in 
neural pathways. In the present study, we profiled the transcriptome of fetal
gubernaculum explants exposed to dihydrotestosterone (DHT) and compared this
response to that with INSL3. We exposed fetal (Embryonic Day 17) rat gubernacula 
to DHT for 24 h (10 and 30 nM) or 6 h (1 and 10 nM) in organ culture and analyzed
gene expression relative to that of vehicle-treated controls using Affymetrix
arrays. Results were annotated using functional, pathway, and promoter analyses
and independently validated for selected transcripts using quantitative RT-PCR
(qRT-PCR). Transcripts were differentially expressed after 24 h but not 6 h. Most
highly overrepresented functional categories included those related to gene
expression, skeletal and muscular development and function, and Wnt signaling.
Promoter response elements enriched in the DHT-specific transcriptome included
consensus sequences for c-ETS1, ELK1, CREB, CRE-BP1/c-June, NRF2, and USF. We
observed that 55% of DHT probe sets were also differentially expressed after
INSL3 exposure and that the direction of change was the same in 96%. The qRT-PCR 
results confirmed that DHT increased expression of the INSL3-responsive genes
Crlf1 and Chrdl2 but reduced expression of Wnt4. We also validated reduced Tgfb2 
and Cxcl12 and increased Slit3 expression following DHT exposure. These data
suggest a robust overlap in the DHT- and INSL3-regulated transcriptome that may
be mediated in part by CREB signaling and a common Wnt pathway response for both 
hormones in the fetal gubernaculum.

PMCID: PMC4076356
PMID: 24174575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jan;34(1):84-95. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00987-13. Epub 2013 Oct 28.

Temporal production of the signaling lipid phosphatidic acid by phospholipase D2 
determines the output of extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling in
cancer cells.

Zhang F(1), Wang Z, Lu M, Yonekubo Y, Liang X, Zhang Y, Wu P, Zhou Y, Grinstein
S, Hancock JF, Du G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, University of Texas Health
Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, USA.

The Ras-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) cascade is an important
signaling module in cells. One regulator of the Ras-ERK cascade is phosphatidic
acid (PA) generated by phospholipase D (PLD) and diacylglycerol kinase (DGK).
Using a newly developed PA biosensor, PASS (phosphatidic acid biosensor with
superior sensitivity), we found that PA was generated sequentially by PLD and DGK
in epidermal growth factor (EGF)-stimulated HCC1806 breast cancer cells.
Inhibition of PLD2, one of the two PLD members, was sufficient to eliminate most 
of the PA production, whereas inhibition of DGK decreased PA production only at
the later stages of EGF stimulation, suggesting that PLD2 precedes DGK
activation. The temporal production of PA by PLD2 is important for the nuclear
activation of ERK. While inhibition of both PLD and DGK had no effect on the
overall ERK activity, inhibition of PLD2 but not PLD1 or DGK blocked the nuclear 
ERK activity in several cancer cell lines. The decrease of active ERK in the
nucleus inhibited the activation of Elk1, c-fos, and Fra1, the ERK nuclear
targets, leading to decreased proliferation of HCC1806 cells. Together, these
findings reveal that PA production by PLD2 determines the output of ERK in cancer
cell growth factor signaling.

PMCID: PMC3911278
PMID: 24164897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(10):e1003870. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003870. Epub 2013 Oct
10.

Preferential binding to Elk-1 by SLE-associated IL10 risk allele upregulates IL10
expression.

Sakurai D(1), Zhao J, Deng Y, Kelly JA, Brown EE, Harley JB, Bae SC,
Alarc<U+03CC>n-Riquelme ME; BIOLUPUS and GENLES networks, Edberg JC, Kimberly RP,
Ramsey-Goldman R, Petri MA, Reveille JD, Vil· LM, AlarcÛn GS, Kaufman KM, Vyse
TJ, Jacob CO, Gaffney PM, Sivils KM, James JA, Kamen DL, Gilkeson GS, Niewold TB,
Merrill JT, Scofield RH, Criswell LA, Stevens AM, Boackle SA, Kim JH, Choi J,
Pons-Estel BA; Argentine Collaborative Group, Freedman BI, Anaya JM, Martin J, Yu
CY, Chang DM, Song YW, Langefeld CD, Chen W, Grossman JM, Cantor RM, Hahn BH,
Tsao BP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Immunoregulatory cytokine interleukin-10 (IL-10) is elevated in sera from
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) correlating with disease
activity. The established association of IL10 with SLE and other autoimmune
diseases led us to fine map causal variant(s) and to explore underlying
mechanisms. We assessed 19 tag SNPs, covering the IL10 gene cluster including
IL19, IL20 and IL24, for association with SLE in 15,533 case and control subjects
from four ancestries. The previously reported IL10 variant, rs3024505 located at 
1 kb downstream of IL10, exhibited the strongest association signal and was
confirmed for association with SLE in European American (EA) (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.7◊10<U+207B>8,
OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.30), but not in non-EA ancestries. SNP imputation conducted in EA dataset 
identified three additional SLE-associated SNPs tagged by rs3024505 (rs3122605,
rs3024493 and rs3024495 located at 9.2 kb upstream, intron 3 and 4 of IL10,
respectively), and SLE-risk alleles of these SNPs were dose-dependently
associated with elevated levels of IL10 mRNA in PBMCs and circulating IL-10
protein in SLE patients and controls. Using nuclear extracts of peripheral blood 
cells from SLE patients for electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we identified 
specific binding of transcription factor Elk-1 to oligodeoxynucleotides
containing the risk (G) allele of rs3122605, suggesting rs3122605 as the most
likely causal variant regulating IL10 expression. Elk-1 is known to be activated 
by phosphorylation and nuclear localization to induce transcription. Of interest,
phosphorylated Elk-1 (p-Elk-1) detected only in nuclear extracts of SLE PBMCs
appeared to increase with disease activity. Co-expression levels of p-Elk-1 and
IL-10 were elevated in SLE T, B cells and monocytes, associated with increased
disease activity in SLE B cells, and were best downregulated by ERK inhibitor.
Taken together, our data suggest that preferential binding of activated Elk-1 to 
the IL10 rs3122605-G allele upregulates IL10 expression and confers increased
risk for SLE in European Americans.

PMCID: PMC3794920
PMID: 24130510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Am J Pathol. 2013 Dec;183(6):1871-84. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.09.001. Epub
2013 Oct 8.

TNF-a modulation of intestinal epithelial tight junction barrier is regulated by 
ERK1/2 activation of Elk-1.

Al-Sadi R(1), Guo S, Ye D, Ma TY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, 
Albuquerque, New Mexico.

Comment in
    Am J Pathol. 2013 Dec;183(6):1700-2.

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF-a) is a proinflammatory cytokine that plays a critical
role in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease. TNF-a causes an increase 
in intestinal permeability; however, the signaling pathways and the molecular
mechanisms involved remain unclear. The major purpose of this study was to
investigate the role of MAP kinase pathways (ERK1/2 and p38 kinase) and the
molecular processes involved. An in vitro intestinal epithelial model system
consisting of Caco-2 monolayers and an in vivo mouse model system were used to
delineate the cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in TNF-a effects on
tight junction barrier. The TNF-a-induced increase in Caco-2 tight junction
permeability was mediated by activation of the ERK1/2 signaling pathway, but not 
the p38 kinase pathway. Activation of the ERK1/2 pathway led to phosphorylation
and activation of the ETS domain-containing transcription factor Elk-1. The
activated Elk-1 translocated to the nucleus, where it bound to its binding motif 
on the myosin light chain kinase (MLCK) promoter region, leading to the
activation of MLCK promoter activity and gene transcription. In addition, in vivo
intestinal perfusion studies also indicated that the TNF-a-induced increase in
mouse intestinal permeability requires ERK1/2-dependent activation of Elk-1.
These studies provide novel insight into the cellular and molecular processes
that regulate the TNF-a-induced increase in intestinal epithelial tight junction 
permeability.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24121020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Jan 25;382(1):159-69. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.09.021.
Epub 2013 Sep 26.

Insulin-activated Elk-1 recruits the TIP60/NuA4 complex to increase prolactin
gene transcription.

Mahajan MA(1), Stanley FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, United States.

Insulin increases prolactin gene expression in GH4 cells through phosphorylation 
of Elk-1 (Jacob and Stanley, 2001). We preformed a reverse two-hybrid screen
using Elk-1-B42 as bait to identify proteins from GH4 cells that might serve as
co-activators or co-repressors for insulin-increased prolactin gene expression. A
number of the components of the TIP60/NuA4 complex interacted with Elk-1
suggesting that Elk-1 might activate transcription by recruiting the TIP60
chromatin-remodeling complex to the prolactin promoter. Inhibition of
insulin-increased prolactin-luciferase expression by wild type and mutant
adenovirus E1A protein provided physiological context for these yeast studies.
Inhibition of histone deacetylases dramatically increased both basal and
insulin-increased prolactin gene transcription. Co-immune precipitation
experiments demonstrated Elk-1 and TIP60 associate in vitro. Transient or stable 
expression of TIP60 activated insulin-increased prolactin gene expression while a
mutated TIP60 blocked insulin-increased prolactin gene expression. Analysis of
the prolactin mRNA by quantitative RT-PCR showed that insulin-increased prolactin
mRNA accumulation and that this was inhibited in GH4 cells that stably expressed 
mutant TIP60. Finally, ChIP experiments demonstrate the insulin-dependent
occupancy of the prolactin promoter by Elk-1 and TIP60. Our studies suggest that 
insulin activates prolactin gene transcription by activating Elk-1 that recruits 
the NuA4 complex to the promoter.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24075908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 8;288(45):32742-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.478016. Epub 2013
Sep 26.

Regulation of the microRNA 200b (miRNA-200b) by transcriptional regulators PEA3
and ELK-1 protein affects expression of Pin1 protein to control anoikis.

Zhang X(1), Zhang B, Gao J, Wang X, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)From the State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology and.

MicroRNA (miRNA) 200s regulate E-cadherin by directly targeting ZEB1/ZEB2, which 
are transcriptional repressors of E-cadherin. Decreased expression of E-cadherin 
results in cancer cells losing interaction with the extracellular matrix and
detaching from the primary tumor. Normally, cells will undergo anoikis after
losing interaction with the extracellular matrix. Cancer cells must, therefore,
possess the ability to resist anoikis during the process of metastasis. Here we
show that miRNA-200b regulates anoikis by directly targeting the 3' UTR of Pin1
mRNA and regulating Pin1 expression at the translational level. We found that
down-regulation of miRNA-200b promotes cancer cells survival during metastasis,
and the homeless state of these cells resulted in decreased expression of
miRNA-200b in the MCF-7 cell line. We also found that expression of miRNA-200b is
down-regulated in human breast cancer during lymph node metastasis, which has a
significant negative correlation with Pin1 expression. Two members of the ETS
(E-26) family (PEA3 and ELK-1) regulate the expression of miRNA-200b. PEA3
promotes the expression of miRNA-200b, and ELK-1 is a transcriptional repressor
of miRNA-200b. In addition, miRNA-200b regulates the activity of PEA3 and ELK-1
via the Pin1-pERK pathway and forms self-regulated feedback loops. This study
characterizes the role of miRNA-200b in the regulation of anoikis and
demonstrates the regulation of its own expression in the process of metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3820908
PMID: 24072701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Biotech Histochem. 2014 Apr;89(3):199-208. doi: 10.3109/10520295.2013.832799.
Epub 2013 Sep 20.

Role of the ERK signaling pathway in regulating vasopressin secretion in
dehydrated rats.

Nikitina LS(1), Dorofeeva NA, Kirillova OD, Korotkov AA, Glazova M,
Chernigovskaya EV.

Author information: 
(1)Sechenov Institute of Evolutionary Physiology and Biochemistry, Russian
Academy of Sciences , 44 Thorez pr., 194223.

Dehydration activates the vasopressinergic system of the hypothalamus. We
analyzed the effects of dehydration induced by water deprivation for 3 days on
the activities of ERK1/2 and transcription factors, Elk1 and cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) in vasopressinergic neurons, as well as the
distribution and level of the motor protein, kinesin, in the
hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal system. We showed that dehydration resulted in
enhanced vasopressin (VP) expression and activation of CREB, and increased the
activity of the MEK/ERK/Elk1 pathway in magnocellular neurons of the supraoptic
nucleus. The activation of VP secretion was associated also with accumulation of 
phospho-ERK1/2 in the VP-ergic terminals of the posterior lobe of the pituitary. 
Analysis of the amount and distribution of kinesin and SNAP25, the proteins
associated with transport and secretion, demonstrated that dehydration enhanced
kinesin content in the perikarya of magnocellular neurons in the supraoptic
nucleus and decreased kinesin and SNAP25 levels in the posterior pituitary.
ERK1/2 and ERK1/2-dependent transcription factors, Elk1 and CREB, participate in 
the regulation of dehydration-evoked VP expression. We propose that ERK1/2 and
kinesin participate in regulation of anterograde transport of VP dense core
vesicles.

PMID: 24053164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Redox Biol. 2013 May 23;1:319-31. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2013.04.001.

Effects of 4-hydroxynonenal on vascular endothelial and smooth muscle cell redox 
signaling and function in health and disease.

Chapple SJ(1), Cheng X, Mann GE.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, British Heart Foundation Centre of Research
Excellence, School of Medicine, King's College London, 150 Stamford Street,
London SE1 9NH, U.K.

4-hydroxynonenal (HNE) is a lipid hydroperoxide end product formed from the
oxidation of n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids. The relative abundance of HNE
within the vasculature is dependent not only on the rate of lipid peroxidation
and HNE synthesis but also on the removal of HNE adducts by phase II metabolic
pathways such as glutathione-S-transferases. Depending on its relative
concentration, HNE can induce a range of hormetic effects in vascular endothelial
and smooth muscle cells, including kinase activation, proliferation, induction of
phase II enzymes and in high doses inactivation of enzymatic processes and
apoptosis. HNE also plays an important role in the pathogenesis of vascular
diseases such as atherosclerosis, diabetes, neurodegenerative disorders and in
utero diseases such as pre-eclampsia. This review examines the known production, 
metabolism and consequences of HNE synthesis within vascular endothelial and
smooth muscle cells, highlighting alterations in mitochondrial and endoplasmic
reticulum function and their association with various vascular pathologies.

PMCID: PMC3757694
PMID: 24024167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Asian J Androl. 2013 Nov;15(6):753-8. doi: 10.1038/aja.2013.84. Epub 2013 Aug 26.

The miRNA let-7a1 inhibits the expression of insulin-like growth factor 1
receptor (IGF1R) in prostate cancer PC-3 cells.

Wang LN, Chen WW, Zhang J, Li CY, Liu CY, Xue J, Zhang PJ, Jiang AL.

Reduced microRNA (miRNA) let-7a expression and the activation of insulin-like
growth factor-1 receptor (IGF1R) signalling are both involved in prostate cancer 
and progression. In the present study, we demonstrated that the growth inhibitory
effect of let-7a1 is directly related to targeting IGF1R gene expression in PC-3 
cells. TargetScan predicted three potential target sites (T1, T2 and T3) of
let-7a in the 3' untranslational region (3' UTR) of IGF1R mRNA. Real-time PCR,
Western blot and luciferase reporter assays were used to detect the effects of
let-7a1 overexpression or let-7a1 inhibitor on the IGF1R gene expression in PC-3 
cells. The results indicated that let-7a1 could inhibit IGF1R expression by
directly targeting the T1 and T2 sites in the 3' UTR of the IGF1R mRNA. We then
used RT-PCR, luciferase reporter assays, 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-
diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay, flow cytometry and Hoechst 33342
staining to examine whether let-7a1-mediated inhibition of IGF1R expression also 
affects the IGF1R-mediated signalling events, including Elk1 activity and c-fos
gene expression, proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle. We demonstrated that
let-7a1-mediated IGF1R downregulation was accompanied by attenuation of Elk1
activity and c-fos expression, inhibition of cell proliferation, enhanced
apoptosis and cell cycle arrest, and that loss function of let-7a1 via inhibition
can upregulate IGF1R accompanied by an increase of Elk1 activity and c-fos
expression, thereby enhancing cell proliferation. Altogether, these findings
suggest that let-7a may be novel therapeutic candidate for prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3854054
PMID: 23974362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2013 Sep 27;288(39):28152-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.504308. Epub
2013 Aug 12.

The F-box protein FBXO25 promotes the proteasome-dependent degradation of ELK-1
protein.

Teixeira FR(1), Manfiolli AO, Soares CS, Baqui MM, Koide T, Gomes MD.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Biochemistry and Immunology and.

FBXO25 is one of the 69 known human F-box proteins that serve as specificity
factors for a family of ubiquitin ligases composed of SKP1, Rbx1, Cullin1, and
F-box protein (SCF1) that are involved in targeting proteins for degradation
across the ubiquitin proteasome system. However, the substrates of most SCF E3
ligases remain unknown. Here, we applied an in chip ubiquitination screen using a
human protein microarray to uncover putative substrates for the FBXO25 protein.
Among several novel putative targets identified, the c-fos protooncogene
regulator ELK-1 was characterized as the first endogenous substrate for
SCF1(FBXO25) E3 ligase. FBXO25 interacted with and mediated the ubiquitination
and proteasomal degradation of ELK-1 in HEK293T cells. In addition, FBXO25
overexpression suppressed induction of two ELK-1 target genes, c-fos and egr-1,
in response to phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate. Together, our findings show that 
FBXO25 mediates ELK-1 degradation through the ubiquitin proteasome system and
thereby plays a role in regulating the activation of ELK-1 pathway in response to
mitogens.

PMCID: PMC3784726
PMID: 23940030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 24;8(7):e69423. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069423. Print 2013.

Katanin-p80 gene promoter characterization and regulation via Elk1.

SelÁuk E(1), Kirimtay K, Canbaz D, Cesur GI, Korulu S, Karabay A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul Technical University,
Istanbul, Turkey.

Katanin is an ATPase family member protein that participates in microtubule
severing. It has heterodimeric structure consisting of 60 kDa (katanin-p60) and
80 kDa (katanin-p80) subunits encoded by KATNA1 and KATNB1 genes, respectively.
Katanin-p60 has the enzymatic activity for microtubule severing, whereas
katanin-p80 consists of multiple domains with different functions such as
targeting katanin-p60 to the centrosome, augmenting microtubule severing by
katanin-p60, and even suppressing microtubule severing. Despite the various
important functions of katanin-p80, its transcriptional regulation has not been
studied yet. Elk1 transcription factor has been shown to interact with
microtubules and regulate the transcription of another microtubule severing
protein, spastin. In spite of katanin's importance, and structural and functional
similarities to spastin, there is no study on the transcriptional regulation of
katanin yet. In this study, we aimed to characterize KATNB1 promoter and analyze 
the effects of Elk1 on katanin-p80 expression. We identified a 518- bp TATA-less 
promoter including a critical CpG island and GC boxes as an optimal promoter, and
sequential deletion of CpG island and the GC elements gradually decreased the
KATNB1 promoter activity. In addition, we showed Elk1 binding on the KATNB1
promoter by EMSA. We found that Elk1 activated KATNB1 promoter, and increased
both mRNA and protein levels of katanin-p80 in SH-SY5Y cells. On the other hand, 
KCl treatment increasing SUMOylation decreased KATNB1 promoter activity. Since
microtubule severing is an important cellular mechanism of which malfunctions
result in serious diseases such as spastic paraplegia, Alzheimer's disease and
cell cycle related disorders, identification of KATNB1 transcriptional regulation
is crucial in understanding the coordination of microtubule severing activity by 
different proteins in the cells.

PMCID: PMC3722181
PMID: 23894477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Biol Chem. 2013 Sep 6;288(36):25701-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.502674. Epub 2013
Jul 26.

A novel p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase/Elk-1 transcription factor-dependent
molecular mechanism underlying abnormal endothelial cell proliferation in
plexogenic pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Patel M(1), Predescu D, Tandon R, Bardita C, Pogoriler J, Bhorade S, Wang M,
Comhair S, Hemnes AR, Chen J, Machado R, Husain A, Erzurum S, Predescu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 
60612, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2013 Dec 27;288(52):36855. Ryan-Hemnes, Anna [corrected to Hemnes,
Anna Ryan].

Plexiform lesions (PLs), the hallmark of plexogenic pulmonary arterial
hypertension (PAH), contain phenotypically altered, proliferative endothelial
cells (ECs). The molecular mechanism that contributes to EC proliferation and
formation of PLs is poorly understood. We now show that a decrease in
intersectin-1s (ITSN-1s) expression due to granzyme B (GrB) cleavage during
inflammation associated with PAH and the high p38/Erk1/2(MAPK) activity ratio
caused by the GrB/ITSN cleavage products lead to EC proliferation and selection
of a proliferative/plexiform EC phenotype. We used human pulmonary artery ECs of 
PAH subjects (EC(PAH)), paraffin-embedded and frozen human lung tissue, and
animal models of PAH in conjunction with microscopy imaging, biochemical, and
molecular biology approaches to demonstrate that GrB cleaves ITSN-1s, a
prosurvival protein of lung ECs, and generates two biologically active fragments,
an N-terminal fragment (GrB-EH(ITSN)) with EC proliferative potential and a
C-terminal product with dominant negative effects on Ras/Erk1/2. The
proliferative potential of GrB-EH(ITSN) is mediated via sustained phosphorylation
of p38(MAPK) and Elk-1 transcription factor and abolished by chemical inhibition 
of p38(MAPK). Moreover, lung tissue of PAH animal models and human specimens and 
EC(PAH) express lower levels of ITSN-1s compared with controls and the
GrB-EH(ITSN) cleavage product. Moreover, GrB immunoreactivity is associated with 
PLs in PAH lungs. The concurrent expression of the two cleavage products results 
in a high p38/Erk1/2(MAPK) activity ratio, which is critical for EC
proliferation. Our findings identify a novel GrB-EH(ITSN)-dependent pathogenic
p38(MAPK)/Elk-1 signaling pathway involved in the poorly understood process of PL
formation in severe PAH.

PMCID: PMC3764778
PMID: 23893408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cell Rep. 2013 Jul 25;4(2):262-70. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.06.026. Epub 2013
Jul 18.

Human pluripotent stem cells with distinct X inactivation status show molecular
and cellular differences controlled by the X-Linked ELK-1 gene.

Bruck T(1), Yanuka O, Benvenisty N.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Unit, Department of Genetics, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew
University, Jerusalem 91904, Israel.

Female human pluripotent stem cells show vast heterogeneity regarding the status 
of X chromosome inactivation. By comparing the gene expression profile of cells
with two active X chromosomes (XaXa cells) to that of cells with only one active 
X chromosome (XaXi cells), a set of autosomal genes was shown to be overexpressed
in the XaXa cells. Among these genes, we found significant enrichment for genes
regulated by the X-linked transcription factor ELK-1. Comparison of the phenotype
of XaXa and XaXi cells demonstrated differences in programmed cell death and
differentiation, implying some growth disadvantage of the XaXa cells.
Interestingly, ELK-1-overexpressing cells mimicked the phenotype of XaXa cells,
whereas knockdown of ELK-1 with small hairpin RNA mimicked the phenotype of XaXi 
cells. When cultured at low oxygen levels, these cellular differences were
considerably weakened. Our analysis implies a role of ELK-1 in the differences
between pluripotent stem cells with distinct X chromosome inactivation statuses.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23871667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2013 Oct;6(10):826-30. doi: 10.1016/S1995-7645(13)60146-7.

Estrogen up-regulates MMP2/9 expression in endometrial epithelial cell via
VEGF-ERK1/2 pathway.

Shan B(1), Li W, Yang SY, Li ZR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics of Hainan People's Hospital, Hai Kou 
570311, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of estrogen on anovulatory dysfunctional uterine
bleeding (ADUB).
METHODS: Primary endometrial epithelial cells of Hainan Lizu female was cultured 
and hydrolytic activity of gelatinase was determined by gelatin zymography
analysis. Cellular mRNA and protein synthesis was blocked respectively to
determine whether the increased expression of MMP-2/9 was induced by estrogen.
The expression of VEGF was blocked by siRNA. After treatment with various
factors, MMP-9, VEGF, total Erk and phosphorylated Erk expression in primary
uterine epithelial cells was detected by Western blotting analysis. Cell
MMP-2/9mRNA levels was measured by real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The activity and expression of MMP2/9 was increased in the endometrium
of patients with ADUB. Estrogen could up-regulate the expression of VEGF and
activate Erk 1/2-Elk1 signal path. After interference by siRNA, ERK1/2 pathway
was blocked in cells, and the expression of MMP-2/9 was down-regulated. ERK1/2
specific blocker U0126 blocked ERK phosphorylation, and it could down-regulate
the expression of MMP-2/9.
CONCLUSIONS: The results showed that the estrogen can increase the expression of 
VEGF, and thus activate ERK1/2 pathway to induce MMP-2/9 expression.

Copyright © 2013 Hainan Medical College. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 23870474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 20;8(6):e66255. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066255. Print 2013.

hypoxia-inducible factors activate CD133 promoter through ETS family
transcription factors.

Ohnishi S(1), Maehara O, Nakagawa K, Kameya A, Otaki K, Fujita H, Higashi R,
Takagi K, Asaka M, Sakamoto N, Kobayashi M, Takeda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hokkaido University Graduate
School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. sonishi@pop.med.hokudai.ac.jp

CD133 is a cellular surface protein that has been reported to be a cancer stem
cell marker, and thus it is considered to be a potential target for cancer
treatment. However, the mechanism regulating CD133 expression is not yet
understood. In this study, we analyzed the activity of five putative promoters
(P1-P5) of CD133 in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells and colon cancer cell 
line WiDr, and found that the activity of promoters, particularly of P5, is
elevated by overexpression of hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF-1a and HIF-2a).
Deletion and mutation analysis identified one of the two E-twenty six (ETS)
binding sites (EBSs) in the P5 region as being essential for its promoter
activity induced by HIF-1a and HIF-2a. In addition, a chromatin
imunoprecipitation assay demonstrated that HIF-1a and HIF-2a bind to the proximal
P5 promoter at the EBSs. The immunoprecipitation assay showed that HIF-1a
physically interacts with Elk1; however, HIF-2a did not bind to Elk1 or ETS1.
Furthermore, knockdown of both HIF-1a and HIF-2a resulted in a reduction of CD133
expression in WiDr. Taken together, our results revealed that HIF-1a and HIF-2a
activate CD133 promoter through ETS proteins.

PMCID: PMC3688781
PMID: 23840432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013 Aug 15;188(4):482-91. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201304-0700OC.

Endothelial indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase protects against development of pulmonary
hypertension.

Xiao Y(1), Christou H, Liu L, Visner G, Mitsialis SA, Kourembanas S, Liu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Boston Childrenís Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

RATIONALE: A proliferative and apoptosis-resistant phenotype in pulmonary
arterial smooth muscle cells (PASMCs) is key to pathologic vascular remodeling in
pulmonary hypertension (PH). Expression of indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) by
vascular endothelium is a newly identified vasomotor-regulatory mechanism also
involved in molecular signaling cascades governing vascular smooth muscle cell
(vSMC) plasticity.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the therapeutic potential of enhanced endothelial IDO 
in development of PH and its associated vascular remodeling.
METHODS: We used loss and gain of function in vivo studies to establish the role 
and determine the therapeutic effect of endothelial IDO in hypoxia-induced PH in 
mice and monocrotaline-induced PH in rats. We also studied PASMC phenotype in an 
IDO-high in vivo and in vitro tissue microenvironment.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The endothelium was the primary site for
endogenous IDO production within mouse lung, and the mice lacking this gene had
exaggerated hypoxia-induced PH. Conversely, augmented pulmonary endothelial IDO
expression, through a human IDO-encoding Sleeping Beauty (SB)-based nonviral
gene-integrating approach, halted and attenuated the development of PH, right
ventricular hypertrophy, and vascular remodeling in both preclinical models of
PH. IDO derived from endothelial cells promoted apoptosis in PH-PASMCs through
depolarization of mitochondrial transmembrane potential and down-regulated
PH-PASMC proliferative/synthetic capacity through enhanced binding of myocardin
to CArG box DNA sequences present within the promoters of vSMC
differentiation-specific genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Enhanced endothelial IDO ameliorates PH and its associated vascular 
structural remodeling through paracrine phenotypic modulation of PH-PASMCs toward
a proapoptotic and less proliferative/synthetic state.

PMCID: PMC3778740
PMID: 23822766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1832(12):1969-79. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.06.010. Epub 2013 Jun 28.

Egr1 regulates lithium-induced transcription of the Period 2 (PER2) gene.

Kim SH(1), Yu HS, Park HG, Ahn YM, Kim YS, Lee YH, Ha K, Shin SY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Behavioral Medicine, Medical Research Center, Seoul
National University, Seoul 110-744, Republic of Korea.

A growing body of evidence suggests that the circadian molecular system is
involved in the pathogenic and therapeutic mechanisms underlying bipolar
disorders. Lithium, a representative mood stabilizer, has been reported to induce
the Period 2 (PER2) gene; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms require
further study. We found that lithium upregulated PER2 expression at the
transcriptional level in neuronally differentiated SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma
cells. Promoter reporter analyses using serial deletions of the PER2 promoter
revealed that two early growth response 1 (Egr1)-binding sites (EBS) between
positions -180 and -100 are required for maximal activation of the PER2 promoter 
by lithium. Ectopic expression of Egr1 enhanced lithium-induced PER2 promoter
activity, while a point mutation in EBS abolished it. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation indicated that Egr1 bound directly
to the PER2 promoter. Stimulation of the extracellular-signal regulated kinase
(ERK)1/2/Elk1 pathway by lithium was functionally linked to PER2 expression
through Egr1 induction, and lithium-induced PER2 expression was strongly
attenuated by depletion of Egr1 by siRNA. Lithium also upregulated the expression
of Per2 and Egr1 in mouse frontal cortex. Induction of Per2 by lithium was
attenuated in Egr1(-/-) mice. In conclusion, lithium stimulates PER2
transcription through the ERK/Elk1/Egr1 pathway in neuronal cells, indicating a
connection between the ERK-Egr1 pathway and a circadian gene system in the
mechanism of action of lithium.

© 2013.

PMID: 23816566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Biomed Sci. 2013 Jul 2;20:46. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-20-46.

The cAMP effector EPAC activates Elk1 transcription factor in prostate smooth
muscle, and is a minor regulator of a1-adrenergic contraction.

Hennenberg M(1), Strittmatter F, Schmetkamp H, Rutz B, Walther S, Stief CG,
Gratzke C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Prostate smooth muscle tone is regulated by a1-adrenoceptor-induced
contraction and cAMP-mediated relaxation. EPAC is an effector of cAMP, being
involved in smooth muscle relaxation and cell cycle control outside the lower
urinary tract. Here, we investigated the expression and function of EPAC in human
prostate tissues from patients undergoing radical prostatectomy.
RESULTS: mRNA and protein expression of EPAC was detected in all prostate tissues
by RT-PCR and Western blot analysis. Immunoreactivity was observed in stromal
cells, and colocalized with immunofluorescence for a-smooth muscle actin and
calponin. Under normal conditions, noradrenaline- or phenylephrine-induced
contraction of prostate strips in the organ bath was not affected by the EPAC
activator pCPT (SP-8-pCPT-2'-O-Me-cAMPS.NA) (30 µM). However, when the
cyclooxygenase inhibitor indomethacin (50 µM) was added, EPAC activators pCPT and
OME (8-CPT-2'-O-Me-cAMP.Na) (30 µM) significantly reduced contractions by low
concentrations of phenylephrine. These effects were not observed on
noradrenaline-induced contraction. OME and pCPT caused phosphorylation of the
transcription factor Elk1 in prostate tissues. Elk1 activation was confirmed by
EMSA (electrophoretic mobility shift assay), where OME and pCPT incresed Elk1
binding to a specific DNA probe.
CONCLUSIONS: EPAC activation may reduce a1-adrenergic prostate contraction in the
human prostate, although this effect is masked by cyclooxygenases and
ﬂ-adrenoceptors. A main EPAC function in the human prostate may be the regulation
of the transcription factor Elk1.

PMCID: PMC3712007
PMID: 23815815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Braz J Infect Dis. 2013 Jul-Aug;17(4):410-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bjid.2012.11.009.
Epub 2013 Jun 21.

Differential gene expressions of the MAPK signaling pathway in enterovirus
71-infected rhabdomyosarcoma cells.

Shi W(1), Hou X, Li X, Peng H, Shi M, Jiang Q, Liu X, Ji Y, Yao Y, He C, Lei X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Third Affiliated Hospital of Suzhou
University, Changzhou, Jiangsu, China. : shiweifeng67@163.com

BACKGROUND: Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway plays an
important role in response to viral infection. The aim of this study was to
explore the function and mechanism of MAPK signaling pathway in enterovirus 71
(EV71) infection of human rhabdomyosarcoma (RD) cells.
METHODS: Apoptosis of RD cells was observed using annexin V-FITC/PI binding assay
under a fluorescence microscope. Cellular RNA was extracted and transcribed to
cDNA. The expressions of 56 genes of MAPK signaling pathway in EV71-infected RD
cells at 8h and 20h after infection were analyzed by PCR array. The levels of
IL-2, IL-4, IL-10, and TNF-a in the supernatant of RD cells infected with EV71 at
different time points were measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: The viability of RD cells decreased obviously within 48h after EV71
infection. Compared with the control group, EV71 infection resulted in the
significantly enhanced releases of IL-2, IL-4, IL-10 and TNF-a from infected RD
cells (p<0.05). At 8h after infection, the expressions of c-Jun, c-Fos, IFN-ﬂ,
MEKK1, MLK3 and NIK genes in EV71-infected RD cells were up-regulated by
2.08-6.12-fold, whereas other 19 genes (e.g. AKT1, AKT2, E2F1, IKK and NF-<U+03BA>B1)
exhibited down-regulation. However, at 20h after infection, those MAPK signaling 
molecules including MEKK1, ASK1, MLK2, MLK3, NIK, MEK1, MEK2, MEK4, MEK7, ERK1,
JNK1 and JNK2 were up-regulated. In addition, the expressions of AKT2, ELK1,
c-Jun, c-Fos, NF-<U+03BA>B p65, PI3K and STAT1 were also increased.
CONCLUSION: EV71 infection induces the differential gene expressions of MAPK
signaling pathway such as ERK, JNK and PI3K/AKT in RD cells, which may be
associated with the secretions of inflammatory cytokines and host cell apoptosis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Editora Ltda. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23797008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Jul 11;93(1):173-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.05.021. Epub
2013 Jun 20.

Gain-of-function mutations in RIT1 cause Noonan syndrome, a RAS/MAPK pathway
syndrome.

Aoki Y(1), Niihori T, Banjo T, Okamoto N, Mizuno S, Kurosawa K, Ogata T, Takada
F, Yano M, Ando T, Hoshika T, Barnett C, Ohashi H, Kawame H, Hasegawa T, Okutani 
T, Nagashima T, Hasegawa S, Funayama R, Nagashima T, Nakayama K, Inoue S,
Watanabe Y, Ogura T, Matsubara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai
980-8574, Japan. aokiy@med.tohoku.ac.jp

RAS GTPases mediate a wide variety of cellular functions, including cell
proliferation, survival, and differentiation. Recent studies have revealed that
germline mutations and mosaicism for classical RAS mutations, including those in 
HRAS, KRAS, and NRAS, cause a wide spectrum of genetic disorders. These include
Noonan syndrome and related disorders (RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase
[RAS/MAPK] pathway syndromes, or RASopathies), nevus sebaceous, and
Schimmelpenning syndrome. In the present study, we identified a total of nine
missense, nonsynonymous mutations in RIT1, encoding a member of the RAS
subfamily, in 17 of 180 individuals (9%) with Noonan syndrome or a related
condition but with no detectable mutations in known Noonan-related genes.
Clinical manifestations in the RIT1-mutation-positive individuals are consistent 
with those of Noonan syndrome, which is characterized by distinctive facial
features, short stature, and congenital heart defects. Seventy percent of
mutation-positive individuals presented with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; this
frequency is high relative to the overall 20% incidence in individuals with
Noonan syndrome. Luciferase assays in NIH 3T3 cells showed that five RIT1
alterations identified in children with Noonan syndrome enhanced ELK1
transactivation. The introduction of mRNAs of mutant RIT1 into 1-cell-stage
zebrafish embryos was found to result in a significant increase of embryos with
craniofacial abnormalities, incomplete looping, a hypoplastic chamber in the
heart, and an elongated yolk sac. These results demonstrate that gain-of-function
mutations in RIT1 cause Noonan syndrome and show a similar biological effect to
mutations in other RASopathy-related genes.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3710767
PMID: 23791108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. DNA Cell Biol. 2013 Sep;32(9):488-97. doi: 10.1089/dna.2013.2070. Epub 2013 Jun
19.

Cyclic tensile stress during physiological occlusal force enhances osteogenic
differentiation of human periodontal ligament cells via ERK1/2-Elk1 MAPK pathway.

Li L(1), Han M, Li S, Wang L, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Stomatology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Physiological occlusal force constitutively exists in the oral environment and is
important for periodontal homeostasis and remodeling. Cyclic tensile stress (CTS)
triggers the biological response of periodontal ligament (PDL). However, a few
reports have studied the correlation between CTS during physiological occlusal
force and PDL cell activities such as osteogenic differentiation. In the present 
study, human PDL cells (hPDLCs) were subjected to 10% elongation CTS loading at
0.5<U+2009>Hz for 24<U+2009>h, which represents the physiological conditions of occlusal force.
Gene expression microarray was used to investigate the mechano-induced
differential gene profile and pathway analysis in vitro. The osteogenic relative 
factors, that is, SPP1, RUNX2, and SP7, were assessed by real-time PCR and
Western blot. The involvement of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signaling pathways was investigated by Western blot with a specific inhibitor.
The expressions of SPP1, RUNX2, SP7, p-ERK1/2, and p-Elk1 were up-regulated after
10% CTS exposure. However, these up-regulated expressions were prevented by
ERK1/2 inhibitor U0126 in the physiological occlusal force-applied hPDLCs. These 
results showed that 10% CTS could enhance osteogenic differentiation of hPDLCs
via ERK1/2-Elk1 MAPK pathway, indicating that CTS during physiological occlusal
force is a potent agent for PDL remodeling.

PMCID: PMC3752521
PMID: 23781879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1833(10):2369-77. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.06.006. Epub 2013 Jun 14.

Calpastatin is upregulated in non-immune neuronal cells via toll-like receptor 2 
(TLR2) pathways by lipid-containing agonists.

Vaisid T(1), Kosower NS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv, Tel-Aviv, Israel.

Calpain (intracellular Ca(2+)-dependent protease) and calpastatin (calpain
specific endogenous inhibitor) are widely distributed in biological systems, and 
have been implicated in many cellular physiological and pathological processes.
Calpastatin level is of central importance to the control of calpain activity. We
demonstrated for the first time that calpastatin is overexpressed in
mycoplasma-contaminated cultured cells (SH-SY5Y cells that are infected by a
strain of Mycoplasma hyorhinis (NDMh)). We have found that the
calpastatin-upregulating activity resides in the mycoplasmal membrane
lipoproteins, and is associated with NF-<U+03BA>B activation. Calpain-promoted
proteolysis is attenuated in the NDMh lipoprotein-treated cells. Here we show
that the NDMh lipoproteins promoted an increase in calpastatin in SH-SY5Y cells
via the TLR2/TAK1/NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. The synthetic mycoplasmal lipopeptide MALP-2 and
the bacterial lipopeptide PAM3CSK4 (TLR2 agonists) also promoted calpastatin
upregulation. LPS (TLR4 agonist) activated NF-<U+03BA>B without calpastatin increase in 
the cell. In contrast, lipoteichoic acid (TLR2 agonist) upregulated calpastatin
not via NF-<U+03BA>B activation, but via the MEK1/ELK1 pathway. Zymosan and
peptidoglycan, TLR2 agonists that lack lipids, did not induce calpastatin
upregulation. Cell treatment with a calpastatin-upregulating agonist
(lipoteichoic acid) led to the attenuation of Ca(2+)-promoted calpain activity,
whereas agonists that do not upregulate calpastatin (LPS, Zymosan) were
ineffective. Overall, the results indicate that in these non-immune cells,
calpastatin is upregulated by TLR2-agonists containing lipids, with more than one
downstream pathway involved. Such agonists may be useful for studying mechanisms 
and factors involved in calpastatin regulation. In addition, suitable TLR2
agonists may be of interest in devising treatments for pathological processes
involving excessive calpain activation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23773963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Neurobiol Dis. 2013 Oct;58:116-22. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.05.014. Epub 2013 Jun 
3.

Prion formation correlates with activation of translation-regulating protein
4E-BP and neuronal transcription factor Elk1.

Allard EK(1), Grujic M, Fisone G, Kristensson K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Cellular mechanisms play a role in conversion of the normal prion protein PrP(C) 
to the disease-associated protein PrP(Sc). The cells provide not only PrP(C), but
also still largely undefined factors required for efficient prion replication.
Previously, we have observed that interference with ERK and p38-JNK MAP kinase
pathways has opposing effects on the formation of prions indicating that the
process is regulated by a balance in intracellualar signaling pathways. In order 
to obtain a "flow-chart" of such pathways, we here studied the activation of
MEK/ERK and mTORC1 downstream targets in relation to PrP(Sc) accumulation in
GT1-1 cells infected with the RML or 22L prion strains. We show that inhibition
of mTORC1 with rapamycin causes a reduction of PrP(Sc) accumulation at similar
low levels as seen when the interaction between the translation initiation
factors eIF4E and eIF4G downstream mTORC1 is inhibited using 4EGI-1. No effect is
seen following the inhibition of molecules (S6K1 and Mnk1) that links MEK/ERK
signaling to mTORC1-mediated control of translation. Instead, stimulation (high
[KCl] or [serum]) or inhibition (MEK-inhibitor) of prion formation is associated 
with increased or decreased phosphorylation of the neuronal transcription factor 
Elk1, respectively. This study shows that prion formation can be modulated by
translational initiating factors, and suggests that MEK/ERK signaling plays a
role in the conversion of PrP(C) to PrP(Sc) via an Elk1-mediated transcriptional 
control. Altogether, our studies indicate that prion protein conversion is under 
the control of intracellular signals, which hypothetically, under certain
conditions may elicit irreversible responses leading to progressive
neurodegenerative diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23742760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Allergy. 2013 Jul;68(7):870-9. doi: 10.1111/all.12162. Epub 2013 Jun 5.

Phthalates suppress type I interferon in human plasmacytoid dendritic cells via
epigenetic regulation.

Kuo CH(1), Hsieh CC, Kuo HF, Huang MY, Yang SN, Chen LC, Huang SK, Hung CH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Exposure to environmental endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) is
associated with allergy, chronic inflammation, and immunodeficiency. Phthalates, 
the common EDCs used in plastic industry, may act as adjuvants to disrupt immune 
system and enhance allergy. Plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs) are predominant cells
secreting type I interferon (IFN) against infection and are professional
antigen-presenting cells in regulating adaptive immunity. However, the effects of
phthalates on the function of pDCs are unknown.
METHODS: Circulating pDCs were isolated from healthy subjects, were pretreated
with diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) and butyl benzyl phthalate (BBP), and were
stimulated with Toll-like receptor (TLR)-9 agonist CpG. IFN-a/IFN-ﬂ levels,
surface markers, and T-cell stimulatory function were investigated using ELISA,
flow cytometry, and pDC/T-cell coculture assay. Mechanisms were investigated
using receptor antagonists, pathway inhibitors, Western blotting, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: Diethylhexyl phthalate and butyl benzyl phthalate suppressed CpG-induced
IFN-a/IFN-ﬂ expression in pDCs, and the effect was reversed by aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR) antagonist. Diethylhexyl phthalate suppressed CpG-activated
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-MEK1/2-ERK-ELK1 and NF<U+03BA>B signaling
pathways. Diethylhexyl phthalate suppressed CpG-induced interferon regulatory
factor (IRF)-7 expression by suppressing histone H3K4 trimethylation at IRF7 gene
promoter region through inhibiting translocation of H3K4-specific
trimethyltransferase WDR5 from cytoplasm into nucleus. Butyl benzyl phthalate or 
diethylhexyl phthalate-treated pDCs suppressed IFN-<U+03B3> but enhanced IL-13
production by CD4+ T cells.
CONCLUSION: Phthalates may interfere with immunity against infection and promote 
the deviation of Th2 response to increase allergy by acting on human pDCs via
suppressing IFN-a/IFN-ﬂ expression and modulating the ability to stimulate T-cell
responses.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23738920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Cell. 2013 Jun 27;50(6):844-55. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.04.030. Epub 2013 
May 30.

Genome-wide kinase-chromatin interactions reveal the regulatory network of ERK
signaling in human embryonic stem cells.

Gˆke J(1), Chan YS, Yan J, Vingron M, Ng HH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore 138672,
Singapore.

The extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)/mitogen-activated protein kinase 
signal-transduction cascade is one of the key pathways regulating proliferation
and differentiation in development and disease. ERK signaling is required for
human embryonic stem cells' (hESCs') self-renewing property. Here, we studied the
convergence of the ERK signaling cascade at the DNA by mapping genome-wide
kinase-chromatin interactions for ERK2 in hESCs. We observed that ERK2 binding
occurs near noncoding genes and histone, cell-cycle, metabolism, and
pluripotency-associated genes. We find that the transcription factor ELK1 is
essential in hESCs and that ERK2 co-occupies promoters bound by ELK1. Strikingly,
promoters bound by ELK1 without ERK2 are occupied by Polycomb group proteins that
repress genes involved in lineage commitment. In summary, we propose a model
wherein extracellular-signaling-stimulated proliferation and intrinsic repression
of differentiation are integrated to maintain the identity of hESCs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23727019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Gen Physiol. 2013 Jun;141(6):721-35. doi: 10.1085/jgp.201210938.

External pH modulates EAG superfamily K+ channels through EAG-specific acidic
residues in the voltage sensor.

Kazmierczak M(1), Zhang X, Chen B, Mulkey DK, Shi Y, Wagner PG, Pivaroff-Ward K, 
Sassic JK, Bayliss DA, Jegla T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 
16802, USA.

The Ether-a-go-go (EAG) superfamily of voltage-gated K(+) channels consists of
three functionally distinct gene families (Eag, Elk, and Erg) encoding a diverse 
set of low-threshold K(+) currents that regulate excitability in neurons and
muscle. Previous studies indicate that external acidification inhibits activation
of three EAG superfamily K(+) channels, Kv10.1 (Eag1), Kv11.1 (Erg1), and Kv12.1 
(Elk1). We show here that Kv10.2, Kv12.2, and Kv12.3 are similarly inhibited by
external protons, suggesting that high sensitivity to physiological pH changes is
a general property of EAG superfamily channels. External acidification
depolarizes the conductance-voltage (GV) curves of these channels, reducing low
threshold activation. We explored the mechanism of this high pH sensitivity in
Kv12.1, Kv10.2, and Kv11.1. We first examined the role of acidic voltage sensor
residues that mediate divalent cation block of voltage activation in EAG
superfamily channels because protons reduce the sensitivity of Kv12.1 to Zn(2+). 
Low pH similarly reduces Mg(2+) sensitivity of Kv10.1, and we found that the pH
sensitivity of Kv11.1 was greatly attenuated at 1 mM Ca(2+). Individual
neutralizations of a pair of EAG-specific acidic residues that have previously
been implicated in divalent block of diverse EAG superfamily channels greatly
reduced the pH response in Kv12.1, Kv10.2, and Kv11.1. Our results therefore
suggest a common mechanism for pH-sensitive voltage activation in EAG superfamily
channels. The EAG-specific acidic residues may form the proton-binding site or
alternatively are required to hold the voltage sensor in a pH-sensitive
conformation. The high pH sensitivity of EAG superfamily channels suggests that
they could contribute to pH-sensitive K(+) currents observed in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3664700
PMID: 23712551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Int J Mol Med. 2013 Aug;32(2):281-90. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1389. Epub 2013 May 
23.

Genome-wide analysis of murine bone marrow-derived very small embryonic-like stem
cells reveals that mitogenic growth factor signaling pathways play a crucial role
in the quiescence and ageing of these cells.

Mierzejewska K(1), Heo J, Kang JW, Kang H, Ratajczak J, Ratajczak MZ, Kucia M,
Shin DM.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Institute at the James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA.

It has been postulated that the most primitive population of stem cells,
Oct4(+)Sca-1(+)Lin(-)CD45(-) very small embryonic-like stem cells (VSELs),
differentiate into tissue-committed stem cells in adult mice. However, Oct4(+)
VSELs remain quiescent in adult tissues and do not form teratomas. In thi study, 
we report the characteristics of the VSEL transcriptome by gene set enrichment
analysis employing a microarray database established from 20 murine bone
marrow-derived, FACS-sorted VSELs in comparison with hematopoietic stem cells and
embryonic stem cells. In the Oct4(+) VSELs, we observed the upregulation of
tissue-specific gene sets and a gene set encoding the complement-coagulation
cascade. By contrast, in the VSELs, we observed the downregulation of genes
involved in the UV radiation response, mRNA processing and mitogenic growth
factor signaling [e.g., insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and neurotrophic
tyrosine kinase receptor A (TRKA), as well as the ERK and PI3K pathways].
Employing leading-edge subset analysis and real-time PCR assays, we observed that
several genes, such as growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2), son of
sevenless homolog 1 (Sos1), SHC (Src homology 2 domain containing) transforming
protein 1 (Shc1), mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1 (Map2k1), v-akt
murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog 3 (Akt3), Elk1, ribosomal protein S6
kinase, 90 kDa, polypeptide 3 (Rps6kA3), glycogen synthase kinase 3ﬂ (Gsk3ﬂ) and 
casein kinase 2, alpha 1 polypeptide (Csnk2A1), which are involved in mitogenic
growth factor signaling pathways, were commonly downregulated in the VSELs.
Notably, this repression was reversed in the VSELs co-cultured over a C2C12
supportive cell-line, whereby they are induced to form VSEL-derived spheres
(VSEL-DSs); thus, they are enriched, forming more differentiated stem cells.
Therefore, we suggest that the repression of mitogenic growth factor signaling
(e.g., through the IGF-1 receptor) may prevent uncontrolled Oct4(+) VSEL
proliferation and teratoma formation. Thus, restoring the responsiveness to
mitogenic growth factors may be a crucial step in employing these cells in
regenerative medicine.

PMCID: PMC3776718
PMID: 23708325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Biol Psychiatry. 2013 Oct 1;74(7):511-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.04.012.
Epub 2013 May 20.

ELK1 transcription factor linked to dysregulated striatal mu opioid receptor
signaling network and OPRM1 polymorphism in human heroin abusers.

Sillivan SE(1), Whittard JD, Jacobs MM, Ren Y, Mazloom AR, Caputi FF, Horvath M, 
Keller E, Ma'ayan A, Pan YX, Chiang LW, Hurd YL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience (SES, JDW, MMJ, YR, FFC, YLH);
Department of Pharmacology and Systems Therapeutics (SES, MMJ, YR, ARM, FFC, AM, 
YLH), Ichan School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.

BACKGROUND: Abuse of heroin and prescription opiate medications has grown to
disturbing levels. Opioids mediate their effects through mu opioid receptors
(MOR), but minimal information exists regarding MOR-related striatal signaling
relevant to the human condition. The striatum is a structure central to reward
and habitual behavior and neurobiological changes in this region are thought to
underlie the pathophysiology of addiction disorders.
METHODS: We examined molecular mechanisms related to MOR in postmortem human
brain striatal specimens from a homogenous European Caucasian population of
heroin abusers and control subjects and in an animal model of heroin
self-administration. Expression of ets-like kinase 1 (ELK1) was examined in
relation to polymorphism of the MOR gene OPRM1 and drug history.
RESULTS: A characteristic feature of heroin abusers was decreased expression of
MOR and extracellular regulated kinase signaling networks, concomitant with
dysregulation of the downstream transcription factor ELK1. Striatal ELK1 in
heroin abusers associated with the polymorphism rs2075572 in OPRM1 in a genotype 
dose-dependent manner and correlated with documented history of heroin use, an
effect reproduced in an animal model that emphasizes a direct relationship
between repeated heroin exposure and ELK1 dysregulation. A central role of ELK1
was evidenced by an unbiased whole transcriptome microarray that revealed ~20% of
downregulated genes in human heroin abusers are ELK1 targets. Using chromatin
immune precipitation, we confirmed decreased ELK1 promoter occupancy of the
target gene Use1.
CONCLUSIONS: ELK1 is a potential key transcriptional regulatory factor in
striatal disturbances associated with heroin abuse and relevant to genetic
mutation of OPRM1.

© 2013 Society of Biological Psychiatry.

PMCID: PMC4070524
PMID: 23702428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:609581. doi: 10.1155/2013/609581.
Epub 2013 Apr 16.

Phyllanthus Suppresses Prostate Cancer Cell, PC-3, Proliferation and Induces
Apoptosis through Multiple Signalling Pathways (MAPKs, PI3K/Akt, NF<U+03BA>B, and
Hypoxia).

Tang YQ(1), Jaganath I, Manikam R, Sekaran SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya,
50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Phyllanthus is a traditional medicinal plant that has been found to have
antihepatitis, antibacterial, and anticancer properties. The present studies were
to investigate the in vitro molecular mechanisms of anticancer effects of
Phyllanthus (P. amarus, P. niruri, P. urinaria, and P. watsonii) plant extracts
in human prostate adenocarcinoma. The cancer ten-pathway reporter array was
performed and revealed that the expression of six pathway reporters were
significantly decreased (Wnt, NF<U+03BA>B, Myc/Max, hypoxia, MAPK/ERK, and MAPK/JNK) in 
PC-3 cells after treatment with Phyllanthus extracts. Western blot was conducted 
and identified several signalling molecules that were affected in the signalling 
pathways including pan-Ras, c-Raf, RSK, Elk1, c-Jun, JNK1/2, p38 MAPK, c-myc,
DSH, ﬂ-catenin, Akt, HIF-1a, GSK3ﬂ, NF<U+03BA>B p50 and p52, Bcl-2, Bax, and VEGF, in
treated PC-3 cells. A proteomics-based approach, 2D gel electrophoresis, was
performed, and mass spectrometry (MS/MS) results revealed that there were 72
differentially expressed proteins identified in treated PC-3 cells and were
involved in tumour cell adhesion, apoptosis, glycogenesis and glycolysis,
metastasis, angiogenesis, and protein synthesis and energy metabolism. Overall,
these findings suggest that Phyllanthus can interfere with multiple signalling
cascades involved in tumorigenesis and be used as a potential therapeutic
candidate for treatment of cancer.

PMCID: PMC3652183
PMID: 23690850  [PubMed]


107. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Aug 1;319(13):2113-23. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.05.005. Epub 
2013 May 10.

Retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) exosomes contain signaling phosphoproteins
affected by oxidative stress.

Biasutto L(1), Chiechi A, Couch R, Liotta LA, Espina V.

Author information: 
(1)CNR Institute of Neuroscience, Viale G. Colombo 3, 35121 Padova, Italy.
lucia.biasutto@cnr.it

Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a leading cause of vision loss and
blindness among the elderly population in the industrialized world. One of the
typical features of this pathology is the gradual death of retinal pigment
epithelial (RPE) cells, which are essential for maintaining photoreceptor
functions and survival. The etiology is multifactorial, and oxidative stress is
clearly one of the key factors involved in disease pathogenesis (Plafker, Adv.
Exp. Med. Biol. 664 (2010) 447-56; Qin, Drug Dev. Res. 68 (2007) 213-225). Recent
work has revealed the presence of phosphorylated signaling proteins in the
vitreous humour of patients affected by AMD or other retinal diseases. While the 
location of these signaling proteins is typically the cell membrane or
intracellular compartments, vitreous samples were proven to be cell-free
(Davuluri et al., Arch. Ophthalmol. 127 (2009) 613-21). To gain a better
understanding of how these proteins can be shed into the vitreous, we used
reverse phase protein arrays (RPMA) to analyze the protein and phosphoprotein
content of exosomes shed by cultured ARPE-19 cells under oxidative stress
conditions. Seventy two proteins were shown to be released by ARPE-19 cells and
compartmentalized within exosomes. Forty one of them were selectively detected in
their post-translationally modified form (i.e., phosphorylated or cleaved) for
the first time in exosomes. Sets of these proteins were linked together
reflecting activation of pathway units within exosomes. A subset of
(phospho)proteins were altered in exosomes secreted by ARPE-19 cells subjected to
oxidative stress, compared to that secreted by control/non stressed cells.
Stress-altered exosome proteins were found to be involved in pathways regulating 
apoptosis/survival (i.e, Bak, Smac/Diablo, PDK1 (S241), Akt (T308), Src (Y416),
Elk1 (S383), ERK 1/2 (T202/Y204)) and cell metabolism (i.e., AMPKa1 (S485),
acetyl-CoA carboxylase (S79), LDHA). Exosomes may thus represent the conduit
through which membrane and intracellular signaling proteins are released into the
vitreous. Changes in their (phospho)protein content upon stress conditions
suggest their possible role in mediating cell-cell signaling during
physio-pathological events; furthermore, exosomes may represent a potential
source of biomarkers.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3727419
PMID: 23669273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cell. 2013 Apr 11;153(2):389-401. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.026.

A Direct in vivo RNAi screen identifies MKK4 as a key regulator of liver
regeneration.

Wuestefeld T(1), Pesic M, Rudalska R, Dauch D, Longerich T, Kang TW, Yevsa T,
Heinzmann F, Hoenicke L, Hohmeyer A, Potapova A, Rittelmeier I, Jarek M, Geffers 
R, Scharfe M, Klawonn F, Schirmacher P, Malek NP, Ott M, Nordheim A, Vogel A,
Manns MP, Zender L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Endocrinology, Medical School
Hannover, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2014 Mar;59(3):1201-3.
    Cell. 2013 Apr 11;153(2):283-4.

The liver harbors a distinct capacity for endogenous regeneration; however, liver
regeneration is often impaired in disease and therefore insufficient to
compensate for the loss of hepatocytes and organ function. Here we describe a
functional genetic approach for the identification of gene targets that can be
exploited to increase the regenerative capacity of hepatocytes. Pools of small
hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) were directly and stably delivered into mouse livers to
screen for genes modulating liver regeneration. Our studies identify the
dual-specific kinase MKK4 as a master regulator of liver regeneration. MKK4
silencing robustly increased the regenerative capacity of hepatocytes in mouse
models of liver regeneration and acute and chronic liver failure.
Mechanistically, induction of MKK7 and a JNK1-dependent activation of the AP1
transcription factor ATF2 and the Ets factor ELK1 are crucial for increased
regeneration of hepatocytes with MKK4 silencing.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23582328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Apr 11;4:e588. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.117.

Reactive oxygen species-responsive miR-210 regulates proliferation and migration 
of adipose-derived stem cells via PTPN2.

Kim JH(1), Park SG, Song SY, Kim JK, Sung JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Bioscience, CHA University, Seoul, Korea.

Hypoxia enhances the proliferation and migration of adipose-derived stem cells
(ASCs) via the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Therefore, this study
primarily investigated whether or not ROS generation could regulate microRNA-210 
(miR-210) expression, and increase proliferation/migration of ASCs. In addition, 
we tried to identify the signaling pathways involved in miR-210 upregulation and 
the direct target genes of miR-210 that mediate these functions. Various sources 
of ROS generation such as hypoxia, antimycin, rotenone, and platelet-derived
growth factor (PDGF)-BB upregulated miR-210 expression, and increased the
proliferation/migration of ASCs. There is a positive feed-forward loop between
ROS generation and miR-210, and miR-210 itself increases ROS generation by
downregulation of iron-sulfur cluster scaffold homolog 2 (ISCU2). Although
hypoxia-inducible factor-1a was not involved in miR-210 expression,
pharmacological or small interfering RNA (siRNA)-driven inhibition of Akt and
ERK1/2 molecules reduced miR-210 expression. Transfection of siRNAs of NF-<U+03BA>B and 
Elk1 also reduced miR-210 expression, indicating that these signaling pathways
mediate miR-210 upregulation. Protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 2
(PTPN2) was selected for miR-210 target gene, and it was downregulated by ROS
generators or miR-210 mimic treatment. PTPN2 was first proven to be a direct
miR-210 target in luciferase activity assay, and pharmacological inhibition or
overexpression of PTPN2 regulated the proliferation and migration of ASC. In
conclusion, ROS generation from diverse sources induces miR-210 expression in
ASCs via PDGFR-ﬂ, Akt and ERK pathways. Transcription of miR-210 expression is
regulated by NF-<U+03BA>B and Elk1, and miR-210 increases the proliferation and
migration of ASCs via ISCU2 and PTPN2 downregulation.

PMCID: PMC3641340
PMID: 23579275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Clin Invest. 2013 May;123(5):2193-206. doi: 10.1172/JCI64201. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

Endothelial SRF/MRTF ablation causes vascular disease phenotypes in murine
retinae.

Weinl C(1), Riehle H, Park D, Stritt C, Beck S, Huber G, Wolburg H, Olson EN,
Seeliger MW, Adams RH, Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Molecular Biology, Interfaculty Institute of Cell Biology,
University of T¸bingen, T¸bingen, Germany.

Retinal vessel homeostasis ensures normal ocular functions. Consequently, retinal
hypovascularization and neovascularization, causing a lack and an excess of
vessels, respectively, are hallmarks of human retinal pathology. We provide
evidence that EC-specific genetic ablation of either the transcription factor SRF
or its cofactors MRTF-A and MRTF-B, but not the SRF cofactors ELK1 or ELK4, cause
retinal hypovascularization in the postnatal mouse eye. Inducible, EC-specific
deficiency of SRF or MRTF-A/MRTF-B during postnatal angiogenesis impaired
endothelial tip cell filopodia protrusion, resulting in incomplete formation of
the retinal primary vascular plexus, absence of the deep plexi, and persistence
of hyaloid vessels. All of these features are typical of human
hypovascularization-related vitreoretinopathies, such as familial exudative
vitreoretinopathies including Norrie disease. In contrast, conditional EC
deletion of Srf in adult murine vessels elicited intraretinal neovascularization 
that was reminiscent of the age-related human pathologies retinal angiomatous
proliferation and macular telangiectasia. These results indicate that angiogenic 
homeostasis is ensured by differential stage-specific functions of SRF target
gene products in the developing versus the mature retinal vasculature and suggest
that the actin-directed MRTF-SRF signaling axis could serve as a therapeutic
target in the treatment of human vascular retinal diseases.

PMCID: PMC3635718
PMID: 23563308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cell Rep. 2013 Apr 25;3(4):1071-9. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.02.030. Epub 2013
Mar 28.

Balancing of histone H3K4 methylation states by the Kdm5c/SMCX histone
demethylase modulates promoter and enhancer function.

Outchkourov NS(1), MuiÒo JM, Kaufmann K, van Ijcken WF, Groot Koerkamp MJ, van
Leenen D, de Graaf P, Holstege FC, Grosveld FG, Timmers HT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cancer Research, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Universiteitsweg
100, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The functional organization of eukaryotic genomes correlates with specific
patterns of histone methylations. Regulatory regions in genomes such as enhancers
and promoters differ in their extent of methylation of histone H3 at lysine-4
(H3K4), but it is largely unknown how the different methylation states are
specified and controlled. Here, we show that the Kdm5c/Jarid1c/SMCX member of the
Kdm5 family of H3K4 demethylases can be recruited to both enhancer and promoter
elements in mouse embryonic stem cells and in neuronal progenitor cells.
Knockdown of Kdm5c deregulates transcription via local increases in H3K4me3. Our 
data indicate that by restricting H3K4me3 modification at core promoters, Kdm5c
dampens transcription, but at enhancers Kdm5c stimulates their activity.
Remarkably, an impaired enhancer function activates the intrinsic promoter
activity of Kdm5c-bound distal elements. Our results demonstrate that the Kdm5c
demethylase plays a crucial and dynamic role in the functional discrimination
between enhancers and core promoters.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23545502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. ScientificWorldJournal. 2013;2013:105464. doi: 10.1155/2013/105464. Epub 2013 Mar
3.

Transcriptional regulation of fucosyltransferase 1 gene expression in colon
cancer cells.

Taniuchi F(1), Higai K, Tanaka T, Azuma Y, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Toho
University, Miyama 2-2-1, Funabashi, Chiba 274-8510, Japan.

The a 1,2-fucosyltransferase I (FUT1) enzyme is important for the biosynthesis of
H antigens, Lewis B, and Lewis Y. In this study, we clarified the transcriptional
regulation of FUT1 in the DLD-1 colon cancer cell line, which has high expression
of Lewis B and Lewis Y antigens, expresses the FUT1 gene, and shows a
1,2-fucosyltransferase (FUT) activity. 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends
revealed a FUT1 transcriptional start site -10 nucleotides upstream of the site
registered at NM_000148 in the DataBase of Human Transcription Start Sites
(DBTSS). Using the dual luciferase assay, FUT1 gene expression was shown to be
regulated at the region -91 to -81 nt to the transcriptional start site, which
contains the Elk-1 binding site. Site-directed mutagenesis of this region
revealed the Elk-1 binding site to be essential for FUT1 transcription.
Furthermore, transfection of the dominant negative Elk-1 gene, and the chromatin 
immunoprecipitation (CHIp) assay, supported Elk-1-dependent transcriptional
regulation of FUT1 gene expression in DLD-1 cells. These results suggest that a
defined region in the 5'-flanking region of FUT1 is critical for FUT1
transcription and that constitutive gene expression of FUT1 is regulated by Elk-1
in DLD-1 cells.

PMCID: PMC3603716
PMID: 23533340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Neurosci. 2013 Mar 20;33(12):5367-74. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2641-12.2013.

Centaurin-a1-Ras-Elk-1 signaling at mitochondria mediates ﬂ-amyloid-induced
synaptic dysfunction.

Szatmari EM(1), Oliveira AF, Sumner EJ, Yasuda R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Alzheimer's disease is thought to be caused by ﬂ-amyloid peptide (Aﬂ)-dependent
synaptic dysfunction. However, the signaling pathways connecting Aﬂ and synaptic 
dysfunction remain elusive. Here we report that Aﬂ transiently increases the
expression level of centaurin-a1 (CentA1) in neurons, which induces a
Ras-dependent association of Elk-1 with mitochondria, leading to mitochondrial
and synaptic dysfunction in organotypic hippocampal slices of rats.
Downregulation of the CentA1-Ras-Elk-1 pathway restored normal mitochondrial
activity, spine structural plasticity, spine density, and the amplitude and
frequency of miniature EPSCs in Aﬂ-treated neurons, whereas upregulation of the
pathway was sufficient to decrease spine density. Elevations of CentA1 and
association of Elk-1 with mitochondria were also observed in transgenic mice
overexpressing a human mutant form of amyloid precursor protein. Therefore, the
CentA1-Ras-Elk-1 signaling pathway acts on mitochondria to regulate dendritic
spine density and synaptic plasticity in response to Aﬂ in hippocampal neurons,
providing new pharmacological targets for Alzheimer's disease.

PMCID: PMC3866502
PMID: 23516302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Aug;114(8):1819-31. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24530.

Sorafenib induces endometrial carcinoma apoptosis by inhibiting Elk-1-dependent
Mcl-1 transcription and inducing Akt/GSK3ﬂ-dependent protein degradation.

Sun NK(1), Huang SL, Chang TC, Chao CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Chang Gung University
College of Medicine, Taoyuan 333, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Endometrial carcinoma (EC) is one of the main gynecologic malignancies affecting 
women, but effective treatments are currently lacking. In the present study, we
investigated the effect of sorafenib, a general kinase inhibitor, on several EC
cell lines (HEC1A, HEC1B, and RL95-2). Sorafenib induced cell death in EC cells
with the following order of sensitivity: HEC1A > HEC1B > RL95-2. Sorafenib
suppressed several anti-apoptotic proteins in HEC1A cells, including myeloid cell
leukemia 1 (Mcl-1). Ectopic overexpression of Mcl-1 prevented the cell killing
effect of sorafenib. Sorafenib suppressed Mcl-1 at the gene transactivation level
by inactivating the ERK/Elk-1 pathway. Accordingly, the inhibitory effect of
sorafenib on Mcl-1 expression decreased following knockdown of Elk-1 using
short-hairpin RNA (shRNA). Elk-1 overexpression rescued both the inhibitory
effect of sorafenib on Mcl-1 expression and the cell killing effect of sorafenib.
Furthermore, sorafenib reduced the stability of the Mcl-1 protein by enhancing
its ubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome via the AKT/GSK3ﬂ and the
ERK pathways. Similar results were detected in other EC cell lines. These results
indicate that sorafenib induces apoptosis in EC cells by down-regulating the
anti-apoptotic protein Mcl-1 via transcriptional inhibition and protein
degradation. Our results thus support the notion that sorafenib may be used in
endometrial cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23463670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2013 Jun;139(6):953-61. doi: 10.1007/s00432-013-1401-9. 
Epub 2013 Mar 2.

KRAS allel-specific activity of sunitinib in an isogenic disease model of
colorectal cancer.

Modest DP(1), Camaj P, Heinemann V, Schwarz B, Jung A, Laubender RP, Gamba S,
Haertl C, Stintzing S, Primo S, Bruns CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, University Hospital Grosshadern, University of
Munich, Munich, Germany. dominik.modest@med.uni-muenchen.de

PURPOSE: To investigate the impact of different KRAS mutations on treatment with 
the tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib in SW48 colorectal cancer cell line
variants.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Isogenic SW48 KRAS wt, G12A, G12C, G12D, G12R, G12S, G12
V, and G13D cells were evaluated for ERK phosphorylation with and without EGF
stimulation. In addition, the respective cell lines were tested for the effect of
sunitinib on ERK/ELK phosphorylation, cell cycle, and cytotoxicity.
RESULTS: Compared to KRAS wt cells, all KRAS mutant variants were associated with
resistance to sunitinib treatment. In the MTT chemosensitivity assay, the grade
of resistance was less pronounced in G13D and highest in G12A, G12C, and G12S
mutant cells. The reduction in ERK phosphorylation due to treatment with
sunitinib was highest in G12V (89 %) mutant cells and lowest in G12A (24 %)
mutant cells. ELK phosphorylation was less decreased in all KRAS mutant variants 
compared to KRAS wt cells following sunitinib treatment. The grade of resistance 
appears to correlate with the individual KRAS-dependent intrinsic activation of
ERK.
CONCLUSION: Our isogenic cell culture model suggests that KRAS mutations in SW48 
colorectal cancer cells are linked to resistance to the multityrosine kinase
inhibitor sunitinib. KRAS G13D mutant SW48 cells represented the KRAS subspecies 
with the lowest grade of resistance. Future studies will have to clarify whether 
KRAS can be used to guide sunitinib treatment or-in general-a treatment with a
multityrosine kinase inhibitor in mCRC.

PMID: 23455880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Gene. 2013 Aug 15;526(1):54-60. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.02.004. Epub 2013 Feb
20.

Elk1 and AP-1 sites in the TBP promoter mediate alcohol-induced deregulation of
Pol III-dependent genes.

Zhong Q(1), Shi G, Zhang Y, Levy D, Zhong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

The major risk factors for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are chronic liver
diseases that include hepatitis B, hepatitis C, alcoholic liver disease and
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. However, the mechanisms of alcohol-associated HCC 
remain to be elucidated. The products of RNA Pol III (RNA polymerase III)
dependent genes are elevated in both transformation cells and tumor cells. TBP
(TATA-box binding protein) is a central transcription factor, which regulates Pol
I, Pol II and Pol III gene activity. Our studies have demonstrated that alcohol
increases TBP expression and Pol III gene transcription to promote liver tumor
formation. We continue to investigate how ethanol mediates TBP expression. Here, 
we report that ethanol induces TBP promoter activity and the induction is ethanol
dose dependent. Blocking the JNK1 pathway by a chemical inhibitor and siRNA
reduces this ethanol-induced activity. Furthermore, mutating G>A at a -46 bp Elk1
binding site of the TBP promoter or mutating AP-1 binding site at -37 bp (A>G)
and -38 bp (C>T) reduces the TBP promoter activity. Mutation of both Elk1 and
AP-1 binding sites dramatically represses this induction. Together, these studies
demonstrate that, for the first time, alcohol increases Pol III gene
transcription through a response element, which is composed of the overlapping
Elk1 and AP-1 binding sites of the TBP promoter and affected by alcohol. It
suggests that these binding sites may play a critical role in alcohol-induced
deregulation of Pol III genes in liver tumor development.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3715583
PMID: 23454483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 19;288(16):11047-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.438473. Epub
2013 Feb 20.

The ETS domain transcription factor ELK1 directs a critical component of growth
signaling by the androgen receptor in prostate cancer cells.

Patki M(1), Chari V, Sivakumaran S, Gonit M, Trumbly R, Ratnam M.

Author information: 
(1)Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, Michigan 48201-2013, USA.

The androgen receptor (AR) is essential for diverse aspects of prostate
development and function. Molecular mechanisms by which prostate cancer (PC)
cells redirect AR signaling to genes that primarily support growth are unclear. A
systematic search for critical AR-tethering proteins led to ELK1, an ETS
transcription factor of the ternary complex factor subfamily. Although
genetically redundant, ELK1 was obligatory for AR-dependent growth and clonogenic
survival in both hormone-dependent PC and castration-recurrent PC cells but not
for AR-negative cell growth. AR required ELK1 to up-regulate a major subset of
its target genes that was strongly and primarily enriched for cell growth
functions. AR functioned as a coactivator of ELK1 by association through its A/B 
domain, bypassing the classical mechanism of ELK1 activation by phosphorylation
and without inducing ternary complex target genes. The ELK1-AR synergy per se was
ligand-independent, although it required ligand for nuclear localization of AR as
targeting the AR A/B domain to the nucleus recapitulated the action of hormone;
accordingly, Casodex was a poor antagonist of the synergy. ELK3, the closest
substitute for ELK1 in structure/function and genome recognition, did not
interact with AR. ELK1 thus directs selective and sustained gene induction that
is a substantial and critical component of growth signaling by AR in PC cells.
The ELK1-AR interaction offers a functionally tumor-selective drug target.

PMCID: PMC3630885
PMID: 23426362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Transcription. 2013 Jan-Feb;4(1):39-51. doi: 10.4161/trns.22874.

Mediator MED23 regulates basal transcription in vivo via an interaction with
P-TEFb.

Wang W(1), Yao X, Huang Y, Hu X, Liu R, Hou D, Chen R, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

The Mediator is a multi-subunit complex that transduces regulatory information
from transcription regulators to the RNA polymerase II apparatus. Growing
evidence suggests that Mediator plays roles in multiple stages of eukaryotic
transcription, including elongation. However, the detailed mechanism by which
Mediator regulates elongation remains elusive. In this study, we demonstrate that
Mediator MED23 subunit controls a basal level of transcription by recruiting
elongation factor P-TEFb, via an interaction with its CDK9 subunit. The mRNA
level of Egr1, a MED23-controlled model gene, is reduced 4-5 fold in Med23 (-/-) 
ES cells under an unstimulated condition, but Med23-deficiency does not alter the
occupancies of RNAP II, GTFs, Mediator complex, or activator ELK1 at the Egr1
promoter. Instead, Med23 depletion results in a significant decrease in P-TEFb
and RNAP II (Ser2P) binding at the coding region, but no changes for several
other elongation regulators, such as DSIF and NELF. ChIP-seq revealed that
Med23-deficiency partially reduced the P-TEFb occupancy at a set of
MED23-regulated gene promoters. Further, we demonstrate that MED23 interacts with
CDK9 in vivo and in vitro. Collectively, these results provide the mechanistic
insight into how Mediator promotes RNAP II into transcription elongation.

PMCID: PMC3644042
PMID: 23340209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e49892. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049892. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

The ETS transcription factors ELK1 and GABPA regulate different gene networks to 
control MCF10A breast epithelial cell migration.

Odrowaz Z(1), Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Members of the ETS transcription factor family often target the same binding
regions and hence have the potential to regulate the same genes and downstream
biological processes. However, individual family members also preferentially bind
to other genomic regions, thus providing the potential for controlling distinct
transcriptional programmes and generating specific biological effects. The ETS
transcription factor ELK1 controls cell migration in breast epithelial cells
through targeting a cohort of genes, independently from another family member
GABPA, and therefore achieves biological specificity. Here, we demonstrate that
GABPA also controls cell migration in breast epithelial cells. However, GABPA
controls the expression of a different network of target genes to ELK1. Both
direct and indirect target genes for GABPA are identified and amongst the direct 
targets we confirm the importance of RAC1 and KIF20A for cell migration.
Therefore, although ELK1 and GABPA ultimately control the same biological
process, they do so by regulating different cohorts of target genes associated
with cytoskeletal functions and cell migration control.

PMCID: PMC3527487
PMID: 23284628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e50904. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050904. Epub 2012 Nov 30.

Silodosin inhibits noradrenaline-activated transcription factors Elk1 and SRF in 
human prostate smooth muscle.

Hennenberg M(1), Strittmatter F, Beckmann C, Rutz B, F¸llhase C, Waidelich R,
Montorsi F, Hedlund P, Andersson KE, Stief CG, Gratzke C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factors Elk1 and serum response factor (SRF) are
central regulators of cell cycle and phenotype in various cell types. Elk1 is
activated by phosphorylation (serine-383), while activation of SRF requires its
co-factor, myocardin. Activation of Elk1 and SRF results in binding to specific
DNA sequences in promoter regions, and may be induced by adrenergic receptor
activation in different organs.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the effects of adrenergic stimulation on Elk1 and SRF in
the human prostate and the ability of the highly selective a1A-adrenoceptor
antagonist, silodosin, on transcription factor activation.
METHODS: Prostate tissue was obtained from patients undergoing radical
prostatectomy. Expression of Elk1, SRF, and myocardin was estimated by Western
blot and immunohistochemistry. Colocalizations were studied by double
immunofluorescence staining. Noradrenaline- (NA-) and phenylephrine- (PE-)
induced phosphorylation of Elk1 was assessed by Western blot analysis using a
phospho-specific antibody. NA-induced activation of Elk1 and SRF was investigated
by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA).
RESULTS: Immunoreactivity for Elk1, SRF, and myocardin was observed in stromal
cells of tissues from each patient. In fluorescence stainings, SRF colocalized
with myocardin and a-smooth muscle actin (aSMA). Stimulation of prostate tissues 
with PE (10 µM) or NA (30 µM) increased the phosphorylation of Elk1 at
serine-383. NA-induced Elk1 activation was confirmed by EMSA, where a NA-induced 
binding of Elk1 to the DNA sequence TTTGCAAAATGCAGGAATTGTTTTCACAGT was observed. 
Similarly, NA caused SRF binding to the SRF-specific DNA sequence
CCATATTAGGCCATATTAGG. Application of silodosin (3 µM) to prostate tissues reduced
the activity of Elk1 and SRF in NA-stimulated tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Silodosin blocks the activation of the two transcription factors,
Elk1 and SRF, which is induced by noradrenaline in the human prostate. A role of 
a1-adrenoceptors beyond smooth muscle contraction may be considered, which
includes a function in transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC3511420
PMID: 23226423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Breast. 2013 Feb;22(1):89-95. doi: 10.1016/j.breast.2012.09.013. Epub 2012 Nov 2.

Immunohistochemical study of pElk-1 expression in human breast cancer:
association with breast cancer biologic profile and clinicopathologic features.

Laliotis A(1), Vrekoussis T, Kafousi M, Sanidas E, Askoxilakis J, Melissas J,
Mavroudis D, Castanas E, Stathopoulos EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, University of Crete, School of Medicine,
Heraklion, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Recently an increased interest on Elk1 protein and its role in breast
cancer evolution has been noted. This protein is an element of the Ets family of 
transcription factors and it has been involved in a number of important cell
processes through the activation of different genes, in a number of normal
tissues as well as in many malignancies.
METHODS: One hundred and seventy (n = 170) cases of operable breast cancer
(invasive ductal, lobular and mixed type breast carcinomas) were randomly
selected and investigated for the expression of pElk-1, Ki-67 and Cyclin D1 using
immunohistochemistry. Our findings were correlated with tumors' clinicopathologic
data and biologic profile.
RESULTS: Activated Elk1 is positively associated with ER (p-value: 0.018) and
also shows a positive association of with Cyclin D1 (p-value: <0.001). No
relationship was noted between pElk1 and Ki67 (p-value: 0.213). Luminal A and B
Her-2 negative breast cancer subtypes were showing greater pElk-1
immunoreactivity compared to Her-2 and Basal breast cancer subtypes, and also a
higher staining intensity. No association of the molecule with other
clinicopathologic characteristics (tumor size, stage, histological type or lymph 
node metastases) or disease adverse events (local recurrence, metastasis or
death) was evidenced.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings offer a new perspective for the role of pElk-1 in
breast neoplasia suggesting a direct relation of this molecule to tumor biology
and a putative target of personalized breast cancer therapies, although its
prognostic/discriminant role is not supported.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23127278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Transcription. 2012 Nov-Dec;3(6):323-35. doi: 10.4161/trns.22518. Epub 2012 Nov
1.

Ets1 and Elk1 transcription factors regulate cancerous inhibitor of protein
phosphatase 2A expression in cervical and endometrial carcinoma cells.

Pallai R(1), Bhaskar A, Sodi V, Rice LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Signaling and Cell Cycle, Venenum Biodesign, L.L.C,
Hamilton, NJ, USA.

Cancerous inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A (CIP2A) has been identified as a
proto-oncogene that is overexpressed in various types of human cancers. CIP2A
acts by inhibiting protein phosphatase 2A-dependent destabilization of c-Myc,
resulting in increased cell proliferation. Here, we have characterized the
proximal promoter region of the human CIP2A gene in cervical, endometrial and
liver carcinoma cells. The 5' flanking minimal proximal promoter of the CIP2A
gene consists of putative binding sites for Ets1 and Elk1 in forward and reverse 
orientations. Here, we show that Ets1 and Elk1 binding is essential for CIP2A
basal expression in several urogenital cancer cell lines. Interestingly, both
Ets1 and Elk1 are required together for CIP2A expression, as siRNA knockdown of
Ets1 and Elk1 together decreased CIP2A gene transcription, whereas knockdown of
Ets1 or Elk1 alone had no effect. Moreover, ectopic expression of Ets1 and Elk1
together increased CIP2A expression. To gain physiological significance of the
Ets1 and Elk1 regulation we observed, a panel of matched human cervical carcinoma
samples was analyzed for the expression of CIP2A and Ets1 and/or Elk1. We found a
direct correlation between the levels of CIP2A and the levels of Ets1 and Elk1.
Our results suggest that the binding of Ets1 and Elk1 together to the proximal
CIP2A promoter is absolutely required for CIP2A expression in cervical,
endometrial and liver carcinoma cell lines. Thus, different factors regulate
CIP2A expression in a cell-type specific manner. As previous work has shown a
requirement for only Ets1 in prostate and gastric carcinomas, our results now
indicate that CIP2A regulation is more complex than previously determined.

PMCID: PMC3630189
PMID: 23117818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Hum Pathol. 2013 May;44(5):766-76. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.08.001. Epub 2012 
Oct 29.

Elk-1 phosphorylated at threonine-417 is present in diverse cancers and
correlates with differentiation grade of colonic adenocarcinoma.

Morris JF(1), Sul JY, Kim MS, Klein-Szanto AJ, Schochet T, Rustgi A, Eberwine JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA.

Elk-1 is a member of the Ets family of transcription factors, which are
identified by a conserved Ets DNA-binding domain that mediates transcriptional
regulation at Ets sequence--containing promoters. The activation domain of Elk-1 
is important for executing its physiologic functions and contains many
phosphorylation sites targeted by various MAP kinases following exposure to cell 
stressors or mitogenic stimuli. The different combinations of phosphorylated
sites allow specificity of cellular responses mediated through redundant
signaling pathways activated by distinct stimuli. Through phosphorylation of
S383, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-activating stimuli have been shown 
to regulate various processes important in carcinogenesis through transcriptional
regulation in various cell lines, including proliferation. Phosphorylation at the
T417 site (pT417), but not the S383 site, is involved in neuronal apoptosis
induced through dendritic signaling mechanisms and associates with neuronal
lesions in many Lewy body diseases. This points to distinct roles for these
different phosphorylation sites in pathophysiologic pathways. However, the S383
site remains the best characterized in the context of normal function and
carcinogenesis in cell lines, and less is known about the biochemistry of other
phosphorylation sites, particularly in more biochemically relevant models. Here, 
we show that Elk-1 pT417 is present in epithelial cell nuclei of various normal
and cancer tissues and that the number of pT417-positive cells correlates with
differentiation grade of colonic adenocarcinomas. This nuclear localization and
correlation with tumor differentiation in adenocarcinoma suggests a potentially
important transcriptional and biochemical role of this phosphorylation site in
carcinogenesis of this tumor type.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4487418
PMID: 23114923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cancer Sci. 2013 Feb;104(2):214-22. doi: 10.1111/cas.12054. Epub 2012 Dec 13.

Intraperitoneal delivery of a small interfering RNA targeting NEDD1 prolongs the 
survival of scirrhous gastric cancer model mice.

Fujita T(1), Yanagihara K, Takeshita F, Aoyagi K, Nishimura T, Takigahira M,
Chiwaki F, Fukagawa T, Katai H, Ochiya T, Sakamoto H, Konno H, Yoshida T, Sasaki 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

The prognosis of patients with advanced diffuse-type gastric cancer (GC),
especially scirrhous gastric cancer (SGC) remains extremely poor. Peritoneal
carcinomatosis is a frequent form of metastasis of SGC. With survival rates of
patients with peritoneal metastasis at 3 and 5 years being only 9.8% and 0%,
respectively, development of a new treatment is urgently crucial. For such
development, the establishment of a therapeutic mouse model is required. Among
the 11 GC cell lines we examined, HSC-60 showed the most well-preserved
expression profiles of the Hedgehog and epithelial-mesenchymal transition
pathways found in primary SGCs. After six cycles of harvest of ascitic tumor
cells and their orthotopic inoculation in scid mice, a highly metastatic subclone
of HSC-60, 60As6 was obtained, by means of which we successfully developed
peritoneal metastasis model mice. The mice treated with small interfering (si)
RNA targeting NEDD1, which encodes a gamma-tubulin ring complex-binding protein, 
by the atelocollagen-mediated delivery system showed a significantly prolonged
survival. Our mouse model could thus be useful for the development of a new
therapeutic modality. Intraperitoneal administration of siRNAs of targeted genes 
such as NEDD1 could provide a new opportunity in the treatment of the peritoneal 
metastasis of SGC.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 23106787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Signal Transduct. 2012;2012:204236. doi: 10.1155/2012/204236. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Estrogen Regulates MAPK-Related Genes through Genomic and Nongenomic Interactions
between IGF-I Receptor Tyrosine Kinase and Estrogen Receptor-Alpha Signaling
Pathways in Human Uterine Leiomyoma Cells.

Yu L(1), Moore AB, Castro L, Gao X, Huynh HL, Klippel M, Flagler ND, Lu Y,
Kissling GE, Dixon D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathogenesis Group, National Toxicology Program (NTP) Laboratory,
NTP, Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

Estrogen and growth factors play a major role in uterine leiomyoma (UtLM) growth 
possibly through interactions of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and estrogen
receptor-alpha (ERa) signaling. We determined the genomic and nongenomic effects 
of 17ﬂ-estradiol (E(2)) on IGF-IR/MAPKp44/42 signaling and gene expression in
human UtLM cells with intact or silenced IGF-IR. Analysis by RT(2) Profiler
PCR-array showed genes involved in IGF-IR/MAPK signaling were upregulated in UtLM
cells by E(2) including cyclin D kinases, MAPKs, and MAPK kinases; RTK signaling 
mediator, GRB2; transcriptional factors ELK1 and E2F1; CCNB2 involved in cell
cycle progression, proliferation, and survival; and COL1A1 associated with
collagen synthesis. Silencing (si)IGF-IR attenuated the above effects and
resulted in upregulation of different genes, such as transcriptional factor ETS2;
the tyrosine kinase receptor, EGFR; and DLK1 involved in fibrosis. E(2) rapidly
activated IGF-IR/MAPKp44/42 signaling nongenomically and induced phosphorylation 
of ERa at ser118 in cells with a functional IGF-IR versus those without. E(2)
also upregulated IGF-I gene and protein expression through a prolonged genomic
event. These results suggest a pivotal role of IGF-IR and possibly other RTKs in 
mediating genomic and nongenomic hormone receptor interactions and signaling in
fibroids and provide novel genes and targets for future intervention and
prevention strategies.

PMCID: PMC3474284
PMID: 23094148  [PubMed]


126. Cancer Microenviron. 2013 Apr;6(1):91-107. doi: 10.1007/s12307-012-0121-z. Epub
2012 Oct 23.

Transcription factor networks in invasion-promoting breast carcinoma-associated
fibroblasts.

Siletz A(1), Kniazeva E, Jeruss JS, Shea LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, McCormick School of
Engineering, Northwestern University, Technological Institute E-136, 2145
Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL, 60208, USA.

Carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) contribute to both tumor growth and
cancer progression. In this report, we applied an emerging transcription factor
(TF) activity array to fibroblasts to capture the activity of the intracellular
signaling network and to define a signature that distinguishes mammary CAFs from 
normal mammary fibroblasts. Normal fibroblasts that restrained cancer cell
invasion developed into an invasion-promoting CAF phenotype through exposure to
conditioned medium from MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. A myofibroblast-like CAF 
cell line expressing high levels of smooth muscle actin was compared to normal
mammary fibroblasts before and after induction. Comparison of TF activity
profiles for all three fibroblast types identified a TF activity signature common
to CAFs which included activation of reporters for TFs ELK1, GATA1, retinoic acid
receptor (RAR), serum response factor (SRF), and vitamin D receptor (VDR).
Additionally, CAFs resembling myofibroblasts, relative to normal fibroblasts, had
elevated activation corresponding to NF-kappaB, RUNX2, and YY1, and distinct
activity patterns for several differentiation-related TF reporters. Induction of 
CAFs by exposure of normal fibroblasts to conditioned medium from MDA-MB-231
cells resulted in increased activation of reporters for HIF1, several STAT TFs,
and proliferation-related TFs such as AP1. Myofibroblast-like CAFs and induced
normal mammary fibroblasts promoted invasion of breast cancer cells by distinct
mechanisms, consistent with their distinct patterns of TF activation. The TF
activity profiles of CAF subtypes provide an overview of intracellular signaling 
associated with the induction of a pro-invasive stroma, and provide a mechanistic
link between the microenvironmental stimuli and phenotypic response.

PMCID: PMC3601213
PMID: 23090154  [PubMed]


127. Mol Vis. 2012;18:2420-37. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Molecular deregulation induced by silencing of the high mobility group protein A2
gene in retinoblastoma cells.

Venkatesan N(1), Krishnakumar S, Deepa PR, Deepa M, Khetan V, Reddy MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ocular pathology, Vision Research Foundation, Sankara
Nethralaya, Chennai, India.

AIM: To explore the molecular mechanisms deregulated by high mobility group
protein A2 (HMGA2) gene silencing in retinoblastoma (RB) cells.
METHODS: Synthetic anti-HMGA2 short interfering RNA (siRNA) was used to silence
the HMGA2 gene in cultured Y79 RB cells that were subjected to whole genome
microarray analysis. The expression of differentially regulated key genes was
confirmed with quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR) in post-silenced RB cell lines (Y79 and WERI Rb1). These deregulated
genes were compared for their constitutive expression in primary RB tumors
(n=10). Zymographic determination of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity was 
performed in RB cells. A cell cycle assay and a proliferation assay were
performed in post-transfected RB cells.
RESULTS: HMGA2 gene silencing in cultured RB cells results in reduced cell
proliferation and transition in the G1/S phase. The whole genome microarray
analysis of HMGA2 silenced Y79 cells revealed overall upregulation of 1,132 genes
(= 1.0 fold) and downregulation of 1,562 genes (= -1.0 fold). Specific
quantitative pathway analysis of the deregulated genes (using Biointerpreter)
revealed 150 upregulated genes and 77 downregulated genes (= 1.0 fold) involved
in vital pathways, namely, mitogen-activated protein kinase, Janus kinase/signal 
transducers and activators of transcription, Ras pathway, Ras-induced
extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases 1 and 2, and tumor protein p53.
The differential expression of genes obtained from microarray analysis (Homo
sapiens ELK1, member of ETS oncogene family [ELK1], Homo sapiens cyclin-dependent
kinase 6 [CDK6], Homo sapiens E2F transcription factor 4, p107/p130-binding
[E2F4], Homo sapiens G-2 and S-phase expressed 1 [GTSE1], Damage-regulated
autophagy modulator [DRAM], Homo sapiens cadherin 1, type 1,E-cadherin
(epithelial) [CDH1], Homo sapiens snail homolog 1 (Drosophila) [SNAI1], Homo
sapiens matrix metallopeptidase 2 [MMP2], and Homo sapiens matrix
metallopeptidase 9 [MMP9]) was confirmed with quantitative reverse-transcriptase 
polymerase chain reaction in post-silenced RB cells. Zymographic analysis
revealed that the increase in MMP mRNA expression in the post-silenced RB cells
did not correlate with corresponding enzyme activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study revealed molecular regulatory changes induced by HMGA2
silencing in RB cancer cells, offering mechanistic insights into the anticancer
potential. HMGA2 may be considered a promising candidate for gene silencing
therapy in RB.

PMCID: PMC3472926
PMID: 23077401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Curr Biol. 2012 Nov 6;22(21):2017-26. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.08.050. Epub 2012
Oct 11.

Adhesion regulates MAP kinase/ternary complex factor exchange to control a
proliferative transcriptional switch.

Wozniak MA(1), Cheng CQ, Shen CJ, Gao L, Olarerin-George AO, Won KJ, Hogenesch
JB, Chen CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA.

BACKGROUND: The ternary complex factors (TCFs; Elk1, Net, and Sap-1) are growth
factor-responsive transcription cofactors of serum response factor (SRF) and are 
activated by MAP kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation to regulate immediate early gene
transcription. Although cell adhesion also can regulate immediate early genes and
proliferation, the mechanism for this effect has remained unexplored.
RESULTS: Restricting adhesion and spreading of G(0)-synchronized cells on
substrates with decreasing size of micropatterned islands of fibronectin
suppressed serum-induced immediate early gene expression and S phase entry.
Knockdown of Sap-1 decreased expression of the immediate early genes egr1 and fos
and subsequent proliferation normally present with high adhesion, whereas
knockdown of Net rescued egr1 and fos expression and proliferation normally
suppressed by low adhesion. Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies showed
increased occupancy of egr1 and fos promoters by Sap-1 with high adhesion,
whereas low adhesion increased Net occupancy. This switch in TCF promoter binding
was regulated by an adhesion-mediated switch in MAPK activity. Increasing
adhesion enhanced serum-induced JNK activity while suppressing p38 activity,
leading to increased Sap-1 phosphorylation and Net dephosphorylation, and
switching Net with Sap-1 at egr1 and fos promoters to support proliferation.
Microarray studies confirmed this switch in TCF regulation of proliferative genes
and uncovered novel gene targets and functions coregulated by Sap-1 and Net.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate a key role for the TCFs in adhesion-induced
transcription and proliferation and reveal a novel MAPK/TCF transcriptional
switch that controls this process.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3586562
PMID: 23063436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 9;109(41):E2813-22. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1204311109. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

Selective requirement for Mediator MED23 in Ras-active lung cancer.

Yang X(1), Zhao M, Xia M, Liu Y, Yan J, Ji H, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences-Max Planck Institute Partner Institute for
Computational Biology, Shanghai Institute for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

K-RAS-activating mutations occur frequently in non-small cell lung cancer,
leading to aberrant activation of the Ras-MAPK signaling pathway that contributes
to the malignant phenotype. However, the development of Ras-targeted therapeutics
remains challenging. Here, we show that MED23, a component of the multisubunit
Mediator complex that is known to integrate signaling and gene activities, is
selectively important for Ras-active lung cancer. By screening a large panel of
human lung cancer cell lines with or without a Ras mutation, we found that Med23 
RNAi specifically inhibits the proliferation and tumorigenicity of lung cancer
cells with hyperactive Ras activity. Med23 deficiency in fibroblasts selectively 
inhibited the oncogenic transformation induced by Ras but not by c-Myc. The
transcription factor ELK1, which is phosphorylated by MAPK for relaying Ras
signaling to MED23, also was required for the Ras-driven oncogenesis.
Transcriptome analysis revealed that MED23 and ELK1 co-regulate a common set of
target genes enriched in regulating cell-cycle and -proliferation functions to
support the Ras dependency. Furthermore, MED23 was up-regulated by Ras
transformation in correlation with the strength of Ras signaling as indicated by 
the ELK1 phosphorylation level and was found to be overexpressed in both
Ras-mutated lung cancer cell lines and primary tumor samples. Remarkably, lower
Med23 expression predicted better survival in Ras-active lung cancer patients and
xenograft mice. Collectively, our findings demonstrate a critical role for MED23 
in enabling the "Ras-addiction" of lung carcinogenesis, thus providing a
vulnerable target for the treatment of Ras-active lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC3478617
PMID: 22988093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e41354. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041354. Epub 2012 Sep 12.

Differential regulation of transcription factors by location-specific EGF
receptor signaling via a spatio-temporal interplay of ERK activation.

Wu P(1), Wee P, Jiang J, Chen X, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Medical Genetics and Signal Transduction Research Group,
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(1). doi:10.1371/annotation/2a7e4838-1938-4728-b796-f4cf06b8c36d.

It is well established that EGFR signals from both the plasma membrane (PM) and
endosome (EN). However, very little is known about whether and how the EGFR
signals at the PM and EN to differentially regulate various signaling pathways
and the physiological outcomes. In this communication, we established a system
that allowed the specific activations of EGFR at different cell locations: PM and
EN. PM activation of EGFR is achieved by activation of endocytosis-deficient
mutant EGFR1010LL/AA stably expressed in CHO cells (CHO-LL/AA cell). EN
activation of EGFR is achieved by activating the wild type EGFR stably expressed 
in CHO cells (CHO-EGFR cell) after its internalization into EN with a previously 
reported protocol. We showed that both EGFR activations at PM and EN activated
ERK to a similar level, but differentially stimulated transcriptional factors
c-jun and c-fos. We further showed that EGFR activations at PM and EN resulted in
differential spatio-temporal dynamics of phosphorylated ERK which caused the
differential activation of two downstream substrates ELK1 and RSK. Finally we
showed that EGFR signaling from PM and EN led to different physiological
outcomes. CHO-LL/AA cells that only generate PM EGFR signals have a larger cell
size and slower proliferation rate than CHO-EGFR cells. We conclude that
location-specific EGFR activation differentially regulates cell functions through
a spatio-temporal interplay of ERK activation.

PMCID: PMC3440385
PMID: 22984397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Genes Dev. 2012 Oct 1;26(19):2192-205. doi: 10.1101/gad.192666.112. Epub 2012 Sep
12.

Mediator MED23 plays opposing roles in directing smooth muscle cell and adipocyte
differentiation.

Yin JW(1), Liang Y, Park JY, Chen D, Yao X, Xiao Q, Liu Z, Jiang B, Fu Y, Bao M, 
Huang Y, Liu Y, Yan J, Zhu MS, Yang Z, Gao P, Tian B, Li D, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

The Mediator complex functions as a control center, orchestrating diverse
signaling, gene activities, and biological processes. However, how Mediator
subunits determine distinct cell fates remains to be fully elucidated. Here, we
show that Mediator MED23 controls the cell fate preference that directs
differentiation into smooth muscle cells (SMCs) or adipocytes. Med23 deficiency
facilitates SMC differentiation but represses adipocyte differentiation from the 
multipotent mesenchymal stem cells. Gene profiling revealed that the presence or 
absence of Med23 oppositely regulates two sets of genes: the RhoA/MAL targeted
cytoskeleton/SMC genes and the Ras/ELK1 targeted growth/adipogenic genes.
Mechanistically, MED23 favors ELK1-SRF binding to SMC gene promoters for
repression, whereas the lack of MED23 favors MAL-SRF binding to SMC gene
promoters for activation. Remarkably, the effect of MED23 on SMC differentiation 
can be recapitulated in zebrafish embryogenesis. Collectively, our data
demonstrate the dual, opposing roles for MED23 in regulating the cytoskeleton/SMC
and growth/adipogenic gene programs, suggesting its "Ying-Yang" function in
directing adipogenesis versus SMC differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3465740
PMID: 22972934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Cancer Res. 2012 Nov 15;72(22):5921-33. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0736. Epub 
2012 Sep 11.

Temporal molecular and biological assessment of an erlotinib-resistant lung
adenocarcinoma model reveals markers of tumor progression and treatment response.

Weaver Z(1), Difilippantonio S, Carretero J, Martin PL, El Meskini R, Iacovelli
AJ, Gumprecht M, Kulaga A, Guerin T, Schlomer J, Baran M, Kozlov S, McCann T,
Mena S, Al-Shahrour F, Alexander D, Wong KK, Van Dyke T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Preclinical Research, SAIC-Frederick, Inc, Frederick
National Laboratory for Cancer Research/NCI, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

Patients with lung cancer with activating mutations in the EGF receptor (EGFR)
kinase, who are treated long-term with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), often
develop secondary mutations in EGFR associated with resistance. Mice engineered
to develop lung adenocarcinomas driven by the human EGFR T790M resistance
mutation are similarly resistant to the EGFR TKI erlotinib. By tumor volume
endpoint analysis, these mouse tumors respond to BIBW 2992 (an irreversible
EGFR/HER2 TKI) and rapamycin combination therapy. To correlate EGFR-driven
changes in the lung with response to drug treatment, we conducted an integrative 
analysis of global transcriptome and metabolite profiling compared with
quantitative imaging and histopathology at several time points during tumor
progression and treatment. Responses to single-drug treatments were temporary,
whereas combination therapy elicited a sustained response. During tumor
development, metabolomic signatures indicated a shift to high anabolic activity
and suppression of antitumor programs with 11 metabolites consistently present in
both lung tissue and blood. Combination drug treatment reversed many of the
molecular changes found in tumored lung. Data integration linking cancer
signaling networks with metabolic activity identified key pathways such as
glutamine and glutathione metabolism that signified response to single or dual
treatments. Results from combination drug treatment suggest that metabolic
transcriptional control through C-MYC and SREBP, as well as ELK1, NRF1, and NRF2,
depends on both EGFR and mTORC1 signaling. Our findings establish the importance 
of kinetic therapeutic studies in preclinical assessment and provide in vivo
evidence that TKI-mediated antiproliferative effects also manifest in specific
metabolic regulation.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3500850
PMID: 22969147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Nov;6(5):1190-4. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.1050. Epub 2012 Aug 27.

Type II cGMP-dependent protein kinase inhibits ERK/JNK-mediated activation of
transcription factors in gastric cancer cells.

Sang J(1), Chen Y, Jiang L, Tao Y, Wu Y, Wang Y, Li Y, Lan T, Shao G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Science and Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu University, Jiangsu
212013, PR China. sangjianrong@yahoo.com.cn

A previous study has shown that type†II cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG II)
inhibits the proliferation of gastric cancer cells through blocking EGF-triggered
MAPK/ERK signal transduction, indicating that the kinase may be a potential
anticancer factor. In the present study, the role of PKG II in the EGF-induced
activation of transcription factors in the MAPK/ERK signal transduction pathway
was investigated. BGC-823 human gastric cancer cells were infected with
adenoviral constructs encoding the cDNA of PKG†II (pAd-PKG II) to increase the
expression of PKG II and treated with 8-pCPT-cGMP to activate the enzyme. Using
luciferase reporter assays, it was revealed that PKG II markedly suppressed the
EGF-induced transcriptional activities of AP-1 and Elk1. Consistent with the
inhibitory effect of PKG†II on AP-1 activity, the expression levels of c-Jun and 
c-Fos, components of AP-1, were also inhibited. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis
demonstrated that EGF treatment increased the AP-1 content through inducing the
formation of p-c-Jun-c-Jun homodimers and p-c-Jun-c-Fos heterodimers. However,
this combination was efficiently blocked by activated PKG†II. While pretreatments
with MAPK inhibitors suppressed the EGF-induced transcriptional activities of
AP-1 and Elk1, PKG†II prevented the EGF-induced phosphorylation/activation of ERK
and JNK, but not the phosphorylation of p38MAPK induced by EGF. These data
suggest that PKG II inhibits the EGF-triggered proliferation of gastric cancer
cells through suppressing ERK-/JNK-, but not p38MAPK, -mediated AP-1 and Elk1
transactivation.

PMID: 22940826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Circ Res. 2012 Aug 31;111(6):659-61. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.112.277368.

Modulation of smooth muscle cell phenotype: the other side of the story.

Huang J, Parmacek MS.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2012 Aug 31;111(6):685-96.

PMCID: PMC3439141
PMID: 22935528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Circ Res. 2012 Oct 12;111(9):1137-46. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.112.273755. Epub
2012 Aug 14.

Upregulation of TRPM7 channels by angiotensin II triggers phenotypic switching of
vascular smooth muscle cells of ascending aorta.

Zhang Z(1), Wang M, Fan XH, Chen JH, Guan YY, Tang YB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen
University, 74 Zhongshan 2nd Rd, Guangzhou, China 510080. zzhang510@gmail.com

Erratum in
    Circ Res. 2012 Dec 7;111(12):e391-2.

RATIONALE: Angiotensin II (Ang II) has pleiotropic effects on vascular smooth
muscle cells (VSMCs). It has been demonstrated to promote the proliferative
phenotype of VSMCs in mouse ascending aorta, but the underlying mechanisms remain
incompletely understood.
OBJECTIVE: The present study was designed to explore whether the Ca(2+)-permeable
transient receptor potential melastatin 7 (TRPM7) channel is involved in Ang
II-induced phenotype switching of ascending aortic VSMCs and to dissect the
molecular mechanisms by which TRPM7 modulates VSMC phenotype.
METHODS AND RESULTS: As revealed by current recording, Ang II infusion increased 
TRPM7 whole-cell currents in ascending aortic VSMCs. The increase in TRPM7
currents was found to result from enhanced expression of TRPM7 protein rather
than elevated single-channel activity (open probability and slope conductance)
and/or reduced Mg(2+)-mediated channel block. Mechanistically, Ang II elevated
TRPM7 expression via Ang II type 1 receptor-mediated ERK1/2 signaling. As
indicated by the expression levels of VSMC differentiation marker genes,
phenotypic switching of ascending aorta occurred during Ang II infusion.
Meanwhile, ERK1/2-Elk-1 signaling pathway known to suppress VSMC differentiation 
was activated in Ang II-infused ascending aorta. Knockdown of TRPM7 with small
interfering RNA established a causative role of TRPM7 in Ang II-induced
phenotypic change and promotion of cell proliferation. Moreover, TRPM7 was shown 
to be required for Pyk2-ERK1/2-Elk-1 pathway activation by Ang II, which
potentiated TRPM7 channel function and thus activated the Ca(2+)-sensitive kinase
Pyk2. Finally, TRPM7 knockdown attenuated Ang II-induced displacement of
myocardin from SM22 promoter, but the effects could be reversed by expression of 
constitutively active c-Src.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data establish that upregulation of TRPM7 channels by Ang II
contributes to the development of the proliferative phenotype of ascending aortic
VSMCs, and TRPM7 channel suppresses VSMC gene expression via Ca(2+)
influx-mediated activation of Pyk2-ERK1/2-Elk-1 pathway.

PMID: 22896586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. BMC Cancer. 2012 Aug 1;12:331. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-331.

A systems biology approach to the global analysis of transcription factors in
colorectal cancer.

Pradhan MP(1), Prasad NK, Palakal MJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Informatics, Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

BACKGROUND: Biological entities do not perform in isolation, and often, it is the
nature and degree of interactions among numerous biological entities which
ultimately determines any final outcome. Hence, experimental data on any single
biological entity can be of limited value when considered only in isolation. To
address this, we propose that augmenting individual entity data with the
literature will not only better define the entity's own significance but also
uncover relationships with novel biological entities.To test this notion, we
developed a comprehensive text mining and computational methodology that focused 
on discovering new targets of one class of molecular entities, transcription
factors (TF), within one particular disease, colorectal cancer (CRC).
METHODS: We used 39 molecular entities known to be associated with CRC along with
six colorectal cancer terms as the bait list, or list of search terms, for mining
the biomedical literature to identify CRC-specific genes and proteins. Using the 
literature-mined data, we constructed a global TF interaction network for CRC. We
then developed a multi-level, multi-parametric methodology to identify TFs to
CRC.
RESULTS: The small bait list, when augmented with literature-mined data,
identified a large number of biological entities associated with CRC. The
relative importance of these TF and their associated modules was identified using
functional and topological features. Additional validation of these highly-ranked
TF using the literature strengthened our findings. Some of the novel TF that we
identified were: SLUG, RUNX1, IRF1, HIF1A, ATF-2, ABL1, ELK-1 and GATA-1. Some of
these TFs are associated with functional modules in known pathways of CRC,
including the Beta-catenin/development, immune response, transcription, and DNA
damage pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: Our methodology of using text mining data and a multi-level,
multi-parameter scoring technique was able to identify both known and novel TF
that have roles in CRC. Starting with just one TF (SMAD3) in the bait list, the
literature mining process identified an additional 116 CRC-associated TFs. Our
network-based analysis showed that these TFs all belonged to any of 13 major
functional groups that are known to play important roles in CRC. Among these
identified TFs, we obtained a novel six-node module consisting of
ATF2-P53-JNK1-ELK1-EPHB2-HIF1A, from which the novel JNK1-ELK1 association could 
potentially be a significant marker for CRC.

PMCID: PMC3539921
PMID: 22852817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Nov 5;363(1-2):46-61. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.07.006.
Epub 2012 Jul 24.

Relaxin induces matrix-metalloproteinases-9 and -13 via RXFP1: induction of MMP-9
involves the PI3K, ERK, Akt and PKC-<U+03B6> pathways.

Ahmad N(1), Wang W, Nair R, Kapila S.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1078, USA.

We determined the precise role of relaxin family peptide (RXFP) receptors-1 and
-2 in the regulation of MMP-9 and -13 by relaxin, and delineated the signaling
cascade that contributes to relaxin's modulation of MMP-9 in fibrocartilaginous
cells. Relaxin treatment of cells in which RXFP1 was silenced resulted in
diminished induction of MMP-9 and -13 by relaxin, whereas overexpression of RXFP1
potentiated the relaxin-induced expression of these proteinases. Suppression or
overexpression of RXFP2 resulted in no changes in the relaxin-induced MMP-9 and
-13. Studies using chemical inhibitors and siRNAs to signaling molecules showed
that PI3K, Akt, ERK and PKC-<U+03B6> and the transcription factors Elk-1, c-fos and, to 
a lesser extent, NF-<U+03BA>B are involved in relaxin's induction of MMP-9. Our findings
provide the first characterization of signaling cascade involved in the
regulation of any MMP by relaxin and offer mechanistic insights on how relaxin
likely mediates extracellular matrix turnover.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3447121
PMID: 22835547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Circ Res. 2012 Aug 31;111(6):685-96. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.112.269811. Epub
2012 Jul 18.

Cooperative binding of KLF4, pELK-1, and HDAC2 to a G/C repressor element in the 
SM22a promoter mediates transcriptional silencing during SMC phenotypic switching
in vivo.

Salmon M(1), Gomez D, Greene E, Shankman L, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Virginia, School of Medicine, Robert M. Berne Cardiovascular
Research Center, PO Box 801394, Charlottesville, VA 22908-1394, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2012 Aug 31;111(6):659-61.

RATIONALE: We previously identified conserved G/C Repressor elements in the
promoters of most smooth muscle cell (SMC) marker genes and demonstrated that
mutation of this element within the SM22a promoter nearly abrogated repression of
this transgene after vascular wire injury or within lesions of ApoE-/- mice.
However, the mechanisms regulating the activity of the G/C Repressor are unknown,
although we have previously shown that phenotypic switching of cultured SMC is
dependent on Krupple-like factor (KLF)4.
OBJECTIVE: The goals of the present studies were to ascertain if (1)
injury-induced repression of SM22a gene after vascular injury is mediated through
KLF4 binding to the G/C Repressor element and (2) the transcriptional repressor
activity of KLF4 on SMC marker genes is dependent on cooperative binding with
pELK-1 (downstream activator of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway) and
subsequent recruitment of histone de-acetylase 2 (HDAC2), which mediates
epigenetic gene silencing.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were performed
on chromatin derived from carotid arteries of mice having either a wild-type or
G/C Repressor mutant SM22a promoter-LacZ transgene. KLF4 and pELK-1 binding to
the SM22a promoter was markedly increased after vascular injury and was G/C
Repressor dependent. Sequential ChIP assays and proximity ligation analyses in
cultured SMC treated with platelet-derived growth factor BB or oxidized
phospholipids showed formation of a KLF4, pELK-1, and HDAC2 multiprotein complex 
dependent on the SM22a G/C Repressor element.
CONCLUSIONS: Silencing of SMC marker genes during phenotypic switching is
partially mediated by sequential binding of pELK-1 and KLF4 to G/C Repressor
elements. The pELK-1-KLF4 complex in turn recruits HDAC2, leading to reduced
histone acetylation and epigenetic silencing.

PMCID: PMC3517884
PMID: 22811558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Oncogene. 2013 Apr 18;32(16):2069-78. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.222. Epub 2012 Jun
11.

Functional characterization of the promoter region of the human EVI1 gene in
acute myeloid leukemia: RUNX1 and ELK1 directly regulate its transcription.

Maicas M(1), V·zquez I, Vicente C, GarcÌa-S·nchez MA, Marcotegui N, Urquiza L,
Calasanz MJ, Odero MD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, Division of Oncology, CIMA, University of Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain.

The EVI1 gene (3q26) codes for a transcription factor with important roles in
normal hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis. High expression of EVI1 is a negative
prognostic indicator of survival in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) irrespective of 
the presence of 3q26 rearrangements. However, the only known mechanisms that lead
to EVI1 overexpression are 3q aberrations, and the MLL-ENL oncoprotein, which
activates the transcription of EVI1 in hematopoietic stem cells. Our aim was to
characterize the functional promoter region of EVI1, and to identify
transcription factors involved in the regulation of this gene. Generation of
seven truncated constructs and luciferase reporter assays allowed us to determine
a 318-bp region as the minimal promoter region of EVI1. Site-directed mutagenesis
and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays identified RUNX1 and ELK1 as
putative transcription factors of EVI1. Furthermore, knockdown of RUNX1 and ELK1 
led to EVI1 downregulation, and their overexpression to upregulation of EVI1.
Interestingly, in a series of patient samples with AML at diagnosis, we found a
significant positive correlation between EVI1 and RUNX1 at protein level.
Moreover, we identified one of the roles of RUNX1 in the activation of EVI1
during megakaryocytic differentiation. EVI1 knockdown significantly inhibited the
expression of megakaryocytic markers after treating K562 cells with TPA, as
happens when knocking down RUNX1. In conclusion, we define the minimal promoter
region of EVI1 and demonstrate that RUNX1 and ELK1, two proteins with essential
functions in hematopoiesis, regulate EVI1 in AML. Furthermore, our results show
that one of the mechanisms by which RUNX1 regulates the transcription of EVI1 is 
by acetylation of the histone H3 on its promoter region. This study opens new
directions to further understand the mechanisms of EVI1 overexpressing leukemias.

PMID: 22689058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Clin Invest. 2012 Jul;122(7):2469-81. doi: 10.1172/JCI62044. Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Paxillin mediates extranuclear and intranuclear signaling in prostate cancer
proliferation.

Sen A(1), De Castro I, Defranco DB, Deng FM, Melamed J, Kapur P, Raj GV, Rossi R,
Hammes SR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, NY, USA.

In prostate cancer, the signals that drive cell proliferation change as tumors
progress from castration-sensitive (androgen-dominant) to castration-resistant
states. While the mechanisms underlying this change remain uncertain,
characterization of common signaling components that regulate both stages of
prostate cancer proliferation is important for developing effective treatment
strategies. Here, we demonstrate that paxillin, a known cytoplasmic adaptor
protein, regulates both androgen- and EGF-induced nuclear signaling. We show that
androgen and EGF promoted MAPK-dependent phosphorylation of paxillin, resulting
in nuclear translocation of paxillin. We found nuclear paxillin could then
associate with androgen-stimulated androgen receptor (AR). This complex bound
AR-sensitive promoters, retaining AR within the nucleus and regulating
AR-mediated transcription. Nuclear paxillin also complexed with ERK and ELK1,
mediating c-FOS and cyclin D1 expression; this was followed by proliferation.
Thus, paxillin is a liaison between extranuclear MAPK signaling and nuclear
transcription in response to androgens and growth factors, making it a potential 
regulator of both castration-sensitive and castration-resistant prostate cancer. 
Accordingly, paxillin was required for normal growth of human prostate cancer
cell xenografts, and its expression was elevated in human prostate cancer tissue 
microarrays. Paxillin is therefore a potential biomarker for prostate cancer
proliferation and a possible therapeutic target for prostate cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC3386821
PMID: 22684108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Traffic. 2012 Sep;13(9):1218-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2012.01378.x. Epub 2012
Jun 11.

Rab6-mediated retrograde transport regulates inner nuclear membrane targeting of 
caveolin-2 in response to insulin.

Jeong K(1), Kwon H, Lee J, Jang D, Hwang EM, Park JY, Pak Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Division of Applied Life Science (BK21 Program),
PMBBRC, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701, Korea.

Here, we have identified a retrograde transport pathway of caveolin-2 (cav-2) for
its regulatory function in the nucleus. Confocal microscopy analysis,
photoactivation experiments and subcellular fractionation revealed that cav-2
localized in the Golgi was transported to the inner nuclear membrane (INM) in
response to insulin. Exogenous caveolin-1 (cav-1) and P132L-cav-1 expression did 
not affect the Golgi localization and insulin-induced INM targeting of cav-2.
Cav-2(DKV) mutant in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) was unable to translocate to 
the INM in response to insulin. The GTP-bound form of Rab6 promoted, but Rab6
siRNA and the GDP-bound form of Rab6 abrogated, retrograde trafficking of cav-2
from the Golgi to ER. Colchicine or nocodazole treatment abolished
insulin-induced INM targeting of cav-2. Knock down of gp210 inhibited
insulin-induced import of cav-2 from ER/outer nuclear membrane (ONM) to the INM. 
The INM-targeted cav-2 prevented heterochromatinization and promoted
transcriptional activation of Elk-1 and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3). The results provide molecular mechanisms for
insulin-induced INM translocation of cav-2 initiated (i) by Golgi-to-ER
retrograde trafficking of cav-2 via microtubule-based Rab6-GTP-dependent
transport and subsequently processed (ii) by gp210-mediated import of cav-2 from 
ER/ONM to INM.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22607032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(5):e1002694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002694. Epub 2012 May 
10.

ELK1 uses different DNA binding modes to regulate functionally distinct classes
of target genes.

Odrowaz Z(1), Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom.

Eukaryotic transcription factors are grouped into families and, due to their
similar DNA binding domains, often have the potential to bind to the same genomic
regions. This can lead to redundancy at the level of DNA binding, and mechanisms 
are required to generate specific functional outcomes that enable distinct gene
expression programmes to be controlled by a particular transcription factor. Here
we used ChIP-seq to uncover two distinct binding modes for the ETS transcription 
factor ELK1. In one mode, other ETS transcription factors can bind regulatory
regions in a redundant fashion; in the second, ELK1 binds in a unique fashion to 
another set of genomic targets. Each binding mode is associated with different
binding site features and also distinct regulatory outcomes. Furthermore, the
type of binding mode also determines the control of functionally distinct
subclasses of genes and hence the phenotypic response elicited. This is
demonstrated for the unique binding mode where a novel role for ELK1 in
controlling cell migration is revealed. We have therefore uncovered an unexpected
link between the type of binding mode employed by a transcription factor, the
subsequent gene regulatory mechanisms used, and the functional categories of
target genes controlled.

PMCID: PMC3349735
PMID: 22589737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jul 13;287(29):24698-712. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.326504. Epub
2012 May 14.

The human biliverdin reductase-based peptide fragments and biliverdin regulate
protein kinase Cd activity: the peptides are inhibitors or substrate for the
protein kinase C.

Miralem T(1), Lerner-Marmarosh N, Gibbs PE, Tudor C, Hagen FK, Maines MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

PKCd, a Ser/Thr kinase, promotes cell growth, tumorigenesis, and apoptosis. Human
biliverdin reductase (hBVR), a Ser/Thr/Tyr kinase, inhibits apoptosis by reducing
biliverdin-IX to antioxidant bilirubin. The enzymes are activated by similar
stimuli. Reportedly, hBVR is a kinase-independent activator of PKCd and is
transactivated by the PKC (Gibbs, P. E., Miralem, T., Lerner-Marmarosh, N.,
Tudor, C., and Maines, M. D. (2012) J. Biol. Chem. 287, 1066-1079). Presently, we
examined interactions between the two proteins in the context of regulation of
their activities and defining targets of hBVR phosphorylation by PKCd. LC-MS/MS
analysis of PKCd-activated intact hBVR identified phosphorylated serine positions
21, 33, 230, and 237, corresponding to the hBVR Src homology-2 domain motif
(Ser(230) and Ser(237)), flanking the ATP-binding motif (Ser(21)) and in PHPS
sequence (Ser(33)) as targets of PKCd. Ser(21) and Ser(230) were also
phosphorylated in hBVR-based peptides. The Ser(230)-containing peptide was a high
affinity substrate for PKCd in vitro and in cells; the relative affinity was PKCd
> PKCﬂII > PKC<U+03B6>. Two overlapping peptides spanning this substrate, KRNRYLSF and
SFHFKSGSL, were effective inhibitors of PKCd kinase activity and PKCd-supported
activation of transcription factors Elk1 and NF-<U+03BA>B. Only SFHFKSGSL, in
PKCd-transfected phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate-stimulated cells, caused
membrane blebbing and cell loss. Biliverdin noncovalently inhibited PKCd, whereas
PKCd potentiated hBVR reductase activity and accelerated the rate of bilirubin
formation. This study, together with previous findings, reveals an unexpected
regulatory interplay between PKCd and hBVR in modulating cell death/survival in
response to various activating stimuli. In addition, this study has identified
novel substrates for and inhibitors of PKCd. We suggest that hBVR-based
technology may have utility to modulate PKCd-mediated functions in the cell.

PMCID: PMC3397897
PMID: 22584576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Chin J Physiol. 2012 Apr 30;55(2):75-81. doi: 10.4077/CJP.2012.AMM121.

Expression of protein kinase Ca and the MZF-1 and elk-1 transcription factors in 
human bladder transitional cell carcinoma cells.

Jou YC(1), Chiu YW, Chen YH, Hwang JM, Chao PY, Shiu JJ, Hwang WH, Liu JY, Hsu
LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Chiayi Christian Hospital, Chiayi, Republic of China.

In a recent study on hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), we have shown that the
transcription factors Myeloid Zinc Finger-1 (MZF-1) and Ets-like-protein 1
(Elk-1) are significantly related to protein kinase C alpha (PKCa) expression.
The purpose of this study was to determine the correlation of the expression of
PKCa with the expression of Elk-1 and MZF-1 in various differentiated urinary
bladder transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) cell lines: 5637, BFTC905, TSGH8301,
HT1376 and HT1197 cells. The malignant potential in the five TCC cell lines was
examined by using cell proliferation/migration/invasion assay and the protein and
mRNA levels of PKCa, ElK-1 and MZF-1 were examined by Western blot and RT-PCR
analysis. The results showed that the rate of cell proliferation in the TSGH8301 
cell line was higher than that in other cell lines, while there were obvious
signs of cell migration and invasion in 5637, BFTC905 and HT1376 cells, and no
sign in TSGH8301 and HT1197 cells. The resulting expression levels of Elk-1 and
PKCa were the highest in 5637 cells, but the MZF-1 expression observed in all
five cell lines showed no significant difference. To determine whether a
correlation exists between PKCa and Elk-1, a shRNA knockout assay was performed
and the results showed that the reduction of Elk-1 expression in 5637 cells did
not result in the decreased PKCa expression. Therefore, although the findings
showed elevated expression of Elk-1 and PKCa in 5637 cells, the regulator of PKCa
in bladder cancer cells is yet to be determined.

PMID: 22559731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35147. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035147. Epub 2012 Apr 20.

MicroRNAs up-regulated by CagA of Helicobacter pylori induce intestinal
metaplasia of gastric epithelial cells.

Zhu Y(1), Jiang Q, Lou X, Ji X, Wen Z, Wu J, Tao H, Jiang T, He W, Wang C, Du Q, 
Zheng S, Mao J, Huang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
zhuyongliangch@yahoo.com.cn

CagA of Helicobacter pylori is a bacterium-derived oncogenic protein closely
associated with the development of gastric cancers. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a
class of widespread non-coding RNAs, many of which are involved in cell growth,
cell differentiation and tumorigenesis. The relationship between CagA protein and
miRNAs is unclear. Using mammalian miRNA profile microarrays, we found that
miRNA-584 and miRNA-1290 expression was up-regulated in CagA-transformed cells,
miRNA-1290 was up-regulated in an Erk1/2-dependent manner, and miRNA-584 was
activated by NF-<U+03BA>B. miRNA-584 sustained Erk1/2 activities through inhibition of
PPP2a activities, and miRNA-1290 activated NF-<U+03BA>B by knockdown of NKRF. Foxa1 was 
revealed to be an important target of miRNA-584 and miRNA-1290. Knockdown of
Foxa1 promoted the epithelial-mesenchymal transition significantly.
Overexpression of miRNA-584 and miRNA-1290 induced intestinal metaplasia of
gastric epithelial cells in knock-in mice. These results indicate that miRNA-584 
and miRNA-1290 interfere with cell differentiation and remodel the tissues. Thus,
the miRNA pathway is a new pathogenic mechanism of CagA.

PMCID: PMC3335061
PMID: 22536353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Blood. 2012 Jun 7;119(23):5478-91. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-01-403154. Epub 2012
Apr 19.

Identification of LMO2 transcriptome and interactome in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma.

Cubedo E(1), Gentles AJ, Huang C, Natkunam Y, Bhatt S, Lu X, Jiang X,
Romero-Camarero I, Freud A, Zhao S, Bacchi CE, MartÌnez-Climent JA,
S·nchez-GarcÌa I, Melnick A, Lossos IS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of Miami, Sylvester Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

LMO2 regulates gene expression by facilitating the formation of multipartite
DNA-binding complexes. In B cells, LMO2 is specifically up-regulated in the
germinal center (GC) and is expressed in GC-derived non-Hodgkin lymphomas. LMO2
is one of the most powerful prognostic indicators in diffuse large B-cell (DLBCL)
patients. However, its function in GC B cells and DLBCL is currently unknown. In 
this study, we characterized the LMO2 transcriptome and transcriptional complex
in DLBCL cells. LMO2 regulates genes implicated in kinetochore function,
chromosome assembly, and mitosis. Overexpression of LMO2 in DLBCL cell lines
results in centrosome amplification. In DLBCL, the LMO2 complex contains some of 
the traditional partners, such as LDB1, E2A, HEB, Lyl1, ETO2, and SP1, but not
TAL1 or GATA proteins. Furthermore, we identified novel LMO2 interacting
partners: ELK1, nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFATc1), and lymphoid
enhancer-binding factor1 (LEF1) proteins. Reporter assays revealed that LMO2
increases transcriptional activity of NFATc1 and decreases transcriptional
activity of LEF1 proteins. Overall, our studies identified a novel LMO2
transcriptome and interactome in DLBCL and provides a platform for future
elucidation of LMO2 function in GC B cells and DLBCL pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3369683
PMID: 22517897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34154. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034154. Epub 2012 Mar 26.

JWA deficiency suppresses dimethylbenz[a]anthracene-phorbol ester induced skin
papillomas via inactivation of MAPK pathway in mice.

Gong Z(1), Shi Y, Zhu Z, Li X, Ye Y, Zhang J, Li A, Li G, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology & Toxicology, the Key Laboratory of
Modern Toxicology, Ministry of Education, School of Public Health, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

Our previous studies indicated that JWA plays an important role in DNA damage
repair, cell migration, and regulation of MAPKs. In this study, we investigated
the role of JWA in chemical carcinogenesis using conditional JWA knockout
(JWA(<U+0394>2/<U+0394>2)) mice and two-stage model of skin carcinogenesis. Our results
indicated that JWA(<U+0394>2/<U+0394>2) mice were resistant to the development of skin
papillomas initiated by 7, 12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA) followed by
promotion with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). In JWA(<U+0394>2/<U+0394>2) mice,
the induction of papilloma was delayed, and the tumor number and size were
reduced. In primary keratinocytes from JWA(<U+0394>2/<U+0394>2) mice, DMBA exposure induced
more intensive DNA damage, while TPA-promoted cell proliferation was reduced. The
further mechanistic studies showed that JWA deficiency blocked TPA-induced
activation of MAPKs and its downstream transcription factor Elk1 both in vitro
and in vivo. JWA(<U+0394>2/<U+0394>2) mice are resistance to tumorigenesis induced by DMBA/TPA 
probably through inhibition of transcription factor Elk1 via MAPKs. These results
highlight the importance of JWA in skin homeostasis and in the process of skin
tumor development.

PMCID: PMC3312911
PMID: 22461904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Neurochem. 2012 May;121(4):639-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07711.x. Epub 
2012 Mar 28.

Activation of Elk-1 participates as a neuroprotective compensatory mechanism in
models of Huntington's disease.

Anglada-Huguet M(1), Giralt A, Perez-Navarro E, Alberch J, XifrÛ X.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Biologia Cel∑lular, Immunologia i NeurociËncies, Facultat de
Medicina, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

The transcription factor Elk-1 has been revealed as neuroprotective against toxic
stimuli. In this study, we explored the neuroprotective capacity of Elk-1 in
Huntington's disease. To this aim, we used two exon-1 mutant huntingtin (mhtt)
mouse models (R6/1 and R6/2), and a full-length mhtt striatal cell model
(STHdh(Q111/Q111) ). Analysis of Elk-1 and pElk-1(Ser383) in the striatum of R6
mice revealed increased levels during the disease progression. Similarly, Elk-1
and pElk-1(Ser383) levels were increased in STHdh(Q111/Q111) cells when compared 
with wild-type cells. In addition, we observed a predominant nuclear localization
of Elk-1 in STHdh(Q111/Q111) cells, and in the striatum of 30-week-old R6/1 mice.
Nuclear Elk-1 did not colocalize with mhtt aggregates, suggesting a higher
transcriptional activity. In agreement, the knock-down of Elk-1 decreased
immediate early genes expression in STHdh(Q111/Q111) cells, but not in wild-type 
cells. Interestingly, reduction of Elk-1 levels by siRNAs transfection promoted
cell death and caspase 3 cleavage in STHdh(Q111/Q111) cells, but not in wild-type
cells. In summary, we propose that increased protein levels, phosphorylation and 
nuclear localization of Elk-1 observed in exon-1 and full-length Huntington's
disease models could be a compensatory mechanism activated by striatal cells in
response to the presence of mhtt that contributes to neuroprotection.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2012 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 22372926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Chin J Physiol. 2012 Feb 29;55(1):31-6. doi: 10.4077/CJP.2012.AMM109.

Expression of protein kinase C a and the MZF-1 and Elk-1 transcription factors in
human breast cancer cells.

Yue CH(1), Chiu YW, Tung JN, Tzang BS, Shiu JJ, Huang WH, Liu JY, Hwang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tungs' Taichung Metro Harbor Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan, Republic of China.

Recently, our research into hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has shown that the
transcription factors Myeloid Zinc Finger-1 (MZF-1) and Ets-like-protein 1 are
related to protein kinase C alpha (PKCa) expression. The purpose of this study
was to determine the correlation of the expression of PKCawith the expressions of
Elk-1 and MZF-1 in various differentiated breast cancer cell lines: MDA- MB-231, 
Hs57BT, SKBR3, MDA-MB-468 and MCF-7. The malignant potential in the five lines of
breast cancer cells was examined by using a cell proliferation/migration/invasion
assay and the protein and mRNA levels of PKCa, ElK-1 and MZF-1 were examined by
Western blot and RT-PCR analysis, re- spectively. The results showed that there
were obvious signs of migration and invasion of cells in MDA- MB-231 and Hs57BT
cells, little signs of cell migration and invasion in MDA-MB-468 cells, and no
sign in SKBR3 and MCF-7 cells. Moreover, the highest expression levels of PKCa,
Elk-1 and MZF-1 were also observed in MDA-MB-231 and Hs57BT cells when compared
to the other breast cancer cell lines. These findings confirm that elevated
expression of PKCain breast cancer cells may be correlated with the potential of 
cell migration and invasion, and suggest an association between the expression of
PKCa and the expression of the transcription factors Elk-1 and MZF-1.

PMID: 22242952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Scientifica (Cairo). 2012;2012:861647. doi: 10.6064/2012/861647. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

SKIP Downregulation Increases TGF-ﬂ1-Induced Matrix Metalloproteinase-9
Production in Transformed Keratinocytes.

Kocic J(1), Villar V, Krstic A, Santibanez JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Experimental Hematology, Institute for Medical Research,
University of Belgrade, Dr. Subotica 4, P.O. Box 102, 11129 Belgrade, Serbia ;
Department of Biology, University of the Balearic Islands, Ctrretera Valldemossa,
Km 7.5, 07122 Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-ﬂ1) is a potent inductor of matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) in transformed cells. Recently, Ski-interacting
protein (SKIP) has been described as a regulator of TGF-ﬂ1 signal transduction,
but its role in the induction of cell malignance by TGF-ﬂ1 has not been fully
elucidated so far. In the present study, we analyzed the role of SKIP on
TGF-ﬂ1-induced MMP-9 production. Mouse transformed keratinocytes (PDV) were
stably transfected with SKIP antisense construct. We observed that SKIP depletion
provoked an enhancement in the expression of MMP-9 in response to TGF-ﬂ1
treatment. The downregulation of SKIP produced an enhancement in TGF-ﬂ1-activated
ERK1,2 MAP kinase as well as increased transactivation of downstream Elk1
transcription factor. The increased MMP-9 production in response to TGF-ﬂ1 was
dependent of MAPK activation as PD98059, an MEK inhibitor, reduced MMP-9
expression in SKIP antisense transfected cells. Thus, we propose SKIP as a
regulatory protein in TGF-ﬂ1-induced MMP-9 expression acting by controlling
ERK1,2 signaling in transformed cells.

PMCID: PMC3820466
PMID: 24278749  [PubMed]


151. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2012 Apr;341(1):24-32. doi: 10.1124/jpet.111.188706. Epub
2011 Dec 28.

Blocking epidermal growth factor receptor activation by 3,3'-diindolylmethane
suppresses ovarian tumor growth in vitro and in vivo.

Kandala PK(1), Wright SE, Srivastava SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cancer Biology Center, Texas Tech
University Health Sciences Center, 1406 Coulter, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA.

Genetic alterations, including the overexpression of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) (in approximately 70% of ovarian tumors), play a crucial role in 
the signal transduction pathways that regulate key cellular functions, such as
cell survival and proliferation, and are responsible for compromising traditional
chemotherapy. 3,3'-Diindolylmethane (DIM) is an indole compound present in
Brassica vegetables. In our previous studies, we demonstrated that BR-DIM, a
formulated version of DIM, suppressed the growth of ovarian cancer cells by
causing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. In the present study, we delineated the 
mechanism by which DIM suppressed the growth of SKOV-3, OVCAR-3, and TOV-21G
human ovarian cancer cells. DIM treatment caused significant down-regulation of
the constitutive EGFR protein level as well as phosphorylation of EGFR at
Tyr1068, Tyr992, Tyr845, and Tyr1173 in various ovarian cancer cells. To
determine whether DIM suppressed the activation of EGFR by activating
phosphorylation, cells were treated with epidermal growth factor. Epidermal
growth factor treatment significantly blocked the DIM-mediated inhibition of EGFR
activation and apoptosis in both SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3 cells. In addition, DIM
treatment drastically reduced the phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein
kinase kinase (MEK) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), which are
downstream to EGFR, without affecting their protein levels. DIM treatment also
inhibited the kinase activity of ERK, as observed by the down-regulation of
phospho-E twenty-six like transcription factor 1 (p-ELK1) in all three ovarian
cancer cell lines. DIM significantly suppressed the growth of ovarian tumors in
vivo. Tumor growth suppressive effects of DIM in SKOV-3 tumor xenografts were
associated with reduced phosphorylation of EGFR, MEK, and ERK. These results
indicate that DIM induces apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells by inhibiting the
EGFR-ERK pathway in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3310701
PMID: 22205686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Mar 5;350(1):31-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.11.016. Epub
2011 Nov 25.

Protein phosphorylation involved in the gene expression of the hydrogen sulphide 
producing enzyme cystathionine <U+03B3>-lyase in the pancreatic ﬂ-cell.

Taniguchi S(1), Kimura T, Umeki T, Kimura Y, Kimura H, Ishii I, Itoh N, Naito Y, 
Yamamoto H, Niki I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Oita University, 1-1 Idaigaoka, Hasama, Oita
879-5593, Japan.

Cystathionine <U+03B3>-lyase (CSE) is one of the major enzymes for the production of
hydrogen sulphide (H(2)S), a multifunctional gasotransmitter in the pancreatic
ﬂ-cell. We examined the mechanisms by which glucose induces CSE expression in
mouse pancreatic islets and the insulin-secreting cell line MIN6. CSE expression 
was increased by anti-diabetic sulphonylureas, and decreased by the ATP-sensitive
K(+)-channel opener diazoxide and the voltage-dependent Ca(2+) channel blocker
nitrendipine. Application of the synthetic inhibitors of protein kinases revealed
the involvement of Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMK) II and
extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK) in glucose- and
thapsigargin-induced CSE expression. The CaMK IId knockdown also suppressed CSE
expression. Knockdown of the transcription factors Sp1 and Elk1, both of which
can be phosphorylated by ERK, blunted CSE expression. By a reporter assay, we
found Sp1 may directly and Elk1 may indirectly regulate CSE expression. These
findings suggest Ca(2+)-dependent CSE expression may be mediated via protein
phosphorylation of Sp1 and Elk1 in pancreatic ﬂ-cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22133746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Apr;113(4):1253-64. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23458.

M-Ras induces Ral and JNK activation to regulate MEK/ERK-independent gene
expression in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Castro AF(1), Campos T, Babcock JT, Armijo ME, MartÌnez-Conde A, Pincheira R,
Quilliam LA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de BioquÌmica y BiologÌa Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias
BiolÛgicas, Universidad de ConcepciÛn, ConcepciÛn, Chile. arcastro@udec.cl

Constitutive activation of M-Ras has previously been reported to cause
morphologic and growth transformation of murine cells, suggesting that M-Ras
plays a role in tumorigenesis. Cell transformation by M-Ras correlated with weak 
activation of the Raf/MEK/ERK pathway, although contributions from other
downstream effectors were suggested. Recent studies indicate that signaling
events distinct from the Raf/MEK/ERK cascade are critical for human
tumorigenesis. However, it is unknown what signaling events M-Ras triggers in
human cells. Using constitutively active M-Ras (Q71L) containing additional
mutations within its effector-binding loop, we found that M-Ras induces
MEK/ERK-dependent and -independent Elk1 activation as well as
phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt and JNK/cJun activation in human MCF-7
breast cancer cells. Among several human cell lines examined, M-Ras-induced
MEK/ERK-independent Elk1 activation was only detected in MCF-7 cells, and
correlated with Rlf/M-Ras interaction and Ral/JNK activation. Supporting a role
for M-Ras signaling in breast cancer, EGF activated M-Ras and promoted its
interaction with endogenous Rlf. In addition, constitutive activation of M-Ras
induced estrogen-independent growth of MCF-7 cells that was dependent on
PI3K/Akt, MEK/ERK, and JNK activation. Thus, our studies demonstrate that M-Ras
signaling activity differs between human cells, highlighting the importance of
defining Ras protein signaling within each cell type, especially when designing
treatments for Ras-induced cancer. These findings also demonstrate that M-Ras
activity may be important for progression of EGFR-dependent tumors.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3303964
PMID: 22121046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mol Immunol. 2012 Jan;49(4):572-81. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.10.004. Epub 2011 
Nov 9.

Novel regulatory mechanism and functional implication of plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) expression in CpG-ODN-stimulated macrophages.

Thapa B(1), Kim YH, Kwon HJ, Kim DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei 
University, 134 Sinchon-Dong, Seodaemun-Gu, 120-749 Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Macrophages are activated by recognizing bacterial DNA and
CpG-oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG-ODNs) through Toll-like receptor-9 (TLR-9).
Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) has been shown to be an important
factor in inflammation-induced macrophage migration which is essential for
defense functions. The aim of this study was to demonstrate the molecular
mechanism associated with the regulation of PAI-1 expression and its biological
significance in CpG-ODN-stimulated mouse macrophages. Our results clearly show
that PAI-1 expression in macrophages was highly up-regulated by
CpG-ODN-stimulation in vitro and in vivo. The TLR-9-mediated stimulation of PAI-1
expression was independent of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway and involved the synergistic
activation of Sp1 and Elk-1 by the MEK1/2-ERK and JNK signaling pathways. The
elevated PAI-1 expression resulted in significantly enhanced transmigration of
RAW264.7 cells through vitronectin but not through fibronectin. We suggest that
CpG-ODN plays a role in regulating macrophage migration by stimulating the
expression of PAI-1, and the migration is modulated depending on the
microenvironmental extracellular matrix components.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22078208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 2;287(1):257-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.304006. Epub 2011
Nov 7.

Oncogenic Ras and B-Raf proteins positively regulate death receptor 5 expression 
through co-activation of ERK and JNK signaling.

Oh YT(1), Yue P, Zhou W, Balko JM, Black EP, Owonikoko TK, Khuri FR, Sun SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University School of
Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Oncogenic mutations of ras and B-raf frequently occur in many cancer types and
are critical for cell transformation and tumorigenesis. Death receptor 5 (DR5) is
a cell surface pro-apoptotic death receptor for tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand and has been targeted in cancer therapy. The current
study has demonstrated induction of DR5 expression by the oncogenic proteins Ras 
and B-Raf and revealed the underlying mechanisms. We demonstrated that both Ras
and B-Raf induce DR5 expression by enforced expression of oncogenic Ras (e.g.
H-Ras12V or K-Ras12V) or B-Raf (i.e. V600E) in cells and by analyzing gene
expression array data generated from cancer cell lines and from human cancer
tissues. This finding is further supported by our results that knockdown of
endogenous K-Ras or B-Raf (V600E) reduced the expression of DR5. Importantly, we 
have elucidated that Ras induces DR5 expression through co-activation of ERK/RSK 
and JNK signaling pathways and subsequent cooperative effects among the
transcriptional factors CHOP, Elk1, and c-Jun to enhance DR5 gene transcription. 
Moreover, we found that the majority of cancer cell lines highly sensitive to the
DR5 agonistic antibody AMG655 have either Ras or B-Raf mutations. Our findings
warrant further study on the biology of DR5 regulation by Ras and B-Raf, which
may provide new insight into the biology of Ras and B-Raf, and on the potential
impact of Ras or B-Raf mutations on the outcome of DR5-targeted cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3249076
PMID: 22065586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 6;287(2):1066-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.279612. Epub 2011
Nov 7.

Formation of ternary complex of human biliverdin reductase-protein kinase Cd-ERK2
protein is essential for ERK2-mediated activation of Elk1 protein, nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B, and inducible nitric-oxidase synthase (iNOS).

Gibbs PE(1), Miralem T, Lerner-Marmarosh N, Tudor C, Maines MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Growth factors, insulin, oxidative stress, and cytokines activate ERK1/2 by PKCd 
and MEK1/2. Human biliverdin reductase (hBVR), a Ser/Thr/Tyr kinase and
intracellular scaffold/bridge/anchor, is a nuclear transporter of
MEK1/2-stimulated ERK1/2 (Lerner-Marmarosh, N., Miralem, T., Gibbs, P. E., and
Maines, M. D. (2008) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 6870-6875). hBVR, PKCd,
and MEK1/2 overlap in their tissue expression profile and type of activators.
Presently, we report on formation of an hBVR-PKCd-ERK2 ternary complex that is
essential for ERK2 signal transduction and activation of genes linked to cell
proliferation and cancer. MEK1/2 and the protein phosphatase PP2A were also
present in the complex. When cells were stimulated with insulin-like growth
factor-1 (IGF-1), an increased interaction between hBVR and PKCd was detected by 
FRET-fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy. hBVR and ERK2 were phosphorylated 
by PKCd; however, the PKC was not a substrate for either ERK2 or hBVR. IGF-1 and 
phorbol ester increased hBVR/PKCd binding; hBVR was required for the activation
of PKCd and its interaction with ERK2. The C-terminal phenylalanine residues of
PKCd (Phe(660), Phe(663), and Phe(665)) were necessary for binding to ERK2 but
not for hBVR binding. Formation of the hBVR-PKCd-ERK2 complex required the hBVR
docking site for ERK, FXFP (DEF, C-box) and D(d)-box (ILXXLXL) motifs. The
hBVR-based peptide KKRILHCLGLA inhibited PKC activation and PKCd/ERK2
interaction. Phorbol ester- and TNF-a-dependent activation of the ERK-regulated
transcription factors Elk1 and NF-<U+03BA>B and expression of the iNOS gene were
suppressed by hBVR siRNA; those activities were rescued by hBVR. The findings
reveal the direct input of hBVR in PKCd/ERK signaling and identify hBVR-based
peptide regulators of ERK-mediated gene activation.

PMCID: PMC3256887
PMID: 22065579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Biomaterials. 2012 Jan;33(3):740-50. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.10.026.
Epub 2011 Oct 26.

Function of MAPK and downstream transcription factors in monomer-induced
apoptosis.

Krifka S(1), Hiller KA, Bolay C, Petzel C, Spagnuolo G, Reichl FX, Schmalz G,
Schweikl H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Operative Dentistry and Periodontology, University Hospital
Regensburg, University of Regensburg, D-93042 Regensburg, Germany.

The resin monomer triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA) disrupts vital cell 
functions, and the production of oxidative stress is considered a common
underlying mechanism. The precise signaling pathways, however, that initiate
monomer-induced effects, which disturb responses of the innate immune system,
inhibit dentin mineralization processes, or induce apoptosis in target cells in
vitro are still unknown. The present study provides insight into the causal
relationship between TEGDMA-induced apoptosis and the activation of MAPK and
transcription factors downstream using pharmacological inhibitors of the ERK1/2, 
p38 and JNK pathways. The endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 0.1 µg/ml) was
included as an inducer of MAPK activity in RAW264.7 mouse macrophages. Cell
viability was decreased from 95% in untreated cultures to about 43% after a 24 h 
exposure to 3 mM TEGDMA. Inhibition of the ERK1/2 pathway by the MEK1/2 inhibitor
PD98059 reduced cell viability to 84%. While apoptosis induced by TEGDMA remained
unchanged, Western blot analyses revealed that the activation of ERK1/2 in the
presence of TEGDMA was inhibited by PD98059. LPS-induced expression of activated 
transcription factors c-Jun, ATF-2, ATF-3 and phospho-Elk1 was decreased in cells
co-treated with TEGDMA. This inhibition was more intense in the presence of
PD98059, indicating that the MEK/ERK pathway is involved in the inhibition of the
LPS-induced activation of transcription factors by TEGDMA. No clear effects of
the p38 inhibitor SB203580 and the JNK inhibitor SP600125 on TEGDMA-induced
apoptosis were detected. The antioxidant N-acetylcysteine (NAC) protected cells
from TEGDMA-induced cell death, and inhibited the activation of ERK1/2, p38 and
JNK by TEGDMA. Moreover, the TEGDMA-induced downregulation of the expression of
the transcription factors c-Jun and ATF-2 was prevented as well. In conclusion,
physiologically relevant concentrations of inhibitors differentially modified the
expression of MAPK and transcription factors in cell cultures exposed to LPS and 
the monomer TEGDMA. The absence of a drastic effect of the MAPK pathway
inhibitors on TEGDMA-induced apoptosis on the one hand, and the protective effect
of NAC and PD98059 in particular on TEGDMA-induced MAPK activation and apoptosis 
on the other hand, leads to a new model for the role of MAPK in the regulation of
cell homeostasis in monomer-exposed cells and tissues.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22033125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Neurosci. 2011 Oct 5;31(40):14296-307. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2890-11.2011.

Alterations of molecular and behavioral responses to cocaine by selective
inhibition of Elk-1 phosphorylation.

Besnard A(1), Bouveyron N, Kappes V, Pascoli V, PagËs C, Heck N, Vanhoutte P,
Caboche J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, UnitÈ Mixte de Recherche en SantÈ 952, F-75005 Paris, France.

Activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling pathway
in the striatum is crucial for molecular adaptations and long-term behavioral
alterations induced by cocaine. In response to cocaine, ERK controls the
phosphorylation levels of both mitogen and stress-activated protein kinase 1
(MSK-1), a nuclear kinase involved in histone H3 (Ser10) and cAMP response
element binding protein phosphorylation, and Elk-1, a transcription factor
involved in serum response element (SRE)-driven gene regulations. We recently
characterized the phenotype of msk-1 knock-out mice in response to cocaine.
Herein, we wanted to address the role of Elk-1 phosphorylation in cocaine-induced
molecular, morphological, and behavioral responses. We used a cell-penetrating
peptide, named TAT-DEF-Elk-1 (TDE), which corresponds to the DEF docking domain
of Elk-1 toward ERK and inhibits Elk-1 phosphorylation induced by ERKs without
modifying ERK or MSK-1 in vitro. The peptide was injected in vivo before cocaine 
administration in mice. Immunocytochemical, molecular, morphological, and
behavioral studies were performed. The TDE inhibited Elk-1 and H3 (Ser10)
phosphorylation induced by cocaine, sparing ERK and MSK-1 activation.
Consequently, TDE altered cocaine-induced regulation of genes bearing SRE site(s)
in their promoters, including c-fos, zif268, <U+0394>FosB, and arc/arg3.1
(activity-regulated cytoskeleton-associated protein). In a chronic cocaine
administration paradigm, TDE reversed cocaine-induced increase in dendritic spine
density. Finally, the TDE delayed the establishment of cocaine-induced
psychomotor sensitization and conditioned-place preference. We conclude that
Elk-1 phosphorylation downstream from ERK is a key molecular event involved in
long-term neuronal and behavioral adaptations to cocaine.

PMID: 21976515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Science. 2011 Aug 26;333(6046):1161-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1206638.

MED23 mutation links intellectual disability to dysregulation of immediate early 
gene expression.

Hashimoto S(1), Boissel S, Zarhrate M, Rio M, Munnich A, Egly JM, Colleaux L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de GÈnÈtique et de Biologie MolÈculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/UniversitÈ de Strasbourg, BP 163, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, C. U.
Strasbourg, France.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2012 May;81(5):430.

MED23 is a subunit of the Mediator complex, a key regulator of protein-coding
gene expression. Here, we report a missense mutation (p. R617Q) in MED23 that
cosegregates with nonsyndromic autosomal recessive intellectual disability. This 
mutation specifically impaired the response of JUN and FOS immediate early genes 
(IEGs) to serum mitogens by altering the interaction between enhancer-bound
transcription factors (TCF4 and ELK1, respectively) and Mediator. Transcriptional
dysregulation of these genes was also observed in cells derived from patients
presenting with other neurological disorders linked to mutations in other
Mediator subunits or proteins interacting with MED. These findings highlight the 
crucial role of Mediator in brain development and functioning and suggest that
altered IEG expression might be a common molecular hallmark of cognitive deficit.

PMID: 21868677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2011 Sep;32(2):285-95. doi:
10.1016/j.etap.2011.06.001. Epub 2011 Jun 17.

Differential gene expression profiles of human leukemia cell lines exposed to
benzene and its metabolites.

Sarma SN(1), Kim YJ, Ryu JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Toxicology Laboratory, Korea Institute of Science &
Technology, P.O. Box 131, Cheongryang, Seoul 130-650, Republic of Korea.
sarma@kist.re.kr

Benzene is a well-known environmental pollutant that can induce hematotoxicity,
aplastic anemia, acute myelogenous leukemia, and lymphoma. Benzene toxicity is
likely mediated through metabolites induced by means of multiple pathways.
Although benzene metabolites are known to induce oxidative stress and disrupt the
cell cycle, the mechanism underlying leukemogenesis is not fully understood. The 
aim of this study was to analyze the genome-wide expression profiles of human
promyelocytic leukemia HL-60 cells that had been exposed to benzene and its
metabolites. This was carried out using whole human genome oligonucleotide
microarrays to ascertain potential biomarkers. Genes that were differentially
expressed (>1.5-fold and p-values <0.05) after exposure to benzene (BZ),
hydroquinone (HQ), and 1,4-benzoquinone (BQ) were then classified with GO, KEGG
and GSEA pathway annotation. All genes that were identified were then
functionally categorized as being involved in the cell cycle, the p53 signaling
pathway, apoptosis, the MAPK signaling pathway, or the T cell receptor signaling 
pathway. Functionally important genes were further validated by means of
real-time RT-PCR. The results showed that EGR1, PMAIP1, AR, CCL2, CD69, HSPA8,
SLC7A11, HERPUD1, ELK1, and MKI57 genes altered their expression profiles.
Similar expression profiles were also found in human erythromyeloblastoid
leukemia K562 cells and in human leukemic monocyte lymphoma U937 cells. In
conclusion, gene expression profiles along with GO, KEGG and GSEA pathway
annotation analysis have provided an insight into the leukemogenesis as well as
highlighted potential gene-based biomarkers of human leukemia cell lines when
they are exposed to benzene and its metabolites.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21843810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Nat Med. 2012 Jan;66(1):177-84. doi: 10.1007/s11418-011-0573-3. Epub 2011 Aug
11.

Herbal formula HMC05 prevents human aortic smooth muscle cell migration and
proliferation by inhibiting the ERK1/2 MAPK signaling cascade.

Kang YH(1), Yang IJ, Shin HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Oriental Medicine, Dongguk University,
Gyeongju 780-714, Republic of Korea.

HMC05 is a formulation derived from eight medicinal herbs, and prevents neointima
formation by inhibition of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway
with induction of heat shock protein 27 expression. In this study, we
investigated the influence of HMC05 regulation on the MAPK/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 signaling cascade in the inhibition of the
migration and proliferation of human aortic smooth muscle cells (HASMCs). The
inhibitory effects of HMC05 (25, 50, and 100 µg/ml) on tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-a; 0 or 100 ng/ml)-induced HASMC migration and proliferation
were investigated by wound migration and proliferation assays, Western blotting
and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. HMC05 completely inhibited
TNF-a-induced HASMC migration and proliferation. HMC05 prevented TNF-a receptor
1-mediated phosphorylation of signal transduction molecules involved in MAPK
signaling cascades such as MEK1/2, ERK1/2, Elk-1 transcription factor and p90 kDa
ribosomal S6 kinase. The expression of matrix metalloproteinase, a modulator of
vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation and migration, was inhibited by HMCO5
treatment, as was TNF-a-induced mRNA expression of intracellular adhesion
molecule 1 and vascular cell adhesion molecule 1. HMC05 disruption of the
MEK/ERK/Elk-1 and p90RSK pathways prevents HASMC migration and proliferation.

PMID: 21833774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mol Hum Reprod. 2011 Dec;17(12):747-57. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gar053. Epub 2011 Aug
10.

Is galectin-1 a trigger for trophoblast cell fusion?: the MAP-kinase pathway and 
syncytium formation in trophoblast tumour cells BeWo.

Fischer I(1), Weber M, Kuhn C, Fitzgerald JS, Schulze S, Friese K, Walzel H,
Markert UR, Jeschke U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ludwig Maximilians University of
Munich, Maistrasse 11, 80337 Munich, Germany.

Galectin-1 (gal-1), a member of the mammalian ﬂ-galactoside-binding proteins,
exerts biological effects by recognition of glycan ligands, including those
involved in cell adhesion and growth regulation. In a previous study, we
demonstrated that gal-1 induces cell differentiation processes on the membrane of
choriocarcinoma cells BeWo, including the receptor tyrosine kinases, REarranged
during transfection, janus kinase 2 and vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 3. Within this study, we examined which mitogen-activated protein
kinases (MAPK) and serine/threonine kinases were phoshorylated by gal-1. Out of a
number of 21 different MAPKs and other serine/threonine kinases, the stimulation 
of BeWo cells with gal-1 showed a significant alteration of signal intensity in
extracellular-regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2), Akt-3, Akt-pan and glycogen
synthase kinase-a/ﬂ (GSK-3a/ﬂ). We demonstrated that gal-1 significantly
inhibited ERK1/2, Akt-3/pan and GSK-3a/ﬂ phosphorylation in BeWo cells and in
addition induced Elk1 transcription factor activation. In contrast to gal-1
effects, MAPK inhibitor U0126 reduced syncytium formation of BeWo cells. The
results of our data showed that phosphorylation of MAP kinases are involved in
gal-1-induced signal transduction processes in BeWo cells. Additional results
obtained with MAPK inhibitor U0126 close the gap between syncytium formation
induced by gal-1 and MAPK activation in trophoblast cells. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that gal-1 induces the activation of Elk1, a transcription factor
that is activated by MAPK pathways.

PMID: 21831883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 16;108(33):13806-11. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1104383108. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

Long-lasting behavioral responses to stress involve a direct interaction of
glucocorticoid receptors with ERK1/2-MSK1-Elk-1 signaling.

GutiËrrez-Mecinas M(1), Trollope AF, Collins A, Morfett H, Hesketh SA, KersantÈ
F, Reul JM.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Laboratories for Integrative Neuroscience and Endocrinology,
University of Bristol, Bristol BS1 3NY, United Kingdom.

Stressful events are known to have a long-term impact on future behavioral stress
responses. Previous studies suggested that both glucocorticoid hormones and
glutamate acting via glucocorticoid receptors (GRs) and N-methyl D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptors, respectively, are of critical importance for the consolidation 
of these long-lasting behavioral responses at the dentate gyrus, the gateway of
the hippocampal formation. We found that an acute psychologically stressful event
resulted in ERK1/2 phosphorylation (pERK1/2), which within 15 min led to the
activation of the nuclear kinases MSK1 and Elk-1 in granule neurons of the
dentate gyrus. Next, MSK1 and Elk-1 activation evoked serine-10 phosphorylation
and lysine-14 acetylation in histone H3, resulting in the induction of the
neuroplasticity-associated immediate-early genes c-Fos and Egr-1 in these
neurons. The pERK1/2-mediated activation of MSK1 and Elk-1 required a rapid
protein-protein interaction between pERK1/2 and activated GRs. This is a unique
nongenomic mechanism of glucocorticoid hormone action in dentate gyrus granule
neurons on long-lasting behavioral responses to stress involving direct
cross-talk of GRs with ERK1/2-MSK1-Elk-1 signaling to the nucleus.

PMCID: PMC3158237
PMID: 21808001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Sep 15;17(18):5867-77. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0737. 
Epub 2011 Aug 1.

Resection of non-small cell lung cancers reverses tumor-induced gene expression
changes in the peripheral immune system.

Kossenkov AV(1), Vachani A, Chang C, Nichols C, Billouin S, Horng W, Rom WN,
Albelda SM, Showe MK, Showe LC.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

PURPOSE: To characterize the interactions of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
tumors with the immune system at the level of mRNA and microRNA (miRNA)
expression and to define expression signatures that characterize the presence of 
a malignant tumor versus a nonmalignant nodule.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We have examined the changes of both mRNA and miRNA
expression levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) between paired
samples collected from NSCLC patients before and after tumor removal using
Illumina gene expression arrays.
RESULTS: We found that malignant tumor removal significantly changes expression
of more than 3,000 protein-coding genes, especially genes in pathways associated 
with suppression of the innate immune response, including natural killer cell
signaling and apoptosis-associated ceramide signaling. Binding sites for the ETS 
domain transcription factors ELK1, ELK4, and SPI1 were enriched in promoter
regions of genes upregulated in the presence of a tumor. Additional important
regulators included five miRNAs expressed at significantly higher levels before
tumor removal. Repressed protein-coding targets of those miRNAs included many
transcription factors, several involved in immunologically important pathways.
Although there was a significant overlap in the effects of malignant tumors and
benign lung nodules on PBMC gene expression, we identified one gene panel which
indicates a tumor or nodule presence and a second panel that can distinguish
malignant from nonmalignant nodules.
CONCLUSIONS: A tumor presence in the lung influences mRNA and miRNA expression in
PBMC and this influence is reversed by tumor removal. These results suggest that 
PBMC gene expression signatures could be used for lung cancer diagnosis.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3618688
PMID: 21807633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2011 Oct;22(7):576-82. doi:
10.1097/MBC.0b013e3283497647.

Regulation of thrombin-induced plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 in 4T1 murine
breast cancer cells.

McEachron TA(1), Church FC, Mackman N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7035, USA.

Protease-activated receptor-1 (PAR-1) and PAR-2 are overexpressed in cancer cells
and activation of these receptors contributes to malignancy. We have recently
shown that thrombin activates PAR-1, which induces transactivation of PAR-2,
resulting in increased plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) expression in
4T1 murine mammary adenocarcinoma cells. Our goal was to analyze the signal
transduction pathways that regulate thrombin-induced PAI-1 expression. We found
that thrombin stimulation activates the ERK1/2-ELK1-EGR1 pathway in 4T1 cells.
Furthermore, inhibition of p42/p44 MAPK signaling reduced PAI-1 expression. These
results begin to delineate the mechanism by which thrombin activates a
PAR-1/PAR-2 complex to induce PAI-1 expression in the 4T1 murine breast cancer
cell line.

PMID: 21799402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Ann Neurol. 2011 Oct;70(4):591-9. doi: 10.1002/ana.22514. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

DJ-1 modulates the expression of Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase-1 through the
Erk1/2-Elk1 pathway in neuroprotection.

Wang Z(1), Liu J, Chen S, Wang Y, Cao L, Zhang Y, Kang W, Li H, Gui Y, Chen S,
Ding J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Institute of Health Science,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Science and
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: Loss of function mutations of Park7/DJ-1 gene increase the
susceptibility of dopaminergic cells to reactive oxygen species and cause early
onset familial Parkinson disease (PD). However, the mechanisms underlying
dopaminergic neuron loss related to DJ-1 mutation remain undefined. Therefore, it
is important to find the new mechanisms underlying the antioxidative functions of
DJ-1.
METHODS: DJ-1 knockdown cells and DJ-1 knockout mice were used to elucidate the
mechanisms underlying the antioxidative stress of DJ-1. Preliminary study of the 
saliva from PD patients and controls was used to confirm our findings obtained
from the above studies.
RESULTS: Our experiments showed that DJ-1 interacted with Erk1/2 and was required
for the nuclear translocation of Erk1/2 upon oxidative stimulation. The
translocation of Erk1/2 activated Elk1 and sequentially promoted superoxide
dismutase1 (SOD1) expression. The nuclear translocation of Erk1/2, the activation
of Elk1, and the ensuing upregulation of SOD1 were all suppressed in DJ-1
knockdown cells and DJ-1 null mice treated with oxidative insult. Furthermore,
reintroduction of SOD1 into DJ-1 knockdown cells protected them against oxidative
stress. Finally, in the preliminary study, we found close correlation between the
protein levels of DJ-1 and SOD1 in the saliva samples from different stages of PD
patients.
INTERPRETATION: Our studies suggest that DJ-1 regulates SOD1 expression through
Erk1/2-Elk1 pathway in its protective response to oxidative insult.

Copyright © 2011 American Neurological Association.

PMID: 21796667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. BMB Rep. 2011 Jul;44(7):452-7.DOI 10.5483/BMBRep.2011.44.7.452.

Estrogen receptor beta stimulates Egr-1 transcription via MEK1/Erk/Elk-1 cascade 
in C6 glioma cells.

Kim JH(1), Jeong IY, Lim Y, Lee YH, Shin SY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Life Sciences, College of Science and Technology,
Hanyang University, Ansan, Korea.

The Egr-1 is an immediate early response gene encoding a transcription factor
that functions in the regulation of cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis. 
Estrogen has diverse physiological effects, including cellular proliferation and 
neuroprotection against brain injury. There are two types of estrogen receptors
(ERs), ERa and ERﬂ. ERa-induced Egr-1 expression has been extensively studied;
however, the role of ERﬂ is yet not known. In the present study, we investigated 
whether or not ERﬂ induces Egr-1 expression in C6 rat glioma cells, which express
ERﬂ but not ERa. Our results show that ERﬂ promoted up-regulation of Egr-1
expression via a non-genomic mechanism involving the Raf/MEK1/Erk/Elk-1 signaling
cascade.

PMID: 21777515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Apr;227(4):1628-38. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22880.

Transactivation of EGFR/PI3K/Akt involved in ATP-induced inflammatory protein
expression and cell motility.

Lin CC(1), Lin WN, Cheng SE, Tung WH, Wang HH, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthetics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung
University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

Phenotype transition of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) is important in
vascular diseases, such as atherosclerosis and restenosis. Once released, ATP may
promote activation of VSMCs by stimulating cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), cytosolic
phospholipase A(2) (cPLA(2)) expression and prostaglandin (PG)E(2) synthesis via 
activation of MAPKs and NF-<U+03BA>B. However, whether alternative signaling pathways
participated in regulating COX-2 and cPLA(2) expression associated with cell
migration were investigated in rat VSMCs. Western blot analysis, RT-PCR, promoter
assay and PGE(2) ELISA were used to determine expression of COX-2, cPLA(2) and
PGE(2). Specific inhibitors and siRNAs against various protein kinases or
transcription factors were used to investigate the related signaling components
in inflammatory protein induction by ATP<U+03B3>S. We found that ATP<U+03B3>S-induced COX-2 and
cPLA(2) expression and PGE(2) release was attenuated by the pharmacological
inhibitors or transfection with siRNA against PKCd, c-Src, EGFR, PI3-K, Akt,
p44/p42 MAPK or Elk-1. Moreover, ATP<U+03B3>S-stimulated phosphorylation of PKCd, c-Src,
EGFR, Akt, p42/p44 MAPK and Elk-1, suggesting the participation of
PKCd/c-Src/EGFR/PI3-K/Akt/p42/p44 MAPK cascade in mediating Elk-1 activities in
VSMCs. In addition, migration assay revealed that ATP<U+03B3>S promoted cell mobility
through up-regulation of COX-2 and cPLA(2) expression and PGE(2) release, which
was attenuated by pretreatment with PGE(2) receptor antagonists. Taken together, 
these data showed that ATP<U+03B3>S up-regulated the expression of COX-2 and cPLA(2)
through transactivation of PKCd/c-Src/EGFR/PI3K/Akt/Elk-1 pathway. Newly
synthesized PGE(2) acted on its receptors to promote cell motility of
ATP<U+03B3>S-stimulated VSMCs.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21678415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2011 Sep;301(3):F650-9. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00215.2011. Epub 2011 Jun 15.

ERK pathway mediates P2X7 expression and cell death in renal interstitial
fibroblasts exposed to necrotic renal epithelial cells.

Ponnusamy M(1), Liu N, Gong R, Yan H, Zhuang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital, Warren Alpert Medical School of
Brown University, Providence, USA.

We recently reported that necrotic renal proximal epithelial cells (RPTC)
stimulate the expression of P2X7 receptor in renal fibroblasts and that P2X7
receptor mediates deleterious epithelial-fibroblast cross talk. The present study
was carried out to investigate the signaling mechanism of necrotic RPTC-induced
P2X7 expression in cultured renal interstitial fibroblasts (NRK-49F). Exposure of
NRK-49F to necrotic RPTC supernatant (RPTC-Sup) induced a time- and
dose-dependent phosphorylation of several signaling pathways including
extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK1/2), p38, c-Jun N-terminal kinases
(JNKs), and AKT in NRK-49F. Pharmacological inhibition of ERK1/2, but not p38,
JNK, and AKT pathways, blocked RPTC-Sup-induced P2X7 expression and renal
interstitial fibroblast death. Knockdown of ERK1/2 or MEK1, a direct upstream
activator of ERK1/2, also reduced RPTC-Sup-induced P2X7 expression and cell death
of renal fibroblasts. Conversely, overexpression of MEK1 enhanced these
responses. Upon necrotic RPTC exposure, phosphorylation of Elk1, a
transcriptional factor targeted by ERK1/2, was increased in NRK-49F, and
knockdown of Elk1 by siRNA remarkably reduced RPTC-Sup-induced P2X7 expression as
well as renal fibroblast death. Furthermore, silencing of MEK1 inhibited Elk1
phosphorylation in response to necrotic RPTC, whereas overexpression of MEK1
increased Elk1 phosphorylation. Taken together, these data reveal that necrotic
RPTC induces P2X7 expression in renal fibroblasts through activation of the
MEK1-ERK1/2-Elk1 signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3174556
PMID: 21677150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 29;286(30):26860-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.216721. Epub
2011 Jun 3.

The ETS family transcription factor ELK-1 regulates induction of the cell
cycle-regulatory gene p21(Waf1/Cip1) and the BAX gene in sodium arsenite-exposed 
human keratinocyte HaCaT cells.

Shin SY(1), Kim CG, Lim Y, Lee YH.

Author information: 
(1)SMART Institute of Advanced Biomedical Science, Konkuk University, Seoul
143-701, Korea. shinsy@konkuk.ac.kr

Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (CDKN1A), often referred to as p21(Waf1/Cip1)
(p21), is induced by a variety of environmental stresses. Transcription factor
ELK-1 is a member of the ETS oncogene superfamily. Here, we show that ELK-1
directly trans-activates the p21 gene, independently of p53 and EGR-1, in sodium 
arsenite (NaASO(2))-exposed HaCaT cells. Promoter deletion analysis and
site-directed mutagenesis identified the presence of an ELK-1-binding core motif 
between -190 and -170 bp of the p21 promoter that confers inducibility by
NaASO(2). Chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift
analyses confirmed the specific binding of ELK-1 to its putative binding sequence
within the p21 promoter. In addition, NaASO(2)-induced p21 promoter activity was 
enhanced by exogenous expression of ELK-1 and reduced by expression of siRNA
targeted to ELK-1 mRNA. The importance of ELK-1 in response to NaASO(2) was
further confirmed by the observation that stable expression of ELK-1 siRNA in
HaCaT cells resulted in the attenuation of NaASO(2)-induced p21 expression.
Although ELK-1 was activated by ERK, JNK, and p38 MAPK in response to NaASO(2),
ELK-1-mediated activation of the p21 promoter was largely dependent on ERK. In
addition, EGR-1 induced by ELK-1 seemed to be involved in NaASO(2)-induced
expression of BAX. This supports the view that the ERK/ELK-1 cascade is involved 
in p53-independent induction of p21 and BAX gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3143646
PMID: 21642427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Biochem J. 2011 Sep 1;438(2):337-47. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101484.

Ca2+-induced PARP-1 activation and ANF expression are coupled events in
cardiomyocytes.

Geistrikh I(1), Visochek L, Klein R, Miller L, Mittelman L, Shainberg A,
Cohen-Armon M.

Author information: 
(1)Neufeld Cardiac Research Institute, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv
University, Israel.

The nuclear protein PARP-1 [poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1] is activated in
cardiomyocytes exposed to hypoxia causing DNA breaks. Unlike this stress-induced 
PARP-1 activation, our results provide evidence for Ca(2+)-induced PARP-1
activation in contracting newborn cardiomyocytes treated with growth factors and 
hormones that increased their contraction rate, induced intracellular Ca(2+)
mobilization and its rhythmical and transient translocation into the nucleus.
Furthermore, activated PARP-1 up-regulated the activity of phosphorylated ERK
(extracellular-signal-regulated kinase) in the nucleus, promoting expression of
the Elk1 target gene c-fos. Up-regulation of the transcription factor
c-Fos/GATA-4 promoted ANF (atrial natriuretic factor) expression. Given that
expression of ANF is known to be implicated in morphological changes, growth and 
development of cardiomyocytes, these results outline a PARP-1-dependent signal
transduction mechanism that links contraction rate and Ca(2+) mobilization with
the expression of genes underlying morphological changes in cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 21635224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2011 Jun 1;3:1241-8.

Involvement of LOC66273 isoform 2, a novel Mth938 containing protein, in MAPK
pathway.

Wang H(1), Ma X, Zhang H, Zang J, Hu S, Li D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, China Agricultural University,
Beijing, China.

Using dual-luciferase reporter assay system, our previous study showed that LI2, 
significantly increased AP-1 transcriptional activity. Sub-cellular localization 
showed that GFP-LI2 fusion protein is diffusely distributed in the cytoplasm,
with some highly concentrated spots around the nucleus, suggesting that LI2
protein has a physiological role in cytoplasm. Overexpression of LI2
significantly increased AP-1 transcriptional activity. Moreover, LI2
significantly promoted transcriptional activity of Elk1 and c-jun, which might,
at least partly, be associated with activated ERK1/2 and JNK/SAPK signaling
pathway. These data suggest that LI2 is a novel MAPK regulating protein.

PMID: 21622130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Genetics. 2011 Aug;188(4):847-58. doi: 10.1534/genetics.111.128389. Epub 2011 May
19.

Spatial regulation of lag-2 transcription during vulval precursor cell fate
patterning in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Zhang X(1), Greenwald I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University,
College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.
isg4@columbia.edu

lag-2 encodes a ligand for LIN-12/Notch and is a component of the lateral signal 
that activates LIN-12/Notch during Caenorhabditis elegans vulval precursor cell
(VPC) fate patterning. lag-2 is specifically transcribed in one VPC, named P6.p, 
in response to activation of EGFR/Ras/MAPK by the inductive signal that initiates
vulval development. Here, we show that a critical molecular event linking
inductive and lateral signaling is the relief of VPC-wide lag-2 repression in
P6.p. We find that the lag-2 promoter contains an element, VPCrep, which mediates
repression in all VPCs when the inductive signal is absent, and another promoter 
element, VPCact, which is required for activation when repression is relieved by 
the inductive signal. We show that repression through VPCrep is mediated by the
Elk1 ortholog LIN-1, and that the level and subcellular accumulation of a
functional LIN-1::GFP protein is similar in all six VPCs before and after vulval 
induction, suggesting that relief of LIN-1-mediated repression in P6.p is likely 
due to the known MAPK-dependent phosphorylation of LIN-1. We also provide
evidence that the factor(s) acting through VPCact is present in all VPCs but is
not modulated by the inductive signal, and that transcription of lag-2 requires
the Hth/Meis ortholog UNC-62 and the Mediator complex component SUR-2. Relief of 
repression of lag-2 in P6.p offers a plausible mechanistic basis for spatial
restriction of lag-2 in generating the precise spatial pattern of VPC fates.

PMCID: PMC3176094
PMID: 21596897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Blood. 2011 Sep 1;118(9):2622-31. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-299784. Epub 2011
May 6.

Antiangiogenic antitumor activities of IGFBP-3 are mediated by IGF-independent
suppression of Erk1/2 activation and Egr-1-mediated transcriptional events.

Kim JH(1), Choi DS, Lee OH, Oh SH, Lippman SM, Lee HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
M D Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Most antiangiogenic therapies currently being evaluated in clinical trials target
the vascular endothelial growth factor pathway; however, the tumor vasculature
can acquire resistance to vascular endothelial growth factor-targeted therapy by 
shifting to other angiogenesis mechanisms. Insulin-like growth factor binding
protein-3 (IGFBP-3) has been reported to suppress tumor growth and angiogenesis
by both IGF-dependent and IGF-independent mechanisms; however, understanding of
its IGF-independent mechanisms is limited. We observed that IGFBP-3 blocked tumor
angiogenesis and growth in non-small cell lung cancer and head and neck squamous 
cell carcinoma. Conditioned media from an IGFBP-3-treated non-small cell lung
cancer cell line displayed a significantly decreased capacity to induce HUVEC
proliferation and aortic sprouting. In cancer cells, IGFBP-3 directly interacted 
with Erk1/2, leading to inactivation of Erk1/2 and Elk-1, and suppressed
transcription of early growth response protein 1 and its target genes, basic
fibroblast growth factor and platelet-derived growth factor. These data suggest
that IGF-independent Erk1/2 inactivation and decreased IGFBP-3-induced Egr-1
expression block the autocrine and paracrine loops of angiogenic factors in
vascular endothelial and cancer cells. Together, these findings provide a
molecular framework of IGFBP-3's IGF-independent antiangiogenic antitumor
activities. Future studies are needed for development of IGFBP-3 as a new line of
antiangiogengic cancer drug.

PMCID: PMC3167363
PMID: 21551235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Gastroenterology. 2011 Jul;141(1):164-75. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.03.058. Epub
2011 Apr 5.

Serum response factor-dependent MicroRNAs regulate gastrointestinal smooth muscle
cell phenotypes.

Park C(1), Hennig GW, Sanders KM, Cho JH, Hatton WJ, Redelman D, Park JK, Ward
SM, Miano JM, Yan W, Ro S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, University of Nevada School of
Medicine, Reno, Nevada, USA.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2011 Jul;141(1):24-7.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Smooth muscle cells (SMCs) change phenotypes under various
pathophysiological conditions. These changes are largely controlled by the serum 
response factor (SRF), a transcription factor that binds to CC (A/T)6 GG (CArG)
boxes in SM contractile genes. MicroRNAs (miRNA) regulate transitions among SMC
phenotypes. The SMC miRNA transcriptome (SMC miRNAome) and its regulation by SRF 
have not been determined.
METHODS: We performed massively parallel sequencing to identify gastrointestinal 
(GI) SMC miRNA transcriptomes in mice and humans. SMC miRNA transcriptomes were
mapped to identify all CArG boxes, which were confirmed by SRF knockdown and
microarrays. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction was used to identify
SMC-phenotypic miRNAs in differentiated and proliferating SMCs. Bioinformatics
and target validation analysis showed regulation of SMC phenotype by
SRF-dependent, SMC-phenotype miRNAs.
RESULTS: We cloned and identified GI miRNA transcriptomes using genome-wide
analyses of mouse and human cells. The SM miRNAome consisted of hundreds of
unique miRNAs that were highly conserved among both species. We mapped miRNAs
CArG boxes and found that many had an SRF-dependent signature in the SM miRNAome.
The SM miRNAs CArG boxes had several distinct features. We also identified
approximately 100 SMC-phenotypic miRNAs that were induced in differentiated or
proliferative SMC phenotypes. We showed that SRF-dependent, SMC-phenotypic miRNAs
bind and regulate Srf and its cofactors, myocadin (Myocd) and member of ETS
oncogene family Elk1.
CONCLUSIONS: The GI SMC phenotypes are controlled by SRF-dependent,
SMC-phenotypic miRNAs that regulate expression of SRF, MYOCD, and ELK1.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3129374
PMID: 21473868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 3;286(22):19215-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.175448. Epub 2011
Apr 6.

Calcium input potentiates the transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1-dependent
signaling to promote the export of inorganic pyrophosphate by articular
chondrocyte.

Cailotto F(1), Reboul P, Sebillaud S, Netter P, Jouzeau JY, Bianchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiopathologie, Pharmacologie et IngÈnierie Articulaires,
FacultÈ de MÈdecine, UMR 7561 CNRS-Nancy-UniversitÈ, Vandúuvre-LËs-Nancy, France.
frederic.cailotto@hotmail.fr

Transforming growth factor (TGF)-ﬂ1 stimulates extracellular PP(i) (ePP(i))
generation and promotes chondrocalcinosis, which also occurs secondary to
hyperparathyroidism-induced hypercalcemia. We previously demonstrated that ANK
was up-regulated by TGF-ﬂ1 activation of ERK1/2 and Ca(2+)-dependent protein
kinase C (PKCa). Thus, we investigated mechanisms by which calcium could affect
ePP(i) metabolism, especially its main regulating proteins ANK and PC-1 (plasma
cell membrane glycoprotein-1). We stimulated articular chondrocytes with TGF-ﬂ1
under extracellular (eCa(2+)) or cytosolic Ca(2+) (cCa(2+)) modulations. We
studied ANK, PC-1 expression (quantitative RT-PCR, Western blotting), ePP(i)
levels (radiometric assay), and cCa(2+) input (fluorescent probe).
Voltage-operated Ca(2+)-channels (VOC) and signaling pathways involved were
investigated with selective inhibitors. Finally, Ank promoter activity was
evaluated (gene reporter). TGF-ﬂ1 elevated cCa(2+) and ePP(i) levels (by
up-regulating Ank and PC-1 mRNA/proteins) in an eCa(2+) dose-dependent manner.
TGF-ﬂ1 effects were suppressed by cCa(2+) chelation or L- and T-VOC blockade
while being mostly reproduced by ionomycin. In the same experimental conditions, 
the activation of Ras, the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and PKCa, and the
stimulation of Ank promoter activity were affected similarly. Activation of SP1
(specific protein 1) and ELK-1 (Ets-like protein-1) transcription factors
supported the regulatory role of Ca(2+). SP1 or ELK-1 overexpression or blockade 
experiments demonstrated a major contribution of ELK-1, which acted
synergistically with SP1 to activate Ank promoter in response to TGF-ﬂ1. TGF-ﬂ1
promotes input of eCa(2+) through opening of L- and T-VOCs, to potentiate ERK1/2 
and PKCa signaling cascades, resulting in an enhanced activation of Ank promoter 
and ePP(i) production in chondrocyte.

PMCID: PMC3103300
PMID: 21471198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 20;286(20):18268-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.201665. Epub
2011 Mar 17.

Collagen fragments inhibit hyaluronan synthesis in skin fibroblasts in response
to ultraviolet B (UVB): new insights into mechanisms of matrix remodeling.

Rˆck K(1), Grandoch M, Majora M, Krutmann J, Fischer JW.

Author information: 
(1)Institut f¸r Pharmakologie und Klinische Pharmakologie, Universit‰tsklinikum
D¸sseldorf, 40225 D¸sseldorf, Germany.

UVB irradiation causes characteristic features of skin aging including remodeling
of the dermal extracellular matrix. A key feature during this process is the
up-regulation of matrix metalloproteinases and cleavage of collagen. Hyaluronic
acid (HA), a major component of the dermal matrix, decreases after chronic UVB
exposure. However, the factors that govern the decline of HA synthesis during the
course of actinic aging are largely unknown. The aim of the present study was to 
explore whether collagen degradation causes inhibition of HA synthesis in human
skin fibroblasts. After treatment of fibroblasts with collagen fragments (CF) in 
vitro, resolution of the actin cytoskeleton and inhibition of HA secretion
occurred because of specific down-regulation of hyaluronan synthase 2 (HAS2)
expression. The a(v)ﬂ(3)-agonist, RGDS, latrunculin A, and an inhibitor of
Rho-activated kinase inhibited HAS2 expression. Conversely, blocking antibodies
to a(v)ﬂ(3) abolished the down-regulation of HAS2 and the cytoskeletal effects.
Furthermore, inhibition of cofilin phosphorylation in response to CF was
prevented by a(v)ﬂ(3)-blocking antibodies. The key role of ERK signaling was
shown by reduced nuclear accumulation of phosphoERK and of ELK-1 phosphorylation 
in response to CF. In addition, the ERK inhibitor PD98059 reduced HAS2
expression. Also, UVB irradiation of fibroblasts caused down-regulation of HAS2, 
which was sensitive to matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors and to
a(v)ﬂ(3)-blocking antibodies. In conclusion, these data suggest that CF activate 
a(v)ﬂ(3)-integrins and in turn inhibit Rho kinase (ROCK) signaling and nuclear
translocation of phosphoERK, resulting in reduced HAS2 expression. Therefore, a
novel mechanism is presented how proteolytic collagen cleavage may inhibit HA
synthesis in dermal fibroblasts during extrinsic skin aging.

© 2011 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3093899
PMID: 21454612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Urol. 2011 May;185(5):1894-8. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2010.12.095. Epub 2011 Mar
21.

Molecular effects of genistein on male urethral development.

Ross AE(1), Marchionni L, Phillips TM, Miller RM, Hurley PJ, Simons BW, Salmasi
AH, Schaeffer AJ, Gearhart JP, Schaeffer EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21287, USA.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2011 May;185(5):1898-9.

PURPOSE: The increasing incidence of hypospadias is partly attributed to
increased gestational exposure to endocrine disruptors. We investigated the
effects of genistein, the primary phytoestrogen in soy, on the molecular program 
of male urethral development.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Female mice were fed diets supplemented with genistein
(500 mg/kg diet) or control diets before breeding and throughout gestation.
Urethras from embryonic day 17.5 male fetuses were harvested, and RNA was
prepared, amplified, labeled and hybridized on whole genome microarrays. Data
were analyzed using packages from the R/Bioconductor project. Immunohistochemical
analysis and immunoblotting were used to confirm the activity of MAPK and the
presence of Ntrk1 and Ntrk2 during urethral development.
RESULTS: Gestational exposure to genistein altered the urethral expression of 277
genes (p <0.008). Among the most affected were hormonally regulated genes,
including IGFBP-1, Kap and Rhox5. Differentially expressed genes were grouped
into functional pathways of cell proliferation, adhesion, apoptosis and tube
morphogenesis (p <0.0001), and were enriched for members of the MAPK (p <0.00001)
and TGF-ﬂ (p <0.01) signaling cascades. Differentially expressed genes
preferentially contained ELK1, Myc/Max, FOXO, HOX and ER control elements. The
MAPK pathway was active, and its upstream genistein affected tyrosine kinase
receptors Ntrk1 and Ntrk2 were present in the developing male urethra.
CONCLUSIONS: Gestational exposure to genistein contributes to hypospadias by
altering pathways of tissue morphogenesis, cell proliferation and cell survival. 
In particular, genes in the MAPK and TGF-ﬂ signaling pathways and those
controlled by FOXO, HOX and ER transcription factors are disrupted.

Copyright © 2011 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21421236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. BMC Cell Biol. 2011 Mar 16;12:11. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-12-11.

Requirement of Osteopontin in the migration and protection against Taxol-induced 
apoptosis via the ATX-LPA axis in SGC7901 cells.

Zhang R(1), Wang J, Ma S, Huang Z, Zhang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029,
China.

BACKGROUND: Autotaxin (ATX) possesses lysophospholipase D (lyso PLD) activity,
which converts lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) into lysophosphatidic acid (LPA).
The ATX-LPA signaling axis has been implicated in angiogenesis, chronic
inflammation and tumor progression. Osteopontin (OPN) is an important chemokine
involved in the survival, proliferation, migration, invasion and metastasis of
gastric cancer cells. The focus of the present study was to investigate the
relationship between the ATX-LPA axis and OPN.
RESULTS: In comparison with non-treated cells, we found that the ATX-LPA axis
up-regulated OPN expression by 1.92-fold in protein levels and 1.3-fold in mRNA
levels. The ATX-LPA axis activates LPA2, Akt, ERK and ELK-1 and also protects
SGC7901 cells from apoptosis induced by Taxol treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the first evidence that expression of OPN
induced by ATX-LPA axis is mediated by the activation of Akt and MAPK/ERK
pathways through the LPA2 receptor. In addition, OPN is required for the
protective effects of ATX-LPA against Taxol-induced apoptosis and ATX-LPA-induced
migration of SGC7901 cells.

PMCID: PMC3068946
PMID: 21406114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Neurochem. 2011 May;117(4):724-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07243.x. Epub 
2011 Apr 6.

SPG4 gene promoter regulation via Elk1 transcription factor.

Canbaz D(1), Kirimtay K, Karaca E, Karabay A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul Technical University,
Istanbul, Turkey.

The most common cause of autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia, that
is characterized with axonal degeneration in corticospinal tracts and posterior
columns, is known to be caused by mutations in the SPG4 gene which encodes
spastin, a microtubule severing ATPase belonging to AAA family. Spastin promotes 
the formation of microtubule networks that are essential for axon growth and
branching which are important for neuronal plasticity. Mutations observed in SPG4
gene of hereditary spastic paraplegia patients have been shown to cause reduced
spastin levels. In addition to mutations, transcriptional regulation of spastin
gene expression may also affect spastin level. ETS (E Twenty Six-specific)-domain
transcription factor, Elk1, has been shown to be important for synaptic
plasticity and interact with microtubules. In this study, we aimed to identify
the critical promoter regions of SPG4 gene and effects of Elk on SPG4 gene
expression. We identified 700 bp TATA-less promoter including a critical CpG
island as an optimal promoter, and deletion of the CpG island gradually decreased
the SPG4 promoter activity. In addition, we identified the binding sites of Elk1 
on the SPG4 promoter by EMSA. Over-expression of Elk1 showed that it repressed
the SPG4 promoter and also decreased spastin protein level in SHSY-5Y cells.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 21395583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. OMICS. 2011 Mar;15(3):155-67. doi: 10.1089/omi.2010.0076.

Neoplastic alterations induced in mammalian skin following mancozeb exposure
using in vivo and in vitro models.

Tyagi S(1), George J, Singh R, Bhui K, Shukla Y.

Author information: 
(1)Proteomics Laboratory, Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Council of
Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR), Lucknow 226001 (U.P), India.

Mancozeb, ethylene(bis)dithiocarbamate fungicides, has been well documented in
the literature as a multipotent carcinogen, but the underlying mechanism remains 
unrevealed. Thus, mancozeb has been selected in this study with the objective to 
decipher the molecular mechanism that culminates in carcinogenesis. We employed
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry to generate a
comparative proteome profile of control and mancozeb (200<U+2009>mg/kg body weight)
exposed mouse skin. Although many differentially expressed proteins were found,
among them, two significantly upregulated proteins, namely, S100A6 (Calcyclin)
and S100A9 (Calgranulin-B), are known markers of keratinocyte differentiation and
proliferation, which suggested their role in mancozeb-induced neoplastic
alterations. Therefore, we verified these alterations in the human system by
using HaCaT cells as an in vitro model for human skin keratinocyte
carcinogenesis. Upregulation of these two proteins upon mancozeb (0.5<U+2009>µg/mL)
exposure in HaCaT cells indicated its neoplastic potential in human skin also.
This potential was confirmed by increase in number of colonies in colony
formation and anchorage-independent growth assays. Modulation of S100A6/S100A9
targets, elevated phosphorylation of extracellular signal regulated kinase
(ERK1/2), Elk1, nuclear factor- kappa B and cell division cycle 25 C phosphatase,
and cyclin D1 and cyclooxygenase-2 upregulation was seen. In addition, PD98059
(ERK1/2 inhibitor) reduced cell proliferation induced by mancozeb, confirming the
involvement of ERK1/2 signaling. Conclusively, we herein present the first report
asserting that the mechanism involving S100A6 and S100A9 regulated ERK1/2
signaling underlies the mancozeb-induced neoplastic potential in human skin.

PMID: 21375462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. BMC Genomics. 2011 Feb 25;12:128. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-128.

Expression profile analysis of the inflammatory response regulated by hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 4a.

Wang Z(1), Bishop EP, Burke PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a), a liver-specific transcription 
factor, plays a significant role in liver-specific functions. However, its
functions are poorly understood in the regulation of the inflammatory response.
In order to obtain a genomic view of HNF4a in this context, microarray analysis
was used to probe the expression profile of an inflammatory response induced by
cytokine stimulation in a model of HNF4a knock-down in HepG2 cells.
RESULTS: The expression of over five thousand genes in HepG2 cells is
significantly changed with the dramatic reduction of HNF4a concentration compared
to the cells with native levels of HNF4a. Over two thirds (71%) of genes that
exhibit differential expression in response to cytokine treatment also reveal
differential expression in response to HNF4a knock-down. In addition, we found
that a number of HNF4a target genes may be indirectly mediated by an ETS-domain
transcription factor ELK1, a nuclear target of mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK).
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that HNF4a has an extensive impact on the
regulation of a large number of the liver-specific genes. HNF4a may play a role
in regulating the cytokine-induced inflammatory response. This study presents a
novel function for HNF4a, acting not only as a global player in many cellular
processes, but also as one of the components of inflammatory response in the
liver.

PMCID: PMC3053261
PMID: 21352552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Jan;131(2):401-11. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1410-9. 
Epub 2011 Feb 23.

Influence of stromal-epithelial interactions on breast cancer in vitro and in
vivo.

Potter SM(1), Dwyer RM, Hartmann MC, Khan S, Boyle MP, Curran CE, Kerin MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgery, School of Medicine, National University of Ireland,
Galway, Ireland.

Stromal cell-secreted chemokines including CCL2 have been implicated in the
primary tumor microenvironment, as mediators of tumor cell migration,
proliferation, and angiogenesis. Expression of CCL2 and its principal receptor
CCR2 was analyzed by RQ-PCR in primary tumor cells and breast cancer cell lines. 
Breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231, T47D) were co-cultured directly on a
monolayer of primary breast tumor and normal stromal cells, retrieved using
EpCAM+ magnetic beads, and changes in expression of CCL2, CCR2, MMP11, ELK1,
VIL2, and Ki67 detected by RQ-PCR. Epithelial cell migration and proliferation in
response to stromal cell-secreted factors was also analyzed. In vivo, tumor
xenografts were formed by co-injecting T47D cells with primary tumor stromal
cells. Following establishment, tumors were harvested and digested, epithelial
cells retrieved and analyzed by RQ-PCR. Whole tumor tissue was also analyzed by
immunohistochemistry for CD31 and the VIL2 encoded protein Ezrin. Tumor stromal
cells expressed significantly higher levels of CCL2 than normal cells, with no
CCR2 expression detected. Primary epithelial cells and breast cancer cell lines
expressed elevated CCL2, with relative expression of CCR2 found to be higher than
the ligand. Interaction of breast cancer epithelial cells with primary tumor, but
not normal stromal cells, stimulated increased expression of CCL2 (8-fold), ELK1 
(6-fold), VIL2 (6-fold), and MMP11 (17-fold). Factors secreted by stromal cells, 
including CCL2, stimulated a significant increase in epithelial cell migration,
with no effect on cell proliferation in vitro observed. In vivo, the presence of 
stromal cells resulted in tumors of increased volume, mediated at least in part
through neoangiogenesis demonstrated by immunohistochemistry (CD31). Admixed
tumor xenografts exhibited increased expression of Ki67, MMP11, VIL2, and ELK1.
Elevated Ezrin protein was also detected, with increased cytoplasmic
localization. The results presented highlight mechanisms through which breast
cancer epithelial cells can harness stromal cell biology to support tumor
progression.

PMID: 21344235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Endocrinol. 2011 May;209(2):245-54. doi: 10.1530/JOE-10-0219. Epub 2011 Feb 9.

Genome-wide screening in human growth plates during puberty in one patient
suggests a role for RUNX2 in epiphyseal maturation.

Emons J(1), Dutilh BE, Decker E, Pirzer H, Sticht C, Gretz N, Rappold G, Cameron 
ER, Neil JC, Stein GS, van Wijnen AJ, Wit JM, Post JN, Karperien M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 ZA Leiden,
The Netherlands. j.emons@lumc.nl

In late puberty, estrogen decelerates bone growth by stimulating growth plate
maturation. In this study, we analyzed the mechanism of estrogen action using two
pubertal growth plate specimens of one girl at Tanner stage B2 and Tanner stage
B3. Histological analysis showed that progression of puberty coincided with
characteristic morphological changes: a decrease in total growth plate height
(P=0.002), height of the individual zones (P<0.001), and an increase in
intercolumnar space (P<0.001). Microarray analysis of the specimens identified
394 genes (72% upregulated and 28% downregulated) that changed with the
progression of puberty. Overall changes in gene expression were small (average
1.38-fold upregulated and 1.36-fold downregulated genes). The 394 genes mapped to
13 significantly changing pathways (P<0.05) associated with growth plate
maturation (e.g. extracellular matrix, cell cycle, and cell death). We next
scanned the upstream promoter regions of the 394 genes for the presence of
evolutionarily conserved binding sites for transcription factors implicated in
growth plate maturation such as estrogen receptor (ER), androgen receptor, ELK1, 
STAT5B, cyclic AMP response element (CREB), and RUNX2. High-quality motif sites
for RUNX2 (87 genes), ELK1 (43 genes), and STAT5B (31 genes), but not ER, were
evolutionarily conserved, indicating their functional relevance across primates. 
Moreover, we show that some of these sites are direct target genes of these
transcription factors as shown by ChIP assays.

PMID: 21307122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011 Jun 1;183(11):1499-509. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201006-0912OC. Epub 2011 Feb 4.

Haplotype association mapping of acute lung injury in mice implicates activin a
receptor, type 1.

Leikauf GD(1), Concel VJ, Liu P, Bein K, Berndt A, Ganguly K, Jang AS, Brant KA, 
Dietsch M, Pope-Varsalona H, Dopico RA Jr, Di YP, Li Q, Vuga LJ, Medvedovic M,
Kaminski N, You M, Prows DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Graduate School of Public
Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15219-3130, USA.
gleikauf@pitt.edu

RATIONALE: Because acute lung injury is a sporadic disease produced by
heterogeneous precipitating factors, previous genetic analyses are mainly limited
to candidate gene case-control studies.
OBJECTIVES: To develop a genome-wide strategy in which single nucleotide
polymorphism associations are assessed for functional consequences to survival
during acute lung injury in mice.
METHODS: To identify genes associated with acute lung injury, 40 inbred strains
were exposed to acrolein and haplotype association mapping, microarray, and
DNA-protein binding were assessed.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The mean survival time varied among mouse strains 
with polar strains differing approximately 2.5-fold. Associations were identified
on chromosomes 1, 2, 4, 11, and 12. Seven genes (Acvr1, Cacnb4, Ccdc148, Galnt13,
Rfwd2, Rpap2, and Tgfbr3) had single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) associations
within the gene. Because SNP associations may encompass "blocks" of associated
variants, functional assessment was performed in 91 genes within ± 1 Mbp of each 
SNP association. Using 10% or greater allelic frequency and 10% or greater
phenotype explained as threshold criteria, 16 genes were assessed by microarray
and reverse real-time polymerase chain reaction. Microarray revealed several
enriched pathways including transforming growth factor-ﬂ signaling. Transcripts
for Acvr1, Arhgap15, Cacybp, Rfwd2, and Tgfbr3 differed between the strains with 
exposure and contained SNPs that could eliminate putative transcriptional factor 
recognition sites. Ccdc148, Fancl, and Tnn had sequence differences that could
produce an amino acid substitution. Mycn and Mgat4a had a promoter SNP or
3'untranslated region SNPs, respectively. Several genes were related and encoded 
receptors (ACVR1, TGFBR3), transcription factors (MYCN, possibly CCDC148), and
ubiquitin-proteasome (RFWD2, FANCL, CACYBP) proteins that can modulate cell
signaling. An Acvr1 SNP eliminated a putative ELK1 binding site and diminished
DNA-protein binding.
CONCLUSIONS: Assessment of genetic associations can be strengthened using a
genetic/genomic approach. This approach identified several candidate genes,
including Acvr1, associated with increased susceptibility to acute lung injury in
mice.

PMCID: PMC3137140
PMID: 21297076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Apr;25(4):669-80. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0437. Epub 2011 Feb
3.

GnRH induces the c-Fos gene via phosphorylation of SRF by the calcium/calmodulin 
kinase II pathway.

Ely HA(1), Mellon PL, Coss D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California San Diego, 9500 
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0674, USA.

Despite extensive studies on GnRH regulation of the gonadotropin subunit genes,
very little is known about mechanism of induction of intermediary immediate early
genes, such as c-Fos, that are direct targets of GnRH signaling and that upon
induction, activate transcription of gonadotropin genes. Although c-Fos is
induced by a variety of stimuli in other cell types, in the gonadotropes, only
GnRH induces c-Fos and through it FSHﬂ. Thus, understanding the specificity of
c-Fos induction by GnRH will provide insight into GnRH regulation of FSHﬂ gene
expression. GnRH induction of c-Fos in LﬂT2 cells requires the serum response
factor (SRF)-binding site, but not the Ets/ELK1 site. This is in contrast to
c-Fos induction by growth factors in other cells, which activate c-Fos
transcription via phosphorylation of ELK1 and require the ELK1-binding site. The 
SRF site alone is sufficient for induction by GnRH, whereas induction by
12-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) requires both the ELK1 and SRF sites.
Although ELK1 site is not required, upon GnRH stimulation, ELK1 interacts with
SRF and is recruited to the SRF site. GnRH phosphorylates ELK1 through ERK1/2 and
p38 MAPK, which correlates with the signaling pathways necessary for c-Fos and
FSHﬂ induction. GnRH also causes phosphorylation of SRF through
calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CamKII), which leads to increased binding to its 
site. CamKII activation is sufficient for phosphorylation of SRF and for
induction of the c-Fos gene through the SRF site. Thus, GnRH uses a combination
of growth factor signaling and the CamKII pathway to induce c-Fos to regulate
FSHﬂ gene expression in gonadotrope cells.

PMCID: PMC3063085
PMID: 21292826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Jun 1;90(3):557-64. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvr039. Epub 2011 Feb
1.

A phospholipase C<U+03B3>1-activated pathway regulates transcription in human vascular
smooth muscle cells.

Hunter I(1), Mascall KS, Ramos JW, Nixon GF.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen
AB25 2ZD, UK.

AIMS: Growth factor-induced repression of smooth muscle (SM) cell marker genes is
an integral part of vascular SM (VSM) cell proliferation. This is partly
regulated via translocation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2)
to the nucleus which activates the transcription factor Elk-1. The mediators
involved in ERK1/2 nuclear translocation in VSM cells are unknown. The aim of
this study is to examine the mechanisms which regulate growth factor-induced
nuclear translocation of ERK1/2 and gene expression in VSM cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In cultured human VSM cells, phospholipase C (PLC)<U+03B3>1
expression was required for platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-induced ERK1/2 
nuclear translocation, Elk-1 phosphorylation, and subsequent repression of SM
a-actin gene expression. The mechanisms of a role for PLC<U+03B3>1 in ERK1/2 nuclear
localization were further examined by investigating interacting proteins. The
ERK1/2-binding phosphoprotein, protein enriched in astrocytes-15 (PEA-15), was
phosphorylated by PDGF and this phosphorylation required activation of PLC<U+03B3>1. In 
cells pre-treated with PEA-15 siRNA, ERK1/2 distribution significantly increased 
in the nucleus and resulted in decreased SM a-actin expression and increased VSM 
cell proliferation. Overexpression of PEA-15 increased ERK1/2 localization in the
cytoplasm. The regulatory role of PEA-15 phosphorylation was assessed. In VSM
cells overexpressing a non-phosphorylatable form of PEA-15, PDGF-induced ERK1/2
nuclear localization was inhibited.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that PEA-15 phosphorylation by PLC<U+03B3>1 is
required for PDGF-induced ERK1/2 nuclear translocation. This represents an
important level of phenotypic control by directly affecting Elk-1-dependent
transcription and ultimately SM cell marker protein expression in VSM cells.

PMCID: PMC3096307
PMID: 21285289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Biochem J. 2011 Mar 15;434(3):399-413. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101244.

Characterization of a novel JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) inhibitory peptide.

Ngoei KR(1), Catimel B, Church N, Lio DS, Dogovski C, Perugini MA, Watt PM, Cheng
HC, Ng DC, Bogoyevitch MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia.

An improved understanding of the roles of protein kinases in intracellular
signalling and disease progression has driven significant advances in protein
kinase inhibitor discovery. Peptide inhibitors that target the kinase protein
substrate-binding site have continued to attract attention. In the present paper,
we describe a novel JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) inhibitory peptide PYC71N,
which inhibits JNK activity in vitro towards a range of recombinant protein
substrates including the transcription factors c-Jun, ATF2 (activating
trancription factor 2) and Elk1, and the microtubule regulatory protein DCX
(doublecortin). Analysis of cell culture studies confirmed the actions of a
cell-permeable version of PYC71 to inhibit c-Jun phosphorylation during acute
hyperosmotic stress. The analysis of the in vitro data for the kinetics of this
inhibition indicated a substrate-inhibitor complex-mediated inhibition of JNK by 
PYC71N. Alanine-scanning replacement studies revealed the importance of two
residues (PYC71N Phe9 or Phe11 within an FXF motif) for JNK inhibition. The
importance of these residues was confirmed through interaction studies showing
that each change decreased interaction of the peptide with c-Jun. Furthermore,
PYC71N interacted with both non-phosphorylated (inactive) JNK1 and the substrate 
c-Jun, but did not recognize active JNK1. In contrast, a previously characterized
JNK-inhibitory peptide TIJIP [truncated inhibitory region of JIP (JNK-interacting
protein)], showed stronger interaction with active JNK1. Competition binding
analysis confirmed that PYC71N inhibited the interaction of c-Jun with JNK1.
Taken together, the results of the present study define novel properties of the
PYC71N peptide as well as differences from the characterized TIJIP, and highlight
the value of these peptides to probe the biochemistry of JNK-mediated substrate
interactions and phosphorylation.

PMID: 21162712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Eur J Cell Biol. 2011 Apr;90(4):333-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2010.10.003. Epub
2010 Nov 30.

Glycine-induced cytoprotection is mediated by ERK1/2 and AKT in renal cells with 
ATP depletion.

Jiang L(1), Qin X, Zhong X, Liu L, Jiang L, Lu Y, Fan L, He Z, Chen Q.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210029, People's Republic of China.

Glycine receptor (GlyR) activation by glycine protects cells against ATP
depletion. However, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. To define signaling
pathways responsible for the GlyR mediated cytoprotection, we examined the
phosphorylation status of key kinases signaling pathways in Madin-Darby canine
kidney (MDCK) cells. Our results indicated that growing the ATP-depleted MDCK
cells in glycine-containing media increased the level of phosphorylated
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1/2), Ets-like transcription
factor-1 (Elk1), AKT, and Forkhead box O-class 1 (FoxO1), decreased the level of 
phosphorylated p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase, while having little effect
on the phosphorylation status of c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1 and 2. Similar
phosphorylation changes in these molecules took place in the GlyRa1 stably
expressing HEK-293 cell. We also showed that treating MDCK cells with ERK1/2
inhibitor PD98059 or AKT inhibitor LY294002 diminished cytoprotection against
cell death by glycine, as determined by assessment of lactate dehydrogenase
release and 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide
activity. In contrast, treatment with p38 inhibitor SB203580 enhanced the
glycine-induced cytoprotection. Finally, RNAi-mediated silencing of GlyRa1
abolished the glycine-induced changes in phosphorylation status of the above
kinases in ATP-depleted cells. Taken together, our results suggest that the
ERK1/2 and AKT signaling pathways are involved in the glycine-GlyR protection of 
MDCK cells against death induced by ATP depletion.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21122942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 28;286(4):2477-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.177899. Epub 2010 
Nov 22.

Quantitative analysis of ERK2 interactions with substrate proteins: roles for
kinase docking domains and activity in determining binding affinity.

Burkhard KA(1), Chen F, Shapiro P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

Extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1 and -2 (ERK1/2) proteins regulate a
variety of cellular functions, including cell proliferation and differentiation, 
by interacting with and phosphorylating substrate proteins. Two docking sites,
common docking (CD/ED) domain and F-site recruitment site (FRS), on ERK proteins 
have been identified. Specific interactions with the CD/ED domain and the FRS
occur with substrates containing a docking site for ERK and JNK, LXL (DEJL) motif
(D-domain) and a docking site for ERK, FXF (DEF) motif (F-site), respectively.
However, the relative contributions of the ERK docking sites in mediating
substrate interactions that allow efficient phosphate transfer are largely
unknown. In these studies, we provide a quantitative analysis of ERK2
interactions with substrates using surface plasmon resonance to measure real time
protein-protein interactions. ERK2 interacted with ELK-1 (DEF and DEJL motifs),
RSK-1 (DEJL motif), and c-Fos (DEF motif) with K(D) values of 0.25, 0.15, and
0.97 µM, respectively. CD/ED domain mutations inhibited interactions with ELK-1
and RSK-1 by 6-fold but had no effect on interactions with c-Fos. Select
mutations in FRS residues differentially inhibited ELK-1 or c-Fos interactions
with ERK2 but had little effect on RSK-1 interactions. Mutations in both the ED
and FRS docking sites completely inhibited ELK-1 interactions but had no effect
on interactions with stathmin, an ERK substrate whose docking site is unknown.
The phosphorylation status of ERK2 did not affect interactions with RSK-1 or
c-Fos but did inhibit interactions with ELK-1 and stathmin. These studies provide
a quantitative evaluation of specific docking domains involved in mediating
interactions between ERK2 and protein substrates and define the contributions of 
these interactions to phosphate transfer.

PMCID: PMC3024742
PMID: 21098038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Mol Med (Berl). 2011 Jan;89(1):29-41. doi: 10.1007/s00109-010-0694-2. Epub 2010
Nov 18.

Effects of PGI2 analogues on Th1- and Th2-related chemokines in monocytes via
epigenetic regulation.

Kuo CH(1), Ko YC, Yang SN, Chu YT, Wang WL, Huang SK, Chen HN, Wei WJ, Jong YJ,
Hung CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan, Republic of China.

Comment in
    J Mol Med (Berl). 2011 Jan;89(1):1-3.

Chemokines play important roles in asthma. Prostaglandin I(2) (PGI(2)) analogue
is recently suggested as a candidate for treating asthma. However, the effects of
PGI(2) analogues on the expression of Th1- and Th2-related chemokines are
unknown. To this end, we investigated the in vitro effects of PGI(2) analogues on
the expression of Th1-related chemokine interferon-<U+03B3>-inducible protein-10
(IP-10/CXCL10) and Th2-related chemokine macrophage-derived chemokine (MDC/CCL22)
in human monocytes. The human monocytes were pretreated with iloprost and
treprostinil before lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation. IP-10 and MDC were
measured by ELISA. Intracellular signaling was investigated by cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) assay, western blot and chromatin immunoprecipitation.
PGI(2) analogues enhanced MDC, but suppressed IP-10 expression in LPS-stimulated 
monocytes. These effects were reversed by the I prostanoid (IP) receptor
antagonist (CAY10449), peroxisomal proliferators-activated receptor (PPAR)-a
antagonist (GW6741) and PPAR-<U+03B3> antagonist (GW9662). PGI(2) analogues increased
intracellular cAMP levels. Forskolin, an adenyl cyclase activator, conferred
similar effects. PGI(2) analogue-enhanced MDC expression was reduced by nuclear
factor (NF) <U+03BA>B inhibitor (BAY 117085) and mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK)-p38 inhibitor (SB203580). PGI(2) analogues up-regulated phospho-p65 and
phospho-p38 but down-regulated phospho-ERK expression. Iloprost enhanced H3
acetylation in MDC promoter area and suppressed H3 acetylation, H3K4, and H3K36
trimethylation in IP-10 promoter area. PGI(2) analogues enhanced MDC expression
via the I prostanoid-receptor-cAMP, PPAR-a and PPAR-<U+03B3>, NF<U+03BA>B-p65, MAPK-p38-ATF2
pathways and increasing histone acetylation, and suppressed IP-10 expression via 
the IP-receptor-cAMP, PPAR-<U+03B3>, MAPK-ERK-ELK1 pathways and inhibiting histone
acetylation and trimethylation in LPS-stimulated monocytes. PGI(2) analogues may 
therefore increase Th2 recruitment and inflammation.

PMID: 21085923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 31;285(53):41310-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.153775. Epub 2010
Nov 2.

ERK/ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK) signaling positively regulates death receptor 5
expression through co-activation of CHOP and Elk1.

Oh YT(1), Liu X, Yue P, Kang S, Chen J, Taunton J, Khuri FR, Sun SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University School of
Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Death receptor 5 (DR5) is a death domain-containing transmembrane receptor that
triggers apoptosis upon binding to its ligand or when overexpressed. Its
expression is induced by certain small molecule drugs, including celecoxib,
through mechanisms that have not been fully elucidated. The current study has
revealed a novel ERK/ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK)-dependent mechanism that regulates
DR5 expression primarily using celecoxib as a DR5 inducer. Both C/EBP homologous 
protein (CHOP) and Elk1 are required for celecoxib-induced DR5 expression based
on promoter deletion and mutation analysis and siRNA-mediated gene silencing
results. Co-expression of both CHOP and Elk1 exhibited enhanced effects on
increasing DR5 promoter activity and DR5 expression, indicating that CHOP and
Elk1 co-operatively regulate DR5 expression. Because Elk1 is an ERK-regulated
protein, we accordingly found that celecoxib increased the levels of
phosphorylated ERK1/2, RSK2, and Elk1. Inhibition of either ERK signaling with a 
MEK inhibitor or ERK1/2 siRNA, or RSK2 signaling with an RSK2 inhibitor or RSK2
siRNA abrogated DR5 up-regulation by celecoxib as well as other agents. Moreover,
these inhibitions suppressed celecoxib-induced CHOP up-regulation. Thus,
ERK/RSK-dependent, CHOP and Elk1-mediated mechanisms are critical for DR5
induction. Additionally, celecoxib increased CHOP promoter activity in an
ATF4-dependent manner, and siRNA-mediated blockade of ATF4 abrogated both CHOP
induction and DR5 up-regulation, indicating that ATF4 is involved in
celecoxib-induced CHOP and DR5 expression. Collectively, we conclude that small
molecules such as celecoxib induce DR5 expression through activating ERK/RSK
signaling and subsequent Elk1 activation and ATF4-dependent CHOP induction.

PMCID: PMC3009856
PMID: 21044953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011 Jan;300(1):H191-200. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00232.2010. Epub 2010 Oct 29.

Hypotonic swelling-induced activation of PKN1 mediates cell survival in cardiac
myocytes.

Kajimoto K(1), Shao D, Takagi H, Maceri G, Zablocki D, Mukai H, Ono Y, Sadoshima 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Cell Biology and Molecular
Medicine, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, New Jersey Medical 
School, Newark, New Jersey 07103, USA.

Hypotonic cell swelling in the myocardium is induced by pathological conditions, 
including ischemia-reperfusion, and affects the activities of ion
transporters/channels and gene expression. However, the signaling mechanism
activated by hypotonic stress (HS) is not fully understood in cardiac myocytes. A
specialized protein kinase cascade, consisting of Pkc1 and MAPKs, is activated by
HS in yeast. Here, we demonstrate that protein kinase N1 (PKN1), a
serine/threonine protein kinase and a homolog of Pkc1, is activated by HS (67%
osmolarity) within 5 min and reaches peak activity at 60 min in cardiac myocytes.
Activation of PKN1 by HS was accompanied by Thr(774) phosphorylation and
concomitant activation of PDK1, a potential upstream regulator of PKN1. HS also
activated RhoA, thereby increasing interactions between PKN1 and RhoA. PP1
(10(-5) M), a selective Src family tyrosine kinase inhibitor, significantly
suppressed HS-induced activation of RhoA and PKN1. Constitutively active PKN1
significantly increased the transcriptional activity of Elk1-GAL4, an effect that
was inhibited by dominant negative MEK. Overexpression of PKN1 significantly
increased ERK phosphorylation, whereas downregulation of PKN1 inhibited
HS-induced ERK phosphorylation. Downregulation of PKN1 and inhibition of ERK by
U-0126 both significantly inhibited the survival of cardiac myocytes in the
presence of HS. These results suggest that a signaling cascade, consisting of
Src, RhoA, PKN1, and ERK, is activated by HS, thereby promoting cardiac myocyte
survival.

PMCID: PMC3023260
PMID: 21037231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 17;285(51):39844-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.164509. Epub
2010 Oct 18.

Regulation of Syk by phosphorylation on serine in the linker insert.

Paris LL(1), Hu J, Galan J, Ong SS, Martin VA, Ma H, Tao WA, Harrison ML, Geahlen
RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA.

The Syk protein-tyrosine kinase is phosphorylated on multiple tyrosines after the
aggregation of the B cell antigen receptor. However, metabolic labeling
experiments indicate that Syk is inducibly phosphorylated to an even greater
extent on serine after receptor ligation. A combination of phosphopeptide mapping
and mass spectrometric analyses indicates that serine 291 is a major site of
phosphorylation. Serine 291 lies within a 23-amino acid insert located within the
linker B region that distinguishes Syk from SykB and Zap-70. The phosphorylation 
of serine-291 by protein kinase C enhances the ability of Syk to couple the
antigen receptor to the activation of the transcription factors NFAT and Elk-1.
Protein interaction studies indicate a role for the phosphorylated linker insert 
in promoting an interaction between Syk and the chaperone protein, prohibitin.

PMCID: PMC3000966
PMID: 20956537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Immunol. 2010 Nov 1;185(9):5211-24. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000514. Epub 2010
Sep 22.

Monocyte 15-lipoxygenase gene expression requires ERK1/2 MAPK activity.

Bhattacharjee A(1), Mulya A, Pal S, Roy B, Feldman GM, Cathcart MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

IL-13 induces profound expression of 15-lipoxygenase (15-LO) in primary human
monocytes. Our studies have defined the functional IL-13R complex, association of
Jaks with the receptor components, and the tyrosine phosphorylation of several
Stat molecules in response to IL-13. Furthermore, we identified both p38MAPK and 
protein kinase Cd as critical regulators of 15-LO expression. In this study, we
report an ERK1/2-dependent signaling cascade that regulates IL-13-mediated 15-LO 
gene expression. We show the rapid phosphorylation/activation of ERK1/2 upon
IL-13 exposure. Our results indicate that Tyk2 kinase is required for the
activation of ERK1/2, which is independent of the Jak2, p38MAPK, and protein
kinase Cd pathways, suggesting bifurcating parallel regulatory pathways
downstream of the receptor. To investigate the signaling mechanisms associated
with the ERK1/2-dependent expression of 15-LO, we explored the involvement of
transcription factors, with predicted binding sites in the 15-LO promoter, in
this process including Elk1, early growth response-1 (Egr-1), and CREB. Our
findings indicate that IL-13 induces Egr-1 nuclear accumulation and CREB serine
phosphorylation and that both are markedly attenuated by inhibition of ERK1/2
activity. We further show that ERK1/2 activity is required for both Egr-1 and
CREB DNA binding to their cognate sequences identified within the 15-LO promoter.
Furthermore, by transfecting monocytes with the decoy oligodeoxyribonucleotides
specific for Egr-1 and CREB, we discovered that Egr-1 and CREB are directly
involved in regulating 15-LO gene expression. These studies characterize an
important regulatory role for ERK1/2 in mediating IL-13-induced monocyte 15-LO
expression via the transcription factors Egr-1 and CREB.

PMCID: PMC3061395
PMID: 20861348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Thromb Haemost. 2010 Nov;104(5):998-1008. doi: 10.1160/TH10-04-0243. Epub 2010
Aug 30.

Allele-specific transcription of the PAI-1 gene in human astrocytes.

Hultman K(1), Tjarnlund-Wolf A, Odeberg J, Eriksson P, Jern C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience and Rehabilitation, Institute of
Neuroscience and Physiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.

The 4G allele of the PAI-1 -675(4G/5G) insertion/deletion promoter polymorphism
has been associated with elevated plasma levels of PAI-1 and an increased risk of
myocardial infarction. However, this allele has also been associated with a
reduced risk of ischaemic stroke. In the brain, PAI-1 is mainly produced by
astrocytes, and can reduce the neurotoxic effects exerted by tissue-type
plasminogen activator during pathophysiologic conditions. The aim of the present 
study was to investigate whether the PAI-1 -675(4G/5G) polymorphism and the
linked -844A/G polymorphism affect transcriptional activity of the PAI-1 gene in 
human astrocytes. Haplotype chromatin immunoprecipitation (haploChIP) was used in
order to quantify allele-specific promoter activity in heterozygous cells.
Protein-DNA interactions were investigated by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay (EMSA). A clear allele-specific difference in PAI-1 gene expression was
observed in astrocytes, where the haplotype containing the 4G and the -844A
alleles was associated with higher transcriptional activity compared to the 5G
and -844G-containing haplotype. EMSA revealed an allele-specific binding of
nuclear proteins to the 4G/5G site as well as to the -844A/G site. Supershift
experiments identified specific binding of the transcription factors Elf-1 and
Elk-1 to the -844G allele. The relative impact of the different sites on
allele-specific PAI-1 promoter activity remains to be determined. We demonstrate 
that common polymorphisms within the PAI-1 promoter affect transcriptional
activity of the PAI-1 gene in human astrocytes, thus providing a possible
molecular genetic mechanism behind the association between PAI-1 promoter
variants and ischaemic stroke.

PMID: 20806116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Nov;45(5):317-27. doi: 10.1677/JME-10-0046. Epub 2010 Aug 
23.

Rainbow trout somatostatin receptor subtypes SSTR1A, SSTR1B, and SSTR2
differentially activate the extracellular signal-regulated kinase and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signaling pathways in transfected cells.

Hagemeister AL(1), Kittilson JD, Bergan HE, Sheridan MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, North Dakota State University, Department
2715, PO Box 6050, Fargo, North Dakota 58108-6050, USA.

Previously, we reported that extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and
protein kinase B (Akt), a downstream target of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K), mediated somatostatin (SS) inhibition of GH receptor, IGF1, and IGF1
receptor expression. In this study, we used Chinese hamster ovary-K1 cells that
stably transfected individually with trout SS receptors (SSTR1A, SSTR1B, and
SSTR2) to elucidate receptor-effector pathway linkages. SS induced ERK and Akt
activation in a time- and concentration-related manner in all SSTR-expressing
cells; however, the PI3K/Akt pathway was activated to a greater extent through
SSTR1A than through either SSTR1B or SSTR2, whereas the ERK pathway was activated
to a greater extent though SSTR2 than through either SSTR1A or SSTR1B. Although
the ERK pathway inhibitor U0126 had no effect on Akt activation, the PI3K
inhibitor LY294002 reduced ERK activation to near control levels in all
SSTR-expressing cell lines, suggesting some cross talk between the pathways,
possibly at the level of c-Raf, the phosphorylation of which also was induced by 
SS via each SSTR. Pertussis toxin (PTX) completely abolished SS-induced
activation of ERK and Akt in SSTR1A-, SSTR1B-, and SSTR2-expressing cells,
suggesting that these receptors link to the ERK and PI3K/Akt pathways via
PTX-sensitive G-proteins. SS-induced activation of Elk1, Stat3, and C/EBPﬂ also
was mediated by each of the trout SSTRs. These findings establish important
receptor-effector pathway linkages for fish SSTRs and provide insight into the
molecular mechanisms by which SSs may elicit diverse physiological effects in
target cells.

PMID: 20732992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 8;285(41):31819-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.155846. Epub 2010
Aug 3.

The p38 SAPK is recruited to chromatin via its interaction with transcription
factors.

Ferreiro I(1), Barragan M, Gubern A, Ballestar E, Joaquin M, Posas F.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signalling Research Group, Departament de CiËncies Experimetals i de la
Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Dr Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.

In mammals, the stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK) p38 coordinates a rapid
and complex transcriptional program to adapt to sudden changes in the
extracellular environment. Although a number of genes have been reported to be
under the control of p38, the basic mechanisms of transcriptional regulation by
this SAPK remain uncharacterized. Here we show that in response to osmotic shock,
anisomycin- or TNFa-activated p38 SAPK is recruited to stress-induced genes. The 
MAPKK MKK6 is also found at stress-responsive promoters. The recruitment of RNA
polymerase II complex to the target promoters requires p38 activity. Moreover,
when tethered to DNA as a LexA fusion protein, p38 activates transcription in a
stress-regulated manner. Thus, p38 activity allows for recruitment of RNA
polymerase and transcription initiation. p38 directly phosphorylates and
interacts with the transcription factor Elk1. p38 activity is necessary for the
recruitment of Elk1 to the c-Fos promoter, and knocking down Elk1 by siRNAs
compromises both p38 recruitment to the c-Fos promoter and c-Fos transcriptional 
up-regulation upon osmostress. In addition, p38 recruitment to the osmoinducible 
gene Cox2 and the TNFa target gene IL8 is mediated by the transcription factors
AP1 and NF<U+03BA>B, respectively. Therefore, anchoring of active SAPK to target genes
is mediated by transcription factors. The presence of active p38 at open reading 
frames also suggests the involvement of the SAPK in elongation. Taken together,
SAPK recruitment to target genes appears to be a broad mechanism to regulate
transcription that has been preserved from yeast to mammals.

PMCID: PMC2951253
PMID: 20682780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Feb;38(2):1375-82. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0240-x. Epub 2010
Aug 3.

AC3-33, a novel secretory protein, inhibits Elk1 transcriptional activity via ERK
pathway.

Hao D(1), Gao P, Liu P, Zhao J, Wang Y, Yang W, Lu Y, Shi T, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Northchina Coal Medical College, No. 57 JianShe South
Road, Tangshan, 063000, People's Republic of China.

The transcription factor AP-1 plays an important role in cellular proliferation, 
transformation and death. In this study, we report a novel human gene, AC3-33
(GenBank name: c3orf33, FLJ31139), which encodes a secretory protein that can
inhibit Elk1 transcriptional activity via ERK1/2 pathway. The AC3-33 mRNA encodes
a protein of 251 amino acids, which is a classical secretory protein. Functional 
investigation reveals that overexpression of AC3-33 significantly inhibit AP-1
activity and DNA-binding ability. Further investigation indicated that
overexpression of AC3-33 significantly inhibit transcriptional activity of Elk1
and c-jun, but not c-fos. As for the upstream of signaling pathway of Elk-1, our 
study demonstrated that overexpression of AC3-33 significantly down-regulates
phosphorylation of ERK1/2, but not JNK/SAPK or p38 MAPK. These results clearly
indicate that AC3-33 is a novel member of the secretory family and inhibits Elk1 
transcriptional activity via ERK1/2 MAPK.

PMID: 20680465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Aug;1799(8):555-60. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2010.07.001.
Epub 2010 Jul 14.

SUMOylation can regulate the activity of ETS-like transcription factor 4.

Kaikkonen S(1), Makkonen H, Rytinki M, Palvimo JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine/Medical Biochemistry, University of Eastern Finland, 
Kuopio, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland.

ETS-like transcription factor 4 (ELK4) (a.k.a. serum response factor accessory
protein 1) belongs to the ternary complex factor (TCF) subfamily of E twenty-six 
(ETS) domain transcription factors. Compared to the other TCF subfamily members, 
ELK1 and ELK3 (NET), there is limited information of the mechanisms regulating
the ELK4 activity. Here, we show that the ELK4 can be covalently modified
(SUMOylated) by small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) 1 protein, an important
regulator of signaling and transcription. SUMOylation of ELK4 was reversed by
SUMO-specific proteases (SENP) 1 and 2 and stimulated by SUMO E3 ligase PIAS3.
Conserved lysine residue 167 that is located in the NET inhibitory domain of ELK4
was identified as the main site of SUMO-1 conjugation. Interestingly, mutation of
the K167 disrupting the SUMOylation markedly enhanced the transcriptional
activity of the ELK4, but weakened its repressive function on c-fos promoter. In 
conclusion, our results suggest that covalent modification by SUMO-1 can regulate
the activity of ELK4, contributing to the transcriptional repression by the ELK4.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20637912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Nov 1;88(2):296-303. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvq213. Epub 2010 Jul 
8.

Novel role of Egr-1 in nicotine-related neointimal formation.

Vazquez-Padron RI(1), Mateu D, Rodriguez-Menocal L, Wei Y, Webster KA, Pham SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Vascular Biology Institute, University of Miami
Miller School of Medicine, 1600 NW 10th Avenue, RMSB 7147A, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Nov 1;88(2):207-8.

AIMS: The aim of this study was to investigate the mechanisms by which nicotine
increases vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation and post-injury
neointimal formation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Vascular injury was inflicted in the right iliac artery of
nicotine-treated and control rats. Nicotine increased post-injury VSMC
proliferation (Ki67(+) cells) and neointimal formation (neointima/media ratio,
0.42 ± 0.23 vs. 0.14 ± 0.07, P= 0.02). To determine the mechanisms by which
nicotine exacerbates VSMC proliferation, cultured cells were exposed to nicotine,
and signalling pathways leading to cell proliferation were studied. Nicotine
activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. The blockade of this signalling axis abolished
nicotine-mediated proliferation. Functional nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and
Ca(2+) influx were necessary for ERK1/2 activation and nicotine-induced
mitogenesis in VSMCs. Downstream to ERK1/2, nicotine induced the phosphorylation 
of Ets-like gene 1 in a timely co-ordinated manner with the up-regulation of the 
atherogenic transcription factor, early growth response 1 (Egr-1). The treatment 
of balloon-injured arteries with a lentivirus vector carrying a short hairpin RNA
against Egr-1 abolished the deleterious effect of nicotine on vascular
remodelling.
CONCLUSION: Nicotine acts through its receptors in VSMC to activate the ERK-Egr-1
signaling cascade that induces cell proliferation and exacerbates post-injury
neointimal development.

PMCID: PMC2980942
PMID: 20615913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Dec;67(23):4065-77. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0426-3. Epub 
2010 Jun 26.

Factor binding and chromatin modification in the promoter of murine Egr1 gene
upon induction.

Tur G(1), Georgieva EI, Gagete A, LÛpez-Rodas G, RodrÌguez JL, Franco L.

Author information: 
(1)The Chromatin Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Valencia, Dr Moliner, 50, 46100 Burjassot, Valencia, Spain.

The influence of chromatin on immediate-early gene expression has been studied in
a model of Egr1 induction in intact mouse cells. ChIP analysis of factor and RNA 
polymerase binding reveals that the gene is constitutively poised for
transcription in nonstimulated cells, but a repressing chromatin structure
hampers productive transcription. Stimulation with phorbol esters results in a
transient activation, which starts at 5†min and peaks at 30†min. Quantitative
mapping of promoter occupancy by the different factors shows for the first time
that no direct competition between SP1 and EGR1 occurs. The phosphorylation of
ELK1 and CREB, which involves both the cascades of MEK1/2 and p38 kinases, is
required for gene expression, which ceases following the binding of NAB1 and NAB2
to the promoter. The changes in histone acetylation and the differential
recruitment of histone-modifying complexes further show the role of chromatin in 
the activation of this immediate-early gene.

PMID: 20582451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Immunol. 2010 Jul 15;185(2):1082-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000472. Epub 2010
Jun 16.

Ternary complex factors SAP-1 and Elk-1, but not net, are functionally equivalent
in thymocyte development.

Costello P(1), Nicolas R, Willoughby J, Wasylyk B, Nordheim A, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research Institute,
Lincoln's Inn Fields Laboratories, London, United Kingdom.

The ternary complex factors (TCFs; SAP-1, Elk-1, and Net) are serum response
factor cofactors that share many functional properties and are coexpressed in
many tissues. SAP-1, the predominant thymus TCF, is required for thymocyte
positive selection. In this study, we assessed whether the different TCFs are
functionally equivalent. Elk-1 deletion, but not the hypomorphic Net(delta)
mutation, exacerbated the SAP-1 positive selection phenotype, but triply
deficient thymocytes were no more defective than SAP-1(-/-) Elk-1(-/-) cells.
Inactivation of the other TCFs did not affect SAP-1-independent processes,
including beta-selection, regulatory T cell selection, and negative selection,
although reduced marginal zone B cells were observed in SAP-1(-/-) Elk-1(-/-)
animals. Ectopic expression of Elk-1, but not Net, rescued positive selection of 
SAP-1(-/-) thymocytes; thus, SAP-1 and Elk-1 are functionally equivalent in this 
system, and the SAP-1 null selection phenotype reflects only its high expression 
in the thymus. Array analysis of TCR-stimulated double-positive cells identified 
SAP-1-dependent inducible genes whose transcription was further impaired in
SAP-1(-/-) Elk-1(-/-) cells; thus, these genes, which include Egr-1 and Egr-2,
represent candidate mediators of positive selection. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed subtly different promoter targeting between the
different TCFs. Ectopic expression of Egr-1 restored positive selection in SAP-1 
null thymocytes, establishing it (and possibly other Egr family members) as the
major effector for ERK-SAP-1 signaling in thymocyte positive selection.

PMID: 20554967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010 Sep;299(3):C561-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00127.2010. Epub 2010 Jun 16.

Angiotensin II-induced upregulation of AT(1) receptor expression: sequential
activation of NF-kappaB and Elk-1 in neurons.

Mitra AK(1), Gao L, Zucker IH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.

It has been clearly established that increased circulating angiotensin II (ANG
II) with concurrent upregulation of brain and peripheral ANG II type 1 receptors 
(AT(1)R) are important mediators in the pathophysiology of several diseases
characterized by sympatho-excitation. In an effort to further understand the
regulation of AT(1)R expression in neurons, we determined the role of sequential 
activation of the transcription factors nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) and
Ets-like protein 1 (Elk-1) in AT(1)R upregulation. We used CATH.a neurons as our 
neuronal cell model. Cells were treated with ANG II (100 nM) over a preset time
course. Following ANG II activation, there was a temporal increase in the p65
subunit of NF-kappaB that was observed at 30 min, peaked at 1 h, and was
sustained up to 24 h. There was a concomitant decrease of IkappaB and increased
IkappaK expression. We also observed an increase in AT(1)R expression which
followed the temporal increase of NF-kappaB. The activation of NF-kappaB was
blocked by using the inhibitors parthenolide or p65 small interfering RNA (siRNA)
which both led to a decrease in AT(1)R expression. The expression of Elk-1 was
upregulated over a time period following ANG II activation and was decreased
following NF-kappaB inhibition. p65-DNA binding was assessed using
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, and it was shown that there was a
time-dependent increased binding that was inhibited by means of parthenolide
pretreatment or siRNA-mediated p65 gene silencing. Therefore, our results suggest
a combined role for the transcription factors NF-kappaB and Elk-1 in the
upregulation of AT(1)R in the CATH.a cell neuronal model. These data imply a
positive feedback mechanism that may impact neuronal discharge sensitivity in
response to ANG II.

PMCID: PMC2944315
PMID: 20554912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 May 27;4:74. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-74.

Co-expression module analysis reveals biological processes, genomic gain, and
regulatory mechanisms associated with breast cancer progression.

Shi Z(1), Derow CK, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Computing Center for Research & Education, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN 37240, USA.

BACKGROUND: Gene expression signatures are typically identified by correlating
gene expression patterns to a disease phenotype of interest. However, individual 
gene-based signatures usually suffer from low reproducibility and
interpretability.
RESULTS: We have developed a novel algorithm Iterative Clique Enumeration (ICE)
for identifying relatively independent maximal cliques as co-expression modules
and a module-based approach to the analysis of gene expression data. Applying
this approach on a public breast cancer dataset identified 19 modules whose
expression levels were significantly correlated with tumor grade. The
correlations were reproducible for 17 modules in an independent breast cancer
dataset, and the reproducibility was considerably higher than that based on
individual genes or modules identified by other algorithms. Sixteen out of the 17
modules showed significant enrichment in certain Gene Ontology (GO) categories.
Specifically, modules related to cell proliferation and immune response were
up-regulated in high-grade tumors while those related to cell adhesion was
down-regulated. Further analyses showed that transcription factors NYFB,
E2F1/E2F3, NRF1, and ELK1 were responsible for the up-regulation of the cell
proliferation modules. IRF family and ETS family proteins were responsible for
the up-regulation of the immune response modules. Moreover, inhibition of the
PPARA signaling pathway may also play an important role in tumor progression. The
module without GO enrichment was found to be associated with a potential genomic 
gain in 8q21-23 in high-grade tumors. The 17-module signature of breast tumor
progression clustered patients into subgroups with significantly different
relapse-free survival times. Namely, patients with lower cell proliferation and
higher cell adhesion levels had significantly lower risk of recurrence, both for 
all patients (p = 0.004) and for those with grade 2 tumors (p = 0.017).
CONCLUSIONS: The ICE algorithm is effective in identifying relatively independent
co-expression modules from gene co-expression networks and the module-based
approach illustrated in this study provides a robust, interpretable, and
mechanistic characterization of transcriptional changes.

PMCID: PMC2902438
PMID: 20507583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Mol Psychiatry. 2011 Jul;16(7):729-37. doi: 10.1038/mp.2010.53. Epub 2010 May 18.

Maternal warmth buffers the effects of low early-life socioeconomic status on
pro-inflammatory signaling in adulthood.

Chen E(1), Miller GE, Kobor MS, Cole SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada. echen@psych.ubc.ca

The notion that family support may buffer individuals under adversity from poor
outcomes has been theorized to have important implications for mental and
physical health, but little is known about the biological mechanisms that explain
these links. We hypothesized that adults who grew up in low socioeconomic status 
(SES) households but who experienced high levels of maternal warmth would be
protected from the pro-inflammatory states typically associated with low SES. A
total of 53 healthy adults (aged 25-40 years) low in SES early in life were
assessed on markers of immune activation and systemic inflammation. Genome-wide
transcriptional profiling also was conducted. Low early-life SES individuals who 
had mothers, who expressed high warmth toward them, exhibited less Toll-like
receptor-stimulated production of interleukin 6, and reduced bioinformatic
indications of pro-inflammatory transcription factor activity (NF-<U+03BA>B) and immune 
activating transcription factor activity (AP-1) compared to those who were low in
SES early in life but experienced low maternal warmth. To the extent that such
effects are causal, they suggest the possibility that the detrimental immunologic
effects of low early-life SES environments may be partly diminished through
supportive family climates.

PMCID: PMC2925055
PMID: 20479762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 16;285(29):22036-49. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.108878. Epub
2010 May 12.

Activation and repression of cellular immediate early genes by serum response
factor cofactors.

Lee SM(1), Vasishtha M, Prywes R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York
10027, USA.

The induction of expression of many cellular immediate early genes (IEG) involves
the transcription factor serum response factor (SRF). Two families of SRF
coactivators have also been implicated in IEG induction, the ternary complex
factors (TCFs), ELK1, Sap1, and Net, and the myocardin-related factors, MKL1 and 
MKL2. We found that serum induction of some SRF target genes is preferentially
regulated by MKL1/2, whereas others are redundantly activated by both TCFs and
MKL1/2. Yet ELK1 can also repress transcription. Binding of ELK1 and MKL1 to SRF 
has been found to be mutually exclusive in vitro, suggesting that ELK1 could
repress expression of IEGs by blocking MKL1 binding. We characterized the in vivo
binding of MKL1 and ELK1 to target genes and found an inverse relationship of
serum-induced MKL1 binding and serum-decreased ELK1 binding. However, experiments
with short hairpin RNA-mediated MKL1/2 depletion and expression of a nuclear MKL1
(N100) variant in stably transfected cells failed to alter ELK1 binding,
suggesting that ELK1 binding to target genes is regulated independently of
MKL1/2. Nevertheless, we found that short interfering RNA-mediated depletion of
TCFs increased target gene expression in cells containing the N100 MKL1
activator, most notably in cells under continuous growth conditions. These
results indicate that the TCFs can function both as activators and repressors of 
target gene expression depending upon the cellular growth conditions.

PMCID: PMC2903344
PMID: 20466732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Neurochem. 2010 Jul;114(2):452-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06762.x. Epub 
2010 Apr 20.

ERK signaling leads to mitochondrial dysfunction in extracellular zinc-induced
neurotoxicity.

He K(1), Aizenman E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

A zinc-induced signaling pathway leading to extracellular signal-regulated kinase
1/2 (ERK1/2) activation and subsequent neuronal death has been investigated. We
find that an extracellular zinc application stimulates biphasic phosphorylation
of ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK in rat cultured neurons. The activation of ERK1/2, but not
p38, is responsible for zinc neurotoxicity as only U0126, a MEK inhibitor that
blocks ERK1/2 phosphorylation, significantly protects cortical neurons from zinc 
exposure. Over-expression of a dominant negative Ras mutant blocks zinc-induced
Elk1-dependent gene expression in neurons, indicating the involvement of Ras
activation in the zinc pathway leading to ERK phosphorylation and Elk1 signaling.
We also find that zinc treatment results in neuronal mitochondrial
hyperpolarization. Importantly, both U0126 and bongkrekic acid, an inhibitor of
the mitochondrial adenine nucleotide translocase, effectively reduce
zinc-triggered mitochondrial changes. As bongkrekic acid also prevents
zinc-triggered neuronal death but not ERK1/2 phosphorylation, activation of MAPK 
signaling precedes and is required for mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death. 
These results provide new insight on the mechanism of extracellular zinc-induced 
toxicity in which the regulation of mitochondrial function by the Ras/MEK/ERK
pathway is closely associated with neuronal viability.

PMCID: PMC2910154
PMID: 20412391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Apr;15(4):970-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01065.x.

Cellular and molecular mechanism of interleukin-1ﬂ modulation of Caco-2
intestinal epithelial tight junction barrier.

Al-Sadi R(1), Ye D, Said HM, Ma TY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, 
Albuquerque, NM, USA.

Interleukin-1ﬂ (IL-1ﬂ) is a prototypical multifunctional cytokine that plays an
important role in intestinal inflammation of Crohn's disease and other
inflammatory conditions of the gut. Previous studies have shown that IL-1ﬂ causes
an increase in intestinal epithelial tight junction (TJ) permeability both in in 
vivo animal and in vitro cell culture model systems. The IL-1ﬂ-induced increase
in intestinal epithelial TJ permeability has been postulated to be an important
pathogenic mechanism contributing to intestinal inflammation. However, the
signalling pathways and the molecular processes that mediate the IL-1ﬂ modulation
of intestinal epithelial TJ barrier remain unclear. Here, we show that the
IL-1ﬂ-induced increase in Caco-2 monolayer TJ permeability was mediated by
activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2) signalling
pathway and that inhibition of ERK1/2 activity inhibits the IL-1ﬂ-induced
increase in Caco-2 TJ permeability. The activation of ERK1/2 pathway caused a
downstream activation of nuclear transcription factor Elk-1. The activated Elk-1 
translocated to the nucleus and binds to the cis-binding motif on myosin light
chain kinase (MLCK) promoter region, triggering MLCK gene activation, MLCK mRNA
transcription and MLCK protein synthesis and MLCK catalysed opening of the
intestinal epithelial TJ barrier. These studies provide novel insight into the
cellular and molecular processes that mediate the IL-1ﬂ-induced increase in
intestinal epithelial TJ permeability.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3922681
PMID: 20406328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Jul;45(1):19-32. doi: 10.1677/JME-10-0017. Epub 2010 Apr
15.

Appearance of the pituitary factor Pit-1 increases chromatin remodeling at
hypersensitive site III in the human GH locus.

Yang X(1), Jin Y, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Expression of pituitary and placental members of the human GH and chorionic
somatomammotropin (CS) gene family is directed by an upstream remote locus
control region (LCR). Pituitary-specific expression of GH requires direct binding
of Pit-1 (listed as POU1F1 in the HUGO database) to sequences marked by a
hypersensitive site (HS) region (HS I/II) 14.6 kb upstream of the GH-N gene
(listed as GH1 in the HUGO database). We used human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293)
cells overexpressing wild-type and mutant Pit-1 proteins as a model system to
gain insight into the mechanism by which Pit-1 gains access to the GH LCR.
Addition of Pit-1 to these cells increased DNA accessibility at HS III, located
28 kb upstream of the human GH-N gene, in a POU homeodomain-dependent manner, as 
reflected by effects on histone hyperacetylation and RNA polymerase II activity. 
Direct binding of Pit-1 to HS III sequences is not supported. However, the
potential for binding of ETS family members to this region has been demonstrated,
and Pit-1 association with this ETS element in HS III sequences requires the POU 
homeodomain. Also, both ETS1 and ELK1 co-precipitate from human pituitary
extracts using two independent sources of Pit-1 antibodies. Finally,
overexpression of ELK1 or Pit-1 expression in HEK293 cells increased GH-N RNA
levels. However, while ELK1 overexpression also stimulated placental CS RNA
levels, the effect of Pit-1 appeared to correlate with ETS factor levels and
target GH-N preferentially. These data are consistent with recruitment and an
early role for Pit-1 in remodeling of the GH LCR at the constitutively open HS
III through protein-protein interaction.

PMID: 20395397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2010 Jun;298(6):L870-9. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00382.2009. Epub 2010 Mar 26.

Regulation of heme oxygenase-1 gene by peptidoglycan involves the interaction of 
Elk-1 and C/EBPalpha to increase expression.

Hung CC(1), Liu X, Kwon MY, Kang YH, Chung SW, Perrella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Heme oxygenase (HO)-1 is a cytoprotective enzyme with anti-inflammatory
properties. HO-1 is induced during a systemic inflammatory response, and
expression of HO-1 is beneficial during sepsis of a Gram-positive source.
Systemic infection from Gram-positive organisms has emerged as an important cause
of sepsis, with Staphylococcus aureus as a common etiology. An important mediator
of Gram-positive infections is peptidoglycan (PGN), a cell wall component of
these organisms. Here, we demonstrate that HO-1 played an important, protective
role in vivo, as mice deficient in HO-1 were very sensitive to the lethal effects
of PGN derived from S. aureus. PGN induced HO-1 protein and mRNA levels, and this
regulation occurred at the level of gene transcription. The PGN-responsive region
of the HO-1 promoter (from -117 to -66 bp) contains a functional EBS, and Ets
proteins are known to be involved in the regulation of inflammatory responses. We
showed previously that Ets factors (activators Ets-2 and Ets-1 and repressor
Elk-3) regulate HO-1 expression by Gram-negative endotoxin. However, during
exposure to a Gram-positive stimulus in the present study, Elk-1 was a potent
activator of HO-1 in conjunction with PGN. The ability of Elk-1 to induce HO-1
promoter activity was independent of direct DNA binding, but rather occurred by
interacting with the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-alpha (C/EBPalpha), which
binds to DNA. Moreover, silencing of C/EBPalpha in macrophages prevented
induction of HO-1 promoter activity by either Elk-1 or PGN. These data provide
further insight into the regulation and function of HO-1 by a mediator of
Gram-positive bacteria.

PMCID: PMC2886611
PMID: 20348279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Apr 16;394(4):993-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.03.109. Epub 2010 Mar 21.

Human TMEM174 that is highly expressed in kidney tissue activates AP-1 and
promotes cell proliferation.

Wang P(1), Sun B, Hao D, Zhang X, Shi T, Ma D.

Author information: 
(1)Chinese National Human Genome Center, #3-707 North YongChang Road BDA, Beijing
100191, PR China.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jan 7;404(1):580.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades play an important role in
regulation of AP-1 activity through the phosphorylation of distinct substrates.
In the present study, we identified a novel protein, TMEM174, whose RNA
transcripts are highly expressed in human kidney tissue. TMEM174 is comprised of 
243 amino acids, and contains two predicted transmembrane helices which determine
its subcellular localization in endoplasmic reticulum and influences its
functions. Over-expression of TMME174 enhanced the transcriptional activity of
AP-1 and promoted cell proliferation, whereas the truncated mutant TMEM174DeltaTM
without the transmembrane regions did not retain these functions. The possible
mechanism of activation of AP-1 by TMEM174 was further examined. Our results
suggest the potential role of TMEM174 in renal development and physiological
function.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20331980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Apr 16;394(4):1058-62. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.03.123. Epub 2010 Mar 21.

The role of ERK-1/2 in the N/OFQ-induced inhibition of delayed rectifier
potassium currents.

Wang W(1), Cui Q, Li Y, Li B, Yang X, Cui L, Jin H, Qu L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neural Electrophysiology, Department of Physiology, Harbin
Medical University, Harbin 150081, China.

Nociceptin/orphanin FQ (N/OFQ) is an endogenous opioid-like heptadecapeptide
involved in many neurocognitive functions, including learning and memory. Our
previous report showed that N/OFQ inhibits the delayed rectifier potassium
current (I(K)), and this effect is associated with protein kinase C (PKC)
activation. Therefore, we wanted to determine if extracellular signal-regulated
kinase-1/2 (ERK-1/2) signaling is regulated by N/OFQ and associated with the
effect of N/OFQ on the I(K). In the current study, we tested if N/OFQ and two PKC
activators [phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate (PDBu) and ingenol 3,20-dibenzoate (IDB)]
affected the phosphorylation level of ERK-1/2 and its nuclear substrate, ETS-like
transcription factor-1 (Elk-1), using western blots. In addition, we tested if
ERK-1/2 affected the N/OFQ-induced inhibition of the I(K) by using whole-cell
patch-clamp recordings in acutely dissociated rat parietal cortical neurons. We
found that N/OFQ, PDBu, and IDB increased the amount of phosphorylated ERK-1/2
and Elk-1; U0126, a specific inhibitor for ERK-1/2, attenuated the inhibitory
effect of N/OFQ on the I(K). These data suggest that the ERK-1/2 pathway, at
least in part, mediates the inhibitory effect of N/OFQ on the I(K) in acutely
dissociated rat cerebral parietal cortical neurons.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20331962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2010 Jun;44(2):165-77. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.03.005. Epub
2010 Mar 18.

The expression of ELK transcription factors in adult DRG: Novel isoforms,
antisense transcripts and upregulation by nerve damage.

Kerr N(1), Pintzas A, Holmes F, Hobson SA, Pope R, Wallace M, Wasylyk C, Wasylyk 
B, Wynick D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, School of Medical Sciences,
University of Bristol, Bristol BS81TD, UK.

ELK transcription factors are known to be expressed in a number of regions in the
nervous system. We show by RT-PCR that the previously described Elk1,
Elk3/Elk3b/Elk3c and Elk4 mRNAs are expressed in adult dorsal root ganglia (DRG),
together with the novel alternatively spliced isoforms Elk1b, Elk3d and
Elk4c/Elk4d/Elk4e. These isoforms are also expressed in brain, heart, kidney and 
testis. In contrast to Elk3 protein, the novel Elk3d isoform is cytoplasmic,
fails to bind ETS binding sites and yet can activate transcription by an indirect
mechanism. The Elk3 and Elk4 genes are overlapped by co-expressed Pctk2 (Cdk17)
and Mfsd4 genes, respectively, with the potential formation of Elk3/Pctaire2 and 
Elk4/Mfsd4 sense-antisense mRNA heteroduplexes. After peripheral nerve injury the
Elk3 mRNA isoforms are each upregulated approximately 2.3-fold in DRG (P<0.005), 
whereas the natural antisense Pctaire2 isoforms show only a small increase (21%, 
P<0.01) and Elk1 and Elk4 mRNAs are unchanged.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2862884
PMID: 20304071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 10;5(3):e9641. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009641.

Characterization of the activation of protein tyrosine phosphatase,
receptor-type, Z polypeptide 1 (PTPRZ1) by hypoxia inducible factor-2 alpha.

Wang V(1), Davis DA, Veeranna RP, Haque M, Yarchoan R.

Author information: 
(1)HIV and AIDS Malignancy Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: Hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) are the principal means by which
cells upregulate genes in response to hypoxia and certain other stresses. There
are two major HIFs, HIF-1 and HIF-2. We previously found that certain genes are
preferentially activated by HIF-2. One was protein tyrosine phosphatase,
receptor-type, Z polypeptide 1 (PTPRZ1). PTPRZ1 is overexpressed in a number of
tumors and has been implicated in glioblastoma pathogenesis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To understand the preferential activation of
PTPRZ1 by HIF-2, we studied the PTPRZ1 promoter in HEK293T cells and Hep3B cells.
Through deletion and mutational analysis, we identified the principal hypoxia
response element. This element bound to both HIF-1 and HIF-2. We further
identified a role for ELK1, an E26 transformation-specific (Ets) factor that can 
bind to HIF-2alpha but not HIF-1alpha, in the HIF-2 responsiveness. Knock-down
experiments using siRNA to ELK1 decreased HIF-2 activation by over 50%. Also, a
deletion mutation of one of the two Ets binding motifs located near the principal
hypoxia response element similarly decreased activation of the PTPRZ1 promoter by
HIF-2. Finally, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed binding of HIF and
ELK1 to the PTPRZ1 promoter region.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results identify HIF-binding and Ets-binding
motifs on the PTPRZ1 promoter and provide evidence that preferential activation
of PTPRZ1 by HIF-2 results at least in part from cooperative binding of HIF-2 and
ELK1 to nearby sites on the PTPRZ1 promoter region. These results may have
implications in tumor pathogenesis and in understanding neurobiology, and may
help inform the development of novel tumor therapy.

PMCID: PMC2835759
PMID: 20224786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Mar;197(2):122-9. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.11.018.

Array comparative genomic hybridization analysis of adult acute leukemia
patients.

Yasar D(1), Karadogan I, Alanoglu G, Akkaya B, Luleci G, Salim O, Timuragaoglu A,
Toruner GA, Berker-Karauzum S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Akdeniz University, Antalya 07508,
Turkey.

We have performed a retrospective array-based comparative hybridization
(array-CGH) study on 41 acute leukemia samples [n=17 acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) patients only at diagnosis, n=3 ALL patients both at diagnosis and relapse;
n=20 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients only at diagnosis and n=1 AML patient 
both at diagnosis and relapse] using an Agilent 44K array. In addition to
previously detected cytogenetic aberrations, we observed cryptic aberrations in
95% of ALL and 90.5% of AML cases. ALL-specific recurrent abnormalities were RB1 
(n=3), PAX5 (n=4), and CDKN2B (n=3) deletions; AML-specific recurrent
abnormalities were HOXA9 and HOXA10 (n=2) deletions and NOTCH1 duplication (n=2).
Recurrent duplication of the ELK1 oncogene was observed in both ALL (n=2) and AML
(n=3) cases. Our results demonstrate that oligo-array CGH (oaCGH) is an effective
method for defining copy number alterations and identification of novel recurring
unbalanced abnormalities. At least for now, however, the use of oaCGH for routine
diagnosis still has some restrictions.

PMID: 20193845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Mol Cancer. 2010 Feb 19;9:39. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-39.

Analysis of an alternative human CD133 promoter reveals the implication of
Ras/ERK pathway in tumor stem-like hallmarks.

Tabu K(1), Kimura T, Sasai K, Wang L, Bizen N, Nishihara H, Taga T, Tanaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, Hokkaido University
Graduate School of Medicine, Kita-15, Nishi-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: An increasing number of studies support the presence of stem-like
cells in human malignancies. These cells are primarily responsible for tumor
initiation and thus considered as a potential target to eradicate tumors. CD133
has been identified as an important cell surface marker to enrich the stem-like
population in various human tumors. To reveal the molecular machinery underlying 
the stem-like features in tumor cells, we analyzed a promoter of CD133 gene using
human colon carcinoma Caco-2 and synovial sarcoma Fuji cells, which endogenously 
express CD133 gene.
RESULTS: A reporter analysis revealed that P5 promoter, located far upstream in a
human CD133 gene locus, exhibits the highest activity among the five putative
promoters (P1 to P5). Deletion and mutation analysis identified two ETS binding
sites in the P5 region as being essential for its promoter activity.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated the specific binding between
nuclear factors and the ETS binding sequence. Overexpression of dominant-negative
forms of Ets2 and Elk1 resulted in the significant decrease of P5 activity.
Furthermore, treatment of Fuji cells with a specific MEK/ERK inhibitor, U0126,
also markedly decreased CD133 expression, but there was no significant effect in 
Caco-2 cells, suggesting cell type-specific regulation of CD133 expression.
Instead, the side population, another hallmark of TSLCs, was dramatically
diminished in Caco-2 cells by U0126. Finally, Ras-mediated oncogenic
transformation in normal human astrocytes conferred the stem-like capability to
form neurosphere-like colonies with the increase of CD133 mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, the Ras/ERK pathway at least in part contributes to
the maintenance and the acquisition of stem-like hallmarks, although the extent
of its contribution is varied in a cell type-specific manner. These findings
could help our comprehensive understanding of tumor stemness, and also improve
the development of eradicative therapies against human malignancies.

PMCID: PMC2836276
PMID: 20167130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Mutagenesis. 2010 May;25(3):271-9. doi: 10.1093/mutage/geq003. Epub 2010 Feb 3.

Bystander effects induced by chemicals and ionizing radiation: evaluation of
changes in gene expression of downstream MAPK targets.

Asur R(1), Balasubramaniam M, Marples B, Thomas RA, Tucker JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Wayne State University, 5047 Gullen Mall,
Suite 1370, Detroit, MI 48202-3917, USA.

Radiation-induced bystander effects have been evaluated extensively, including
the involvement of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways. However,
few studies have examined the ability of chemicals to induce bystander effects,
and the molecular mechanisms involved in chemical bystander effects have not been
investigated. We have previously demonstrated the ability of mitomycin C (MMC)
and phleomycin (PHL) to induce bystander effects in normal human lymphoblastoid
cells. Here, we demonstrate changes in the expression of MAPK target genes
following bystander exposure to MMC or PHL or ionizing radiation. The expression 
changes of 18 genes, which code for proteins that are downstream targets of MAPK 
proteins, were evaluated at various time points following direct or bystander
exposure to MMC, PHL and ionizing radiation. The 18 genes were analysed as groups
belonging to one of the seven possible combinations of the three MAPK pathways.
We observed statistically significant changes in expression of several genes
following exposure to each agent. However, when the expression changes were
analysed in the bystander cells alone, significant increases in expression of
MAPK target genes were observed for MMC- and radiation-induced bystander effects 
but not for PHL. PHL is an acknowledged radiomimetic agent; however, in the
present study, PHL responses did not resemble those of radiation. These results
provide evidence for bystander-induced changes in MAPK proteins and downstream
targets and suggest that the bystander effects are a part of a general stress
response.

PMID: 20130020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Prostate. 2010 May 1;70(6):630-45. doi: 10.1002/pros.21097.

Molecular characterization of the Ggamma-globin-Tag transgenic mouse model of
hormone refractory prostate cancer: comparison to human prostate cancer.

Calvo A(1), Perez-Stable C, Segura V, Catena R, Guruceaga E, Nguewa P, Blanco D, 
Parada L, Reiner T, Green JE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Histology and Pathology, Center for
Applied Medical Research, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer (PrCa) has a high incidence in Western countries and 
at present, there is no cure for hormone refractory prostate cancer. Transgenic
mouse models have proven useful for understanding mechanisms of prostate
carcinogenesis. The characterization of genetically modified mouse PrCa models
using high-throughput genomic analyses provides important information to guide
appropriate experiment applications for such model.
METHODS: We have analyzed the transcriptome of the hormone refractory and highly 
metastatic Fetal Globin-SV40/T-antigen (Ggamma-globin-Tag) transgenic mouse model
for PrCa compared to normal mouse prostate tissue. Gene expression patterns found
in Ggamma-globin-Tag mouse prostate tumors were compared with publicly available 
human localized and metastatic prostate tumors (GEO accession # GSE3325) through 
hierarchical cluster analysis, Pearson's rank correlation coefficient, and Self
Organizing Feature Maps (SOM) analyses.
RESULTS: Ggamma-globin-Tag tumors clustered closely with human metastatic tumors 
and gene expression patterns had a significant correlation (P < 0.01), unlike
human localized primary tumors (P > 0.6). Bioinformatic analyses identified
deregulated genetic pathways and networks in Ggamma-globin-Tag tumors, which
displayed similarities to alterations in human PrCa. Changes in the expression of
genes involved in DNA replication and repair (Rb1, p53, Myc, PCNA, DNMT3A) and
growth factor signaling pathways (TGFbeta2, ERK1/2, NRas, and Notch1) are
deregulated in the Ggamma-globin-Tag tumors, suggesting their key role in the
oncogenic process. Identification of an enrichment of putative binding sites for 
transcription factors revealed eight transcription factors that may be important 
in Ggamma-globin-Tag carcinogenesis, including SP1, NF-Y, CREB, Elk1, and E2F.
Novel genes related to microtubule regulation were also identified in
Ggamma-globin-Tag tumors as potentially important candidate targets for PrCa.
Overexpression of stathmin-1, whose expression was increased in human metastatic 
prostate tumors, was validated in Ggamma-globin-Tag tumors by
immunohistochemistry. This protein belongs to the SV40/T-antigen cancer signature
identified in previous studies in prostate, breast, and lung cancer mouse models.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that the Ggamma-globin-Tag model for hormone
refractory PrCa shares important features with aggressive, metastatic human PrCa.
Given the role of stathmin-1 in the destabilization of microtubles and taxane
resistance, the Ggamma-globin-Tag model and other SV40/T-antigen driven
transgenic models may be useful for testing potential therapies directed at
stathmin-1 in human prostate tumors.

PMCID: PMC3457648
PMID: 20058236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. BMC Med Genomics. 2009 Dec 21;2:70. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-2-70.

Identifying significant genetic regulatory networks in the prostate cancer from
microarray data based on transcription factor analysis and conditional
independency.

Yeh HY(1), Cheng SW, Lin YC, Yeh CY, Lin SF, Soo VW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, HsinChu 300,
Taiwan. d926708@oz.nthu.edu.tw

BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer is a world wide leading cancer and it is
characterized by its aggressive metastasis. According to the clinical
heterogeneity, prostate cancer displays different stages and grades related to
the aggressive metastasis disease. Although numerous studies used microarray
analysis and traditional clustering method to identify the individual genes
during the disease processes, the important gene regulations remain unclear. We
present a computational method for inferring genetic regulatory networks from
micorarray data automatically with transcription factor analysis and conditional 
independence testing to explore the potential significant gene regulatory
networks that are correlated with cancer, tumor grade and stage in the prostate
cancer.
RESULTS: To deal with missing values in microarray data, we used a
K-nearest-neighbors (KNN) algorithm to determine the precise expression values.
We applied web services technology to wrap the bioinformatics toolkits and
databases to automatically extract the promoter regions of DNA sequences and
predicted the transcription factors that regulate the gene expressions. We adopt 
the microarray datasets consists of 62 primary tumors, 41 normal prostate tissues
from Stanford Microarray Database (SMD) as a target dataset to evaluate our
method. The predicted results showed that the possible biomarker genes related to
cancer and denoted the androgen functions and processes may be in the development
of the prostate cancer and promote the cell death in cell cycle. Our predicted
results showed that sub-networks of genes SREBF1, STAT6 and PBX1 are strongly
related to a high extent while ETS transcription factors ELK1, JUN and EGR2 are
related to a low extent. Gene SLC22A3 may explain clinically the differentiation 
associated with the high grade cancer compared with low grade cancer. Enhancer of
Zeste Homolg 2 (EZH2) regulated by RUNX1 and STAT3 is correlated to the
pathological stage.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide a computational framework to reconstruct the genetic
regulatory network from the microarray data using biological knowledge and
constraint-based inferences. Our method is helpful in verifying possible
interaction relations in gene regulatory networks and filtering out incorrect
relations inferred by imperfect methods. We predicted not only individual gene
related to cancer but also discovered significant gene regulation networks. Our
method is also validated in several enriched published papers and databases and
the significant gene regulatory networks perform critical biological functions
and processes including cell adhesion molecules, androgen and estrogen
metabolism, smooth muscle contraction, and GO-annotated processes. Those
significant gene regulations and the critical concept of tumor progression are
useful to understand cancer biology and disease treatment.

PMCID: PMC2805685
PMID: 20025723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Am J Pathol. 2010 Jan;176(1):278-87. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090187. Epub 2009
Dec 11.

Downstream targets of homeobox gene HLX show altered expression in human
idiopathic fetal growth restriction.

Rajaraman G(1), Murthi P, Pathirage N, Brennecke SP, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Melbourne, RWH Campus,
20 Flemington Rd., Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. graja@unimelb.edu.au

Fetal growth restriction (FGR), a clinically significant pregnancy disorder, is
poorly understood at the molecular level. This study investigates idiopathic FGR 
associated with placental insufficiency. Previously, we showed that the homeobox 
gene HLX is expressed in placental trophoblast cells and that HLX expression is
significantly decreased in human idiopathic FGR. Here, we used the novel approach
of identifying downstream targets of HLX in cell culture to detect potentially
important genes involved in idiopathic FGR. Downstream targets were revealed by
decreasing HLX expression in cultured trophoblast cells with HLX-specific small
interfering RNAs to model human idiopathic FGR and comparing these levels with
controls using a real-time PCR-based gene profiling system. Changes in candidate 
HLX target mRNA levels were verified in an independent trophoblast cell line, and
candidate target gene expression was assessed in human idiopathic FGR-affected
placentae (n = 25) compared with gestation-matched controls (n = 25). The
downstream targets RB1 and MYC, cell cycle regulatory genes, showed significantly
increased mRNA levels in FGR-affected tissues compared with gestation-matched
controls, whereas CCNB1, ELK1, JUN, and CDKN1 showed significantly decreased mRNA
levels (n = 25, P < 0.001, t-test). The changes for RB1 and CDKN1C were verified 
by Western blot analysis in FGR-affected placentae compared with
gestation-matched controls (n = 6). We conclude that cell cycle regulatory genes 
RB1, MYC, CCNB1, ELK1, JUN, and CDKN1C, which control important trophoblast cell 
functions, are targets of HLX.

PMCID: PMC2797890
PMID: 20008130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. BMC Genomics. 2009 Dec 10;10:595. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-595.

Deciphering the transcriptional circuitry of microRNA genes expressed during
human monocytic differentiation.

Schmeier S(1), MacPherson CR, Essack M, Kaur M, Schaefer U, Suzuki H, Hayashizaki
Y, Bajic VB.

Author information: 
(1)South African National Bioinformatics Institute, University of the Western
Cape, Modderdam Road, Bellville, South Africa. sebastian.schmeier@kaust.edu.sa

BACKGROUND: Macrophages are immune cells involved in various biological processes
including host defence, homeostasis, differentiation, and organogenesis.
Disruption of macrophage biology has been linked to increased pathogen infection,
inflammation and malignant diseases. Differential gene expression observed in
monocytic differentiation is primarily regulated by interacting transcription
factors (TFs). Current research suggests that microRNAs (miRNAs) degrade and
repress translation of mRNA, but also may target genes involved in
differentiation. We focus on getting insights into the transcriptional circuitry 
regulating miRNA genes expressed during monocytic differentiation.
RESULTS: We computationally analysed the transcriptional circuitry of miRNA genes
during monocytic differentiation using in vitro time-course expression data for
TFs and miRNAs. A set of TF-->miRNA associations was derived from predicted TF
binding sites in promoter regions of miRNA genes. Time-lagged expression
correlation analysis was utilised to evaluate the TF-->miRNA associations. Our
analysis identified 12 TFs that potentially play a central role in regulating
miRNAs throughout the differentiation process. Six of these 12 TFs (ATF2, E2F3,
HOXA4, NFE2L1, SP3, and YY1) have not previously been described to be important
for monocytic differentiation. The remaining six TFs are CEBPB, CREB1, ELK1,
NFE2L2, RUNX1, and USF2. For several miRNAs (miR-21, miR-155, miR-424, and
miR-17-92), we show how their inferred transcriptional regulation impacts
monocytic differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: The study demonstrates that miRNAs and their transcriptional
regulatory control are integral molecular mechanisms during differentiation.
Furthermore, it is the first study to decipher on a large-scale, how miRNAs are
controlled by TFs during human monocytic differentiation. Subsequently, we have
identified 12 candidate key controllers of miRNAs during this differentiation
process.

PMCID: PMC2797535
PMID: 20003307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Oncogene. 2010 Mar 11;29(10):1553-60. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.435. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

Rapamycin inhibits oncogenic intestinal ion channels and neoplasia in APC(Min/+) 
mice.

Koehl GE(1), Spitzner M, Ousingsawat J, Schreiber R, Geissler EK, Kunzelmann K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Regensburg, University of
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. gudrun.koehl@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene is mutated in familial adenomatous
polyposis. Mice with a heterozygous APC(Min) mutation develop multiple intestinal
neoplasia (Min) leading to premature death. Early in colorectal carcinogenesis,
APC(Min/+) mice show enhanced Akt-mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling,
which is paralleled by upregulation of oncogenic K(+) channels. In this study, we
tested the effect of mTOR inhibition with rapamycin on tumor formation in
APC(Min/+) mice and evaluated ion channel regulation. We found that continuous
long-term rapamycin treatment of APC(Min/+) mice dramatically inhibits intestinal
neoplasia. Moreover, although untreated APC(Min/+) mice lose weight, experience
intestinal bleeding and succumb to multiple neoplasia by 22.3+/-1.4 weeks of age,
mice treated with rapamycin maintain stable weight and survive long term
(39.6+/-3.4 weeks), with more than 30% surviving >1 year. Impressively,
abnormalities in colonic electrolyte transport typical for APC(Min/+) mice are
abolished, along with the suppression of epithelial Na(+) channel (ENaC) and
oncogenic K(+) ion channels BK, Elk1 and Erg1, both functionally and at mRNA
levels. These results show that continuous prophylaxis by rapamycin markedly
inhibits the development of APC mutation-related polyposis, and suggest a novel
contributing mechanism of action through the blockade of intestinal oncogenic ion
channels.

PMID: 19966863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Jul 14;89(26):1834-7.

[Application of bioinformatics analysis to optimize amifostine combination
therapeutic regimen of myelodysplastic syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu XC(1), Yang B, Zhu HL, Fan H, Li SX, Liu Y, Yao SQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing
100853, China. luxuechun@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To apply bioinformatics analysis to study the potential mechanism of
amifostine for the treatment of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and optimize
amifostine combination regimen to further improve the efficacy and prognosis of
MDS.
METHODS: Bioinformatics analysis: Internet-based human gene expression open
database was used to predict the genomic profiling by regulation of amifostine
and gene expression of MDS. And then possible target genes of amifostine were
screened to predict the feasibility of amifostine combination regimen. Finally,
similar analysis of gene expression profiling was conducted to forecast the
potential therapeutic drugs for MDS. Clinical investigation: eighteen patients
with MDS, non-responding to traditional drugs, were enrolled. According to the
latest WHO classification, the patients were divided into 7 patients of
refractory anemia (RA), 2 patients of refractory anemia with ring sideroblast
(RARS) and 9 patients of refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia (RCMD).
Distributions of age was 19-91 years old (mean: 79). There were 17 males and 1
female. The regimen of amifostine plus recombinant human erythropoietin (rhEPO)
was used to treat the MDS patients. Administration formula was as follows: the
intravenous drip of amifostine at a dosage of 0.4 gram per day was given 5 days
weekly for 4 consecutive weeks; the subcutaneous injection of rhEPO at a dosage
of 6 000 IU was given 3 times weekly. Therapeutic effect was evaluated 2 weeks
post-therapy.
RESULTS: Approximately 2.6 percent of human gene involved in apoptosis, cell
cycle and differentiation was regulated by amifostine. Especially, upregulation
of ELK1 expression, which belongs to downstream functional gene of EPO pathway,
and downregulation of Cyclin D1 expression were successfully predicted. Based on 
the potential therapeutic mechanism amifostine for MDS, amifostine plus EPO had
dual effects on MDS, i. e. promotion of hematopoiesis and inhibition of tumor
cell proliferation. Clinical investigation showed that the response rates of
hemoglobin, neutrophil and platelet were 83.3%, 66.7% and 55.6% respectively. The
results suggested that the regimen of amifostine plus EPO had better therapeutic 
effects than a single agent.
CONCLUSIONS: The study successfully used bioinformatics analysis to screen target
genes regulated by amifostine and optimize amifostine combination therapeutic
regimen for MDS. Bioinformatics method is a convenient, economical and effective 
supplementary approach for studying the pathogenesis and therapeutics of MDS.

PMID: 19953928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Cancer Res. 2009 Dec 1;69(23):9125-32. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1709. Epub
2009 Nov 10.

Detection of treatment-induced changes in signaling pathways in gastrointestinal 
stromal tumors using transcriptomic data.

Ochs MF(1), Rink L, Tarn C, Mburu S, Taguchi T, Eisenberg B, Godwin AK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA. mfo@jhu.edu

Cell signaling plays a central role in the etiology of cancer. Numerous
therapeutics in use or under development target signaling proteins; however,
off-target effects often limit assignment of positive clinical response to the
intended target. As direct measurements of signaling protein activity are not
generally feasible during treatment, there is a need for more powerful methods to
determine if therapeutics inhibit their targets and when off-target effects
occur. We have used the Bayesian Decomposition algorithm and data on
transcriptional regulation to create a novel methodology, Differential Expression
for Signaling Determination (DESIDE), for inferring signaling activity from
microarray measurements. We applied DESIDE to deduce signaling activity in
gastrointestinal stromal tumor cell lines treated with the targeted therapeutic
imatinib mesylate (Gleevec). We detected the expected reduced activity in the KIT
pathway, as well as unexpected changes in the p53 pathway. Pursuing these
findings, we have determined that imatinib-induced DNA damage is responsible for 
the increased activity of p53, identifying a novel off-target activity for this
drug. We then used DESIDE on data from resected, post-imatinib treatment tumor
samples and identified a pattern in these tumors similar to that at late time
points in the cell lines, and this pattern correlated with initial clinical
response. The pattern showed increased activity of ETS domain-containing protein 
Elk-1 and signal transducers and activators of transcription 3 transcription
factors, which are associated with the growth of side population cells. DESIDE
infers the global reprogramming of signaling networks during treatment,
permitting treatment modification that leverages ongoing drug development
efforts, which is crucial for personalized medicine.

PMCID: PMC2789202
PMID: 19903850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Gastroenterology. 2010 Mar;138(3):1189-99.e1-2. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2009.10.045. Epub 2009 Nov 6.

NFAT-induced histone acetylation relay switch promotes c-Myc-dependent growth in 
pancreatic cancer cells.

Kˆenig A(1), Linhart T, Schlengemann K, Reutlinger K, Wegele J, Adler G, Singh G,
Hofmann L, Kunsch S, B¸ch T, Sch‰fer E, Gress TM, Fernandez-Zapico ME,
Ellenrieder V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Endocrinology, Philipps-University of
Marburg, 35043 Marburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Induction of immediate early transcription factors (ITF)
represents the first transcriptional program controlling mitogen-stimulated cell 
cycle progression in cancer. Here, we examined the transcriptional mechanisms
regulating the ITF protein c-Myc and its role in pancreatic cancer growth in
vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: Expression of ITF proteins was examined by reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction and immunoblotting, and its implications in cell cycle 
progression and growth was determined by flow cytometry and [(3)H]-thymidine
incorporation. Intracellular Ca(2+) concentrations, calcineurin activity, and
cellular nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) distribution were analyzed.
Transcription factor complex formations and promoter regulation were examined by 
immunoprecipitations, reporter gene assays, and chromatin immunoprecipitation.
Using a combination of RNA interference knockdown technology and xenograft
models, we analyzed the significance for pancreatic cancer tumor growth.
RESULTS: Serum promotes pancreatic cancer growth through induction of the
proproliferative NFAT/c-Myc axis. Mechanistically, serum increases intracellular 
Ca(2+) concentrations and activates the calcineurin/NFAT pathway to induce c-Myc 
transcription. NFAT binds to a serum responsive element within the proximal
promoter, initiates p300-dependent histone acetylation, and creates a local
chromatin structure permissive for the inducible recruitment of Ets-like gene
(ELK)-1, a protein required for maximal activation of the c-Myc promoter. The
functional significance of this novel pathway was emphasized by impaired c-Myc
expression, G1 arrest, and reduced tumor growth upon NFAT depletion in vitro and 
in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study uncovers a novel mechanism regulating cell growth and
identifies the NFAT/ELK complex as modulators of early stages of
mitogen-stimulated proliferation in pancreatic cancer cells.

Copyright 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2895621
PMID: 19900447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 8;285(2):1311-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.032557. Epub 2009
Oct 27.

Novel nuclear nesprin-2 variants tether active extracellular signal-regulated
MAPK1 and MAPK2 at promyelocytic leukemia protein nuclear bodies and act to
regulate smooth muscle cell proliferation.

Warren DT(1), Tajsic T, Mellad JA, Searles R, Zhang Q, Shanahan CM.

Author information: 
(1)British Heart Foundation Centre, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, King's
College London, London SE5 9NU, United Kingdom. derek.warren@kcl.ac.uk

Nuclear and cytoplasmic scaffold proteins have been shown to be essential for
temporal and spatial organization, as well as the fidelity, of MAPK signaling
pathways. In this study we show that nesprin-2 is a novel extracellular
signal-regulated MAPK1 and 2 (ERK1/2) scaffold protein that serves to regulate
nuclear signaling by tethering these kinases at promyelocytic leukemia protein
nuclear bodies (PML NBs). Using immunofluorescence microscopy, GST pull-down and 
immunoprecipitation, we show that nesprin-2, ERK1/2, and PML colocalize and bind 
to form a nuclear complex. Interference of nesprin-2 function, by either
siRNA-mediated knockdown or overexpression of a dominant negative nesprin-2
fragment, augmented ERK1/2 nuclear signaling shown by increased SP1 activity and 
ELK1 phosphorylation. The functional outcome of nesprin-2 disruption and the
resultant sustained ERK1/2 signal was increased proliferation. Importantly, these
activities were not induced by previously identified nuclear envelope
(NE)-targeted nesprin-2 isoforms but rather were mediated by novel nuclear
isoforms that lacked the KASH domain. Taken together, this study suggests that
nesprin-2 is a novel intranuclear scaffold, essential for nuclear ERK1/2
signaling fidelity and cell cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC2801258
PMID: 19861416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 18;284(51):35827-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.046276.

Intracellular metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5) activates signaling
cascades distinct from cell surface counterparts.

Jong YJ(1), Kumar V, O'Malley KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

G-protein-coupled receptors are thought to transmit extracellular signals to the 
cytoplasm from their position on the cell surface. Some receptors, including the 
metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5), are also highly expressed on
intracellular membranes where they serve unknown functions. Here, we show that
activation of cell surface versus intracellular mGluR5 results in unique Ca(2+)
signatures leading to unique cellular responses. Specifically, activation of
either cell surface or intracellular mGluR5 leads to JNK,
Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMK), and cyclic adenosine
3',5'-monophosphate-responsive element-binding protein phosphorylation, whereas
activation of only intracellular mGluR5 leads to ERK1/2 and Elk-1
phosphorylation. Using pharmacological and genetic approaches, the present
findings support a role for CaMK kinase in mediating mGluR5-dependent cyclic
adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate-responsive element-binding protein phosphorylation,
whereas CaMKII is upstream of intracellular mGluR5-mediated Elk-1
phosphorylation. Consistent with models showing Elk-1 regulating cascades of gene
expression, the known Elk-1 targets c-fos and egr1 were up-regulated following
intracellular mGluR5 activation, whereas a representative non-Elk-1 target,
c-jun, was not. These findings emphasize that glutamate not only serves as a
neurotransmitter for cell surface receptors but, when transported into the cell, 
can also activate intracellular receptors such as mGluR5. Glutamate activation of
intracellular mGluR5 serves an important role in the regulation of nuclear
Ca(2+), transcriptional activation, and gene expression necessary for
physiological processes such as synaptic plasticity.

PMCID: PMC2791012
PMID: 19840937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Oct;8(10):2780-90. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-0549. Epub
2009 Oct 6.

Triptolide is an inhibitor of RNA polymerase I and II-dependent transcription
leading predominantly to down-regulation of short-lived mRNA.

VispÈ S(1), DeVries L, CrÈancier L, Besse J, BrÈand S, Hobson DJ, Svejstrup JQ,
Annereau JP, Cussac D, Dumontet C, Guilbaud N, Barret JM, Bailly C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Oncologie ExpÈrimentale, Institut de Recherche Pierre
Fabre, 3 rue des satellites, BP94244, Toulouse Cedex 4, 31432 France.
stephane.vispe@pierre-fabre.com

Triptolide, a natural product extracted from the Chinese plant Tripterygium
wilfordii, possesses antitumor properties. Despite numerous reports showing the
proapoptotic capacity and the inhibition of NF-kappaB-mediated transcription by
triptolide, the identity of its cellular target is still unknown. To clarify its 
mechanism of action, we further investigated the effect of triptolide on RNA
synthesis in the human non-small cell lung cancer cell line A549. Triptolide
inhibited both total RNA and mRNA de novo synthesis, with the primary action
being on the latter pool. We used 44K human pan-genomic DNA microarrays and
identified the genes primarily affected by a short treatment with triptolide.
Among the modulated genes, up to 98% are down-regulated, encompassing a large
array of oncogenes including transcription factors and cell cycle regulators. We 
next observed that triptolide induced a rapid depletion of RPB1, the RNA
polymerase II main subunit that is considered a hallmark of a transcription
elongation blockage. However, we also show that triptolide does not directly
interact with the RNA polymerase II complex nor does it damage DNA. We thus
conclude that triptolide is an original pharmacologic inhibitor of RNA polymerase
activity, affecting indirectly the transcription machinery, leading to a rapid
depletion of short-lived mRNA, including transcription factors, cell cycle
regulators such as CDC25A, and the oncogenes MYC and Src. Overall, the data shed 
light on the effect of triptolide on transcription, along with its novel
potential applications in cancers, including acute myeloid leukemia, which is in 
part driven by the aforementioned oncogenic factors.

PMID: 19808979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Sep;5(9):e1000587. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000587. Epub 2009
Sep 18.

Differential regulation of type I interferon and epidermal growth factor pathways
by a human Respirovirus virulence factor.

Caignard G(1), Komarova AV, BouraÔ M, Mourez T, Jacob Y, Jones LM, Rozenberg F,
Vabret A, Freymuth F, Tangy F, Vidalain PO.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de GÈnomique Virale et Vaccination, Department of Virology,
Institut Pasteur, CNRS URA 3015, Paris, France.

A number of paramyxoviruses are responsible for acute respiratory infections in
children, elderly and immuno-compromised individuals, resulting in airway
inflammation and exacerbation of chronic diseases like asthma. To understand the 
molecular pathogenesis of these infections, we searched for cellular targets of
the virulence protein C of human parainfluenza virus type 3 (hPIV3-C). We found
that hPIV3-C interacts directly through its C-terminal domain with STAT1 and
GRB2, whereas C proteins from measles or Nipah viruses failed to do so. Binding
to STAT1 explains the previously reported capacity of hPIV3-C to block type I
interferon signaling, but the interaction with GRB2 was unexpected. This adaptor 
protein bridges Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) receptor to MAPK/ERK pathway, a
signaling cascade recently found to be involved in airway inflammatory response. 
We report that either hPIV3 infection or transient expression of hPIV3-C both
increase cellular response to EGF, as assessed by Elk1 transactivation and
phosphorylation levels of ERK1/2, 40S ribosomal subunit protein S6 and
translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E). Furthermore, inhibition of MAPK/ERK
pathway with U0126 prevented viral protein expression in infected cells.
Altogether, our data provide molecular basis to explain the role of hPIV3-C as a 
virulence factor and determinant of pathogenesis and demonstrate that
Paramyxoviridae have evolved a single virulence factor to block type I interferon
signaling and to boost simultaneous cellular response to growth factors.

PMCID: PMC2736567
PMID: 19806178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Biol Chem. 2009 Nov 27;284(48):33006-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.012591. Epub
2009 Oct 5.

Noncatalytic function of ERK1/2 can promote Raf/MEK/ERK-mediated growth arrest
signaling.

Hong SK(1), Yoon S, Moelling C, Arthan D, Park JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin 53226, USA.

Kinase activity is known as the key biochemical property of MAPKs. Here, we
report that ERK1/2 also utilizes its noncatalytic function to mediate certain
signal transductions. Sustained activation of the Raf/MEK/ERK pathway induces
growth arrest, accompanied by changes in cell cycle regulators (decreased
retinoblastoma phosphorylation, E2F1 down-regulation, and/or p21(CIP1)
up-regulation) and cell type-specific changes in morphology and expression of
c-Myc or RET in the human tumor lines LNCaP, U251, and TT. Ablation of ERK1/2 by 
RNA interference abrogated all these effects. However, active site-disabled ERK
mutants (ERK1-K71R, ERK2-K52R, and ERK2-D147A), which competitively inhibit
activation of endogenous ERK1/2, could not block Raf/MEK-induced growth arrest as
well as changes in the cell cycle regulators, although they effectively blocked
phosphorylation of the ERK1/2 catalytic activity readouts, p90(RSK) and ELK1, as 
well as the cell type-specific changes. Because this indicated a potential
noncatalytic ERK1/2 function, we generated stable lines of the tumor cells in
which both ERK1 and ERK2 were significantly knocked down, and we further
investigated the possibility using rat-derived kinase-deficient ERK mutants
(ERK2-K52R and ERK2-T183A/Y185F) that were not targeted by human small hairpin
RNA. Indeed, ERK2-K52R selectively restored Raf-induced growth inhibitory
signaling in ERK1/2-depleted cells, as manifested by regained cellular ability to
undergo growth arrest and to control the cell cycle regulators without affecting 
c-Myc and morphology. However, ERK2-T183A/Y185F was less effective, indicating
the requirement of TEY site phosphorylation. Our study suggests that functions of
ERK1/2 other than its "canonical" kinase activity are also involved in the
pathway-mediated growth arrest signaling.

PMCID: PMC2785141
PMID: 19805545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Biol Pharm Bull. 2009 Oct;32(10):1770-5.

Inhibitory effect of panduratin A on c-Jun N-terminal kinase and activator
protein-1 signaling involved in Porphyromonas gingivalis supernatant-stimulated
matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression in human oral epidermoid cells.

Yanti(1), Lee M, Kim D, Hwang JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei
University, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-749, Korea.

Porphyromonas gingivalis, a type of Gram-negative periodontopathogen, causes
periodontal disease by activating intracellular signaling pathways that produce
excessive inflammatory responses such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs).
Recently, we reported that panduratin A, a chalcone compound isolated from
Kaempferia pandurata ROXB., caused the decreased levels of MMP-9 secretion,
protein, and gene expression in human oral epidermoid KB cells exposed to P.
gingivalis supernatant. In this study, we clarified if mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) signaling mediated MMP-9 expression by examining the effect of
specific MAPK inhibitors, i.e. U0126, SB203580, and SP600125, on P. gingivalis
supernatant-stimulated MMP-9 expression in KB cells. We next elucidated the
molecular mechanism by which panduratin A attenuated signaling pathways involved 
in MMP-9 expression by performing gelatin zymography, Western blotting, reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and promoter assays. Exposure of KB
cells to P. gingivalis supernatant up-regulated the expression of MMP-9 protein
and gene, and activation of activator protein-1 (AP-1) element, MAPK
phosphorylation (extracellular signal-related kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), p38, and c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK)), and transcription factors (Elk1, c-Jun, and c-Fos). A
JNK inhibitor (SP600125) significantly attenuated MMP-9 gene expression and AP-1 
activity in KB cells in response to P. gingivalis supernatant. Similar to
SP600125, panduratin A was found to strongly suppress the level of phosphorylated
JNK and block AP-1 activity in P. gingivalis supernatant-stimulated KB cells. In 
summary, JNK and AP-1 are the major signaling for P. gingivalis
supernatant-stimulated MMP-9 expression in KB cells, and panduratin A markedly
down-regulates MMP-9 expression through inhibition of these signaling.

PMID: 19801842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Cell Biochem. 2010 Feb;335(1-2):263-72. doi: 10.1007/s11010-009-0276-1. Epub 
2009 Oct 2.

Activation of RhoA and FAK induces ERK-mediated osteopontin expression in
mechanical force-subjected periodontal ligament fibroblasts.

Hong SY(1), Jeon YM, Lee HJ, Kim JG, Baek JA, Lee JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Dental Clinic, School of Medicine, Ajou
University, Suwon 443-721, South Korea.

The precise mechanism by which Rho kinase translates the mechanical signals into 
OPN up-regulation in force-exposed fibroblasts has not been elucidated. Human
periodontal ligament fibroblasts (hPLFs) were exposed to mechanical force by
centrifuging the culture plates at a magnitude of 50 g/cm(2) for 60 min. At
various times of the force application, they were processed for analyzing cell
viability, trypan blue exclusion, and OPN expression at protein and RNA levels.
Cellular mechanism(s) of the force-induced OPN up-regulation was also examined
using various kinase inhibitors or antisense oligonucleotides specific to
mechanosensitive factors. Centrifugal force up-regulated OPN expression and
induced a rapid and transient increase in the phosphorylation of focal adhesion
kinase (FAK), extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), and Elk1.
Pharmacological blockade of RhoA/Rho-associated coiled coil-containing kinase
(ROCK) signaling markedly reduced force-induced FAK and ERK1/2 phosphorylation.
Transfecting hPLFs with FAK antisense oligonucleotide diminished ERK1/2
activation and force-induced OPN expression. Further, ERK inhibitor inhibited
significantly OPN expression, Elk1 phosphorylation, and activator protein-1
(AP-1)-DNA binding activation, but not FAK phosphorylation, in the force-applied 
cells. These results demonstrate that FAK signaling plays critical roles in
force-induced OPN expression in hPLFs through interaction with Rho/ROCK as
upstream effectors and ERK-Elk1/ERK-c-Fos as downstream effectors.

PMID: 19798549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Cell Death Differ. 2010 Feb;17(2):236-45. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.109. Epub 2009
Aug 21.

p53-independent upregulation of miR-34a during oncogene-induced senescence
represses MYC.

Christoffersen NR(1), Shalgi R, Frankel LB, Leucci E, Lees M, Klausen M, Pilpel
Y, Nielsen FC, Oren M, Lund AH.

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Research & Innovation Centre, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Aberrant oncogene activation induces cellular senescence, an irreversible growth 
arrest that acts as a barrier against tumorigenesis. To identify microRNAs
(miRNAs) involved in oncogene-induced senescence, we examined the expression of
miRNAs in primary human TIG3 fibroblasts after constitutive activation of B-RAF. 
Among the regulated miRNAs, both miR-34a and miR-146a were strongly induced
during senescence. Although members of the miR-34 family are known to be
transcriptionally regulated by p53, we find that miR-34a is regulated
independently of p53 during oncogene-induced senescence. Instead, upregulation of
miR-34a is mediated by the ETS family transcription factor, ELK1. During
senescence, miR-34a targets the important proto-oncogene MYC and our data suggest
that miR-34a thereby coordinately controls a set of cell cycle regulators. Hence,
in addition to its integration in the p53 pathway, we show that alternative
cancer-related pathways regulate miR-34a, emphasising its significance as a
tumour suppressor.

PMID: 19696787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Genome Res. 2009 Nov;19(11):1963-73. doi: 10.1101/gr.093047.109. Epub 2009 Aug
17.

Elucidation of the ELK1 target gene network reveals a role in the coordinate
regulation of core components of the gene regulation machinery.

Boros J(1), Donaldson IJ, O'Donnell A, Odrowaz ZA, Zeef L, Lupien M, Meyer CA,
Liu XS, Brown M, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, United
Kingdom.

Transcription factors play an important role in orchestrating the activation of
specific networks of genes through targeting their proximal promoter and distal
enhancer regions. However, it is unclear how the specificity of downstream
responses is maintained by individual members of transcription-factor families
and, in most cases, what their target repertoire is. We have used ChIP-chip
analysis to identify the target genes of the ETS-domain transcription factor
ELK1. Two distinct modes of ELK1 target gene selection are identified; the first 
involves redundant promoter binding with other ETS-domain family members; the
second occurs through combinatorial binding with a second transcription factor
SRF, which specifies a unique group of target genes. One of the most prominent
groups of genes forming the ELK1 target network includes classes involved in core
gene expression control, namely, components of the basal transcriptional
machinery, the spliceosome and the ribosome. Amongst the set of genes encoding
the basal transcription machinery components, are a functionally linked subset of
GTFs and TAFs. Our study, therefore, reveals an unsuspected level of coordinate
regulation of components of the core gene expression control machinery and also
identifies two different modes of promoter targeting through binding with a
second transcription factor or redundant binding with other ETS-domain family
members.

PMCID: PMC2775591
PMID: 19687146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Environ Health Perspect. 2009 Jul;117(7):1124-30. doi: 10.1289/ehp.0800157. Epub 
2009 Apr 3.

Distinct contributions of JNK and p38 to chromium cytotoxicity and inhibition of 
murine embryonic stem cell differentiation.

Chen L(1), Ovesen JL, Puga A, Xia Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267, USA.

BACKGROUND: Potassium dichromate [Cr(VI)] is a widespread environmental toxicant 
responsible for increased risk of several human diseases. Cr(VI) exposure leads
to activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), including c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK)1/2, p38, and extracellular-signal regulated kinase
(ERK)1/2.
OBJECTIVES: We evaluated the contribution of MAPKs to Cr(VI) toxicity.
METHODS: Phosphorylation of MAPKs and their downstream effectors was evaluated by
Western immunoblotting; reactive oxygen species were measured by DCFDA
(5',6'-chloromethyl-2'-7'-dichlorofluorescin diacetate) labeling and flow
cytometry, and glutathione and glutathione disulfide levels were determined by
monochrome graphic spectroflurometer. Cytotoxicity was assessed by the MTS
[3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tet
razolium] assay and colony formation. Embryoid body (EB) differentiation was
evaluated by contracting cardiomyocyte formation, and real-time polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) was used for cardiomyocyte-specific and stem-cell-specific gene
expression.
RESULTS: Acute treatment of mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells with 50 microM Cr(VI)
induced the rapid phosphorylation of JNK, p38, and ERK and their respective
downstream transcription factors, c-JUN, activating transcription factor-2, and
ELK1. MAPK activation and cytotoxicity induction were partially blocked by
pretreatment with the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine. Ablation of the upstream MAP
kinase kinase (MAP2K7) in ES cells prevented JNK activation, whereas ablation of 
MAP2K4 prevented both JNK and p38 activation. Using specific MAPK inhibitors and 
MAP2K4- and MAP2K7-deficient ES cells, we showed that JNK reduced acute Cr(VI)
cytotoxicity, p38 potentiated it, and ERK had no effect. At low submicromolar
concentrations, Cr(VI) caused MAP2K4/7-dependent JNK activation and
MAP2K4-dependent p38 activation and strongly inhibited contracting cardiomyocyte 
development in wild-type ES cells, but much less so in Map2k7((-/-)) cells.
CONCLUSION: Each MAPK distinctly contributes to chromium toxicity. Whereas JNK
prevents and p38 promotes acute cytotoxicity, JNK contributes to optimal
inhibition of ES cell differentiation by chromium.

PMCID: PMC2717140
PMID: 19654923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. BMC Syst Biol. 2009 Jul 17;3:73. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-3-73.

An integrative ChIP-chip and gene expression profiling to model SMAD regulatory
modules.

Qin H(1), Chan MW, Liyanarachchi S, Balch C, Potter D, Souriraj IJ, Cheng AS,
Agosto-Perez FJ, Nikonova EV, Yan PS, Lin HJ, Nephew KP, Saltz JH, Showe LC,
Huang TH, Davuluri RV.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology,
and Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
huaxia.qin@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The TGF-beta/SMAD pathway is part of a broader signaling network in
which crosstalk between pathways occurs. While the molecular mechanisms of
TGF-beta/SMAD signaling pathway have been studied in detail, the global networks 
downstream of SMAD remain largely unknown. The regulatory effect of SMAD complex 
likely depends on transcriptional modules, in which the SMAD binding elements and
partner transcription factor binding sites (SMAD modules) are present in specific
context.
RESULTS: To address this question and develop a computational model for SMAD
modules, we simultaneously performed chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
microarray analysis (ChIP-chip) and mRNA expression profiling to identify
TGF-beta/SMAD regulated and synchronously coexpressed gene sets in ovarian
surface epithelium. Intersecting the ChIP-chip and gene expression data yielded
150 direct targets, of which 141 were grouped into 3 co-expressed gene sets
(sustained up-regulated, transient up-regulated and down-regulated), based on
their temporal changes in expression after TGF-beta activation. We developed a
data-mining method driven by the Random Forest algorithm to model SMAD
transcriptional modules in the target sequences. The predicted SMAD modules
contain SMAD binding element and up to 2 of 7 other transcription factor binding 
sites (E2F, P53, LEF1, ELK1, COUPTF, PAX4 and DR1).
CONCLUSION: Together, the computational results further the understanding of the 
interactions between SMAD and other transcription factors at specific target
promoters, and provide the basis for more targeted experimental verification of
the co-regulatory modules.

PMCID: PMC2724489
PMID: 19615063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Nature. 2009 Aug 6;460(7256):705-10. doi: 10.1038/nature08195. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

miR-145 and miR-143 regulate smooth muscle cell fate and plasticity.

Cordes KR(1), Sheehy NT, White MP, Berry EC, Morton SU, Muth AN, Lee TH, Miano
JM, Ivey KN, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, California
94158, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are regulators of myriad cellular events, but evidence for a
single miRNA that can efficiently differentiate multipotent stem cells into a
specific lineage or regulate direct reprogramming of cells into an alternative
cell fate has been elusive. Here we show that miR-145 and miR-143 are
co-transcribed in multipotent murine cardiac progenitors before becoming
localized to smooth muscle cells, including neural crest stem-cell-derived
vascular smooth muscle cells. miR-145 and miR-143 were direct transcriptional
targets of serum response factor, myocardin and Nkx2-5 (NK2 transcription factor 
related, locus 5) and were downregulated in injured or atherosclerotic vessels
containing proliferating, less differentiated smooth muscle cells. miR-145 was
necessary for myocardin-induced reprogramming of adult fibroblasts into smooth
muscle cells and sufficient to induce differentiation of multipotent neural crest
stem cells into vascular smooth muscle. Furthermore, miR-145 and miR-143
cooperatively targeted a network of transcription factors, including Klf4
(Kruppel-like factor 4), myocardin and Elk-1 (ELK1, member of ETS oncogene
family), to promote differentiation and repress proliferation of smooth muscle
cells. These findings demonstrate that miR-145 can direct the smooth muscle fate 
and that miR-145 and miR-143 function to regulate the quiescent versus
proliferative phenotype of smooth muscle cells.

PMCID: PMC2769203
PMID: 19578358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Endocrinology. 2009 Sep;150(9):4326-37. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0394. Epub 2009 Jun 
25.

Chorionic gonadotropin regulates prostaglandin E synthase via a
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-extracellular regulatory kinase pathway in a human 
endometrial epithelial cell line: implications for endometrial responses for
embryo implantation.

Banerjee P(1), Sapru K, Strakova Z, Fazleabas AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois, Chicago,
Illinois 60612, USA.

Successful implantation necessitates modulation of the uterine environment by the
embryo for a specific period of time during the menstrual cycle. Infusion of
chorionic gonadotropin (CG) into the oviducts of baboons to mimic embryo transit 
induces a myriad of morphological, biochemical, and molecular changes in the
endometrium. Endometrial epithelial cells from both baboons and humans when
stimulated by CG in vitro, activates a cAMP-independent MAPK pathway leading to
prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) synthesis. This study shows that in the human
endometrial cell line, HES, CG, acting via its G-protein coupled receptor,
phosphorylates protein kinase B, c-Raf, and ERK1/2 in a phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K)-dependent manner. Furthermore, ERK1/2 phosphorylation is
independent of the signaling paradigms of Galpha(s), Galpha(I), and epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) transactivation, typical of gonadal cells,
indicating an alternative signaling pattern in the endometrium. After
phosphorylation by CG, ERK1/2 translocates to the nucleus in a time-dependent
manner. Downstream of ERK1/2, CG activates the nuclear transcription factor,
Elk1, also in a PI3K-MAPK-dependent manner. Lastly, we show that in HES cells,
this pathway regulates the expression of the microsomal enzyme PGE(2) synthase
(mPTGES), a terminal prostanoid synthase responsible for PGE(2) synthesis. CG
regulates the mPTGES promoter and also induces mPTGES synthesis in HES cells via 
the PI3K-ERK1/2 pathway. We suggest that this alternative PI3K-ERK-Elk pathway
activated by CG regulates prostaglandin production by the endometrial epithelium 
and serves as an early trigger to prepare the endometrium for implantation.

PMCID: PMC2736085
PMID: 19556419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Neurotox Res. 2010 Jan;17(1):50-65. doi: 10.1007/s12640-009-9077-2. Epub 2009 Jun
25.

Oxidized low-density lipoprotein-induced matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression
via PKC-delta/p42/p44 MAPK/Elk-1 cascade in brain astrocytes.

Wang HH(1), Hsieh HL, Wu CY, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Chang Gung University, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st Road,
Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

After ischemic injury to brain, disruption of the blood-brain barrier (BBB)
raises the possibility of exposing the central nervous system (CNS) to oxidized
low-density lipoprotein (oxLDL), a risk factor implicated in neurodegenerative
diseases. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), especially MMP-9, contribute to
extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling during the CNS diseases. However, the
molecular mechanisms underlying oxLDL-induced MMP-9 expression in astrocytes
remained unclear. Here, we reported that oxLDL induced MMP-9 expression via a
PKC-delta/p42/p44 MAPK-dependent Elk-1 activation in rat brain astrocyte (RBA)-1 
cells, revealed by gelatin zymography, RT-PCR, and Western blotting analyses.
These responses were attenuated by pretreatment with pharmacological inhibitors
and transfection with dominant negative mutants. Moreover, Elk-1-mediated MMP-9
gene transcription was confirmed by transfection with an Elk-1 binding
site-mutated MMP-9 promoter construct (mt-Ets-MMP9), which blocked
oxLDL-stimulated MMP-9 luciferase activity. Understanding the regulatory
mechanisms by which oxLDL induced MMP-9 expression in astrocytes might provide a 
new therapeutic strategy of brain diseases.

PMID: 19554388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Lipid Res. 2010 Jan;51(1):182-91. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M900289-JLR200.

A common FADS2 promoter polymorphism increases promoter activity and facilitates 
binding of transcription factor ELK1.

Lattka E(1), Eggers S, Moeller G, Heim K, Weber M, Mehta D, Prokisch H, Illig T, 
Adamski J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum M¸nchen, German Research Center
for Environmental Health, Neuherberg Germany.

Fatty acid desaturases (FADS) play an important role in the formation of omega-6 
and omega-3 highly unsaturated fatty acids (HUFAs). The composition of HUFAs in
the human metabolome is important for membrane fluidity and for the modulation of
essential physiological functions such as inflammation processes and brain
development. Several recent studies reported significant associations of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human FADS gene cluster with HUFA levels
and composition. The presence of the minor allele correlated with a decrease of
desaturase reaction products and an accumulation of substrates. We performed
functional studies with two of the associated polymorphisms (rs3834458 and
rs968567) and showed an influence of polymorphism rs968567 on FADS2 promoter
activity by luciferase reporter gene assays. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays proved allele-dependent DNA-binding ability of at least two protein
complexes to the region containing SNP rs968567. One of the proteins binding to
this region in an allele-specific manner was shown to be the transcription factor
ELK1 (a member of ETS domain transcription factor family). These results indicate
that rs968567 influences FADS2 transcription and offer first insights into the
modulation of complex regulation mechanisms of FADS2 gene transcription by SNPs.

PMCID: PMC2789778
PMID: 19546342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Peptides. 2009 Nov;30(11):2014-24. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.06.015. Epub 2009
Jun 21.

Melanin-concentrating hormone induces neurite outgrowth in human neuroblastoma
SH-SY5Y cells through p53 and MAPKinase signaling pathways.

Cotta-Grand N(1), RovËre C, Guyon A, Cervantes A, Brau F, Nahon JL.

Author information: 
(1)The Institut de Pharmacologie MolÈculaire et Cellulaire, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique and UniversitÈ Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Valbonne, France.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) peptide plays a major role in energy
homeostasis regulation. Little is known about cellular functions engaged by
endogenous MCH receptor (MCH-R1). Here, MCH-R1 mRNA and cognate protein were
found expressed in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. Electrophysiological
experiments demonstrated that MCH modulated K(+) currents, an effect depending
upon the time of cellular growth. MCH treatments induced a transient
phosphorylation of MAPKinases, abolished by PD98059, and partially blocked by
PTX, suggesting a Galphai/Galphao protein contribution. MCH stimulated expression
and likely nuclear localization of phosphorylated p53 proteins, an effect fully
dependent upon MAPKinase activities. MCH treatment also increased phosphorylation
of Elk-1 and up-regulated Egr-1, two transcriptional factors targeted by the
MAPKinase pathway. Finally, MCH provoked neurite outgrowth after 24h-treatment of
neuroblastoma cells. This effect and transcriptional factors activation were
partly prevented by PD98059. Collectively, our results provide the first evidence
for a role of MCH in neuronal differentiation of endogenously MCH-R1-expressing
cells via non-exclusive MAPKinase and p53 signaling pathways.

PMID: 19540893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Br J Cancer. 2009 Jul 7;101(1):132-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605111. Epub 2009 Jun 
16.

Death-associated protein 3 is overexpressed in human thyroid oncocytic tumours.

Jacques C(1), Fontaine JF, Franc B, Mirebeau-Prunier D, Triau S, Savagner F,
Malthiery Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U694, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire d'Angers, Laboratoire de
Biochimie et Biologie MolÈculaire, Angers, France.
caroline.jacques@univ-angers.fr

BACKGROUND: The human death-associated protein 3 (hDAP3) is a GTP-binding
constituent of the small subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome with a
pro-apoptotic function.
METHODS: A search through publicly available microarray data sets showed 337
genes potentially coregulated with the DAP3 gene. The promoter sequences of these
337 genes and 70 out of 85 mitochondrial ribosome genes were analysed in silico
with the DAP3 gene promoter sequence. The mitochondrial role of DAP3 was also
investigated in the thyroid tumours presenting various mitochondrial contents.
RESULTS: The study revealed nine transcription factors presenting enriched motifs
for these gene promoters, five of which are implicated in cellular growth (ELK1, 
ELK4, RUNX1, HOX11-CTF1, TAL1-ternary complex factor 3) and four in mitochondrial
biogenesis (nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), GABPA, PPARG-RXRA and
estrogen-related receptor alpha (ESRRA)). An independent microarray data set
showed the overexpression of ELK1, RUNX1 and ESRRA in the thyroid oncocytic
tumours. Exploring the thyroid tumours, we found that DAP3 mRNA and protein
expression is upregulated in tumours presenting a mitochondrial biogenesis
compared with the normal tissue. ELK1 and ESRRA were also showed upregulated with
DAP3.
CONCLUSION: ELK1 and ESRRA may be considered as potential regulators of the DAP3 
gene expression. DAP3 may participate in mitochondrial maintenance and play a
role in the balance between mitochondrial homoeostasis and tumourigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2713694
PMID: 19536094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Int J Oncol. 2009 Jul;35(1):175-9.

The kinase defective EPHB6 receptor tyrosine kinase activates MAP kinase
signaling in lung adenocarcinoma.

Yu J(1), Bulk E, Ji P, Hascher A, Koschmieder S, Berdel WE, M¸ller-Tidow C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology and Oncology, University of M¸nster,
D-48129 M¸nster, Germany.

Decreased expression levels of EPHB6, a member of the receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTKs), are associated with an increased risk of metastasis development in early 
stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, the signaling properties of
the kinase-defective EPHB6 receptor are not well-understood. Here, we show that
expression of EPHB6 in A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells led to phosphorylation of
the MAP kinase ERK. Conversely, siRNA based knockdown of EPHB6 reversed ERK
phosphorylation. Intriguingly, EPHB6-induced phosphorylation of ERK was uncoupled
by activation of the Elk-1 transcriptional factor. These analyses suggest that
kinase defective EPHB6 can lead to MAPK activation.

PMID: 19513565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Dev Cell. 2009 May;16(5):764-71. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.04.006.

Mediator MED23 links insulin signaling to the adipogenesis transcription cascade.

Wang W(1), Huang L, Huang Y, Yin JW, Berk AJ, Friedman JM, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Adipocyte differentiation is orchestrated by multiple signaling pathways and a
temporally regulated transcriptional cascade. However, the mechanisms by which
insulin signaling is linked to this cascade remain unclear. Here we show that the
Med23 subunit of the Mediator Complex and its interacting transcription factor
Elk1 are critical regulators of adipogenesis. Med23(-/-) embryonic fibroblast
cells were refractory to hormone-induced adipogenesis. Knockdown of either Med23 
or Elk1, or overexpression of dominant-negative Elk1, inhibited adipogenesis. In 
the absence of either Elk1 or Med23, Krox20, an immediate early gene stimulated
by insulin during adipogenesis, was uninducible. Moreover, the adipogenic defect 
in Med23-deficient cells was rescued by ectopic expression of Krox20 or one of
its downstream factors, C/EBPbeta or PPARgamma. Mechanistically, the
insulin-stimulated, Med23-deficient preinitiation complex failed to initiate
robust transcription of Krox20. Collectively, our results suggest that Med23
serves as a critical link transducing insulin signaling to the transcriptional
cascade during adipocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2835773
PMID: 19460352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2009 Jul;66(13):2195-204. doi: 10.1007/s00018-009-0040-4. Epub
2009 May 12.

PAP1 signaling involves MAPK signal transduction.

FerrÈs-MasÛ M(1), Sacilotto N, LÛpez-Rodas G, Dagorn JC, Iovanna JL, Closa D,
Folch-Puy E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology,Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
CientÌficas-Institut d'Investigacions BiomËdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Centro de
InvestigaciÛn BiomÈdica en Red de Enfermedades Hep·ticas y Digestivas, Barcelona,
Spain.

Pancreatitis-associated protein 1 (PAP1) belongs to the Reg family of secretory
proteins. Several important biological roles have been attributed to PAP1 but the
signaling pathways activated by this protein remain only partially understood.
Here, we describe the intracellular pathways triggered by PAP1 in a pancreatic
acinar cell line. Taking advantage of the fact that PAP1 induces its own
transcription, we performed ChIP assays to analyze the recruitment of
transcriptional factors on its promoter. Our results show that PAP1 increased the
transactivation activity of pap1 and the binding on its promoter of the nuclear
factors C/EBPbeta, P-CREB, P-ELK1, EGR1, STAT3, and ETS2, which are downstream
targets of MAPK signaling. p44/42, p38, and JNK MAPKs activity increased after
PAP1 treatment. In addition, pharmacological inhibition of these kinases markedly
inhibited the induction of pap1 mRNA. Taken together, these results indicated
that the mechanism of PAP1 action involves the activation of the MAPK
superfamily.

PMID: 19434369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Ethnopharmacol. 2009 Jun 22;123(2):315-24. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2009.02.047. Epub
2009 Mar 9.

Kaempferia pandurata Roxb. inhibits Porphyromonas gingivalis supernatant-induced 
matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression via signal transduction in human oral
epidermoid cells.

Yanti(1), Anggakusuma, Gwon SH, Hwang JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Yonsei University, 134 Shinchon-dong,
Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Kaempferia pandurata Roxb., an edible tropical
medicinal plant (Zingiberaceae), has been traditionally used to treat dental
caries. However, its efficacy on inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9
for preventing periodontal inflammation has been rarely studied to date.
AIM OF THE STUDY: This present study was focused to investigate the effects of
the ethanolic extract of Kaempferia pandurata Roxb. on inhibition of
Porphyromonas gingivalis supernatant-induced MMP-9 expression through activation 
of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways in human oral
epidermoid KB cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: MMP-9 expression and its signaling pathways in KB cells
induced by Porphyromonas gingivalis supernatant were determined by gelatin
zymogram, Western blotting and reporter gene assays.
RESULTS: Kaempferia pandurata significantly decreased MMP-9 expression at both
protein and mRNA levels in a dose-dependent manner. Kaempferia pandurata
interfered Porphyromonas gingivalis supernatant-induced MMP-9 expression in KB
cells by downregulating MAPK phosphorylation (extracellular signal-related kinase
1/2, p38 kinase and c-Jun N-terminal kinase), inhibiting transcriptional
expression (Elk1, c-Jun and c-Fos), and blocking AP-1 and NF-kappaB activities.
CONCLUSIONS: Kaempferia pandurata could be employed as a candidate for MMP-9
inhibitor with therapeutic potential for treatment of periodontal inflammation.

PMID: 19429378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Sci Signal. 2009 May 5;2(69):ra20. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.1164302.

Complexity in transcription control at the activation domain-mediator interface.

Balamotis MA(1), Pennella MA, Stevens JL, Wasylyk B, Belmont AS, Berk AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, Molecular
Biology Institute, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095,
USA.

Erratum in
    Sci Signal. 2009 Sep 22;2(89):er8.

Transcript elongation by polymerase II paused at the Egr1 promoter is activated
by mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylation of the ternary complex factor
(TCF) ELK1 bound at multiple upstream sites and subsequent phospho-ELK1
interaction with mediator through the MED23 subunit. Consequently, Med23 knockout
(KO) nearly eliminates Egr1 (early growth response factor 1) transcription in
embryonic stem (ES) cells, leaving a paused polymerase at the promoter. Med23 KO 
did not, however, eliminate Egr1 transcription in fibroblasts. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis and direct visualization of fluorescently labeled
TCF derivatives and mediator subunits revealed that three closely related TCFs
bound to the same control regions. The relative amounts of these TCFs, which
responded differently to the loss of MED23, differed in ES cells and fibroblasts.
Transcriptome analysis suggests that most genes expressed in both cell types,
such as Egr1, are regulated by alternative transcription factors in the two cell 
types that respond differently to the same signal transduction pathways.

PMCID: PMC2774526
PMID: 19417216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Apr;1791(4):238-45. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2009.01.021.
Epub 2009 Feb 6.

EP(3) prostanoid receptor isoforms utilize distinct mechanisms to regulate ERK
1/2 activation.

Israel DD(1), Regan JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, The University of Arizona, College 
of Pharmacy, 1703 E. Mabel St., Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.

Prostaglandin-E(2) (PGE(2)) is a hormone derived from the metabolism of
arachidonic acid whose functions include regulation of platelet aggregation,
fever and smooth muscle contraction/relaxation. PGE(2) mediates its physiological
and pathophysiological effects through its binding to four G-protein coupled
receptor subtypes, named EP(1), EP(2), EP(3) and EP(4). The EP(3) prostanoid
receptor is unique in that it has multiple isoforms generated by alternative mRNA
splicing. These splice variants display differences in tissue expression,
constitutive activity and regulation of signaling molecules. To date there are
few reports identifying differential activities of EP(3) receptor isoforms and
their effects on gene regulation. We generated HEK cell lines expressing the
human EP(3-Ia), EP(3-II) or EP(3-III) isoforms. Using immunoblot analysis we
found that nM concentrations of PGE(2) strongly stimulated the phosphorylation of
ERK 1/2 by the EP(3-II) and EP(3-III) isoforms; whereas, ERK 1/2 phosphorylation 
by the EP(3-Ia) isoform was minimal and only occurred at muM concentrations of
PGE(2). Furthermore, the mechanisms of the PGE(2) mediated phosphorylation of ERK
1/2 by the EP(3-II) and EP(3-III) isoforms were different. Thus, PGE(2)
stimulation of ERK 1/2 phosphorylation by the EP(3-III) isoform involves
activation of a Galpha(i)/PI3K/PKC/Src and EGFR-dependent pathway; while for the 
EP(3-II) isoform it involves activation of a Galpha(i)/Src and EGFR-dependent
pathway. These differences result in unique differences in the regulation of
reporter plasmid activity for the downstream effectors ELK1 and AP-1 by the
EP(3-II) and EP(3-III) prostanoid receptor isoforms.

PMCID: PMC2679851
PMID: 19416642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 Jul;297(1):G11-26. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00025.2009. Epub 2009 Apr 23.

Follicle-stimulating hormone increases cholangiocyte proliferation by an
autocrine mechanism via cAMP-dependent phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Elk-1.

Mancinelli R(1), Onori P, Gaudio E, DeMorrow S, Franchitto A, Francis H, Glaser
S, Carpino G, Venter J, Alvaro D, Kopriva S, White M, Kossie A, Savage J, Alpini 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division Gastroenterology, Texas A&M Health Science
Center, College of Medicine, Texas, USA.

Sex hormones regulate cholangiocyte hyperplasia in bile duct-ligated (BDL) rats. 
We studied whether follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) regulates cholangiocyte
proliferation. FSH receptor (FSHR) and FSH expression was evaluated in liver
sections, purified cholangiocytes, and cholangiocyte cultures (NRICC). In vivo,
normal female and male rats were treated with FSH or immediately after BDL with
antide (a gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist blocking FSH secretion) or a 
neutralizing FSH antibody for 1 wk. We evaluated 1) cholangiocyte proliferation
in sections and cholangiocytes and 2) changes in secretin-stimulated cAMP
(functional index of cholangiocyte growth) levels, and ERK1/2 and Elk-1
phosphorylation. NRICC were stimulated with FSH before evaluation of
proliferation, cAMP/IP(3) levels, and ERK1/2 and Elk-1 phosphorylation. To
determine whether FSH regulates cholangiocyte proliferation by an autocrine
mechanism, we evaluated the effects of 1) cholangiocyte supernatant (containing
FSH) on NRICC proliferation and 2) FSH silencing in NRICC before measuring
proliferation and ERK1/2 and Elk-1 phosphorylation. Cholangiocytes and NRICC
express FSHR and FSH and secrete FSH. In vivo administration of FSH to normal
rats increased, whereas administration of antide and anti-FSH antibody to BDL
rats decreased 1) ductal mass and 2) secretin-stimulated cAMP levels,
proliferation, and ERK1/2 and Elk-1 phosphorylation in cholangiocytes compared
with controls. In NRICC, FSH increased cholangiocyte proliferation, cAMP levels, 
and ERK1/2 and Elk-1 phosphorylation. The supernatant of cholangiocytes increased
NRICC proliferation, inhibited by preincubation with anti-FSH antibody. Silencing
of FSH gene decreases cholangiocyte proliferation and ERK1/2 and Elk-1
phosphorylation. Modulation of cholangiocyte FSH expression may be important for 
the management of cholangiopathies.

PMCID: PMC2711748
PMID: 19389804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Immunobiology. 2009;214(6):430-40. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2008.11.013. Epub 2009
Feb 27.

Growth hormone-induced production of cytokines in murine peritoneal macrophages
in vitro: role of JAK/STAT, PI3K, PKC and MAP kinases.

Tripathi A(1), Sodhi A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi 221005, India.

The immunomodulatory properties of growth hormone (GH) are well recognized.
Enhanced production of NO and cytokines by macrophages on treatment with GH was
reported by us recently. The present investigation elucidates the signaling
mechanism(s) by which GH activates macrophages in vitro. It is observed that GH
induces the phosphorylation (activation) of JAK2, PI3K, PKC and MAP kinases.
Studies with pharmacological inhibitors of various signaling molecules also
indicated that GH-induced proinflammatory responses in macrophages are mediated
by JAK2/PI3K/PKC/ERK1/2, JAK2/JNK and JAK/STAT signaling cascades. It was further
observed that GH induced the enhanced expression/phosphorylation of transcription
factors c-fos, c-jun, Elk-1 and Stat1. It is also demonstrated that GH-induced
ERK1/2 cascade regulates the production of TNF-alpha and IL-1beta in macrophages,
whereas JNK cascade mediated the production of TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma and IL-12.
These results suggest that JAK2 plays a central role in mediating proinflammatory
responses of macrophages on GH treatment.

PMID: 19250698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 10;284(15):9804-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809051200. Epub 2009 
Feb 13.

BLNK binds active H-Ras to promote B cell receptor-mediated capping and ERK
activation.

Imamura Y(1), Oda A, Katahira T, Bundo K, Pike KA, Ratcliffe MJ, Kitamura D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Research Institute for Biological Sciences,
Tokyo University of Science, 2669 Yamazaki, Noda, Chiba 278-0022, Japan.

Cross-linked B cell receptor (BCR) aggregates on the cell surface, then assembles
into the "cap" where Ras is co-localized, and transduces various intracellular
signals including Ras-ERK activation. BCR signals induce proliferation,
differentiation, or apoptosis of B cells depending on their maturational stage.
The adaptor protein BLNK binds various signaling proteins and Igalpha, a
signaling subunit of the BCR complex, and plays an important role in the BCR
signal transduction. BLNK was shown to be required for activation of ERK, but not
of Ras, after BCR cross-linking, raising a question how BLNK facilitates ERK
activation. Here we demonstrate that BLNK binds the active form of H-Ras, and
their binding is facilitated by BCR cross-linking. We have identified a 10-amino 
acid Ras-binding domain within BLNK that is necessary for restoration of
BCR-mediated ERK activation in BLNK-deficient B cells and for anti-apoptotic
signaling. The Ras-binding domain fused with a CD8alpha-Igalpha chimeric receptor
could induce prolonged ERK phosphorylation, transcriptional activation of Elk1,
as well as the capping of the receptor in BLNK-deficient B cells. These results
indicate that BLNK recruits active H-Ras to the BCR complex, which is essential
for sustained surface expression of BCR in the form of the cap and for the signal
leading to functional ERK activation.

PMCID: PMC2665102
PMID: 19218240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Cell Physiol. 2009 Jun;219(3):634-41. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21708.

Mitochondrial localization, ELK-1 transcriptional regulation and growth
inhibitory functions of BRCA1, BRCA1a, and BRCA1b proteins.

Maniccia AW(1), Lewis C, Begum N, Xu J, Cui J, Chipitsyna G, Aysola K, Reddy V,
Bhat G, Fujimura Y, Henderson B, Reddy ES, Rao VN.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Department of OB/GYN, Morehouse School of Medicine,
Georgia Cancer Center for Excellence, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

BRCA1 is a tumor suppressor gene that is mutated in families with breast and
ovarian cancer. Several BRCA1 splice variants are found in different tissues, but
their subcellular localization and functions are poorly understood at the moment.
We previously described BRCA1 splice variant BRCA1a to induce apoptosis and
function as a tumor suppressor of triple negative breast, ovarian and prostate
cancers. In this study we have analyzed the function of BRCA1 isoforms (BRCA1a
and BRCA1b) and compared them to the wild-type BRCA1 protein using several
criteria like studying expression in normal and tumor cells by RNase protection
assays, subcellular localization/fractionation by immunofluorescence microscopy
and Western blot analysis, transcription regulation of biological relevant
proteins and growth suppression in breast cancer cells. We are demonstrating for 
the first time that ectopically expressed GFP-tagged BRCA1, BRCA1a, and BRCA1b
proteins are localized to the mitochondria, repress ELK-1 transcriptional
activity and possess antiproliferative activity on breast cancer cells. These
results suggest that the exon 9, 10, and 11 sequences (aa 263-1365) which contain
two nuclear localization signals, p53, Rb, c-Myc, gamma-tubulin, Stat, Rad51,
Rad50 binding domains, angiopoietin-1 repression domain are not absolutely
required for mitochondrial localization and growth suppressor function of these
proteins. Since mitochondrial dysfunction is a hallmark of cancer, we can
speculate that the mitochondrial localization of BRCA1 proteins may be
functionally significant in regulating both the mitochondrial DNA damage as well 
as apoptotic activity of BRCA1 proteins and mislocalization causes cancer. J.
Cell. Physiol. 219: 634-641, 2009. (c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3693557
PMID: 19170108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Feb 27;380(1):54-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.01.026. Epub 2009 Jan 21.

CacyBP/SIP binds ERK1/2 and affects transcriptional activity of Elk-1.

Kilanczyk E(1), Filipek S, Jastrzebska B, Filipek A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Nencki Institute of
Experimental Biology, 3 Pasteur Street, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland.

In this work we showed for the first time that mouse CacyBP/SIP interacts with
extracellular signal regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2). We also established that
a calcium binding protein, S100A6, competes for this interaction. Moreover, the
E217K mutant of CacyBP/SIP does not bind significantly to ERK1/2 although it
retains the ability to interact with S100A6. Molecular modeling shows that the
E217K mutation in the 189-219 CacyBP/SIP fragment markedly changes its
electrostatic potential, suggesting that the binding with ERK1/2 might have an
electrostatic character. We also demonstrate that CacyBP/SIP-ERK1/2 interaction
inhibits phosphorylation of the Elk-1 transcription factor in vitro and in the
nuclear fraction of NB2a cells. Altogether, our data suggest that the binding of 
CacyBP/SIP with ERK1/2 might regulate Elk-1 phosphorylation/transcriptional
activity and that S100A6 might further modulate this effect via Ca(2+)-dependent 
interaction with CacyBP/SIP and competition with ERK1/2.

PMID: 19166809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Endocrinology. 2009 May;150(5):2404-12. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1239. Epub 2009 Jan 
22.

Opposite effects of interleukin-1alpha and transforming growth factor-beta2
induce stage-specific regulation of junctional adhesion molecule-B gene in
Sertoli cells.

Wang Y(1), Lui WY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, School of Biological Sciences, The University of
Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

In the mammalian testis, junctional adhesion molecule-B (JAM-B) is found at the
blood-testis barrier between Sertoli cells and the apical ectoplasmic
specializations between Sertoli and germ cells. The expression of JAM-B is
tightly regulated to allow the transit of developing germ cells across the
blood-testis barrier and the timely release of mature spermatids at stage VIII.
In this study, the basal transcription of JAM-B in the mouse Sertoli cell line,
MSC-1 cells, was examined. We found that the constitutive expression of JAM-B is 
carried out by the binding of specificity proteins (Sps), ETS domain
transcription factor Elk-1 (Elk1), neuron-restrictive silencer factor (NRSF), and
E2F transcription factor 3 (E2F3) to various cis-acting elements including TG
interacting factor (TGIF), Elk-1, NRSF, and proximal Sp1 (pSp1) + E2F binding
motifs. We also investigated the effects of two cytokines IL-1alpha and TGF-beta2
on JAM-B expression. IL-1alpha promotes JAM-B expression by facilitating the
binding of Elk-1 to TGIF and pSp1 + E2F motifs in a p38-dependent manner, which
leads to an additive effect on Sp1- and NRSF-mediated JAM-B transactivation.
TGF-beta2 inhibits JAM-B transcription via the activation of mothers against
decapentaplegic (Smad) proteins and activated Smads compete with specificity
proteins (Sp1 and Sp3) for the TGIF motif, resulting in JAM-B repression.
IL-1alpha and Smad3 expression have been reported to be stage specific. IL-1alpha
is absent in the seminferous epithelium at stages VII-VIII, whereas a high level 
of nuclear Smad3 level is found at the same stages. This study shows for the
first time that IL-1alpha and TGF-beta2 regulate JAM-B expression in an opposite 
manner, and in vitro data obtained herein provide some clues on how junctions are
regulated in the testis.

PMID: 19164472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Br J Cancer. 2009 Jan 27;100(2):389-98. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604846. Epub 2008
Dec 23.

Cross talk between hedgehog and epithelial-mesenchymal transition pathways in
gastric pit cells and in diffuse-type gastric cancers.

Ohta H(1), Aoyagi K, Fukaya M, Danjoh I, Ohta A, Isohata N, Saeki N, Taniguchi H,
Sakamoto H, Shimoda T, Tani T, Yoshida T, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

We previously reported hedgehog (Hh) signal activation in the mucus-secreting pit
cell of the stomach and in diffuse-type gastric cancer (GC).
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is known to be involved in tumour
malignancy. However, little is known about whether and how both signallings
cooperatively act in diffuse-type GC. By microarray and reverse
transcription-PCR, we investigated the expression of those Hh and EMT signalling 
molecules in pit cells and in diffuse-type GCs. How both signallings act
cooperatively in those cells was also investigated by the treatment of an
Hh-signal inhibitor and siRNAs of Hh and EMT transcriptional key regulator genes 
on a mouse primary culture and on human GC cell lines. Pit cells and diffuse-type
GCs co-expressed many Hh and EMT signalling genes. Mesenchymal-related genes
(WNT5A, CDH2, PDGFRB, EDNRA, ROBO1, ROR2, and MEF2C) were found to be activated
by an EMT regulator, SIP1/ZFHX1B/ZEB2, which was a target of a primary
transcriptional regulator GLI1 in Hh signal. Furthermore, we identified two
cancer-specific Hh targets, ELK1 and MSX2, which have an essential role in GC
cell growth. These findings suggest that the gastric pit cell exhibits
mesenchymal-like gene expression, and that diffuse-type GC maintains expression
through the Hh-EMT pathway. Our proposed extensive Hh-EMT signal pathway has the 
potential to an understanding of diffuse-type GC and to the development of new
drugs.

PMCID: PMC2634717
PMID: 19107131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 30;284(5):3125-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807466200. Epub 2008
Nov 18.

Co-stimulation of the bone-related Runx2 P1 promoter in mesenchymal cells by SP1 
and ETS transcription factors at polymorphic purine-rich DNA sequences
(Y-repeats).

Zhang Y(1), Hassan MQ, Xie RL, Hawse JR, Spelsberg TC, Montecino M, Stein JL,
Lian JB, van Wijnen AJ, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Transcriptional control of Runx2 gene expression through two alternative
promoters (P1 and P2) is critical for the execution of its function as an
osteogenic cell fate determining factor. In all vertebrates examined to date, the
bone related P1 promoter contains a purine-rich region (-303 to -128 bp in the
rat) that separates two regulatory domains. The length of this region differs
dramatically between species even within the same order. Using deletion analysis,
we show that part of this purine-rich region (-200 to -128) containing a
duplicated element (Y-repeat) positively regulates Runx2 P1 transcription.
Electrophoretic mobility assays and chromatin immunoprecipitations reveal that
Y-repeat binds at least two different classes of transcription factors related to
GC box binding proteins (e.g. SP1 and SP7/Osterix) and ETS-like factors (e.g.
ETS1 and ELK1). Forced expression of SP1 increases Runx2 P1 promoter activity
through the Y-repeats, and small interfering RNA depletion of SP1 decreases Runx2
expression. Similarly, exogenous expression of wild type ELK1, but not a
defective mutant that cannot be phosphorylated, enhances Runx2 gene expression.
SP1 is most abundant in proliferating cells, and ELK1 is most abundant in
postconfluent cells; during MC3T3-E1 osteoblast differentiation, both proteins
are transiently co-expressed when Runx2 expression is enhanced. Taken together,
our data suggest that basal Runx2 gene transcription is regulated by dynamic
interactions between SP1 and ETS-like factors during progression of osteogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2631976
PMID: 19017640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 Sep 29;9:404. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-404.

Integrative bioinformatics analysis of transcriptional regulatory programs in
breast cancer cells.

Niida A(1), Smith AD, Imoto S, Tsutsumi S, Aburatani H, Zhang MQ, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 110-0032, Japan.
niida@iam.u-tokyo.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Microarray technology has unveiled transcriptomic differences among
tumors of various phenotypes, and, especially, brought great progress in
molecular understanding of phenotypic diversity of breast tumors. However,
compared with the massive knowledge about the transcriptome, we have surprisingly
little knowledge about regulatory mechanisms underling transcriptomic diversity.
RESULTS: To gain insights into the transcriptional programs that drive tumor
progression, we integrated regulatory sequence data and expression profiles of
breast cancer into a Bayesian Network, and searched for cis-regulatory motifs
statistically associated with given histological grades and prognosis. Our
analysis found that motifs bound by ELK1, E2F, NRF1 and NFY are potential
regulatory motifs that positively correlate with malignant progression of breast 
cancer.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that these 4 motifs are principal regulatory
motifs driving malignant progression of breast cancer. Our method offers a more
concise description about transcriptome diversity among breast tumors with
different clinical phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC2572072
PMID: 18823535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008 Dec;28(12):2275-81. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.175992. Epub 2008 Sep 25.

Advanced glycation end-product of low density lipoprotein activates the toll-like
4 receptor pathway implications for diabetic atherosclerosis.

Hodgkinson CP(1), Laxton RC, Patel K, Ye S.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology, William Harvey Research Institute, Charterhouse Square,
London EC1M 6BQ, UK. c.hodgkinson@qmul.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: Diabetes is a major risk factor for coronary heart disease.
Accumulation of advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) attributable to
hyperglycemia in diabetics promotes the development of atherosclerosis. However, 
the underlying mechanisms remain unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The advanced glycation end-product of
low-density-lipoprotein (AGE-LDL) induced proinflammatory cytokine production in 
human coronary artery endothelial cells and human- and mouse-macrophages. AGE-LDL
stimulated cytokine synthesis was markedly reduced in mouse macrophages with a
TLR4 loss-of-function mutation. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments indicated
AGE-LDL interacts with TLR4, RAGE, and CD36. Incubation of cultured macrophages
with TLR4, RAGE, or CD36 antibodies inhibited AGE-LDL stimulation of tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)alpha production. A competitive binding inhibitor of TLR4
blocked AGE-LDL binding to the receptor. After transfection of a HEK293 cell
system with wild-type TLR4, AGE-LDL activated a signaling pathway including p38
alpha, JNK, and ERK1 kinases and AP1, Elk1, and NF-kappaB transcription factors; 
the net result being increased cytokine production. These effects were absent
when cells were transfected with empty plasmid. Two common polymorphisms in TLR4,
D299G and T399I, reduced the response of TLR4 to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) but had
no effect on AGE-LDL signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that AGE-LDL activates a TLR4-mediated
signaling pathway, thus inducing proinflammatory cytokine production. This
mechanism may partly explain the increased risk of atherosclerosis observed in
diabetics.

PMID: 18818414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. BMC Neurosci. 2008 Sep 15;9:85. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-9-85.

Enhanced expressions of microvascular smooth muscle receptors after focal
cerebral ischemia occur via the MAPK MEK/ERK pathway.

Maddahi A(1), Edvinsson L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Vascular Research, BMC A13, Lund University, 221 84
Lund, Sweden. Aida.Maddahi@med.lu.se

BACKGROUND: MEK1/2 is a serine/threonine protein that phosphorylates
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2). Cerebral ischemia results in
enhanced expression of cerebrovascular contractile receptors in the middle
cerebral artery (MCA) leading to the ischemic region. Here we explored the role
of the MEK/ERK pathway in receptor expression following ischemic brain injury
using the specific MEK1 inhibitor U0126.
METHODS AND RESULT: Rats were subjected to a 2-h middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO) followed by reperfusion for 48-h and the ischemic area was calculated. The
expression of phosphorylated ERK1/2 and Elk-1, and of endothelin ETA and ETB,
angiotensin AT1, and 5-hydroxytryptamine 5-HT1B receptors were analyzed with
immunohistochemistry using confocal microscopy in cerebral arteries, microvessels
and in brain tissue. The expression of endothelin ETB receptor was analyzed by
quantitative Western blot. We demonstrate that there is an increase in the number
of contractile smooth muscle receptors in the MCA and in micro- vessels within
the ischemic region. The enhanced expression occurs in the smooth muscle cells as
verified by co-localization studies. This receptor upregulation is furthermore
associated with enhanced expression of pERK1/2 and of transcription factor pElk-1
in the vascular smooth muscle cells. Blockade of transcription with the MEK1
inhibitor U0126, given at the onset of reperfusion or as late as 6 hours after
the insult, reduced transcription (pERK1/2 and pElk-1), the enhanced vascular
receptor expression, and attenuated the cerebral infarct and improved neurology
score.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that MCAO results in upregulation of cerebrovascular
ETB, AT1 and 5-HT1B receptors. Blockade of this event with a MEK1 inhibitor as
late as 6 h after the insult reduced the enhanced vascular receptor expression
and the associated cerebral infarction.

PMCID: PMC2553085
PMID: 18793415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Jan;30(1):106-13. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn213. Epub 2008 Sep 
12.

Organochlorine-mediated potentiation of the general coactivator p300 through p38 
mitogen-activated protein kinase.

Bratton MR(1), Frigo DE, Vigh-Conrad KA, Fan D, Wadsworth S, McLachlan JA, Burow 
ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tulane University Health Science Center, New
Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

The activity of nuclear transcription factors is often regulated by specific
kinase-signaling pathways. We have previously shown that the organochlorine
pesticide dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) stimulates activator protein-1
activity through the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). Here, we show
that DDT and its metabolites also stimulate the transcriptional activity of
cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding protein and Elk1 and
potentiate gene expression through cyclic adenosine monophosphate and hypoxia
response elements. Because DDT stimulates gene expression through various
transcription factors and hence multiple response elements, we hypothesized that 
p38 signaling targets a common shared transcriptional activator. Here, we
demonstrate using both pharmacological and molecular techniques, the general
coactivator p300 is phosphorylated and potentiated by the p38 MAPK signaling
cascade. We further show that p38 directly phosphorylates p300 in its N-terminus.
These results, together with our previous work, suggest that p38 stimulates
downstream transcription factors in part by targeting the general coactivator
p300.

PMCID: PMC2639031
PMID: 18791200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2008 Nov;295(5):C1175-82. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00288.2008. Epub 2008 Sep 3.

Kruppel-like factor 4, Elk-1, and histone deacetylases cooperatively suppress
smooth muscle cell differentiation markers in response to oxidized phospholipids.

Yoshida T(1), Gan Q, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, Univ. of Virginia, MR5
Room 1226, 415 Lane Road, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. ty2c@virginia.edu

Phenotypic switching of vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs), such as increased
proliferation, enhanced migration, and downregulation of SMC differentiation
marker genes, is known to play a key role in the development of atherosclerosis. 
However, the factors and mechanisms controlling this process are not fully
understood. We recently showed that oxidized phospholipids, including
1-palmitoyl-2-(5-oxovaleroyl)-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (POVPC), which
accumulate in atherosclerotic lesions, are potent repressors of expression of SMC
differentiation marker genes in cultured SMCs as well as in rat carotid arteries 
in vivo. Here, we examined the molecular mechanisms whereby POVPC induces
suppression of SMC differentiation marker genes in cultured SMCs. Results showed 
that POVPC induced phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Elk-1. The MEK inhibitors U-0126
and PD-98059 attenuated POVPC-induced suppression of smooth muscle (SM)
alpha-actin and SM-myosin heavy chain. POVPC also induced expression of
Kr¸ppel-like factor 4 (Klf4). Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that 
POVPC caused simultaneous binding of Elk-1 and Klf4 to the promoter region of the
SM alpha-actin gene. Moreover, coimmunoprecipitation assays showed a physical
interaction between Elk-1 and Klf4. Results in Klf4-null SMCs showed that
blockade of both Klf4 induction and Elk-1 phosphorylation completely abolished
POVPC-induced suppression of SMC differentiation marker genes. POVPC-induced
suppression of SMC differentiation marker genes was also accompanied by
hypoacetylation of histone H4 at the SM alpha-actin promoter, which was mediated 
by the recruitment of histone deacetylases (HDACs), HDAC2 and HDAC5.
Coimmunoprecipitation assays showed that Klf4 interacted with HDAC5. Results
provide evidence that Klf4, Elk-1, and HDACs coordinately mediate POVPC-induced
suppression of SMC differentiation marker genes.

PMCID: PMC2584997
PMID: 18768922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Oct 15;105(3):875-84. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21889.

ERK activation and nuclear signaling induced by the loss of cell/matrix adhesion 
stimulates anchorage-independent growth of ovarian cancer cells.

Al-Ayoubi A(1), Tarcsafalvi A, Zheng H, Sakati W, Eblen ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Pharmacology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Ovarian cancer metastasis involves the sloughing of epithelial cells from the
ovary into the peritoneal cavity, where the cells can survive and proliferate in 
peritoneal ascites under anchorage-independent conditions. For normal epithelial 
cells and fibroblasts, cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix is required to
prevent apoptosis and for proper activation and nuclear signaling of the ERK MAP 
kinase. The mechanisms of ERK regulation by adhesion have been determined by our 
lab and others. In this report, we elucidate a novel means of ERK regulation by
cellular adhesion in ovarian cancer cells. We demonstrate that ERK and its
activator MEK are robustly stimulated after cell detachment from a substratum in 
several ovarian cancer cell lines, but not a benign ovarian cell line,
independent of serum and FAK or PAK activity. MEK and ERK activation was
sustained for 48 h after detachment, while activation by serum or growth factors 
in adherent cells was transient. Re-attachment of suspended ovarian cells to
fibronectin restored basal levels of MEK and ERK activity. ERK activity in
suspended cells was dynamically controlled through an autocrine stimulatory
pathway and prevalent phosphatase activity. Suspended cells demonstrated higher
levels of ERK nuclear signaling to Elk1 compared to adherent cells. Inhibition of
ERK activation with the MEK inhibitor U0126 had minor effects on adherent cell
growth, but greatly decreased growth in soft agar. These data demonstrate a
unique regulation of ERK by cellular adhesion and suggest a mechanism by which
ERK may regulate anchorage-independent growth of metastatic ovarian cancer cells.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18726893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Thromb Haemost. 2008 Aug;100(2):301-7.

Functional Toll-like receptor 4 mutations modulate the response to fibrinogen.

Hodgkinson CP(1), Patel K, Ye S.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology, William Harvey Research Institute, John Vane Science
Centre, Charterhouse Square, London, UK. c.hodgkinson@qmul.ac.uk

Fibrinogen has been implicated in atherosclerosis; in part by activating the
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) receptor Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). The
fibrinogen-TLR4 signalling pathway remains uncharacterised. In human macrophages 
fibrinogen stimulated interleukin (IL)6 expression and ERK (extracellular
signal-related kinase) phosphorylation. In HEK293-CD14-MD2 cells expressing TLR4,
fibrinogen induced robust phosphorylation of ERK1, p38alpha and JNK and activated
transcription factors NFkappaB, Elk-1 and AP-1 (activator protein-1). The net
effect of this signalling pathway was a pro-inflammatory response characterised
by IL6 and TNFalpha synthesis and increased IL8, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)1,
MMP9, and MCP-1 promoter activity. Two common TLR4 mutations, D299G and T399I,
render the receptor LPS hyporesponsive. The effect of fibrinogen on polymorphic
variant TLR4s was markedly different; enhancing activation of kinases,
transcription factors, cytokine synthesis and promoter activity. This study
indicates that fibrinogen activates TLR4, explaining how fibrinogen promotes
inflammatory protein expression.

PMID: 18690351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Stem Cells Dev. 2008 Oct;17(5):897-908. doi: 10.1089/scd.2007.0155.

Differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells into the smooth muscle
lineage by blocking ERK/MAPK signaling pathway.

Tamama K(1), Sen CK, Wells A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ohio State University Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio 
43210, USA. kenichi.tamama@osumc.edu

Smooth muscle cells (SMCs) are major components of blood vessels and other hollow
visceral organs required for tissue engineering of these organs. This study aims 
to evaluate whether adult bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMMSCs),
multipotent cells, can be converted into SMCs. We examined the ERK/MAPK pathway
as it exerts anti-myogenic signals in SMCs. Undifferentiated BMMSCs express most 
SMC marker genes, albeit mainly at low levels, except smooth muscle myosin heavy 
chain (SMMHC), the most definitive marker of differentiated SMC. The treatment of
BMMSC with MEK inhibitor up-regulated the expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin
(ASMA), h-caldesmon, and SMMHC in BMMSC in low serum condition. MEK
inhibitor-treated BMMSC also contracted a collagen gel in response to endothelin.
Interestingly, inhibition of MEK induced myocardin expression in BMMSC. In
conclusion, BMMSCs treated MEK inhibitor gain a SMC-like phenotype with
ligand-induced cell contractility to endothelin in vitro. This approach has
obvious implications for cell therapeutics and tissue engineering of hollow
visceral organs such as blood vessels.

PMCID: PMC2973839
PMID: 18564029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2008 Jul;20(7):829-42. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2982.2008.01149.x.

Regulation of SRF/CArG-dependent gene transcription during chronic partial
obstruction of murine small intestine.

Chen J(1), Chen H, Sanders KM, Perrino BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Center of Biomedical Research
Excellence, University of Nevada School of Medicine, Reno, NV 89557, USA.

Intestinal obstructions lead to a variety of motility disorders. Small intestine 
smooth muscles undergo dramatic phenotypic changes in response to obstruction,
but the underlying molecular mechanisms are unknown. Using RT-PCR, ChIP, Re-ChIP,
and Western blots, we examined the effect of small bowel mechanical obstruction
on smooth muscle gene expression. Obstruction caused a transient hyperplasia,
followed by a prolonged hypertrophic response of small intestine smooth muscle
cells. Smooth muscle myosin heavy chain (MHC), alpha-actin, and gamma-actin
expression decreased initially, and then increased as hypertrophy developed.
Myocardin expression decreased initially and then increased, while kruppel-like
factors (KLF)4 and KLF5 expression increased initially, and then decreased. Serum
response factor (SRF) expression decreased initially, and then recovered to
sham-operated levels as hypertrophy developed. SRF binding to smooth muscle MHC
and alpha-actin promoters decreased initially, but then increased above
sham-operated levels as hypertrophy developed. Elk-1 binding to smooth muscle
myosin heavy chain and alpha-actin promoters increased initially, and then
decreased to sham-operated levels as hypertrophy developed. c-fos expression
increased initially, which was associated with increased SRF/Elk-1 binding to the
c-fos promoter. The Elk-1 phosphorylation inhibitor U-0126 inhibited the increase
in c-fos expression. These findings indicate a dynamic response of small
intestine smooth muscles to bowel obstruction involving switching between
differentiated, proliferative, and hypertrophic phenotypes. These results suggest
that changes in the expression and interactions between SRF, myocardin, Elk-1,
and c-fos play key roles in the phenotypic switching of small intestine smooth
muscles in response to mechanical obstruction.

PMID: 18557893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2008 Aug;295(2):C394-405. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00423.2007. Epub 2008 Jun 11.

Erythropoietin enhancement of rat pancreatic tumor cell proliferation requires
the activation of ERK and JNK signals.

Bose C(1), Udupa KB.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research, Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System, 4300 West
Seventh St., Little Rock, AR 72205-5446, USA.

Erythropoietin (EPO) regulates the proliferation and differentiation of erythroid
cells by binding to its specific transmembrane receptor EPOR. Recent studies,
however, have shown that the EPOR is additionally present in various cancer cells
and EPO induces the proliferation of these cells, suggesting a different function
for EPO other than erythropoiesis. Therefore, the purpose of the present study
was to examine EPOR expression and the role of EPO in the proliferation and
signaling cascades involved in this process, using the rat pancreatic tumor cell 
line AR42J. Our results showed that AR42J cells expressed EPOR, and EPO
significantly enhanced their proliferation. Cell cycle analysis of EPO-treated
cells indicated an increased percentage of cells in the S phase, whereas cell
numbers in G0/G1 phase were significantly reduced. Phosphorylation of
extracellular regulatory kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and c-Jun NH(2) terminal kinase 1/2 
(JNK1/2) was rapidly stimulated and sustained after EPO addition. Treatment of
cells with mitogen-activated protein/ERK kinase (MEK) inhibitor PD98059 or JNK
inhibitor SP600125 significantly inhibited EPO-enhanced proliferation and also
increased the fraction of cells in G0/G1 phase. Furthermore, the inhibition of
JNK using small interference RNA (siRNA) suppressed EPO-enhanced proliferation of
AR42J cells. Taken together, our results indicate that AR42J cells express EPOR
and that the activation of both ERK1/2 and JNK1/2 by EPO is essential in
regulating proliferation and the cell cycle. Thus both appear to play a key role 
in EPO-enhanced proliferation and suggest that the presence of both is required
for EPO-mediated proliferation of AR42J cells.

PMID: 18550701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 May 13;105(19):6870-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0800750105. Epub 2008 May 7.

Human biliverdin reductase is an ERK activator; hBVR is an ERK nuclear
transporter and is required for MAPK signaling.

Lerner-Marmarosh N(1), Miralem T, Gibbs PE, Maines MD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Rochester School of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Activation of the MEK/ERK/Elk-signaling cascade is a mechanism for relaying
mitogenic and stress stimuli for gene activation. MEK1 is the proximate kinase
for activation of ERK1/2, and nuclear targeting of ERK1/2 is obligatory for Elk1 
transcriptional activity. Human biliverdin reductase (hBVR) is a recently
described Ser/Thr/Tyr kinase in the MAPK insulin/insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF1)-signaling cascade. Using 293A cells and in vitro experiments, we detail
the formation of a ternary complex of MEK/ERK/hBVR, activation of MEK1 and ERK1/2
kinase activities by hBVR, and phosphorylation of hBVR by ERK1/2. hBVR is nearly 
as effective as IGF1 in activating ERK; intact hBVR ATP-binding domain is
necessary for Elk1 activation, whereas protein-protein interaction is the basis
for hBVR activation of MEK1 and ERK. The two MAPK docking consensus sequences
present in hBVR, F(162)GFP and K(275)KRILHCLGL (C- and D-box, respectively), are 
ERK interactive sites; interaction at each site is critical for ERK/Elk1
activation. Transfection with mutant hBVR-P(165) or peptides corresponding to the
C- or D-box blocked activation of ERK by IGF1. Transfection with D-box mutant
hBVR prevented the activation of ERK by wild-type protein and dramatically
decreased Elk1 transcriptional activity. hBVR is a nuclear transporter of ERK;
experiments with hBVR nuclear export signal (NES) and nuclear localization signal
(NLS) mutants demonstrated its critical role in the nuclear localization of
IGF-stimulated ERK for Elk1 activation. These findings, together with
observations that si-hBVR blocked activation of ERK and Elk1 by IGF1 and
prevented formation of ternary complex between MEK/ERK/hBVR, define the critical 
role of hBVR in ERK signaling and nuclear functions of the kinase.

PMCID: PMC2383961
PMID: 18463290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Cancer Biol Ther. 2008 Jul;7(7):1080-9. Epub 2008 Apr 19.

Sustained ERK activation is involved in the kaempferol-induced apoptosis of
breast cancer cells and is more evident under 3-D culture condition.

Kim BW(1), Lee ER, Min HM, Jeong HS, Ahn JY, Kim JH, Choi HY, Choi H, Kim EY,
Park SP, Cho SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology and Bio/Molecular Informatics Center,
Konkuk University, Seoul, Korea.

In order to determine the effects of a variety of flavonoids, we applied
differing amounts of several flavonoids to human breast cancer cells. Kaempferol 
treatment resulted in significant reduction of cell viability in the MCF-7 cells,
although it exerted only minor effect on the cell viability of MDA-MB-231 or
mammary epithelial HC-11 cells. Kaempferol was demonstrated to induce sustained
ERK activation concomitantly with MEK1 and ELK1 activation, and this
kaempferol-induced apoptosis was suppressed by treatment with PD98059, the
overexpression of a kinase-inactive ERK mutant, or ERK siRNA. Kaempferol
treatment was shown to profoundly induce the generation of fluorescent DCF in the
MCF-7 cells, and treatment with N-acetyl cysteine suppressed kaempferol-induced
PARP cleavage. Moreover, because breast cancer is associated with increased
collagen synthesis and accumulation, we utilized a collagen-based 3D culture
method. Under the 3-dimensional culture condition employed herein, kaempferol
treatment was shown to result in a significant reduction in cell viability, an
effect which occurred in a dose-dependent manner. Compared with what was observed
under conventional 2D culture condition, we observed more evident apoptotic cell 
death and ERK activation as the result of kaempferol treatment in a
collagen-based 3D culture environment. Similar to the case of conventional 2D
cultured cells, the addition of PD98059 significantly suppressed intracellular
ROS production. Collectively, these results show that the sustained activation of
the ERK signaling pathway is markedly involved in kaempferol-induced apoptosis of
breast cancer MCF-7 cells, and that this effect is more evident under 3D culture 
condition.

PMID: 18443432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jun 27;371(2):304-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.04.063. Epub 2008 Apr 22.

ERK signaling regulates tumor promoter induced c-Jun recruitment at the Fra-1
promoter.

Adiseshaiah P(1), Li J, Vaz M, Kalvakolanu DV, Reddy SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, The Johns Hopkins University
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Room E7610, 615 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore,
MD 21205, USA.

Fra-1 as an integral part of AP-1 (Jun/Fos) drives transcriptional programs
involved in several physiologic and pathologic processes. It is also critical for
tumor cell motility and metastasis. We have previously shown that two critical
elements of Fra-1 promoter, the upstream TPA response element (TRE) and the serum
response element (SRE), are necessary for its induction in response to phorbol
esters in human pulmonary epithelial cell lines. Here, we have investigated the
roles of various MAP kinases in regulating Fra-1 expression in response to TPA.
Using pharmacologic and genetic tools, we demonstrate a prominent role for
ERK1/2, but not JNK1/2 and p38, signaling in the TPA-induced activation of
specific transcription factors that bind to the AP1 site and the SRE. Inhibition 
of ERK1/2 pathway suppresses Elk1 activation, and c-Jun and Fra-2 recruitment to 
the promoter.

PMCID: PMC2441865
PMID: 18435914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Neurosci Lett. 2008 May 23;437(1):20-4. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.03.064. Epub
2008 Mar 27.

Wildtype Elk-1, but not a SUMOylation mutant, represses egr-1 expression in
SH-SY5Y neuroblastomas.

Demir O(1), Kurnaz IA.

Author information: 
(1)Yeditepe University, Department of Genetics and Bioengineering, Istanbul,
Turkey. odemir@yeditepe.edu.tr

Elk-1, an ETS domain transcription factor of the TCF (ternary complex factor)
subfamily, is known to be involved in the regulation of immediate-early genes
such as c-fos upon mitogen activation, and thus commonly implied in cell
proliferation. Early growth response-1, Egr-1, which was known to be an
immediate-early gene, has recently been shown to be pro-apoptotic for SH-SY5Y
neuroblastoma cells. In that respect, it was not clear whether Elk-1 would
activate or repress from this promoter, since Elk-1 is mostly associated with
proliferation and not apoptosis. In this study, we wanted to address whether
Elk-1 activates or represses egr-1 promoter in neuroblastoma cells, and using a
combination of RNA interference and reporter analyses, we present evidence that
egr-1 gene is repressed by Elk-1 in normally cycling SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cell
line in a SUMO (small ubiquitin-related modifier)-dependent manner, a potential
mechanism used by these cells to bypass apoptosis.

PMID: 18434015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Heart Vessels. 2008 Mar;23(2):124-33. doi: 10.1007/s00380-007-1015-8. Epub 2008
Apr 4.

Beneficial effects of low doses of red wine consumption on perturbed shear
stress-induced atherogenesis.

Napoli C(1), Balestrieri ML, Sica V, Lerman LO, Crimi E, De Rosa G, Schiano C,
Servillo L, D'Armiento FP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology, Division of Clinical Pathology, 1st School of
Medicine, II University of Naples, Complesso S. Andrea delle Dame, Via L. de
Crecchio 7, Naples, 80138, Italy. claudio.napoli@unina2.it

Moderate wine intake is associated with a reduced risk of morbidity and mortality
from cardiovascular disease. Atherosclerosis is enhanced in arterial segments
exposed to disturbed flow. Perturbed shear stress increases also the endothelial 
expression of oxidation-sensitive responsive genes (such as ELK-1 and p-JUN).
This study evaluates the effects of chronic consumption of red wine on perturbed 
shear stress-induced atherogenesis. Results indicated that chronic treatment with
red wine significantly attenuated the activation of redox-sensitive genes (ELK-1 
and p-JUN) and increased endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) expression
(which was decreased by perturbed shear stress) in cultured human coronary
endothelial cells (EC) and in atherosclerosis-prone areas of hypercholesterolemic
mice. Oral administration of red wine to hypercholesterolemic mice reduced
significantly the progression of atherosclerosis. Moreover, short-term
supplementation with red wine to C57BL/6J mice significantly increased
upregulation of aortic eNOS and SIRT1 expression induced by physical training.
These findings establish that administration of low doses of red wine can
attenuate the proatherogenic effects induced by perturbed shear stress in vitro
and in vivo. This evidence may have implications for the prevention of
atherosclerotic lesion progression and its clinical manifestations.

PMID: 18389338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Immunity. 2008 Apr;28(4):499-508. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.02.015. Epub 2008
Mar 20.

Erk kinases link pre-B cell receptor signaling to transcriptional events required
for early B cell expansion.

Yasuda T(1), Sanjo H, PagËs G, Kawano Y, Karasuyama H, PouyssÈgur J, Ogata M,
Kurosaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Lymphocyte Differentiation, RIKEN Research Center for Allergy
and Immunology, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2008 Apr;28(4):488-90.

The pre-B cell receptor (pre-BCR) plays a crucial role in the development of
immature B cells. Although certain aspects of proximal pre-BCR signaling have
been studied, the intermediate signal transducers and the distal transcription
modulators are poorly characterized. Here, we demonstrate that deletion of both
Erk1 and Erk2 kinases was associated with defective pre-BCR-mediated cell
expansion as well as a block in the transition of pro-B to pre-B cells.
Phosphorylation of transcription factors Elk1 and CREB was mediated by Erk, and a
dominant-negative mutation in the Erk-mediated phosphorylation sites of Elk1 or
CREB suppressed pre-BCR-mediated cell expansion as well as expression of genes
including Myc, which is involved in the cell-cycle progression. Together, our
results identify a crucial role for Erk kinases in regulating B cell development 
by initiating transcriptional regulatory network and thereby pre-BCR-mediated
cell expansion.

PMID: 18356083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Steroids. 2008 Oct;73(9-10):922-8. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2008.01.010. Epub 2008
Jan 19.

The role and mechanism of progesterone receptor activation of extra-nuclear
signaling pathways in regulating gene transcription and cell cycle progression.

Boonyaratanakornkit V(1), Bi Y, Rudd M, Edwards DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology and Pathology, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. virojb@bcm.tmc.edu

Human progesterone receptor (PR) contains a polyproline motif in the
amino-terminal domain that interacts with the SH3 domain of Src and mediates
rapid activation of c-Src and downstream MAPK (Erk-1/-2) independent of the
transcriptional activity of PR. Forcedly target PR to different locations in the 
cell by use of mutations or tags for different cell compartments showed that
progestin activation of Src/MAPK is mediated by PR outside the nucleus. No
distinction could be made between the cytoplasm and cell membrane as the site of 
PR activation of Src. Therefore we can only conclude that this is an
extra-nuclear action of PR. Interestingly, the B isoform of PR which is naturally
distributed between cytoplasm and nucleus mediated progestin activation of
Src/MAPK, whereas PR-A that is predominantly nuclear failed to do so indicating
that the two PR isoforms have distinct abilities to mediate rapid activation of
signaling pathways. Due to distinct cellular locations, progestin activation of
Src/MAPK signaling can regulate selected target genes such as cyclin D1 (CCND1)
that lack direct PR binding response elements (PREs). Progestin induction of
CCND1 was observed in cells expressing PR-B but not PR-BDeltaSH3 or PR-A and
induction in the presence of PR-B was dramatically reduced in the presence of
inhibitors of Src or MAPK. In contrast progestin induction of Sgk (serum and
glucocorticoid regulated kinase) gene, which contains a classical PRE, was
observed with both PR isoforms as well as PR-BDeltaSH3 and was unaffected by Src 
and MAPK inhibitors. PR bound to enhancer region of Sgk in a progestin dependent 
manner as detected by chromatin co-immunoprecipitation (ChIP) whereas no PR
binding to CCDN1 was observed. Consistent with CCND1 data, progestin stimulation 
of cell cycle progression was only observed in cells expressing PR-B but not
cells expressing PR-BDeltaSH3 or PR-A. These results demonstrate the importance
of PR activation of extra-nuclear signaling pathways in regulating selected
target genes and cell cycle progression.

PMID: 18321550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. PLoS One. 2008 Mar 5;3(3):e1718. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001718.

Adaptor SKAP-55 binds p21 activating exchange factor RasGRP1 and negatively
regulates the p21-ERK pathway in T-cells.

Schneider H(1), Wang H, Raab M, Valk E, Smith X, Lovatt M, Wu Z,
Maqueira-Iglesias B, Strebhardt K, Rudd CE.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signalling Section, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

While the adaptor SKAP-55 mediates LFA-1 adhesion on T-cells, it is not known
whether the adaptor regulates other aspects of signaling. SKAP-55 could
potentially act as a node to coordinate the modulation of adhesion with
downstream signaling. In this regard, the GTPase p21(ras) and the extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway play central roles in T-cell function. In
this study, we report that SKAP-55 has opposing effects on adhesion and the
activation of the p21(ras) -ERK pathway in T-cells. SKAP-55 deficient primary
T-cells showed a defect in LFA-1 adhesion concurrent with the hyper-activation of
the ERK pathway relative to wild-type cells. RNAi knock down (KD) of SKAP-55 in
T-cell lines also showed an increase in p21(ras) activation, while
over-expression of SKAP-55 inhibited activation of ERK and its transcriptional
target ELK. Three observations implicated the p21(ras) activating exchange factor
RasGRP1 in the process. Firstly, SKAP-55 bound to RasGRP1 via its C-terminus,
while secondly, the loss of binding abrogated SKAP-55 inhibition of ERK and ELK
activation. Thirdly, SKAP-55-/- primary T-cells showed an increased presence of
RasGRP1 in the trans-Golgi network (TGN) following TCR activation, the site where
p21(ras) becomes activated. Our findings indicate that SKAP-55 has a dual role in
regulating p21(ras)-ERK pathway via RasGRP1, as a possible mechanism to restrict 
activation during T-cell adhesion.

PMCID: PMC2249700
PMID: 18320039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Cancer Res. 2008 Mar 1;68(5):1369-77. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5222.

p21 Waf1/Cip1 expression by curcumin in U-87MG human glioma cells: role of early 
growth response-1 expression.

Choi BH(1), Kim CG, Bae YS, Lim Y, Lee YH, Shin SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, Research Center for
Transcription Control, Institute of Biomedical Science and Technology, Konkuk
University, Seoul, Korea.

Curcumin, a natural compound, is a well-known chemopreventive agent with potent
anticarcinogenic activity in a wide variety of tumor cells. Curcumin inhibits
cancer cell proliferation in part by suppressing cyclin D1 and inducing
expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(Waf1/Cip1). Both
p53-dependent and p53-independent mechanisms regulate p21(Waf1/Cip1) expression, 
but the mechanism by which curcumin regulates p21(Waf1/Cip1) expression remains
unknown. Here, we report that transcription of the p21(Waf1/Cip1) gene is
activated by early growth response-1 (Egr-1) independently of p53 in response to 
curcumin treatment in U-87MG human glioblastoma cells. Egr-1 is a transcription
factor that helps regulate differentiation, growth, and apoptosis in many cell
types. Egr-1 expression is induced by curcumin through extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK), but not the 
p38, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways, which mediate the
transactivation of Elk-1. Transient expression of Egr-1 enhanced curcumin-induced
p21(Waf1/Cip1) promoter activity, whereas suppression of Egr-1 expression by
small interfering RNA abrogated the ability of curcumin to induce p21(Waf1/Cip1) 
promoter activity. In addition, stable knockdown of Egr-1 expression in U-87MG
cells suppressed curcumin-induced p21 expression. Our results indicate that ERK
and JNK MAPK/Elk-1/Egr-1 signal cascade is required for p53-independent
transcriptional activation of p21(Waf1/Cip1) in response to curcumin in U-87MG
human glioblastoma cells.

PMID: 18316600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Nitric Oxide. 2008 Jun;18(4):241-55. doi: 10.1016/j.niox.2008.02.001. Epub 2008
Feb 9.

The low molecular weight S-nitrosothiol, S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine,
promotes cell cycle progression in rabbit aortic endothelial cells.

Oliveira CJ(1), Curcio MF, Moraes MS, Tsujita M, Travassos LR, Stern A, Monteiro 
HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Molecular Biology--CINTERGEN, Federal University of
S„o Paulo (UNIFESP), S„o Paulo, SP, Brazil.

S-Nitrosylation reactions are considered to be a major mechanism by which
NO-related bioactivities are regulated in vivo. In the present study, we show the
effects of the low molecular weight S-nitrosothiol,
S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine (SNAP), on cell cycle progression of rabbit
aortic endothelial cells (RAEC). SNAP at low concentrations (0.1mM) stimulated
the p21Ras-ERK1/2 MAP kinase signaling pathway. Activation of this signaling
pathway was strongly inhibited in cells stably transfected with S-nitrosylation
insensitive p21Ras (p21(Ras (C118S))). Furthermore, the SNAP-induced effects on
cell cycle progression were eliminated in RAEC expressing N17Ras, a negative
dominant mutant of p21Ras. Upon stimulation with SNAP, ERK1/2 MAP kinases become 
phosphorylated and translocate to the nucleus promoting the phosphorylation of
the transcription factor Elk1. Synthesis of Cyclin D1 and stimulation of the
cyclin-dependent kinases cdk4 and cdk6 resulted in the phosphorylation of the
nuclear protein Rb and its dissociation from the E2F family of transcription
factors. Cells then pass the restriction point in the late G1 phase. Cyclins E
and A were expressed as the cell cycle progressed through the S phase upon
stimulation with SNAP. Further transition in the cell cycle from the G2 to M
phase was evidenced by the G2/M peak found in a histogram of the cell-phase
distribution in SNAP-treated RAEC. These observations suggest that low molecular 
weight S-nitrosothiols may promote cell cycle progression possibly through the
transnitrosation of p21Ras, and activation of the Ras-ERK1/2 MAP kinases
signaling pathway.

PMID: 18291122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Cell Signal. 2008 May;20(5):836-43. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2007.12.014. Epub 2007
Dec 27.

DUSP6/MKP-3 inactivates ERK1/2 but fails to bind and inactivate ERK5.

Arkell RS(1), Dickinson RJ, Squires M, Hayat S, Keyse SM, Cook SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Signalling, The Babraham Institute, Babraham Research 
Campus, Cambridge, CB22 3AT, UK.

Extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1 and -2 (ERK1/2) are activated by dual
threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation of a TEY motif. The highly related kinase 
ERK5 is also activated by phosphorylation at a TEY motif. Inactivation of ERK1/2 
is achieved by distinct members of the dual-specificity protein phosphatase
(DUSP) family, which are responsible for the specific, regulated
de-phosphorylation of the TEY motif. These include both nuclear (DUSP5) and
cytoplasmic (DUSP6) enzymes. DUSP6, a candidate tumour suppressor gene, is
thought to be highly specific for inactivation of ERK1/2 but several reports have
suggested that it may also inactivate ERK5. Here we have compared the ability of 
DUSP6 to regulate the ERK1/2 and ERK5 protein kinases. We find that DUSP6 binds
to ERK1/2 in both yeast and human cells but fails to bind to ERK5. Recombinant
ERK2 can induce catalytic activation of DUSP6 whereas ERK5 cannot. Ectopic
expression of DUSP6 can de-phosphorylate a co-expressed ERK2 construct but does
not de-phosphorylate ERK5. Finally, expression of DUSP6 blocks the MEK1-driven
activation of GAL4-ELK1, an ERK1/2-regulated transcription factor, but fails to
block the MEK5-driven activation of GAL4-MEF2D, an ERK5-regulated transcription
factor. These results demonstrate that even upon over-expression DUSP6 fails to
inactivate ERK5, confirming that it is indeed an ERK1/2-specific DUSP.

PMID: 18280112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Pharm Res. 2008 Sep;25(9):2143-50. doi: 10.1007/s11095-008-9545-z. Epub 2008 Feb 
6.

Silibinin impairs constitutively active TGFalpha-EGFR autocrine loop in advanced 
human prostate carcinoma cells.

Tyagi A(1), Sharma Y, Agarwal C, Agarwal R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Colorado Denver, Denver, Colorado 80262, USA.

PURPOSE: Epidermal growth factor (EGF) and transformation growth factor-alpha
(TGFalpha) are potent mitogens that regulate proliferation of prostate cancer
cells via autocrine and paracrine loops, and promote tumor metastasis. They exert
their action through binding to the cell surface receptor, epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), and cause activation of Erk1/2 mediated mitogenic
signaling in human prostate cancer (PCA) at both advanced and
androgen-independent stages. Thus, we rationalized that inhibiting this mitogenic
pathway could be useful in controlling advanced PCA growth.
METHODS: LNCaP and DU145 human PCA cells were treated with silibinin (100-200
microM) for different time points, and the levels of TGFalpha, activated
signaling molecules (EGFR, Erk1/2 and Jnk1/2) and Erk1/2 kinase activity were
analyzed employing ELISA, immunoprecipitation and/or immunoblotting techniques.
The mRNA levels of TGFalpha were analyzed by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Treatment of cells (LNCaP and DU145) with silibinin resulted in a
decrease in TGFalpha protein at both secreted and cellular levels together with a
decrease in its mRNA level. Silibinin also caused an inhibition of EGFR
activation followed by that of Erk1/2 without any change in their protein levels.
The kinase activity of Erk1/2 to Elk1 was also inhibited by silibinin at least in
DU145 cells. In other study, silibinin caused strong inhibition of Jnk1/2
activation in LNCaP cells while in DU145 cells, a strong induction in Jnk1/2
activation was observed. These results suggest that silibinin impairs
TGFalpha-EGFR-Erk1/2 signaling in both androgen-dependent (LNCaP) and
-independent (DU145) advanced human prostate carcinoma cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This study, for the first time, identifies the inhibitory effect of 
silibinin on constitutively active TGFalpha-EGFR autocrine loop in advanced human
PCA cells, which plausible contributes to the strong efficacy of silibinin in PCA
prevention and intervention, as reported in recent studies.

PMID: 18253818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Biol Cell. 2008 Jun;100(6):365-75. doi: 10.1042/BC20070140.

Both ERK and JNK are required for enhancement of MD-2 gene expression during
differentiation of HL-60 cells.

Li C(1), Yu Y, Wang Y, Liu L, Zhang M, Sugano S, Wang Z, Chang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai 200031, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND INFORMATION: MD-2 is associated with the extracellular domain of TLR4 
(Toll-like receptor 4) and augments TLR4-dependent LPS (lipopolysaccharide)
responses in vitro. Our previous investigation found that PMA-induced HL-60 cell 
differentiation to macrophages is associated largely with TLR2 and CD14 and, to a
much lesser extent, with TLR4.
RESULTS: We studied the MD-2 expression during differentiation of HL-60 cells
induced by PMA. The results showed that PMA, but not VitD(3)
(1alpha,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D(3)), strongly induces MD-2 gene expression by
HL-60 cells in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Treatment with an MEK [MAPK
(mitogen-activated protein kinase)/ERK (extracellular-signal-regulated kinase)
kinase] inhibitor (PD98059) and a JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) inhibitor
(SP600125) suppresses PMA-induced MD-2 gene expression, whereas impairment of p38
function by treatment with the inhibitor SB203580 has no effect on MD-2 mRNA. In 
order to reveal the possible molecular mechanism for such a regulation of MD-2
gene expression, we cloned and analysed the putative MD-2 gene promoter.
Transient transfection of different deletion mutants demonstrated that the region
-185/-171 (5'-TCCTTTACAGGAAGT-3') of the MD-2 gene promoter is closely related to
gene transcription in response to PMA. Additionally, the transcription factor
Elk-1 has been found to bind this specific motif.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that ERK and JNK pathways are involved in
PMA-mediated MD-2 gene expression during HL-60 cell differentiation, and the
activation of the MEK/possible ERK/Elk signal pathway is the mechanism
responsible for PMA-induced MD-2 gene expression in differentiated HL-60 cells.

PMID: 18181766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Mar;28(6):1999-2010. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01633-07. Epub 2008 Jan
2.

Regulation of MDMX expression by mitogenic signaling.

Gilkes DM(1), Pan Y, Coppola D, Yeatman T, Reuther GW, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, MRC3057A, 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL 33612,
USA.

MDMX is an important regulator of p53 transcriptional activity and stress
response. MDMX overexpression and gene amplification are implicated in p53
inactivation and tumor development. Unlike MDM2, MDMX is not inducible by p53,
and little is known about its regulation at the transcriptional level. We found
that MDMX levels in tumor cell lines closely correlate with promoter activity and
mRNA level. Activated K-Ras and insulin-like growth factor 1 induce MDMX
expression at the transcriptional level through mechanisms that involve the
mitogen-activated protein kinase and c-Ets-1 transcription factors.
Pharmacological inhibition of MEK results in down-regulation of MDMX in tumor
cell lines. MDMX overexpression was detected in approximately 50% of human colon 
tumors and showed strong correlation with increased extracellular
signal-regulated kinase phosphorylation. Therefore, MDMX expression is regulated 
by mitogenic signaling pathways. This mechanism may protect normal proliferating 
cells from p53 but also hamper p53 response during tumor development.

PMCID: PMC2268405
PMID: 18172009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2008 Jan;65(2):338-49.

CCDC134, a novel secretory protein, inhibits activation of ERK and JNK, but not
p38 MAPK.

Huang J(1), Shi T, Ma T, Zhang Y, Ma X, Lu Y, Song Q, Liu W, Ma D, Qiu X.

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medical Science, Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing, People's Republic of China.

In this study, we report a novel gene, CCDC134 (coiled-coil domain containing
134), that encodes a secretory protein that can inhibit the MAPK pathway as a
novel human MAPK-regulating protein. The CCDC134 mRNA contains 1280 nucleotides, 
encoding a protein of 229 amino acids. CCDC134 is a classical secretory protein. 
Expression profile analysis by Northern blot, RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry and
Western blot reveals that CCDC134 is widely expressed in normal adult tissues,
tumor tissues and cell lines. Functional investigation reveals that
overexpression of CCDC134 and its purified protein significantly inhibit
transcriptional activity of Elk1 and phosphorylation of Erk and JNK/SAPK but not 
p38 MAPK. Conversely, specific siRNA against CCDC134 activates Elk1
transcriptional activity and promotes Erk and JNK/SAPK phosphorylation. These
results clearly indicate that CCDC134 is a novel member of the secretory family
and down-regulates the Raf-1/MEK/ERK and JNK/ SAPK pathways.

PMID: 18087676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2007 Dec;5(2):680-5.

Meeting Report:The 7th ESPE Growth Plate Working Group Symposium - EUROGROP June 
27th 2007, Helsinki, Finland.

Miclea RL(1), Phillip M, S‰vendahl L, Wit JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Republished in
    J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Mar;21(3):287-94.

Longitudinal bone growth occurs within the epiphyseal growth plate, a highly
organized biological structure located at the distal ends of the long bones, via 
endochondral bone formation. This developmentally regulated process is finely
tuned through the interaction of circulating systemic hormones and locally
produced peptide growth factors, the net result of which is to trigger changes in
gene expression by growth plate chondrocytes. These molecular events lead to
carefully orchestrated alterations in chondrocyte size, extracellular matrix
components, secreted enzymes, growth factors and receptor expression. These
events finally result in calcification of the matrix, chondrocyte death, vascular
invasion and the completion of endochondral bone formation. Although the past
several years have seen important progress in the identification of numerous
important factors, which, in a complex and integrated network, control
longitudinal bone growth, many of the signaling pathways and their interactions
in the growth plate remain poorly understood. The ESPE Growth Plate Working Group
(EUROGROP) was established in 2000 with the aim of bringing together both basic
and clinical European research groups with an interest in the biology and
pathology of the growth plate. The 7th EUROGROP Symposium was held as an official
ESPE working group of the 46th ESPE Annual Meeting held in Helsinki, Finland,
2007. It enabled researchers, coming from all parts of the world to discuss their
ongoing studies and exchange technical information. The program consisted of
three lectures and four original papers, all followed by attractive discussions. 
This report summarizes the data presented and provides some comments on each of
the presentations.ABBREVIATIONS: 11beta-HSD: 11 Beta-Hydroxysteroid
Dehydrogenase; Agc: Aggrecan; Aln: Alendronate; Asb- 4: Ankyrin Repeat and SOCS
Box-Containing Protein 4; Atf6: Activating Transcription Factor6; BSP:
Bisphosphonates; Calca: Calcitonin, Alpha Cdkn2a: Cyclin-Dependent Kinase
Inhibitor 2A; Col1: Collagen 1; Col2: Collagen 2 Col10: Collagen 10; Dex:
Dexamethasone; Elk1: Member of ETS Oncogene Family; Esr1: Estrogen Receptor 1
(Alpha); Fli1: Friend Leukemia Integration 1; Gabp: GA Repeat Binding Protein;
GC: Glucocorticoids; Ghr: Growth Hormone Receptor; Hif-1alpha: Hypoxia-Inducible 
Factor 1 Alpha; hMSCs: Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells; Igf1: Insulin-Like Growth
Factor 1; Igfbp1: Insulin-Like Growth Factor Binding Protein 1; Igf1r:
Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1-Receptor; Igf2: Insulin-Like Growth Factor 2; Igf2r:
Insulin-Like Growth Factor 2-Receptor; Nfe2l2: Nuclear Factor, Erythroid Derived 
2, Like 2; Nrf1: Nuclear Respiratory Factor 1; Pam: Pamidronate; Prss11: HtrA
Serine Peptidase 1; PTU: Propylthiouracil; Pycard: PYD and CARD Domain
Containing; Rxrg: Retinoid X Receptor Gamma; Tam: Tamoxifen.

PMID: 18084163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. In Vivo. 2007 Sep-Oct;21(5):871-5.

Effect of a plant-derived natural compound, Flavin7, on the ERK signaling pathway
in immortalized mouse proximal tubule cells.

N·dasi E(1), Ember I, Arany I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences
and Central Arkansas Veteran HealthCare System, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.
edit.nadasi@aok.pte.hu

BACKGROUND: Since MAP kinases represent an important pathway of transducing
external stimuli to internal signals in cells, determining their possible role in
cancer cells may offer a promising way for the treatment and prognosis of
malignant diseases. Our previous experiments have shown that a flavonoid-rich
solution, Flavin7, was able to diminish kidney tumor growth in vivo.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Effects of Flavin 7 on the MAPK signaling pathway were
determined in immortalized mouse proximal tubule cells by determining cell
viability, flow cytometric analysis, luciferase assays and Western blots.
RESULTS: At a nontoxic dose, Flavin7 markedly reduced phosphorylation of ERK and 
inhibited activity of its downstream targets such as Elk1 and CREB via inhibition
of the ERK-kinase MEK1.
CONCLUSION: Because of its ability to temporarily inhibit kidney tumor growth and
activation of the MEK1/ERK pathway in vitro, further in vivo investigations may
determine the potential role of Flavin7 in the treatment of malignancies.

PMID: 18019427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Circ Res. 2008 Jan 4;102(1):42-50. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Hemin upregulates Egr-1 expression in vascular smooth muscle cells via reactive
oxygen species ERK-1/2-Elk-1 and NF-kappaB.

Hasan RN(1), Schafer AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2008 Jan 4;102(1):6-8.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and oxidant stress are important mediators of
cardiovascular pathologies including atherosclerosis. One source of ROS in the
vasculature is free heme released from hemoglobin. Because Egr-1, the regulator
of cell proliferation and apoptosis, is also induced by oxidant stress and is
likewise implicated in atherosclerosis, we examined the regulation of Egr-1 by
heme in vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs). Hemin increased Egr-1 expression
(mRNA, protein) within 30 minutes and ERK-1/2 phosphorylation and nuclear
translocation within 5 minutes. Inhibiting hemin-induced ERK-1/2 activation by
U0126 (MAPK-inhibitor), the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine, the NADPH oxidase
inhibitors apocynin and diphenyleneiodonium chloride, the superoxide scavenger
tiron, or tricarbonyldichlororuthenium(II)-dimer (carbon-monoxide donor; CORM-2) 
blocked hemin-induced Egr-1 expression. Hemin activated Elk-1, SRF, and NF-kappaB
and promoted their interaction with the Egr-1 promoter. Downregulating Elk-1 (via
siRNA) or blocking NF-kappaB activation (via BAY-11-7082) abolished hemin
induction of Egr-1. Finally, hemin-induced Egr-1 bound the promoters of tissue
factor (TF), Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor (PAI)-1, and NGF-1A Binding (NAB)-2,
upregulating their expression, and increased the biochemical activity of TF and
PAI-1. Upregulation of Egr-1 and its target genes by heme-induced oxidant stress 
may be an important event in the initiation and progression of inflammatory
vascular diseases such as atherosclerosis.

PMID: 17967787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Endocrinology. 2008 Feb;149(2):793-801. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Nuclear exclusion of forkhead box O and Elk1 and activation of nuclear
factor-kappaB are required for C2C12-RasV12C40 myoblast differentiation.

De Alvaro C(1), Nieto-Vazquez I, Rojas JM, Lorenzo M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquimica y Biologia Molecular II, Facultad de Farmacia,
Universidad Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain. mlorenzo@farm.ucm.es.

Activating ras point mutations are frequently found in skeletal muscle tumors
such as rhabdomyosarcomas. In this study we investigated the impact of two
different H-ras mutants in skeletal muscle differentiation: RasV12, a
constitutively active form, and RasV12C40, a mutant deficient in Raf1 activation.
Stably transfected C2C12-RasV12 myoblasts actively proliferated as indicated by
the sustained expression of proliferating cell nuclear antigen and retinoblastoma
at the hyperphosphorylated state and failed to express differentiation markers.
This differentiation-defective phenotype was a consequence of the chronic
p44/p42MAPK phosphorylation and the inability of the cells to activate AKT.
Moreover, we observed that p44/p42MAPK activation in C2C12-RasV12 myoblasts
phosphorylated the ETS-like transcription factor (ELK) 1, which translocates to
the nuclei and seemed to be involved in maintaining myoblast proliferation.
C2C12-RasV12C40 myoblasts cultured in low serum repressed phosphorylation of
p44/p42MAPK and ELK1, resulting in cell cycle arrest and myogenic
differentiation. Under this condition, activation of AKT, p70S6K, and p38MAPK was
produced, leading to formation of myotubes in 3 d, 1 d earlier than in control
C2C12-AU5 cells. Moreover, the expression of muscle-specific proteins, mainly the
terminal differentiation markers caveolin-3 and myosin heavy chain, also occurred
1 d earlier than in control cells. Furthermore, AKT activation produced
phosphorylation of Forkhead box O that led to nuclear exclusion and inactivation,
allowing myogenesis. In addition, we found an induction of nuclear factor-kappaB 
activity in the nucleus in C2C12-RasV12C40 myotubes attributed to p38MAPK
activation. Accordingly, muscle differentiation is associated with a pattern of
transcription factors that involves nuclear exclusion ELK1 and Forkhead box O and
the increase in nuclear factor-kappaB DNA binding.

PMID: 17962350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2007 Nov;28(11):556-60. Epub 2007 Oct 24.

PARP-1 activation in the ERK signaling pathway.

Cohen-Armon M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neufeld Cardiac Research Institute, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv
University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel. marmon@post.tau.ac.il

PARP-1 is a highly conserved DNA-binding protein, the most abundant member of the
polyADP-ribose polymerases (PARP) family, which catalyzes post-translational
modification of proteins by polyADP-ribosylation. This modification affects
protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions. Binding of PARP-1 to breakages in
damaged DNA causes its activation and auto-polyADP-ribosylation in a process that
is pivotal for DNA repair. Our recent findings outlined an alternative mechanism 
of PARP-1 activation via a direct interaction with phosphorylated ERK2
(externally regulated kinase), which is unrelated to DNA damage and does not
involve PARP-1 binding to DNA. Furthermore, ERK2-induced PARP-1 activation
dramatically amplifies ERK-signals, enhancing ERK-induced phosphorylation of the 
transcription factor Elk1 and enhancing core histone acetylation and expression
of the Elk1 target gene, c-fos. Thus, PARP-1 activation in the ERK signaling
pathway mediates epigenetic mechanisms promoting growth, proliferation and
differentiation regulated by the Raf-MEK-ERK phosphorylation cascade.

PMID: 17950909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Cell Biol Int. 2008 Feb;32(2):210-6. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Antisense oligonucleotide Elk-1 suppresses the tumorigenicity of human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Ying TH(1), Hsieh YH, Hsieh YS, Liu JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chung Shan Medical University
Hospital, No. 110, Sec. 1, Chien-Kuo N. Road, Taichung 40203, Taiwan.

In previous studies, we showed that reducing Ets-like protein-1 (Elk-1)
expression inhibited protein kinase C alpha (PKC alpha) expression and decreased 
cell migration and invasion in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In this
study, we have investigated the role of Elk-1 in tumorigenesis. SK-Hep-1 HCC
cells were transfected with the ElK-1 antisense oligonucleotide (ODN). In the
pretreated cells we detected a reduction of mRNA level using RT-PCR. The
inhibitory rate of cell growth was measured by MTT assay. Pretreated-SK-Hep-1 HCC
cells were implanted subcutaneously into nude mice to observe the tumor growth
and calculate tumor inhibitory rate. The results showed that 5 microM of the
antisense ODN Elk-1 suppressed both Elk-1 and PKC alpha production by SK-Hep-1
HCC cells after cationic liposome-mediated transfection, to 8% and 1% of control 
values, respectively, and the growth of SK-Hep-1 HCC cells was inhibited at 2-5
microM doses of the antisense ODN Elk-1. The control reagent, sense ODN Elk-1,
showed no effects. In BALB/nude mice, SK-Hep-1 HCC cells transfected with the 5
microM antisense ODN Elk-1 formed tumors much smaller than those of sense ODN
Elk-1 pretreated cells. The maximum inhibitory rate of tumor growth was
80.8+/-12.6% and the tumor formation time was prolonged from 13 to 25 days. These
findings suggested the usefulness of antisense ODN Elk-1 as a new reagent for
liver cancer therapy.

PMID: 17950002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Physiol Res. 2008;57(5):753-9. Epub 2007 Oct 11.

Expression of phospho-Elk-1 in rat gut after the whole body gamma irradiation.

Dri·k D(1), Osterreicher J, Reh·kov· Z, Vilasov· Z, V·vrov· J.

Author information: 
(1)Gynecology Obstetrics Clinic, University Hospital Bulovka, Prague, Czech
Republic. driak@seznam.cz

Gastrointestinal form is the second stage of acute radiation syndrome (ARS) with 
a threshold dose of 8 Gy in man. It represents an absolutely lethal
clinical-pathological unit, necro-hemorrhagic enteritis and proctocolitis, with
unknown causal therapy. Elk-1 is a protein acting as a transcription factor
activating specified genes. The purpose of our study was to examine the
expression of phospho-Elk-1 in irradiated jejunum and transversal colon of rats
with radiation-induced enterocolitis and to assess the importance of this
transcriptional factor as a biodosimetric marker of radiation-induced
enteropathy. The laboratory rats were randomly divided into 21 groups, 10 animals
per group, and irradiated with whole body gamma-irradiation of 1, 5, 10, 15, and 
20 Gy. Samples of jejunum and transversal colon were taken 24, 48, 72, and 96
hours later, immunohisto-chemically stained, and the phospho-Elk-1 expression was
examined using computer image analysis. A group of 10 sham-irradiated animals was
used as control. Significantly increased expression of phospho-Elk-1 in rat
jejunum has been found in all time intervals after irradiation by sublethal doses
of 1 and 5 Gy, whereas after the irradiation by lethal doses, the expression of
phospho-Elk-1 in rat jejunum varied considerably. Significantly increased
expression of phospho-Elk-1 in transversal colon has also been found in the first
days after irradiation by sublethal doses of 1 and 5 Gy. After irradiation by
lethal doses, there was no uniform pattern of the changes in the expression of
phospho-Elk-1 in rat transversal colon. The detection of phospho-Elk-1 might be
considered as a suitable and very sensitive biodosimetric marker of
radiation-induced injury of small and large intestine. According to our
knowledge, this is the first study on the phospho-Elk-1 expression in irradiated 
jejunum and transversal colon in the rat.

PMID: 17949253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Int Immunopharmacol. 2007 Nov;7(11):1403-13. Epub 2007 Jul 30.

Signaling molecules involved in production and regulation of IL-1beta by murine
peritoneal macrophages in vitro on treatment with concanavalin A.

Sodhi A(1), Kesherwani V.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi-221005, India. ajit.sodhi@lycos.com

In the present study we report the activation of murine peritoneal macrophages in
vitro on treatment with Concanavalin A (ConA). ConA (10 microg/ml) treatment of
macrophages resulted in the transcription of IL-1beta gene at 16 h and maximum
production of IL-1beta at 24 h. To investigate the signaling molecules involved
in the production of IL-1beta different pharmacological inhibitors were used. It 
was observed that genestein, wortmannin, H-7, TMB-8, PD98059, SB202190, and
tyrophostin (AG490) down regulated the expression of IL-1beta. These observations
suggested the involvement of tyrosine kinase, PI3 kinase, protein kinase C,
p42/44, p38, Ca(++) and JAK2 signaling molecules in ConA induced production of
IL-1beta by macrophages. Maximum protein tyrosine kinase activity and expression 
of PI3K in macrophages was seen at 5 min, PKC activity and Ca(++) release was
found at 10 min after ConA treatment. Maximum expression of phospho-JAK2 at 2.5-5
min, phospho-p42/44 at 5-60 min, phospho-p38 at 15-30 min, phospho-IkappaB and
phospho-Stat1 at 30-60 min and phospho-ELK1, c-Fos, phospho-Stat3 at 60 min of
ConA treatment was observed. Pharmacological inhibitors were also used to check
the cascade of activation of tyrosine kinase, PKC, PI3 kinase, p42/44, p38, JAK
kinase and release of Ca(++) from intracellular storage to sort out the signaling
pathways involved in the release of IL-1beta by macrophages on treatment with
ConA in vitro.

PMID: 17761344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Feb;214(2):504-12.

Cell surface restriction of EGFR by a tenascin cytotactin-encoded EGF-like repeat
is preferential for motility-related signaling.

Iyer AK(1), Tran KT, Griffith L, Wells A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Penssylvania
15261, USA.

The 14th EGFL-repeat (Ten14) of human tenascin cytotactin activates the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) with micromolar affinity; however, unlike EGF,
Ten14-mediated activation of EGFR does not lead to receptor internalization. As
the divergent signaling pathways downstream of EGFR have been shown to be
triggered from plasma membrane and cytosolic locales, we investigated whether
Ten14-mediated surface restriction of EGFR resulted in altered biochemical and
cellular responses as compared to EGF. Molecules associated with migratory
cascades were activated to a relatively greater extent in response to Ten14, with
very weak activation of proliferation-associated cascades. Activation of
phospholipase C gamma (PLCgamma) and m-calpain, associated with lamellipod
protrusion and tail retraction, respectively, were noted at even at
sub-saturating doses of Ten14. However, activation of ERK/MAPK, p90RSK, and Elk1,
factors affecting proliferation, remained low even at high Ten14 concentrations. 
Similar activation profiles were observed for EGF-treated cells at 4 degrees C, a
maneuver that limits receptor internalization. We demonstrate a concurrent effect
of such altered signaling on biophysical responses-sustained migration was
observed at levels of Ten14 that activated PLCgamma, but did not stimulate
proliferation significantly. Here, we present a novel class of EGFR ligands that 
can potentially signal as a part of the extracellular matrix, triggering specific
intracellular signaling cascades leading to a directed cellular response from an 
otherwise pleiotropic receptor. This work extends the signaling paradigm of EGFL 
repeat being presented in a restricted fashion as part of the extracellular
matrix.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2963575
PMID: 17708541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Glycoconj J. 2007 Dec;24(9):573-82. Epub 2007 Aug 1.

Production of TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, IL-12 and IFN-gamma in murine peritoneal
macrophages on treatment with wheat germ agglutinin in vitro: involvement of
tyrosine kinase pathways.

Sodhi A(1), Kesherwani V.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi 221005, India. ajit.sodhi@lycos.com

Treatment of macrophages with various doses of wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) for
different time intervals resulted in enhanced expression of TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, 
IL-12 and IFN-gamma. The maximum expressions were observed at 24 h with 100 ng/ml
of WGA. Enhanced transcription of cytokines TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, IL-12, and
IFN-gamma was observed at 16 h of WGA treatment by RT-PCR. Pharmacological
inhibitor of tyrosine kinase, PI3 kinase, protein kinase C, p42/44, p38, JNK and 
intracellular calcium immobilizing agent down regulated the WGA induced
expression of cytokines TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, IL-12 and IFN-gamma. Maximum protein
tyrosine kinase activity in macrophages was seen at 5 min of WGA treatment.
Maximum cytosolic Ca++ was observed at 10 min of WGA treatment. WGA treated
macrophages showed maximum activation of protein kinase C (PKC) and PI3 kinase at
10 min, p42/44, p38 at 15 min and JNK at 30 min. Transcription factor ELK1 was
activated at 60 min and IÍB, c-Fos and c-Jun at 30 min of WGA treatment. The
pharmacological inhibitors were also used to check the cascade of activation of
tyrosine kinase, PKC, PI3 kinase, p42/44, p38, JNK and release of calcium from
intracellular storage to sort out the signal pathways involved in the release of 
TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, IL-12, and IFN-gamma by macrophages on treatment with WGA in
vitro.

PMID: 17668318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2007 Oct 15;224(2):174-81. Epub 2007 Jul 3.

MAPK-ERK activation in kidney of male rats chronically fed ochratoxin A at a dose
causing a significant incidence of renal carcinoma.

Marin-Kuan M(1), Nestler S, Verguet C, BezenÁon C, Piguet D, Delatour T, Mantle
P, Cavin C, Schilter B.

Author information: 
(1)NestlÈ Research Center, PO Box 44, Vers-chez-les-Blanc, CH-1000 Lausanne 26,
Switzerland. maricel.marin-kuan@rdls.nestle.com

Kidney samples of male Fischer 344 (F-344) rats fed a carcinogenic dose of OTA
over 7 days, 21 days and 12 months were analysed for various cell signalling
proteins known to be potentially involved in chemical carcinogenicity. OTA was
found to increase the phosphorylation of atypical-PKC. This was correlated with a
selective downstream activation of the MAP-kinase extracellular regulated kinases
isoforms 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) and of their substrates ELK1/2 and p90RSK. Moreover,
analysis of effectors acting upstream of PKC indicated a possible mobilisation of
the insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (lGFr) and phosphoinositide-dependent
kinase-1 (PDK1) system. An increased histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymatic
activity associated with enhanced HDAC3 protein expression was also observed.
These findings are potentially relevant with respect to the understanding of OTA 
nephrocarcinogenicity. HDAC-induced gene silencing has previously been shown to
play a role in tumour development. Furthermore, PKC and the MEK-ERK MAP-kinase
pathways are known to play important roles in cell proliferation, cell survival, 
anti-apoptotic activity and renal cancer development.

PMID: 17651772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(14):4858-68. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

Elk1 and SRF transcription factors convey basal transcription and mediate glucose
response via their binding sites in the human LXRB gene promoter.

Nilsson M(1), Dahlman-Wright K, Karelmo C, Ebeling M, Gustafsson JA, Steffensen
KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition at Novum, Karolinska Institutet,
S-14157 Huddinge, Sweden.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jan;36(1):352. Ebeling, Martin [added].

The nuclear receptors LXRalpha (NR1H3) and LXRbeta (NR1H2) are attractive drug
targets for the treatment of diabetes and cardiovascular disease due to their
established role as regulators of cholesterol and lipid metabolism. A large body 
of literature has recently indicated their important roles in glucose metabolism 
and particularly LXRbeta is important for proper insulin production in pancreas. 
In this study, we report that glucose induces transcription via the LXRB gene
promoter. The transcription start site of the human LXRB gene was determined and 
we identified two highly conserved, and functional, ETS and Elk1 binding sites,
respectively, in the LXRB gene promoter. The Elk1 binding site also bound the
serum responsive factor (SRF). Mutation of these sites abolished binding.
Furthermore, mutation of the binding sites or siRNA knockdown of SRF and Elk1
significantly reduced the promoter activity and impaired the glucose response.
Our results indicate that the human LXRB gene is controlled by glucose, thereby
providing a novel mechanism by which glucose regulates cellular functions via
LXRbeta.

PMCID: PMC1950530
PMID: 17626048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Development. 2007 Aug;134(15):2751-9. Epub 2007 Jul 4.

Requirement for ERK MAP kinase in mouse preimplantation development.

Maekawa M(1), Yamamoto T, Kohno M, Takeichi M, Nishida E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Biostudies,
Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

Preimplantation development is a crucial step for successful implantation and
pregnancy. Although both compaction and blastocyst formation have been
extensively studied, mechanisms regulating the early cell division stages before 
compaction have remained unclear. Here, we show that extracellular signal
regulated kinase (ERK) mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase function is
required for early embryonic cell division before compaction. Our analysis
demonstrates that inhibition of ERK activation in late two-cell-stage embryos
leads to a reversible arrest in the G2 phase at the four-cell stage. The
G2-arrested four-cell-stage embryos showed weakened cell-cell adhesion as
compared with control embryos. Remarkably, microarray analyses showed that most
of the programmed changes of upregulated and downregulated gene expression during
the four- to eight-cell stages proceeded normally in four-cell-stage-arrested
embryos that were subsequently released to resume development; however, the
expression profiles of a proportion of genes in these embryos closely paralleled 
the stages of embryonic rather than normal development. These parallel genes
included the genes encoding intercellular adhesion molecules, whose expression
appeared to be positively regulated by the ERK pathway. We also show that,
whereas ERK inactivation in eight-cell-stage embryos did not lead to cell
division arrest, it did cause this arrest when cadherin-mediated cell-cell
adhesion was disrupted. These results demonstrate an essential role of ERK
function in two-cell to eight-cell-stage embryos, and suggest a loose parallelism
between the gene expression programs and the developmental stages before
compaction.

PMID: 17611221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(14):4649-63. Epub 2007 Jun 25.

Alternatively spliced isoforms of the human elk-1 mRNA within the 5' UTR:
implications for ELK-1 expression.

Araud T(1), Genolet R, Jaquier-Gubler P, Curran J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Geneva
Medical School (CMU), 1 rue Michel Servet, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland.

The expression of cellular proteins that play central roles in the regulation of 
cell growth and differentiation is frequently tightly controlled at the level of 
translation initiation. In this article, we provide evidence that the ETS domain 
transcription factor ELK-1 forms part of this class of genes. Its mRNA 5' UTR is 
composed of a complexed mosaic of elements, including uAUGs, uORFs and RNA
structure, that interplay to modulate ribosomal access to the ELK-1 AUG start
codon. Superimposed upon this is the generation of two different 5' UTRs via
alternative splicing. The two spliced isoforms show altered cellular and tissue
distributions and behave differently in polysomal recruitment assays in the
presence of the drug rapamycin. We propose that repression is therefore the sum
of a series of interplaying negative elements within the 5' UTRs, a situation
which may reflect the need for tight translational control of ELK-1 in different 
tissues and under changing physiological conditions.

PMCID: PMC1950554
PMID: 17591614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Oct;213(1):36-44.

P2X(7) receptor stimulation upregulates Egr-1 biosynthesis involving a cytosolic 
Ca(2+) rise, transactivation of the EGF receptor and phosphorylation of ERK and
Elk-1.

Stefano L(1), Rˆssler OG, Griesemer D, Hoth M, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, Homburg, Germany.

The P2X(7) receptor is an ATP-gated ionotropic receptor that is permeable for
small cations including Ca(2+) ions. Using 293 cells expressing P2X(7) receptors,
we show that the P2X(7) receptor-specific ligand 2',3'-O-(4-benzoyl-benzoyl)-ATP 
(BzATP) induces a signaling cascade leading to the biosynthesis of biologically
active Egr-1, a zinc finger transcription factor. BzATP-triggered Egr-1
biosynthesis was attenuated by the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase
inhibitor PD98059, by BAPTA-AM, the acetoxymethylester of the cytosolic Ca(2+)
chelator BAPTA, and by an epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor-specific
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (AG1478). These results indicate that phosphorylation
and activation of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase ERK, elevated
levels of intracellular Ca(2+) and the transactivation of the EGF receptor are
essential for BzATP-induced upregulation of Egr-1. The requirement of Ca(2+)
within the signaling cascade was upstream of Raf kinase activation.
Lentiviral-mediated expression of MAP kinase phosphatase-1 (MKP-1), a
dual-specific phosphatase that dephosphorylates and inactivates ERK in the
nucleus, inhibited Egr-1 biosynthesis following BzATP stimulation, indicating
that MKP-1 functions as a nuclear shut-off device. Furthermore, the ternary
complex factor Elk-1 was phosphorylated and the transcriptional activation
potential of Elk-1 was enhanced following P2X(7) receptor stimulation. Expression
of a dominant-negative mutant of Elk-1 impaired BzATP-induced upregulation of
Egr-1 biosynthesis. Thus, Elk-1 connects the intracellular signaling cascade
elicited by activation of P2X(7) receptors with the transcription of the Egr-1
gene.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17474086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Genome Res. 2007 May;17(5):641-8. Epub 2007 Apr 6.

X chromosome cDNA microarray screening identifies a functional PLP2 promoter
polymorphism enriched in patients with X-linked mental retardation.

Zhang L(1), Jie C, Obie C, Abidi F, Schwartz CE, Stevenson RE, Valle D, Wang T.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

X-linked Mental Retardation (XLMR) occurs in 1 in 600 males and is highly
genetically heterogeneous. We used a novel human X chromosome cDNA microarray
(XCA) to survey the expression profile of X-linked genes in lymphoblasts of XLMR 
males. Genes with altered expression verified by Northern blot and/or
quantitative PCR were considered candidates. To validate this approach, we
documented the expected changes of expression in samples from a patient with a
known X chromosome microdeletion and from patients with multiple copies of the X 
chromosome. We used our XCA to survey lymphoblast RNA samples from 43 unrelated
XLMR males and found 15 genes with significant (>or=1.5-fold) reduction in
expression in at least one proband. Of these, subsequent analysis confirmed
altered expression in 12. We followed up one, PLP2, at Xp11.23, which exhibits
approximately fourfold decreased expression in two patients. Sequencing analysis 
in both patients revealed a promoter variant, -113C>A, that alters the
core-binding site of the transcription factor ELK1. We showed that PLP2-(-113C>A)
is sufficient to cause reduced expression using a luciferase reporter system and 
is enriched in a cohort of males with probable XLMR (14 of 239, 5.85%) as
compared to normal males (9 of 577, 1.56%) (chi2=11.07, P<0.001). PLP2 is
expressed abundantly in the pyramidal cells of hippocampus and granular cells of 
the cerebellum in the brain. We conclude that our XCA screening is an efficient
strategy to identify genes that show significant changes in transcript abundance 
as candidate genes for XLMR.

PMCID: PMC1855181
PMID: 17416750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Oncogene. 2007 Aug 23;26(39):5772-83. Epub 2007 Apr 2.

Id3 is a novel regulator of p27kip1 mRNA in early G1 phase and is required for
cell-cycle progression.

Chassot AA(1), Turchi L, Virolle T, Fitsialos G, Batoz M, Deckert M, Dulic V,
Meneguzzi G, Busc‡ R, Ponzio G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U634; FacultÈ de MÈdecine, UniversitÈ Nice Sophia Antipolis, Nice
cedex, France.

P27kip is a key inhibitory protein of the cell-cycle progression, which is
rapidly downregulated in early G1 phase by a post-translational mechanism
involving the proteosomal degradation. In this study, using a wounding model that
induces cell-cycle entry of human dermal fibroblasts, we demonstrate that p27mRNA
is downregulated when cells progress into the G1 phase, and then it returns to
its basal level when cells approach the S phase. By using a quantitative
polymerase chain reaction screening we identified inhibitors of differentiation
(Id3), a bHLH transcriptional repressor, as a candidate mediator accounting for
p27 mRNA decrease. Id3 silencing, using an small interfering RNA approach,
reversed the injury mediated p27 downregulation demonstrating that Id3 is
involved in the transcriptional repression of p27. Reporter gene experiments and 
a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that Id3 likely exerts its
repressive action through ELK1 inhibition. By inhibiting early p27
downregulation, Id3 depletion blocked (i) the G1-phase progression as assessed by
the inhibition of pRb phosphorylation and p130 degradation and (ii) the G1/S
transition as observed by the inhibition of cyclin A induction, demonstrating
that p27 mRNA decrease is required for cell proliferation. Apart from its effect 
on the early p27 diminution, Id3 appears also involved in the control of the
steady-state level of p27 at the G1/S boundary. In conclusion, this study
identifies a novel mechanism of p27 regulation which besides p27 protein
degradation also implicates a transcriptional mechanism mediated by Id3.

PMID: 17404577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Environ Health Perspect. 2007 Feb;115(2):243-7. Epub 2006 Nov 20.

Mechanisms of acquired androgen independence during arsenic-induced malignant
transformation of human prostate epithelial cells.

Benbrahim-Tallaa L(1), Webber MM, Waalkes MP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Comparative Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute at the
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina 27709, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer progression often occurs with overexpression of
growth factors and receptors, many of which engage the Ras/mitogen-activated
protein MAP kinase (MAPK) pathway.
OBJECTIVES: In this study we used arsenic-transformed human prostate epithelial
cells, which also show androgen-independent growth, to study the possibility that
chronic activation of Ras/MAPK signaling may contribute to arsenic-induced
prostate cancer progression.
METHODS: Control and chronic arsenic-transformed prostate epithelial cells
(CAsE-PE) were compared for Ras/MAPK signaling capacities using reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analyses.
RESULTS: We found activation of HER-2/neu oncogene in transformed CAsE-PE cells, 
providing molecular evidence of androgen independence in the transformed cells.
CAsE-PE cells displayed constitutively increased expression of unmutated K-Ras
(6-fold), and the downstream MAP kinases A-Raf and B-Raf (2.2-fold and 3.2-fold, 
respectively). There was also increased expression of phosphorylated MEK1/2 and
Elk1 in the transformant cells. The MEK1/2 inhibitor, U0126, blocked PSA
overexpression in CAsE-PE cells.
CONCLUSION: Thus, arsenic-induced malignant transformation and acquired androgen 
independence are linked to Ras signaling activation in human prostate epithelial 
cells. Chronic activation of this pathway can sensitize the androgen receptor to 
subphysiologic levels of androgen. This may be important in arsenic
carcinogenesis and provide a mechanism that may be common for prostate cancer
progression driven by diverse agents.

PMCID: PMC1817693
PMID: 17384772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Zhongguo Ying Yong Sheng Li Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Feb;23(1):121-5.

[NR2B-pERK1/2-pElk-1 signaling contributes to the avoidance learning and memory
of rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen XH(1), Shu SY, Liang ZJ, Bao XM, Chen LX, Wu YM.

Author information: 
(1)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510282, China.

AIM: To investigate whether NR2B-pERK1/2-pElk-1 signaling contributes to the
Y-maze learning and memory of rat brain.
METHODS: 45 adult male SD rats were divided into 4 groups: (1) Ifenprodil
peritoneal injection group (Ifenprodil ip, n = 14); (2) DMSO peritoneal injection
group(DMSO ip, n = 15); (3) Ifenprodil cerebral ventricle injection group
(Ifenprodil ic, n = 8); (4) DMSO cerebral ventricle injection group(DMSO ic, n = 
8). Y-maze training and test were used as an learning and memory enhancing
stimulus. Immunohistochemical and Western blotting methods were used for
detecting pERK1/2 and pElk-1 expression intensity of different brain regions.
RESULTS: Compared with the DMSO ip group, the ifenprodil ip group showed no
change on the Y-maze learning score (P > 0.05), but its Y-maze memory score
tested 24 after learning decreased (P < 0.05). Ifenprodil peritoneal injection
made brain pERK1/2 and pElk-1 expression decreased generally. In hippocampus,
marginal division of striatum(MrD), amygdala,these changes were more significant 
(P < 0.05). Compared with the DMSO ic group, the reconsolidation of Y-maze memory
tested 6 hours after ifenprodil injection was impaired in ifenprodil ic group (P 
< 0.05). The OD value of pERK1/2 and pElk-1 positive bands in ifenprodil ic group
attenuated generally. The pElk-1 positive bands of caudate putamen and MrD almost
disappeared in ifenprodil ic group.
CONCLUSION: NR2B is essential for the formation of long-term memory,
reconsolidation of Y-maze memory. The deactivation of NR2B by ifenprodil will
impair these courses. Meanwhile, the deactivation of NR2B attenuates pERK1/2 and 
pElk-1 expression of learning and memory related regions after Y-maze learning
and memory reconsolidation test. In MrD and caudate putamen, the pElk-1
expression are completely blocked by ifenprodil after memory reconsolidation
test.

PMID: 21171386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Mar 16;354(3):783-8. Epub 2007 Jan 19.

Identification of Dok-4b, a Dok-4 splice variant with enhanced inhibitory
properties.

Baldwin C(1), Bedirian A, Li H, Takano T, Lemay S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, McGill University Health
Centre, Montreal, Que., Canada H3A 2B4.

Dok adapter proteins have been primarily implicated in negative regulation of
tyrosine kinase signaling, but Dok-4 has been reported to exert both inhibitory
and stimulatory effects. We have identified a splice variant of Dok-4, Dok-4b,
which contains a 39 aa insert within the its C-terminal region. The approximately
45kDa Dok-4b protein was detected in several human epithelial cell lines. Based
on genomic sequences, Dok-4b was also predicted to exist in primates and possibly
bovines, but not in rodents or other species. Compared to Dok-4, Dok-4b inhibited
the tyrosine kinase-induced activation of both Erk and Elk-1 more strongly.
Truncation of the C-terminal region of Dok-4 (Dok-4 DeltaCT) also enhanced the
inhibitory activity of Dok-4, whereas expression of the isolated C-terminal
domain enhanced Elk-1 activation, suggesting that the N-terminus and C-terminus
of Dok-4 possess opposing inhibitory and stimulatory properties, respectively,
the balance of which is altered by alternative splicing of Dok-4 to Dok-b.

PMID: 17258175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Cell. 2007 Jan 26;25(2):297-308.

DNA-independent PARP-1 activation by phosphorylated ERK2 increases Elk1 activity:
a link to histone acetylation.

Cohen-Armon M(1), Visochek L, Rozensal D, Kalal A, Geistrikh I, Klein R,
Bendetz-Nezer S, Yao Z, Seger R.

Author information: 
(1)Neufeld Cardiac Research Institute, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv
University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel. marmon@post.tau.ac.il

PolyADP-ribose polymerases (PARPs) catalyze a posttranslational modification of
nuclear proteins by polyADP-ribosylation. The catalytic activity of the abundant 
nuclear protein PARP-1 is stimulated by DNA strand breaks, and PARP-1 activation 
is required for initiation of DNA repair. Here we show that PARP-1 also acts
within extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling cascade that
mediates growth and differentiation. The findings reveal an alternative mode of
PARP-1 activation, which does not involve binding to DNA or DNA damage. In a
cell-free system, recombinant PARP-1 was intensively activated and thereby
polyADP-ribosylated by a direct interaction with phosphorylated ERK2, and the
activated PARP-1 dramatically increased ERK2-catalyzed phosphorylation of the
transcription factor Elk1. In cortical neurons treated with nerve growth factors 
and in stimulated cardiomyocytes, PARP-1 activation enhanced ERK-induced
Elk1-phosphorylation, core histone acetylation, and transcription of the
Elk1-target gene c-fos. These findings constitute evidence for PARP-1 activity
within the ERK signal-transduction pathway.

PMID: 17244536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Neurochem. 2007 Jan;100(2):555-66. Epub 2006 Nov 29.

JNK- and Rac1-dependent induction of immediate early gene pip92 suppresses
neuronal differentiation.

Park JB(1), Kim EJ, Yang EJ, Seo SR, Chung KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.

The immediate early gene pip92 is rapidly and transiently induced by serum, basic
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), nerve growth factor (NGF) and phobol ester, as
well as various toxic stimuli. Rho GTPases, such as RhoA, Rac1 and Cdc42, have
been implicated in both cytoskeletal rearrangement and cell cycle control. Rac1
and Cdc42 induce neurite outgrowth in many types of neuronal cells. A downstream 
effector of both Rac1 and Cdc42, p21-activated kinase (Pak1), is highly enriched 
in neurons. In the present study, we examined the signal transduction pathways
involved in pip92 induction, focusing on the involvement of Rho family guanosine 
5'-triphosphate (GTP)ases. We also examined the functional role of pip92
expression during FGF-induced neuronal differentiation in embryonic hippocampal
cells. Significant and robust activation of c-Jun N-terminal Kinase (JNK), Rac1
and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) appeared to be important for
pip92 induction in response to bFGF. Transient transfection of kinase-inactive
MEKK7 or chemical inhibitors of JNK significantly decreased the activation of
Rac1 by FGF. However, blockade of Rac1 did not affect JNK activity. Moreover, a
MEK-ERK blockade did not affect Rac1 activity. Activation of JNK and Rac1 induced
Pak1 activity, which could then phosphorylate and activate transcription factor
Elk1. Stimulation of Pak1-dependent Elk1 was required for the bFGF-induced
activation of pip92. Suppression of endogenous pip92 expression by siRNA
significantly enhanced bFGF-induced neurite outgrowth, while the ectopic
expression of pip92 suppressed the neurite extension. Taken together, these data 
suggest that neurogenic growth factor-induced expression of pip92 is critical for
the regulation of neuronal differentiation, occurring through the subsequent
activation of Rac1, JNK, Pak1 and Elk1.

PMID: 17156131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Brain Res. 2007 Jan 12;1128(1):21-32. Epub 2006 Nov 28.

Analysis of transcriptional modulation of the presenilin 1 gene promoter by
ZNF237, a candidate binding partner of the Ets transcription factor ERM.

Pastorcic M(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, Fort Worth, TX 76107,
USA.

DNA sequences required for the expression of the human presenilin 1 (PS1) gene
have been identified between -118 and +178 flanking the major initiation site
(+1) mapped in SK-N-SH cells. Several Ets sites are located both upstream as well
as downstream from the +1 site, including an Ets motif present at -10 that
controls 90% of transcription in SK-N-SH cells. However, in SH-SY5Y cells,
transcription initiates further downstream and requires an alternative set of
promoter elements including a +90 Ets motif. Ets2, ER81, ERM and Elk1 were
identified by yeast one-hybrid selection in a human brain cDNA library using the 
-10 Ets motif as a bait. We have shown that ERM recognizes specifically Ets
motifs on the PS1 promoter located at -10 as well as downstream at +90, +129 and 
+165 and activates PS1 transcription with promoter fragments whether or not they 
contain the -10 Ets site. We have now searched for ERM interacting proteins by
yeast two-hybrid selection in a human brain cDNA library using the C-terminal 415
amino acid of ERM as a bait. One of the interacting proteins was ZNF237, a member
of the MYM gene family. It is widely expressed in different tissues in eukaryotes
under several forms derived by alternative splicing, including a large 382 amino 
acid form containing a single MYM domain, and 2 shorter forms of 208 and 213
amino acids respectively that do not. We show that both the 382 as well as the
208 amino acid forms are expressed in SK-N-SH cells but not in SH-SY5Y cells.
Both forms interact with ERM and repress the transcription of PS1 in SH-SY5Y
cells. The effect of both C-terminal and N-terminal deletions indicates that the 
N-terminal 120 amino acid region is required for interaction with ERM in yeast,
and furthermore single amino acid mutations show that residues 112 and 114 play
an important role. The repression of transcription in SH-SY5Y cells also appears 
to require the N-terminal potion of ZNF237 and was affected by mutation of the
amino acid 112. Data from electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicate that ERM
and possibly ZNF237 interact with a fragment of the PS1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC1876729
PMID: 17126306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 15;66(22):10778-85.

Imaging mitogen-activated protein kinase function in xenograft models of prostate
cancer.

Ilagan R(1), Pottratz J, Le K, Zhang L, Wong SG, Ayala R, Iyer M, Wu L, Gambhir
SS, Carey M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) play important roles in malignancy. The 
ability to detect and quantitate MAPKs in live animal models of cancer will
facilitate an understanding of disease progression. We have developed a gene
expression-based imaging system that detects and quantifies MAPK activity in
prostate cancer tumors implanted into severe combined immunodeficient mice. The
imaging technology uses a modified version of two-step transcriptional
amplification (TSTA). The tissue specificity of gene expression is imparted by an
enhanced version of the prostate-specific antigen regulatory region that
expresses GAL4-ELK1. GAL4-ELK1 confers MAPK specificity by activating a firefly
luciferase (FLuc) reporter gene when the Ets-like transcription factor (ELK) 1
activation domain is phosphorylated by MAPK. FLuc activity in live animals was
detected using the Xenogen In vivo Imaging System. We validated the TSTA-ELK1
system by analyzing its response to epidermal growth factor treatment in
transfected tissue culture cells and in adenovirus (AdTSTA-ELK1)-injected
prostate cancer xenograft tumors. We measured MAPK activity in two
well-characterized xenograft models, CWR22 and LAPC9. Although no significant
differences in MAPK levels were detected between androgen-dependent and
androgen-independent xenografts, the CWR22 models display significantly higher
levels of AdTSTA-ELK1 activity versus LAPC9. Western blots of tumor extracts
showed that the elevated imaging signal in CWR22 xenografts correlated with
elevated levels of phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 but
not p38 or c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase. We conclude that a gene expression-based 
optical imaging system can accurately detect and quantify MAPK activity in live
animals.

PMID: 17108114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 15;177(10):7193-202.

A JNK-independent signaling pathway regulates TNF alpha-stimulated, c-Jun-driven 
FRA-1 protooncogene transcription in pulmonary epithelial cells.

Adiseshaiah P(1), Kalvakolanu DV, Reddy SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Among the several effectors that mediate TNF-alpha action is AP-1, which consists
of transcription factors belonging to the JUN and FOS families. Although the
effects of TNF-alpha in immune cells, such as the induction of NF-kappaBeta, are 
well known, the mechanisms by which it induces transcriptional activation of AP-1
in pulmonary epithelial cells are not well defined. In this study, we report that
TNF-alpha stimulates the expression of the FRA-1 protooncogene in human pulmonary
epithelial cells using c-Jun, acting via a 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13 acetate
response element located at -318. Although TNF-alpha stimulates phosphorylation
of c-Jun, the inhibition of JNK activity had no significant effect on FRA-1
induction. Consistent with this result, ectopic expression of a c-Jun mutant
lacking JNK phosphorylation sites had no effect on the TNF-alpha-induced
expression of the promoter. In contrast, inhibition of the ERK pathway or ectopic
expression of an ERK1 mutant strikingly reduced FRA-1 transcription. ERK
inhibition not only blocked phosphorylation of Elk1, CREB, and ATF1, which
constitutively bind to the FRA-1 promoter, but also suppressed the recruitment of
c-Jun to the promoter. We found that short interfering RNA-mediated silencing of 
FRA-1 enhances TNF-alpha-induced IL-8 expression, whereas overexpression causes
an opposite effect. Our findings collectively indicate that ERK signaling plays
key roles in both Elk1, CREB, and ATF-1 activation and the subsequent recruitment
of c-Jun to the FRA-1 promoter in response to TNF-alpha in pulmonary epithelial
cells.

PMID: 17082637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Lab Invest. 2006 Dec;86(12):1243-60. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

Early pathogenic events associated with Sjˆgren's syndrome (SjS)-like disease of 
the NOD mouse using microarray analysis.

Killedar SJ(1), Eckenrode SE, McIndoe RA, She JX, Nguyen CQ, Peck AB, Cha S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, College of Dentistry, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Erratum in
    Lab Invest. 2007 Apr;87(4):398. Cha, Seunghee R [corrected to Cha, Seunghee];
Killedar, Smruti Y [corrected to Killedar, Smruti J].

Recently, we reported development of the C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mouse carrying two 
genetic intervals derived from the NOD mouse. These two genetic regions confer
full Sjˆgren's syndrome (SjS)-like disease in SjS-non-susceptible C57BL/6 mice.
The current study was undertaken to apply microarray technology to define the
molecular basis underlying onset of SjS-disease in C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mice.
Using oligonucleotide microarrays, gene expression profiles of submandibular
glands derived from 8- to 12-week-old C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mice and 8-week-old
C57BL/6 mice were performed for comparison. Significant differential expressions 
were determined using the Mann-Whitney U test. Hybridizations using submandibular
cDNA probes revealed 75 differentially expressed genes at 8 weeks and 105
differentially expressed genes at 12 weeks of age in C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mice
compared to 8-week-old C57BL/6 mice. These genes were related generally to basic 
cellular activities such as transcription, translation, DNA replication, and
protein folding. During the predisease phase, genes upregulated encode proteins
associated with the IFN-gamma signal-transduction-pathway (Jak/Stat1), TLR-3
(Irf3 and Traf6) and apoptosis (casp11 and casp3), indicative of chronic
proinflammatory stimuli, especially IL-1. Between 8 and 12 weeks of age, sets of 
clustered genes were upregulated that are associated with adaptive immune
responses, especially B cell activation, proliferation and differentiation
(Baffr, Taci, Bcma, Blys, April, CD70, CD40L, Traf1, Traf3, Pax5, c-Jun, Elk1 and
Nf-kB), and neural receptors (Taj/Troy). Altered gene expressions of TLR3 and
TNF-superfamily-receptors and ligands during this early phase of SjS suggest a
possible viral etiology in the altered glandular homeostasis with an upregulated,
possibly overstimulated, B-lymphocyte activation in the early autoimmune response
present in the submandibular glands. The importance of NF-kappaB as a critical
signal transduction pathway is also suggested but its link is not yet clear.

PMID: 17075579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. EMBO J. 2006 Nov 1;25(21):5083-93. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

An extended consensus motif enhances the specificity of substrate modification by
SUMO.

Yang SH(1), Galanis A, Witty J, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Protein modification by SUMO conjugation is an important regulatory event.
Sumoylation usually takes place on a lysine residue embedded in the core
consensus motif psiKxE. However, this motif confers limited specificity on the
sumoylation process. Here, we have probed the roles of clusters of acidic
residues located downstream from the core SUMO modification sites in proteins
such as the transcription factor Elk-1. We demonstrate that these are
functionally important in SUMO-dependent transcriptional repression of Elk-1
transcriptional activity. Mechanistically, the acidic residues are important in
enhancing the efficiency of Elk-1 sumoylation by Ubc9. Similar mechanisms operate
in other transcription factors and phosphorylation sites can functionally
substitute for acidic residues. Thus, an extended sumoylation motif, termed the
NDSM (negatively charged amino acid-dependent sumoylation motif), helps define
functional SUMO targets. We demonstrate that this extended motif can be used to
correctly predict novel targets for SUMO modification.

PMCID: PMC1630412
PMID: 17036045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Invest Dermatol. 2007 Jan;127(1):98-105. Epub 2006 Oct 5.

Functional implications of the IL-6 signaling pathway in keloid pathogenesis.

Ghazizadeh M(1), Tosa M, Shimizu H, Hyakusoku H, Kawanami O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Gerontology, Nippon Medical
School, Kawasaki, Japan. ciem@nms.ac.jp

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2007 Jan;127(1):6-8.

The molecular mechanism(s) behind keloid pathogenesis remains unclear. Previously
by global gene expression analysis of keloid fibroblasts (KFs), we implicated the
IL-6 signaling pathway in keloid pathogenesis. Here, we determine a functional
role of IL-6 signaling in keloid scars. Primary cultures of KFs and surrounding
nonlesional fibroblasts (NFs) were subjected to induction or inhibition of IL-6
or its specific receptor IL-6 receptor alpha (IL-6R alpha) and detection of their
effects on extracellular matrix gene expression. The levels of gp130 and several 
downstream targets in IL-6 signaling were also examined. IL-6 secretion was
significantly higher in KFs than NFs. Addition of IL-6 peptide to NFs culture or 
inhibition of IL-6 or its receptor IL-6R alpha by their corresponding antibodies 
in KFs culture revealed a dose-dependent increase or decrease in collagen type I 
alpha 2 and fibronectin 1 mRNAs, respectively. Induction of IL-6 by IL-1beta
peptide and stimulation by IL-6 peptide in NFs, or inhibition of IL-6 or IL-6R
alpha in KFs cultures demonstrated a dose-dependent increase or decrease in
procollagen I synthesis, respectively. The mRNA and protein expressions of gp130 
and several downstream targets in IL-6 signaling (JAK1, STAT3, RAF1, and ELK1)
were upregulated in KFs versus NFs. Our results indicate that IL-6 signaling may 
play an integral role in keloid pathogenesis and provide clues for development of
IL-6 receptor blocking strategies for therapy or prophylaxis of keloid scars.

PMID: 17024100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Eur J Hum Genet. 2007 Jan;15(1):68-75. Epub 2006 Sep 13.

X-linked mental retardation: a comprehensive molecular screen of 47 candidate
genes from a 7.4 Mb interval in Xp11.

Jensen LR(1), Lenzner S, Moser B, Freude K, Tzschach A, Wei C, Fryns JP, Chelly
J, Turner G, Moraine C, Hamel B, Ropers HH, Kuss AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

About 30% of the mutations causing nonsyndromic X-linked mental retardation (MRX)
are thought to be located in Xp11 and in the pericentromeric region, with a
particular clustering of gene defects in a 7.4 Mb interval flanked by the genes
ELK1 and ALAS2. To search for these mutations, 47 brain-expressed candidate genes
located in this interval have been screened for mutations in up to 22 mental
retardation (MR) families linked to this region. In total, we have identified 57 
sequence variants in exons and splice sites of 27 genes. Based on these data,
four novel MR genes were identified, but most of the sequence variants observed
during this study have not yet been described. The purpose of this article is to 
present a comprehensive overview of this work and its outcome. It describes all
sequence variants detected in 548 exons and their flanking sequences, including
disease-causing mutations as well as possibly relevant polymorphic and silent
sequence changes. We show that many of the studied genes are unlikely to play a
major role in MRX. This information will help to avoid duplication of efforts in 
the ongoing endeavor to unravel the molecular causes of MRX.

PMID: 16969374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Neuroreport. 2006 Sep 18;17(13):1437-41.

Epidermal growth factor receptor-induced circadian-time-dependent gene regulation
in suprachiasmatic nucleus.

Vadigepalli R(1), Hao H, Miller GM, Liu H, Schwaber JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Daniel Baugh Institute for 
Functional Genomics and Computational Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

A significant functional role for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in the 
suprachiasmatic nucleus is suggested by recent findings that epidermal growth
factor receptor and its ligand transforming growth factor-alpha are highly
expressed in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Recent studies indicate that epidermal 
growth factor receptor activation induces behavioral and physiological effects,
strengthening the notion that epidermal growth factor receptor can modulate
suprachiasmatic nucleus neural function and behavior. A global transcriptional
profiling study is performed to investigate the gene expression response to
epidermal growth factor receptor activation in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. The
results indicate that all of the observed gene expression response is
circadian-time dependent. The response included several genes encoding different 
neuropeptide receptors, ion channels and kinases. In order to hypothesize the
transcription factors underlying the epidermal growth factor receptor response,
different circadian-time-dependent gene expression groups were analyzed for
enriched transcriptional regulatory elements in the promoters. The results
indicate that several transcription factors such as Elk1 and cAMP-responsive
element binding protein/activating transcription factor family, known to be
'input points' to the core clock network, are playing a role. Together, these
results indicate that epidermal growth factor receptor has a
circadian-time-dependent neuromodulatory function in the suprachiasmatic nucleus.

PMID: 16932154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Sep 22;348(2):540-9. Epub 2006 Jul 28.

K-Ras4B proteins are expressed in the nucleolus: Interaction with nucleolin.

Birchenall-Roberts MC(1), Fu T, Kim SG, Huang YK, Dambach M, Resau JH, Ruscetti
FW.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Program, SAIC-Frederick, Inc., National Cancer Institute at
Frederick, Frederick, MD 2170, USA. birchena@mail.ncifcrf.gov

Kirsten Ras4B (K-Ras4B) is a potent onco-protein that is expressed in the
majority of human cell types and is frequently mutated in carcinomas. K-Ras4B,
like other members of the Ras family of proteins, is considered to be a
cytoplasmic protein that must be localized to the plasma membrane for activation.
Here, using confocal microscopy and biochemical analysis, we show that K-Ras4B,
but not H-Ras or the closely related K-Ras4A, is also present in the nucleoli of 
normal and transformed cells. Subcellular fractionation and immunostaining show
that K-Ras4B is located not only in the cytoplasm, but also in the nucleolar
compartment. Modification of a C-terminal hexa-lysine motif unique to K-Ras4B
results in exclusively cytoplasmic forms of the protein. Nucleolin, a pleiotropic
regulator of cellular processes, including transcriptional regulation, is also
characterized by a nucleolar-like nuclear appearance. We show that K-Ras4B and
nucleolin co-localize within the nucleus and that nucleolin physically associates
with K-Ras4B. Inhibition of K-Ras4B/nucleolin association blocked nucleolar
localization of K-Ras4B. Using siRNA to knockdown the expression of nucleolin
eliminated the nucleolar localization of K-Ras4B and significantly repressed the 
activation of the well-characterized K-Ras4B transcriptional target Ap-1, but
stimulated Elk1. These data provide evidence of a nucleolar localization of
K-Ras4B and describe a functional association between K-Ras4B and nucleolin.

PMID: 16889753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Cell Signal. 2007 Jan;19(1):93-102. Epub 2006 Jun 8.

Sef-S, an alternative splice isoform of sef gene, inhibits NIH3T3 cell
proliferation via a mitogen-activated protein kinases p42 and p44
(ERK1/2)-independent mechanism.

Rong Z(1), Ren Y, Cheng L, Li Z, Li Y, Sun Y, Li H, Xiong S, Chang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Tsinghua Institute of Genome Research, Department of Biological Sciences and
Biotechnology, and School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China.

sef (similar expression to fgf genes) was recently identified as a negative
regulator of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling in zebrafish, chicken,
mouse and human. By repressing events upstream and/or downstream Ras, Sef
inhibits FGF-induced ERK activation and cell proliferation. Here we report that
Sef-S, an alternative splice isoform of Sef, lacks a signal peptide and is
localized in cytosol. Sef-S inhibits FGF-induced NIH3T3 cell proliferation, a
similar function to Sef. However, Sef-S represses neither the intensity nor the
duration of ERK activation. Moreover, Sef-S does not inhibit Elk1-dependent
transcription. Our study revealed that the signal peptide is critical for the
different activities between Sef and Sef-S in FGF-Ras-MAPK signaling cascades.
Furthermore, we observed that Sef-S associated with FGFR2 in a
co-immunoprecipitated complex. These results indicate that Sef-S inhibits
FGF-induced NIH3T3 cell proliferation via an ERK-independent mechanism and
therefore suggest that alternative splice licenses sef gene to inhibit cell
proliferation via multiple signaling pathways.

PMID: 16857343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Immunol. 2006 Jul 1;177(1):401-13.

p300/Cyclic AMP-responsive element binding-binding protein mediates
transcriptional coactivation by the CD28 T cell costimulatory receptor.

Nandiwada SL(1), Li W, Zhang R, Mueller DL.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatic and Autoimmune Diseases Division, and Center for Immunology,
University of Minnesota Medical School, 312 Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN
55455, USA.

During Ag stimulation of T cells, the recognition of B7 molecules by the CD28
costimulatory receptor increases the level of c-Fos, a component of the AP-1
transactivator known to bind the 5' Il2 gene enhancer. In this study, we show
that the costimulation of Fos transcription by CD28 is associated with increased 
binding of p300/CREB-binding protein (CBP) molecules at the Fos promoter, and is 
blocked by an adenoviral E1A molecular antagonist of p300/CBP. Furthermore,
transcriptional activation by a C-terminal domain of CBP is strengthened when
CD28 molecules are actively signaling. This increased amount and activity of
p300/CBP molecules at the Fos gene correlated with higher histone H4 acetylation 
and RNA polymerase II association with the promoter. These data suggest a global 
mechanism whereby CD28 signaling influences the rate and intensity of new gene
expression during Ag recognition via direct control over the coactivator function
of p300/CBP.

PMID: 16785536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2006 Dec;291(6):C1308-17. Epub 2006 May 24.

ERK1/2 regulates ANG II-dependent cell proliferation via cytoplasmic activation
of RSK2 and nuclear activation of elk1.

Godeny MD(1), Sayeski PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Functional Genomics, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

In a concurrently submitted article, we show that ANG II-induced ERK1/2
activation is mediated by both c-Src/Yes/Fyn and heterotrimeric G
protein/PKCzeta-dependent signaling. Furthermore, we show that heterotrimeric G
protein/PKCzeta-activated ERK1/2 is destined for the nucleus while ERK1/2
activated by c-Src/Yes/Fyn-dependent signaling remains in the cytoplasm.
Interestingly, both mechanisms of activation are required for maximum ANG
II-induced cell proliferation. In this study, we sought to determine the
mechanisms by which ERK1/2 facilitate cell proliferation via these distinct
nuclear and cytoplasmic events, using cells that were lacking either
c-Src/Yes/Fyn or heterotrimeric G protein/PKCzeta-dependent ERK1/2 activation. A 
loss of c-Src/Yes/Fyn blocked ANG II-dependent RSK2 activation, RSK2 nuclear
translocation, serum-response factor (SRF) phosphorylation, a portion of c-fos
transcriptional activity and c-Fos phosphorylation. Blocking ANG II-induced
heterotrimeric G protein/PKCzeta activity resulted in a loss of ERK1/2 nuclear
translocation, elk1 phosphorylation, and the remaining portion of c-fos
transcriptional activity not dependent on c-Src/Yes/Fyn. Inhibition of RSK with
the potent and selective inhibitor, SL0101, attenuated ANG II-induced cell
proliferation, and, in combination with a PKCzeta pseudosubstrate, completely
attenuated cell proliferation. Thus we conclude that ERK1/2 mediate ANG
II-dependent cell proliferation via distinct cytoplasmic and nuclear signaling
events, which are in turn governed by c-Src/Yes/Fyn and heterotrimeric G
protein/PKCzeta-dependent signaling, respectively.

PMID: 16723511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Nat Methods. 2006 Jun;3(6):455-60.

Region-directed phototransfection reveals the functional significance of a
dendritically synthesized transcription factor.

Barrett LE(1), Sul JY, Takano H, Van Bockstaele EJ, Haydon PG, Eberwine JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Multiple nuclear transcription factors including E-26-like protein 1 (Elk-1) have
been found in neuronal dendrites, yet the functional significance of such
localization has not yet been explained. Here we use a focal transfection
procedure, 'phototransfection', to introduce Elk1 mRNA into specific regions of
live, intact primary rat neurons. Introduction and translation of Elk1 mRNA in
dendrites produced cell death, whereas introduction and translation of Elk1 mRNA 
in cell bodies did not produce cell death. Elk-1 translated in dendrites was
transported to the nucleus, and cell death depended upon transcription,
supporting the dendritic imprinting hypothesis and highlighting the importance of
the dendritic environment on protein function. Our demonstration of the utility
of phototransfection for spatially controlled introduction of mRNAs opens the
broader opportunity to use this method to introduce selected quantities of small 
molecules into discrete regions of live cells to assess their biological
functions.

PMID: 16721379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Mol Cell. 2006 May 19;22(4):477-87.

PIASxalpha differentially regulates the amplitudes of transcriptional responses
following activation of the ERK and p38 MAPK pathways.

Yang SH(1), Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, UK.

Activation of the MAP kinase pathways leads to changes in gene expression
profiles through direct targeting of transcription factors and their
coregulators. Here we identify PIASxalpha as a key regulator that determines the 
differential response of the transcription factor Elk-1 to the ERK and the
stress-activated p38 MAP kinase pathways. While PIASxalpha functions as a
coactivator to facilitate SUMO and HDAC-2 removal from Elk-1 in response to ERK
pathway activation, PIASxalpha acts in the opposite manner to inhibit HDAC-2 and 
SUMO loss following stress-activated MAP kinase pathway signaling. Thus,
PIASxalpha either enhances or dampens down the activation of Elk-1 target genes, 
depending on the pathway activated. p38 MAP kinase-mediated PIASxalpha
phosphorylation allows it to switch between these two alternative modes of
operation. Thus, PIASxalpha acts as a key signal integrator that permits
different responses from the same transcription factor, depending on the
signaling pathway that is activated.

PMID: 16713578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Br J Pharmacol. 2006 Jun;148(3):350-65.

Regulation of ERK1/2 activity by ghrelin-activated growth hormone secretagogue
receptor 1A involves a PLC/PKCvarepsilon pathway.

Mousseaux D(1), Le Gallic L, Ryan J, Oiry C, Gagne D, Fehrentz JA, Galleyrand JC,
Martinez J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire des Aminoacides, Peptides et ProtÈines (LAPP), CNRS UMR-5810, UMI 
et UMII, UFR Pharmacie, 15 avenue Charles Flahault, Montpellier 34093, Cedex 5,
France.

1. The growth hormone secretagogue receptor 1a (GHSR-1a) is a G-protein coupled
receptor, involved in the biological actions of ghrelin by triggering inositol
phosphates and calcium intracellular second messengers. It has also been reported
that ghrelin could activate the 44- and 42-kDa extracellular signal-regulated
protein kinases (ERK1/2) in different cell lines, but it is not clear whether
this regulation is GHSR-1a dependent or not. 2. To provide direct evidence for
the coupling of GHSR-1a to ERK1/2 activation, this pathway has been studied in a 
heterologous expression system. 3. Thus, in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells we 
showed that ghrelin induced, via the human GHSR-1a, a transient and
dose-dependent activation of ERK1/2 leading to activation of the transcriptional 
factor Elk1. 4. We then investigated the precise mechanisms involved in
GHSR-1a-mediated ERK1/2 activation using various specific inhibitors and
dominant-negative mutants and found that internalization of GHSR-1a was not
necessary. Our results also indicate that phospholipase C (PLC) was involved in
GHSR-1a-mediated ERK1/2 activation, however, pathways like tyrosine kinases,
including Src, and phosphoinositide 3-kinases were not found to be involved.
GHSR-1a-mediated ERK1/2 activation was abolished both by a general protein kinase
C (PKC) inhibitor, Gˆ6983, and by PKC depletion using overnight pretreatment with
phorbol ester. Moreover, the calcium chelator, BAPTA-AM, and the inhibitor of
conventional PKCs, Gˆ6976, had no effect on the GHSR-1a-mediated ERK1/2
activation, suggesting the involvement of novel PKC isoforms (epsilon, delta),
but not conventional or atypical PKCs. Further analyses suggest that PKCepsilon
is required for the activation of ERK1/2. 5. Taken together, these data suggest
that ghrelin, through GHSR-1a, activates the Elk1 transcriptional factor and
ERK1/2 by a PLC- and PKCepsilon-dependent pathway.

PMCID: PMC1751558
PMID: 16582936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Mar 21;103(12):4516-21. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

Serum response factor MADS box serine-162 phosphorylation switches proliferation 
and myogenic gene programs.

Iyer D(1), Chang D, Marx J, Wei L, Olson EN, Parmacek MS, Balasubramanyam A,
Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism,
Center for Cardiovascular Development, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

Phosphorylation of a cluster of amino acids in the serum response factor (SRF)
"MADS box" alphaI coil DNA binding domain regulated the transcription of genes
associated with proliferation or terminal muscle differentiation. Mimicking
phosphorylation of serine-162, a target of protein kinase C-alpha, with an
aspartic acid substitution (SRF-S162D) completely inhibited SRF-DNA binding and
blocked alpha-actin gene transcription even in the presence of potent myogenic
cofactors, while preserving c-fos promoter activity because of stabilization of
the ternary complex via Elk-1. Introduction of SRF-S162D into SRF null ES cells
permitted transcription of the c-fos gene but was unable to rescue expression of 
myogenic contractile genes. Transition of proliferating C2C12 myoblasts to
postfusion myocytes after serum withdrawal was associated with a progressive
decline in SRF-S162 phosphorylation and an increase in alpha-actin gene
expression. Hence, the phosphorylation status of serine-162 in the alphaI coil
may constitute a novel switch that directs target gene expression into
proliferation or differentiation programs.

PMCID: PMC1450203
PMID: 16537394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Cell Signal. 2006 Oct;18(10):1647-54. Epub 2006 Mar 7.

Nore1B regulates TCR signaling via Ras and Carma1.

Ishiguro K(1), Avruch J, Landry A, Qin S, Ando T, Goto H, Xavier R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit Street,
Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Nore1A was originally identified as a potential Ras effector, and Nore1B is an
alternatively spliced isoform. Both share a Ras/Rap association domain (RA
domain) but only Nore1A contains sequence motifs that predict SH3 domain binding 
and diacylglycerol/phorbol ester binding in the amino-terminal region. Here we
report that Carma1 binds to Nore1A and Nore1B through the RA domain and that
Carma1 interacts with active Ras in the presence of Nore1B. RNA interference
against Nore1B attenuates NF-kappaB activation induced by T cell receptor (TCR)
ligation, but not NF-kappaB activation induced by TNFalpha or lipoteichoic acid. 
In addition, Nore1B is also required for KiRas GV12-mediated ERK1 activation and 
Elk1 reporter activity in T cells. We also provide evidence that knockdown of
Nore1B also impairs polarized redistribution of Ras at the B cell-T cell immune
interface. Together, these findings suggest that endogenous Nore1B recruits
active Ras to the APC-T cell interface and mediates the interaction between Ras
and Carma1.

PMCID: PMC3204664
PMID: 16520020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 14;281(15):10174-81. Epub 2006 Feb 20.

A Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-regulated Akt-independent signaling promotes
cigarette smoke-induced FRA-1 expression.

Zhang Q(1), Adiseshaiah P, Kalvakolanu DV, Reddy SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Bloomberg School of Public Health
and Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University, 615 
North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

The FRA-1 proto-oncogene is overexpressed in a variety of human tumors and is
known to up-regulate the expression of genes involved in tumor progression and
invasion. The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt pathway is also known to
regulate these cellular processes. More importantly, respiratory toxicants and
carcinogens activate both the PI3K-Akt pathway and FRA-1 expression in human
bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells. In this study we investigated a potential link 
between the PI3K-Akt pathway and the cigarette smoke (CS)-stimulated epidermal
growth factor receptor-mediated FRA-1 induction in non-oncogenic HBE cells.
Treatment of cells with LY294002, an inhibitor of the PI3K-Akt pathway,
completely blocked CS-induced FRA-1 expression. Surprisingly pharmacological
inhibition of Akt had no significant effect on CS-induced FRA-1 expression.
Likewise the inhibition of protein kinase C zeta, which is a known downstream
effector of PI3K, did not alter FRA-1 expression. We found that the PI3K through 
p21-activated kinase 1 regulates FRA-1 proto-oncogene induction by CS and the
subsequent activation of the Elk1 and cAMP-response element-binding protein
transcription factors that are bound to the promoter in HBE cells.

PMID: 16490785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Nat Immunol. 2006 Mar;7(3):274-83. Epub 2006 Feb 12.

Positive regulation of immune cell function and inflammatory responses by
phosphatase PAC-1.

Jeffrey KL(1), Brummer T, Rolph MS, Liu SM, Callejas NA, Grumont RJ, Gillieron C,
Mackay F, Grey S, Camps M, Rommel C, Gerondakis SD, Mackay CR.

Author information: 
(1)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New South Wales 2010, Australia.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases facilitate many cellular processes and are
essential for immune cell function. Their activity is controlled by kinases and
dual-specificity phosphatases. A comprehensive microarray analysis of human
leukocytes identified DUSP2 (encoding the phosphatase PAC-1) as one of the most
highly induced transcripts in activated immune cells. We generated Dusp2(-/-)
mice and found considerably reduced inflammatory responses in the 'K/BxN' model
of rheumatoid arthritis. PAC-1 deficiency led to increased activity of Jun kinase
(Jnk) but unexpected impairment of the activity of extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (Erk) and the kinase p38, reduced activity of the transcription factor
Elk1 and a complex of mobilized transcription factor NFAT and the AP-1
transcription factor and decreased effector immune cell function. Thus, PAC-1 is 
a key positive regulator of inflammatory cell signaling and effector functions,
mediated through Jnk and Erk mitogen-activated protein kinase crosstalk.

PMID: 16474395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Differentiation. 2006 Feb;74(1):30-9.

Serum response factor, its cofactors, and epithelial-mesenchymal signaling in
urinary bladder smooth muscle formation.

Li J(1), Shiroyanagi Y, Lin G, Haqq C, Lin CS, Lue TF, Willingham E, Baskin LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology University of California 400 Parnassus Avenue, ACC-610
California 94143-0738 San Francisco, USA.

Little is known about the mechanism of bladder smooth muscle differentiation. We 
hypothesize that epithelial-mesenchymal signaling induces the expression of
smooth muscle proteins in bladder mesenchyme resulting in smooth muscle
differentiation. We confirmed that smooth muscle differentiation in the mouse
urinary bladder occurs first at gestational day 14 (E14) based upon
immunohistochemical localization of smooth muscle alpha-actin (SMAA). To
investigate murine bladder smooth muscle differentiation and
epithlelial-mesenchymal signaling in the developing bladder, we analyzed gene
expression profiles of intact embryonic murine bladders and separated epithelial 
and mesenchymal components at embryonic days E13, E14, E15, E16, and postnatal
day 1 (P1). Using cDNA microarray, we identified regulators of vascular smooth
muscle differentiation in bladder mesenchyme, including serum response factor
(SRF) and its cofactors, ELK1 and SRF accessory protein (SAP)1, as well as two
SRF-associated pathways, angiotension receptor II and transforming growth factor-
beta2. Immunohistochemistry showed diffuse expression of SRF in the bladder at
E12 with localization of expression to the peripheral mesenchyme at E13 and E14. 
Our results suggest that bladder smooth muscle differentiation may share a
similar gene expression program as occurs during vascular smooth muscle
differentiation. The unique structure of the urinary bladder makes it an ideal
model for studies of smooth muscle differentiation and epithelial-mesenchymal
signaling.

PMID: 16466398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Jun 1;98(3):632-41.

Roles of MAP kinases in the regulation of bone matrix gene expressions in human
osteoblasts by oscillatory fluid flow.

Wu CC(1), Li YS, Haga JH, Wang N, Lian IY, Su FC, Usami S, Chien S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan,
Taiwan.

We investigated the effects of oscillatory flow in regulating the gene
expressions of type I collagen (COL1, the main component of human bone tissues)
and osteopontin (OPN, the key gene for calcium deposition) in human
osteoblast-like (MG-63) cells, and the roles of mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPKs) in this regulation. The cells were subjected to oscillatory flow (0.5 +/-
4 dyn/cm(2)) or kept under static condition for various time periods (15 min, 30 
min, 1 h, 2 h, 4 h, 8 h, and 16 h). Oscillatory flow caused significant
up-regulations of both COL1 and OPN gene expressions over the 16 h of study, and 
a transient activation of MAPKs was starting at 15 min and declining to basal
level in 2 h. The flow-induction of COL1 was blocked by an ERK inhibitor
(PD98059) and reduced by a JNK inhibitor (SP600125), whereas that of OPN was
abolished by PD98059. Analysis of the cis-elements in the COL1 and OPN promoters 
suggests the involvement of transacting factors Elk-1 and AP-1 in the
transcription regulation. The ERK inhibitor (PD98059) blocked Elk-1
phosphorylation, as well as COL1 and OPN gene expression. The JNK inhibitor
(SP600125) abolished c-jun phosphorylation and COL1 expression. These results
suggest that the flow-induction of OPN was mediated through the ERK-Elk1-OPN
pathway, and that COL1 was regulated by both the ERK-Elk1-COL1 and JNK-c-JUN-COL1
pathway.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16440309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Cell Biochem. 2006 May 1;98(1):185-93.

Ndrg4 enhances NGF-induced ERK activation uncoupled with Elk-1 activation.

Hongo S(1), Watanabe T, Takahashi K, Miyazaki A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Showa University School of Medicine, Shinagawa-ku,
Tokyo 142-8555, Japan. shongo@med.showa-u.ac.jp

Ndrg4 is expressed predominantly in the early postnatal rat brain and may be
related to neural cell differentiation. PC12 cell lines stably expressing
increased levels of Ndrg4 protein display enhanced NGF-induced phosphorylation of
MEK and ERK. In contrast, the Ndrg4-C2-overexpressed PC12 cell lines showed
attenuated NGF-promoted phosphorylation of Elk-1, which is a nuclear target of
ERK. A reporter assay also indicated that Ndrg4-C2 suppresses Elk-1-mediated
transcriptional activation and SRE reporter expression. The suppressive effect of
Ndrg4-C2 on NGF-induced activation of Elk-1 was abolished by colchicine but not
by cytochalasin D, suggesting that microtubules are involved in the reduced
activation of Elk-1 by Ndrg4. Ndrg4 may play a role in supporting the activation 
of ERK and its target proteins needed for neuronal differentiation and in
reducing the activation of Elk-1 implicated in cell growth.

PMID: 16408304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Biomol Screen. 2006 Mar;11(2):145-54. Epub 2005 Dec 16.

Identification of inhibitors of the kinase activity of oncogenic V600E BRAF in an
enzyme cascade high-throughput screen.

Newbatt Y(1), Burns S, Hayward R, Whittaker S, Kirk R, Marshall C, Springer C,
McDonald E; Cancer Genome Project, Marais R, Workman P, Aherne W.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Haddow Laboratories, The
Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UK.

The Cancer Genome Project has identified several oncogenic mutations in BRAF that
represent important opportunities for cancer drug discovery. The V600E BRAF
mutation accounts for approximately 90% of the mutations identified. A strong
case has emerged from molecular, cellular, and structural studies for the
identification and development of inhibitors of this mutated BRAF protein. The
authors have developed and run a high-throughput screen to find inhibitors of
V600E BRAF using an enzyme cascade assay in which oncogenic BRAF activates MEK1, 
which in turn activates ERK2, which then phosphorylates the transcription factor 
ELK1. A phosphospecific antibody, Europium-labeled secondary antibody, and a
time-resolved fluorescent readout were used to measure phosphorylation of ELK1.
Overall assay variation was 12.4%. The assay was used to screen 64,000 compounds 
with an overall Z' factor of 0.58 +/- 0.12. A series of 3,5, di-substituted
pyridines were identified as inhibitors of the cascade assay. These compounds did
not inhibit a shortened activated MEK1 to ELK1 cascade but were active (0.5-27.9 
microM) in a V600E BRAF assay and represent a potential starting point for future
drug discovery and development.

PMID: 16361694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2005 Dec;116(6):1364-71.

Defective nuclear translocation of nuclear factor of activated T cells and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase underlies deficient IL-2 gene expression in
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.

Cianferoni A(1), Massaad M, Feske S, de la Fuente MA, Gallego L, Ramesh N, Geha
RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: Proliferation and IL-2 production in response to T-cell receptor
ligation are impaired in patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS). The
transcription factors nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB), nuclear factor of
activated T cells (NF-AT), and activating protein-1 (AP-1) play a critical role
in IL-2 gene expression.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the mechanisms of impaired IL-2 production after T-cell
receptor ligation in T cells deficient in WAS protein (WASP).
METHODS: T cells from WASP-/- mice were stimulated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28.
Nuclear NF-kappaB, NF-AT, and AP-1 DNA-binding activity was examined by
electroshift mobility assay. NF-ATp dephosphorylation and nuclear localization
were examined by Western blot and indirect immunofluorescence. Phosphorylation of
the mitogen-activated protein kinases Erk and Jnk, and of their nuclear
substrates Elk-1 and c-Jun, was examined by Western blot. Expression of mRNA for 
IL-2 and the NF-kappaB-dependent gene A20 and of the AP-1 components c-fos and
c-Jun was examined by quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Nuclear translocation and activity of NF-kappaB were normal in T cells
from WASP-/- mice. In contrast, NF-ATp dephosphorylation and nuclear
localization, nuclear AP-1 binding activity, and expression of c-fos, but not
c-Jun, were all impaired. Phosphorylation of Jnk, c-Jun, and Erk were normal.
However, nuclear translocation of phosphorylated Erk and phosphorylation of its
nuclear substrate Elk1, which activates the c-fos promoter, were impaired.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that WASP is essential for NF-ATp activation,
and for nuclear translocation of p-Erk, Elk1 phosphorylation, and c-fos gene
expression in T cells. These defects underlie defective IL-2 expression and
T-cell proliferation in WAS.

PMID: 16337472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2005 Nov 15;30(22):2503-9.

Hypoxia activates MAPK activity in rat nucleus pulposus cells: regulation of
integrin expression and cell survival.

Risbud MV(1), Guttapalli A, Albert TJ, Shapiro IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
PA 19107, USA. makarand.risbud@jefferson.edu

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to investigate whether activation of 
MAPK subtypes ERK and p38 influences integrin expression and promotes nucleus
pulposus cell survival in hypoxia.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: We have recently shown that in a low oxygen
environment, rat nucleus pulposus cells activate phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase/Akt (PI3K/Akt) and mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (MAPK/ERK) signaling pathways. However, the role of these
signaling pathways in regulating cell matrix interactions is not known.
METHODS: Rat nucleus pulposus cells were cultured in hypoxia (2% O2) or normoxia 
(20% O2). Western blotting and kinase assay were used to analyze expression of
MAPK signaling molecules. Cell attachment to collagen was studied using an
adhesion assay, whereas flow cytometry and RT-PCR were performed to quantify
integrin receptor expression.
RESULTS: In a hypoxic environment (2% O2), rat nucleus pulposus cells showed a
persistent phosphorylation of p38 and ERK proteins; pERK catalyzed the
phosphorylation of Elk1-Gst fusion protein. When ERK activity was blocked, cell
adhesion to Type II collagen, one of the major extracellular matrix proteins in
the nucleus pulposus tissue, was impaired. A similar inhibitory effect on
collagen adhesion was observed when nucleus pulposus cells were treated with an
antibody to alpha2 integrin. Furthermore, when ERK activity was inhibited, there 
was a decrease in alpha2 integrin mRNA expression. In contrast to ERK, inhibition
of p38 activity did not modulate alpha2 integrin subunit mRNA expression.
Likewise, inhibition of ERK, but not p38, resulted in downregulation of nucleus
pulposus alpha2 integrin protein levels and blocked cell survival in hypoxia.
CONCLUSIONS: Hypoxia activated MAPK signaling pathway activity in nucleus
pulposus cells. ERK, but not p38, regulated alpha2 integrin expression and cell
survival.

PMID: 16284587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 30;280(52):42644-54. Epub 2005 Oct 20.

Positive regulation of Raf1-MEK1/2-ERK1/2 signaling by protein serine/threonine
phosphatase 2A holoenzymes.

Adams DG(1), Coffee RL Jr, Zhang H, Pelech S, Strack S, Wadzinski BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA.

Protein serine/threonine phosphatase 2A (PP2A) regulates a wide variety of
cellular signal transduction pathways. The predominant form of PP2A in cells is a
heterotrimeric holoenzyme consisting of a scaffolding (A) subunit, a regulatory
(B) subunit, and a catalytic (C) subunit. Although PP2A is known to regulate
Raf1-MEK1/2-ERK1/2 signaling at multiple steps in this pathway, the specific PP2A
holoenzymes involved remain unclear. To address this question, we established
tetracycline-inducible human embryonic kidney 293 cell lines for overexpression
of FLAG-tagged Balpha/delta regulatory subunits by approximately 3-fold or
knock-down of Balpha by greater than 70% compared with endogenous levels. The
expression of functional epitope-tagged B subunits was confirmed by the detection
of A and C subunits as well as phosphatase activity in FLAG immune complexes from
extracts of cells overexpressing the FLAG-Balpha/delta subunit. Western analysis 
of the cell extracts using phosphospecific antibodies for MEK1/2 and ERK1/2
demonstrated that activation of these kinases in response to epidermal growth
factor was markedly diminished in Balpha knock-down cells but elevated in Balpha-
and Bdelta-overexpressing cells as compared with control cells. In parallel with 
the activation of MEK1/2 and ERK1/2, the inhibitory phosphorylation site of Raf1 
(Ser-259) was dephosphorylated in cells overexpressing Balpha or Bdelta.
Pharmacological inhibitor studies as well as reporter assays for ERK-dependent
activation of the transcription factor Elk1 revealed that the PP2A holoenzymes
ABalphaC and ABdeltaC act downstream of Ras and upstream of MEK1 to promote
activation of this MAPK signaling cascade. Furthermore both PP2A holoenzymes were
found to associate with Raf1 and catalyze dephosphorylation of inhibitory
phospho-Ser-259. Together these findings indicate that PP2A ABalphaC and ABdeltaC
holoenzymes function as positive regulators of Raf1-MEK1/2-ERK1/2 signaling by
targeting Raf1.

PMID: 16239230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Ai Zheng. 2005 Sep;24(9):1080-4.

[Regulatory effect of Smad7 gene on MAPK signal pathway in malignant
transformation of immortalized human bronchial epithelial BEP2D cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang L(1), Huo YY, Zhang KT, Wang Y, Xiang XQ, Hu YC, Yu G, Li G, Mi C, Wu DC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Radiation Medicine, Academy of Military Medical Science, Beijing,
P.R. China.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Smad7 is an inhibitor of transforming growth factor-beta 
(TGF-beta) signal pathway. TGF-beta could induce the expression of several genes 
through activating SMAD and ras/MEK/ERK pathways. This study was to determine
whether Smad7 is involved in regulating mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signal pathway with TGF-beta in malignant transformation of human bronchial
epithelial BEP2D cells.
METHODS: Immortalized BEP2D cells and malignant BERP35T2 cells were
co-transfected with full-length Smad7 cDNA constructed pCISmad7.neo or Smad7
siRNA, transactivator vector pTet-Elk or pTet-Jun, and reporter vector pTRE-Luc, 
and stimulated with TGF-beta. The regulatory effect of Smad7 on MAPK signal
pathway was investigated by standard luciferase assay.
RESULTS: In BEP2D cells, when treated with TGF-beta1, phosphorylated activities
of Elk and Jun were up-regulated (P(Elk)=0.033, P(Jun)=0.016); after
co-transfection of Elk or Jun with pCISmad7.neo, phosphorylated activity of Elk
was increased, and that of Jun was decreased (P(Elk)=0.017, P(Jun)=0.028); after 
co-transfection of Elk or Jun with Smad7 siRNA, phosphorylated activity of Elk
was decreased, and that of Jun was increased (P(Elk)=0.018, P(Jun)=0.005). In
BERP35T2 cells, when treated with TGF-beta1, phosphorylated activity of Elk was
up-regulated (P=0.006); after co-transfection of Elk and Smad7 siRNA,
phosphorylated activity of Elk was decreased (P=0.000); no activity of Jun was
detected in BERP35T2 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: In the process of malignant transformation of BEP2D cells, the
intervention of Smad7 in MAPK signal pathway leads to the activity imbalance
between extracellular signal-related protein kinase (ERK) and c-Jun NH2-terminal 
kinase (JNK), which in turn promotes cell proliferation. All these could
contribute to further malignant transformation of these cells.

PMID: 16159429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Sep 20;102(38):13681-6. Epub 2005 Sep 12.

l-Citrulline and l-arginine supplementation retards the progression of
high-cholesterol-diet-induced atherosclerosis in rabbits.

Hayashi T(1), Juliet PA, Matsui-Hirai H, Miyazaki A, Fukatsu A, Funami J, Iguchi 
A, Ignarro LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 65
Tsuruma-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan. hayashi@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

The objective of this study was to evaluate the influence of ingested l-arginine,
l-citrulline, and antioxidants (vitamins C and E) on the progression of
atherosclerosis in rabbits fed a high-cholesterol diet. The fatty diet caused a
marked impairment of endothelium-dependent vasorelaxation in isolated thoracic
aorta and blood flow in rabbit ear artery in vivo, the development of
atheromatous lesions and increased superoxide anion production in thoracic aorta,
and increased oxidation-sensitive gene expression [Elk-1 and phosphorylated cAMP 
response element-binding protein]. Rabbits were treated orally for 12 weeks with 
l-arginine, l-citrulline, and/or antioxidants. l-arginine plus l-citrulline,
either alone or in combination with antioxidants, caused a marked improvement in 
endothelium-dependent vasorelaxation and blood flow, dramatic regression in
atheromatous lesions, and decrease in superoxide production and
oxidation-sensitive gene expression. These therapeutic effects were associated
with concomitant increases in aortic endothelial NO synthase expression and
plasma NO(2)(-)+NO(3)(-) and cGMP levels. These observations indicate that
ingestion of certain NO-boosting substances, including l-arginine, l-citrulline, 
and antioxidants, can abrogate the state of oxidative stress and reverse the
progression of atherosclerosis. This approach may have clinical utility in the
treatment of atherosclerosis in humans.

PMCID: PMC1224660
PMID: 16157883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Biochemistry. 2005 Sep 20;44(37):12546-53.

Identification and characterization of ERK MAP kinase phosphorylation sites in
Smad3.

Matsuura I(1), Wang G, He D, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, 
USA.

Smad3 is phosphorylated by ERK MAP kinase upon EGF treatment. We have mapped the 
ERK phosphorylation sites to Ser 207, Ser 203, and Thr 178 in Smad3. We show
that, upon EGF treatment, Smad3 is rapidly phosphorylated in these sites, peaking
at approximately 15-30 min and that MEK1 inhibitors PD98059 and U0216 inhibit
Smad3 phosphorylation induced by EGF. Ser 207 is the best ERK site in Smad3. Its 
phosphorylation shows the highest EGF induction in Smad3. It is also a very
sensitive site to EGF treatment, significantly responding to low concentrations
of EGF. These three sites are also phosphorylated by recombinant ERK2 in vitro.
We have compared the kinetic parameters of Smad3 with those of ELK1 and MBP for
ERK2. We further show that mutation of the ERK phosphorylation sites increases
the ability of Smad3 to stimulate a Smad target gene, suggesting that ERK
phosphorylation inhibits Smad3 activity.

PMID: 16156666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Mol Hum Reprod. 2005 Jul;11(7):471-6.

A novel protein Depp, which is induced by progesterone in human endometrial
stromal cells activates Elk-1 transcription factor.

Watanabe H(1), Nonoguchi K, Sakurai T, Masuda T, Itoh K, Fujita J.

Author information: 
(1)Daigo Watanabe Clinic, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

Decidualization of the endometrial stromal cells (ESC), considered to be
stimulated by progesterone and/or cAMP, is crucial for embryo implantation and
placentation. In this study, we isolated a novel clone encoding decidual protein 
induced by progesterone (Depp) from a human ESC cDNA library enriched with
progesterone-inducible genes. Depp mRNA was expressed in various human tissues
including placenta, ovary and kidney. Increased expression of Depp was observed
in endometria during mid- and late-secretory phases and 1st trimester deciduas.
In vitro, Depp mRNA was induced in ESC within 30 min of progesterone treatment,
which was inhibited by the antiprogestin RU486. Androgen alone also induced Depp 
expression. Depp increased the level of phosphorylated Erk and activated the
Elk-1 transcription factor in human embryonal kidney 293 cells, suggesting that
Depp modulates the effects of progesterone during decidualization and in the
decidua by affecting gene expression. Elucidation of the biological function of
Depp in the endometrium will facilitate our understanding of the molecular
mechanisms of decidualization and placental development.

PMID: 16123073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Med Chem. 2005 Jul 14;48(14):4586-95.

Identification of novel extracellular signal-regulated kinase docking domain
inhibitors.

Hancock CN(1), Macias A, Lee EK, Yu SY, Mackerell AD Jr, Shapiro P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, and Molecular and
Cell Biology Program, University of Maryland, Baltimore, 21201, USA.

The extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK1 and ERK2) signal transduction
pathways play a critical role in cell proliferation. Hyperactivation of the ERK
proteins either through increased expression of membrane-bound growth factor
receptors or genetic mutations of upstream proteins is thought to be involved in 
the pathogenesis of many human cancers. Thus, targeted inhibition of ERK
signaling is viewed as a potential approach to prevent cancer cell proliferation.
Currently, no specific inhibitors of the ERK proteins exist. Moreover, most
kinase inhibitors lack specificity because they target the ATP binding region,
which is well conserved among the protein kinase families. Taking advantage of
recently identified ERK docking domains, which are reported to facilitate
substrate protein interactions, we have used computer-aided drug design (CADD) to
identify novel small molecular weight ERK inhibitors. Following a CADD screen of 
over 800 000 molecules, 80 potential compounds were selected and tested for
activity in biological assays. Several compounds inhibited ERK-specific
phosphorylation of ribosomal S6 kinase-1 (Rsk-1) or the ternary complex factor
Elk-1 (TCF/Elk-1), both of which are involved in promoting cell proliferation.
Active compounds showed a dose-dependent reduction in the proliferation of
several cancer cell lines as measured by colony survival assays. Direct binding
between the active compounds and ERK2 was indicated by fluorescence quenching.
These active compounds may serve as lead candidates for development of novel
specific inhibitors of ERK-substrate interactions involved in cell proliferation.

PMID: 15999996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. BMC Chem Biol. 2005 Jul 5;5:1.

Development of ERK Activity Sensor, an in vitro, FRET-based sensor of
Extracellular Regulated Kinase activity.

Green HM(1), Alberola-Ila J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, M/C 147-75, 1200 E,
California Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA. harryg@cco.caltech.edu

BACKGROUND: Study of ERK activation has thus far relied on biochemical assays
that are limited to the use of phospho-specific antibodies and radioactivity in
vitro, and analysis of whole cell populations in vivo. As with many systems,
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) can be utilized to make highly
sensitive detectors of molecular activity. Here we introduce FRET-based ERK
Activity Sensors, which utilize variants of Enhanced Green Fluorescent Protein
fused by an ERK-specific peptide linker to detect ERK2 activity.
RESULTS: ERK Activity Sensors display varying changes in FRET upon
phosphorylation by active ERK2 in vitro depending on the composition of
ERK-specific peptide linker sequences derived from known in vivo ERK targets,
Ets1 and Elk1. Analysis of point mutations reveals specific residues involved in 
ERK binding and phosphorylation of ERK Activity Sensor 3. ERK2 also shows high in
vitro specificity for these sensors over two other major MAP Kinases, p38 and
pSAPK/JNK.
CONCLUSION: EAS's are a convenient, non-radioactive alternative to study ERK
dynamics in vitro. They can be utilized to study ERK activity in real-time. This 
new technology can be applied to studying ERK kinetics in vitro, analysis of ERK 
activity in whole cell extracts, and high-throughput screening technologies.

PMCID: PMC1180429
PMID: 15998468  [PubMed]


337. Oncol Rep. 2005 Jul;14(1):291-4.

Comparative genomics on Fgf11 orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Human FGF19 is the ortholog of rodent Fgf15, and 22 FGF family genes exist within
the human genome as well as within the rodent genome. Mouse Fgf11 refSeq
NM_010198.1 and rat Fgf11 RefSeq NM_130816.1 correspond only to the coding
region. Here, complete coding sequences of mouse, rat and dog Fgf11 orthologs
were determined by using bioinformatics. Mouse Fgf11, rat Fgf11 and dog Fgf11
genes, consisting of five exons, were located within AL603707.5, AC098923.8 and
AC126237.5 genome sequences, respectively. Human FGF11 showed 97.8%, 96.9%, 96.9%
and 68.9% total-amino-acid identity with dog, mouse, rat and zebrafish Fgf11
orthologs, respectively. Rat Fgf11 showed Val205Met amino-acid substitution
compared with rat Fgf11 RefSeq NP_570829.1. Met 205 of rat Fgf11 determined in
this study was conserved among vertebrate Fgf11 orthologs. N-terminal signal
peptide was not identified within vertebrate Fgf11 orthologs. Two Asn-linked
glycosylation sites were identified within zebrafish fgf11, but not within
mammalian Fgf11 orthologs. The 5'-flanking region, exonic regions, and intronic
regions except intron 3 were well conserved between human FGF11 and mouse Fgf11
genes. Match program revealed that EVI1, ELK1, AP1 and E47-binding sites were
conserved between human FGF11 and mouse Fgf11 promoter regions. Human FGF11 mRNA 
was expressed in embryonic stem (ES) cells, neuroblastoma, retinoblastoma, and
brain tumors. This is the first report on the dog Fgf11 gene as well as on
comparative genomics analyses of Fgf11 orthologs.

PMID: 15944803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. EMBO J. 2005 Jun 15;24(12):2161-71. Epub 2005 May 26.

PIASx acts as an Elk-1 coactivator by facilitating derepression.

Yang SH(1), Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

The ETS-domain transcription factor Elk-1 is a MAP kinase-inducible
transcriptional activator protein. However, in the basal state, its activity is
repressed by SUMO-dependent histone deacetylase (HDAC) recruitment. Relief of
this repression accompanies the activation process. Here, we demonstrate that
PIASx(alpha) acts to facilitate this derepression process. Members of the PIAS
family of proteins can act as E3 enzymes that enhance the sumoylation status of a
variety of substrates. However, PIASx-mediated coactivation of Elk-1 occurs in an
E3 activity-independent manner. PIASx(alpha) binds to Elk-1 in vivo and enhances 
its transcriptional activity. The coactivating properties of PIASx(alpha) require
Elk-1 to be modified with SUMO and the integrity of the SUMO binding motif in
PIASx(alpha). PIASx(alpha) activates Elk-1 through alterations in the HAT/HDAC
activities associated with Elk-1. In particular, PIASx(alpha) facilitates the
loss of the repressive HDAC-2 from sumoylated Elk-1, a key event in the
activation of Elk-1 in response to signalling through the ERK MAP kinase pathway.
Our data therefore reveal a novel coactivator function for PIASx(alpha) through
reversing SUMO-mediated repression of transcription factor activity.

PMCID: PMC1150884
PMID: 15920481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Aug;16(8):3562-73. Epub 2005 May 25.

DYRK1A enhances the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade in PC12 cells by
forming a complex with Ras, B-Raf, and MEK1.

Kelly PA(1), Rahmani Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la SantÈ et de la Recherche MÈdicale U584, FacultÈ de
MÈdecine Necker-Enfants Malades, 75730 Paris Cedex 15, France.

Dual-specificity tyrosine-phosphorylated and regulated kinase 1A (Dyrk1A) is the 
human homologue of the Drosophila mnb (minibrain) gene. In Drosophila, mnb is
involved in postembryonic neurogenesis. In human, DYRK1A maps within the Down
syndrome critical region of chromosome 21 and is overexpressed in Down syndrome
embryonic brain. Despite its potential involvement in the neurobiological
alterations observed in Down syndrome patients, the biological functions of the
serine/threonine kinase DYRK1A have not been identified yet. Here, we report that
DYRK1A overexpression potentiates nerve growth factor (NGF)-mediated PC12
neuronal differentiation by up-regulating the Ras/MAP kinase signaling pathway
independently of its kinase activity. Furthermore, we show that DYRK1A prolongs
the kinetics of ERK activation by interacting with Ras, B-Raf, and MEK1 to
facilitate the formation of a Ras/B-Raf/MEK1 multiprotein complex. These data
indicate that DYRK1A may play a critical role in Ras-dependent transducing
signals that are required for promoting or maintaining neuronal differentiation
and suggest that overexpression of DYRK1A may contribute to the neurological
abnormalities observed in Down syndrome patients.

PMCID: PMC1182298
PMID: 15917294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jun;25(11):4792-803.

The noncatalytic amino terminus of mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase 1
directs nuclear targeting and serum response element transcriptional regulation.

Wu JJ(1), Zhang L, Bennett AM.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, SHM B226D, 333
Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8066, USA.

The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphatase 1 (MKP-1) is an
immediate-early gene comprised of a dual-specificity phosphatase domain and a
noncatalytic NH(2) terminus. Here, we show that the NH(2) terminus of MKP-1,
containing the cdc25 homology domains A (CH2A) and B (CH2B), mediates MKP-1
nuclear targeting and modulates MAPK-mediated gene expression. An LXXLL motif
which is known to mediate protein-protein interactions with nuclear-targeted
hormone receptors was identified proximal to the CH2A domain of MKP-1. The NH(2) 
terminus alone of MKP-1 containing this LXXLL motif was sufficient to direct
nuclear targeting, and mutating this motif to LXXAA resulted in the exclusion of 
MKP-1 from the nucleus. We found that the LXXLL motif proximal to the CH2A domain
was present in other nuclear-localized MKPs but was absent in MKPs that localized
to the cytoplasm. These data suggest that this LXXLL motif confers nuclear
targeting properties to the MKPs. The NH(2) terminus of MKP-1 was also found to
inhibit the activation of the serum response element (SRE) by preventing
MAPK-mediated phosphorylation of the regulatory serine 383 residue on Elk-1.
Moreover, we show that MKP-1 plays a major role in the attenuation of
serum-induced SRE activity, since MKP-1 null fibroblasts exhibited enhanced SRE
activity in response to serum compared with wild-type fibroblasts. The NH(2)
terminus of MKP-1, when reconstituted into MKP-1 null fibroblasts to levels
similar to endogenous MKP-1 following serum stimulation, reduced serum-mediated
SRE activity. Collectively, these data reveal novel roles for the NH(2) terminus 
of MKP-1 in nuclear targeting and transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC1140620
PMID: 15899879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Dev Biol. 2005 Apr 15;280(2):321-43.

TGF-beta3 regulates anchoring junction dynamics in the seminiferous epithelium of
the rat testis via the Ras/ERK signaling pathway: An in vivo study.

Xia W(1), Cheng CY.

Author information: 
(1)Population Council, Center for Biomedical Research, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Recent studies have shown that transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta3 regulates
blood-testis barrier (BTB) dynamics in vivo, plausibly by determining the
steady-state levels of occludin and zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) at the BTB site via
the p38 MAP kinase signaling pathway. Since BTB is composed of coexisting TJs and
basal ectoplasmic specializations [ES, a testis-specific adherens junction (AJ)
type] in the seminiferous epithelium of the rat testis, we sought to examine if
TGF-beta3 would also regulate anchoring junction dynamics. Using an in vivo model
in which rats were treated with AF-2364
[1-(2,4-dichlorobenzyl)-indazole-3-carbohydrazide] to perturb Sertoli-germ cell
AJs without affecting the integrity of TJs at the BTB, it was noted that the
event of germ cell loss from the epithelium was associated with a transient surge
in TGF-beta3. Furthermore, it was also associated with a surge in the protein
levels of Ras, p-ERK, and the intrinsic activity of ERK, illustrating TGF-beta3
apparently regulates Sertoli-germ cell ES function via the Ras/MEK/ERK signaling 
pathway. Indeed, pretreatment of rats with TbetaRII/Fc chimera, a TGF-beta
antagonist, or U0126, a specific MEK inhibitor, could significantly delay and
partially block the disruptive effects of AF-2364 in depleting germ cells from
the epithelium. While the protein levels of the cadherin/catenin complex were
significantly induced during AF-2364-mediated germ cell loss, perhaps being used 
to retain germ cells in the epithelium, this increase failed to reverse the loss 
of adhesion function between Sertoli and germ cells because of a loss of
protein-protein interactions between cadherins and catenins. Collectively, these 
results illustrate that the testis has a novel mechanism in place in which an
agent that primarily disrupts TJs can induce secondary loss of AJ function,
leading to germ cell loss from the seminiferous epithelium. Yet an agent that
selectively disrupts AJs (e.g., AF-2364) can limit its effects exclusively at the
Sertoli-germ cell adhesive site without perturbing the Sertoli-Sertoli TJs.

PMID: 15882576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Oncogene. 2005 Apr 14;24(16):2654-66.

A 5'-distal enhanceosome in the PDGF-A gene is activated in choriocarcinoma cells
via ligand-independent binding of vitamin D receptor and constitutive jun kinase 
signaling.

Pedigo NG(1), Zhang H, Bruno ME, Kaetzel CS, Dugan AR, Shanehsaz P, Hennigan RF, 
Xing Z, Koszewski NJ, Kaetzel DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Biomedical Pharmacology, University of Kentucky
College of Medicine, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Overexpression of platelet-derived growth factor A-chain (PDGF-A) is clearly
linked to autocrine and paracrine stimulation of malignant growth in many human
cancers. We have shown previously that PDGF-A overexpression in choriocarcinoma, 
hepatoma and lung carcinoma cell lines is driven by the activity of a 66 bp
enhancer element (ACE66) located approximately 7 kb upstream of the PDGF-A
transcription start site. In this study, the ACE66 element is shown to be
activated in JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cells through synergistic interactions between
consensus DNA motifs for binding of vitamin D receptor, AP1 and ELK1. Binding of 
the vitamin D/retinoid-X receptor (VDR/RXRalpha) heterodimer to the ACE66 element
was reconstituted in vitro with recombinant VDR/RXRalpha and with JEG-3 nuclear
extract, and was verified in living JEG-3 cells by chromatin immunoprecipitation 
analysis. Transcriptional activity of the ACE66 element, as well as occupancy of 
the element by VDR/RXRalpha, was shown to be independent of stimulation with the 
hormonal VDR ligand, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. The jun kinase pathway of
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling was shown to activate the ACE66
enhancer, most likely through activation of factors binding to the AP1 element.
These results identify a novel mechanism of transcriptional enhancement involving
ligand-independent activity of the VDR/RXR heterodimer and MAPK signaling
pathways that appears to play an important role in the overexpression of PDGF in 
many different settings of human malignancy.

PMID: 15829977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Calcif Tissue Int. 2005 May;76(5):371-8. Epub 2005 Apr 11.

CSF-1 induces fos gene transcription and activates the transcription factor Elk-1
in mature osteoclasts.

Yao GQ(1), Itokawa T, Paliwal I, Insogna K.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Comparative Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520-8020, USA. gang-qing.yao@yale.edu

Mice with targeted deletion of the fos gene fail to develop mature osteoclasts,
reflecting an absolute requirement for the c-Fos proto-oncogene in osteoclast
precursors. C-Fos is also expressed in mature osteoclasts; however, the
regulation of fos in these cells has not been studied. By using cultured murine
osteoclast-like cells (OCLs) we found that treatment with colony-stimulation
factor 1 (CSF-1) induced a 3.9-fold increase in c-Fos rnRNA at 30 minutes and a
2.6-fold increase at 60 minutes. With use of mature osteoclasts isolated from
transgenic mice expressing the bacterial Lac-Z gene under the control of the
murine fos promoter, we were able to directly demonstrate transcriptional
activation of fos by CSF-1 in these cells. Transcriptional activation was
2.6-fold greater at 5 minutes and 2.8-fold greater at 15 minutes in CSF-1-treated
cells than in vehicle-treated cells. CSF-1 induced nuclear protein binding to the
fos serum response element that was significantly attenuated by antibodies to the
transcription factor Elk-1 but not by Sap-1a. Treatment of mature osteoclasts
with CSF-1 for 2 hours resulted in a significant increase in the levels of
nuclear c-Fos protein. These data demonstrate that CSF-1 upregulates c-fos
expression in mature osteoclasts at least in part via transcriptional activation 
of fos. CSF-1 induced binding of Elk-1 to the fos gene serum response element
appears to be part of the molecular mechanism by which this occurs.

PMID: 15812575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Oncol Rep. 2005 May;13(5):993-7.

Comparative genomics on Fzd8 orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

WNT signaling pathway networks with Hedgehog, Notch and FGF signaling pathways
during carcinogenesis and embryogenesis. FZD8 is up-regulated in HeLa S3 and A549
cells. Here we identified and characterized rat Fzd8 gene by using
bioinformatics. Rat Fzd8 gene was identified within AC131883.2 genome sequence.
Rat Fzd8 (684 aa) showed 99.1, 96.8, 71.8 and 71.6% total amino-acid identity
with mouse Fzd8, human FZD8, zebrafish fzd8 and Xenopus fzd8, respectively.
Vertebrate Fzd8 orthologs were seven-transmembrane receptors with Frizzled (Fz)
domain within the N-terminal extracellular region, leucine zipper motif around
the fifth transmembrane domain, and Dishevelled (Dvl)-binding motif within the
C-terminal cytoplasmic region. Two Asn-linked glycosylation sites within the
N-terminal extracellular region were conserved among vertebrate Fzd8 orhologs.
One Asn-linked glycosylation site within the second extracellular loop was
conserved among mammalian Fzd8 orthologs, but not in Xenopus and zebrafish fzd8
orthologs. These facts indicate the molecular evolution of Fzd8 orthologs. The
5'-flanking region and exonic region were well conserved among mammalian Fzd8
orthologs. Nucleotide position 92950-94221 of AC131883.2 genome sequence was
identified as the evolutionarily conserved promoter region of rat Fzd8 gene, and 
nucleotide position 133421-132134 of AL121749.14 genome sequence as the
evolutionarily conserved promoter region of human FZD8 gene. Match program
revealed that ELK1- and PAX4-binding sites were conserved between rat Fzd8 and
human FZD8 promoters. This is the first report on the rat Fzd8 gene as well as on
comparative genomics for Fzd8 orthologs.

PMID: 15809770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Int J Oncol. 2005 May;26(5):1435-40.

Comparative genomics on Vangl1 and Vangl2 genes.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M and M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

WNT signals are transduced to the beta-catenin pathway or the planar cell
polarity (PCP) pathway. WNT - beta-catenin pathway is implicated in
carcinogenesis, while WNT-PCP pathway is implicated in cell motility and
metastasis. Drosophila Van Gogh (Vang), Frizzled (Fz), Starry night (Stan),
Prickle (Pk) and Diego (Dgo) are PCP signaling molecules. Vangl1 (Strabismus 2)
and Vangl2 (Strabismus 1 or Ltap) are mammalian homologs of Drosophila Vang
interacting with PRICKLE1, PRICKLE2, ANKRD6, DVL1, DVL2, DVL3, KAI1 and MAGI3.
Here we identified and characterized rat Vangl1 and Vangl2 genes by using
bioinformatics. Rat Vangl1 gene, consisting of eight exons, was located within
AC098913.7 and AC108524.6 genome sequences. Rat Vangl2 gene, consisting of eight 
exons, was located within AC118856.3 and AC115243.5 genome sequences. Exon-intron
structure of mammalian Vangl1 and Vangl2 orthologs was well conserved. E47 and
double ELK1-binding sites were conserved among promoters of mammalian Vangl1
orthologs. PAX4, NFkappaB, HNF4, SOX9, RFX1, and POU2F1 (OCT1)-binding sites were
conserved among promoters of mammalian Vangl2 orthologs. Rat Vangl1 (526 aa) and 
Vangl2 (521 aa) were four-transmembrane proteins with 71.5% total-amino-acid
identity. Ser cluster motif (SxxSxxSxxSxxSxxS) in the N-terminal cytoplasmic
region and PDZ-binding motif in the C-terminal cytoplasmic tail were
evolutionarily conserved among vertebrate Vangl1 and Vangl2 orthologs. This is
the first report on rat Vangl1 and Vangl2 genes as well as on comparative
genomics for Vangl1 and Vangl2 orthologs.

PMID: 15809738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Mol Biol. 2005 Apr 22;348(1):75-83.

Modulating the DNA affinity of Elk-1 with computationally selected mutations.

Park S(1), Boder ET, Saven JG.

Author information: 
(1)Makineni Theoretical Laboratories, Department of Chemistry, University of
Pennsylvania, 231 South 34th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

In order to regulate gene expression, transcription factors must first bind their
target DNA sequences. The affinity of this binding is determined by both the
network of interactions at the interface and the entropy change associated with
the complex formation. To study the role of structural fluctuation in fine-tuning
DNA affinity, we performed molecular dynamics simulations of two highly
homologous proteins, Elk-1 and SAP-1, that exhibit different sequence
specificity. Simulation studies show that several residues in Elk have
significantly higher main-chain root-mean-square deviations than their
counterparts in SAP. In particular, a single residue, D69, may contribute to
Elk's lower DNA affinity for P(c-fos) by structurally destabilizing the carboxy
terminus of the recognition helix. While D69 does not contact DNA directly, the
increased mobility in the region may contribute to its weaker binding. We
measured the ability of single point mutants of Elk to bind P(c-fos) in a
reporter assay, in which D69 of wild-type Elk has been mutated to other residues 
with higher helix propensity in order to stabilize the local conformation. The
gains in transcriptional activity and the free energy of binding suggested from
these measurements correlate well with stability gains computed from helix
propensity and charge-macrodipole interactions. The study suggests that residues 
that are distal to the binding interface may indirectly modulate the binding
affinity by stabilizing the protein scaffold required for efficient DNA
interaction.

PMID: 15808854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Oncogene. 2005 Jun 16;24(26):4193-205.

Mitogen regulated induction of FRA-1 proto-oncogene is controlled by the
transcription factors binding to both serum and TPA response elements.

Adiseshaiah P(1), Peddakama S, Zhang Q, Kalvakolanu DV, Reddy SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

FRA-1, a member of the FOS family of transcription factors, is overexpressed in a
variety of human tumors, and contributes to tumor progression. In addition to
mitogens, various toxicants and carcinogens persistently induce FRA-1 expression 
in vitro and in vivo. Although the mitogen induced expression of c-FOS is
relatively well understood, it is poorly defined in the case of FRA-1. Our recent
analysis of the FRA-1 promoter has shown a critical role for a TRE located at
-318 in mediating the TPA-induced expression. The -379 to -283 bp promoter
segment containing a critical TRE (-318), however, is insufficient for the
induction of FRA-1 promoter. Here, we show that a 40-bp (-276/-237) segment,
comprising a TCF binding site and the CArG box (collectively known as serum
response element, SRE), and an ATF site, is also necessary for the FRA-1
induction by TPA and EGF. Interestingly, the -283 to +32 bp FRA-1 promoter
fragment containing an SRE and an ATF site alone was also insufficient to confer 
TPA sensitivity to a reporter gene. However, in association with the -318 TRE,
the SRE and ATF sites imparted a strong TPA-inducibility to the reporter.
Similarly, EGF also required these motifs for the full induction of this gene.
Using ChIP assays we show that, in contrast to c-Jun, SRF, Elk1, ATF1 and CREB
proteins bind to SRE and ATF sites of the FRA-1 promoter, constitutively.
RNAi-mediated knockdown of endogenous SRF, ELK1 and c-JUN protein expression
significantly reduced TPA-stimulated FRA-1 promoter activity. Thus, a bipartite
enhancer formed by an upstream TRE and the downstream SRE and ATF sites and the
cognate factors is necessary and sufficient for the regulation of FRA-1 in
response to mitogens.

PMID: 15806162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 27;280(21):20375-83. Epub 2005 Mar 25.

Silibinin up-regulates DNA-protein kinase-dependent p53 activation to enhance
UVB-induced apoptosis in mouse epithelial JB6 cells.

Dhanalakshmi S(1), Agarwal C, Singh RP, Agarwal R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado 80262, USA.

In the present study, we employed a well established JB6 mouse epithelial cell
model to define the molecular mechanism of efficacy of a naturally occurring
flavonoid silibinin against ultraviolet B (UVB)-induced skin tumorigenesis. UVB
exposure of cells caused a moderate phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt and a
stronger phosphorylation of p53 at Ser(15), which was enhanced markedly by
silibinin pretreatment. Kinase activity of ERK1/2 for Elk-1 and Akt for glycogen 
synthase kinase-3beta was also potently enhanced by silibinin pretreatment.
Furthermore, silibinin increased the UVB-induced level of cleaved caspase 3 as
well as apoptotic cells. Based on these observations, next we investigated the
role of upstream kinases, ATM/ATR and DNA-PK, which act as sensors for
UVB-induced DNA damage and transduce signals leading to DNA repair or apoptosis. 
Whereas UVB strongly activated ATM as observed by Ser(1981) phosphorylation, it
was not affected by silibinin pretreatment. However, pretreatment of cells with
the DNA-protein kinase (PK) inhibitor LY294002 strongly reversed
silibinin-enhanced Akt-Ser(473) and p53-Ser(15) as well as ERK1/2 phosphorylation
together with a dose-dependent decrease in cleaved caspase 3 and apoptosis (p <
0.05). In addition, silibinin pretreatment strongly enhanced H2A.X-Ser(139)
phosphorylation and DNA-PK-associated kinase activity as well as the physical
interaction of p53 with DNA-PK; pretreatment of cells with LY294002 but not
caffeine abolished the silibinin-caused increase in both DNA-PK activation and
p53-Ser(15) phosphorylations. Together, these findings suggest that silibinin
preferentially activates the DNA-PK-p53 pathway for apoptosis in response to
UVB-induced DNA damage, and that this could be a predominant mechanism of
silibinin efficacy against UVB-induced skin cancer.

PMID: 15792956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mol Carcinog. 2005 May;43(1):59-63.

Functional consequences of mutations in a putative Akt phosphorylation motif of
B-raf in human cancers.

Ikenoue T(1), Kanai F, Hikiba Y, Tanaka Y, Imamura J, Ohta M, Jazag A, Guleng B, 
Asaoka Y, Tateishi K, Kawakami T, Matsumura M, Kawabe T, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

Mutations in the B-raf gene have been reported in a number of human cancers,
including melanoma and lung cancer. More than 80% of the reported B-raf mutations
were V599E; however, non-V599E mutations have been frequently found in non-small 
cell lung cancers as compared with melanoma. Some non-V599E mutations have been
found surrounding Thr439, which is thought likely to be one of the three Akt
phosphorylation sites in the B-raf protein. However, as a previous report
indicated that Thr439 was not phosphorylated by Akt, the functional consequences 
of these mutations have been unclear. Here, we examined the effects of
cancer-related B-raf mutations surrounding Thr439 on the activation of the
mitogen-activated protein/ extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase
(MEK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk) pathway and the transformation 
of NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. Among the three reported mutations (K438Q, K438T, and
T439P) found in non-small cell lung carcinoma and melanoma, none elevated the
activity of the MEK/Erk cascade as determined by in vitro kinase assays,
immunoblots using antibody specific for phosphorylated Erk, or Elk1-dependent
reporter assays. The inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt
signaling by LY294002 increased the Erk activation induced by the mutant B-raf
proteins, as well as by wild-type B-raf. Furthermore, the B-raf mutants did not
have increased NIH 3T3-transforming activities, as determined by colony-formation
assays. These results suggest that the B-raf mutations surrounding Thr439 found
in human cancers are unlikely to contribute to increased oncogenic properties of 
B-raf.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15791648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Mar 29;102(13):4896-901. Epub 2005 Mar 21.

Beneficial effects of pomegranate juice on oxidation-sensitive genes and
endothelial nitric oxide synthase activity at sites of perturbed shear stress.

de Nigris F(1), Williams-Ignarro S, Lerman LO, Crimi E, Botti C, Mansueto G,
D'Armiento FP, De Rosa G, Sica V, Ignarro LJ, Napoli C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Naples,
80131 Naples, Italy.

Atherosclerosis is enhanced in arterial segments exposed to disturbed flow.
Perturbed shear stress increases the expression of oxidation-sensitive responsive
genes (such as ELK-1 and p-JUN) in the endothelium. Evidence suggests that
polyphenolic antioxidants contained in the juice derived from the pomegranate can
contribute to the reduction of oxidative stress and atherogenesis. The aim of the
present study was to evaluate the effects of intervention with pomegranate juice 
(PJ) on oxidation-sensitive genes and endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) expression
induced by high shear stress in vitro and in vivo. Cultured human coronary artery
endothelial cells (EC) exposed to high shear stress in vitro and
hypercholesterolemic mice were used in this study. PJ concentrate reduced the
activation of redox-sensitive genes (ELK-1 and p-JUN) and increased eNOS
expression (which was decreased by perturbed shear stress) in cultured EC and in 
atherosclerosis-prone areas of hypercholesterolemic mice. Moreover, oral
administration of PJ to hypercholesterolemic mice at various stages of disease
reduced significantly the progression of atherosclerosis. This experimental study
indicates that the proatherogenic effects induced by perturbed shear stress can
be reversed by chronic administration of PJ. This approach may have implications 
for the prevention or treatment of atherosclerosis and its clinical
manifestations.

PMCID: PMC555721
PMID: 15781875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Cancer Res. 2005 Mar 15;65(6):2115-24.

Discovery of aberrant expression of R-RAS by cancer-linked DNA hypomethylation in
gastric cancer using microarrays.

Nishigaki M(1), Aoyagi K, Danjoh I, Fukaya M, Yanagihara K, Sakamoto H, Yoshida
T, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, Center of Medical Genomics, and Central Animal Laboratory, 
National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Although hypomethylation was the originally identified epigenetic change in
cancer, it was overlooked for many years in preference to hypermethylation.
Recently, gene activation by cancer-linked hypomethylation has been rediscovered.
However, in gastric cancer, genome-wide screening of the activated genes has not 
been found. By using microarrays, we identified 1,383 gene candidates reactivated
in at least one cell line of eight gastric cancer cell lines after treatment with
5-aza-2'deoxycytidine and trichostatin A. Of the 1,383 genes, 159 genes,
including oncogenes ELK1, FRAT2, R-RAS, RHOB, and RHO6, were further selected as 
gene candidates that are silenced by DNA methylation in normal stomach mucosa but
are activated by DNA demethylation in a subset of gastric cancers. Next, we
showed that demethylation of specific CpG sites within the first intron of R-RAS 
causes activation in more than half of gastric cancers. Introduction of siRNA
into R-RAS-expressing cells resulted in the disappearance of the adhered cells,
suggesting that functional blocking of the R-RAS-signaling pathway has great
potential for gastric cancer therapy. Our extensive gene list provides other
candidates for this class of oncogene.

PMID: 15781621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2005 Feb;113(2):94-101.

Reduced phosphorylation of transcription factor Elk-1 in cultured fibroblasts of 
a patient with premature aging syndrome and insulin resistance.

Knebel B(1), Avci H, Bullmann C, Kotzka J, M¸ller-Wieland D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry, German Diabetes
Center at the Heinrich-Heine University D¸sseldorf, Member of the Leibniz
Society, D¸sseldorf, Germany.

The effect of insulin and growth factor mediated signaling to gene regulation was
investigated in cultured fibroblasts of a patient with a premature aging syndrome
(metageria) and severe insulin resistance. Insulin receptor structure and
function as well as major pathways activated by insulin, i.e. phosphatidyl
inositol-3 kinase (PI-3 K) cascade or mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
cascades, were functional. Inducibility of the proto-oncogene cfos, a
representative endpoint of signaling pathways related to gene expression, by
growth factors or insulin was reduced in patient cells. This reduced induction
persisted in cfos promoter reporter gene studies indicating that the post
receptor defect is localized proximal to the cfos promoter itself. Abundances of 
the transcription factors Elk-1 and SRF being major players in coupling of MAPKs 
to cfos promoter activation were not altered. However, basal and inducible
phosphorylation of Elk-1 was impaired. In addition, basal and stimulated
transcriptional activity mediated by Elk-1 was almost abolished in patient cells.
Therefore these results identify a post receptor defect in cFos induction, which 
appears to be related to a functional alteration of Elk-1. A possible relation of
this signal transduction defect to the specific premature aging syndrome remains 
to be elucidated.

PMID: 15772901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Oncol Rep. 2005 Apr;13(4):777-80.

Comparative genomics on Wnt7a orthologs.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

WNT and Hedgehog signaling pathways network together during carcinogenesis and
embryogenesis. WNT7A mRNA is expressed in human gastric and pancreatic cancer
cells. WNT7A mRNA expression is relatively high in the temporal, occipital and
parietal lobes, paracentral gyrus of the cerebral cortex, caudate nucleus,
hippocampus, medulla oblongata and putamen within the adult human brain. Here, we
identified and characterized the rat Wnt7a gene using bioinformatics. The rat
Wnt7a gene, consisting of four exons, was located within the AC106100.7 genome
sequence. Rat Wnt7a (349 aa) with 24 Cys residues and 3 Asn-linked glycosylation 
sites showed 99.7, 99.1 and 93.7% total-amino- acid identity with mouse Wnt7a,
human WNT7A and chicken wnt7a, respectively. The N-terminal signal peptide was
not identified within the Wnt7a orthologs. Exonic regions, except the 3'-UTR,
were conserved between the rat Wnt7a and human WNT7A genes; however, the
5'-flanking region was significantly divergent between the rat Wnt7a and human
WNT7A genes. Although the COMP1- and ELK1-binding sites within exon 1 were
conserved among mammalian Wnt7a promoters, transcriptional regulation of the
rodent Wnt7a orthologs was predicted to be distinct from that of human WNT7A
based on the divergence within the 5'-flanking promoter region. Therefore,
biological functions of rodent Wnt7a are not always consistent with those of
human WNT7A due to promoter evolution. This is the first report on the rat Wnt7a 
gene and comparative genomics for Wnt7a orthologs.

PMID: 15756457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Int J Mol Med. 2005 Apr;15(4):743-7.

Comparative genomics on Wnt3-Wnt9b gene cluster.

Katoh M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Cell Biology Section, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 
Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

WNT signals, transduced through Frizzled (FZD) receptors with extracellular
WNT-binding domain and cytoplasmic Dishevelled-binding domain, are implicated in 
carcinogenesis and embryogenesis. WNT3-WNT9B (WNT14B) locus (17q21.31) and
WNT3A-WNT9A (WNT14) locus (1q42.13) are paralogous regions within the human
genome. Here, the rat Wnt3 and Wnt9b genes were identified and characterized by
using bioinformatics. Wnt3 and Wnt9b genes at rat chromosome 10q32.1 were
clustered in head-to-head manner with an interval of about 24 kb within
AC105632.3 genome sequence. The rat Wnt3 gene, consisting of five exons, encoded 
a 355-aa protein with N-terminal signal peptide, 24 conserved Cys residues and
two Asn-linked glycosylation sites. The rat Wnt9b gene, consisting of four exons,
encoded a 359-aa protein with N-terminal signal peptide, 24 conserved Cys
residues and one Asn-linked glycosylation site. The rat Wnt3 core promoter showed
80.5% nucleotide identity with human WNT3 core promoter, while rat Wnt9b core
promoter showed 45.6% nucleotide identity with human WNT9B core promoter. MYB
(c-Myb), ELK1, POU2F1 (OCT1), HNF4A (HNF-4), COMP1, NFYA (NF-Y) and NKX2-5
binding sites were conserved between rat Wnt3 and human WNT3 core promoters. The 
Wnt3-Wnt9b intergenic conserved region (IGCR), corresponding to nucleotide
position 124747-125252 of AC105632.3 genome sequence, showed 85.6% nucleotide
identity with human WNT3-WNT9B IGCR. GC content of rat Wnt3-Wnt9b IGCR was 59.5%.
Wnt3-Wnt9b IGCR was predicted as regulatory element rather than gene because cDNA
or EST derived from Wnt3-Wnt9b IGCR was not identified. This is the first report 
on the rat Wnt3 and Wnt9b genes as well as on comparative genomics on the
Wnt3-Wnt9b gene cluster.

PMID: 15754041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Biochemistry. 2005 Mar 15;44(10):3909-14.

Induction of a cell stress response gene RTP801 by DNA damaging agent methyl
methanesulfonate through CCAAT/enhancer binding protein.

Lin L(1), Qian Y, Shi X, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine and Walther Cancer Institute, Indianapolis, Indiana
46202, USA.

RTP801 is a newly discovered stress response gene that is induced by hypoxia and 
other cell stress signals. Here, we investigated the mechanism by which a DNA
damaging agent, methyl methanesulfonate (MMS), induces RTP801 transcription. In
HaCaT human keratinocytes, MMS was able to induce a rapid increase in the mRNA
level of RTP801. Correspondingly, MMS treatment was capable of stimulating a 2.5 
kb RTP801 promoter. Deletion studies with the promoter demonstrated a critical
region between -1057 and -981 bp of the promoter that is responsive to MMS
treatment. Point mutations of the consensus Elk-1 and C/EBP sites within this
region were able to abrogate the stimulatory effect of MMS, indicating that Elk-1
and C/EBP are both involved in the transcriptional regulation of the RTP801 gene 
by MMS. Furthermore, a gel mobility shift assay revealed that MMS was able to
initiate rapid formation of a protein complex that bound the C/EBP site of the
promoter. In addition, an anti-C/EBPbetaantibody was capable of further shifting 
the bound protein complex. Therefore, these studies indicate that RTP801 is a
transcriptional target of MMS in human keratinocytes and that C/EBP is implicated
in transcriptional control of the gene.

PMID: 15751966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Mol Cell. 2005 Mar 4;17(5):683-94.

Mediator requirement for both recruitment and postrecruitment steps in
transcription initiation.

Wang G(1), Balamotis MA, Stevens JL, Yamaguchi Y, Handa H, Berk AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute and Department of Microbiology, Immunology and
Molecular Genetics, University of California Los Angeles, 611 Young Drive East,
Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2005 Mar 18;17(6):752-4.

Mediator complexes are required for activators to stimulate Pol II preinitiation 
complex assembly on an associated promoter. We show here that for the mouse Egr1 
gene, controlled largely by MAP kinase phosphorylation of the ELK1 transcription 
factor, the MED23 Mediator subunit that interacts with phospho-ELK1 is also
required to stimulate Pol II initiation at a step subsequent to preinitiation
complex assembly. In Med23-/- cells, histone acetylation, methylation, and
chromatin remodeling complex association at the Egr1 promoter were equivalent to 
that of wild-type cells, yet Egr1 induction was greatly reduced. MAP kinase
activation stimulated Pol II and GTF promoter binding. However, the difference in
factor binding between wild-type and mutant cells was much less than the
difference in transcription, and Pol II remained localized to the promoter in
mutant cells. These results indicate that an interaction with MED23 stimulates
initiation by promoter bound Pol II in addition to Pol II and GTF recruitment.

PMID: 15749018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Neuron. 2005 Mar 3;45(5):715-26.

Vimentin-dependent spatial translocation of an activated MAP kinase in injured
nerve.

Perlson E(1), Hanz S, Ben-Yaakov K, Segal-Ruder Y, Seger R, Fainzilber M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, 76100
Rehovot, Israel.

How are phosphorylated kinases transported over long intracellular distances,
such as in the case of axon to cell body signaling after nerve injury? Here, we
show that the MAP kinases Erk1 and Erk2 are phosphorylated in sciatic nerve
axoplasm upon nerve injury, concomitantly with the production of soluble forms of
the intermediate filament vimentin by local translation and calpain cleavage in
axoplasm. Vimentin binds phosphorylated Erks (pErk), thus linking pErk to the
dynein retrograde motor via direct binding of vimentin to importin beta.
Injury-induced Elk1 activation and neuronal regeneration are inhibited or delayed
in dorsal root ganglion neurons from vimentin null mice, and in rats treated with
a MEK inhibitor or with a peptide that prevents pErk-vimentin binding. Thus,
soluble vimentin enables spatial translocation of pErk by importins and dynein in
lesioned nerve.

PMID: 15748847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Biol Reprod. 2005 Jun;72(6):1421-8. Epub 2005 Feb 23.

Angiotensin II elevates nitric oxide synthase 3 expression and nitric oxide
production via a mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade in ovine fetoplacental 
artery endothelial cells.

Zheng J(1), Wen Y, Chen DB, Bird IM, Magness RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Perinatal Research Laboratories,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53715, USA. jzheng@wisc.edu

Normal pregnancy is associated with high angiotensin II (ANG II) concentrations
in the maternal and fetal circulation. These high levels of ANG II may promote
production vasodilators such as nitric oxide (NO). ANG II receptors are expressed
in ovine fetoplacental artery endothelial (OFPAE) cells and mediate ANG
II-stimulated OFPAE cell proliferation. Herein, we tested whether ANG II
stimulated NO synthase 3 (NOS3, also known as eNOS) expression and total NO
(NO(x)) production via activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase 3/1
(MAPK3/1, also known as ERK1/2) in OFPAE cells. ANG II elevated (P < 0.05) eNOS
protein, but not mRNA levels with a maximum effect at 10 nM. ANG II also dose
dependently increased (P < 0.05) NO(x) production with a maximal effect at doses 
of 1-100 nM. Activation of ERK1/2 by ANG II was determined by immunocytochemistry
and Western blot analysis. ANG II rapidly induced positive staining for
phosphorylated ERK1/2, appearing in cytosol after 1-5 min of ANG II treatment,
accumulating in nuclei after 10 min, and disappearing at 15 min. ANG II increased
(P < 0.05) phosphorylated ERK1/2 protein levels. Activation of ERK1/2 was
confirmed by an immunocomplex kinase assay using ELK1 as a substrate. PD98059
significantly inhibited ANG II-induced ERK1/2 activation, and the ANG II-elevated
eNOS protein levels but only partially reduced ANG II-increased NO(x) production.
Thus, in OFPAE cells, the ANG II increased NO(x) production is associated with
elevated eNOS protein expression, which is mediated at least in part via
activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase1 and kinase2 (MAP2K1
and MAP2K2, known also as MEK1/2)/ERK1/2 cascade. Together with our previous
observation that ANG II stimulates OFPAE cell proliferation, these data suggest
that ANG II is a key regulator for both vasodilation and angiogenesis in the
ovine fetoplacenta.

PMID: 15728793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 22;280(16):16393-401. Epub 2005 Feb 15.

The SPRY domain-containing SOCS box protein 1 (SSB-1) interacts with MET and
enhances the hepatocyte growth factor-induced Erk-Elk-1-serum response element
pathway.

Wang D(1), Li Z, Messing EM, Wu G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, and
The James P. Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

The suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) protein family includes a SPRY
(repeats in splA and RyR) domain-containing SOCS box protein (SSB) subfamily,
which consists of four members, SSB-1, SSB-2, SSB-3, and SSB-4. These proteins
contain a central SPRY domain and a C-terminal SOCS box. Although some of the
SOCS protein subfamilies function as adaptors for a large family of
ubiquitin-protein isopeptide ligases to regulate certain signaling pathways, the 
function of the SSB subfamily remains to be determined. In our previous studies, 
we have found that two SPRY domain-containing proteins, RanBP9 and RanBP10,
interact with MET through the SPRY domain. In the present study, we explored the 
function of SSB proteins in the regulation of the hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF)-MET signaling. Our results showed that all four SSB proteins also
interacted with the MET. The MET interaction with SSB-1 was further investigated.
We demonstrated that SSB-1 bound to MET tyrosine kinase domain through its SPRY
domain. MET interacted with SSB-1 in both the absence and the presence of HGF,
but HGF treatment resulted in the recruitment of more SSB-1 by MET. We showed
that overexpression of SSB-1 but not other SSB proteins enhanced the HGF-induced 
serum response element (SRE)-luciferase activity. Overexpression of SSB-1
exhibited no effect on the basal level or epidermal growth factor-induced
SRE-luciferase activity. SSB-1 also enhanced HGF-induced Erk phosphorylation.
Suppression of SSB-1 by the RNA interference method down-regulated HGF-induced
SRE-luciferase activity and decreased Elk-1 activation. These results suggest
that SSB-1 may play an important role in enhancing the HGF-induced Erk-Elk-1-SRE 
pathway. Furthermore, we demonstrated that in response to HGF stimulation, the
SSB-1 protein became phosphorylated at tyrosine residue 31. The phosphorylated
SSB-1 protein bound to p120Ras-GTPase-activating protein (GAP) but did not
promote the degradation of p120RasGAP, indicating that enhanced HGF-MET signaling
by overexpression of SSB-1 was not dependent on p120RasGAP degradation.

PMID: 15713673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Jan 15;11(2 Pt 1):440-9.

Overexpression of tropomysin-related kinase B in metastatic human pancreatic
cancer cells.

Sclabas GM(1), Fujioka S, Schmidt C, Li Z, Frederick WA, Yang W, Yokoi K, Evans
DB, Abbruzzese JL, Hess KR, Zhang W, Fidler IJ, Chiao PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

PURPOSE: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is currently the fourth leading cause of
cancer death in the United States, and most pancreatic cancers develop locally
advanced disease or metastasis at the time of diagnosis. The mechanisms by which 
it invades and metastasizes are not known.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To identify the genes involved in pancreatic cancer
metastasis, we analyzed the gene expression profiles between highly metastatic
Colo357L3.6pl and parental Colo357FG pancreatic cancer cell lines using cDNA
microarrays and confirmed differential gene expression by reverse
transcription-PCR, Western blotting, and immunologic analysis of 54 samples from 
pancreatic cancer patients. The correlation with clinical outcome was also
examined. The possible signaling pathways involved with tropomyosin-related
kinase B (TrkB) were analyzed.
RESULTS: Our findings showed that TrkB was overexpressed in the highly metastatic
Colo357L3.6pl cells, which correlated with perineural invasion (P = 0.026),
positive retroperitoneal margin (P = 0.0005), and shorter latency to development 
of liver metastasis (Cox proportional hazard ratio, 0.3; 95% confidence interval,
0.1-0.8; P = 0.01) in patient samples. Extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1
and 2 were activated and Elk-1 and AP-1 DNA binding activity was induced in
Colo357L3.6pl cells. Furthermore, interleukin 8 and vascular endothelial growth
factor were more strongly expressed in Colo357L3.6pl than Colo357FG cells, and
these findings were confirmed in Colo357L3.6pl and Colo357FG orthotopic tumors.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that overexpression of TrkB and activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase and AP-1, which may in turn induce the
expression of vascular endothelial growth factor and interleukin 8, may mediate
the cardinal clinical features of locally aggressive growth and metastasis of
pancreatic cancer. Our results also imply that TrkB receptor may be a novel
therapeutic target for pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 15701826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Neurochem. 2005 Feb;92(4):915-24.

Activation of c-fos by lipopolysaccharide in glial cells via p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase-dependent activation of serum or cyclic
AMP/calcium response element.

Simi A(1), Edling Y, Ingelman-Sundberg M, Tindberg N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Division of Molecular Toxicology,
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. Anastasia.Simi@manchester.ac.uk

Pathological conditions such as ischaemic stroke and inflammatory disorders cause
c-fos activation in the brain. This activation contributes to the initiation of
the brain's inflammatory response, orchestrated by activated glial cells. The
inflammatory signalling cascades leading to c-fos activation in glial cells are
not well characterized. Thus, we have attempted a detailed analysis of the
cis-acting elements, transcription factors and upstream kinase pathways involved 
in the activation of c-fos by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in primary rat cortical
glial cells. We found that (1) LPS-induced c-fos mRNA levels were sensitive to
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitors but not to
mitogen-activated/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) or
calcium-calmodulin-dependent kinase inhibitors, (2) LPS activated both serum
response element (SRE) and cyclic AMP/calcium response element (CRE)-driven
luciferase reporters in transient transfection assays, (3) LPS induced the
phosphorylation of Elk1 CRE-binding protein (CREB)/activated transcription
factor-1 (ATF-1) and the activation of GAL4-Elk1 and GAL4-CREB chimeric proteins,
and (4) mutation of both SRE and CRE elements was necessary and sufficient to
completely abolish LPS induction of a rat c-fos proximal promoter-luciferase
reporter. Thus, c-fos activation by LPS in glial cells occurs via the SRE or CRE 
in an independent manner, and involves the Elk1 or CREB/ATF-1 transcription
factors. Elk1-mediated transactivation was dependent on p38 MAPK, suggesting a
crucial role of these factors in mediating inflammatory responses in the CNS.

PMID: 15686494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Chin Med Sci J. 2004 Dec;19(4):270-5.

U0126 prevents ERK pathway phosphorylation and interleukin-1beta mRNA production 
after cerebral ischemia.

Wang ZQ(1), Chen XC, Yang GY, Zhou LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200040. zhiqiuwang@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the role of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) in
cerebral ischemia and the mechanism of protective effects of U0126
(1,4-diamino-2,3-dicyano-1,4-bis[2-aminophenylthio] butadiene) on ischemic brain.
METHODS: Mice underwent left middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) by
introducing a suture in the lumen. U0126 was injected intravenously through the
internal jugular vein. The immuno-activity of phosphorylated ERK1/2 (pERK1/2),
phosphorylated mitogen activated protein kinase kinase (pMEK), and phosphorylated
Elk-1 (pElk-1) was assessed by Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry.
Interleukin (IL)-1beta mRNA level was measured by ribonuclease protection assay.
RESULTS: Phosphorylated ERK1/2 in 2 hours MCAO mice was down-regulated after
intravenous injection of U0126. The inhibition was dose dependent and treatment
time related. pMEK and pElk-1 were also reduced in a similar fashion after U0126 
treatment. IL-1beta mRNA increased after 1 and 2 hours of MCAO. After injection
of U0126, it was down-regulated during 1 to 4 hours after MCAO.
CONCLUSION: Intravenous administration of the MEK inhibitor U0126 inhibits pMEK, 
pERK1/2, and pElk-1 up-regulation induced by cerebral ischemia. The protective
effect of U0126 against ischemic injury is probably resulted from the reduction
of IL-1beta mRNA via the inhibition of ERK pathway.

PMID: 15669185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 May;19(5):1231-50. Epub 2005 Jan 20.

Thyrocytes express a functional toll-like receptor 3: overexpression can be
induced by viral infection and reversed by phenylmethimazole and is associated
with Hashimoto's autoimmune thyroiditis.

Harii N(1), Lewis CJ, Vasko V, McCall K, Benavides-Peralta U, Sun X, Ringel MD,
Saji M, Giuliani C, Napolitano G, Goetz DJ, Kohn LD.

Author information: 
(1)Edison Biotechnology Institute, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701, USA.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) initiate an innate immune response. TLR3 on dendritic 
cells recognize double-stranded (ds) RNA and then signal increases in cytokines
and recognition molecules important for immune cell interactions. In this report,
we demonstrate TLR3 mRNA and protein are expressed on Fisher rat thyroid cell
line-5 (FRTL-5) thyroid cells and are functional because incubating cells with
polyinosine-polycytidylic acid causes 1) transcriptional activation of both the
nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB)/Elk1 and interferon (IFN) regulatory
factor-3/IFN-beta signal paths, 2) posttranscriptional activation of NF-kappaB
and ERK1/2, and 3) increased IFN-beta mRNA. TLR3 can be overexpressed, along with
dsRNA-dependent protein kinase, major histocompatibility complex-I or II, and IFN
regulatory factor-1, by transfecting dsRNA into the cells, infection with
Influenza A virus, or incubation with IFN-beta, but not by incubation with dsRNA 
or IFNgamma, or by dsDNA transfection. A methimazole (MMI) derivative,
phenylmethimazole, to a significantly greater degree than MMI, prevents
overexpression by inhibiting increased transcriptional activation of IRF-3 and of
IFN-stimulated response elements, phosphorylation of signal transducers and
activation of transcription (STAT-1), but not NF-kappaB activation. TLR3 can be
functionally overexpressed in cultured human thyrocytes by dsRNA transfection or 
IFN-beta treatment. Immunohistochemical studies show that TLR3 protein is
overexpressed in human thyrocytes surrounded by immune cells in 100% of patients 
with Hashimoto's thyroiditis examined, but not in normal or Graves' thyrocytes.
We conclude that functional TLR3 are present on thyrocytes; TLR3 downstream
signals can be overexpressed by pathogen-related stimuli; overexpression can be
reversed by phenylmethimazole to a significantly greater extent than MMI by
inhibiting only the IFN regulatory factor-3/IFN-beta/signal transducers and
activation of transcription arm of the TLR3 signal system; and TLR3
overexpression can induce an innate immune response in thyrocytes, which may be
important in the pathogenesis of Hashimoto's thyroiditis and in the immune cell
infiltrates.

PMID: 15661832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 25;280(12):11961-72. Epub 2005 Jan 17.

Hyaluronan-CD44 interaction with IQGAP1 promotes Cdc42 and ERK signaling, leading
to actin binding, Elk-1/estrogen receptor transcriptional activation, and ovarian
cancer progression.

Bourguignon LY(1), Gilad E, Rothman K, Peyrollier K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, and the Endocrine Unit,
Veterans Affair Medical Center, San Francisco, California 94121, USA.
lillyb@itsa.ucsf.edu

In this study, we have examined the interaction of hyaluronan (HA)-CD44 with
IQGAP1 (one of the binding partners for the Rho GTPase Cdc42) in SK-OV-3.ipl
human ovarian tumor cells. Immunological and biochemical analyses indicated that 
IQGAP1 (molecular mass of approximately 190 kDa) is expressed in SK-OV-3.ipl
cells and that IQGAP1 interacts directly with Cdc42 in a GTP-dependent manner.
Both IQGAP1 and Cdc42 were physically linked to CD44 in SK-OV-3.ipl cells
following HA stimulation. Furthermore, the HA-CD44-induced Cdc42-IQGAP1 complex
regulated cytoskeletal function via a close association with F-actin that led to 
ovarian tumor cell migration. In addition, the binding of HA to CD44 promoted the
association of ERK2 with the IQGAP1 molecule, which stimulated both ERK2
phosphorylation and kinase activity. The activated ERK2 then increased the
phosphorylation of both Elk-1 and estrogen receptor-alpha (ER alpha), resulting
in Elk-1- and estrogen-responsive element-mediated transcriptional up-regulation.
Down-regulation of IQGAP1 (by treating cells with IQGAP1-specific small
interfering RNAs) not only blocked IQGAP1 association with CD44, Cdc42, F-actin, 
and ERK2 but also abrogated HA-CD44-induced cytoskeletal function, ERK2 signaling
(e.g. ERK2 phosphorylation/activity, ERK2-mediated Elk-1/ER alpha
phosphorylation, and Elk-1/ER alpha-specific transcriptional activation), and
tumor cell migration. Taken together, these findings indicate that HA-CD44
interaction with IQGAP1 serves as a signal integrator by modulating Cdc42
cytoskeletal function, mediating Elk-1-specific transcriptional activation, and
coordinating "cross-talk" between a membrane receptor (CD44) and a nuclear
hormone receptor (ER alpha) signaling pathway during ovarian cancer progression.

PMID: 15655247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Mol Cancer Res. 2004 Dec;2(12):702-11.

Vav transformation requires activation of multiple GTPases and regulation of gene
expression.

Palmby TR(1), Abe K, Karnoub AE, Der CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, CB 7295, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA.

Although Vav can act as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for RhoA, Rac1, and 
Cdc42, its transforming activity has been ascribed primarily to its ability to
activate Rac1. However, because activated Vav, but not Rac-specific guanine
nucleotide exchange factors, exhibits very potent focus-forming transforming
activity when assayed in NIH 3T3 cells, Vav transforming activity must also
involve activation of Rac-independent pathways. In this study, we determined the 
involvement of other Rho family proteins and their signaling pathways in Vav
transformation. We found that RhoA, Rac1, and Cdc42 functions are all required
for Vav transforming activity. Furthermore, we determined that Vav activation of 
nuclear factor-kappaB and the Jun NH2-terminal kinase mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) is necessary for full transformation by Vav, whereas p38 MAPK does 
not seem to play an important role. We also determined that Vav is a weak
activator of Elk-1 via a Ras- and MAPK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase
kinase-dependent pathway, and this activity was essential for Vav transformation.
Thus, we conclude that full Vav transforming activation is mediated by the
activation of multiple small GTPases and their subsequent activation of signaling
pathways that regulate changes in gene expression. Because Vav is activated by
the epidermal growth factor receptor and other tyrosine kinases involved in
cancer development, defining the role of aberrant Vav signaling may identify
activities of receptor tyrosine kinases important for human oncogenesis.

PMID: 15634759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2005 Jan 14;229(1-2):39-47.

17beta-Estradiol rapidly stimulates c-fos expression via the MAPK pathway in T84 
cells.

Hennessy BA(1), Harvey BJ, Healy V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University College Cork, Ireland.

In this study, we show that 17beta-Estradiol (E2) induced the proliferation of
T84 colonic carcinoma cells. We, further, investigated the mechanisms underlying 
this proliferation and show that E2 induced c-fos protooncogene expression in T84
cells in a timescale consistent with a rapid non-genomic action of the hormone.
Furthermore, E2 rapidly phosphorylated both CREB and ELK1, transcription factors 
that bind to the c-fos promoter and stimulate transcription. Pretreatment with
PD98059 and H89, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway and protein
kinase A (PKA) inhibitors, respectively showed that phosphorylation of CREB and
ELK1 and subsequent c-fos induction was mediated by the MAPK pathway only.
Finally, the estrogen receptor (ER) antagonist, ICI 182,780, blocked the
activation of MAPK pathway, subsequent CREB and ELK1 phosphorylation and c-fos
induction in T84 cells suggesting an ER dependent mechanism. Consistent with this
finding, ICI 182,780 caused a substantial reduction in the proliferative effects 
of E2 on T84 cells.

PMID: 15607527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Mar;90(3):1670-7. Epub 2004 Dec 14.

Extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase, but not c-Jun N-terminal kinase,
is activated by type II gonadotropin-releasing hormone involved in the inhibition
of ovarian cancer cell proliferation.

Kim KY(1), Choi KC, Park SH, Auersperg N, Leung PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of British Columbia, Room
2H-30, 4490 Oak Street Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Although a novel second form of GnRH (GnRH-II) has been reported to have an
antiproliferative effect on gynecologic cancer cells, its biological mechanism
remains to be elucidated. We have previously demonstrated that GnRH-II activates 
p38 MAPK. There is accumulating evidence that activation of MAPKs by GnRH-I and
-II is important for cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. In the
present study, we further investigated the involvement of GnRH-II in the
inhibition of cell proliferation and activation of ERK1/2 and c-Jun N-terminal
protein kinase/stress-activated protein kinase (JNK/SAPK) in ovarian cancer
cells, OVCAR-3. The [(3)H]thymidine incorporation and
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assays
revealed that treatment with GnRH-II suppresses cell proliferation of ovarian
cancer cells. Western blot analysis demonstrated that ERK1/2 was activated by
GnRH-II (100 nm). Moreover, PD98059 (10 mum), an inhibitor of a MAPK/ERK kinase, 
reversed the activation of ERK1/2 induced by GnRH-II. The activation of ERK1/2 by
GnRH-II subsequently phosphorylated Elk-1 as a downstream pathway, which was
blocked by PD98059. On the other hand, it is not likely that GnRH-II activates
the JNK/SAPK pathway. Taken together, these results indicate that the ERK1/2
pathway is involved in the effect of GnRH-II on antiproliferation and may be an
important target for ovarian cancer therapy.

PMID: 15598681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 11;280(6):4117-24. Epub 2004 Dec 7.

Glucocorticoid receptor-induced MAPK phosphatase-1 (MPK-1) expression inhibits
paclitaxel-associated MAPK activation and contributes to breast cancer cell
survival.

Wu W(1), Pew T, Zou M, Pang D, Conzen SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and the Committee on Cancer Biology, University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) activation has recently been shown to inhibit
apoptosis in breast epithelial cells. We have previously described a group of
genes that is rapidly up-regulated in these cells following dexamethasone (Dex)
treatment. In an effort to dissect the mechanisms of GR-mediated breast
epithelial cell survival, we now examine the molecular events downstream of GR
activation. Here we show that GR activation leads to both the rapid induction of 
MAPK phosphatase-1 (MKP-1) mRNA and its sustained expression. Induction of the
MKP-1 protein in the MCF10A-Myc and MDA-MB-231 breast epithelial cell lines was
also seen. Paclitaxel treatment resulted in MAPK activation and apoptosis of
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, and both processes were inhibited by Dex
pretreatment. Furthermore, induction of MKP-1 correlated with the inhibition of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) 
activity, whereas p38 activity was minimally affected. Blocking Dex-induced MKP-1
induction using small interfering RNA increased ERK1/2 and JNK phosphorylation
and decreased cell survival. ERK1/2 and JNK inactivation was associated with
Ets-like transcription factor-1 (ELK-1) dephosphorylation. To explore the gene
expression changes that occur downstream of ELK-1 dephosphorylation, we used a
combination of temporal gene expression data and promoter element analyses. This 
approach revealed a previously unrecognized transcriptional target of ELK-1, the 
human tissue plasminogen activator (tPA). We verified the predicted ELK-1--> tPA 
transcriptional regulatory relationship using a luciferase reporter assay. We
conclude that GR-mediated MAPK inactivation contributes to cell survival and that
the potential transcriptional targets of this inhibition can be identified from
large scale gene array analysis.

PMID: 15590693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 18;280(7):6036-46. Epub 2004 Dec 3.

Srcasm modulates EGF and Src-kinase signaling in keratinocytes.

Li W(1), Marshall C, Mei L, Dzubow L, Schmults C, Dans M, Seykora J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania Medical School, 415
Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The Src-activating and signaling molecule (Srcasm) is a recently described
activator and substrate of Src-family tyrosine kinases (SFKs). When
phosphorylated at specific tyrosines, Srcasm associates with Grb2 and p85, the
regulatory subunit of phosphoinositide 3-kinase; however, little is known about
the role of Srcasm in cellular signaling. Data presented here demonstrate that
epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor ligands promote the tyrosine
phosphorylation of endogenous and adenovirally transduced Srcasm in
keratinocytes, and that increased levels of Srcasm activate endogenous SFKs, with
a preference for Fyn and Src. In addition, Srcasm potentiates EGF-dependent
signals transmitted by SFKs in keratinocytes. Tyrosine phosphorylation of Srcasm 
is dependent on growth factors and the activity of EGFR and SFKs. Increased
Srcasm expression enhances p44/42 mitogen-activated protein kinase activity and
Elk-1-dependent transcriptional events. Elevated Srcasm levels inhibit
keratinocyte proliferation while promoting specific aspects of keratinocyte
differentiation. Lastly, Srcasm levels are decreased in human cutaneous
neoplasia. Collectively, these data demonstrate that Srcasm plays a role in
linking EGF receptor- and SFK-dependent signaling to differentiation in
keratinocytes.

PMID: 15579470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 11;280(6):4906-12. Epub 2004 Dec 2.

Helicobacter-induced intestinal metaplasia in the stomach correlates with Elk-1
and serum response factor induction of villin.

Rieder G(1), Tessier AJ, Qiao XT, Madison B, Gumucio DL, Merchant JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-0682, USA.

Chronic Helicobacter pylori infection results in serious sequelae, including
atrophy, intestinal metaplasia, and gastric cancer. Intestinal metaplasia in the 
stomach is defined by the presence of intestine-like cells expressing
enterocyte-specific markers, such as villin. In this study, we demonstrate that
villin is expressed in intestine-like cells that develop after chronic infection 
with H. pylori in both human stomach and in a mouse model. Transfection studies
were used to identify specific regions of the villin promoter that are inducible 
by exposure of the cells to H. pylori. We demonstrated that induction of the
villin promoter by H. pylori in a human gastric adenocarcinoma cell line (AGS)
required activation of the Erk pathway. Elk-1 and the serum response factor (SRF)
are downstream transcriptional targets of the Erk pathway. We observed inducible 
binding of Elk-1 and the SRF after 3 and 24 h of treatment with H. pylori,
suggesting that the bacteria alone are sufficient to initiate a cascade of
signaling events responsible for villin expression. Thus, H. pylori induction of 
villin in the stomach correlates with activation and cooperative binding of Elk-1
and the SRF to the proximal promoter of villin.

PMID: 15576363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Neurosci. 2004 Dec 1;24(48):10846-57.

A novel Ca2+-independent signaling pathway to extracellular signal-regulated
protein kinase by coactivation of NMDA receptors and metabotropic glutamate
receptor 5 in neurons.

Yang L(1), Mao L, Tang Q, Samdani S, Liu Z, Wang JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Science, University of Missouri-Kansas City,
School of Medicine, Kansas City, Missouri 64108, USA.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2004 Dec 15;24(50):3 p following 11415.

The specification and organization of glutamatergic synaptic transmission require
the coordinated interaction among glutamate receptors and their synaptic adaptor 
proteins closely assembled in the postsynaptic density (PSD). Here we
investigated the interaction between NMDA receptors and metabotropic glutamate
receptor 5 (mGluR5) in the integral regulation of extracellular signal-regulated 
protein kinase (ERK) and gene expression in cultured rat striatal neurons. We
found that coapplication of NMDA and the mGluR5 agonist
(S)-3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine synergistically increased ERK phosphorylation.
Interestingly, the synergistic increase in ERK phosphorylation was dependent on
the cross talk between NMDA receptor-associated synaptic adaptor protein PSD-95
and the mGluR5-linked adaptor protein Homer1b/c but not on the conventional Ca2+ 
signaling derived from NMDA receptors (Ca2+ influx) and mGluR5 (intracellular
Ca2+ release). This was demonstrated by the findings that the synergistic
phosphorylation of ERK induced by coactivation of NMDA receptors and mGluR5 was
blocked by either a Tat peptide that disrupts NMDA receptor/PSD-95 binding or
small interfering RNAs that selectively reduce cellular levels of Homer1b/c.
Furthermore, ERK activated through this PSD-95/Homer1b/c-dependent and
Ca2+-independent pathway was able to phosphorylate the two key transcription
factors Elk-1 and cAMP response element-binding protein, which further leads to
facilitation of c-Fos expression. Together, we have identified a novel
Ca2+-independent signaling pathway to ERK by the synergistic interaction of NMDA 
receptors and mGluR5 via their adaptor proteins in the PSD of neurons, which
underlies a synapse-to-nucleus communication important for the transcriptional
regulation.

PMID: 15574735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):1149-55. Epub 2004 Nov 4.

The ETS domain transcription factor Elk-1 regulates the expression of its partner
protein, SRF.

Kasza A(1), O'Donnell A, Gascoigne K, Zeef LA, Hayes A, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building,
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, United Kingdom.

The ternary complex factors (TCF) are a subfamily of ETS domain transcription
factors that bind and activate serum response elements (SREs) in the promoters of
target genes in a ternary complex with a second transcription factor, serum
response factor (SRF). Here, we have identified the SRF gene as a target for the 
TCFs, thereby providing a positive feedback loop whereby TCF activation leads to 
the enhancement of the expression of its partner protein SRF. The binding of the 
TCF Elk-1 to the SRF promoter and subsequent regulation of SRF expression occurs 
in a ternary complex-dependent manner. Our data therefore reveal that SRF is an
important target for the ERK and Rho signaling pathways that converge on a
ternary TCF-SRF complex at the SRE on the SRF promoter.

PMID: 15531578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Nov;24(22):10000-15.

Extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1c (ERK1c), a novel 42-kilodalton ERK,
demonstrates unique modes of regulation, localization, and function.

Aebersold DM(1), Shaul YD, Yung Y, Yarom N, Yao Z, Hanoch T, Seger R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) are signaling molecules that
regulate many cellular processes. We have previously identified an alternatively 
spliced 46-kDa form of ERK1 that is expressed in rats and mice and named ERK1b.
Here we report that the same splicing event in humans and monkeys causes, due to 
sequence differences in the inserted introns, the production of an ERK isoform
that migrates together with the 42-kDa ERK2. Because of the differences of this
isoform from ERK1b, we named it ERK1c. We found that its expression levels are
about 10% of ERK1. ERK1c seems to be expressed in a wide variety of tissues and
cells. Its activation by MEKs and inactivation by phosphatases are slower than
those of ERK1, which is probably the reason for its differential regulation in
response to extracellular stimuli. Unlike ERK1, ERK1c undergoes
monoubiquitination, which is increased with elevated cell density concomitantly
with accumulation of ERK1c in the Golgi apparatus. Elevated cell density also
causes enhanced Golgi fragmentation, which is facilitated by overexpression of
native ERK1c and is prevented by dominant-negative ERK1c, indicating that ERK1c
mediates cell density-induced Golgi fragmentation. The differential regulation of
ERK1c extends the signaling specificity of MEKs after stimulation by various
extracellular stimuli.

PMCID: PMC525466
PMID: 15509801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2004 Jul;33(4):398-9.

[Activation of ERK1/2 and Elk1 in A549 cells induced by crocidolite].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang X(1), Wu Y, Li Z, Samet JM, Ghio AJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450052, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
1/2 and Elk1 in pulmonary disease induced by crocidolite asbestos fiber.
METHOD: Western blotting and Immunoprecipitation were used to detect the
expression of phosphorylated ERK1/2 and Elk1 in human bronchial airway A549 cell 
line stimulated by crocidolite.
RESULTS: The expression of phosphorylated ERK1/2 and Elk1 were striking higher
than those of the control, the differences were significant (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Phosphorylated ERK1/2 and Elk1 probably involved in the process of
the diseases induced by crocidolite.

PMID: 15461256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Nov 15;93(5):1063-74.

Egr-1 is activated by 17beta-estradiol in MCF-7 cells by mitogen-activated
protein kinase-dependent phosphorylation of ELK-1.

Chen CC(1), Lee WR, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USA.

Early growth response-1 (Egr-1) is an immediate-early gene induced by E2 in the
rodent uterus and breast cancer cells. E2 induces Egr-1 mRNA and protein levels
in MCF-7 human breast cancer cells and reporter gene activity in cells
transfected with pEgr-1A, a construct containing the -600 to +12 region of the
Egr-1 promoter linked to the firefly luciferase gene. Deletion analysis of the
Egr-1 promoter identified a minimal E2-responsive region of the promoter that
contained serum response element (SRE)3 (-376 to -350) which bound Elk-1 and
serum response factor (SRF) in gel mobility shift assays. Hormone-responsiveness 
of Egr-1 in MCF-7 cells was specifically inhibited by PD98059, a
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase inhibitor, but not by LY294002, an
inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3-K). These results contrasted with
hormone-dependent activation of the SRE in the c-fos promoter, which was
inhibited by both PD98059 and LY294002. Differences in activation of the SREs in 
Egr-1 and c-fos were related to promoter sequence, which defines the affinities
of Elk-1 and SRF to their respective binding sites. Thus, Egr-1, like c-fos, is
activated through non-genomic (extranuclear) pathways of estrogen action in
breast cancer cells.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15449318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Oct 15;93(3):579-87.

WDR26: a novel Gbeta-like protein, suppresses MAPK signaling pathway.

Zhu Y(1), Wang Y, Xia C, Li D, Li Y, Zeng W, Yuan W, Liu H, Zhu C, Wu X, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, 410081 Hunan,
China.

WD40 repeat proteins play important roles in a variety of cellular functions,
including cell growth, proliferation, apoptosis, and intracellular signal
transduction. Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are evolutionary
conserved enzymes in cell signal transduction connecting cell-surface receptors
to critical regulatory targets within cells and control cell survival,
adaptation, and proliferation. Previous studies revealed that G-protein coupled
receptors (GPCRs) play important roles in the signal transduction from
extracellular stimuli to MAPKs and the WD40-containing Gbeta proteins as well as 
Gbeta-like proteins are involved in the stimulation and regulation of the MAPK
signaling pathways. Here we report the identification and characterization of a
novel human WD40 repeat protein, WD40 repeat protein 26 (WDR26). The cDNA of
WDR26 is 3,729 bp, encoding a Gbeta-like protein of 514 amino acids in the
cytoplasm. The protein is highly conserved in evolution across different species 
from yeast, Drosophila, mouse, to human. Northern blot analysis indicates that
WDR26 is expressed in most of the examined human tissues, especially at a high
level in skeletal muscle. Overexpression of WDR26 in the cell inhibits the
transcriptional activities of ETS proteins, ELK-1 and c-fos serum response
element (SRE), mediated by MEKK1. These results suggest that WDR26 may act as a
negative regulator in MAPK signaling pathway and play an important role in cell
signal transduction.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15378603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2004 Aug;24(8):934-43.

Changes in trkB-ERK1/2-CREB/Elk-1 pathways in hippocampal mossy fiber
organization after traumatic brain injury.

Hu B(1), Liu C, Bramlett H, Sick TJ, Alonso OF, Chen S, Dietrich WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami,
Florida 33136, USA. bhu@med.miami.edu

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) leads to mossy fiber reorganization, which is
considered to be a causative factor in the development of temporal lobe epilepsy.
However, the underlying mechanism is not fully understood. Emerging evidence
suggests that TrkB-ERK1/2-CREB/Elk-1 pathways are highly related to synaptic
plasticity. This study used the rat fluid-percussion injury model to investigate 
activation of TrkB-ERK1/2-CREB/Elk-1 signaling pathways after TBI. Rats were
subjected to 2.0-atm parasagittal TBI followed by 30 minutes, 4 hours, 24 hours, 
and 72 hours of recovery. After TBI, striking activation of
TrkB-ERK1/2-CREB/Elk-1 signaling pathways in mossy fiber organization were
observed with confocal microscopy and Western blot analysis. ERK1/2 was highly
phosphorylated predominantly in hippocampal mossy fibers, whereas TrkB was
phosphorylated both in the mossy fibers and the dentate gyrus region at 30
minutes and 4 hours of recovery after TBI. CREB was also activated at 30 minutes,
peaked at 24 hours of recovery, and returned to the control level at 72 hours of 
recovery in dentate gyrus granule cells. Elk-1 phosphorylation was seen in CA3
neurons at 4 hours after TBI. The results suggest that the signaling pathways of 
TrkB-ERK1/2-CREB/Elk-1 are highly activated in mossy fiber organization, which
may contribute to mossy fiber reorganization seen after TBI.

PMID: 15362724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Oct 8;323(1):9-16.

TRIM45, a novel human RBCC/TRIM protein, inhibits transcriptional activities of
ElK-1 and AP-1.

Wang Y(1), Li Y, Qi X, Yuan W, Ai J, Zhu C, Cao L, Yang H, Liu F, Wu X, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Heart Development, College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal
University, Changsha 410081, Hunan, People's Republic of China.

The tripartite motif (TRIM) proteins play important roles in a variety of
cellular functions including cell proliferation, differentiation, development,
oncogenesis, and apoptosis. In this study, we report the identification and
characterization of the human tripartite motif-containing protein 45 (TRIM45), a 
novel member of the TRIM family, from a human embryonic heart cDNA library.
TRIM45 has a predicted 580 amino acid open reading frame, encoding a putative
64-kDa protein. The N-terminal region harbors a RING finger, two B-boxes, and a
predicted alpha-helical coiled-coil domain, which together form the RBCC/TRIM
motif found in a large family of proteins, whereas the C-terminal region contains
a filamin-type immunoglobulin (IG-FLMN) domain. Northern blot analysis indicates 
that TRIM45 is expressed in a variety of human adult and embryonic tissues. In
the cell, TRIM45 protein is expressed both in cytoplasm and in cell nucleus.
Overexpression of TRIM45 in COS-7 cells inhibits the transcriptional activities
of ElK-1 and AP-1. These results suggest that TRIM45 may act as a new
transcriptional repressor in mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 15351693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. BMC Mol Biol. 2004 Aug 25;5:13.

Expression profiling of serum inducible genes identifies a subset of SRF target
genes that are MKL dependent.

Selvaraj A(1), Prywes R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York,
USA. as814@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Serum Response Factor (SRF) is a transcription factor that is
required for the expression of many genes including immediate early genes,
cytoskeletal genes, and muscle-specific genes. SRF is activated in response to
extra-cellular signals by its association with a diverse set of co-activators in 
different cell types. In the case of the ubiquitously expressed immediate early
genes, the two sets of SRF binding proteins that regulate its activity are the
TCF family of proteins that include Elk1, SAP1 and SAP2 and the myocardin-related
MKL family of proteins that include MKL1 and MKL2 (also known as MAL, MRTF-A and 
-B and BSAC). In response to serum or growth factors these two classes of
co-activators are activated by different upstream signal transduction pathways.
However, it is not clear how they differentially activate SRF target genes.
RESULTS: In order to identify the serum-inducible SRF target genes that are
specifically dependent on the MKL pathway, we have performed microarray
experiments using a cell line that expresses dominant negative MKL1. This
approach was used to identify SRF target genes whose activation is MKL-dependent.
Twenty-eight of 150 serum-inducible genes were found to be MKL-dependent. The
promoters of the serum-inducible genes were analyzed for SRF binding sites and
other common regulatory elements. Putative SRF binding sites were found at a
higher rate than in a mouse promoter database but were only identified in 12% of 
the serum-inducible promoters analyzed. Additional partial matches to the
consensus SRF binding site were found at a higher than expected rate in the
MKL-dependent gene promoters. The analysis for other common regulatory elements
is discussed.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that a subset of immediate early and SRF
target genes are activated by the Rho-MKL pathway. MKL may also contribute to the
induction of other SRF target genes however its role is not essential, possibly
due to other activation mechanisms such as MAPK phosphorylation of TCFs.

PMCID: PMC516031
PMID: 15329155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Sep 17;322(2):535-41.

Insulin potentiates EGFR activation and signaling in fibroblasts.

Chong MP(1), Barritt GJ, Crouch MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Flinders University, GPO Box 2100,
Adelaide, SA 5001, Australia. matthew.chong@tgr-biosciences.com.au

Insulin is an essential hormone for cell growth and potentiates the mitogenic
actions of multiple growth factors, including EGF. While potentiation has been
shown to be mediated by the upregulation of the cyclin/CDK system, the upstream
mechanisms of such synergy have not been elucidated. Our study has examined
whether insulin could mediate synergy by enhancing early signaling events of the 
EGF receptor (EGFR). Tyrosine phosphorylation at the cell periphery of confluent 
Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts induced by EGF was potentiated by insulin within 2 min of
stimulation. Insulin potentiation of EGF-mediated phosphorylation of the EGFR
occurred 2 min after stimulation. EGFR transactivation by insulin was not
observed. In addition, downstream mitogenic signaling events including ERK1/2
activation and Elk-1 phosphorylation were enhanced in response to insulin and EGF
coadministration. This study shows mitogenic synergy between insulin and EGF can 
occur at the earliest signaling event, receptor phosphorylation, and independent 
of transactivation.

PMID: 15325263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Sep;24(17):7806-19.

NF-kappaB and AP-1 connection: mechanism of NF-kappaB-dependent regulation of
AP-1 activity.

Fujioka S(1), Niu J, Schmidt C, Sclabas GM, Peng B, Uwagawa T, Li Z, Evans DB,
Abbruzzese JL, Chiao PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Box 107, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) and activator protein 1 (AP-1) transcription
factors regulate many important biological and pathological processes. Activation
of NF-kappaB is regulated by the inducible phosphorylation of NF-kappaB inhibitor
IkappaB by IkappaB kinase. In contrast, Fos, a key component of AP-1, is
primarily transcriptionally regulated by serum responsive factors (SRFs) and
ternary complex factors (TCFs). Despite these different regulatory mechanisms,
there is an intriguing possibility that NF-kappaB and AP-1 may modulate each
other, thus expanding the scope of these two rapidly inducible transcription
factors. To determine whether NF-kappaB activity is involved in the regulation of
fos expression in response to various stimuli, we analyzed activity of AP-1 and
expression of fos, fosB, fra-1, fra-2, jun, junB, and junD, as well as AP-1
downstream target gene VEGF, using MDAPanc-28 and MDAPanc-28/IkappaBalphaM
pancreatic tumor cells and wild-type, IKK1-/-, and IKK2-/- murine embryonic
fibroblast cells. Our results show that elk-1, a member of TCFs, is one of the
NF-kappaB downstream target genes. Inhibition of NF-kappaB activity greatly
decreased expression of elk-1. Consequently, the reduced level of activated Elk-1
protein by extracellular signal-regulated kinase impeded constitutive, serum-,
and superoxide-inducible c-fos expression. Thus, our study revealed a distinct
and essential role of NF-kappaB in participating in the regulation of elk-1,
c-fos, and VEGF expression.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Microbiology

PMCID: PMC507000
PMID: 15314185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Sep;24(17):7359-69.

Sphingosine kinase protects lipopolysaccharide-activated macrophages from
apoptosis.

Wu W(1), Mosteller RD, Broek D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California, Los
Angeles 90089, USA.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) signaling is critical for the innate immune response to 
gram-negative bacteria. Here, evidence is presented for LPS stimulation of
sphingosine kinase (SPK) in the RAW 264.7 murine macrophage cell line and rat
primary hepatic macrophages (HMs). LPS treatment of RAW 264.7 cells resulted in a
time- and dose-dependent activation of SPK and membrane translocation of SPK1.
Further, LPS-induced SPK activation was blocked by SPK1-specific small
interfering RNA (siRNA). Overexpression of Toll-like receptor 4 and MD2, the
receptor and coreceptor of LPS, in HEK 293 cells activated SPK activity in the
absence of LPS treatment. Inhibition of SPK by the pharmacological inhibitor
N,N-dimethylsphingosine (DMS) or SPK1-specific siRNA blocked LPS stimulation of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and p38 but enhanced LPS-induced c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase activation. The SPK inhibitor DMS and dominant-negative SPK1
also blocked LPS activation of Elk-1 and NF-kappaB reporters in RAW 264.7 cells. 
Inhibition of SPK sensitized RAW 264.7 cells and HMs to LPS-induced apoptosis.
These data demonstrate the critical role of SPK1 in LPS signaling in macrophages 
and suggest that SPK1 is a potential therapeutic target to block hyperimmune
responses induced by gram-negative bacteria.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Microbiology

PMCID: PMC507005
PMID: 15314148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Immunol. 2004 Aug 15;173(4):2552-61.

Transcriptional regulation of the human TLR9 gene.

Takeshita F(1), Suzuki K, Sasaki S, Ishii N, Klinman DM, Ishii KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Retroviral Immunology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
takesita@yokohama-cu.ac.jp

To clarify the molecular basis of human TLR9 (hTLR9) gene expression, the
activity of the hTLR9 gene promoter was characterized using the human myeloma
cell line RPMI 8226. Reporter gene analysis and EMSA demonstrated that hTLR9 gene
transcription was regulated via four cis-acting elements, cAMP response element, 
5'-PU box, 3'-PU box, and a C/EBP site, that interacted with the CREB1, Ets2,
Elf1, Elk1, and C/EBPalpha transcription factors. Other members of the C/EBP
family, such as C/EBPbeta, C/EBPdelta, and C/EBPepsilon, were also important for 
TLR9 gene transcription. CpG DNA-mediated suppression of TLR9 gene transcription 
led to decreased binding of the trans-acting factors to their corresponding
cis-acting elements. It appeared that suppression was mediated via c-Jun and
NF-kappaB p65 and that cooperation among CREB1, Ets2, Elf1, Elk1, and C/EBPalpha 
culminated in maximal transcription of the TLR9 gene. These findings will help to
elucidate the mechanism of TLR9 gene regulation and to provide insight into the
process by which TLR9 evolved in the mammalian immune system.

PMID: 15294971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Mol Med (Berl). 2004 Aug;82(8):530-8. Epub 2004 May 6.

The zinc finger transcription factor Egr-1 is upregulated in arsenite-treated
human keratinocytes.

Al-Sarraj A(1), Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Building 44,
University of Saarland Medical Center, 66421 Homburg, Germany.

Arsenite is a human carcinogen that may induce cancer in skin, liver, kidney,
bladder or lung. Arsenite executes its toxic effects by the induction of
signaling cascades. In particular, the activation of the stress-induced protein
kinase c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase and p38 and the phosphorylation and
activation of the transcription factor c-Jun have been linked to the biological
effects of arsenite. We analyzed whether arsenite has an impact on the
biosynthesis of the zinc finger transcription factor Egr-1. Egr-1 transcription
is upregulated following treatment of cells with hormones, cytokines or toxic
chemicals, and thus Egr-1 integrates many signaling cascades with changes in gene
expression patterns. Here, we show by Western blot experiments that arsenite
induces a transient synthesis of Egr-1 in human HaCaT keratinocytes. Egr-1
biosynthesis was activated by arsenite concentrations insufficient for the
induction of c-Jun biosynthesis. This arsenite-triggered Egr-1 biosynthesis was
completely inhibited by the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase inhibitor
PD98059 and by AG1487, an epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor-specific
tyrosine kinase inhibitor. These results indicate that activation of the EGF
receptor as well as stimulation of the mitogen activated/extracellular
signal-regulated protein kinase is essential for arsenite-induced upregulation of
Egr-1. Moreover, we detected an elevated transcriptional activation potential of 
the ternary complex factor Elk1, a key transcriptional regulator of serum
response element-driven gene transcription. The Egr-1 5'-flanking region contains
five serum response elements. Accordingly, we observed an increase in Egr-1
promoter activity as a result of arsenite treatment. The fact that low
concentrations of arsenite are sufficient to induce Egr-1 biosynthesis suggests
that Egr-1 may be an integral part of arsenite-triggered signaling cascades
leading to tumor formation or cell death via alterations of the cellular genetic 
program.

PMID: 15292961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 8;279(41):42422-30. Epub 2004 Aug 3.

Sphingosine 1-phosphate stimulates smooth muscle cell differentiation and
proliferation by activating separate serum response factor co-factors.

Lockman K(1), Hinson JS, Medlin MD, Morris D, Taylor JM, Mack CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) is a lipid agonist that regulates smooth muscle
cell (SMC) and endothelial cell functions by activating several members of the
S1P subfamily of G-protein-coupled Edg receptors. We have shown previously that
SMC differentiation is regulated by RhoA-dependent activation of serum response
factor (SRF). Because S1P is a strong activator of RhoA, we hypothesized that S1P
would stimulate SMC differentiation. Treatment of primary rat aortic SMC cells
with S1P activated RhoA as measured by precipitation with a glutathione
S-transferase-rhotekin fusion protein. In SMC and 10T1/2 cells, S1P treatment
up-regulated the activities of several transiently transfected SMC-specific
promoters, and these effects were inhibited by the Rho-kinase inhibitor, Y-27632.
S1P also increased smooth muscle alpha-actin protein levels in SMC but had no
effect on SRF binding to the smooth muscle alpha-actin CArG B element.
Quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR showed that S1P treatment of SMC or 10T1/2
cells did not increase the mRNA level of either of the recently identified SRF
co-factors, myocardin or myocardin-related transcription factor-A (MRTF-A).
MRTF-A protein was expressed highly in SMC and 10T1/2 cultures, and importantly
the effects of S1P were inhibited by a dominant negative form of MRTF-A
indicating that S1P may regulate the transcriptional activity of MRTF-A. Indeed, 
S1P treatment increased the nuclear localization of FLAG-MRTF-A, and the effect
of MRTF-A overexpression on smooth muscle alpha-actin promoter activity was
inhibited by dominant negative RhoA. S1P also stimulated SMC growth by activating
the early growth response gene, c-fos. This effect was not attenuated by Y-27632 
but could be inhibited by the MEK inhibitor, UO126. S1P enhanced SMC growth
through ERK-mediated phosphorylation of the SRF co-factor, Elk-1, as measured by 
gel shift and Elk-1 activation assays. Taken together these results demonstrate
that S1P activates multiple signaling pathways in SMC and regulates proliferation
by ERK-dependent activation of Elk-1 and differentiation by RhoA-dependent
activation of MRTF-A.

PMID: 15292266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Neurosci. 2004 Jul 28;24(30):6799-809.

Beta-amyloid peptide at sublethal concentrations downregulates brain-derived
neurotrophic factor functions in cultured cortical neurons.

Tong L(1), Balazs R, Thornton PL, Cotman CW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Brain Aging and Dementia, University of California Irvine,
Irvine, California 92697-4540, USA. tongl@uci.edu

The accumulation of beta-amyloid (Abeta) is one of the etiological factors in
Alzheimer's disease (AD). It has been assumed that the underlying mechanism
involves a critical role of Abeta-induced neurodegeneration. However, low levels 
of Abeta, such as will accumulate during the course of the disease, may interfere
with neuronal function via mechanisms other than those involving
neurodegeneration. We have been testing, therefore, the hypothesis that Abeta at 
levels insufficient to cause degeneration (sublethal) may interfere with critical
signal transduction processes. In cultured cortical neurons Abeta at sublethal
concentrations interferes with the brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF)-induced activation of the Ras-mitogen-activated protein
kinase/extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK) and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K)/Akt pathways. The effect of sublethal
Abeta(1-42) on BDNF signaling results in the suppression of the activation of
critical transcription factor cAMP response element-binding protein and Elk-1 and
cAMP response element-mediated and serum response element-mediated transcription.
The site of interference with the Ras/ERK and PI3-K/Akt signaling is downstream
of the TrkB receptor and involves docking proteins insulin receptor substrate-1
and Shc, which convey receptor activation to the downstream effectors. The
functional consequences of Abeta interference with signaling are robust, causing 
increased vulnerability of neurons, abrogating BDNF protection against DNA
damage- and trophic deprivation-induced apoptosis. These new findings suggest
that Abeta engenders a dysfunctional encoding state in neurons and may initiate
and/or contribute to cognitive deficit at an early stage of AD before or along
with neuronal degeneration.

PMID: 15282285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Dev Cell. 2004 Jul;7(1):33-44.

Sef is a spatial regulator for Ras/MAP kinase signaling.

Torii S(1), Kusakabe M, Yamamoto T, Maekawa M, Nishida E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Biostudies,
Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

Spatiotemporal control of the Ras/ERK MAP kinase signaling pathway is among the
key mechanisms for regulating a wide variety of cellular processes. In this
study, we report that human Sef (hSef), a recently identified inhibitor whose
action mechanism has not been fully defined, acts as a molecular switch for ERK
signaling by specifically blocking ERK nuclear translocation without inhibiting
its activity in the cytoplasm. Thus, hSef binds to activated forms of MEK,
inhibits the dissociation of the MEK-ERK complex, and blocks nuclear
translocation of activated ERK. Consequently, hSef inhibits phosphorylation and
activation of the nuclear ERK substrate Elk-1, while it does not affect
phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic ERK substrate RSK2. Downregulation of
endogenous hSef by hSef siRNA enhances the stimulus-induced ERK nuclear
translocation and the activity of Elk-1. These results thus demonstrate that hSef
acts as a spatial regulator for ERK signaling by targeting ERK to the cytoplasm.

PMID: 15239952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Jun 30;221(1-2):1-8.

Expression of a mutant IRS inhibits metabolic and mitogenic signalling of insulin
in human adipocytes.

Stenkula KG(1), Said L, Karlsson M, Thorn H, Kj¯lhede P, Gustavsson J, Sˆderstrˆm
M, StrÂlfors P, Nystrom FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Diabetes Research Centre, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Linkˆping University, SE 581 85 Linkˆping, Sweden.

Adipose tissue is a primary target of insulin, but knowledge about insulin
signalling in human adipocytes is limited. We developed an electroporation
technique for transfection of primary human adipocytes with a transfection
efficiency of 15% +/- 5 (mean +/- S.D.). Human adipocytes were co-transfected
with a mutant of IRS-3 (all four potential PI3-kinase binding motifs mutated:
IRS-3F4) and HA-tagged protein kinase B (HA-PKB/Akt). HA-PKB/Akt was
immunoprecipitated from cell lysates with anti-HA antibodies, resolved with
SDS-PAGE, and immunoblotted with phospho-specific antibodies. We found that
IRS-3F4 blocked insulin stimulation of HA-PKB/Akt phosphorylation and in further 
analyses also translocation of recombinant HA-tagged glucose transporter to the
plasma membrane. IRS-3F4 also blocked insulin-induced activation of the
transcription factor Elk-1. Our results demonstrate the critical importance of
IRS for metabolic as well as mitogenic signalling by insulin. This method for
transfection of primary human adipocytes will be useful for studying insulin
signalling in human adipocytes with molecular biological techniques.

PMID: 15223127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Cell Biol. 2004 Jun 21;165(6):767-73.

SUMOylation regulates nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling of Elk-1.

Salinas S(1), BrianÁon-Marjollet A, Bossis G, Lopez MA, Piechaczyk M,
Jariel-Encontre I, Debant A, Hipskind RA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Genetique Moleculaire de Montpellier, 34293 Montpellier, Cedex 05,
France.

The transcription factor Elk-1 is a nuclear target of mitogen-activated protein
kinases and regulates immediate early gene activation by extracellular signals.
We show that Elk-1 is also conjugated to SUMO on either lysines 230, 249, or 254.
Mutation of all three sites is necessary to fully block SUMOylation in vitro and 
in vivo. This Elk-1 mutant, Elk-1(3R), shuttles more rapidly to nuclei of Balb/C 
cells fused to transfected HeLa cells. Coexpression of SUMO-1 or -2 strongly
reduces shuttling by Elk-1 without affecting that of Elk-1(3R), indicating that
SUMOylation regulates nuclear retention of Elk-1. Accordingly, overexpression of 
Elk-1(3R) in PC12 cells, where cytoplasmic relocalization of Elk-1 has been
linked to differentiation, enhances neurite extension relative to Elk-1. The
effect of Elk-1, but not of the 3R mutant, was blocked upon cotransfection with
SUMO-1 or -2 and enhanced by coexpression with mutant Ubc-9. Thus, SUMO
conjugation is a novel regulator of Elk-1 function through the control of its
nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling.

PMCID: PMC2172397
PMID: 15210726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Jul 1;297(1):224-34.

Differential regulation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase and MAP kinase pathways 
by hepatocyte growth factor vs. insulin-like growth factor-I in myogenic cells.

Halevy O(1), Cantley LC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Signal Transduction, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
halevyo@agri.huij.ac.il

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) promotes the proliferation of adult myoblasts and 
inhibits their differentiation, whereas insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I)
enhances both processes. Recent studies indicate that activation of the
phosphoinositide 3'-kinase (PI3K) pathway promotes myoblast differentiation,
whereas activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular
signal-regulated protein kinase (MAPK/ERK) promotes proliferation and inhibits
their differentiation. This simple model is confounded by the fact that both HGF 
and IGF-I have been shown to activate both pathways. In this study, we have
compared the ability of HGF and IGF-I to activate PI3K and MAPK/ERK in i28
myogenic cells. We find that, although the two stimuli result in comparable
recruitment of the p85alpha subunit of PI3K into complexes with
tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins, the p85beta regulatory subunit and p110alpha
catalytic subunit of PI3K are preferentially recruited into these complexes in
response to IGF-I. In agreement with this observation, IGF-I is much more potent 
than HGF in stimulating phosphorylation of Akt/PKB, a protein kinase downstream
of PI3K. In contrast, MAPK/ERK phosphorylation was higher in response to HGF and 
lasted longer, relative to IGF-I. Moreover, the specific PI3K inhibitor,
Wortmannin, abolished MAPK/ERK and Elk-1 phosphorylation in HGF-treated cells,
suggesting the requirement of PI3K in mediating the HGF-induced MAPK pathway.
UO126, a specific MAPK pathway inhibitor, had no effect on PI3K activity or Akt
phosphorylation, implying that at least in muscle cells, the MAPK/ERK pathway is 
not required for HGF-induced PI3K activation. These results provide a biochemical
rationale for the previous observations that HGF and IGF-I have opposite effects 
on myogenic cells, consistent with studies linking PI3K activation to
differentiation and MAPK/ERK activation to proliferation in these cells.
Moreover, the finding that PI3K activity is required for HGF-induced MAPK
activation suggests its additional role in proliferation, rather than exclusively
in the differentiation of adult myoblasts.

PMID: 15194438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(11):4613-26.

Mitochondrial AKAP121 binds and targets protein tyrosine phosphatase D1, a novel 
positive regulator of src signaling.

Cardone L(1), Carlucci A, Affaitati A, Livigni A, DeCristofaro T, Garbi C,
Varrone S, Ullrich A, Gottesman ME, Avvedimento EV, Feliciello A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Molecolare e Cellulare, via S. Pansini,
5, 80131 Naples, Italy. feliciel@unina.it

A-kinase anchor protein 121 (AKAP121) and its spliced isoform AKAP84 anchor
protein kinase A (PKA) to the outer membrane of mitochondria, focusing and
enhancing cyclic AMP signal transduction to the organelle. We find that
AKAP121/84 also binds PTPD1, a src-associated protein tyrosine phosphatase. A
signaling complex containing AKAP121, PKA, PTPD1, and src is assembled in vivo.
PTPD1 activates src tyrosine kinase and increases the magnitude and duration of
epidermal growth factor (EGF) signaling. EGF receptor phosphorylation and
downstream activation of ERK 1/2 and Elk1-dependent gene transcription are
enhanced by PTPD1. Expression of a PTPD1 mutant lacking catalytic activity
inhibits src and downregulates ERK 1/2 but does not affect the activity of c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase 1/2 and p38alpha mitogen-activated protein kinase. AKAP121
binds to and redistributes PTPD1 from the cytoplasm to mitochondria and inhibits 
EGF signaling. Our findings indicate that PTPD1 is a novel positive regulator of 
src signaling and a key component of the EGF transduction pathway. By binding
and/or targeting the phosphatase on mitochondria, AKAP121 modulates the amplitude
and persistence of src-dependent EGF transduction pathway. This represents the
first example of physical and functional interaction between AKAPs and a protein 
tyrosine phosphatase.

PMCID: PMC416429
PMID: 15143158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 9;279(28):29374-85. Epub 2004 May 7.

The major vault protein is a novel substrate for the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2
and scaffold protein in epidermal growth factor signaling.

Kolli S(1), Zito CI, Mossink MH, Wiemer EA, Bennett AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8066, USA.

The catalytic activity of the Src homology 2 (SH2) domain-containing tyrosine
phosphatase, SHP-2, is required for virtually all of its signaling effects.
Elucidating the molecular mechanisms of SHP-2 signaling, therefore, rests upon
the identification of its target substrates. In this report, we have used SHP-2
substrate-trapping mutants to identify the major vault protein (MVP) as a
putative SHP-2 substrate. MVP is the predominant component of vaults that are
cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein complexes of unknown function. We show that MVP is 
dephosphorylated by SHP-2 in vitro and it forms an enzyme-substrate complex with 
SHP-2 in vivo. In response to epidermal growth factor (EGF), SHP-2 associates via
its SH2 domains with tyrosyl-phosphorylated MVP. MVP also interacts with the
activated form of the extracellular-regulated kinases (Erks) in response to EGF
and a constitutive complex between tyrosyl-phosphorylated MVP, SHP-2, and the
Erks was detected in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Using MVP-deficient fibroblasts, 
we demonstrate that MVP cooperates with Ras for optimal EGF-induced Elk-1
activation and is required for cell survival. We propose that MVP functions as a 
novel scaffold protein for both SHP-2 and Erk. The regulation of MVP tyrosyl
phosphorylation by SHP-2 may play an important role in cell survival signaling.

PMID: 15133037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Hepatol. 2004 Mar;40(3):431-8.

Connective tissue growth factor induces c-fos gene activation and cell
proliferation through p44/42 MAP kinase in primary rat hepatic stellate cells.

Gao R(1), Ball DK, Perbal B, Brigstock DR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Virale et MolÈculaire, UniversitÈ Paris 7, Diderot
75005, France.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Connective tissue growth factor (CCN2) is expressed during
activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSC) and promotes HSC proliferation,
adhesion, and collagen production. The aim of the study was to investigate CCN2
signaling pathways in HSC.
METHODS: Primary HSC were obtained by enzymatic perfusion of rat liver. DNA
synthesis was evaluated by [(3)H]thymidine incorporation. Phosphorylation of
Elk-1, extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2) and focal adhesion kinase
(FAK) was evaluated by Western blot. Transcriptional factor binding activity was 
determined by gel mobility shift assay while c-fos promoter and CCN2 promoter
activity was evaluated using luciferase reporters. c-fos mRNA expression was
evaluated by Northern blot.
RESULTS: CCN2 stimulated DNA synthesis and phosphorylation of FAK, Elk-1 and
ERK1/2, the latter of which was blocked by heparin. The serum response element
binding activity and luciferase reporter activity of the c-fos promoter, together
with expression of c-fos, were enhanced by CCN2. CCN2-induced c-fos gene
activation, expression and cell proliferation were blocked by inhibiting ERK1/2
with PD98059. CCN2 promoter activity was enhanced by TGF-beta1 or PDGF via a
Smad7-dependent pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: CCN2-stimulated HSC DNA synthesis is associated with transient
induction of c-fos gene activation and expression as well as activation of the
ERK1/2 signal pathway.

PMID: 15123357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Cell Biochem. 2004 May 15;92(2):258-69.

P53 down-regulates matrix metalloproteinase-1 by targeting the communications
between AP-1 and the basal transcription complex.

Sun Y(1), Zeng XR, Wenger L, Firestein GS, Cheung HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami, Florida
33101, USA. ysun@med.miami.edu

We have previously reported that human matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP1) is a p53
target gene subject to down-regulation (Sun et al. [1999]: J Biol Chem
274:11535-11540]. In the present study, we demonstrate that the down-regulation
of the human -83MMP1 promoter fragment by p53 was abolished when the -72AP-1 site
was eliminated and that a GAL4-cJun-mediated but not a GAL4-Elk1-mediated
induction of pFR-luci was effectively inhibited by p53 suggesting an AP-1
dependent but AP-1 binding independent mechanism. Results from gel mobility shift
assays were consistent with an AP-1 binding independent mechanism. We also
demonstrate that both p300 and TATA box binding proteins cooperated with the
transcription factor AP-1 to induce the promoter of MMP1; however, p53 only
inhibited the p300-mediated induction of the MMP1 promoter and the inhibition was
-72AP-1 dependent. Furthermore, the down-regulation of the MMP1 promoter and mRNA
by p53 could be reversed by p300 and by a p53 binding p300 fragment that had no
coactivator activity. Taken together, these results indicate that p53
down-regulates MMP1 mainly by disrupting the communications between the
transactivator AP-1 and the basal transcriptional complex, which are partially
mediated by p300. Finally, by using p53 truncated mutant constructs, we
demonstrate that both the N-terminal activation domain and the C-terminal
oligomerization domains of p53 were required for the down-regulation of MMP1
transcription.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15108353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Cell Physiol. 2004 Jun;199(3):441-50.

Inducible expression of a MAP kinase phosphatase-3-GFP chimera specifically
blunts fibroblast growth and ras-dependent tumor formation in nude mice.

Marchetti S(1), Gimond C, Roux D, GothiÈ E, PouyssÈgur J, PagËs G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Signaling, Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, Nice,
France.

The p42/p44 mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway participates in a
wide range of cellular programs including proliferation, migration,
differentiation, and survival. Specific pharmacological inhibitors, like PD98059 
and U0126, are often used to inhibit p42/p44 MAPK signaling. However, these
inhibitors are not appropriate to study the function of these kinases in whole
organisms. We thus developed an inducible system designed to inhibit p42/p44 MAPK
activity through the expression of a phosphatase specific for these two kinases, 
the MAPK phosphatase 3 (MKP-3). A fibroblast cell line was established in which
MKP-3 expression is controlled by tetracycline. Tetracycline-induced MKP-3
resulted in partial de-phosphorylation of p42/p44 MAPKs in serum-stimulated
cells. However, we could improve MKP-3 stability and thereby the rate of MAPK
de-phosphorylation, when the C-terminal end of MKP-3 was fused to the green
fluorescent protein (GFP). Importantly, the fusion of GFP to MKP-3 did not alter 
the specificity of the phosphatase towards its MAPK substrates. We further show
that conditional expression of MKP-3-GFP in this fibroblast cell line results in 
the inhibition of: (a) the phosphorylation of the p42/p44 MAPK substrates Elk1
and HIF-1alpha, (b) vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), cyclin D1, and
c-fos gene transcription in response to MAPK pathway activation, and (c) cell
proliferation. Finally, the MKP-3-GFP inducible cell line was transformed by
Ha-ras and injected into nude mice. Treatment of mice with the tetracycline
analog doxycycline resulted in a large delay in tumor emergence and growth as
compared to the untreated control group, indicating that MKP-3-GFP activity is
maintained in vivo. Altogether, these results show that inducible expression of
MKP-3-GFP constitutes a valuable tool to study the role of p42/p44 MAPKs in
various cellular responses in both cultured cell and animal models, a tool that
may also be used to block unwanted cell growth in pathological conditions.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15095291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 18;279(25):26425-32. Epub 2004 Apr 15.

Identification and characterization of a novel BASH N terminus-associated
protein, BNAS2.

Imamura Y(1), Katahira T, Kitamura D.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Biological Sciences, Tokyo University of Science, 2669 
Yamazaki, Noda-city, Chiba 278-0022, Japan.

A B cell-specific adaptor protein, BASH (also known as BLNK or SLP-65), is
crucial for B cell receptor (BCR) signaling. BASH binds to various signaling
intermediates, such as Btk, PLCgamma2, Vav, and Grb2, through its well defined
motifs. Although functional significance of such interactions has been
documented, BASH-mediated signal transduction mechanism is not fully understood. 
Using the yeast two-hybrid system, we have identified a novel protein that binds 
to a conserved N-terminal domain of BASH, which we named BNAS2 (BASH N terminus
associated protein 2). From its deduced amino acid sequence, BNAS2 is presumed to
contain four transmembrane domains, which are included in a central MARVEL
domain, and to localize to endoplasmic reticulum. BNAS2 was co-precipitated with 
BASH as well as Btk and ERK2 from a lysate of mouse B cell line. In the
transfected cells, the exogenous BNAS2 was localized in a mesh-like structure in 
the cytoplasm resembling that of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and nuclear membrane.
BASH was co-localized with BNAS2 in a manner dependent on its N-terminal domain. 
RT-PCR analysis indicated that BNAS2 mRNA is expressed ubiquitously except for
plasma cells. In chicken B cell line DT40, overexpression of BNAS2 resulted in an
enhancement of BCR ligation-mediated transcriptional activation of Elk1, but not 
of NF-kappaB, in a manner dependent on the dose of BNAS2. Thus BNAS2 may serve as
a scaffold for signaling proteins such as BASH, Btk, and ERK at the ER and
nuclear membrane and may facilitate ERK activation by signaling from cell-surface
receptors.

PMID: 15087455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Mol Cell. 2004 Apr 9;14(1):43-55.

Docking motif interactions in MAP kinases revealed by hydrogen exchange mass
spectrometry.

Lee T(1), Hoofnagle AN, Kabuyama Y, Stroud J, Min X, Goldsmith EJ, Chen L, Resing
KA, Ahn NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado at Boulder,
Boulder, CO 80309, USA.

Protein interactions between MAP kinases and substrates, activators, and
scaffolding proteins are regulated by docking site motifs, one containing basic
residues proximal to Leu-X-Leu (DEJL) and a second containing Phe-X-Phe (DEF).
Hydrogen exchange mass spectrometry was used to identify regions in MAP kinases
protected from solvent by docking motif interactions. Protection by DEJL peptide 
binding was observed in loops spanning beta7-beta8 and alphaD-alphaE in p38alpha 
and ERK2. In contrast, protection by DEF binding to ERK2 revealed a distinct
hydrophobic pocket for Phe-X-Phe binding formed between the P+1 site, alphaF
helix, and the MAP kinase insert. In inactive ERK2, this pocket is occluded by
intramolecular interactions with residues in the activation lip. In vitro assays 
confirm the dependence of Elk1 and nucleoporin binding on ERK2 phosphorylation,
and provide a structural basis for preferential involvement of active ERK in
substrate binding and nuclear pore protein interactions.

PMID: 15068802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Neurochem. 2004 Apr;89(2):383-90.

The protein phosphatase 1/2A inhibitor okadaic acid increases CREB and Elk-1
phosphorylation and c-fos expression in the rat striatum in vivo.

Choe ES(1), Parelkar NK, Kim JY, Cho HW, Kang HS, Mao L, Wang JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Pusan National University, Pusan, Korea.

Activation of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) up-regulates
transcription factor cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and Elk-1
phosphorylation via extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) in the
striatum in vivo. Protein phosphatase 1/2A further regulates immediate early gene
expression by inactivating (dephosphorylating) CREB. In this study, using
semi-quantitative immunohistochemical and western blot analyses and in situ
hybridization histochemistry, we found that intrastriatal infusion of the protein
phosphatase 1/2A inhibitor okadaic acid (0.005, 0.05 and 0.5 nmol) increased CREB
and Elk-1 phosphorylation and c-Fos immunoreactivity in the injected dorsal
striatum in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, okadaic acid (0.05 and 0.5 nM) 
increased c-fos mRNA expression in the dorsal striatum in a dose-dependent
manner. Intrastriatal infusion of the group I agonist 3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine 
(DHPG) at 100 and 250 nM also increased CREB and Elk-1 phosphorylation.
Pre-treatment of okadaic acid (0.05 nm) did not alter DHPG-induced increases in
the phosphorylation of the two transcription factors. These data suggest that
protein phosphatase 1/2A in striatal neurons is tonically active in
dephosphorylating CREB and Elk-1 and thus suppressing constitutive c-fos mRNA and
protein expression. Inhibition of the phosphatase 1/2A may contribute to the
group I mGluR-regulated phosphorylation of these transcription factors and c-fos 
expression.

PMID: 15056282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Biochem J. 2004 Jul 15;381(Pt 2):437-46.

The vaccinia virus-stimulated mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is 
required for virus multiplication.

Andrade AA(1), Silva PN, Pereira AC, De Sousa LP, Ferreira PC, Gazzinelli RT,
Kroon EG, Ropert C, Bonjardim CA.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de TransduÁ„o de Sinal, Instituto de CiÍncias BiolÛgicas, Universidade
Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. AntÙnio Carlos, 6627, Campus Pampulha, 31270-901,
Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Early events play a decisive role in virus multiplication. We have shown
previously that activation of MAPK/ERK1/2 (mitogen-activated protein
kinase/extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 1/2) and protein kinase A are
pivotal for vaccinia virus (VV) multiplication [de Magalh„es, Andrade, Silva,
Sousa, Ropert, Ferreira, Kroon, Gazzinelli and Bonjardim (2001) J. Biol. Chem.
276, 38353-38360]. In the present study, we show that VV infection provoked a
sustained activation of both ERK1/2 and RSK2 (ribosomal S6 kinase 2). Our results
also provide evidence that this pattern of kinase activation depends on virus
multiplication and ongoing protein synthesis and is maintained independently of
virus DNA synthesis. It is noteworthy that the VGF (VV growth factor), although
involved, is not essential for prolonged ERK1/2 activation. Furthermore, our
findings suggest that the VV-stimulated ERK1/2 activation also seems to require
actin dynamics, microtubule polymerization and tyrosine kinase phosphorylation.
The VV-stimulated pathway MEK/ERK1/2/RSK2 (where MEK stands for MAPK/ERK kinase) 
leads to phosphorylation of the ternary complex factor Elk-1 and expression of
the early growth response (egr-1) gene, which kinetically paralleled the kinase
activation. The recruitment of this pathway is biologically relevant, since its
disruption caused a profound effect on viral thymidine kinase gene expression,
viral DNA replication and VV multiplication. This pattern of sustained kinase
activation after VV infection is unique. In addition, by connecting upstream
signals generated at the cytoskeleton and by tyrosine kinase, the MEK/ERK1/2/RSK2
cascade seems to play a decisive role not only at early stages of the infection, 
i.e. post-penetration, but is also crucial to define the fate of virus progeny.

PMCID: PMC1133850
PMID: 15025565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2004 Feb;25(2):345-54.

Blocked MAP kinase activity selectively enhances neurotrophic growth responses.

Althini S(1), Usoskin D, Kylberg A, Kaplan PL, Ebendal T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Unit for Developmental Neuroscience, Biomedical
Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) 4 and 6 as well as MEK inhibitors PD98059 and 
U0126 potentiate neurotrophin 3 (NT3)- and neurturin (NTN)-induced neurite
outgrowth and survival of peripheral neurons from the E9 chicken embryo.
Preexposure to BMP4 or PD98059 was sufficient to prime the potentiation of
subsequently added NT3. Phosphorylation of Erk2, induced by NT3, was reduced by
MEK inhibition but unaffected by BMP signaling. Real-time PCR showed that neither
BMP stimulation nor MEK inhibition increased Trk receptor expression and that the
BMP-induced genes Smad6 and Id1 were not upregulated by PD98059. In contrast,
both MEK inhibition and BMP signaling suppressed transcription of the
serum-response element (SRE)-driven Egr1 gene. A reporter assay using
NGF-stimulated PC12 cells demonstrated that MEK/Erk/Elk-driven transcriptional
activity was inhibited by Smad1/5 and by PD98059. Thus, suppression of
SRE-controlled transcription represents a likely convergence point for pathways
regulating neurotrophic responses.

PMID: 15019950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Nature. 2004 Mar 11;428(6979):185-9.

Myocardin and ternary complex factors compete for SRF to control smooth muscle
gene expression.

Wang Z(1), Wang DZ, Hockemeyer D, McAnally J, Nordheim A, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

Smooth muscle cells switch between differentiated and proliferative phenotypes in
response to extracellular cues, but the transcriptional mechanisms that confer
such phenotypic plasticity remain unclear. Serum response factor (SRF) activates 
genes involved in smooth muscle differentiation and proliferation by recruiting
muscle-restricted cofactors, such as the transcriptional coactivator myocardin,
and ternary complex factors (TCFs) of the ETS-domain family, respectively. Here
we show that growth signals repress smooth muscle genes by triggering the
displacement of myocardin from SRF by Elk-1, a TCF that acts as a myogenic
repressor. The opposing influences of myocardin and Elk-1 on smooth muscle gene
expression are mediated by structurally related SRF-binding motifs that compete
for a common docking site on SRF. A mutant smooth muscle promoter, retaining
responsiveness to myocardin and SRF but defective in TCF binding, directs ectopic
transcription in the embryonic heart, demonstrating a role for TCFs in
suppression of smooth muscle gene expression in vivo. We conclude that growth and
developmental signals modulate smooth muscle gene expression by regulating the
association of SRF with antagonistic cofactors.

PMID: 15014501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Exp Dermatol. 2004 Feb;13(2):70-7.

ERK activation by mechanical strain is regulated by the small G proteins rac-1
and rhoA.

Laboureau J(1), Dubertret L, Lebreton-De Coster C, Coulomb B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche sur la Peau, HÙpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France.

Physical forces play an important role in regulating cell functions. We applied
mechanical strain to human fibroblasts by magnetic attraction of
superparamagnetic arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD)-coated beads. We confirmed
that the MAP kinases Erk and p38 are activated by mechanical strain, and went
further by demonstrating the activation of Elk-1 by mechanical strain, mainly
through a MEK-Erk pathway. Transfection of a dominant negative form of the G
protein rac-1 (rac T17N), and inhibition of PI3K, an effector of rac-1,
efficiently prevented Elk-1 activation by mechanical forces. Transfection with C3
transferase, known to inhibit rhoA, and inhibition of rock (a downstream effector
of rhoA), gave similar results. However, contrary to the active form of rhoA (rho
G14V), transfection of the active form of rac-1 (rac G12V) induced Elk activation
and mimicked the effects of mechanical strain. These results point out that the
two small G proteins rhoA and rac-1 participate in cell sensitivity to mechanical
strain and lead to the modulation of the Erk pathway.

PMID: 15009099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Genesis. 2004 Feb;38(2):87-92.

Elk-1 knock-out mice engineered by Flp recombinase-mediated cassette exchange.

Cesari F, Rennekampff V, Vintersten K, Vuong LG, Seibler J, Bode J, Wiebel FF,
Nordheim A.

Elk-1 is a member of the TCF subfamily of Ets proteins. TCFs interact with SRF at
serum response elements (SREs) of immediate early genes (IEGs), such as c-fos and
Egr-1, thereby mediating IEG induction upon extracellular stimulation. We
previously generated an Elk-1 null allele (Elk1-137) in murine embryonic stem
(ES) cells by homologous recombination. In Elk1-137, the Elk-1 gene was replaced 
by a Hygromycin B phosphotransferase - Thymidine Kinase (HygTk) fusion gene,
flanked by two nonidentical Flp recombinase recognition (FRT) sites (Cesari et
al., [2004] Mol Cell Biol, in press) to allow for the subsequent generation of
alternative alleles of interest by recombinase-mediated cassette exchange (RMCE).
Elk1-deficient mice derived from Elk-1((137/0)) ES cells are viable and do not
reveal strong phenotypical abnormalities, apart from male sterility. However, the
Elk-1 locus contains the Tk cassette, which has previously been related to this
defect. Therefore, in our first experiment involving the technique of Flp RMCE we
chose to remove the HygTk cassette in Elk-1((137/0)) ES cells and to generate
Elk-1((RMCE16/0)) and Elk-1((RMCE16/RMCE16)) mice. In so doing, we provide
evidence that the sterility of Elk1((137/0)) mice was not due to the absence of
Elk-1 but rather the presence of HygTk. This is the first report of mice derived 
from ES cells which were subjected to Flp RMCE and thus proves that RMCE is a
powerful tool for the genetic engineering of previously tagged loci in the mouse 
genome.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14994271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Mol Cell. 2004 Feb 27;13(4):611-7.

SUMO promotes HDAC-mediated transcriptional repression.

Yang SH(1), Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith
Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, United Kingdom.

Recently, SUMO modification has been shown to impart repressive properties on
several transcriptional regulatory proteins. Indeed, the ETS domain transcription
factor Elk-1 is modified by SUMO, and this modification is reversed by ERK MAP
kinase pathway activation. This causes a switch from a repressive to activated
state. However, the mechanism(s) of SUMO-mediated transcriptional repression is
unclear. Here, we have investigated how sumoylation of Elk-1 leads to
transcriptional repression. We demonstrate that sumoylation of Elk-1 results in
the recruitment of histone deacetylase activity to promoters. In particular, our 
data point to a key role for HDAC-2. This recruitment leads to decreased histone 
acetylation and hence transcriptional repression at Elk-1 target genes. Thus, our
data demonstrate an important integration point for two protein-modifying
pathways in the cell, the SUMO and deacetylation pathways, that combine to
promote transcriptional repression.

PMID: 14992729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Feb;32(1):209-26.

Androgen inhibition of MAP kinase pathway and Elk-1 activation in proliferating
osteoblasts.

Wiren KM(1), Toombs AR, Zhang XW.

Author information: 
(1)Bone and Mineral Research Unit, Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Portland, Oregon, USA. wirenk@ohsu.edu

Non-aromatizable androgens have significant beneficial effects on skeletal
homeostasis independently of conversion to estradiol, but the effects of
androgens on bone cell metabolism and cell proliferation are still poorly
understood. Using an osteoblastic model with enhanced androgen responsiveness,
MC3T3-E1 cells stably transfected with androgen receptor (AR) under the control
of the type I collagen promoter (colAR-MC3T3), the effects of androgens on
mitogenic signaling were characterized. Cultures were treated with the
non-aromatizable androgen 5alpha-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) and the effects on
osteoblast viability were determined as measured by an MTT assay. A complex
response was observed in that continuous short-term DHT treatment enhanced
osteoblast viability, but with longer-term DHT treatment inhibition was observed.
The inhibition by DHT was prevented by the specific AR antagonist
hydroxyflutamide, and was also observed in primary cultures of normal rat
calvarial osteoblasts. In order to identify potential mediators of this effect,
mitogenic pathway-specific cDNA microarrays were interrogated. Reduced
hybridization of several genes important in MAP kinase-mediated signaling was
observed, with the most dramatic effect on Elk-1 expression. Analysis of
phosphorylation cascades demonstrated that DHT treatment inhibited phosphoERK1/2 
levels, MAP kinase activation of Elk-1, Elk-1 protein and phosphoElk-1 levels,
and downstream AP-1/luciferase reporter activity. Together, these data provide
the first evidence that androgen inhibition of the MAP kinase signaling pathway
is a potential mediator of osteoblast growth, and are consistent with the
hypothesis that the MAP cascade may be a specific downstream target of DHT.

PMID: 14766003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(1):294-305.

Mice deficient for the ets transcription factor elk-1 show normal immune
responses and mildly impaired neuronal gene activation.

Cesari F(1), Brecht S, Vintersten K, Vuong LG, Hofmann M, Klingel K, Schnorr JJ, 
Arsenian S, Schild H, Herdegen T, Wiebel FF, Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Molekularbiologie, Universit‰tsklinikum T¸bingen, T¸bingen, Germany.

The transcription factor Elk-1 belongs to the ternary complex factor (TCF)
subfamily of Ets proteins. TCFs interact with serum response factor to bind
jointly to serum response elements in the promoters of immediate-early genes
(IEGs). TCFs mediate the rapid transcriptional response of IEGs to various
extracellular stimuli which activate mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling. 
To investigate physiological functions of Elk-1 in vivo, we generated
Elk-1-deficient mice by homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells. These
animals were found to be phenotypically indistinguishable from their wild-type
littermates. Histological analysis of various tissues failed to reveal any
differences between Elk-1 mutant and wild-type mice. Elk-1 deficiency caused no
changes in the proteomic displays of brain or spleen extracts. Also, no
immunological defects could be detected in mice lacking Elk-1, even upon
infection with coxsackievirus B3. In mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Elk-1 was
dispensable for c-fos and Egr-1 transcriptional activation upon stimulation with 
serum, lysophosphatidic acid, or tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate. However, in
brains of Elk-1-deficient mice, cortical and hippocampal CA1 expression of c-fos,
but not Egr-1 or c-Jun, was markedly reduced 4 h following kainate-induced
seizures. This was not accompanied by altered patterns of neuronal apoptosis.
Collectively, our data indicate that Elk-1 is essential neither for mouse
development nor for adult life, suggesting compensatory activities by other TCFs.

PMCID: PMC303347
PMID: 14673163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Mar;18(3):574-87. Epub 2003 Dec 12.

Binding of AP-2 and ETS-domain family members is associated with enhancer
activity in the hypersensitive site III region of the human growth
hormone/chorionic somatomammotropin locus.

Jin Y(1), Norquay LD, Yang X, Gregoire S, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, 730 William Avenue,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3E 3J7.

The human GH gene family is specifically expressed in somatotrophs of the
anterior pituitary and placental syncytiotrophoblast. Two nuclease-hypersensitive
sites, HS III and HS V, are associated with a region of chromatin located 28 and 
30 kb upstream of the pituitary GH gene transcription initiation site (+1) in
both pituitary and placenta nuclei. A role for this region in pituitary GH gene
expression has been reported, but the potential relevance to placental gene
expression has not been determined. Deletion analysis of a 5.2-kb region
(nucleotides - 27,568/-32,746) containing HS III to V-related sequences localized
significant enhancer activity to a 574-bp HS III fragment (nucleotides
-27,676/-28,249) in multiple transfected cell lines. Four nuclease-protected
regions [footprints (FP) 1-4] were identified in the 574-bp fragment. FP2 and FP3
were detected with placenta cell nuclear protein, whereas FP1 and FP4 were
observed with placental and nonplacental cell nuclear extract. Disruption of FP1 
had no effect on heterologous promoter activity in transfected pituitary and
placental cells, whereas loss of FP2 and FP3 resulted in modest increases in
placental cells, reflecting the presence of repressor activity associated with
these regions in vitro. In contrast, disruption of the FP4 region by mutation or 
deletion significantly reduced enhancer activity. As a result, 30-fold enhancer
activity was localized to a 41-bp region in transfected placental tumor cells.
Binding of candidate proteins, activator protein (AP)-2 (FP3) and Elk-1 (FP4),
was confirmed using competition assays with specific oligonucleotides and
antibodies. Moreover, these factors were associated with the hyperacetylated HS
III region in human pituitary [activator protein 2 (AP-2) and Elk-1] and term
placenta (AP-2) chromatin. These data implicate AP-2 and ETS-domain family
members in the regulation of the GH/CS locus and raise the possibility that
different complexes form in the HS III region in placenta and pituitary cells.

PMID: 14673137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 5;279(10):9400-8. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Bcr-Abl regulates protein kinase Ciota (PKCiota) transcription via an Elk1 site
in the PKCiota promoter.

Gustafson WC(1), Ray S, Jamieson L, Thompson EA, Brasier AR, Fields AP.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA.

The protein kinase C (PKC) family of serine/threonine kinases plays an important 
role in numerous cancer signaling pathways, including those downstream of the
bcr-abl oncogene. We demonstrated previously that atypical PKCiota is required
for Bcr-Abl-mediated resistance of human K562 chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) 
cells to Taxol-induced apoptosis. Here, we report that the pattern of PKC isozyme
expression characteristic of CML cells is regulated by Bcr-Abl. When Bcr-Abl was 
expressed in Bcr-Abl-negative HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cells, expression of
the PKCbetaI, PKCbetaII, and PKCiota genes was induced, whereas expression of the
PKCdelta gene was reduced to levels similar to those found in CML cells. Given
the importance of PKCiota in Bcr-Abl-mediated transformation, we characterized
the mechanism by which Bcr-Abl regulates PKCiota expression. A 1200-bp PKCiota
promoter construct isolated from genomic DNA was highly active in
Bcr-Abl-positive K562 cells and was activated when Bcr-Abl-negative cells were
transfected with Bcr-Abl. Bcr-Abl-mediated induction of the PKCiota promoter was 
dependent upon MEK1/2 activity, but not phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase or p38 MAPK
activity. Mutational analysis of the PKCiota promoter revealed a region between
97 and 114 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site that is responsible for 
Bcr-Abl-mediated regulation. Mutation of a consensus Elk1-binding site within
this region abolished Bcr-Abl-mediated regulation. We conclude that Bcr-Abl
regulates PKCiota expression through the MEK-dependent activation of an Elk1
element within the proximal PKCiota promoter. Our results indicate that
Bcr-Abl-mediated transformation involves transcriptional activation of the
PKCiota gene, which in turn is required for Bcr-Abl-mediated chemoresistance.

PMID: 14670960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Mol Hum Reprod. 2004 Jan;10(1):43-8.

Molecular mechanisms involved in GnRH analogue-related apoptosis for uterine
leiomyomas.

Bifulco G(1), Miele C, Pellicano M, Trencia A, Ferraioli M, Paturzo F, Tommaselli
GA, Beguinot F, Nappi C.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Ostetrico-Ginecologiche, Urologiche e Medicina della
Riproduzione, University of Naples, 'Frederico II', Italy.
giuseppebifulco@hotmail.com

GnRH agonist therapy is known to reduce uterine leiomyoma volume, although the
molecular mechanisms responsible for this effect remain poorly understood. In
this study, we have investigated the molecular mechanisms involved in the
anti-proliferative effect of a GnRH agonist, leuprolide acetate (LA), in uterine 
leiomyomas obtained from six patients treated with LA for 3 months before surgery
(group B), compared with tumours from six untreated patients (group A). To this
end, we have evaluated the expression and the activity of molecules involved in
the regulation of cell survival and proliferation. In group B, the total activity
of PI3K was reduced by 60% compared with control samples. Furthermore, LA caused 
a reduction of PKB activation of approximately 50%, measured as serine 473
phosphorylation. In parallel with PKB reduction in LA samples, we observed a 60% 
reduction in the phosphorylation of its substrate BAD. While Bcl-xL/BAD
association was not significantly modified in LA-treated leiomyomas, BAD/14.3.3
interaction was reduced, due to a 50% decreased 14.3.3 expression. In addition,
LA was able to reduce the expression of the antiapoptotic proteins FLIP and
PED/PEA15 by 70 and 50% respectively, compared with control samples. We next
evaluated the activation of MAP kinases in leiomyomas. Activation of p42 and p44 
MAP kinase isoforms was increased by 30% in group B. However, the phosphorylation
of the transcription factor Elk1 was not increased in a similar fashion in
LA-treated leiomyomas compared with group A. Thus, these data suggest that LA
reduction of leiomyoma volume is mediated at least in part by a decreased
activation of the PI3K/PKB survival pathway and by the suppression of
antiapoptotic factors.

PMID: 14665705  [PubMed - in process]


410. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Feb;18(2):350-8. Epub 2003 Nov 13.

Negative regulation of insulin-stimulated mitogen-activated protein kinase
signaling by Grb10.

Langlais P(1), Dong LQ, Ramos FJ, Hu D, Li Y, Quon MJ, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Health Science Center, 7703
Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, Texas 78229, USA.

Grb10 is a Pleckstrin homology and Src homology 2 (SH2) domain-containing protein
that binds to the tyrosine-phosphorylated insulin receptor in response to insulin
stimulation. Loss of Grb10 function in mice results in fetal and placental
overgrowth; however, the molecular mechanism remains unknown. In the present
study, we show that overexpression of Grb10 in Chinese hamster ovary cells
expressing the insulin receptor or in 3T3-L1 adipocytes reduced
insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of MAPK. Overexpression of Grb10 in rat
primary adipocytes also inhibited insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of the MAPK 
downstream substrate Elk1. To determine the mechanism by which Grb10 inhibited
insulin-stimulated MAPK signaling, we examined whether Grb10 affects the
phosphorylation of MAPK upstream signaling components. We found that
overexpression of Grb10 inhibited the insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of Shc, 
a positive regulator of the MAPK signaling pathway. The inhibitory effect was
diminished when the SH2 domain of Grb10 was deleted. The negative role of Grb10
in insulin signaling was established by suppression of endogenous Grb10 by RNA
interference in HeLa cells overexpressing the insulin receptor, which enhanced
insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of MAPK, Shc, and Akt. Taken together, our
findings suggest that Grb10 functions as a negative regulator in the
insulin-stimulated MAPK signaling pathway. In addition, the inhibitory effect of 
Grb10 on the MAPK pathway is most likely due to a direct block of
insulin-stimulated Shc tyrosine phosphorylation.

PMID: 14615605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. DNA Cell Biol. 2003 Oct;22(10):665-77.

Specificity in stress response: epidermal keratinocytes exhibit specialized
UV-responsive signal transduction pathways.

Adachi M(1), Gazel A, Pintucci G, Shuck A, Shifteh S, Ginsburg D, Rao LS, Kaneko 
T, Freedberg IM, Tamaki K, Blumenberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, New York University School of Medicine, New York,
New York 10016, USA.

UV light, a paradigmatic initiator of cell stress, invokes responses that include
signal transduction, activation of transcription factors, and changes in gene
expression. Consequently, in epidermal keratinocytes, its principal and frequent 
natural target, UV regulates transcription of a distinctive set of genes.
Hypothesizing that UV activates distinctive epidermal signal transduction
pathways, we compared the UV-responsive activation of the JNK and NFkappaB
pathways in keratinocytes, with the activation of the same pathways by other
agents and in other cell types. Using of inhibitors and antisense
oligonucleotides, we found that in keratinocytes only UVB/UVC activate JNK, while
in other cell types UVA, heat shock, and oxidative stress do as well.
Keratinocytes express JNK-1 and JNK-3, which is unexpected because JNK-3
expression is considered brain-specific. In keratinocytes, ERK1, ERK2, and p38
are activated by growth factors, but not by UV. UVB/UVC in keratinocytes
activates Elk1 and AP1 exclusively through the JNK pathway. JNKK1 is essential
for UVB/UVC activation of JNK in keratinocytes in vitro and in human skin in
vivo. In contrast, in HeLa cells, used as a control, crosstalk among signal
transduction pathways allows considerable laxity. In parallel, UVB/UVC and
TNFalpha activate the NFkappaB pathway via distinct mechanisms, as shown using
antisense oligonucleotides targeted against IKKbeta, the active subunit of IKK.
This implies a specific UVB/UVC responsive signal transduction pathway
independent from other pathways. Our results suggest that in epidermal
keratinocytes specific signal transduction pathways respond to UV light. Based on
these findings, we propose that the UV light is not a genetic stress response
inducer in these cells, but a specific agent to which epidermis developed highly 
specialized responses.

PMID: 14611688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Biochemistry. 2003 Nov 11;42(44):12792-804.

Cellular effects of small molecule PTP1B inhibitors on insulin signaling.

Xie L(1), Lee SY, Andersen JN, Waters S, Shen K, Guo XL, Moller NP, Olefsky JM,
Lawrence DS, Zhang ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) is implicated as a negative regulator of 
insulin receptor (IR) signaling and a potential drug target for the treatment of 
type 2 diabetes and other associated metabolic syndromes. To further define the
role of PTP1B in insulin signaling and to test the hypothesis that blocking the
activity of PTP1B would augment the action of insulin, we prepared several cell
permeable, potent and selective, small molecule PTP1B inhibitors, and evaluated
their biological effects in several insulin sensitive cell lines. Our data
indicate that PTP1B inhibitors bind to and colocalize with PTP1B on the surface
of the endoplasmic reticulum and PTP1B exerts its negative effect on insulin
signaling upstream of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and MEK1. Treatment of cells 
with PTP1B inhibitors, both in the presence and in the absence of insulin,
markedly enhances IRbeta and IRS-1 phosphorylation, Akt and ERK1/2 activation,
Glut4 translocation, glucose uptake, and Elk1 transcriptional activation and cell
proliferation. These results indicate that small molecule inhibitors targeted to 
PTP1B can act as both insulin mimetics and insulin sensitizers. Taken together,
our findings combined with results from PTP1B knockout, antisense, and
biochemical studies provide strong evidence that PTP1B negatively regulates
insulin signaling and that small molecule PTP1B inhibitors have the ability to
potentiate and augment the action of insulin.

PMID: 14596593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Oncogene. 2003 Oct 23;22(48):7661-6.

Transient expression of E1A and Ras oncogenes causes downregulation of c-fos gene
transcription in nontransformed REF52 cells.

Usenko T(1), Kukushkin A, Pospelova T, Pospelov V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 194064 St-Petersburg,
Russia.

Stable transformation of rat embryo fibroblast (REF) cells with E1A and cHa-ras
oncogenes leads to downmodulation of c-fos gene transcription. This repression is
provided in part by the association of Elk-1 transcription factor with histone
deacetylases mediated through effects of Ras on MAP-kinase cascades. Here, we
focus on the primary effects of E1A and Ras displayed in transient transfection
assay on the transactivating capability of Elk-1, which is a key transcription
factor of c-fos gene regulation. Our data show that E1A is able to suppress
serum- and Ras-induced stimulation of Gal-luc reporter activity by a full-length 
Gal-Elk1-428 fusion protein as well as the expression of c-fos promoter-driven
luciferase constructs (fos-luc). The repression can be relieved by trichostatin
A, a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, implying the involvement of HDACs and 
an inactive chromatin structure formed due to underacetylation of nucleosomal
histones. Thus, upon transient transfection of E1A and Ras oncogenes in REF52
cells or their stable expression in E1A+cHa-ras cells, E1A contributes to the
formation of inactive chromatin structure through association with p300/CBP
histone acetyltransferases at c-fos promoters, whereas Ras mediates its effect
through constitutive activation of the MAP/ERK kinase cascade, thereby promoting 
the recruitment of HDAC1 to the Elk-1 transcription factor. As a result,
downregulation of c-fos gene transcription revealed in established E1A+Ras
transformants is unlikely to be a consequence of cell transformation itself, but 
follows from primary effects of E1A and Ras on chromatin remodeling factors.

PMID: 14576829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Neurobiol. 2003 Nov;57(2):204-20.

Rapid electrical and delayed molecular signals regulate the serum response
element after nerve injury: convergence of injury and learning signals.

Lin H(1), Bao J, Sung YJ, Walters ET, Ambron RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, 1201 Black Building, Columbia
University, West 168th Street, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Erratum in
    J Neurobiol. 2004 May;59(2):259. Ying, Ju-Sung [corrected to Sung, Ying-Ju].

Axotomy elicits changes in gene expression, but little is known about how
information from the site of injury is communicated to the cell nucleus. We
crushed nerves in Aplysia californica and the sciatic nerve in the mouse and
found short- and long-term activation of an Elk1-SRF transcription complex that
binds to the serum response element (SRE). The enhanced short-term binding
appeared rapidly and was attributed to the injury-induced activation of an Elk1
kinase that phosphorylates Elk1 at ser383. This kinase is the previously
described Aplysia (ap) ERK2 homologue, apMAPK. Nerve crush evoked action
potentials that propagated along the axon to the cell soma. Exposing axons to
medium containing high K(+), which evoked a similar burst of spikes, or bathing
the ganglia in 20 microM serotonin (5HT) for 20 min, activated the apMAPK and
enhanced SRE binding. Since 5HT is released in response to electrical activity,
our data indicate that the short-term process is initiated by an injury-induced
electrical discharge that causes the release of 5HT which activates apMAPK. 5HT
is also released in response to noxious stimuli for aversive learning. Hence,
apMAPK is a point of convergence for injury signals and learning signals. The
delay before the onset of the long-term SRE binding was reduced when the crush
was closer to the ganglion and was attributed to an Elk1 kinase that is activated
by injury in the axon and retrogradely transported to the cell body. Although
this Elk1 kinase phosphorylates mammalian rElk1 at ser383, it is distinct from
apMAPK.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 14556286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Blood. 2004 Feb 15;103(4):1445-53. Epub 2003 Oct 9.

Identification and characterization of EBP, a novel EEN binding protein that
inhibits Ras signaling and is recruited into the nucleus by the MLL-EEN fusion
protein.

Yam JW(1), Jin DY, So CW, Chan LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Hong Kong.

The chimeric MLL-EEN fusion protein is created as a result of chromosomal
translocation t(11;19)(q23;p13). EEN, an Src homology 3 (SH3) domain-containing
protein in the endophilin family, has been implicated in endocytosis, although
little is known about its role in leukemogenesis mediated by the MLL-EEN fusion
protein. In this study, we have identified and characterized EBP, a novel EEN
binding protein that interacts with the SH3 domain of EEN through a proline-rich 
motif PPERP. EBP is a ubiquitous protein that is normally expressed in the
cytoplasm but is recruited to the nucleus by MLL-EEN with a punctate localization
pattern characteristic of the MLL chimeric proteins. EBP interacts simultaneously
with EEN and Sos, a guanine-nucleotide exchange factor for Ras. Coexpressoin of
EBP with EEN leads to suppression of Ras-induced cellular transformation and
Ras-mediated activation of Elk-1. Taken together, our findings suggest a new
mechanism for MLL-EEN-mediated leukemogenesis in which MLL-EEN interferes with
the Ras-suppressing activities of EBP through direct interaction.

PMID: 14551139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2003 Sep;24(1):238-49.

The concerted signaling of ERK1/2 and JNKs is essential for PC12 cell
neuritogenesis and converges at the level of target proteins.

Waetzig V(1), Herdegen T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein,
Hospitalstrasse 4, D-24105 Kiel, Germany.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways are central signaling elements, 
which translate and integrate stimuli from cell surface receptors into
cytoplasmic and transcriptional responses. Here, we systematically compare the
role of MAPKs in the nerve growth factor-induced long-term differentiation of
PC12 cells and show the persistent nuclear and dose-dependent cytoplasmic
activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) and the
increasing nuclear and cytoplasmic activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs).
Inhibition of ERK1/2 and JNKs significantly reduced neurite outgrowth. Both
synergistically controlled the expression of c-Jun, the induction and/or
phosphorylation of neurofilament, and the phosphorylation of Elk-1. JNKs alone
were responsible for the phosphorylation of c-Jun and activating transcription
factor 2 as well as for the expression of MAPK phosphatase 1. In contrast,
p38alpha was only transiently activated and marginally involved in these
processes. Thus, JNKs and ERK1/2 accomplish differentiation by signaling in
parallel cascades that converge only at the target level.

PMID: 14550783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Neuroimmunol. 2003 Sep;142(1-2):58-66.

Sublytic terminal complement attack induces c-fos transcriptional activation in
myotubes.

Badea TD(1), Park JH, Soane L, Niculescu T, Niculescu F, Rus H, Shin ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21201, USA.

Sublytic C5b-9 alters the molecular phenotype of myotubes by inhibiting
muscle-specific gene expression. Here, we showed that C5b-9 induced c-fos mRNA
and transcription. Using c-fos promoter-CAT constructs and electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA), the minimal c-fos promoter activity was shown to
increase within 30-min exposure to serum C5b-9, which also induced the binding of
serum response factor (SRF), along with ternary complex factor (TCF) Elk1 and
Sap1a to the serum response element. C5b-9 activated ERK1, which in turn
activated Elk1 in myotubes. We propose that c-fos gene transcription associated
with myotube dedifferentiation is induced by C5b-9 through ERK1-mediated assembly
of serum response factor-ternary complex.

PMID: 14512164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Oct 14;100(21):12003-8. Epub 2003 Sep 23.

Activation domain-mediator interactions promote transcription preinitiation
complex assembly on promoter DNA.

Cantin GT(1), Stevens JL, Berk AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute and Department of Microbiology, Immunology and
Molecular Genetics, 611 Charles E. Young Drive East, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The interaction of activators with mediator has been proposed to stimulate the
assembly of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) preinitiation complexes, but there have
been few tests of this model. The finding that the major adenovirus E1A and
mitogen-activated protein kinase-phosphorylated Elk1 activation domains bind to
Sur2 uniquely among the metazoan mediator subunits and the development of
transcriptionally active nuclear extracts from WT and sur2-/- embryonic stem
cells, reported here, allowed a direct test of the model. We found that whereas
VP16, E1A, and phosphorylated Elk1 activation domains each stimulate binding of
mediator, Pol II, and general transcription factors to promoter DNA in extracts
from WT cells, only VP16 stimulated their binding in extracts from sur2-/- cells.
This stimulation of mediator, Pol II, and general transcription factor binding to
promoter DNA correlated with transcriptional activation by these activators in WT
and mutant extracts. Because the mutant mediator was active in reactions with the
VP16 activation domain, the lack of activity in response to the E1A and Elk1
activation domains was not due to loss of a generalized mediator function, but
rather the inability of the mutant mediator to be bound by E1A and Elk1. These
results directly demonstrate that the interaction of activation domains with
mediator stimulates preinitiation complex assembly on promoter DNA.

PMCID: PMC218703
PMID: 14506297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Cell Cycle. 2003 Nov-Dec;2(6):528-30.

SUMO and transcriptional repression: dynamic interactions between the MAP kinase 
and SUMO pathways.

Yang SH(1), Jaffray E, Senthinathan B, Hay RT, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PT
UK.

SUMO modification of proteins is being increasingly linked with transcriptional
repression. We recently demonstrated that SUMO modification also downregulates
the transcriptional activity of the ETS-domain transcription factor Elk-1.
However, as Elk-1 becomes activated through MAP kinase-mediated phosphorylation, 
the SUMO modification is lost, providing an elegant molecular switch that
promotes the loss of repressive activities at the same time as permitting the
recruitment of coactivator proteins. However, the mechanism by which SUMO
promotes transcriptional repression remains enigmatic.

PMID: 14504467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):47038-45. Epub 2003 Sep 11.

Intersectin activates Ras but stimulates transcription through an independent
pathway involving JNK.

Mohney RP(1), Das M, Bivona TG, Hanes R, Adams AG, Philips MR, O'Bryan JP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Signal Transduction, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Services, NIH/DHHS, Building 101, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

Intersectin (ITSN) is a molecular scaffold involved in regulating endocytosis and
mitogenic signaling. We previously demonstrated that ITSN transformed rodent
fibroblasts, accelerated hormone-induced maturation of Xenopus oocytes, and
activated the Elk-1 transcription factor through an MEK- and Erk-independent
mechanism. We now demonstrate that ITSN complexes with the Ras guanine nucleotide
exchange factor Sos1 leading to increased RasGTP levels. Using fluorescence
resonant energy transfer analysis, we demonstrate that ITSN complexes with Ras in
living cells leading to Ras activation on intracellular vesicles. These vesicles 
contain epidermal growth factor receptor but are distinct from
transferrin-positive vesicles. However, Ras is not required for ITSN stimulation 
of transcription. Rather, we demonstrate that ITSN signals through JNK to
activate Elk-1. Although ITSN activation of Elk-1 was Ras-independent, ITSN
cooperates with Ras to synergistically activate JNK. These findings indicate that
ITSN activates multiple intracellular signaling pathways and suggest that this
adaptor protein may coordinately regulate the activity of these pathways in vivo.

PMID: 12970366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Oncogene. 2003 Aug 28;22(36):5554-61.

Akt negatively regulates translation of the ternary complex factor Elk-1.

Figueroa C(1), Vojtek AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-0606, USA.

Cross-talk between signaling pathways plays an important role in regulation of
cell growth, differentiation, survival, and death. Here, we show that Akt
regulates the Elk-1 transcription factor, independent of its negative regulation 
of Raf kinases. Using a constitutively active Mek1 to bypass the regulation of
Raf by Akt, we find that the Elk-1 and Sap1a proteins are dramatically decreased 
in the presence of activated Akt. Akt catalytic activity is required. Also,
Mek-dependent activation of a TCF (Elk-1/Sap-1a)-dependent c-fos reporter is
decreased by activated Akt. Neither the level of Elk-1 mRNA nor the stability of 
the Elk-1 protein is altered by activated Akt. Instead, the rate of incorporation
of labeled methionine into Elk-1 protein is decreased in the presence of Akt. In 
addition, the level of the Elk-1 protein but not GFP is significantly decreased
in the presence of activated Akt, when GFP is expressed from an IRES element in a
bicistronic message with Elk-1. We conclude that Akt negatively regulates
translation of the Elk-1 mRNA. A coding region determinant that maps within the
first 279 nts of the Elk-1 message is necessary and sufficient for Akt-mediated
regulation of Elk-1.

PMID: 12944902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Brain Res Brain Res Protoc. 2003 Aug;12(1):35-40.

An abbreviated procedure for the cloning and identification of Ets transcription 
factors regulating the expression of the human presenilin 1 gene.

Pastorcic M(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, Fort Worth, TX 76107,
USA.

We have previously defined a crucial DNA element controlling 90% of the
expression of the presenilin 1 gene at (-35 to +6). This region contains an Ets
transcription factor binding motif, and a two-basepair alteration within the core
sequence (GGAA to TTAA) of the Ets consensus also reduced transcription by over
90%. We have shown that Ets1/2 transcription factors bind specifically to the -10
Ets element and activate PS1 transcription. The identification of other
transcription factors recognizing specifically this promoter area should provide 
insights into the regulation of PS1. We have used the -10 Ets element as a bait
in yeast one hybrid screening of a human brain cDNA library using a His3 reporter
construct. We describe an abbreviated one-hybrid protocol to screen cDNA
libraries. This assay selected four factors from the Ets family: Ets2, ER81, ERM 
and Elk1. We have also shown that specific DNA binding activity to the -10 Ets
element of PS1 could easily be detected in yeast clones by EMSAs including
protein extracts from yeast cells, thus confirming specific DNA binding activity 
without further sequencing and subcloning into suitable expression vectors.
Ultimately the identity of putative clones was confirmed by DNA sequencing. We
also confirmed the specific DNA binding properties of the factors identified by
showing that the proteins produced by in vitro translation of the entire cDNAs
from Elk1 and ER81 indeed binds specifically to the -10 region of the PS1
promoter.

PMID: 12928043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Eur J Neurosci. 2003 Aug;18(3):473-85.

N-methyl-d-aspartate-triggered neuronal death in organotypic hippocampal cultures
is endocytic, autophagic and mediated by the c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway.

Borsello T(1), Croquelois K, Hornung JP, Clarke PG.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie cellulaire et de Morphologie, UniversitÈ de Lausanne, Rue
du Bugnon 9, CH-1005, Switzerland.

Acute excitotoxic neuronal death was studied in rat organotypic hippocampal
slices exposed to 100 micro mN-methyl-d-aspartate. Fulgurant death of pyramidal
neurons occurred in the CA1 and CA3 regions and was already detectable within 2 h
of the N-methyl-d-aspartate administration. Morphologically, the neuronal death
was neither apoptotic nor necrotic but had the hallmarks of autophagic neuronal
death, as shown by acid phosphatase histochemistry in both CA1 and CA3 and by
electron microscopy in CA1. The dying neurons also manifested strong endocytosis 
of horseradish peroxidase or microperoxidase, occurring probably by a fluid phase
mechanism, and followed, surprisingly, by nuclear entry. In addition to these
autophagic and endocytic characteristics, there were indications that the c-Jun
N-terminal kinase pathway was activated. Its target c-Jun was selectively
phosphorylated in CA1, CA3 and the dentate gyrus and c-Fos, the transcription of 
which is under the positive control of c-Jun N-terminal kinase target Elk1, was
selectively up-regulated in CA1 and CA3. All these effects, the neuronal death
itself and the associated autophagy and endocytosis, were totally prevented by a 
cell-permeable inhibitor of the interaction between c-Jun N-terminal kinase and
certain of its targets. These results show that pyramidal neurons undergoing
excitotoxic death in this situation are autophagic and endocytic and that both
the cell death and the associated autophagy and endocytosis are under the control
of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway.

PMID: 12911744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Neurochem. 2003 Sep;86(5):1213-22.

A novel function of Goalpha: mediation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase
activation by opioid receptors in neural cells.

Zhang WB(1), Zhang Z, Ni YX, Wu YL, Pei G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai 200031, China.

Go is the most abundant G protein expressed in brain but its function is less
known. Here we show a novel function of Goalpha as a mediator of opioid
receptor-induced extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation in neural
cells. The current study found that, in neuroblastoma x glioma NG108-15 hybrid
cells, activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase through delta opioid
receptors was mediated by pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein and independent of 
Gbetagamma subunits, PI3 kinase and receptor internalization. Overexpression of a
dominant negative form of Goalpha1, but not Gialpha2, completely blocked delta
opioid receptor-induced extracellular signal-regulated kinase activity.
Decreasing Goalpha expression by RNA interference greatly reduced delta opioid
receptor-induced extracellular signal-regulated kinase activity and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase-dependent gene expression, while knocking down Gialpha2
did not. By taking advantage of differences between human and mouse Goalpha gene 
sequences, we simultaneously knocked down endogenous Goalpha expression and
expressed exogenous human Goalpha subunits. We found that both human Goalpha1 and
Goalpha2 could mediate delta opioid receptor-induced extracellular
signal-regulated kinase activation. This study suggests that one of the functions
of Goalpha in the brain is to mediate extracellular signal-regulated kinase
activation by G protein-coupled receptors.

PMID: 12911629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2003 Dec;285(6):C1356-66. Epub 2003 Jul 30.

Distribution and functional properties of human KCNH8 (Elk1) potassium channels.

Zou A(1), Lin Z, Humble M, Creech CD, Wagoner PK, Krafte D, Jegla TJ, Wickenden
AD.

Author information: 
(1)Icagen, Inc., 4222 Emperor Blvd., Durham, NC 27703, USA.

The Elk subfamily of the Eag K+ channel gene family is represented in mammals by 
three genes that are highly conserved between humans and rodents. Here we report 
the distribution and functional properties of a member of the human Elk K+
channel gene family, KCNH8. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of mRNA expression
patterns showed that KCNH8, along with the other Elk family genes, KCNH3 and
KCNH4, are primarily expressed in the human nervous system. KCNH8 was expressed
at high levels, and the distribution showed substantial overlap with KCNH3. In
Xenopus oocytes, KCNH8 gives rise to slowly activating, voltage-dependent K+
currents that open at hyperpolarized potentials (half-maximal activation at -62
mV). Coexpression of KCNH8 with dominant-negative KCNH8, KCNH3, and KCNH4
subunits led to suppression of the KCNH8 currents, suggesting that Elk channels
can form heteromultimers. Similar experiments imply that KCNH8 subunits are not
able to form heteromultimers with Eag, Erg, or Kv family K+ channels.

PMID: 12890647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Mol Cell. 2003 Jul;12(1):63-74.

Dynamic interplay of the SUMO and ERK pathways in regulating Elk-1
transcriptional activity.

Yang SH(1), Jaffray E, Hay RT, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, 2.205 Stopford
building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, United Kingdom.

The ETS domain transcription factor Elk-1 is a direct target of the MAP kinase
pathways. Phosphorylation of the Elk-1 transcriptional activation domain by MAP
kinases triggers its activation. However, Elk-1 also contains two domains with
repressive activities. One of these, the R motif, appears to function by
suppressing the activity of the activation domain. Here, we demonstrate that SUMO
modification of the R motif is required for this repressive activity. A dynamic
interplay exists between the activating ERK MAP kinase pathway and the repressive
SUMO pathway. ERK pathway activation leads to both phosphorylation of Elk-1 and
loss of SUMO conjugation and, hence, to the loss of the repressive activity of
the R motif. Thus, the reciprocal regulation of the activation and repressive
activities are coupled by MAP kinase modification of Elk-1.

PMID: 12887893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 24;278(43):41718-27. Epub 2003 Jul 25.

High affinity for farnesyltransferase and alternative prenylation contribute
individually to K-Ras4B resistance to farnesyltransferase inhibitors.

Fiordalisi JJ(1), Johnson RL 2nd, Weinbaum CA, Sakabe K, Chen Z, Casey PJ, Cox
AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology and Pharmacology, CB #7512, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7512, USA. fiordali@med.unc.edu

Farnesyltransferase inhibitors (FTIs) block Ras farnesylation, subcellular
localization and activity, and inhibit the growth of Ras-transformed cells.
Although FTIs are ineffective against K-Ras4B, the Ras isoform most commonly
mutated in human cancers, they can inhibit the growth of tumors containing
oncogenic K-Ras4B, implicating other farnesylated proteins or suggesting distinct
functions for farnesylated and for geranylgeranylated K-Ras, which is generated
when farnesyltransferase is inhibited. In addition to bypassing FTI blockade
through geranylgeranylation, K-Ras4B resistance to FTIs may also result from its 
higher affinity for farnesyltransferase. Using chimeric Ras proteins containing
all combinations of Ras background, CAAX motif, and K-Ras polybasic domain, we
show that either a polybasic domain or an alternatively prenylated CAAX renders
Ras prenylation, Ras-induced Elk-1 activation, and anchorage-independent cell
growth FTI-resistant. The polybasic domain alone increases the affinity of Ras
for farnesyltransferase, implying independent roles for each K-Ras4B sequence
element in FTI resistance. Using microarray analysis and colony formation assays,
we confirm that K-Ras function is independent of the identity of the prenyl group
and, therefore, that FTI inhibition of K-Ras transformed cells is likely to be
independent of K-Ras inhibition. Our results imply that relevant FTI targets will
lack both polybasic and potentially geranylgeranylated methionine-CAAX motifs.

PMID: 12882980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Circ Res. 2003 Aug 22;93(4):321-9. Epub 2003 Jul 24.

Migration inhibitory factor mediates angiogenesis via mitogen-activated protein
kinase and phosphatidylinositol kinase.

Amin MA(1), Volpert OV, Woods JM, Kumar P, Harlow LA, Koch AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Ill, USA.

In this study, we investigated the effects of migration inhibitory factor (rhMIF)
on angiogenesis-related signaling cascades and apoptosis in human endothelial
cells (ECs). We show that in vitro rhMIF induces migration and tube formation in 
Matrigel of human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HMVECs), with potency
comparable to that of basic fibroblast growth factor. In vivo, rhMIF induces
angiogenesis in Matrigel plugs and in the corneal bioassay. Using panels of
relatively specific kinase inhibitors, antisense oligonucleotides, and
dominant-negative mutants, we show that mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) are critical for MIF-dependent HMVEC
migration, whereas Src and p38 kinases are nonessential. Moreover, we demonstrate
that rhMIF induces time-dependent increases in phosphorylation levels of MEK1/2, 
Erk1/2, and Elk-1, as well as PI3K, and its effector kinase, Akt, in HMVECs.
Studies with dominant-negative mutants and antisense oligonucleotides corroborate
these effects in HMVECs. Furthermore, we demonstrate that rhMIF-induced
angiogenesis in the rat cornea in vivo and in the ex vivo endothelial cell
morphogenesis assay is also MAPK- and PI3K-dependent. Our findings support a role
for MIF as an angiogenic factor and provide a rationale for the use of MIF as a
therapeutic inducer of neovascularization in the development of collateral
circulation in coronary artery disease.

PMID: 12881477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Immunol. 2003 Aug 1;171(3):1500-6.

Pellino3, a novel member of the Pellino protein family, promotes activation of
c-Jun and Elk-1 and may act as a scaffolding protein.

Jensen LE(1), Whitehead AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. jensen@pharm.med.upenn.edu

Toll-like receptors and the IL-1R are part of the innate immune response aimed at
mobilizing defense mechanisms in response to infections or injury. These
receptors can initiate common intracellular signaling cascades. One intermediate 
component in these signaling cascades is Pellino, which was first identified in
Drosophila and shown to interact with IL-1R-associated kinase. Two homologues,
Pellino1 and Pellino2, have been identified in mammals. A novel member of the
Pellino protein family has been identified and named Pellino3. Pellino3 shares 84
and 85% amino acid identity with Pellino1 and Pellino2, respectively. Two
alternatively spliced Pellino3 mRNAs, Pellino3a and Pellino3b, are widely
expressed. Pellino3 physically interacts with IL-1R-associated kinase-1, TNF
receptor-associated factor-6, TGF-beta-activated kinase-1, and NF-kappaB-inducing
kinase in an IL-1-dependent manner, suggesting that it plays a role as a
scaffolding protein. In reporter assays Pellino3 leads to activation of c-Jun and
Elk-1, but not NF-kappaB. Pellino3 also leads to activation of c-Jun N-terminal
kinase. These data suggest that Pellino3 plays an important role in the innate
immune response.

PMID: 12874243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Neurochem. 2003 Jul;86(2):451-9.

Opposite regulation by typical and atypical anti-psychotics of ERK1/2, CREB and
Elk-1 phosphorylation in mouse dorsal striatum.

Pozzi L(1), HÂkansson K, Usiello A, Borgkvist A, Lindskog M, Greengard P, Fisone 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

The two mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), extracellular signal-regulated
protein kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1/2), are involved in the control of gene expression
via phosphorylation and activation of the transcription factors cyclic AMP
response element binding protein (CREB) and Elk-1. Here, we have examined the
effect of haloperidol and clozapine, two anti-psychotic drugs, and eticlopride, a
selective dopamine D2 receptor antagonist, on the state of phosphorylation of
ERK1/2, CREB and Elk-1, in the mouse dorsal striatum. Administration of the
typical anti-psychotic haloperidol stimulated the phosphorylation of ERK1/2, CREB
and Elk-1. Virtually identical results were obtained using eticlopride. In
contrast, the atypical anti-psychotic clozapine reduced ERK1/2, CREB and Elk-1
phosphorylation. This opposite regulation was specifically exerted by haloperidol
and clozapine on ERK, CREB, and Elk-1 phosphorylation, as both anti-psychotic
drugs increased the phosphorylation of the dopamine- and cyclic AMP-regulated
phosphoprotein of 32 kDa (DARPP-32) at the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase
(PKA) site. The activation of CREB and Elk-1 induced by haloperidol appeared to
be achieved via different signalling pathways, as inhibition of ERK1/2 activation
abolished the stimulation of Elk-1 phosphorylation without affecting CREB
phosphorylation. This study shows that haloperidol and clozapine induce distinct 
patterns of phosphorylation in the dorsal striatum. The results provide a novel
biochemical paradigm elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying the distinct
therapeutic actions of typical and atypical anti-psychotic agents.

PMID: 12871586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Circ Res. 2003 Aug 22;93(4):302-10. Epub 2003 Jul 17.

Betacellulin and amphiregulin induce upregulation of cyclin D1 and DNA synthesis 
activity through differential signaling pathways in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Shin HS(1), Lee HJ, Nishida M, Lee MS, Tamura R, Yamashita S, Matsuzawa Y, Lee
IK, Koh GY.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Initiatives Center for Endothelial Cells, Division 
of Molecular and Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology,
Hyoja-Dong, Pohang, Republic of Korea

Activation of EGF receptors is closely involved in vascular proliferative
diseases. The signaling mechanisms of EGF ligands, including betacellulin (BTC)
and amphiregulin (AR), are poorly understood. We examined how BTC and AR induced 
DNA synthesis activity in primary cultures of human thoracic aortic smooth muscle
cells (HTASMCs). BTC induced phosphorylation of all four EGF receptors present on
HTASMCs: ErbB1, ErbB2, ErbB3, and ErbB4. BTC rapidly induced the phosphorylation 
of Akt, GSK3alpha/beta, and two FoxO factors, FKHR and AFX, in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. BTC increased nuclear beta-catenin accumulation. BTC
increased cyclin D1 mRNA, cyclin D1 protein, and DNA synthesis activity.
Pretreatment with the phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase (PI 3'-kinase) inhibitor
wortmannin suppressed BTC-induced cyclin D1 mRNA and protein and DNA synthesis
activity. In contrast, AR, a specific ErbB1 ligand, induced sustained ERK1/2 and 
Elk1 phosphorylation, increased cyclin D1 mRNA and protein, and increased DNA
synthesis activity. AR did not produce any changes in Akt phosphorylation.
Pretreatment with PD98059 suppressed AR-induced cyclin D1 mRNA and protein. Thus,
the PI 3'-kinase/Akt/GSK/FoxO/beta-catenin pathway could be the major signaling
cascade for BTC-induced upregulation of cyclin D1 protein, whereas a sustained
ERK/Elk1 activation could be the major signaling cascade for AR-induced
upregulation of cyclin D1 protein in HTASMCs. Moreover, immunohistochemical
staining revealed that that BTC, ErbB1, and ErbB4 are upregulated in the plaques 
of human atherosclerotic coronary arteries. Taken together, BTC and AR could be
potent growth factors in proliferative vascular diseases.

PMID: 12869389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Neurosci. 2003 Jun 1;23(11):4445-56.

ATP acts via P2Y1 receptors to stimulate acetylcholinesterase and acetylcholine
receptor expression: transduction and transcription control.

Choi RC(1), Siow NL, Cheng AW, Ling KK, Tung EK, Simon J, Barnard EA, Tsim KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Molecular Neuroscience Center, Hong Kong University 
of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China.

At the vertebrate neuromuscular junction ATP is known to stabilize acetylcholine 
in the synaptic vesicles and to be co-released with it. We have shown previously 
that a nucleotide receptor, the P2Y1 receptor, is localized at the junction, and 
we propose that this mediates a trophic role for synaptic ATP there. Evidence in 
support of this and on its mechanism is given here. With the use of chick or
mouse myotubes expressing promoter-reporter constructs from genes of
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) or of the acetylcholine receptor subunits, P2Y1
receptor agonists were shown to stimulate the transcription of each of those
genes. The pathway to activation of the AChE gene was shown to involve protein
kinase C and intracellular Ca 2+ release. Application of dominant-negative or
constitutively active mutants, or inhibitors of specific kinases, showed that it 
further proceeds via some of the known intermediates of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase phosphorylation. In both chick and mouse myotubes this
culminates in activation of the transcription factor Elk-1, confirmed by gel
mobility shift assays and by the nuclear accumulation of phosphorylated Elk-1.
All of the aforementioned activations by agonist were amplified when the content 
of P2Y1 receptors was boosted by transfection, and the activations were blocked
by a P2Y1-selective antagonist. Two Elk-1 binding site sequences present in the
AChE gene promoter were jointly sufficient to drive ATP-induced reporter gene
transcription. Thus ATP regulates postsynaptic gene expression via a pathway to a
selective transcription factor activation.

PMID: 12805285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. FEBS Lett. 2003 Jun 19;545(2-3):199-202.

Pellino2 activates the mitogen activated protein kinase pathway.

Jensen LE(1), Whitehead AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Center for Pharmacogenetics, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 153 Johnson Pavilion, 3620 Hamilton Walk,
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6084, USA. jensen@pharm.med.upenn.edu

Engagement of the interleukin-1 (IL1) and Toll receptors, which are part of the
innate immune system, facilitates activation of the transcription factors
NF-kappaB, Elk-1 and AP-1. Pellino1 and Pellino2 have recently been shown to be
intermediates in the pathway leading to activation of NF-kappaB. Here we
demonstrate for the first time that human Pellino2 interacts with TRAF6 (tumor
necrosis factor receptor associated factor 6) and that both Pellino1 and Pellino2
also interact with TAK1 (transforming growth factor-beta activated kinase 1). We 
also show that Pellino2, but not Pellino1, can activate the mitogen activated
protein kinase pathway leading to activation of AP-1 and Elk-1. These
observations suggest a role for the Pellino proteins in the IL1/Toll signaling
cascades as scaffold proteins that may regulate signaling branch-points.

PMID: 12804775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 15;278(33):30642-51. Epub 2003 Jun 3.

Transcriptional regulation of the cytosolic chaperonin theta subunit gene, Cctq, 
by Ets domain transcription factors Elk-1, Sap-1a, and Net in the absence of
serum response factor.

Yamazaki Y(1), Kubota H, Nozaki M, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University, 53 Shogoin Kawaharacho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8397,
Japan.

The chaperonin-containing t-complex polypeptide 1 (CCT) is a molecular chaperone 
that facilitates protein folding in eukaryotic cytosol, and the expression of CCT
is highly dependent on cell growth. We show here that transcription of the gene
encoding the theta subunit of mouse CCT, Cctq, is regulated by the ternary
complex factors (TCFs), Elk-1, Sap-1a, and Net (Sap-2). Reporter gene assay using
HeLa cells indicated that the Cctq gene promoter contains a cis-acting element of
the CCGGAAGT sequence (CQE1) at -36 bp. The major CQE1-binding proteins in HeLa
cell nuclear extract was recognized by anti-Elk-1 or anti-Sap-1a antibodies in
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, and recombinant Elk-1, Sap-1a, or Net
specifically recognized CQE1. The CQE1-dependent transcriptional activity in HeLa
cells was virtually abolished by overexpression of the DNA binding domains of
TCFs. Overexpression of full-length TCFs with Ras indicated that exogenous TCFs
can regulate the CQE1-dependent transcription in a Ras-dependent manner. PD98059,
an inhibitor of MAPK, significantly repressed the CQE1-dependent transcription.
However, no serum response factor was detected by electrophoretic mobility shift 
assay using the CQE1 element. These results indicate that transcription of the
Cctq gene is regulated by TCFs under the control of the Ras/MAPK pathway,
probably independently of serum response factor.

PMID: 12788937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Clin Invest. 2003 Jun;111(11):1651-64.

Kinase-mediated regulation of common transcription factors accounts for the
bone-protective effects of sex steroids.

Kousteni S(1), Han L, Chen JR, Almeida M, Plotkin LI, Bellido T, Manolagas SC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Center for Osteoporosis and
Metabolic Bone Diseases, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little
Rock, Arkansas, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2003 Jun;111(11):1641-3.

It has been found that 4-estren-3alpha,17beta-diol, a synthetic ligand for the
estrogen receptor (ER) or androgen receptor (AR), which does not affect classical
transcription, reverses bone loss in ovariectomized females or orchidectomized
males without affecting the uterus or seminal vesicles, demonstrating that the
classical genotropic actions of sex steroid receptors are dispensable for their
bone-protective effects, but indispensable for their effects on reproductive
organs. We have now investigated the mechanism of action of this compound. We
report that, identically to 17beta-estradiol or dihydrotestosterone, but
differently from raloxifene, estren alters the activity of Elk-1, CCAAT enhancer 
binding protein-beta (C/EBPbeta), and cyclic adenosine monophosphate-response
element binding protein (CREB), or c-Jun/c-Fos by an extranuclear action of the
ER or AR, resulting in activation of the Src/Shc/ERK pathway or downregulation of
JNK, respectively. All of these effects are non-sex specific, require only the
ligand-binding domain of the receptor, and are indispensable for the
antiapoptotic action of these ligands on osteoblastic and HeLa cells. Moreover,
administration of 17beta-estradiol or 4-estren-3alpha,17beta-diol to
ovariectomized mice induces phosphorylation of ERKs, Elk-1, and C/EBPbeta,
downregulates c-Jun, and upregulates the expression of egr-1, an ERK/SRE target
gene. Kinase-initiated regulation of commonly used transcription factors offers a
molecular explanation for the profound skeletal effects of sex steroid receptor
ligands, including synthetic ones that are devoid of classical transcriptional
activity.

PMCID: PMC156107
PMID: 12782668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Mol Cancer Res. 2003 May;1(7):541-50.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase epsilon inhibits signaling by mitogen-activated
protein kinases.

Toledano-Katchalski H(1), Kraut J, Sines T, Granot-Attas S, Shohat G, Gil-Henn H,
Yung Y, Elson A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) mediate signaling from the cell
membrane to the nucleus following their phosphorylation at conserved threonine
and tyrosine residues within their activation loops. We show that protein
tyrosine phosphatase epsilon (PTP epsilon) inhibits ERK1 and ERK2 kinase activity
and reduces their phosphorylation; in agreement, ERK phosphorylation is increased
in fibroblasts and in mammary tumor cells from mice genetically lacking PTP
epsilon. PTP epsilon inhibits events downstream of ERKs, such as transcriptional 
activation mediated by Elk1 or by the serum response element. PTP epsilon also
inhibits transcriptional activation mediated by c-Jun and C/EBP binding protein
(CHOP) but not that mediated by the unrelated NFkB, attesting that it is broadly 
active within the MAPK family but otherwise specific. The effect of PTP epsilon
on ERKs is at least in part indirect because phosphorylation of the threonine
residue in the ERK activation loop is reduced in the presence of PTP epsilon.
Nonetheless, PTP epsilon is present in a molecular complex with ERK, providing
PTP epsilon with opportunity to act on ERK proteins also directly. We conclude
that PTP epsilon is a physiological inhibitor of ERK signaling. Slow induction of
PTP epsilon and its lack of nuclear translocation following mitogenic stimulation
suggest that PTP epsilon functions to prevent inappropriate activation and to
terminate prolonged, rather than acute, activation of ERK in the cytosol.

PMID: 12754301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 8;278(32):29901-12. Epub 2003 May 16.

A bipartite mechanism for ERK2 recognition by its cognate regulators and
substrates.

Zhang J(1), Zhou B, Zheng CF, Zhang ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases control gene expression in response to
extracellular stimuli and exhibit exquisite specificity for their cognate
regulators and substrates. We performed a structure-based mutational analysis of 
ERK2 to identify surface areas that are important for recognition of its
interacting proteins. We show that binding and activation of MKP3 by ERK2 involve
two distinct protein-protein interaction sites in ERK2. Thus, the common docking 
(CD) site composed of Glu-79, Tyr-126, Arg-133, Asp-160, Tyr-314, Asp-316, and
Asp-319 are important for high affinity MKP3 binding but not essential for
ERK2-induced MKP3 activation. MKP3 activation requires residues Tyr-111, Thr-116,
Leu-119, Lys-149, Arg-189, Trp-190, Glu-218, Arg-223, Lys-229, and His-230 in the
ERK2 substrate-binding region, located distal to the common docking site.
Interestingly, many of the residues important for MKP3 recognition are also used 
for Elk1 binding and phosphorylation. In addition to the shared residues, there
are also residues that are unique to each target recognition. There is evidence
indicating that the CD site and the substrate-binding region defined here are
also utilized for MEK1 recognition, and indeed, we demonstrate that the binding
of MKP3, Elk1, and MEK1 to ERK2 is mutually exclusive. Taken together, our data
suggest that the efficiency and fidelity of ERK2 signaling is achieved by a
bipartite recognition process. In this model, one part of the ERK2-binding
proteins (e.g. the kinase interaction motif sequence) docks to the CD site
located on the back side of the ERK2 catalytic pocket for high affinity
association, whereas the interaction of the substrate-binding region with another
structural element (e.g. the FXFP motif in MKP3 and Elk1) may not only stabilize 
binding but also provide contacts crucial for modulating the activity and/or
specificity of ERK2 target molecules.

PMID: 12754209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 May 12;113(1-2):57-66.

Ets transcription factors ER81 and Elk1 regulate the transcription of the human
presenilin 1 gene promoter.

Pastorcic M(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, 76107, USA.

We have previously defined a crucial DNA element controlling 90% of the
expression of the presenilin 1 gene at (-35 to +6). This region contains an Ets
transcription factor binding motif, and a 2-base pair alteration within the core 
sequence (GGAA to TTAA) of the Ets consensus also reduced transcription by over
90%. We have shown that Ets1/2 transcription factors bind specifically to the -10
Ets element and activate PS1 transcription. The identification of other
transcription factors recognizing specifically this promoter area should provide 
insights into the regulation of PS1. We have used the -10 Ets element as a bait
in yeast one hybrid screening of a human brain cDNA library. This assay selected 
three factors from the Ets family: Ets2, ER81 and Elk1. We show that in vitro
translated ER81 indeed binds specifically to the -10 region of the PS1 promoter
and that ER81 activates by two- to threefold the basal transcription of a
presenilin-1 promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter synthetic gene
(-119, +178)PS1CAT in transient infection assays in neuroblastoma cells
(SK-N-SH). GABPalpha, a member of the Ets family closely related to Ets2 and also
containing a pointed domain, only increased PS1 transcription by about twofold.
Cotransfection of GABPbeta together with GABPalpha did not increase PS1
transcription. However, GABPbeta alone activated PS1 transcription by two- to
threefold. In contrast, the more distantly related Ets factor Elk1 repressed PS1 
transcription very effectively.

PMID: 12750007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Endocrinology. 2003 Jun;144(6):2220-8.

The role of a conserved region of the second intracellular loop in AT1
angiotensin receptor activation and signaling.

G·borik Z(1), Jagadeesh G, Zhang M, Sp‰t A, Catt KJ, Hunyady L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Semmelweis University, Faculty of Medicine, H-1088
Budapest, Hungary.

The pleiotropic actions of angiotensin II are mediated by the primarily G(q)
protein-coupled type 1 angiotensin (AT(1)) receptor. In this study a mutational
analysis of the function of the conserved DRYXXV/IXXPL domain in the second
intracellular loop of the rat AT(1A) receptor was performed in COS7 cells.
Alanine substitution studies showed that single replacement of the highly
conserved Asp(125) and Arg(126), but not Tyr(127), moderately impaired
angiotensin II-induced inositol phosphate signaling. However, concomitant
substitution of both Asp(125) and Arg(126) caused marked reduction of both
inositol phosphate signaling and receptor internalization. Alanine scanning of
the adjacent residues showed that substitution of Ile(130), His(132), and
Pro(133) reduced agonist-induced inositol phosphate signal generation, whereas
mutations of Met(134) also impaired receptor internalization. Expression of the
D125A mutant AT(1A) receptor in COS7 cells endowed the receptor with moderate
constitutive activity, as indicated by its enhanced basal Elk1 promoter activity 
and inositol phosphate response to partial agonists. Angiotensin II-induced
stimulation of the Elk1 promoter showed parallel impairment with inositol
phosphate signal generation in receptors containing mutations in this region of
the AT(1A) receptor. These data confirm that Ca(2+) signal generation is required
for the nuclear effects of angiotensin II-induced ERK activation. They are also
consistent with the role of the conserved DRY sequence of the AT(1A) receptor in 
receptor activation, and of Asp(125) in constraining the receptor in its inactive
conformation. Furthermore, in the cytoplasmic helical extension of the third
helix, an apolar surface that includes Ile(130) and Met(134) appears to have a
direct role in G protein coupling.

PMID: 12746278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2003 Oct;285(4):C922-34. Epub 2003 May 7.

G alpha 13-mediated transformation and apoptosis are permissively dependent on
basal ERK activity.

Adarichev VA(1), Vaiskunaite R, Niu J, Balyasnikova IV, Voyno-Yasenetskaya TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

We previously reported that the alpha-subunit of heterotrimeric G13 protein
induces either mitogenesis and neoplastic transformation or apoptosis in a
cell-dependent manner. Here, we analyzed which signaling pathways are required
for G alpha 13-induced mitogenesis or apoptosis using a novel mutant of G alpha
13. We have identified that in human cell line LoVo, the mutation encoding
substitution of Arg260 to stop codon in mRNA of G alpha 13 subunit produced a
mutant protein (G alpha 13-T) that lacks a COOH terminus and is endogenously
expressed in LoVo cells as a polypeptide of 30 kDa. We found that G alpha 13-T
lost its ability to promote proliferation and transformation but retained its
ability to induce apoptosis. We found that full-length G alpha 13 could stimulate
Elk1 transcription factor, whereas truncated G alpha 13 lost this ability. G
alpha 13-dependent stimulation of Elk1 was inhibited by dominant-negative
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MEK) but not by dominant-negative MEKK1.
Similarly, MEK inhibitor PD-98059 blocked G alpha 13-induced Elk1 stimulation,
whereas JNK inhibitor SB-203580 was ineffective. In Rat-1 fibroblasts, G alpha
13-induced cell proliferation and foci formation were also inhibited by
dominant-negative MEK and PD-98059 but not by dominant-negative MEKK1 and
SB-203580. Whereas G alpha 13-T alone did not induce transformation, coexpression
with constitutively active MEK partially restored its ability to transform Rat-1 
cells. Importantly, full-length but not G alpha 13-T could stimulate Src kinase
activity. Moreover, G alpha 13-dependent stimulation of Elk1, cell proliferation,
and foci formation were inhibited by tyrosine kinase inhibitor, genistein, or by 
dominant-negative Src kinase, suggesting the involvement of a Src-dependent
pathway in the G alpha 13-mediated cell proliferation and transformation.
Importantly, truncated G alpha 13 retained its ability to stimulate apoptosis
signal-regulated kinase ASK1 and c-Jun terminal kinase, JNK. Interestingly, the
apoptosis induced by G alpha 13-T was inhibited by dominant-negative ASK1 or by
SB-203580.

PMID: 12736137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 18;278(29):27096-104. Epub 2003 May 6.

Interaction of filamin A with the insulin receptor alters insulin-dependent
activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.

He HJ(1), Kole S, Kwon YK, Crow MT, Bernier M.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Section, Laboratory of Clinical Investigation, NIA, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

The biological actions of insulin are associated with a rapid reorganization of
the actin cytoskeleton within cells in culture. Even though this event requires
the participation of actin-binding proteins, the effect of filamin A (FLNa) on
insulin-mediated signaling events is still unknown. We report here that human
melanoma M2 cells lacking FLNa expression exhibited normal insulin receptor (IR) 
signaling, whereas FLNa-expressing A7 cells were unable to elicit
insulin-dependent Shc tyrosine phosphorylation and p42/44 MAPK activation despite
no significant defect in IR-stimulated phosphorylation of insulin receptor
substrate-1 or activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT cascade.
Insulin-dependent translocation of Shc, SOS1, and MAPK to lipid raft microdomains
was markedly attenuated by FLNa expression. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments and
in vitro binding assays demonstrated that FLNa binds constitutively to IR and
that neither insulin nor depolymerization of actin by cytochalasin D affected
this interaction. The colocalization of endogenous FLNa with IR was detected at
the surface of HepG2 cells. Ectopic expression of a C-terminal fragment of FLNa
(FLNaCT) in HepG2 cells blocked the endogenous IR-FLNa interaction and
potentiated insulin-stimulated MAPK phosphorylation and transactivation of Elk-1 
compared with vector-transfected cells. Expression of FLNaCT had no major effect 
on insulin-induced phosphorylation of the IR, insulin receptor substrate-1, or
AKT, but it elicited changes in actin cytoskeletal structure and ruffle formation
in HepG2 cells. Taken together, these results indicate that FLNa interacts
constitutively with the IR to exert an inhibitory tone along the MAPK activation 
pathway.

PMID: 12734206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Exp Cell Res. 2003 May 15;286(1):152-63.

Insulin induces expression of adenosine kinase gene in rat lymphocytes by
signaling through the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.

Pawelczyk T(1), Sakowicz M, Podgorska M, Szczepanska-Konkel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Gdansk, ul. Debinki 7,
paw. 29, 80-211 Gdansk, Poland. tkpaw@amg.gda.pl

The activity of adenosine kinase (AK) was significantly impaired in splenocytes
isolated from diabetic rats. Administration of insulin to diabetic animals
restored AK activity, protein, and mRNA levels in diabetic splenocytes.
Experiments performed on cultured rat lymphocytes demonstrated that insulin did
not change the stability of AK mRNA. Insulin induced AK gene expression in a
dose- and time-dependent manner. Maximal increases in AK mRNA (3.9-fold) and
activity level (3.7-fold) were observed at the fourth and fifth hours of cell
incubation with 10 nM insulin, respectively. The insulin effect on AK expression 
was not influenced by dibutyryl cAMP (dcAMP). On the other hand dcAMP weakly
increased (1.7-fold) basal expression of AK. Exposure of rat lymphocytes to
wortmannin, an inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), or rapamycin,
an inhibitor of mTOR, did not affect the ability of insulin to stimulate
expression of AK. Prior treatment of the cells with 10 microM PD98059, an
inhibitor of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase (MEK) completely
blocked insulin-stimulated expression of AK gene. Insulin produced a significant 
transient increase in the tyrosine phosphorylation of ERK1/2, and PD98059
inhibited this phosphorylation. Furthermore exposure of cells to insulin has
resulted in transient phosphorylation of Elk-1 on Ser-383 and sustained elevation
of c-Jun and c-Fos protein. The maximal phosphorylation of Elk-1 was observed at 
15 min, and was blocked by PD98059. We concluded that insulin stimulates AK gene 
expression through a series of events occurring sequentially. This includes
activation of the MAPK cascade and subsequent phosphorylation of Elk-1 followed
by increased expression of c-fos and c-jun genes.

PMID: 12729803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 May 16;304(4):795-800.

Induction of neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells by the bacterial nucleoside
N6-methyldeoxyadenosine is mediated through adenosine A2a receptors and via cAMP 
and MAPK signaling pathways.

Charles MP(1), Adamski D, Kholler B, Pelletier L, Berger F, Wion D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U318, CHU Michallon, 38043 Grenoble, France.

We have previously shown that N(6)-methyldeoxyadenosine (MDA) is an inducer of
differentiation in several tumor cells. Here we show that in addition to its
ability to induce neurite-outgrowth in PC12 cells, MDA also significantly
enhances the nerve-growth factor-mediated neurite outgrowth of these cells. Thus,
MDA acts synergistically with NGF to repress cdc2 and cdk2 synthesis and to
enhance tyrosine hydroxylase synthesis. To further elucidate the mechanisms of
action of MDA, we investigated the effect of this drug on various signaling
pathways. The neuritogenesis observed in PC12 following MDA treatment is mediated
through activation of adenylyl cyclase in a PKA independent process and through
the recruitment of the p44/p42 MAPK pathway. Furthermore, the adenosine A(2a)
receptor antagonist ZM 241385 prevents the MDA-induced neuritogenesis, suggesting
that MDA mediates its effect via this adenylyl cyclase-coupled A(2a) receptor.
Collectively, these findings suggest that, in PC12 cells, the MDA-induced
neuritogenesis requires the recruitment of adenosine A(2a) receptor, the
stimulation of adenylate cyclase, and the activation of the p44/42MAP kinase
cascade.

PMID: 12727227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Neurochem. 2003 May;85(4):1006-17.

Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5-regulated Elk-1 phosphorylation and immediate
early gene expression in striatal neurons.

Mao L(1), Wang JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, University of Missouri-Kansas 
City, 2411 Holmes Street, Rm. M3-C225, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA.

The Galphaq protein-coupled metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype-5 (mGluR5) is
densely expressed in medium spiny projection neurons of striatum. Emerging
evidence suggests a significant role of mGluR5 in the addictive plasticity of
striatal neurons that is likely derived from inducible cellular gene expression
related to stimulation of mGluR5 and associative signaling proteins. In this
study, we found that activation of mGluR5 with a selective agonist
(RS)-2-chloro-5-hydroxy-phenylglycine (CHPG) induced a rapid and transient
phosphorylation of a transcription regulator Elk-1 in cultured striatal neurons
from rat E19 embryos or neonatal day-1 pups. The Elk-1 phosphorylation was
dose-dependent and occurred in neurochemically identified GABAergic neurons, but 
not glia. A series of experiments further demonstrated that the CHPG-stimulated
Elk-1 phosphorylation was mediated through selective activation of
mGluR5-regulated phospholipase C and associative second messenger system, i.e.
1,4,5,-triphosphate-sensitive Ca2+ release. Moreover, the Elk-1 phosphorylation
was partially dependent on mGluR5-mediated co-activation of NMDA, but not
kainate/AMPA receptors and L-type voltage-operated Ca2+ channels. Using an
immediate early gene c-fos as a report of inducible gene expression, we found
that CHPG induced marked c-fos mRNA expression. The c-fos induction kinetically
corresponded to the Elk-1 phosphorylation and was attenuated by antisense
oligonucleotides that selectively knocked down Elk-1 proteins. These results
indicate that glutamatergic tone on mGluR5 is positively coupled to Elk-1
phosphorylation in striatal neurons via multiple signaling mechanisms involving
Ca2+ release and NMDA activation, and the mGluR5-mediated Elk-1 phosphorylation
facilitates gene transcription.

PMID: 12716432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 May;23(9):3079-90.

p38alpha isoform Mxi2 binds to extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2
mitogen-activated protein kinase and regulates its nuclear activity by sustaining
its phosphorylation levels.

Sanz-Moreno V(1), Casar B, Crespo P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de BiologÌa Molecular, Universidad de Cantabria, Santander 39011,
Spain.

Mxi2 is a p38alpha splice isoform that is distinctively activated by mitogenic
stimuli. Here we show that Mxi2 immunoprecipitates carry a kinase activity that
is persistently activated by epidermal growth factor in a fashion regulated by
Ras, Raf, and MEK. We demonstrate that this kinase activity can be attributed not
to Mxi2 but rather to extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2),
which coimmunoprecipitated with Mxi2 both by ectopic expression and in a
physiological environment like the kidney. Furthermore, we provide evidence that 
Mxi2-ERK interaction has profound effects on ERK function, demonstrating that
Mxi2 prolongs the duration of the ERK signal by sustaining its phosphorylation
levels. Interestingly, we show that the effects of Mxi2 on ERK are restricted to 
nuclear events. Mxi2 potently up-regulates ERK-mediated activation of the
transcription factors Elk1 and HIF1alpha but has no effect on the activity of ERK
cytoplasmic substrates RSK2 and cPLA(2), induced by epidermal growth factor or by
MEK. Overall, our findings point to Mxi2 as a unique member of the p38 family
that may have an unprecedented role in the regulation of the functions of ERK
mitogen-activated protein kinases.

PMCID: PMC153192
PMID: 12697810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 20;278(25):22278-83. Epub 2003 Mar 28.

TAO (thousand-and-one amino acid) protein kinases mediate signaling from
carbachol to p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and ternary complex factors.

Chen Z(1), Raman M, Chen L, Lee SF, Gilman AG, Cobb MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9041, USA.

The TAO (for thousand-and-one amino acids) protein kinases activate p38
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascades in vitro and in cells by
phosphorylating the MAP/ERK kinases (MEKs) 3 and 6. We found that TAO2 activity
was increased by carbachol and that carbachol and the heterotrimeric G protein
Galphao could activate p38 in 293 cells. Using dominant interfering kinase
mutants, we found that MEKs 3 and 6 and TAOs were required for p38 activation by 
carbachol or the constitutively active mutant GalphaoQ205L. To explore events
downstream of TAOs, the effects of TAO2 on ternary complex factors (TCFs) were
investigated. Transfection studies demonstrated that TAO2 stimulates
phosphorylation of the TCF Elk1 on the major activating site, Ser383, and that
TAO2 stimulates transactivation of Elk1 and the related TCF, Sap1. Reporter
activity was reduced by the p38-selective inhibitor SB203580. Taken together,
these studies suggest that TAO protein kinases relay signals from carbachol
through heterotrimeric G proteins to the p38 MAP kinase, which then activates
TCFs in the nucleus.

PMID: 12665513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Oncogene. 2003 Mar 27;22(12):1836-47.

Immediate-early gene induction by the stresses anisomycin and arsenite in human
osteosarcoma cells involves MAPK cascade signaling to Elk-1, CREB and SRF.

BÈbien M(1), Salinas S, Becamel C, Richard V, Linares L, Hipskind RA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de GÈnÈtique MolÈculaire de Montpellier, CNRS, UMR 5535, IFR 24,
France.

Cellular stress activates multiple mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
cascades and immediate-early gene (IEG) transcription. To address how these
events are linked, we investigated the endogenous signaling/transcription factor 
network driving IEG activation by arsenite and anisomycin in the human
osteosarcoma cell line HOS/TE-85. Induction of IEG transcription by both stresses
corresponded temporally with the phosphorylation of the regulatory factors Elk-1 
and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), along with activation of the
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), stress-activated protein kinase
(SAPK) and p38 MAPK cascades. To assess the role of the different cascades, they 
were selectively inhibited with PD98059, SP600125 and SB203580, respectively.
This implicated all three cascades in Elk-1 phosphorylation after arsenite
treatment, whereas ERK and SAPK inhibition diminished this, and IEG mRNA levels, 
downstream of anisomycin. SB blocked phosphorylation of both serum response
factor (SRF) and CREB, and strongly reduced IEG activation by both stresses.
Combining PD with SB further reduced arsenite induction of IEG transcription.
Thus, all three MAPK cascades mediate anisomycin- and arsenite-induced signaling 
to IEG promoters in HOS cells through the differential targeting of Elk-1, SRF
and CREB.

PMID: 12660819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Urol. 2003 Apr;169(4):1546-52.

The roles of supernumerical X chromosomes and XIST expression in testicular germ 
cell tumors.

Kawakami T(1), Okamoto K, Sugihara H, Hattori T, Reeve AE, Ogawa O, Okada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Japan.

PURPOSE: An overabundance of X chromosomes in testicular germ cell tumors and the
identification of the candidate testicular germ cell tumor susceptibility gene
TGCT1 on Xq27 highlight the potential involvement of X chromosomes in testicular 
germ cell tumor pathogenesis. The current study was designed to shed light on the
question whether the multiple X chromosomes in testicular germ cell tumor are
active or inactive through a complex mechanism of X chromosomal gain and XIST
expression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed 4 testicular germ cell tumor derived cell
lines and 20 primary testicular germ cell tumor tissues. The number of X
chromosomes was determined by fluorescence in situ hybridization using the X
chromosome specific probe. The expression patterns of XIST and the 3 X-linked
genes androgen receptor (AR), fragile X mental retardation (FMR1 ) and Glypican 3
(GPC3 ) were studied by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
Bisulfite genomic sequencing was used to analyze the methylation patterns of the 
AR, FMR1 and GPC3 genes. The relative expression levels of the 2 X-linked
proto-oncogenes ARAF1 and ELK1 were assayed by quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: XIST expression was common in seminomatous testicular germ cell tumors
(2 of 2 or 100% of seminoma derived cell lines and 10 of 12 or 83% of
seminomatous testicular germ cell tumor tissues) but not in nonseminomatous
testicular germ cell tumors (0 of 2 or 0% nonseminoma derived cell lines and 2 of
8 or 25% of nonseminomatous testicular germ cell tumor tissues). However, X
chromosomal gain was consistently observed in the 2 types of tumors. XIST
expression in testicular germ cell tumors and normal testicular parenchyma was
not associated with methylation of the AR, FMR1 or GPC3 genes. After determining 
the expression patterns of AR, FMR1 and GPC3 in testicular germ cell tumor
samples we concluded that multiple X chromosomes in testicular germ cell tumors
were predominantly hypomethylated and active regardless of XIST expression. The
biological significance of excess active X chromosomes in testicular germ cell
tumors was suggested by enhanced expression of the 2 X-linked oncogenes ARAF1 and
ELK1 in the testicular germ cell tumor derived cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: The current data may suggest the potential oncogenic implications of
X chromosomal gain in testicular germ cell tumors.

PMID: 12629412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Hypertension. 2003 Mar;41(3):546-52. Epub 2003 Feb 3.

ERK1/2-dependent contractile protein expression in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Schauwienold D(1), Plum C, Helbing T, Voigt P, Bobbert T, Hoffmann D, Paul M,
Reusch HP.

Author information: 
(1)Institut f¸r Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Freie Universit‰t
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

In vivo, vascular smooth muscle (VSM) cells change their contractile phenotype
toward a more proliferative phenotype during the pathogenesis of vascular
diseases. Because these dedifferentiated VSM cells may gradually regain
contractile functions, we aimed to identify signaling pathways that result in an 
increased expression of contractile proteins in VSM cells. In vitro, serum and
thrombin induced a reversible upregulation of smooth muscle myosin heavy-chain
(SM-MHC) in cultured neonatal rat VSM cells. Cotransfection of a SM-MHC-promoter 
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase-construct with dominant-negative N17Ras or
N17Raf or treatment with the mitogen-activated/ERK-activating kinase (MEK)
inhibitor PD 98059 concentration dependently decreased the serum- or
thrombin-induced SM-MHC promoter activity. Consistently, the serum- or
thrombin-induced phosphorylation of MEK and extracellular signal-regulated kinase
1/2 (ERK1/2) coincided with a MEK-dependent nuclear accumulation of
phosphorylated ERK1/2 and subsequent nuclear phosphorylation of the transcription
factors c-myc and Elk-1. A 5'-deletion analysis of cis-elements within the SM-MHC
promoter demonstrated that a conserved region (nucleotide -1346 to -1102) was
required for both cell type-specific expression and serum- or thrombin-induced
upregulation of the SM-MHC promoter in VSM cells. Within this region, 2
CArG-boxes, a GC-rich element, and a CTF/NF-1 site are critical positively acting
cis-elements for the serum- or thrombin-induced upregulation of SM-MHC. We
conclude that the serum- or thrombin-induced differentiation requires an intact
Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK signaling cascade, nuclear translocation of activated ERK1/2,
phosphorylation of transcription factors, and several cis-elements within the
SM-MHC promoter.

PMID: 12623957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Oncogene. 2003 Mar 6;22(9):1302-16.

Grape seed extract inhibits EGF-induced and constitutively active mitogenic
signaling but activates JNK in human prostate carcinoma DU145 cells: possible
role in antiproliferation and apoptosis.

Tyagi A(1), Agarwal R, Agarwal C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 80262, USA.

A loss of functional androgen receptor and an enhanced expression of growth
factor receptors and associated ligands are causal genetic events in prostate
cancer (PCA) progression. These genetic alterations lead to an epigenetic
mechanism where a feedback autocrine loop between membrane receptor and ligand
(e.g. EGFR-TGFalpha) results in a constitutive activation of
MAPK-Elk1-AP1-mediated mitogenic signaling in human PCA at an advanced and
androgen-independent stage. We rationalized that inhibiting these epigenetic
events could be useful in controlling advanced PCA growth. Recently, we found
that grape seed extract (GSE), a dietary supplement rich in flavonoid
procyanidins, inhibits advanced and androgen-independent human PCA DU145 cell
growth in culture and nude mice. Here, we performed detailed mechanistic studies 
to define the effect of GSE on EGFR-Shc-MAPK-Elk1-AP1-mediated mitogenic
signaling in DU145 cells. Pretreatment of serum-starved cells with GSE resulted
in 70% to almost complete inhibition of EGF-induced EGFR activation and 50% to
complete inhibition of Shc activation, which corroborated with a comparable
decrease in EGF-induced Shc binding to EGFR. Conversely, EGF-induced ERK1/2
phosphorylation was inhibited only by lower doses of GSE; in fact, higher doses
showed an increase. Additional studies showed that GSE alone causes a dose- and
time-dependent increase in ERK1/2 phosphorylation in starved DU145 cells that is 
inhibited by an MEK1 inhibitor PD98059. Independent of this increase in ERK1/2
phosphorylation, GSE showed a strong inhibition of ERK1/2 kinase activity to Elk1
in both cellular and cell-free systems. GSE treatment of cells also inhibited
both EGF-induced and constitutively active Elk1 phosphorylation and AP1
activation. GSE treatment also showed DNA synthesis inhibition in starved and
EGF-stimulated cells as well as loss of cell viability and apoptotic death that
was further increased by adding MEK1 inhibitor. Since GSE strongly induced
apoptosis independent of its affect on an increase in phospho-ERK1/2, we
hypothesized that apoptotic effect of GSE could be by other mechanism(s)
including its effect on stress-associated MAPK, the JNK. Indeed, GSE-treated
cells showed a strong and sustained increase in phospho-JNK1/JNK2 levels, JNK
activity and phospho-cJun levels. An inhibition of GSE-induced JNK activation by 
a novel JNK inhibitor SP600125 resulted in a significant reversal of GSE-induced 
apoptotic death suggesting the involvement of JNK activation by GSE in its
apoptosis response. Together, these results suggest that anticancer effects of
GSE in PCA be mediated via impairment of EGFR-ERK1/2-Elk1-AP1-mediated mitogenic 
signaling and activation of JNK causing growth inhibition and apoptosis,
respectively.

PMID: 12618755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 2;278(18):15794-9. Epub 2003 Feb 24.

Independent and cooperative activation of chromosomal c-fos promoter by STAT3.

Yang E(1), Lerner L, Besser D, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021, USA.

The c-fos gene was one of the earliest vertebrate genes shown to be
transcriptionally induced by growth factors. Intensive study of the promoter of
c-fos (-325 to -80) by transient or permanent transfections of synthetic DNA
constructs has repeatedly shown the importance of several sequence elements and
the resident nuclear proteins that bind them (e.g. ternary complex factor/ELK1;
serum response factor, cAMP response element-binding protein/amino-terminal
fragment/AP-1). However these studies have left unanswered numerous questions
about the role of these proteins in the regulation of the native chromosomal
gene. In particular, the role of a site in this enhancer that binds STATs has
been controversial. We present evidence here that STAT3 and not STAT1 accumulates
on the chromosomal c-fos promoter and provides a boost to transcription without
the activation of resident nuclear proteins through serine kinases. Also, when
resident nuclear proteins such as ELK1 are activated to varying extents by
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways, STAT3 activation provides a 2-fold
boost regardless of the final level of activated transcription. Thus the several 
proteins that interact with the c-fos enhancer apparently can act either in a
cooperative or independent manner to achieve very different levels of
transcription.

PMID: 12600988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Infect Dis. 2003 Mar 1;187(5):820-8. Epub 2003 Feb 24.

Synergistic activation of the serum response element-dependent pathway by
hepatitis B virus x protein and large-isoform hepatitis delta antigen.

Goto T(1), Kato N, Yoshida H, Otsuka M, Moriyama M, Shiratori Y, Koike K,
Matsumura M, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Hepatitis delta virus (HDV) is a naturally occurring satellite of hepatitis B
virus (HBV). There are few studies of the effects of the combination of HBV and
HDV proteins (HDV antigens [HDAgs]) on intracellular signaling pathways. To
understand the influence of HBV and HDV coinfection on hepatocytes, we
investigated the effect of HBV proteins and HDAgs on the serum response element
(SRE)-dependent pathway. Reporter assays revealed that only HBV X protein (HBx), 
alone or with the large isoform of HDAg (LHDAg), synergistically activated the
SRE-dependent pathway. The effect of HBx and LHDAg on Elk1 or serum response
factor (SRF) was examined, because both proteins bind to the SRE. HBx activated
the transcriptional ability of Elk1, whereas LHDAg activated the transcriptional 
ability of SRF. Thus, HBx and LHDAg synergistically activated the SRE-dependent
pathway. These results may help us understand clinical phenomena in patients
coinfected with HBV and HDV.

PMID: 12599056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Feb;88(2):773-80.

Activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway by keratinocyte growth
factor or fibroblast growth factor-10 promotes cell proliferation in human
endometrial carcinoma cells.

Taniguchi F(1), Harada T, Sakamoto Y, Yamauchi N, Yoshida S, Iwabe T, Terakawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tottori University School of
Medicine, Yonago 683-8504, Japan. tani4327@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) exert diverse effects resulting from their
interaction with cognate receptors on target cells. Our current study was
designed to examine the local production and action of two specific
stromal-epithelial cell mediatory factors, keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) and
FGF-10, in human endometrial carcinoma cells. The RT-PCR method was used to
determine gene expression of KGF, FGF-10, and KGF receptor in human endometrial
carcinoma cells (HEC-1) and human endometrial stromal cells. KGF mRNAs were
expressed in both of these cell types. On the other hand, FGF-10 mRNA was
detected only in the endometrial stromal cells, and KGF receptor mRNA was
observed in the HEC-1 cells. The novel finding of the present study is that KGF
is expressed in carcinoma cells and FGF-10 is expressed in human endometrial
stromal cells. The distinct phosphorylation of ERK-1 and -2 (ERK1/2), which are
members of the MAPK family, was observed when HEC-1 cells were treated with KGF
or FGF-10. KGF and FGF-10 could induce the prompt phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and
consequently stimulate DNA synthesis. KGF and FGF-10 did not activate the
phosphorylation of Akt, protein kinase C, or signal transducer and activator of
transcription-3. Blocking the MAPK pathway with the specific methyl ethyl ketone 
1/2 inhibitor (U0126) completely neutralized the enhancement of cell
proliferation induced by KGF and FGF-10. In addition, KGF and FGF-10 activated
expressions of downstream nuclear transcription factors, such as Elk-1 and c-myc,
but not c-fos. These results demonstrate for the first time that KGF and FGF-10
are capable of stimulating the growth of endometrial carcinoma cells via
activating MAPK pathway through autocrine/paracrine fashion.

PMID: 12574212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 25;278(17):15162-7. Epub 2003 Jan 27.

Mapping of synergistic components of weakly interacting protein-protein motifs
using arrays of paired peptides.

Espanel X(1), W‰lchli S, R¸ckle T, Harrenga A, Huguenin-Reggiani M, Hooft van
Huijsduijnen R.

Author information: 
(1)Serono Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Geneva 1228, Switzerland.

Protein-protein recognition usually involves multiple interactions among
different motifs that are scattered over protein surfaces. To identify such weak 
interactions, we have developed a novel double peptide synthesis (DS) method.
This method allows us to map protein-protein interactions that involve two linear
dis- continuous components from a polypeptide by the use of spatially addressable
synergistic pairs of synthetic peptides. The DS procedure is based on the "SPOT" 
membrane-bound peptide synthesis technique, but to synthesize a mixture of two
peptides, it uses both Fmoc (N-(9-fluorenyl)methoxycarbonyl))-alanine and
Alloc-alanine at the first cycle. This allows their selective deprotection by
either piperidine or tributyltin/palladium treatment, respectively. Using SPOT
DS, we confirmed as a proof of principle that Elk-1 Ser(383) phosphorylation by
ERK-2 kinase is stimulated by the presence of the Elk-1-docking domain. SPOT DS
can also be used to dissect protein-protein motifs that define phosphatase
substrate affinity. Using this technique, we identified three new regions in the 
insulin receptor that stimulate the dephosphorylation of the receptor by
protein-tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) 1B and presumably increase the selectivity of 
PTP for this substrate. These data demonstrate that the SPOT DS technique allows 
the identification of non-linear weakly interacting protein motifs, which are an 
important determinant of protein kinase and phosphatase substrate specificity and
of protein-protein interactions in general.

PMID: 12551909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Feb 4;100(3):1420-5. Epub 2003 Jan 13.

Beneficial effects of antioxidants and L-arginine on oxidation-sensitive gene
expression and endothelial NO synthase activity at sites of disturbed shear
stress.

de Nigris F(1), Lerman LO, Ignarro SW, Sica G, Lerman A, Palinski W, Ignarro LJ, 
Napoli C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine-0682, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093,
USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Dec 28;101(52):18262.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Feb 4;100(3):768-70.

Atherogenesis is enhanced in arterial segments exposed to disturbed blood flow,
indicating the active participation of the hemodynamic environment in lesion
formation. Turbulent shear stress selectively regulates responsive genes in the
endothelium and increases the damage induced by free radicals. The purpose of the
present study was to evaluate the effects of intervention with antioxidants and
l-arginine on endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) and oxidation-sensitive gene
perturbation induced by disturbed flow in vitro and in vivo. Both human
endothelial cells exposed to shear stress and high atherosclerosis-prone areas of
hypercholesterolemic low-density lipoprotein receptor knockout (LDLR(-/-)) mice
showed increased activities of redox-transcription factors (ELK-1, p-Jun, and
p-CREB) and decreased expression of eNOS. Intervention with antioxidants and
l-arginine reduced the activation of redox-transcription factors and increased
eNOS expression in cells and in vivo. These results demonstrate that atherogenic 
effects induced by turbulent shear stress can be prevented by cotreatment with
antioxidants and l-arginine. The therapeutic possibility to modulate shear
stress-response genes may have important implications for the prevention of
atherosclerosis and its clinical manifestations.

PMCID: PMC298788
PMID: 12525696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2002 Nov;21(3):463-76.

Phosphorylation of hippocampal Erk-1/2, Elk-1, and p90-Rsk-1 during contextual
fear conditioning: interactions between Erk-1/2 and Elk-1.

Sananbenesi F(1), Fischer A, Schrick C, Spiess J, Radulovic J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroendocrinology, Max Planck Institute for
Experimental Medicine, Hermann-Rein-Strasse 3, 37075, Goettingen, Germany.

The phosphorylation of proteins involved in the MAP kinase signal transduction
pathway was investigated during associative learning of C57BL/6J mice.
Context-dependent fear conditioning, consisting of a single exposure of mice to a
context followed by foot shock, was employed as a learning paradigm. Control
groups consisted of mice exposed to context only or an immediate shock in the
context. Coincident up-regulation of phosphorylated Erk-1/2 and Elk-1 was
observed in the CA3 hippocampal subfield and dentate gyrus 30 min after fear
conditioning but not after the control paradigms. Phosphorylated Erk-1/2 and
Elk-1 were associated and predominantly colocalized in the mossy fibers. In vitro
kinase assays showed that hippocampal Erk-1/2 phosphorylates Elk-1. Notably,
Elk-1 in turn enhances the phosphorylation of Erk-1/2 and its downstream target
p90Rsk-1. Increased phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of p90Rsk-1 was
also demonstrated in the CA3 hippocampal area in vivo during contextual fear
conditioning. The observed interactions between hippocampal Elk-1 and Erk-1/2
proteins may affect the consolidation of contextual memories through activation
of the downstream nuclear targets of Erk-1/2, such as p90Rsk-1, without requiring
nuclear translocation of Elk-1 and Erk-1/2.

PMID: 12498787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Immunol. 2003 Jan 1;170(1):315-24.

Induction of the early growth response gene 1 promoter by TCR agonists and
partial agonists: ligand potency is related to sustained phosphorylation of
extracellular signal-related kinase substrates.

Xi H(1), Kersh GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Responses to partial agonist TCR signals include positive selection of
thymocytes, survival of naive T cells, and homeostatic proliferation. As part of 
an effort to understand the molecular basis of these processes, we have
determined how agonist and partial agonist ligands act differently to induce a
change in gene expression. We have found that the early growth response gene 1
(Egr1) promoter is activated by agonist and partial agonist ligands, but the
partial agonist induces 10-fold lower promoter activity. Both agonist and partial
agonist ligands require all six serum response elements in the Egr1 promoter to
reach maximum induction. Although slightly fewer cells respond to the partial
agonist, all of the responding cells have reduced activity compared with the
cells responding to agonist. The factors binding to the serum response elements
of the Egr1 promoter form a ternary complex (TC) consisting of serum response
factor and either Elk-1 or serum response factor accessory protein-1a. Formation 
of a stable TC and inducible promoter activity are both dependent on
extracellular signal-related kinase activation. Examination of TC formation over 
time reveals that this complex is induced well by partial agonist ligands, but it
is not sustained, whereas agonist stimulation induces longer lived TCs.
Therefore, the data suggest that both agonist and partial agonist ligands can
induce formation of multiple TC on the Egr1 promoter, but the ability of the
agonist ligand to maintain these complexes for an extended time results in the
increased potency of the agonist.

PMID: 12496415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 28;278(13):11303-11. Epub 2002 Dec 19.

The orphan G protein-coupled receptor GPR40 is activated by medium and long chain
fatty acids.

Briscoe CP(1), Tadayyon M, Andrews JL, Benson WG, Chambers JK, Eilert MM, Ellis
C, Elshourbagy NA, Goetz AS, Minnick DT, Murdock PR, Sauls HR Jr, Shabon U,
Spinage LD, Strum JC, Szekeres PG, Tan KB, Way JM, Ignar DM, Wilson S, Muir AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park,
North Carolina 27709, USA. cpb15172@gsk.com

Comment in
    Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Jul;14(5):201-3.

GPR40 is a member of a subfamily of homologous G protein-coupled receptors that
include GPR41 and GPR43 and that have no current function or ligand ascribed.
Ligand fishing experiments in HEK293 cells expressing human GPR40 revealed that a
range of saturated and unsaturated carboxylic acids with carbon chain lengths
greater than six were able to induce an elevation of [Ca(2+)](i), measured using 
a fluorometric imaging plate reader. 5,8,11-Eicosatriynoic acid was the most
potent fatty acid tested, with a pEC(50) of 5.7. G protein coupling of GPR40 was 
examined in Chinese hamster ovary cells expressing the G alpha(q/i)-responsive
Gal4-Elk1 reporter system. Expression of human GPR40 led to a constitutive
induction of luciferase activity, which was further increased by exposure of the 
cells to eicosatriynoic acid. Neither the constitutive nor ligand-mediated
luciferase induction was inhibited by pertussis toxin treatment, suggesting that 
GPR40 was coupled to G alpha(q/11.) Expression analysis by quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR showed that GPR40 was specifically expressed in brain and
pancreas, with expression in rodent pancreas being localized to insulin-producing
beta-cells. These data suggest that some of the physiological effects of fatty
acids in pancreatic islets and brain may be mediated through a cell-surface
receptor.

PMID: 12496284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Biol Reprod. 2003 Jan;68(1):309-15.

Adenosine triphosphate activates mitogen-activated protein kinase in
pre-neoplastic and neoplastic ovarian surface epithelial cells.

Choi KC(1), Tai CJ, Tzeng CR, Auersperg N, Leung PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

To investigate the role of ATP in ovarian tumorigenesis, the present study
examined the expression of the P2U purinoceptor (P2U-R) and effect of ATP on
growth stimulation in pre-neoplastic and neoplastic ovarian surface epithelial
(OSE) cells. The immortalized OSE (IOSE) cell lines, including IOSE-29
(pre-neoplastic), IOSE-29EC (neoplastic), and OVCAR-3 (ovarian adenocarcinoma
cell line) were used. Our results indicated that P2U-R mRNA was expressed and
that ATP exerted a growth-stimulatory effect in IOSE-29, IOSE-29EC, and OVCAR-3. 
To investigate the mechanism of the growth-stimulatory effect, the activation of 
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) by ATP was examined. Treatment with ATP
resulted in MAPK activation in IOSE-29 and IOSE-29EC cells, whereas the
stimulatory effect of ATP in cellular proliferation and MAPK activation was
completely abolished in the presence of PD98059 (an MAPK/ERK kinase inhibitor)
and staurosporin (a protein kinase C inhibitor), suggesting that the growth
stimulatory effect of ATP is mediated via protein kinase C-dependent MAPK
activation in pre-neoplastic and neoplastic OSE cells. In a time-dependent study,
ATP significantly increased MAPK activity at 5-20 min in IOSE-29 cells. Activated
MAPK declined to control levels after 20 min in these cells. Treatment with ATP
significantly induced MAPK activation after 5 min and was sustained for 60 min in
IOSE-29EC cells. In addition, treatment with ATP resulted in substantial
phosphorylation of Elk-1, the Ets family transcriptional factor, confirming that 
ATP action is mediated by activation of MAPK. In conclusion, we have demonstrated
that P2U-R was expressed and that ATP induced growth stimulation in IOSE and
OVCAR-3 cells. Furthermore, treatment with ATP resulted in the activation of an
MAPK cascade and phosphorylation of Elk-1 in IOSE-29 and IOSE-29EC cells. These
results suggest that the MAPK cascade may be involved in growth stimulation in
response to ATP in pre-neoplastic and neoplastic OSE cells.

PMID: 12493727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Jan 1;282(1):48-57.

Activities of MAP-kinase pathways in normal uroepithelial cells and urothelial
carcinoma cell lines.

Swiatkowski S(1), Seifert HH, Steinhoff C, Prior A, Thievessen I, Schliess F,
Schulz WA.

Author information: 
(1)Urologische Klinik, Heinrich-Heine-Universit‰t, D¸sseldorf, Germany.

It is often assumed that MAPK pathways drive proliferation of normal
uroepithelial (UEC) and urothelial carcinoma (TCC) cells. To check this
assumption, activities and inducibilities of promoters containing serum-response 
elements (SRE) or AP-1 binding sites were investigated in cultured UEC and seven 
TCC lines. Reporter plasmids dependent on SRE or AP-1 sites were highly active in
UEC, but significantly less so in TCC lines. Reporter activity in TCC lines could
be induced by constitutively active MEKK4 or TPA. Accordingly, phosphorylation of
the MAPK pathway components MEK, ERK, and ELK1 was most pronounced in UEC and
lower in TCC lines. MAPK-dependent promoter activities and bromodeoxyuridine
incorporation decreased in UEC upon withdrawal of growth factors, but less so in 
TCC lines, in which serum diminution increased apoptosis. Likewise, E2F-dependent
promoters responded to growth factors in UEC, but were more serum-independent in 
the TCC lines, which lack either RB1 or p16(INK4A). MEK inhibitors inhibited BrdU
incorporation in UEC more strongly than in TCC lines. Thus, proliferation of
normal uroepithelial cells is indeed associated with activation of MAPK pathways.
However, autonomous proliferation of TCC lines--unexpectedly--appears much less
dependent on MAPK activation and may rather be promoted by defects in cell cycle 
regulation.

PMID: 12490193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2003 Jan;79(1):122-6.

Modulation of taste-induced Elk-1 activation by identified neurotransmitter
systems in the insular cortex of the behaving rat.

Berman DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, 
Israel. diego.berman@weizmann.ac.il

Taste consumption activates the extracellular responsive kinases 1-2 (ERK1-2) and
the transcription factor Elk-1 in the insular cortex (IC) of the behaving rat.
ERKs activation, an obligatory step for the encoding of long- but not short-term 
memory, was shown to be regulated by multiple neurotransmitter systems in the IC.
Here I show, by the use of local microinfusions of pharmacological agents into
the IC of the behaving rat, that a set of similar systems is required for the
taste-induced activation of Elk-1. N-Methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), glutamate
metabotropic (mGlu), ionotropic AMPA/kainate (AMPA), muscarinic, and dopaminergic
receptors, which all contribute to the acquisition of taste memory, are also
responsible for Elk-1 activation. However, blockade of the beta-adrenergic
transmission does not affect Elk-1 activation. I also show that the basal level
of Elk-1 activation in cortex is mainly maintained by GABAergic transmission.
Thus, the formation of taste memory triggers the activation of Elk-1 in the IC of
the behaving rat via selected neurotransmitter and neuromodulatory systems.

PMID: 12482687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 14;278(7):4416-23. Epub 2002 Dec 4.

Negative regulation of ERK and Elk by protein kinase B modulates c-Fos
transcription.

Galetic I(1), Maira SM, Andjelkovic M, Hemmings BA.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, P. O. Box 2543, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland.

In this study, we have identified novel regulatory steps involved in the
cross-talk between protein kinase B (PKB) and MAPK signaling pathways. We found
that PKB down-regulates the Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK pathway by reducing the activity of
ERK, which leads to inactivation of the transcription factor Elk1. In addition,
PKB is able to reduce protein levels of Elk1. Both events lead to suppression of 
serum response element (SRE)-dependent transcription and a consequent decrease in
the transcription of SRE-containing genes, such as c-fos. Because activation of
the Ras/MAPK cascade is reported to increase c-fos transcription before
apoptosis, our results are consistent with a specific role for PKB in promoting
cell survival. Decrease in c-Fos protein levels in glioblastoma cells with
constitutively active PKB provides further support for our observations.
Therefore, our findings delineate a novel mechanism regulating immediate-early
transcription, which may be involved in the initial steps in PKB-induced
oncogenic transformation.

PMID: 12468535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Biochem J. 2003 Mar 1;370(Pt 2):479-87.

Urea signalling to immediate-early gene transcription in renal medullary cells
requires transactivation of the epidermal growth factor receptor.

Zhao H(1), Tian W, Xu H, Cohen DM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science
University and the Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 3314 S.W. US
Veterans Hospital Road, Portland, OR 97201, USA.

Signalling by physiological levels of urea (e.g. 200 mM) in cells of the
mammalian renal medulla is reminiscent of activation of a receptor tyrosine
kinase. The epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor may be transactivated by a
variety of G-protein-coupled receptors, primarily through
metalloproteinase-dependent cleavage of a membrane-anchored EGF precursor. In the
murine inner medullary collecting duct (mIMCD3) cell line, urea (200 mM) induced 
prompt (1-5 min) tyrosine phosphorylation of the EGF receptor. Pharmacological
inhibition of EGF receptor kinase activity with AG1478 or PD153035 blocked
urea-inducible transcription and expression of the immediate-early gene, Egr-1.
AG1478 blocked, either fully or partially, other hallmarks of urea signalling
including Elk-1 activation and extracellular signal-regulated kinase
phosphorylation. EGF receptor kinase inhibition also blocked the cytoprotective
effect of urea observed in the context of hypertonicity-inducible apoptosis. EGF 
receptor transactivation was likely to be attributable to
metalloproteinase-dependent ectodomain shedding of an EGF receptor agonist
because both specific and non-specific inhibitors of metalloproteinases blocked
the urea effect. Heparin-binding EGF (HB-EGF), in particular, was implicated
because the diphtheria toxin analogue and highly specific antagonist of HB-EGF,
CRM197, also blocked urea-inducible transcription. In aggregate, these data
indicate that signalling in response to urea in renal medullary cells requires
EGF receptor transactivation, probably through autocrine action of HB-EGF.

PMCID: PMC1223202
PMID: 12466022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Gastroenterology. 2002 Dec;123(6):1962-71.

Helicobacter pylori CagA protein activates serum response element-driven
transcription independently of tyrosine phosphorylation.

Hirata Y(1), Maeda S, Mitsuno Y, Tateishi K, Yanai A, Akanuma M, Yoshida H,
Kawabe T, Shiratori Y, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, University of Tokyo, Japan.
HIRATAY-INT@h.u-tokyo.ac.jp

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Infection with Helicobacter pylori possessing the cag
pathogenicity island (PAI) is associated with severe gastritis and gastric
cancer. CagA protein, one of the products of cag PAI, is translocated into
epithelial cells, where cytoskeletal rearrangements occur as a result of CagA
tyrosine (Tyr) phosphorylation. Here we identify a new role for CagA protein as
an activator of host cell signaling.
METHODS: We transfected CagA into epithelial cells and analyzed its effect on
transcription by reporter assays. The mechanism of reporter activation was
assessed by electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) and immunoblots.
Responsible regions of CagA for reporter activation were determined by truncation
and mutagenesis of cagA gene.
RESULTS: In HeLa cells, expression of CagA increased serum response element
(SRE)-driven and serum response factor (SRF)-driven transcription by 40-fold and 
3.3-fold, respectively, but did not affect nuclear factor kappaB- or AP-1-driven 
transcription. CagA-mediated SRE activation was also observed in gastric cell
lines. Immunoblotting and EMSA revealed that transfection of CagA enhanced
phosphorylation of and DNA binding by Elk1. Furthermore, involvement of Ras and
MEK in CagA-mediated Elk1 phosphorylation was observed. SRE activation was
dependent on several regions within the C-terminal portion of CagA
(CagA(873-1002)), and independent of Tyr phosphorylation.
CONCLUSIONS: The C-terminal portion of CagA enhances SRE-driven transcription by 
activating an upstream signaling cascade without requiring CagA Tyr
phosphorylation. This result suggests that translocated CagA regulates 2 distinct
cellular responses: phosphorylation-dependent cytoskeletal rearrangement and
phosphorylation-independent transcriptional activation.

PMID: 12454853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Regul Pept. 2002 Nov 15;109(1-3):141-8.

GRP receptor-mediated immediate early gene expression and transcription factor
Elk-1 activation in prostate cancer cells.

Xiao D(1), Qu X, Weber HC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 
02118, USA.

Bombesin (BN) and its mammalian homologue gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) have
been shown to play an important role in human cancer as autocrine and paracrine
growth factors. Prostatic neuroendocrine cells are thought to secrete these
regulatory peptides and they may therefore interact with their specific,
aberrantly expressed GRP receptor (GRP-R) in prostate cancer. In this study, we
investigated the effect of BN on immediate early gene expression in two
androgen-independent prostate cancer cell lines DU-145 and PC-3 with functional
GRP receptor. We found that BN induced c-fos mRNA expression in both cell lines
in a time-dependent manner. In contrast, c-jun mRNA was only modestly induced in 
DU-145 cells but not at all in PC-3 cells. On the protein level, we detected
BN-induced stimulation of the c-fos gene product but not of c-jun protein.
Sustained increase of the c-myc gene product was detectable in PC-3 but not in
DU-145 cells. Concurrently, we demonstrated BN-dependent activation of the
transcription factor Elk-1 and significant increase of cell proliferation in both
prostate cancer cell lines. Taken together, these data suggest that BN acts as a 
mitogen in prostate cancer and this might be associated with the activation of
the transcription factor Elk-1 and the immediate early gene c-fos.

PMID: 12409226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Oncogene. 2002 Oct 31;21(50):7690-9.

Activation of the EphA2 tyrosine kinase stimulates the MAP/ERK kinase signaling
cascade.

Pratt RL(1), Kinch MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University Cancer Center, West
Lafayette, Indiana, IN 47907-1246, USA.

Intracellular signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases regulates many different
aspects of cell behavior. Recent studies in our laboratory and others have
demonstrated that the EphA2 receptor tyrosine kinase critically regulates tumor
cell growth, migration and invasiveness. Although the cellular consequences of
EphA2 signaling have been the focus of recent attention, the biochemical changes 
that are triggered by ligand-mediated activation of EphA2 remain largely unknown.
Herein, we demonstrate that ligand stimulation of EphA2 promotes the nucleus
translocation and phosphorylation of ERK kinases, followed by an increase in
nuclear induction of the Elk-1 transcription factor. Ligand-mediated activation
allows EphA2 to form a molecular complex with the SHC and GRB2 adaptor proteins. 
Specifically, we demonstrate that tyrosine phosphorylated EphA2 interacts with
the PTB and SH2 domains of SHC. We also show that the interaction of EphA2 with
GRB2 is indirect and mediated by SHC and that this complex is necessary for
EphA2-mediated activation of ERK kinases. These studies provide a novel mechanism
to demonstrate how EphA2 can convey information from the cell exterior to the
nucleus.

PMID: 12400011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2002 Sep-Oct;36(5):825-32.

[Transformation with the E1A + cHa-ras oncogenes enhances the trans-repressor
function of the Elk-1 transcription factor].

[Article in Russian]

Usenko TN(1), Pospelova TV, Pospelov VA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, 194064
Russia.

Rat embryo fibroblasts (REF) transformed with the complementing E1A and cHa-ras
oncogenes show a down-regulation of the c-fos early response gene, which is
transcribed with the participation of Elk-1. The role of Elk-1 was studied with
constructs coding for the full-length factor or its N- or C-terminal fragment
fused with Gal. The trans-activating effect of each construct on the Gal4-Luc
reporter plasmid was estimated in contransfected REF52 and E1A + cHa-ras cells
stimulated with serum or treated with sodium butyrate, a histone deacetylase
inhibitor. In E1A + cHa-ras cells, serum activated the expression of C-terminal
Gal-Elk(206-428) but not that of full-length Gal-Elk(1-428). The serum-induced
activation of Gal-Elk(206-428) was suppressed by PD98059, a MEK/ERK inhibitor,
and enhanced by SB203580, an inhibitor of the p38-kinase cascade. It was assumed 
that p38 negatively affects the MEK/ERK cascade, which plays the major role in
the Elk-1 activation in response to serum. Sodium butyrate enhanced the
Gal-Elk(1-428) activity both in serum-stimulated and in starving E1A - cHa-ras
cells, suggesting a high activity of Elk-1-phosphorylating kinases in the latter.
The butyrate-mediated activation of Gal-Elk(206-428) and Gal-Elk(1-428) was
suppressed by PD98059 and, therefore, depended on the MEK/ERK cascade. Thus,
Elk-1 acted not only as a positive, but also as a negative transcription
regulator. Possibly, to suppress transcription, Elk-1 binds with histone
deacetylases and thereby contributes to the inactive chromatin state in E1A +
cHa-ras cells.

PMID: 12391846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Biol Reprod. 2002 Nov;67(5):1393-404.

Mechanisms of epidermal growth factor signaling: regulation of steroid
biosynthesis and the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein in mouse Leydig tumor
cells.

Manna PR(1), Huhtaniemi IT, Wang XJ, Eubank DW, Stocco DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas 79430, USA.

Steroid hormone biosynthesis in the adrenals and gonads is regulated by the
steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein through its action in mediating the
intramitochondrial transport of cholesterol. A role for epidermal growth factor
(EGF) in modulating steroidogenesis has been previously determined, but the
mechanism of its action remains unknown. The present investigation was designed
to explore the potential mechanism of action of mouse EGF (mEGF) in the
regulation of steroid biosynthesis and StAR protein expression in mLTC-1 mouse
Leydig tumor cells. We show that treatment of mLTC-1 cells with mEGF
significantly increased the levels of progesterone (P), StAR protein, and StAR
mRNA in a time- and dose-dependent manner. The coordinate induction of P
synthesis and StAR gene expression by mEGF was effectively inhibited by
cycloheximide, indicating a requirement for de novo protein synthesis. Also,
longer exposure of mLTC-1 cells to mEGF produced a marked decrease in LH-receptor
mRNA expression. These effects of mEGF were exerted through high-affinity binding
sites (K(d) approximately 0.53 nmol/L) in these cells. It was also determined
that the arachidonic acid (especially lipoxygenase metabolites) and
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways were also involved in the mEGF-induced 
steroidogenic response. However, involvement of the latter pathway was further
assessed in nonsteroidogenic COS-1 cells transfected with the Elk1
trans-reporting plasmids and resulted in a significant increase in luciferase
activity in response to mEGF. Furthermore, deletion and mutational analyses
demonstrated a predominant involvement of activator protein-1 in addition to the 
multiple mEGF responsive elements found within the 5'-flanking region (-151/-1
base pairs) of the mouse StAR gene. These findings provide novel insights into
the mEGF-induced regulatory cascades associated with steroid synthesis and StAR
protein expression in mouse Leydig cells.

PMID: 12390868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Cell Physiol. 2002 Dec;193(3):263-74.

K vitamins, PTP antagonism, and cell growth arrest.

Carr BI(1), Wang Z, Kar S.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Center, Starzl Transplantation Institute, University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.
carrbi@msx.upmc.edu

The main function of K vitamins is to act as co-factors for gamma-glutamyl
carboxylase. However, they have also recently been shown to inhibit cell growth. 
We have chemically synthesized a series of K vitamin analogs with various side
chains at the 2 or 3 position of the core naphthoquinone structure. The analogs
with short thio-ethanol side chains are found to be more potent growth inhibitors
in vitro of various tumor cell lines. Cpd 5 or
[2-(2-mercaptoethanol)-3-methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone] is one of the most potent.
The anti-proliferation activity of these compounds is antagonized by exogenous
thiols but not by non-thiol antioxidants. This suggests that the growth
inhibition is mediated by sulfhydryl arylation of cellular glutathione and
cysteine-containing proteins and not by oxidative stress. The protein tyrosine
phosphatases (PTP) are an important group of proteins that contain cysteine at
their catalytic site. PTPs regulate mitogenic signal transduction and cell cycle 
progression. PTP inhibition by Cpd 5 results in prolonged tyrosine
phosphorylation and activation of several kinases and transcription factors
including EGFR, ERK1/2, and Elk1. Cpd 5 could activate ERK1/2 either by signaling
from an activated EGFR, which is upstream in the signaling cascade, or by direct 
inhibition of ERK1/2 phosphatase(s). Prolonged ERK1/2 phosphorylation strongly
correlates with Cpd 5-mediated growth inhibition. Cpd 5 can also bind to and
inhibit the Cdc25 family of dual specific phosphatases. As a result, several
Cdc25 substrates (Cdk1, Cdk2, Cdk4) involved in cell cycle progression are
tyrosine phosphorylated and thereby inhibited by its action. Cpd 5 could also
inhibit both normal liver regeneration and hepatoma growth in vivo. DNA synthesis
during rat liver regeneration following partial hepatectomy, transplantable rat
hepatoma cell growth, and glutathione-S-transferase-pi expressing hepatocytes
after administration of the chemical carcinogen diethylnitrosamine, are all
inhibited by Cpd 5 administration. The growth inhibitory effect during liver
regeneration and transplantable tumor growth is also correlated with ERK1/2
phosphorylation induced by Cpd 5. Thus, Cpd 5-mediated inhibition of PTPs, such
as Cdc25 leads to cell growth arrest due to altered activity of key cellular
kinases involved in signal transduction and cell cycle progression. This
prototype K vitamin analog represents a novel class of growth inhibitor based
upon its action as a selective PTP antagonist. It is clearly associated with
prolonged ERK1/2 phosphorylation, which is in contrast with the transient ERK1/2 
phosphorylation induced by growth stimulatory mitogens.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12384979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2002 Oct;27(4):565-75.

Amphetamine increases phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase
and transcription factors in the rat striatum via group I metabotropic glutamate 
receptors.

Choe ES(1), Chung KT, Mao L, Wang JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, University of Missouri-Kansas
City, 2411 Holmes St., M3-C15, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA.

Amphetamine is an indirect dopamine receptor agonist and increases glutamate
release in the striatum. Activation of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors
(mGluRs) upregulates cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and Elk-1
phosphorylation via extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) in the
striatum in vivo. In the present study the role of mGluRs in the regulation of
ERK1/2 pathways leading to CREB and Elk-1 phosphorylation by amphetamine was
investigated using immunohistochemistry and Western blot in the rat dorsal
striatum. Acute administration of amphetamine (5 mg/kg, i.p.) caused increases in
phosphorylated (p)CREB, pElk-1, and pERK1/2 immunoreactivity. Intrastriatal
blockade of group I mGluRs with
N-phenyl-7-(hydroxyimino)cyclopropa[b]chromen-1a-carboxamide (PHCCC; 25 nmol)
significantly attenuated amphetamine-induced pCREB, pElk-1, pERK1/2, and Fos
immunoreactivity in both medial and lateral areas of the striatum. Systemic
injection of an mGluR5 antagonist, 2-methyl-6-(phenylethynyl)pyridine
hydrochloride (MPEP; 10 mg/kg, i.p.), also blocked the amphetamine induction of
these phosphoproteins. In contrast, intrastriatal blockade of group II/III mGluRs
with (RS)-alpha-methylserine-o-phosphate monophenyl ester (MSOPPE; 25 nmol) did
not affect amphetamine-induced increases in all the four markers. Similarly,
intrastriatal dantrolene (2 or 20 nmol) that blocks intracellular Ca(2+) release 
from ryanodine-sensitive stores did not affect amphetamine effects. Injection of 
PHCCC, MPEP, MSOPPE, or dantrolene alone did not alter basal levels of the three 
phosphoproteins and Fos. These data suggest that acute amphetamine is able to
facilitate the phosphorylation of CREB, Elk-1, and ERK1/2 signaling proteins and 
Fos gene expression via a group I mGluR-dependent mechanism in the dorsal
striatum.

PMID: 12377393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. FASEB J. 2002 Oct;16(12):1504-14.

Negative regulatory role of overexpression of PLC gamma 1 in the expression of
early growth response 1 gene in rat 3Y1 fibroblasts.

Shin SY(1), Ko J, Chang JS, Min DS, Choi C, Bae SS, Kim MJ, Hyun DS, Kim JH, Han 
MY, Kim YH, Kim YS, Na DS, Suh PG, Lee YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
Yeungnam University, Daegu, Korea 705-717.

The early growth response 1 (Egr-1) gene product is a transcription factor that
functions as an oikis factor. Loss of Egr-1 expression is closely associated with
tumor formation. Phospholipase Cgamma1 (PLCgamma1) is overexpressed in some
tumors, and its overexpression causes anchorage-independent growth. Here we
report that overexpression of PLCgamma1 and SH2-SH3 domain of PLCgamma1 decreased
induction of Egr-1 and the Egr-1-regulated genes TSP-1 and PAI-1. Results from
the nuclear run-on assay and transfection experiment with the proximal 455 base
pair region of the Egr-1 promoter (-454 to +1) showed that Egr-1 transcriptional 
activity was suppressed in PLCgamma1-3Y1 cells whereas decay of Egr-1 mRNA was
similar in both cell lines. Serum response element- and ternary complex factor
Elk-1-mediated transcriptional activation of the reporter gene in response to EGF
were also inhibited in PLCgamma1-3Y1 cells. Pretreatment with the protein
synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX) partially abrogated the serum-induced
suppression of Egr-1 transcription in PLCgamma1-3Y1 cells, suggesting that a
CHX-sensitive factor(s) is involved in the suppression of Egr-1 transcription in 
PLCgamma1-3Y1 cells. Our results demonstrated that overexpression of PLCgamma1
functions as a negative modulator of the tumor suppressor Egr-1 gene expression, 
possibly through inhibition of Elk-1-dependent transcriptional activity.

PMID: 12374773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Oct;22(20):7083-92.

Interaction of serum response factor (SRF) with the Elk-1 B box inhibits
RhoA-actin signaling to SRF and potentiates transcriptional activation by Elk-1.

Murai K(1), Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, Lincoln's Inn Fields
Laboratories, Transcription Laboratory, London WC2A 3PX, United Kingdom.

Serum response factor (SRF) is a transcription factor which regulates many
immediate-early genes. Rho GTPases regulate SRF activity through changes in actin
dynamics, but some SRF target genes, such as c-fos, are insensitive to this
pathway. At the c-fos promoter, SRF recruits members of the ternary complex
factor (TCF) family of Ets domain proteins through interactions with the TCF
B-box region. Analysis of c-fos promoter mutations demonstrates that the TCF and 
ATF/AP1 sites adjoining the SRF binding site inhibit activation of the promoter
by RhoA-actin signaling. The presence of the TCF binding site is sufficient for
inhibition, and experiments with an altered-specificity Elk-1 derivative
demonstrate that inhibition can be mediated by the Elk-1 TCF. Using Elk-1 fusion 
proteins that can bind DNA autonomously, we show that inhibition of RhoA-actin
signaling requires physical interaction between the Elk-1 B box and SRF. These
results account for the insensitivity of c-fos to RhoA-actin signaling.
Interaction of the B box with SRF also potentiates transcriptional activation by 
the Elk-1 C-terminal activation domain. Combinatorial interactions between SRF
and TCF proteins are thus likely to play an important role in determining the
relative sensitivity of SRF target genes to Ras- and Rho-controlled signal
transduction pathways.

PMCID: PMC139817
PMID: 12242287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Oncogene. 2002 Sep 19;21(42):6434-45.

Menin uncouples Elk-1, JunD and c-Jun phosphorylation from MAP kinase activation.

Gallo A(1), Cuozzo C, Esposito I, Maggiolini M, Bonofiglio D, Vivacqua A,
Garramone M, Weiss C, Bohmann D, Musti AM.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Endocrinologia e Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR, Dipartimento di
Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Universita' di Napoli 'FedericoII', 
80131 Napoli, Italy.

Menin, a nuclear protein encoded by the tumor suppressor gene MEN1, interacts
with the AP-1 transcription factor JunD and inhibits its transcriptional
activity. In addition, overexpression of Menin counteracts Ras-induced
tumorigenesis. We show that Menin inhibits ERK-dependent phosphorylation and
activation of both JunD and the Ets-domain transcription factor Elk-1. We also
show that Menin represses the inducible activity of the c-fos promoter.
Furthermore, Menin expression inhibits Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)-mediated
phosphorylation of both JunD and c-Jun. Kinase assays show that Menin
overexpression does not interfere with activation of either ERK2 or JNK1,
suggesting that Menin acts at a level downstream of MAPK activation. An
N-terminal deletion mutant of Menin that cannot inhibit JunD phosphorylation by
JNK, can still repress JunD phosphorylation by ERK2, suggesting that Menin
interferes with ERK and JNK pathways through two distinct inhibitory mechanisms. 
Taken together, our data suggest that Menin uncouples ERK and JNK activation from
phosphorylation of their nuclear targets Elk-1, JunD and c-Jun, hence inhibiting 
accumulation of active Fos/Jun heterodimers. This study provides new molecular
insights into the tumor suppressor function of Menin and suggests a mechanism by 
which Menin may interfere with Ras-dependent cell transformation and oncogenesis.

PMID: 12226747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. FEBS Lett. 2002 Sep 11;527(1-3):119-24.

Involvement of Elk-1 in L6E9 skeletal muscle differentiation.

Khurana A(1), Dey CS.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Research Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, National
Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, 160 062, Punjab, India.

In L6E9 skeletal muscle cells ternary complex factor (TCF) Elk-1 expression
increased with the onset of skeletal muscle differentiation, whereas its
activation decreased as a function of differentiation. Its expression was
predominantly restricted to cytoplasm and activated ones were predominantly
restricted to the nucleus of the differentiated cells. Inhibition of ERK-1/-2
activities by PD098059 resulted into significant reduction in Elk-1 expression
and phosphorylation during differentiation. In contrast, inhibition of p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) enhanced Elk-1 expression and activation,
thereby mediating inhibition of skeletal muscle differentiation. Overexpression
of inactive mutant Elk-1 enhanced differentiation. Data suggest that ERK-1/-2 and
p38 MAPK activities modulate Elk-1 expression and activation to regulate skeletal
muscle differentiation.

PMID: 12220646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Sep 13;297(1):17-23.

A new ERK2 binding protein, Naf1, attenuates the EGF/ERK2 nuclear signaling.

Zhang S(1), Fukushi M, Hashimoto S, Gao C, Huang L, Fukuyo Y, Nakajima T, Amagasa
T, Enomoto S, Koike K, Miura O, Yamamoto N, Tsuchida N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cellular Oncology, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and 
Dental University, Tokyo 113, Japan.

Extracellular signal regulated kinase1/2 (ERK1/2), an important factor in signal 
transduction, controls cell growth, differentiation, and death. To elucidate the 
details of the mechanism of ERK1/2 signaling in human cells, we isolated
Nef-associated factor 1 alpha (Naf1 alpha) by a yeast two-hybrid system, which
bound to human ERK2. The binding was confirmed by a pull-down assay in vitro and 
immunoprecipitation in vivo. Upon EGF treatment, Naf1 alpha was phosphorylated by
the EGF/MEK/ERK2 signal transduction pathway. To identify the role of Naf1 alpha 
in the ERK2 signaling, Naf1 alpha-expressing Saos-2 cells were analyzed for ERK2 
nuclear translocation and activation of its downstream target. Overexpression of 
Naf1 alpha suppressed ERK2 entering into the nucleus and inhibited the
ERK2-dependent Elk1-driven luciferase transcription, suggesting Naf1 alpha to be 
an attenuator of activated ERK2 signaling.

PMID: 12220502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 22;277(47):45592-603. Epub 2002 Sep 5.

Identification of a JAK2-independent pathway regulating growth hormone
(GH)-stimulated p44/42 mitogen-activated protein kinase activity. GH activation
of Ral and phospholipase D is Src-dependent.

Zhu T(1), Ling L, Lobie PE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore, Republic of Singapore.

We have demonstrated here that growth hormone (GH) stimulates the formation of
the active GTP-bound form of both RalA and RalB in NIH-3T3 cells. Full activation
of RalA and RalB by GH required the combined activity of c-Src and JAK2, both
kinases activated by GH independent of the other. Activation of RalA and RalB by 
growth hormone did not require the activity of JAK2 per se. Ras was also
activated by GH and was required for the GH-stimulated formation of GTP-bound
RalA and RalB. Activation of RalA by GH subsequently resulted in increased
phospholipase D activity and the formation of its metabolite, phosphatidic acid. 
GH-stimulated RalA-phospholipase D-dependent formation of phosphatidic acid was
required for activation of p44/42 MAPK and subsequent Elk-1-mediated
transcription stimulated by GH. Thus we report the identification of a
JAK2-independent pathway regulating GH-stimulated p44/42 MAPK activity.

PMID: 12218045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Invest Dermatol. 2002 Jul;119(1):99-106.

Activation and translocation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase after
stimulation of monocytes with contact sensitizers.

Brand P(1), Plochmann S, Valk E, Zahn S, Saloga J, Knop J, Becker D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Mainz, Langenbeckstrasse 1, D-55131
Mainz, Germany.

Recently we described the induction of tyrosine phosphorylation by contact
sensitizers as an early molecular event during the activation of antigen-
presenting cells. In this study, the role of the p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase for the activation of human monocytes after exposure to four structurally 
unrelated contact sensitizers was analyzed in comparison with the irritant
benzalkonium chloride and an inductor of oxidative stress (H2O2) using
immunofluorescence, Western blotting, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
techniques. Bio chemical analysis revealed a translocation of p38 from the
cytoplasm to the detergent-resistant cell fraction only upon stimulation with
contact sensitizers. The activity of p38 was studied by quantification of its
phosphorylated active form with a specific antibody and by kinase assay. Although
all stimulants used in this study led to the activation of p38, a translocation
to the detergent-resistant fraction as well phosphorylation of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase dependent transcription factor Elk-1 was induced
only by contact sensitizers. Evidence for a functional relevance of
mitogen-activated protein kinase activation was provided by measurement of the
hapten-induced production of the proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-1beta. Its 
release was inhibited by blocking p38-mediated signaling using the imidazole
compounds SB203580 and SB202190. These data show that contact sensitizers are
strong activators of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase. Although
activation of this stress-associated pathway has been reported for many other
stimuli, a unique translocation of p38 from the cytoplasm to the
detergent-resistant fraction seems to be a specific event during hapten-induced
activation of antigen-presenting cells.

PMID: 12164931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Neurosci Lett. 2002 Aug 23;329(1):9-12.

Region-specific phosphorylation of ATF-2, Elk-1 and c-Jun in rat hippocampus and 
cerebellum after electroconvulsive shock.

Ahn YM(1), Kang UG, Oh SW, Juhnn YS, Joo YH, Park JB, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Eulji University School of Medicine, Seoul
139-711, South Korea.

There have been reports of regional differences in the activation of mitogen
activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and in the induction of immediate early genes
after electroconvulsive shock (ECS) in the rat brain. This study was performed to
determine whether ECS induce the region-specific phosphorylation of
MAPK-downstream transcription factors, ATF-2, Elk-1, c-Jun, in rat hippocampus
and cerebellum. Following ECS, the phosphorylation of ATF-2 was highly increased 
in the hippocampus but slightly in the cerebellum. The phosphorylation of Elk-1
was increased in the cerebellum but not in the hippocampus. In contrast, the
phosphorylation of c-Jun was increased only in the hippocampus. These results
indicate that ECS can induce the region-specific phosphorylation of
MAPK-downstream transcription factors in rat hippocampus and cerebellum.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12161250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2002 Jul;132(3):375-84.

Differential activation of ERK and JNK by arsenite in mouse muscle cells.

Ishrath A(1), Kumar N, Dey CS.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Research Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, National
Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Sector 67, S.A.S. Nagar,
Punjab 160 062, India.

We studied the activation of MAPKs, such as ERK and JNK, by arsenite in C2C12
mouse skeletal muscle cells as a function of proliferation and differentiation.
Data showed that both ERK and JNK were activated by arsenite in proliferated and 
differentiated cells in a differential manner. The activation of the enzymes was 
not due to alteration in their concentration. The activities were independent of 
each other. ERK activation was possibly partly through the activity of Ras, Raf
and the MEK cascade, and due to oxidative stress, which possibly led to the
activation of the transcription factor, Elk-1. In contrast, the activation of JNK
was solely due to the generation of free radicals, resulting in activation of
c-Jun and perhaps Elk-1. These results show for the first time that, in skeletal 
muscle, stress caused by arsenite involves the MAP-kinase signal transduction
cascade, perhaps in a cell type-specific regulatory pathway.

PMID: 12161171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 25;277(43):40911-8. Epub 2002 Jul 26.

Ras/MAPK pathway confers basement membrane dependence upon endoderm
differentiation of embryonic carcinoma cells.

Smedberg JL(1), Smith ER, Capo-Chichi CD, Frolov A, Yang DH, Godwin AK, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Ovarian Cancer and Tumor Cell Biology Programs, Department of Medical
Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 7701 Burholme Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, 
USA.

The formation of extraembryonic endoderm is one of the earliest steps in the
differentiation of pluripotent cells of the inner cell mass during the early
stages of embryonic development. The primitive endoderm cells and the derived
parietal and visceral endoderm cells gain the capacity to produce collagen IV and
laminin. The deposition of these components results in the formation of basement 
membrane and epithelium of the endoderm, with polarized cells covering the inner 
surface of the blastocoels. We used retinoic acid-induced endoderm
differentiation of stem cell-like F9 embryonic carcinoma cells to study the role 
of the Ras pathway and its regulation in the formation of the visceral endoderm. 
Upon endoderm differentiation of F9 cells induced by retinoic acid, c-Fos
expression, the downstream target of the Ras pathway, is suppressed by uncoupling
Elk-1 phosphorylation/activation to MAPK activity. However, attachment to matrix 
gel greatly enhances the activation of MAPK in endoderm cells but not in
undifferentiated F9 cells. Enhanced MAPK activation as a result of contact with
basement membrane is able to compensate for reduced Elk-1 phosphorylation and
c-Fos expression. We conclude that endoderm differentiation renders the
activation of the Ras pathway basement membrane dependent, contributing to the
epithelial organization of the visceral endoderm.

PMID: 12145292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2002 Aug;302(2):516-24.

Alcohol-induced c-Fos expression in the Edinger-Westphal nucleus: pharmacological
and signal transduction mechanisms.

Bachtell RK(1), Tsivkovskaia NO, Ryabinin AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Behavioral Neuroscience, Oregon Health and Science University,
3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97201, USA.

Mapping inducible transcription factors has shown that the Edinger-Westphal
nucleus is preferentially sensitive to alcohol intoxication. Herein, we
characterize the pharmacological and signal transduction mechanisms related to
alcohol-induced c-Fos expression in Edinger-Westphal neurons. Using
immunohistochemistry, we show that pretreatment with gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA)-ergic antagonists (4 mg/kg bicuculline and 45 mg/kg pentylenetetrazole)
attenuates induction of c-Fos expression by alcohol (2.4 g/kg, intraperitoneal). 
In addition, 10 mg/kg
2-(2,3-dihydro-2-methoxy-1,4-benzodioxin-2-yl)4,5-dihydro-1H-imidazole (RX
821002), an alpha(2A/D)-adrenoceptor antagonist, and 20 mg/kg haloperidol, a
dopamine antagonist, also block alcohol-induced c-Fos expression in
Edinger-Westphal neurons. No effects were seen in alcohol-induced c-Fos after the
pretreatment of 20 mg/kg propranolol (beta-adrenoceptor antagonist), 10 mg/kg
2-(2-(4-(2-methoxyphenyl)piperazin-1-yl)
ethy)-4,4-dimethyl-1,3-(2H,4H)-isoquinolindione dihydrochloride (ARC 239)
(alpha(2B/C)-adrenoceptor antagonist), or 30 mg/kg naltrexone (opioid
antagonist). Although positive modulators for the GABA(A) receptor (20 mg/kg
3alpha-hydroxy-5alpha-pregnan-20-one and 10-30 mg/kg chlordiazepoxide) and opioid
receptor (10 mg/kg morphine) produced significant elevations, agonists for
alpha(2)-adrenoceptors (clonidine) and dopamine receptors (apomorphine) had no
effect on Edinger-Westphal c-Fos expression. These findings suggest that
alcohol-induced c-Fos expression in Edinger-Westphal results from direct
interactions with GABA(A) receptors, which are modified by
alpha(2A/D)-adrenoceptors and dopamine receptors. Also using immunohistochemistry
to identify potential intracellular mechanisms associated with alcohol-induced
c-Fos expression in Edinger-Westphal, we show time-dependent increases in serine 
727 phospho-signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) but no
changes in phospho-cAMP response element-binding protein and phospho-Elk1.
Time-dependent increases in phospho-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
1/2 were found to occur simultaneously with increases in serine 727
phospho-Stat3. Finally, blockade of ERK 1/2 phosphorylation with the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MEK) 1/2 inhibitor SL327 blocked
alcohol-induced c-Fos expression, suggesting that alcohol induces c-Fos in
Edinger-Westphal neurons through activation of the MEK1/2-ERK1/2-Stat3 pathway.

PMID: 12130710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Genes Dev. 2002 Jul 15;16(14):1815-27.

C. elegans EOR-1/PLZF and EOR-2 positively regulate Ras and Wnt signaling and
function redundantly with LIN-25 and the SUR-2 Mediator component.

Howard RM(1), Sundaram MV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Erratum in
    Genes Dev 2002 Aug 15;16(16):2169.

In Caenorhabditis elegans, Ras/ERK and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathways
cooperate to induce P12 and vulval cell fates in a Hox-dependent manner. Here we 
describe eor-1 and eor-2, two new positively acting nuclear components of the Ras
and Wnt pathways. eor-1 and eor-2 act downstream or in parallel to ERK and
function redundantly with the Mediator complex gene sur-2 and the functionally
related gene lin-25, such that removal of both eor-1/eor-2 and sur-2/lin-25
mimics the removal of a main Ras pathway component. Furthermore, the eor-1 and
eor-2 mutant backgrounds reveal an essential role for the Elk1-related gene
lin-1. eor-1 and eor-2 also act downstream or in parallel to pry-1 Axin and
therefore act at the convergence of the Ras and Wnt pathways. eor-1 encodes the
ortholog of human PLZF, a BTB/zinc-finger transcription factor that is fused to
RARalpha in acute promyelocytic leukemia. eor-2 encodes a novel protein.
EOR-1/PLZF and EOR-2 appear to function closely together and cooperate with Hox
genes to promote the expression of Ras- and Wnt-responsive genes. Further studies
of eor-1 and eor-2 may provide insight into the roles of PLZF in normal
development and leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC186391
PMID: 12130541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Cell Physiol. 2002 Aug;192(2):151-9.

Transient and sustained ERK phosphorylation and nuclear translocation in growth
control.

Adachi T(1), Kar S, Wang M, Carr BI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Thomas E. Starzl Transplantation Institute, University 
of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Growth stimulation and inhibition are both associated with tyrosine
phosphorylation. We examined the effects of epidermal growth factor (EGF), a
growth stimulant, and compound 5 (Cpd 5), a protein-tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase)
inhibitor, which inhibits the growth of the same Hep3B hepatoma cells. We found
that both EGF and Cpd 5 induced tyrosine phosphorylation of EGF receptor (EGFR)
and ERK. However, the phosphorylation caused by EGF was transient and that caused
by Cpd 5 was prolonged. Furthermore, Cpd 5 action caused a strong nuclear
phospho-ERK signal and induced phospho-Elk-1, a nuclear target of ERK activation,
in contrast to the weak effects of EGF. An ERK kinase assay demonstrated that ERK
activated by Cpd 5 could phosphorylate its physiological substrate, Elk-1. The
MEK inhibitors PD098056 and U0126 abrogated both the induction by Cpd 5 of
phospho-ERK, its nuclear translocation and phospho-Elk-1 and also antagonized its
growth inhibitory effects. Furthermore, phospho-ERK phosphatase and phospho-Elk-1
activities were lost from nuclear extracts from Cpd 5 treated, but not EGF
treated cells. In conclusion, the data show that Cpd 5 causes growth inhibition
as a consequence of prolonged ERK and Elk-1 phosphorylation, likely a result of
inhibition of multiple PTPases, including those acting on phospho-EGFR, on
phospho-ERK, and on phospho-Elk-1, in contrast to the kinase driven transient
activation resulting from EGF.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12115721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Nutr. 2002 Jul;132(7):1848-53.

Flavonoid phytochemicals regulate activator protein-1 signal transduction
pathways in endometrial and kidney stable cell lines.

Frigo DE(1), Duong BN, Melnik LI, Schief LS, Collins-Burow BM, Pace DK, McLachlan
JA, Burow ME.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Endocrinology Laboratory, Center for Bioenvironmental Research, 
Tulane and Xavier Universities, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

Phytochemicals bind to and regulate the human estrogen receptors (ERalpha and
ERbeta), mimicking actions of the endogenous estrogen, 17beta-estradiol, and
known antiestrogens such as ICI 182,780. Recently, however, some of these
estrogenic phytochemicals have been shown to affect other signal transduction
pathways, such as receptor tyrosine kinases and mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPK). Previously, we found that certain phytochemicals, such as flavone,
apigenin, kaempferide and chalcone, have potent antiestrogenic activity. However,
the antiestrogenicity of these compounds does not correlate with their ER binding
capacity, suggesting alternative signaling as a mechanism for their antagonistic 
effects. In this study, we examined the effects of these compounds on the
transcription factor activator protein-1 (AP-1). Using AP-1-luciferase stable
human endometrial adenocarcinoma Ishikawa and human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293
cells, chalcone, flavone and apigenin all stimulated AP-1 activity. Additionally,
we determined the effects of the phytochemicals on transcription factors that are
downstream targets of various MAPK pathways. To test this, we used HEK 293 cells 
stably cointegrated with GAL4 transcriptional activation systems of Elk-1, c-Jun 
or C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP). Chalcone was the only phytochemical that
activated all three transcription factors [Elk-1, 2.7-fold (P < 0.001); c-Jun,
2.7-fold (P = 0.025); CHOP, 3.0-fold (P = 0.002)], whereas apigenin stimulated
CHOP (3.9-fold; P < 0.001), but inhibited phorbol myristoyl acetate-induced c-Jun
activity (71%;P = 0.006). This work suggests that phytochemicals affect multiple 
signaling pathways that converge at the level of transcriptional regulation. The 
ability of flavonoids to regulate MAPK-responsive pathways in a selective manner 
indicates a mechanism by which phytochemicals may influence human health and
disease.

PMID: 12097658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jul;16(7):1638-51.

Activation and induction of NUR77/NURR1 in corticotrophs by CRH/cAMP: involvement
of calcium, protein kinase A, and MAPK pathways.

Kovalovsky D(1), Refojo D, Liberman AC, Hochbaum D, Pereda MP, Coso OA, Stalla
GK, Holsboer F, Arzt E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de FisiologÌa y BiologÌa Molecular, Departamento de BiologÌa,
Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, 1428
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Nur factors are critical for proopiomelanocortin (POMC) induction by CRH in
corticotrophs, but the pathways linking CRH to Nur are unknown. In this study we 
show that in AtT-20 corticotrophs CRH and cAMP induce Nur77 and Nurr1 expression 
and transcription at the NurRE site by protein kinase A (PKA) and
calcium-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Calcium pathways depend on
calmodulin kinase II (CAMKII) activity, and calcium-independent pathways are
accounted for in part by MAPK activation (Rap1/B-Raf/MAPK-ERK kinase/ERK1/2),
demonstrated by the use of molecular and pharmacological tools. AtT-20
corticotrophs express B-Raf, as do other cells in which cAMP stimulates MAPK.
CRH/cAMP stimulated ERK2 activity and increased transcriptional activity of a
Gal4-Elk1 protein, which was blocked by overexpression of dominant negative
mutants and kinase inhibitors and stimulated by expression of B-Raf. The MAPK
kinase inhibitors did not affect Nur77 and Nurr1 mRNA induction but blocked CRH
or cAMP-stimulated Nur transcriptional activity. Moreover, MAPK stimulated
phosphorylation and transactivation of Nur77. The functional impact of these
pathways was confirmed at the POMC promoter. In conclusion, in AtT-20
corticotrophs the CRH/cAMP signaling that leads to Nur77/Nurr1 mRNA induction and
transcriptional activation, and thus POMC expression, is dependent on protein
kinase A and involves calcium/calmodulin kinase II (Nur induction/activation) and
MAPK calcium-dependent and -independent (Nur phosphorylation-activation)
pathways.

PMID: 12089357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Cell Sci. 2002 Jul 1;115(Pt 13):2781-90.

Cell adhesion differentially regulates the nucleocytoplasmic distribution of
active MAP kinases.

Aplin AE(1), Hogan BP, Tomeu J, Juliano RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. aplina@mail.amc.edu

Cells decide whether to undergo processes, such as proliferation, differentiation
and apoptosis, based upon the cues they receive from both circulating factors and
integrin-mediated adhesion to the extracellular matrix. Integrins control the
activation of the early signaling pathways. For example, growth factor activation
of the ERK cascade is enhanced when cells are adherent. In addition, adhesion
receptors oversee the cellular localization of critical signaling components. We 
have recently shown that ERK signaling to the nucleus is regulated by cell
adhesion at the level of nucleocytoplasmic trafficking. Since the ERKs are only
one class of MAP kinase, we extended these studies to include both JNK and p38
MAP kinases. We have rendered JNK and p38 activation in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts
anchorage-independent either by treatment with anisomycin or by expression of
upstream activators. Under conditions whereby JNK activation is
anchorage-independent, we show that localization of JNK to the nucleus and
JNK-mediated phosphorylation of c-Jun and Elk-1 is not altered by loss of
adhesion. Likewise, the ability of activated p38 to accumulate in the nucleus was
similar in suspended and adherent cells. Finally, we show that expression of a
form of ERK, which is activated and resistant to nuclear export, reverses the
adhesion-dependency of ERK phosphorylation of Elk-1. Thus, adhesion
differentially regulates the nucleocytoplasmic distribution of MAP kinase
members; ERK accumulation in the nucleus occurs more efficiently in adherent
cells, whereas nuclear accumulation of active p38 and active JNK are unaffected
by changes in adhesion.

PMID: 12077368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jul;22(14):5036-46.

The ETS domain transcription factor Elk-1 contains a novel class of repression
domain.

Yang SH(1), Bumpass DC, Perkins ND, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, 2205 Stopford
Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

The ETS domain transcription factor Elk-1 serves as an integration point for
different mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathways. Phosphorylation of
Elk-1 by MAP kinases triggers its activation. However, while the activation
process is well understood, its downregulation-inactivation is less well
characterized. The ETS DNA-binding domain plays a role in the downregulation of
Elk-dependent promoter activity following mitogenic activation by recruiting the 
mSin3A-HDAC complex. Here we have identified a novel evolutionarily conserved
repression domain in Elk-1, termed the R motif, which serves to reduce the basal 
transcriptional activity of Elk-1 and dampen its response to mitogenic signals.
This domain is highly potent and portable and can repress transcription in trans.
The R motif is related to the CRD1 repression domain in p300 and can functionally
replace this domain and confer p21(waf1/cip1) inducibility on p300. However, the 
R motif acts in a context-dependent manner and is not p21(waf1/cip1) responsive
in Elk-1. Thus, the Elk-1 R motif and the p300 CRD1 motif represent a new class
of repression domains that are regulated in a context-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC139783
PMID: 12077333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Neuroreport. 2002 Jun 12;13(8):1013-6.

CaMKII regulates amphetamine-induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation in striatal neurons.

Choe ES(1), Wang JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, University of Missouri-Kansas
City, 2411 Holmes St., M3-C15, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA.

Amphetamine activates extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1/2)
resulting in cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and Elk-1
phosphorylation in striatal neurons. In the present study we investigated whether
calcium and calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) regulates
amphetamine-induced ERK1/2 pathways in striatal neurons using Western blot and
immunohistochemical analysis. Acute administration of amphetamine (5 mg/kg, i.p.)
increased phosphorylated (p)CaMKII immunoreactivity. Inhibition of CaMKII by
intrastriatal infusion of KN62 (2, 10, or 25 nmol) attenuated amphetamine-induced
increases in pERK1/2, pCREB, and pElk-1 immunoreactivity in the ipsilateral
dorsal striatum in a dose-dependent manner. These data suggest that CaMKII
controls amphetamine-activated ERK1/2 pathways in striatal neurons in vivo.

PMID: 12060798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Methods. 2002 Mar;26(3):270-80.

The use of inducible engrailed fusion proteins to study the cellular functions of
eukaryotic transcription factors.

Vickers ER(1), Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, 2.205 Stopford
Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK.

Transcription factors determine cell lineages, control cell fate, and regulate
cellular responses to stimuli. Many methods are currently used to study the
function of transcription factors in a cellular context and several of these
involve overexpressing a constitutively active form of the protein and studying
its effects. Here we outline an alternative approach involving the inducible
expression of dominant-negative transcription factors in human cell lines.
Dominant-negative transcription factors can be used to investigate the effect of 
signaling pathways on complex cellular processes that are regulated by a
particular transcription factor. Potent dominant-negative transcription factors
can be created by using fusions to the engrailed repressor domain. These fusion
proteins can be coupled to inducible expression systems such as the
ecdysone-inducible system. The ability to control protein expression has several 
benefits including the ability to create stable cell lines that express
potentially cytotoxic proteins. Therefore when used in tandem, these two methods 
constitute a new and improved approach for dissecting the cellular role and
transcriptional targets of many transcription factors. Here we illustrate this
integrated approach by using a conditional dominant-negative Elk-1 protein to
identify candidate Elk-1-regulated target genes.

PMID: 12054883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Biochem Soc Trans. 2002 Apr;30(2):1-9.

Complexities in ETS-domain transcription factor function and regulation: lessons 
from the TCF (ternary complex factor) subfamily. The Colworth Medal Lecture.

Sharrocks AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, 2.205 Stopford
Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, U.K. a.d.sharrocks@man.ac.uk

The ETS-domain transcription factor family can be divided into a series of
subfamilies. Elk-1 represents the founding member of the ternary complex factor
(TCF) subfamily. By focusing on the TCF subfamily, we can demonstrate the
complexities that exist in the function and regulation of ETS-domain
transcription factors. This article focuses on Elk-1 in detail and summarizes the
functions of other TCFs. The key themes covered include the domain structure of
the TCFs, the mechanisms of complex formation with serum response factor,
regulation of TCFs by mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades, and
transcriptional regulatory properties of the TCFs. Finally, the emerging role of 
the TCFs in vivo is discussed. A picture is developing indicating that, while
these proteins exhibit significant sequence and functional conservation, key
differences in their structure and regulation are being identified which may
relate to unique functions of these proteins in vivo.

PMID: 12023815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Anticancer Res. 2002 Mar-Apr;22(2A):799-804.

The retinoid-inducible gene I: effect on apoptosis and mitogen-activated kinase
signal pathways.

Huang SL(1), Shyu RY, Yeh MY, Jiang SY.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: The retinoid-inducible gene I (RIG1), belonging to the family of type
II tumor suppressor genes, was isolated from human gastric cancer cells treated
with all-trans retinoic acid. The activity of the RIG1 gene was investigated in
this study.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: HtTA cervical and TSGH9201 gastric cancer cells were
transiently transfected with expression vectors that synthesized RIG1-myc or
RIG1-EGFP fusion protein. Cell growth was analyzed by measuring the incorporation
of bromodeoxyuridine. Apoptosis was evaluated by the formation of in situ DNA
breakage. The activities of mitogen-activated kinase signal pathways were
analyzed using signal pathway trans-reporting systems.
RESULTS: Expression of the RIG1-myc fusion protein resulted in decreased cell
growth. Both RIG1-EGFP and RIG1-myc fusion proteins induced cellular apoptosis
that was characterized by the presence of apoptotic bodies and in situ DNA
breakage. The transactivation activities of Elk1, c-Jun and CHOP proteins were
suppressed by 80, 50 and 88%, respectively, in HtTA cells expressing the RIG1-myc
fusion protein for two days. Similarly, the transactivation activities of the
CHOP protein was suppressed in TSGH9201 and HtTA cells transiently expressing
RIG1-myc and RIG1-EGFP, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The RIG1 fusion proteins exhibited growth suppressive and
apoptosis-inducing activity. The protein negatively-regulated signal pathways of 
extracellular signal-regulated kinase, c-Jun N-terminal kinase and p38
mitogen-activated kinase.

PMID: 12014653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jun;22(11):3875-91.

Role of SHP-2 in fibroblast growth factor receptor-mediated suppression of
myogenesis in C2C12 myoblasts.

Kontaridis MI(1), Liu X, Zhang L, Bennett AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8066, USA.

Ligand activation of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) represses
myogenesis and promotes activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1
and 2 (Erks). The precise mechanism through which the FGFR transmits both of
these signals in myoblasts remains unclear. The SH2 domain-containing protein
tyrosine phosphatase, SHP-2, has been shown to participate in the regulation of
FGFR signaling. However, no role for SHP-2 in FGFR myogenic signaling is known.
In this study, we show that stimulation of C2C12 myoblasts with FGF-2 induces
SHP-2 complex formation with tyrosyl-phosphorylated FGFR substrate 2 alpha (FRS-2
alpha). Both the catalytic activity and, to a much lesser extent, the Grb2
binding-tyrosyl phosphorylation sites of SHP-2 are required for maximal
FGF-2-induced Erk activity and Elk-1 transactivation. When overexpressed in C2C12
myoblasts, wild-type SHP-2, but not a catalytically inactive SHP-2 mutant,
potentiates the suppressive effects of FGF-2 on muscle-specific gene expression. 
In addition, expression of a constitutively active mutant of SHP-2 is sufficient 
to prevent myogenesis. The constitutively active mutant of SHP-2 induces
hyper-tyrosyl phosphorylation of FRS-2 alpha but fails to stimulate or potentiate
either FGF-2-induced Erk activation or Elk-1 transactivation. These data suggest 
that in myoblasts, SHP-2 represses myogenesis via a pathway that is independent
of the Erks. We propose that SHP-2 plays a pivotal role in FGFR signaling in
myoblasts via both Erk-dependent and Erk-independent pathways.

PMCID: PMC133814
PMID: 11997521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 May;87(5):2245-53.

Follicle-stimulating hormone activates mitogen-activated protein kinase in
preneoplastic and neoplastic ovarian surface epithelial cells.

Choi KC(1), Kang SK, Tai CJ, Auersperg N, Leung PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6H 3V5.

To investigate the role of FSH in ovarian cancer development, the present study
examined the expression of FSH receptor (FSH-R) and the effect of FSH on
proliferation of normal, preneoplastic, and neoplastic ovarian surface epithelium
(OSE) cells. Recently, immortalized OSE (IOSE) cell lines, including IOSE-29
(preneoplastic) and IOSE-29EC (neoplastic), were used. Our results indicated that
FSH-R mRNA was expressed and that FSH exerted a growth stimulatory effect in
normal, preneoplastic, and neoplastic OSE cells. To investigate the mechanism of 
the growth stimulatory effect, the activation of MAPKs by FSH was examined in
preneoplastic and neoplastic OSE cells. Treatment with FSH resulted in MAPK
activation of IOSE-29 and IOSE-29EC cells, whereas the stimulatory effect of FSH 
on cellular proliferation and MAPK activation was completely abolished in the
presence of PD98059, a MAPK kinase inhibitor, suggesting that the growth
stimulatory effect of FSH is mediated through MAPK activation in these OSE cells.
In a time-dependent study, FSH significantly increased MAPK activity at 5-10 min 
in IOSE-29 cells. The activated MAPK declined to the control level after 20 min
in these cells. Similarly, treatment with FSH significantly induced MAPK
activation after 5 min and sustained it for 60 min in IOSE-29EC cells. In
addition, treatment with FSH resulted in substantial phosphorylation of Elk-1,
confirming that FSH action is mediated via activation of MAPK. In conclusion, we 
have demonstrated that FSH-R was expressed, and FSH induced growth stimulation in
normal, preneoplastic, and neoplastic OSE cells. Furthermore, treatment with FSH 
stimulated activation of the MAPK cascade and phosphorylated Elk-1 in neoplastic 
OSE cells. These results suggest that the MAPK cascade may be involved in
cellular functions such as growth stimulation in response to FSH in preneoplastic
and neoplastic OSE cells.

PMID: 11994371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 May;22(10):3230-6.

Grap negatively regulates T-cell receptor-elicited lymphocyte proliferation and
interleukin-2 induction.

Shen R(1), Ouyang YB, Qu CK, Alonso A, Sperzel L, Mustelin T, Kaplan MH, Feng GS.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Signal Transduction Research, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Grb-2-related adaptor protein (Grap) is a Grb2-like SH3-SH2-SH3 adaptor protein
with expression restricted to lymphoid tissues. Grap(-/-) lymphocytes isolated
from targeted Grap-deficient mice exhibited enhanced proliferation, interleukin-2
production, and c-fos induction in response to mitogenic T-cell receptor (TCR)
stimulation, compared to wild-type cells. Ectopic expression of Grap led to a
suppression of Elk-1-directed transcription induced by the Ras/Erk pathway,
without having effects on gene expression mediated by Jnk and p38
mitogen-activated protein kinases. Together, these data suggest that Grap, unlike
Grb2, acts as a negative regulator of TCR-stimulated intracellular signaling by
downregulating signal relay through the Ras/Erk pathway.

PMCID: PMC133801
PMID: 11971956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 26;277(30):27517-27. Epub 2002 Apr 23.

Epidermal growth factor-mediated activation of the ETS domain transcription
factor Elk-1 requires nuclear calcium.

Pusl T(1), Wu JJ, Zimmerman TL, Zhang L, Ehrlich BE, Berchtold MW, Hoek JB,
Karpen SJ, Nathanson MH, Bennett AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, 
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Cytosolic and nuclear Ca(2+) have been shown to differentially regulate
transcription. However, the impact of spatially distinct Ca(2+) signals on
mitogen-activated protein kinase-mediated gene expression remains unknown. Here
we investigated the role of nuclear and cytosolic Ca(2+) signals in epidermal
growth factor (EGF)-induced transactivation of the ternary complex factor Elk-1
using a GAL4-Elk-1 construct. EGF increased Ca(2+) in both the nucleus and
cytosol of HepG2 or 293 cells. Pretreatment with the intracellular Ca(2+)
chelator bis(2-aminophenyl)ethyleneglycol-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic acid
significantly reduced EGF-induced transactivation of Elk-1, indicating that
EGF-stimulated Elk-1 transcriptional activity is dependent on intracellular
Ca(2+). To determine the relative contribution of nuclear and cytosolic Ca(2+)
signals during EGF-mediated Elk-1 transactivation, Ca(2+) signals in either
compartment were selectively impaired by targeted expression of the
Ca(2+)-binding protein parvalbumin to either the nucleus or cytosol. Suppression 
of nuclear but not cytosolic Ca(2+) signals inhibited EGF-induced transactivation
of Elk-1. However, suppression of nuclear Ca(2+) signals did not affect the
ability of ERK either to become phosphorylated or to undergo translocation to the
nucleus in response to EGF. Elk-1 phosphorylation and nuclear localization
following EGF stimulation were also unaffected by suppressing nuclear Ca(2+)
signals. These results suggest that nuclear Ca(2+) is required for EGF-mediated
transcriptional activation of Elk-1 and that phosphorylation of Elk-1 alone is
not sufficient to induce its transcriptional activation in response to EGF. Thus,
subcellular targeting of parvalbumin reveals a distinct role for nuclear Ca(2+)
signals in mitogen-activated protein kinase-mediated gene transcription.

PMID: 11971908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Oncogene. 2002 Apr 18;21(17):2641-51.

Rac is activated by erythropoietin or interleukin-3 and is involved in activation
of the Erk signaling pathway.

Arai A(1), Kanda E, Miura O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyoku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Previous studies have shown that hematopoietic cytokines, including
erythropoietin (Epo) and interleukin (IL)-3, activate the Ras GTPase and the
downstream Raf/Erk/Elk-1 signaling pathway. Here we report that Epo or IL-3
rapidly and transiently activates Rac, a Rho family GTPase, in hematopoietic cell
lines, 32D/EpoR-Wt and UT-7. The cytokine-induced activation of Rac was augmented
in a 32D/EpoR-Wt clone that inducibly overexpresses the adaptor protein CrkL or
the Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factor C3G, which forms a complex with CrkL. 
Furthermore, the Rac activation was enhanced or inhibited in cells inducibly
expressing an activated Ras mutant, H-Ras61L, or a dominant negative Ras mutant, 
H-Ras17N, respectively. In addition, the cytokine-induced Rac activation was
inhibited by a phosphatidyl-inositol 3'-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor, LY294002, which 
also inhibited the Erk activation. A dominant negative Rac mutant, Rac17N, also
inhibited the cytokine-induced activation of Erk as well as Elk-1. On the other
hand, activation of Akt downstream of PI3K was found to play an inhibitory role
in cytokine activation of Erk/Elk-1. Together, these results indicate that Rac is
activated by Epo or IL-3 at downstream of the Ras/PI3K pathway in parallel with
Akt and plays a role in activation of the Erk/Elk-1 signaling pathway in
hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 11965537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Genomics. 2002 Apr;79(4):560-72.

An integrated, functionally annotated gene map of the DXS8026-ELK1 interval on
human Xp11.3-Xp11.23: potential hotspot for neurogenetic disorders.

Thiselton DL(1), McDowall J, Brandau O, Ramser J, d'Esposito F, Bhattacharya SS, 
Ross MT, Hardcastle AJ, Meindl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Ophthalmology, University
College, London, EC1V 9EL, UK. dthiselt@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Genomics 2002 Jun;79(6):891.

Human chromosome Xp11.3-Xp11.23 encompasses the map location for a growing number
of diseases with a genetic basis or genetic component. These include several eye 
disorders, syndromic and nonsyndromic forms of X-linked mental retardation
(XLMR), X-linked neuromuscular diseases and susceptibility loci for
schizophrenia, type 1 diabetes, and Graves' disease. We have constructed an
approximately 2.7-Mb high-resolution physical map extending from DXS8026 to ELK1,
corresponding to a genetic distance of approximately 5.5 cM. A combination of
chromosome walking and sequence-tagged site (STS)-content mapping resulted in an 
integrated framework and transcript map, precisely positioning 10 polymorphic
microsatellites (one of which is novel), 16 ESTs, and 12 known genes (RP2, PCTK1,
UHX1, UBE1, RBM10, ZNF157, SYN1, ARAF1, TIMP1, PFC, ELK1, UXT). The composite map
is currently anchored with 89 STSs to give an average resolution of approximately
1 STS every 30 kb. By a combination of EST database searches and in silico
detection of UniGene clusters within genomic sequence generated from this
template map, we have mapped several novel genes within this interval: a Na+/H+
exchanger (SLC9A7), at least two zincfinger transcription factors (KIAA0215 and
Hs.68318), carbohydrate sulfotransferase-7 (CHST7), regucalcin (RGN),
inactivation-escape-1 (INE1), the human ortholog of mouse neuronal protein 15.6, 
and four putative novel genes. Further genomic analysis enabled annotation of the
sequence interval with 20 predicted pseudogenes and 21 UniGene clusters of
unknown function. The combined PAC/BAC transcript map and YAC scaffold presented 
here clarifies previously conflicting data for markers and genes within the
Xp11.3-Xp11.23 interval and provides a powerful integrated resource for
functional characterization of this clonally unstable, yet gene-rich and
clinically significant region of proximal Xp.

PMID: 11944989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Science. 2002 Apr 26;296(5568):755-8. Epub 2002 Apr 4.

Transcription control by E1A and MAP kinase pathway via Sur2 mediator subunit.

Stevens JL(1), Cantin GT, Wang G, Shevchenko A, Shevchenko A, Berk AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, 611
Charles Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Sur2 is a metazoan Mediator subunit that interacts with the adenovirus E1A
protein and functions in a mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway required for 
vulva development in Caenorhabditis elegans. We generated sur2-/- embryonic stem 
cells to analyze its function as a mammalian Mediator component. Our results show
that Sur2 forms a subcomplex of the Mediator with two other subunits, TRAP/Med100
and 95. Knock-out of Sur2 prevents activation by E1A-CR3 and the
mitogen-activated protein kinase-regulated ETS transcription factor Elk-1, but
not by multiple other transcription factors. These results imply that specific
activation domains stimulate transcription by binding to distinct Mediator
subunits. Activation by E1A and Elk-1 requires recruitment of Mediator to a
promoter by binding to its Sur2 subunit.

PMID: 11934987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Acta Neuropathol. 2002 Apr;103(4):391-407. Epub 2002 Jan 31.

Active, phosphorylation-dependent MAP kinases, MAPK/ERK, SAPK/JNK and p38, and
specific transcription factor substrates are differentially expressed following
systemic administration of kainic acid to the adult rat.

Ferrer I(1), Blanco R, Carmona M, Puig B, DomÌnguez I, ViÒals F.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Biologia Cel.lular i Anatomia PatolÚgica, Hospital Princeps
d'Espanya, Universitat de Barcelona, Campus de Bellvitge, Hospitalet de
Llobregat, Spain. iferrer@sakma.es

Excitotoxicity is considered a major cell death inductor in neurodegeneration.
Yet the mechanisms involved in cell death and cell survival following excitotoxic
insults are poorly understood. Expression of active, phosphorylation-dependent
mitogen-activated extracellular signal-regulated kinases (MAPK/ERKs),
stress-activated c-Jun N-terminal kinases (SAPK/JNKs) and p38 kinases, as well as
their putative active, phosphorylation-dependent specific transcriptional factor 
substrates CREB, Elk-1, ATF-2, c-Myc and c-Jun, has been examined following
systemic administration of kainic acid (KA) at convulsant doses to rats.
Increased phosphorylated MAPK (MAPK(P)) immunoreactivity has been found at 3 and 
6 h in the vulnerable regions entorhinal cortex and CA3, in which neurons are
committed to die, as well as in sensitive regions dentate gyrus and gyrus
cinguli, in which neurons will survive. JNK(P) has been observed in the
entorhinal cortex and dentate gyrus, and p38(P) immunoreactivity occurs in the
entorhinal cortex. Strong c-Myc(P) expression parallels MAPK(P) immunoreactivity 
in the entorhinal cortex, CA3, dentate gyrus and gyrus cinguli, showing that
enhanced c-Myc(P) expression does not preclude cell death or cell survival.
Selective decrease of CREB(P) immunoreactivity in entorhinal cortex and CA3
indicates CREB(P) reduction associated with cell death. Strong c-Jun(P)
immunoreactivity has been found in the entorhinal cortex, CA3 and dentate gyrus, 
thus suggesting that regulation of two opposing cellular programs (cell death or 
cell survival) of c-Jun(P) depends on c-Jun interactions with other factors.
Interestingly, ATF-2(P), and to a lesser extent Elk-1(P), is selectively
increased in the dentate gyrus. These results suggest ATF-2(P) involvement in
cell survival of dentate gyrus granule cells. The present results demonstrate
activation of specific MAPK pathways in association with either cell death or
cell survival triggered by KA. Furthermore, increased Ras activation, as seen
with p21 Ras activation assay, indicates a crucial role for Ras in activating MAP
kinases following excitotoxic insult.

PMID: 11904760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Neurosci. 2002 Mar 15;22(6):2054-62.

Long-term depression in the adult hippocampus in vivo involves activation of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase and phosphorylation of Elk-1.

Thiels E(1), Kanterewicz BI, Norman ED, Trzaskos JM, Klann E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260, USA.
thiels@bns.pitt.edu

Protein kinase cascades likely play a critical role in the signaling events that 
underlie synaptic plasticity and memory. The extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) cascade is suited well for such a role because its targets include
regulators of gene expression. Here we report that the ERK cascade is recruited
during long-term depression (LTD) of synaptic strength in area CA1 of the adult
hippocampus in vivo and selectively impacts on phosphorylation of the nuclear
transcription factor Elk-1. Using a combination of in vivo electrophysiology,
biochemistry, pharmacology, and immunohistochemistry, we found the following: (1)
ERK phosphorylation, including phosphorylation of nuclear ERK, and ERK
phosphotransferase activity are increased markedly, albeit transiently, after the
induction of NMDA receptor-dependent LTD at the commissural input to area CA1
pyramidal cells in the hippocampus of anesthetized adult rats; (2) LTD-inducing
paired-pulse stimulation fails to produce lasting LTD in the presence of the ERK 
kinase inhibitor SL327, which suggests that ERK activation is necessary for the
persistence of LTD; and (3) ERK activation during LTD results in increased
phosphorylation of Elk-1 but not of the transcription factor cAMP response
element-binding protein. Our findings indicate that the ERK cascade transduces
signals from the synapse to the nucleus during LTD in hippocampal area CA1 in
vivo, as it does during long-term potentiation in area CA1, but that the pattern 
of coupling of the ERK cascade to transcriptional regulators differs between the 
two forms of synaptic plasticity.

PMID: 11896145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Cancer Lett. 2002 May 28;179(2):185-95.

Troglitazone activates p21Cip/WAF1 through the ERK pathway in HCT15 human
colorectal cancer cells.

Kim JA(1), Park KS, Kim HI, Oh SY, Ahn Y, Oh JW, Choi KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Yonsei 
University, Seoul, South Korea.

In this study, we identified a new mechanism for the anti-proliferation of HCT15 
colorectal cancer cells by troglitazone (TRO). Treating HCT15 cells with 20
microM of TRO transiently increased extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK)
activity within 15 min, and this subsequently induced p21Cip/WAF1 cell cycle
regulator and localized in the nucleus. Raf-1 modification and MEK activation
also occurred after TRO treatment, and Elk-1-dependent trans-reporter gene
expression was concomitantly induced. The induction and nuclear localization of
p21Cip/WAF1 by TRO were blocked by PD98059 pre-treatment, which suggested a role 
for the ERK pathway in p21Cip/WAF1 activation. TRO inhibited BrdU incorporation
and no BrdU incorporation was observed in most p21Cip/WAF1-activated cells.
Therefore, TRO regulates the proliferation of HCT15 cells at least partly by a
mechanism involving the activation of p21Cip/WAF1.

PMID: 11888673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 Jan;80(1):85-90.

Inhibition of MEK1,2/ERK mitogenic pathway by estrogen with antiproliferative
properties in rat aortic smooth muscle cells.

Hwang KC(1), Lee KH, Jang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul 120-752, South Korea.

Proliferation and migration of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) are believed 
to contribute significantly to intimal thickening in atheroscleosis, restenosis, 
and venous bypass graft disease. Estrogen inhibits proliferation and migration of
VSMCs. However, antiproliferative mechanisms of estrogen were not well elucidated
yet. In this study, we investigated the antiproliferative effect of estrogen to
determine whether the transduction signals and protooncogenes were affected in
rat aortic smooth muscle cells (RASMCs). Estrogen inhibited the proliferative
response stimulated by 5% fetal bovine serum (FBS) dose-dependently in RASMCs
(IC50: 40 nM). In 0.5% serum-treated RASMCs, estrogen dramatically inhibited the 
activity of extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK) followed by inhibition
of MEK1,2 activity in dose-dependent manner without affecting the other
mitogen-activating protein kinases (MAPKs), c-jun N-terminal kinases (JNK) and
p38. Induction of Elk-1 mRNA was significantly reduced dose-dependently up to 100
nM of estrogen. These results indicate that the antiproliferative effects of
estrogen in RASMCs involved ERK inhibition followed by the inactivation of MEK1,2
and downregulation of Elk-1 expression.

PMID: 11867267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2002 Jan-Feb;36(1):66-75.

[Role of the TCF phosphorylation state and the chromatin structure in the
negative transcription regulation of the c-fos proto-oncogene in E1A + c-Ha-ras
transformed cells].

[Article in Russian]

Abramova MV(1), Kukushkin AN, Pospelova TV, Svetlikova SB, Pospelov VA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, 194064
Russia.

As compared with normal rat embryo fibroblasts (REF), c-fos transcription is
suppressed in REF transformed with the E1A and cHa-ras complementing oncogenes.
Negative regulation of the fos promoter is due to the serum-responsive element
(SRE) constantly bound with the serum response factor (SRF) and with the ternary 
complex factor (TCF), which form the SRF/SRF/TCF complex. Possible mechanisms of 
the c-fos suppression were studied, including changes in the TCF content and
phosphorylation and replacement of TCF by repressor proteins. In addition, the
transcription factors were tested for DNA-binding activity, and c-fos
transcription was analyzed by RT-PCR in various cell culture conditions and in
the presence of phosphatase and histone deacetylase inhibitors. The c-fos
suppression in transformed REF was explained by formation of a transcriptionally 
inactive chromatin structure in the fos promoter region as a result of histone
deacetylation, rather than by insufficient TCF phosphorylation.

PMID: 11862715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Oncogene. 2002 Jan 24;21(5):719-30.

Downregulation of c-fos gene transcription in cells transformed by E1A and
cHa-ras oncogenes: a role of sustained activation of MAP/ERK kinase cascade and
of inactive chromatin structure at c-fos promoter.

Kukushkin AN(1), Abramova MV, Svetlikova SB, Darieva ZA, Pospelova TV, Pospelov
VA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 194064 St-Petersburg,
Russia.

REF cells transformed by oncogenes E1A and cHa-ras reveal high and constitutive
DNA-binding activity of AP-1 factor lacking in c-Fos protein. Consistently, the
transcription of c-fos gene has been found to be downregulated. To elucidate the 
mechanisms of c-fos downregulation in E1A+cHa-ras transformants, we studied the
levels of activity of ERK, JNK/SAPK and p38 kinases and phosphorylation state of 
Elk-1 transcription factor involved in regulation of c-fos gene. Using two
approaches, Western blot analysis with phospho-specific antibodies to MAP kinases
and in vitro kinase assay with specific substrates, we show here that ectopic
expression of E1A and ras oncogenes leads to a sustained activation of ERK and
p38 kinases, whereas JNK/SAPK kinase activity is similar to that in
non-transformed REF52 cells. Due to sustained activity of the MAP kinase
cascades, Elk-1 transcription factor is being phosphorylated even in
serum-starved E1A+cHa-ras cells; moreover, serum does not additionally increase
phosphorylation of Elk-1, which is predominant TCF protein bound to SRE region of
c-fos gene promoter in these cells. Although the amount of ternary complexes
SRE/SRF/TCF estimated by EMSA was similar both in serum-starved and
serum-stimulated transformed cells, serum addition still caused a modest
activation of c-fos gene transcription at the level of 20% to normal REF cells.
In attempt to determine how serum caused the stimulatory effect, we found that
PD98059, an inhibitor of MEK/ERK kinase cascade, completely suppressed
serum-induced c-fos transcription both in REF and E1A+cHa-ras cells, implicating 
the ERK as primary kinase for c-fos transcription in these cells. In contrast,
SB203580, an inhibitor of p38 kinase, augmented noticeably serum-stimulated
transcription of c-fos gene in REF cells, implying the involvement of p38 kinase 
in negative regulation of c-fos. Furthermore, sodium butyrate, an inhibitor of
histone deacetylase activity, was capable of activating c-fos transcription both 
in serum-stimulated and even in serum-starved E1A+cHa-ras cells. Conversely,
serum-starved REF cells fail to respond to sodium butyrate treatment by c-fos
activation confirming necessity of prior Elk-1 phosphorylation. Taken together,
these data suggest that downregulation of c-fos in E1A+cHa-ras cells seems to
occur due to a maintenance of a refractory state that arises in normal REF cells 
after serum-stimulation. The refractory state of c-fos in E1A+cHa-ras cells is
likely a consequence of Ras-induced sustained activation of MAPK (ERK) cascade
and persistent phosphorylation of TCF (Elk-1) bound to SRE. Combination of these 
events eventually does contribute to formation of an inactive chromatin structure
at c-fos promoter mediated through recruitment of histone deacetylase activity.

PMID: 11850800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Mol Biol. 2001 Nov 30;314(3):495-506.

Crystal structure of a ternary SAP-1/SRF/c-fos SRE DNA complex.

Mo Y(1), Ho W, Johnston K, Marmorstein R.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

Combinatorial DNA binding by proteins for promoter-specific gene activation is a 
common mode of DNA regulation in eukaryotic organisms, and occurs at the promoter
of the c-fos proto-oncogene. The c-fos promoter contains a serum response element
(SRE) that mediates ternary complex formation with the Ets proteins SAP-1 or
Elk-1 and the MADS-box protein, serum response factor (SRF). Here, we report the 
crystal structure of a ternary SAP-1/SRF/c-fos SRE DNA complex containing the
minimal DNA-binding domains of each protein. The structure of the complex reveals
that the SAP-1 monomer and SRF dimer are bound on opposite faces of the DNA, and 
that the DNA recognition helix of SAP-1 makes direct contact with the DNA
recognition helix of one of the two SRF subunits. These interactions facilitate
an 82 degrees DNA bend around SRF and a modulation of protein-DNA contacts by
each protein when compared to each of the binary DNA complexes. A comparison with
a recently determined complex containing SRF, an idealized DNA site, and a SAP-1 
fragment containing a SRF-interacting B-box region, shows a similar overall
architecture but also shows important differences. Specifically, the comparison
suggests that the B-box region of the Ets protein does not significantly
influence DNA recognition by either of the proteins, and that the sequence of the
DNA target effects the way in which the two proteins cooperate for DNA
recognition. These studies have implications for how DNA-bound SRF may modulate
the DNA-binding properties of other Ets proteins such as Elk-1, and for how other
Ets proteins may modulate the DNA-binding properties of other DNA-bound accessory
factors to facilitate promoter-specific transcriptional responses.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11846562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Neurosci Res. 2002 Feb 15;67(4):450-60.

Nitric oxide-induced programmed cell death in human neuroblastoma cells is
accompanied by the synthesis of Egr-1, a zinc finger transcription factor.

Cibelli G(1), Policastro V, Rˆssler OG, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, D-6642 Homburg, Germany.

Nitric oxide (NO) is cytotoxic for human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. While
nuclear condensation was visible in cells treated with nitric oxide donors, we
observed that the plasma membrane remained intact, indicating that NO induced
apoptotic cell death. We analyzed the NO-induced apoptotic signaling cascade in
SH-SY5Y cells and observed a striking increase in early growth response (Egr)-1
promoter activity as a result of NO-induced cell death. Likewise, we detected an 
activation of the transcriptional activation potential of the ternary complex
factor Elk1, a key transcriptional regulator of serum response element-driven
gene transcription. Egr-1 is a zinc finger transcription factor that couples
extracellular signals to long-term responses by altering expression of Egr-1
target genes. The Egr-1 5'-flanking region contains five serum response elements 
(SRE) that function as genetic elements for stimulus-transcription coupling.
Moreover, these SREs are binding sites for Elk1, suggesting that NO activated
Egr-1 gene transcription via activation of Elk1. The NO-induced biosynthesis of
Egr-1 was confirmed by Western blot analysis and an NO-dependent increase in the 
transcriptional activation potential of Egr-1 was observed. The fact that
NO-induced neuronal cell death is accompanied by the biosynthesis of Egr-1
suggests that Egr-1 may be an integral part of the NO triggered apoptotic
signaling cascade.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11835312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Blood. 2002 Feb 15;99(4):1388-97.

Regulation of the Erk2-Elk1 signaling pathway and megakaryocytic differentiation 
of Bcr-Abl(+) K562 leukemic cells by Gab2.

Dorsey JF(1), Cunnick JM, Mane SM, Wu J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

In the blast crisis phase of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), Bcr-Abl(+)
myeloblasts fail to undergo terminal maturation. The extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (Erk) mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase has been
shown to mediate terminal differentiation of myeloid cells. Interestingly,
Bcr-Abl(+) CML cell lines established from blast crisis were found to have low
Erk MAP kinase activity. In this study, we analyzed the role of the Gab2 docking 
protein in regulation of the Erk MAP kinase in Bcr-Abl(+) K562 human CML cells.
Overexpression of Gab2 in K562 cells resulted in transcriptional activation of
the c-fos serum response element (SRE) promoter, whereas overexpression of SHP2, 
Grb2, and CrkL had no effect. Activation of the c-fos SRE transcriptional
activity by Gab2 required tyrosine 604, which is a SHP2 docking site on Gab2, and
the SHP2 tyrosine phosphatase activity. Elk1, c-Jun, and CHOP trans-reporting
assays indicated that overexpression of Gab2 selectively activated the Erk2-Elk1 
signaling pathway. To determine cellular consequences of elevating the Gab2 level
in K562 cells, stable cell lines for doxycycline-inducible expression of the
wild-type Gab2 (Gab2WT) and an SHP2-binding defective Gab2 (Gab2Tyr604Phe) were
established. Analysis of these cell lines indicated that induction of Gab2WT
expression, but not Gab2Tyr604Phe expression, led to Erk activation, growth
arrest, cell spreading, and enlargement; expression of megakaryocyte/platelet
lineage-specific integrins alphaIIb/beta3 (CD41/CD61); and upregulation of RNA
for megakaryocyte/platelet proteins. All of these changes are characteristics of 
megakaryocytic differentiation. Together, these results reveal Gab2 as a limiting
signaling component for Erk MAP kinase activation and terminal differentiation of
K562 CML cells.

PMID: 11830491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Feb 1;11(3):301-15.

Synthesis, purification and structural and functional characterization of
recombinant form of a common genetic variant of human luteinizing hormone.

Manna PR(1), Joshi L, Reinhold VN, Aubert ML, Suganuma N, Pettersson K,
Huhtaniemi IT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Department of Biotechnology, University of Turku,
FIN-20520 Turku, Finland.

A common genetic variant (V) of luteinizing hormone (LH), with two mutations
(Trp(8)Arg and Ile(15)Thr) and an extra glycosylation consensus site
(Asn(13)-Ala-Thr), is associated with abnormalities of reproductive function. To 
address the molecular basis of the functional differences between V- and
wild-type (WT)-LH, recombinant (rec) forms of WT- and V-LH were synthesized in
human embryonic kidney (HEK 293) cells. The rec hormones synthesized were
rigorously purified employing affinity, immunoaffinity and ion exchange
chromatographies (final purity approximately 12 000 IU/mg, 180-fold purification,
28% recovery). Functional properties of the hormone preparations were compared in
vitro and in vivo. The molecular size of both rec LHs was 31 kDa, as determined
by SDS-PAGE. Although the mutations in V-LHbeta did not significantly affect the 
affinity of LH receptor (LHR) binding (Kd approximately 0.4 nmol/L), V-LH had
higher in vitro biopotency than WT-LH, in terms of mLTC-1 mouse Leydig tumor cell
cAMP and progesterone (P) production, and steroidogenic acute regulatory protein 
(StAR) expression. In addition, in HEK 293 cells expressing the human LHR, V-LH
demonstrated 1.8-fold higher response of inositol trisphosphate (IP(3))
production than WT-LH. Furthermore, HEK 293 cells expressing the ElK1
trans-reporting plasmids displayed 2.7-fold greater luciferase response to V-LH
than WT-LH, documenting stimulation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathway. The in vivo half-life of V-LH was clearly faster (5-9 min) than
that of WT-LH (12-22 min) and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG; 50-70 min), when
injected into rat circulation. It is worth noting that analysis by
matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS)
demonstrated clear differences in structures of carbohydrate side chains attached
to the two forms of rec LHs, including incomplete processing of high mannose
glycans (Man(5,8,9)) in V-LH, suggesting different pathways in its intracellular 
trafficking. Collectively, the present findings provide the molecular basis for
the qualitative and quantitative differences in LH action that are observed in
carriers of the V-LHbeta allele.

PMID: 11823449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 29;277(13):10813-23. Epub 2002 Jan 17.

A distinct class of dominant negative Ras mutants: cytosolic GTP-bound Ras
effector domain mutants that inhibit Ras signaling and transformation and enhance
cell adhesion.

Fiordalisi JJ(1), Holly SP, Johnson RL 2nd, Parise LV, Cox AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina 27599, USA.

Cytosolic GTP-bound Ras has been shown to act as a dominant negative (DN)
inhibitor of Ras by sequestering Raf in non-productive cytosolic complexes.
Nevertheless, this distinct class of DN mutants has been neither well
characterized nor extensively used to analyze Ras signaling. In contrast, DN
Ras17N, which functions by blocking Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factors, has 
been well characterized and is widely used. Cytosolic GTP-bound Ras mutants could
be used to inhibit particular Ras effectors by introducing additional mutations
(T35S, E37G or Y40C) that permit them to associate selectively with and inhibit
Raf, RalGDS, or phosphoinositide 3-kinase, respectively. When the wild-type Ras
effector binding region is used, cytosolic Ras should associate with all Ras
effectors, even those that are not yet identified, making these DN Ras mutants
effective inhibitors of multiple Ras functions. We generated cytosolic GTP-bound 
H-, N-, and K-Ras, and we assessed their ability to inhibit Ras-induced
phenotypes. In fibroblasts, cytosolic H-, N-, and K-Ras inhibited Ras-induced
Elk-1 activation and focus formation, induced a flattened cell morphology, and
increased adhesion to fibronectin through modulation of a
beta(1)-subunit-containing integrin, thereby demonstrating that DN activity is
not limited to a subset of Ras isoforms. We also generated cytosolic GTP-bound
Ras effector domain mutants (EDMs), each of which reduced the ability of
cytosolic GTP-bound Ras proteins to inhibit Elk-1 activation and to induce cell
flattening, implicating multiple pathways in these phenotypes. In contrast,
Ras-induced focus formation, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-, or
Ras-induced phospho-Akt levels and cell adhesion to fibronectin were affected by 
T35S and Y40C EDMs, whereas PDGF- or Ras-induced phospho-Erk levels were affected
only by the T35S EDM, implying that a more limited set of Ras-mediated pathways
participate in these phenotypes. These data constitute the first extensive
characterization of this functionally distinct class of DN Ras inhibitor
proteins.

PMID: 11799108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Neurochem. 2002 Jan;80(1):119-25.

MEK and ERK protect hypoxic cortical neurons via phosphorylation of Bad.

Jin K(1), Mao XO, Zhu Y, Greenberg DA.

Author information: 
(1)Buck Institute for Age Research, Novato, California 94945, USA.
kjin@buckinstitute.org

We investigated the role of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways in
hypoxic neuronal injury using primary cultures from murine cerebral cortex.
Hypoxia caused the death of approximately 50% of neurons at 16 h and
approximately 65% of neurons at 24 h. This was associated with phospho-activation
of the MAPK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) kinase MEK1/2 and its
downstream target ERK1/2, but not p38 MAPK or c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), as
detected by western blotting. The MEK1/2 inhibitor, PD98059, increased neuronal
death in hypoxic cultures, suggesting that MEK1/2 promotes neuronal survival,
whereas the p38 inhibitors, SB202190 and SB203580, had no effect. To identify
downstream effects of ERK1/2 that might regulate hypoxic neuronal death, we
measured hypoxia-induced phosphorylation of three ERK1/2 targets: the 90-kDa
ribosomal protein S6 kinase (RSK), the transcription factor ELK1, and the
pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family protein Bad. We observed increased abundance of
inactivated (phospho-)Bad, but no change in phospho-RSK or phospho-ELK1.
Moreover, the MEK inhibitor PD98059 reduced phospho-inactivation of Bad in
hypoxic cultures. These findings suggest that a cell-survival program involving
phospho-activation of MEK1/2 and ERK1/2 and inactivation of Bad is mobilized in
hypoxic neurons, and may help to regulate neuronal fate following
hypoxic-ischemic injury.

PMID: 11796750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 15;277(11):9429-36. Epub 2002 Jan 2.

beta-Arrestin scaffolding of the ERK cascade enhances cytosolic ERK activity but 
inhibits ERK-mediated transcription following angiotensin AT1a receptor
stimulation.

Tohgo A(1), Pierce KL, Choy EW, Lefkowitz RJ, Luttrell LM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Departments of Medicine and
Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

beta-Arrestins are cytosolic proteins that mediate homologous desensitization of 
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) by binding to agonist-occupied receptors and 
by uncoupling them from heterotrimeric G proteins. The recent finding that
beta-arrestins bind to some mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases has suggested
that they might also function as scaffolds for GPCR-stimulated MAP kinase
activation. To define the role of beta-arrestins in the regulation of ERK MAP
kinases, we examined the effect of beta-arrestin overexpression on ERK1/2
activation and nuclear signaling in COS-7 cells expressing angiotensin II type 1a
receptors (AT1aRs). Expression of either beta-arrestin1 or beta-arrestin2 reduced
angiotensin-stimulated phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis but paradoxically
increased angiotensin-stimulated ERK1/2 phosphorylation. The increase in ERK1/2
phosphorylation in beta-arrestin-expressing cells correlated with activation of a
beta-arrestin-bound pool of ERK2. The beta-arrestin-dependent increase in ERK1/2 
phosphorylation was accompanied by a significant reduction in ERK1/2-mediated,
Elk1-driven transcription of a luciferase reporter. Analysis of the cellular
distribution of phospho-ERK1/2 by confocal immunofluorescence microscopy and
cellular fractionation revealed that overexpression of beta-arrestin resulted in 
a significant increase in the cytosolic pool of phospho-ERK1/2 and a
corresponding decrease in the nuclear pool of phospho-ERK1/2 following
angiotensin stimulation. beta-Arrestin overexpression resulted in formation of a 
cytoplasmic pool of beta-arrestin-bound phospho-ERK, decreased nuclear
translocation of phospho-ERK1/2, and inhibition of Elk1-driven luciferase
transcription even when ERK1/2 was activated by overexpression of cRaf-1 in the
absence of AT1aR stimulation. These data demonstrate that beta-arrestins
facilitate GPCR-mediated ERK activation but inhibit ERK-dependent transcription
by binding to phospho-ERK1/2, leading to its retention in the cytosol.

PMID: 11777902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jan;16(1):116-27.

Linkage of rapid estrogen action to MAPK activation by ERalpha-Shc association
and Shc pathway activation.

Song RX(1), McPherson RA, Adam L, Bao Y, Shupnik M, Kumar R, Santen RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA. rs5wf@virginia.edu

E2 rapidly activates MAPK in breast cancer cells, and the mechanism for this
effect has not been fully identified. Since growth factor-induced MAPK activation
involves signaling via the adapter protein Shc (Src-homology and collagen
homology) and its association with membrane receptors, we hypothesized that
breast cancer cells utilize similar signaling mechanisms in response to E2. In
the present study, we demonstrated that E2 rapidly induced Shc phosphorylation
and Shc-Grb2 (growth factor receptor binding protein 2)-Sos (son of sevenless)
complex formation in MCF-7 cells. Overexpression of dominant negative Shc blocked
the effect of E2 on MAPK, indicating a critical role of Shc in E2 action. Using
selective inhibitors, we also demonstrated that ERalpha and Src are upstream
regulators of Shc. A rapid physical association between ERalpha and Shc upon E2
stimulation further evidenced the role of ERalpha on Shc activation. Mutagenesis 
studies showed that the phosphotyrosine binding and SH2 domains of Shc are
required to interact with the activation function 1, but not activation function 
2, domain of ERalpha. Using a glutathione-S-transferase-Shc pull-down assay, we
demonstrated that this ERalpha-Shc association was direct. Biological
consequences of this pathway were further investigated at the genomic and
nongenomic levels. E2 stimulated MAPK-mediated Elk-1 transcriptional activity.
Confocal microscopy studies showed that E2 rapidly induced formation of membrane 
ruffles, pseudopodia, and ERalpha membrane translocation. The E2-induced
morphological changes were prevented by antiestrogen. Together our results
demonstrate that ERalpha can mediate the rapid effects of E2 on Shc, MAPK, Elk-1,
and morphological changes in breast cancer cells

PMID: 11773443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 8;277(10):8741-8. Epub 2001 Dec 26.

Selective in vivo inhibition of mitogen-activated protein kinase activation using
cell-permeable peptides.

Kelemen BR(1), Hsiao K, Goueli SA.

Author information: 
(1)Genencor International, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA.

The extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), a member of the
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), is essential for cellular
proliferation and differentiation, and thus there exists great interest to
develop specific and selective inhibitors of this enzyme. Whereas small molecule 
inhibitors PD098095 and U0126 have been used to study MAPK/ERK kinase (MEK),
their target selectivity has been questioned recently. The cross-reactivity of
ATP-directed inhibitors with other protein kinases prompted us to develop
structure-based selective peptide inhibitors of ERK activation. Based on a
MEK1-derived peptide, we developed inhibitors of ERK activation in vitro and in
vivo. The inclusion of either an alkyl moiety or a membrane-translocating peptide
sequence facilitated the cellular uptake of the peptide inhibitor and prevented
ERK activation in 4-phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate-stimulated NIH 3T3 cells or
nerve growth factor-treated PC12 cells in a concentration-dependent manner. In
addition, cell-permeable peptides inhibited ERK-mediated activation of the
transcriptional activity of ELK1. The peptides did not have an inhibitory effect 
on the activity of two other closely related classes of MAPKs, c-Jun
amino-terminal kinase or p38 protein kinase. Thus, these peptides may serve as
valuable tools for investigating ERK activation and for selective investigation
of ERK-mediated responses. With the knowledge of other kinase interacting
domains, it would be possible to design cell-permeable inhibitors for
investigating diverse cellular signaling mechanisms and for possible therapeutic 
applications.

PMID: 11756441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 22;277(8):6490-6. Epub 2001 Dec 6.

Protein kinase C (PKC)eta-mediated PKC mu activation modulates ERK and JNK signal
pathways.

Br‰ndlin I(1), H¸bner S, Eiseler T, Martinez-Moya M, Horschinek A, Hausser A,
Link G, Rupp S, Storz P, Pfizenmaier K, Johannes FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Interfacial Engineering, Nobelstrasse 12, University 
of Stuttgart, Allmandring 31, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany.

Protein kinase C (PKC), a family of lipid-activated serine kinases, is involved
in multiple functions in the regulation of growth control. The PKC-related
isoform PKC mu/PKD has been implicated in mitogenic signal cascades because of
the activation of p42/p44 MAPK leading to Elk1-mediated gene transcription, and
PKC mu/PKD has been shown to be activated via a PKC-dependent pathway. By using
confocal analyses, we demonstrate here that PKC mu partially colocalizes with PKC
eta in different cell types. Colocalization depends on the presence of the PKC mu
pleckstrin homology domain. Coexpression of constitutively active PKC eta with
PKC mu leads to a significant enhancement of the PKC mu substrate phosphorylation
capacity as a result of an increased phosphorylation of the activation loop
Ser(738/742) of PKC mu, whereas Ser(910) autophosphorylation remains unaffected. 
In vitro phosphorylation experiments show that PKC eta directly phosphorylates
PKC mu on activation loop serines. Consequently, the p42 MAPK cascade is
triggered leading to an increase in reporter gene activity driven by a
serum-responsive element in HEK293 cells. At the same time, PKC eta-mediated JNK 
activation is reduced, providing evidence for a mutual regulation of PKC mu/PKC
eta affecting different arms of the p38/ERK/JNK pathways. Our data provide
evidence for the sequential involvement of selective PKC isoforms in kinase
cascades and identify the relevant domains in PKC mu for interaction with and
activation by PKC eta as pleckstrin homology domain and activation loop.

PMID: 11741879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Immunol. 2001 Dec 15;167(12):6975-82.

Bacterial peptidoglycan-induced tnf-alpha transcription is mediated through the
transcription factors Egr-1, Elk-1, and NF-kappaB.

Xu Z(1), Dziarski R, Wang Q, Swartz K, Sakamoto KM, Gupta D.

Author information: 
(1)Northwest Center for Medical Education, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Gary, IN 46408, USA.

Bacteria and their ubiquitous cell wall component peptidoglycan (PGN) activate
the innate immune system of the host and induce the release of inflammatory
molecules. TNF-alpha is one of the highest induced cytokines in macrophages
stimulated with PGN; however, the regulation of tnf-alpha expression in
PGN-activated cells is poorly understood. This study was done to identify some of
the transcription factors that regulate the expression of the tnf-alpha gene in
macrophages stimulated with PGN. Our results demonstrated that PGN-induced
expression of human tnf-alpha gene is regulated by sequences proximal to -182 bp 
of the promoter. Mutations within the binding sites for cAMP response element,
early growth response (Egr)-1, and kappaB3 significantly reduced this induction. 
The transcription factor c-Jun bound the cAMP response element site, Egr-1 bound 
the Egr-1 motif, and NF-kappaB p50 and p65 bound to the kappaB3 site on the
tnf-alpha promoter. PGN rapidly induced transcription of egr-1 gene and this
induction was significantly reduced by specific mutations within the serum
response element-1 domain of the egr-1 promoter. PGN also induced phosphorylation
and activation of Elk-1, a member of the Ets family of transcription factors.
Elk-1 and serum response factor proteins bound the serum response element-1
domain on the egr-1 promoter, and PGN-induced expression of the egr-1 was
inhibited by dominant-negative Elk-1. These results indicate that PGN induces
activation of the transcription factors Egr-1 and Elk-1, and that PGN-induced
expression of tnf-alpha is directly mediated through the transcription factors
c-Jun, Egr-1, and NF-kappaB, and indirectly through the transcription factor
Elk-1.

PMID: 11739517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Food Chem Toxicol. 2002 Jan;40(1):9-18.

Studies on the inhibition of tumor cell growth and microtubule assembly by
3-hydroxy-4-[(E)-(2-furyl)methylidene]methyl-3-cyclopentene-1,2-dione, an
intensively coloured Maillard reaction product.

Marko D(1), KemÈny M, Bernady E, Habermeyer M, Weyand U, Meiers S, Frank O,
Hofmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Division of Food Chemistry and Environmental
Toxicology, University of Kaiserslautern Erwin-Schroedinger-Str. 52, 67663,
Kaiserslautern, Germany. marko@rhrk.uni-kl.de

Very recently,
3-hydroxy-4-[(E)-(2-furyl)methylidene]methyl-3-cyclopentene-1,2-dione (1) has
been successfully identified as an intensively coloured Maillard product formed
from glucose and L-proline upon thermal food processing. Using a biomimetic
synthetic strategy, reference material of compound 1 was prepared and purified,
and then used to study its effect on the growth of human tumor cells. Compound 1 
was found to potently inhibit the growth of human tumor cells in vitro. Using a
reporter gene assay we could show that in growth inhibitory concentrations
compound 1 effectively inhibits the phosphorylation of the transcription factor
Elk-1. In addition, 1 was found to affect the microtubule skeleton. The human
mammary carcinoma cell line MCF-7 exhibits a decrease of the microtubule
organisation when treated for 24 h with 1 (> or =20 microM). At concentrations of
30 microM and above a loss of microtubule integrity is observed after 1 h
incubation. In vitro studies demonstrated that the polymerisation and, to a minor
extent, also the depolymerisation of tubulin, isolated and purified from bovine
brain, is inhibited in a dose-dependent manner at concentrations of 30 microM and
above. This is the first time that a non-enzymatically formed browning compound
of known structure was reported to effectively inhibit tumor cell growth and
microtubule assembly.

PMID: 11731031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Eur J Neurosci. 2001 Oct;14(8):1303-12.

Biological activity of RE-1 silencing transcription factor (REST) towards
distinct transcriptional activators.

Lietz M(1), Bach K, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, D-66421 Homburg, Germany.

The zinc finger protein RE-1 silencing transcription factor (REST) is a
transcriptional repressor that represses neuronal genes in non-neuronal tissues. 
We have analyzed the ability of REST and the REST mutants, RESTDeltaN and
RESTDeltaC lacking either the N-terminal or C-terminal repression domains of
REST, to inhibit transcription mediated by distinct transcriptional activator
proteins. For this purpose we have designed an activator specific assay where
transcription is activated as a result of only one distinct activation domain. In
addition, binding sites for REST were inserted in the 5'-untranslated region or
at a distant position downstream of the polyadenylation signal. The results show 
that REST or the REST mutants containing only one repression domain were able to 
block transcriptional activation mediated by the transcriptional activation
domains derived from p53, AP2, Egr-1, and GAL4. Moreover, REST, as well as the
REST mutants, blocked the activity of the phosphorylation-dependent activation
domain of Elk1. However, the activity of the activation domain derived from cAMP 
response element binding protein 2 (CREB2), was not inhibited by REST, RESTDeltaN
or RESTDeltaC, suggesting that REST is able to distinguish between distinct
transcriptional activation domains. Additionally, the activator specific assay,
together with a positive-dominant mutant of REST that activated instead of
repressed transcription, was used in titration experiments to show that REST has 
transcriptional repression and no transcriptional activation properties when
bound to the 5'-untranslated region of a gene.

PMID: 11703459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Dec;281(6):E1286-99.

Activation of Elk-1, an Ets transcription factor, by glucose and EGF treatment of
insulinoma cells.

Bernal-Mizrachi E(1), Wen W, Srinivasan S, Klenk A, Cohen D, Permutt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Washington University
School Of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. ebernal@im.wustl.edu

Elk-1, a member of the ternary complex factor family of Ets domain proteins that 
bind serum response elements, is activated by phosphorylation in a cell-specific 
manner in response to growth factors and other agents. The purpose of the current
study was to determine whether Elk-1 activation contributes to
glucose-/depolarization-induced Ca(2+)-dependent induction of immediate early
response genes in pancreatic islet beta-cells. The results of experiments in
insulinoma (MIN6) cells demonstrated that Elk-1-binding sites (Ets elements) in
the Egr-1 gene promoter contribute to transcriptional activation of the gene.
Treatment with either epidermal growth factor (EGF), a known inducer of beta-cell
hyperplasia, glucose, or KCl-induced depolarization resulted in Ser(383)
phosphorylation and transcriptional activation of Elk-1 (4 +/- 0.3-, P = 0.003,
2.3 +/- 0.19-, P = 0.002, and 2.2 +/- 0.1- fold, P = 0.001 respectively). The
depolarization response was inhibited by the Ca(2+) channel blocker verapamil and
by the MEK inhibitor PD98059 (53 +/- 6 and 55 +/- 0.5%, respectively).
EGF-induced activation of Elk-1 was also inhibited by PD98059 (60 +/- 5%). A
dominant negative Ras produced partial inhibition (42%) of the
depolarization-induced Elk-1 transcriptional activation. Transfection with a
constitutively active Ca(2+)/calmodulin kinase IV plasmid also resulted in Elk-1 
transcriptional activation. Experiments with p38, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, 
and protein kinase A inhibitors indicated that these pathways are not involved.
We conclude that Elk-1 activation contributes to glucose-/depolarization-induced 
Ca(2+)-dependent induction of immediate early growth response genes in pancreatic
islet beta-cells. Furthermore, the results demonstrated a convergence of
nutrient- and growth factor-mediated signaling pathways on Elk-1 activation
through induction of Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase ERK-1 and -2. The role 
of these pathways in the glucose-induced proliferation of islet beta-cells can
now be assessed.

PMID: 11701445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Nov 9;288(4):1011-7.

PTEN does not modulate GLUT4 translocation in rat adipose cells under
physiological conditions.

Mosser VA(1), Li Y, Quon MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

PTEN is a 3'-inositol lipid phosphatase that dephosphorylates products of PI
3-kinase. Since PI 3-kinase is required for many metabolic actions of insulin, we
investigated the role of PTEN in insulin-stimulated translocation of GLUT4. In
control rat adipose cells, we observed a approximately 2-fold increase in cell
surface GLUT4 upon maximal insulin stimulation. Overexpression of wild-type PTEN 
abolished this response to insulin. Translocation of GLUT4 in cells
overexpressing PTEN mutants without lipid phosphatase activity was similar to
that observed in control cells. Overexpression of PTEN-CBR3 (mutant with
disrupted membrane association domain) partially impaired translocation of GLUT4.
In Cos-7 cells, overexpression of wild-type PTEN had no effect on ERK2
phosphorylation in response to acute insulin stimulation. However, Elk-1
phosphorylation in response to chronic insulin treatment was significantly
decreased. Thus, when PTEN is overexpressed, both its lipid phosphatase activity 
and subcellular localization play a role in antagonizing metabolic actions of
insulin that are dependent on PI 3-kinase but independent of MAP kinase. However,
because translocation of GLUT4 in cells overexpressing a dominant inhibitory PTEN
mutant (C124S) was similar to that of control cells, we conclude that endogenous 
PTEN may not modulate metabolic functions of insulin under normal physiological
conditions.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11689011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Neurosci Lett. 2001 Nov 9;313(3):129-32.

Group I metabotropic glutamate receptors control phosphorylation of CREB, Elk-1
and ERK via a CaMKII-dependent pathway in rat striatum.

Choe ES(1), Wang JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, University of Missouri-Kansas
City, 2411 Holmes Street, M3-C15, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA.

In vivo activation of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs)
upregulates phosphorylation of cyclic AMP response element-binding protein
(CREB), Elk-1 and extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK) in striatal
neurons. To evaluate putative roles of Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
II (CaMKII) in CREB, Elk-1 and ERK phosphorylation, the CaMKII inhibitor, KN62,
was infused simultaneously with the group I mGluR agonist,
3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine (DHPG), into the rat dorsal striatum. The results
showed that DHPG (125, 250, and 500 nmol) increased phosphorylated (p) CaMKII
immunoreactivity (IR) in a dose-dependent manner. KN62 (50 nmol) significantly
attenuated 500 nmol DHPG-induced pERK, pElk-1 and pCREB IR in the ipsilateral
dorsal striatum. These data indicate that pCaMKII is a possible upstream effector
that is responsible for the regulation of CREB, Elk-1 and ERK phosphoproteins in 
response to group I mGluR stimulation in striatal neurons.

PMID: 11682144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Oct;86(10):4789-97.

Direct action of melatonin in human granulosa-luteal cells.

Woo MM(1), Tai CJ, Kang SK, Nathwani PS, Pang SF, Leung PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of British Columbia, 4490 
Oak Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6H 3V5.

The direct involvement of melatonin in modulation of ovarian steroidogenesis, the
high levels of melatonin found in human follicular fluid, and the presence of
melatonin binding sites in the ovary led us to hypothesize that melatonin acts as
a modulator of ovarian function. In contrast to the hypothalamus and pituitary,
the mechanism of melatonin action at the level of the ovary is still poorly
understood. In the present study, we investigated the gene expression of the two 
different forms of melatonin receptors in human granulosa-luteal cells, using
RT-PCR. PCR products corresponding to the expected sizes of the melatonin
receptor subtypes, mt(1)-R and MT(2)-R, were obtained from granulosa-luteal
cells, and the authenticity of the PCR products was confirmed by Southern blot
hybridization with cDNA probes. Subsequent cloning and sequence analysis revealed
that the ovarian mt(1)-R and MT(2)-R cDNAs are identical to their brain
counterparts. Because gonadotropins and GnRH acting through specific receptors in
the human ovary regulate cellular functions, we investigated the role of
melatonin in the regulation of FSH receptor, LH receptor, GnRH, and GnRH receptor
levels. Treatment with melatonin (10 pM-100 nM) significantly increased LH
receptor mRNA levels without altering the expression of the FSH receptor gene.
Both GnRH and GnRH receptor mRNA levels were significantly decreased, to 61% and 
45% of control levels, respectively, after melatonin treatment. Melatonin
treatment alone had no effect on basal progesterone production but enhanced the
effects of human CG-stimulated progesterone production. Because MAPKs are
activated in response to a diverse array of extracellular stimuli leading to the 
regulation of cell growth, division, and differentiation, and because melatonin
has been shown to modulate cellular proliferation and differentiation, in this
study, we demonstrated that melatonin activated MAPK in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. In summary, our studies demonstrate, for the first time,
that melatonin can regulate progesterone production, LH receptor, GnRH, and GnRH 
receptor gene expression through melatonin receptors in human granulosa-luteal
cells, which may be mediated via the MAPK pathway and activation of Elk-1. Our
results support the notion that melatonin plays a direct role in regulating
ovarian function.

PMID: 11600542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Kobe J Med Sci. 2001 Apr;47(2):47-58.

Heparin and heparan sulfate inhibit extracellular signal-regulated kinase
activation and myocardial cell hypertrophy induced by endothelin-1.

Mizutani K(1), Kawashima S, Ueyama T, Sakoda T, Takeuchi S, Kobayashi S, Yokoyama
M, Hayashi Y, Itoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Pathology, Division of Cardiovascular and Respiratory
Internal Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine.

Heparan sulfate (HS) is one of the components of extracellular matrix and a
potent anti-growth factor in various cells. Heparin has a similar structure to HS
and is demonstrated to inhibit myocardial cell hypertrophy. We examined the
intracellular signal mechanisms linking to the inhibitory effects of heparin and 
HS on endothelin-1 (ET-1)-induced hypertrophy in cultured rat neonatal myocardial
cells (MCs). Heparin inhibited ET-1-induced c-fos mRNA expression. Heparin and HS
inhibited ET-1-induced activation of c-fos promoter/enhancer in MCs. Although
heparin and HS inhibited ET-1-induced activation of the wild-type c-fos serum
response element (SRE), the activation of a mutated c-fos SRE that contains an
intact binding site for the serum response factor (SRF) but lacks the ternary
complex factor (TCF) binding site, was not inhibited. In addition, heparin and HS
inhibited the activation of TPA response element (TRE). However, heparin did not 
inhibit the activation of cyclic AMP response element (CRE). Furthermore, heparin
and HS inhibited ET-1-induced activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) and phosphorylation of Elk-1, which is one of the TCFs. These results
indicate that heparin and HS inhibited ET-1-induced ERK activation, resulting in 
suppression of Elk-1 phosphorylation, and lead to inhibition of c-fos gene
expression through SRF-independent manner. Moreover, heparin and HS inhibited
ET-1-induced [3H] leucine incorporation. These results suggest that heparin and
HS inhibit ET-1 induced myocardial cell hypertrophy through the inhibition of
gene expression and protein synthesis.

PMID: 11599124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2001 Oct 19;94(1-2):75-84.

Group I metabotropic glutamate receptor activation increases phosphorylation of
cAMP response element-binding protein, Elk-1, and extracellular signal-regulated 
kinases in rat dorsal striatum.

Choe ES(1), Wang JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, University of Missouri-Kansas
City, 2411 Holmes Street, M3-C15, Kansas City, MO, USA.

Cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) is a major transcriptional
activator at the calcium and cAMP response-element (CaCRE). Phosphorylated
(p)CREB facilitates gene expression in striatal neurons. Elk-1 is another
transcriptional regulator at the serum response element in the upstream promoter 
region of the CaCRE. Elk-1 is phosphorylated by extracellular signal-regulated
kinases (ERK) and may also contribute to the regulation of gene expression. To
evaluate putative roles of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) in
CREB, Elk-1, and ERK phosphorylation, the group I selective agonist,
3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine (DHPG), was infused into the dorsal striatum at doses 
of 125, 250, or 500 nmol in freely moving rats. Semi-quantitative
immunohistochemistry demonstrated that DHPG significantly increased levels of
pCREB, pElk-1, and pERK immunoreactivity of ipsilateral dorsal striatum in a dose
dependent manner. The increased immunoreactivity by 500 nmol DHPG was
significantly blocked by intrastriatal infusion of the group I selective
antagonist, n-phenyl-7-(hydroxyimino)cyclopropa[b]chromen-1a-carboxamide (PHCCC, 
25 nmol), but not by the group II/III antagonist,
(RS)-alpha-methylserine-o-phosphate monophenyl ester (MSOPPE, 25 nmol). These
data suggest that group I mGluR activation is positively linked to signaling
cascades resulting in CREB, Elk-1, and ERK phosphorylation in the striatum in
vivo.

PMID: 11597767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2001 Oct 19;94(1-2):48-58.

Differential expression of active, phosphorylation-dependent MAP kinases,
MAPK/ERK, SAPK/JNK and p38, and specific transcription factor substrates
following quinolinic acid excitotoxicity in the rat.

Ferrer I(1), Blanco R, Carmona M.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Neuropatologia, Servei d'Anatomia PatolÚgica, Hospital Princeps
d'Espanya (Bellvitge), c/ Feixa Llarga sn, 08907, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.
iferrer@sakma.es

Excitotoxicity is considered a major cell death inductor in neurodegeneration.
Yet mechanisms involved in cell death and cell survival following excitotoxic
insults are poorly understood. Expression of active, phosphorylation-dependent
mitogen-activated extracellular signal-regulated kinases (MAPK/ERKs), stress
activated c-Jun N-terminal kinases (SAPK/JNKs) and p38 kinases, as well as their 
putative active specific transcriptional factor substrates CREB, Elk-1, ATF-2,
c-Myc and c-Jun, have been examined following intracortical injection of the
glutamate analogue quinolinic acid (QA). Increased JNK(P) and p38(P)
immunoreactivity has been found in the core at 1 h following QA injection,
whereas increased MAPK(P) immunoreactivity occurs in neurons and glial cells
localised around the lesion and in neurons in remote cortical regions. This is
accompanied by strong phosphorylated Ser63 c-Jun (c-Jun(P)) immunoreactivity in
the core at 3 h, and by strong phosphorylated CREB, Elk-1 and ATF-2 (CREB(P),
Elk-1(P) and ATF-2(P)) immunoreactivity mainly in neurons around the core at 24 h
following QA injection. Examination with the method of in situ end-labelling of
nuclear DNA fragmentation has revealed large numbers of positive cells with no
apoptotic morphology in the core at 24 h, thus indicating that JNK(P), p38(P) and
c-Jun(P) over-expression precedes cell death. In contrast, MAPK(P), CREB(P),
Elk-1(P) and ATF-2(P), but not phosphorylated c-Myc (c-Myc(P)), over-expression
correlates with cell survival. Examination of cleaved, active caspase-3 has shown
specific immunoreactivity restricted to a few hematogenous cells in the area of
injection. Since cleaved caspase-3 is not expressed by dying cells in the present
paradigm, JNK(P), p38(P) and c-Jun(P) expression is not associated with caspase-3
activation. The present results demonstrate selective activation of specific MAPK
signals which are involved either in cell death or cell survival triggered by
excitotoxic insult.

PMID: 11597764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Diabetes. 2001 Oct;50(10):2376-83.

High glucose-enhanced mesangial cell extracellular signal-regulated protein
kinase activation and alpha1(IV) collagen expression in response to endothelin-1:
role of specific protein kinase C isozymes.

Hua H(1), Goldberg HJ, Fantus IG, Whiteside CI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, the University Health Network. Department of
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

High glucose (HG) stimulates glomerular mesangial cell (MC) expression of
extracellular matrix, a process involving protein kinase C (PKC) isozymes and
enhanced signaling by autocrine peptides such as endothelin-1 (ET-1). The purpose
of this study was to identify the specific PKC isozymes mediating the effects of 
HG on MC extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK1/2) signaling and
alpha1(IV) collagen expression in response to ET-1. HG (30 mmol/l for 72 h)
enhanced ET-1-stimulated alpha1(IV) collagen mRNA expression from 1.2 +/-
0.1-fold to 1.9 +/- 0.2-fold (P < 0.05 vs. normal glucose [NG] + ET-1), and the
effect was significantly reduced by Calphostin C or the MEK (mitogen-activated
protein kinase kinase) inhibitor PD98059. In transiently transfected MCs,
dominant-negative (DN)-PKC-delta, -epsilon, or -zeta inhibited ET-1 activation of
ERK1/2. Likewise, downstream of ERK1/2, ET-1 stimulated Elk-1-driven GAL4
luciferase activity to 11 +/- 1-fold (P < 0.002 vs. NG + ET-1) in HG, and
DN-PKC-delta, -epsilon, or -zeta attenuated this response to NG levels. HG
enhanced ET-1-stimulated intracellular alpha1(IV) collagen protein expression,
assessed by confocal immunofluorescence imaging, showed that individual
DN-PKC-delta, -epsilon, -zeta, as well as DN-PKC-alpha and -beta, attenuated the 
response. Thus, HG-enhanced ET-1 stimulation of alpha1(IV) collagen expression
requires PKC-delta, -epsilon, and -zeta to act through an ERK1/2-dependent
pathway and via PKC-alpha and -beta, which are independent of ERK1/2.

PMID: 11574422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Endocrine. 2001 Jun;15(1):119-27.

Peptides derived from pro-growth hormone-releasing hormone activate p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase in GH3 pituitary cells.

Steinmetz R(1), Zeng P, King DW, Walvoord E, Pescovitz OH.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Endocrinology/Diabetology, Wells Center for Pediatric
Research, Department of Pediatrics, Physiology and Biophysics, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, USA. rsteinme@iupui.edu

Posttranslational processing of the pro-growth hormone-releasing hormone
(proGHRH) peptide can result in the formation of at least two peptide products:
GHRH and the C-terminal peptide, GHRH-related peptide (GHRH-RP). While cyclic
adenosine monophosphate transduces many of the actions of GHRH, other pathways
also have been implicated in its actions. The aims of this study were to examine 
and characterize the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathways by GHRH, and GHRH-RP in pituitary-derived GH3 cells, as well as the
activation of the transcription factors that serve as substrates for these
kinases. GHRH rapidly increased p44/p42 MAPK activity in GH3 cells in a protein
kinase A-dependent and a protein kinase C-independent manner and stimulated the
activation of the transcription factor Elk-1. By contrast, GHRH-RP and p75-92NH2 
had no effect on p44/p42 MAPK phosphorylation in these cells. Additionally, we
determined that all three peptides, GHRH, GHRH-RP, and p75-92NH2, rapidly and
specifically increase phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and stimulate the activation of
the nuclear factor CHOP. These are the first studies to demonstrate the
activation of Elk-1 by GHRH and the activation of p38 MAPK and CHOP by GHRH,
GHRH-RP, and p75-92NH2. We conclude that members of the GHRH family of peptides
differentially activate multiple intracellular signaling pathways and suggest
that the biologic actions of GHRH may be far more diverse than previously
thought.

PMID: 11572318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Exp Cell Res. 2001 Oct 1;269(2):287-300.

Lack of Elk-1 phosphorylation and dysregulation of the extracellular regulated
kinase signaling pathway in senescent human fibroblast.

Tresini M(1), Lorenzini A, Frisoni L, Allen RG, Cristofalo VJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Lankenau Institute for Medical Research, 100 Lancaster Avenue, Wynnewood, 
Pennsylvania 19096, USA.

Replicative senescence is characterized by numerous phenotypic alterations
including the loss of proliferative capacity in response to mitogens and numerous
changes in gene expression including impaired serum inducibility of the
immediate-early genes c-fos and erg-1. Transcription of c-fos in response to
mitogens depends on the activation of a multiprotein complex formed on the c-fos 
serum response element (SRE), which includes the transcription factors SRF (serum
response factor) and TCF (ternary complex factor). Our data indicate that at
least two defects are responsible for the decreased c-fos transcription in
senescent cells, one caused by diminished DNA binding activity of the SRF and
another resulting from impaired activation of the TCF, Elk-1. In nuclei isolated 
from serum stimulated senescent cells the activating phosphorylation of
p62(TCF)/Elk-1, which is catalyzed by the members of the extracellular-regulated 
kinase (ERK) family was strikingly diminished and correlated with a decrease in
the abundance of activated ERK proteins. In contrast, in total cell lysates ERK
phosphorylation and ERK activity (normalized to total protein) reached similar
levels following stimulation of early- and late-passage cells. Interestingly,
senescent cells consistently exhibited higher ERK protein abundance. Thus, the
proportion of phosphorylated (active) ERK molecules in stimulated senescent cells
was lower than in early passage cells. The accumulation of unphosphorylated ERK
molecules in senescent cells correlated with the diminished abundance of
phosphorylated (active) MEK. These data indicate that in senescent cells there is
a general dysregulation in the ERK signaling pathway, which results in the
accumulation of inactive ERK molecules, decreased abundance of active ERK in the 
nucleus of senescent cells, and subsequent lack of activation of the
transcription factor TCF(Elk-1). These impairments, together with the impaired
DNA binding activity of SRF, could potentially account for the lack of c-fos
expression in senescent cells and for multiple other molecular changes dependent 
upon this pathway.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11570821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Circulation. 2001 Sep 18;104(12):1399-406.

p160 Bcr mediates platelet-derived growth factor activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Che W(1), Abe J, Yoshizumi M, Huang Q, Glassman M, Ohta S, Melaragno MG, Poppa V,
Yan C, Lerner-Marmarosh N, Zhang C, Wu Y, Arlinghaus R, Berk BC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Research, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY,
USA.

BACKGROUND: The human Bcr gene was originally identified by its presence in the
chimeric Bcr/Abl oncogene, which is causative for chronic myeloblastic leukemia. 
Because Bcr encodes a serine/threonine protein kinase, we studied its kinase
activity and determined the role of Bcr in the PDGF signaling pathway to ERK1/2
activation and DNA synthesis in rat aortic smooth muscle cells (RASMCs).
METHODS AND RESULTS: In RASMCs, platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF)
stimulated Bcr kinase activity, with a maximum at 1 minute. Because
phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase (PI3-K) is essential for Bcr/Abl leukemogenesis,
we evaluated the role of mouse PDGF-beta-receptor binding sites for PI3-K (Y708, 
Y719) and for phospholipase C-gamma (Y977, Y989) in PDGF-mediated Bcr kinase
activation. The mutant PDGF receptor Y708F/Y719F but not Y977F/Y989F showed
significantly reduced Bcr kinase activity. To determine the role of Bcr in
PDGF-mediated signal transduction events leading to ERK1/2 and its downstream
Elk1 transcription activation, wild-type (WT) and kinase-negative (KN) Bcr were
transiently expressed in RASMCs. Bcr WT enhanced, whereas Bcr KN inhibited,
PDGF-stimulated ERK1/2 and Elk1 transcriptional activity. Overexpression of Bcr
also enhanced PDGF-induced Ras/Raf-1 activity and DNA synthesis, but this
regulation is independent of the kinase activity of Bcr. Finally, we found that
Bcr expression was increased in the neointimal layer after balloon injury of rat 
carotid artery.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrated the importance of Bcr in PDGF-mediated
events, such as activation of Ras, Raf-1, ERK1/2, and Elk1, and stimulation of
DNA synthesis.

PMID: 11560856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2001 Oct;281(4):L766-75.

Functional components of basic fibroblast growth factor signaling that inhibit
lung elastin gene expression.

Carreras I, Rich CB, Jaworski JA, Dicamillo SJ, Panchenko MP, Goldstein R, Foster
JA.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2001 Oct;281(4):L762-5.

Previously, we have demonstrated that basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF)
decreases elastin gene transcription in confluent rat lung fibroblasts via the
binding of a Fra-1-c-Jun heterodimer to an activator protein-1-cAMP response
element in the distal region of the elastin promoter. In the present study, we
show that bFGF activates the mitogen-activated protein kinase extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2, resulting in the translocation of phosphorylated
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 into the nucleus followed by increased 
binding of Elk-1 to the serum response element of the c-Fos promoter, transient
induction of c-Fos mRNA, and sustained induction of Fra-1 mRNA. The addition of
PD-98059, an inhibitor of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase, abrogates the 
bFGF-dependent repression of elastin mRNA expression. Comparative analyses of
confluent and subconfluent fibroblast cultures reveal significant differences in 
elastin mRNA levels and activator protein-1 protein factors involved in the
regulation of elastin transcription. These findings suggest that bFGF modulates
specific cellular events that are dependent on the state of the cell and provide 
a rationale for the differential responses that can be expected in development
and injury or repair situations.

PMID: 11557580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Eur J Neurosci. 2001 Jul;14(2):342-52.

Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol-induced MAPK/ERK and Elk-1 activation in vivo
depends on dopaminergic transmission.

Valjent E(1), PagËs C, Rogard M, Besson MJ, Maldonado R, Caboche J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Signalisation Neuronale et RÈgulations GÈniques, CNRS/UniversitÈ
Pierre et Marie Curie, FRE 2371, 9 quai Saint Bernard, 75005 Paris, France.

It is now well established that central effects of Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC), the main psychoactive component of marijuana, are mediated by CB1
cannabinoid receptors. However, intraneuronal signalling pathways activated in
vivo by THC remain poorly understood. We show that acute administration of THC
induces a progressive and transient activation (i.e. phosphorylation) of the
mitogen activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK/ERK)
in the dorsal striatum and the nucleus accumbens (NA). This activation,
corresponding to both neuronal cell bodies and the surrounding neuropil, is
totally inhibited by the selective antagonist of CB1 cannabinoid receptors, SR
141716A. However, blockade of dopaminergic (DA) D1 receptors by administration of
SCH 23390, prior to THC, totally prevents ERK activation in the striatum, thus
demonstrating a critical involvement of DA systems in THC-induced ERK activation.
DA-D2 and glutamate receptors of NMDA subtypes also participate, albeit to a
lesser extent, to THC-induced ERK activation in the striatum, as shown after
injection of selective antagonists (raclopride and MK801, respectively).
Furthermore, THC-induced phosphorylation of the transcription factor Elk-1, and
up-regulation of zif268 mRNA expression are blocked by SL327, a specific
inhibitor of MAPK/ERK kinase (MEK), the upstream kinase of ERK, as well as SCH
23390. Finally, using the place-preference paradigm, we show that ERK inhibition 
blocks THC-induced rewarding properties. Altogether, our data strongly support
that ERK activation in the striatum is critically involved in long-term neuronal 
adaptive responses underlying THC-induced long-term behaviours.

PMID: 11553284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cancer Res. 2001 Sep 1;61(17):6569-76.

Activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase and c-Jun-NH(2)-terminal
kinase but not p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases is required for
RRR-alpha-tocopheryl succinate-induced apoptosis of human breast cancer cells.

Yu W(1), Liao QY, Hantash FM, Sanders BG, Kline K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutrition/A2703, University of Texas at Austin, 78712, USA.

RRR-alpha-tocopherol succinate (vitamin E succinate, VES) is a potent, selective 
apoptotic agent for cancer cells but not normal cells. VES has been shown to
inhibit the growth of a wide variety of tumor cells in cell culture and animal
models. Studies addressing mechanisms of action of VES-induced apoptosis have
identified transforming growth factor-beta, Fas/CD95-APO-1, and mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway involvement. Here we show that MAPKs, the
extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK), and the stress-activated protein
kinases, c-Jun NH2-terminal kinases (JNK), but not p38, are critical mediators in
VES-induced apoptosis of human breast cancer MDA-MB-435 cells. VES activates
ERK1/2 and JNK both in level and duration of kinase activity. Expression of
dominant negative mutants of ERK1, MAPK/ERK activator-1, or JNK1 but not p38
blocked phosphorylation of the substrate glutathione S-transferase-c-Jun and
inhibited VES-induced apoptosis. Increased phosphorylation and transactivation
activity of nuclear transcription factors c-Jun, ATF-2, and Elk-1 are observed
after VES treatments; however, only c-Jun and ATF-2 appear to be involved in
VES-induced apoptosis based on antisense blockage experiments. Collectively,
these results imply a critical role for ERK1 and JNK1 but not p38 in VES-induced 
apoptosis of human MDA-MB-435 breast cancer cells.

PMID: 11522656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Blood. 2001 Sep 1;98(5):1429-39.

Lipopolysaccharide activation of the MEK-ERK1/2 pathway in human monocytic cells 
mediates tissue factor and tumor necrosis factor alpha expression by inducing
Elk-1 phosphorylation and Egr-1 expression.

Guha M(1), O'Connell MA, Pawlinski R, Hollis A, McGovern P, Yan SF, Stern D,
Mackman N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, 
USA.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induces human monocytes to express many proinflammatory 
mediators, including the procoagulant molecule tissue factor (TF) and the
cytokine tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha). The TF and TNF-alpha genes are 
regulated by various transcription factors, including nuclear factor
(NF)-kappaB/Rel proteins and Egr-1. In this study, the role of the MEK-ERK1/2
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in LPS induction of TF and
TNF-alpha gene expression in human monocytic cells was investigated. The MAPK
kinase (MEK)1 inhibitor PD98059 reduced LPS induction of TF and TNF-alpha
expression in a dose-dependent manner. PD98059 did not affect LPS-induced nuclear
translocation of NF-kappaB/Rel proteins and minimally affected LPS induction of
kappaB-dependent transcription. In contrast, PD98059 and dominant-negative
mutants of the Ras-Raf1-MEK-ERK (extacellular signal-regulated kinase) pathway
strongly inhibited LPS induction of Egr-1 expression. In kinetic experiments LPS 
induction of Egr-1 expression preceded induction of TF expression. In addition,
mutation of the Egr-1 sites in the TF and TNF-alpha promoters reduced expression 
of these proinflammatory genes. It was demonstrated that LPS induction of the
Egr-1 promoter was mediated by 3 SRE sites, which bound an LPS-inducible complex 
containing serum response factor and Elk-1. LPS stimulation transiently induced
phosphorylation of Elk-1 and increased the functional activity of a GAL4-Elk-1TA 
chimeric protein via the MEK-ERK1/2 pathway. The data indicate that LPS induction
of Egr-1 gene expression is required for maximal induction of the TNF-alpha and
TF genes in human monocytic cells.

PMID: 11520792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 19;276(42):38449-56. Epub 2001 Aug 10.

ERK2- and p90(Rsk2)-dependent pathways regulate the CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein-beta interaction with serum response factor.

Hanlon M(1), Sturgill TW, Sealy L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

The serum response element (SRE) of the c-fos promoter is a convergence point for
mitogenic signaling pathways. Several transcription factors regulate SRE,
including serum response factor (SRF), ternary complex factors, and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-beta (C/EBPbeta). C/EBPbeta can interact with both
SRF and the ternary complex factor family member Elk-1, but only in response to
activated Ras. Transactivation of the SRE by C/EBPbeta is also greatly stimulated
by Ras. The Ras effectors that signal to C/EBPbeta are unknown. In this report,
we demonstrate that a consensus MAPK site in C/EBPbeta is necessary for Ras
stimulation of both C/EBPbeta-SRF interaction and transactivation of the SRE by
C/EBPbeta. To dissect signaling pathways activated downstream of Ras, different
Ras effector constructs were analyzed. We show that activated forms of Raf and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase stimulate C/EBPbeta-SRF interaction. We also show a
novel selectivity for the MAPK family member ERK2, where dominant-negative ERK2, 
but not dominant-negative ERK1, blocks Ras stimulation of C/EBPbeta-SRF
interaction. In addition, recombinant C/EBPbeta protein is phosphorylated by
ERK2, but not by ERK1, in vitro. Finally, we demonstrate a requirement for
p90(Rsk2) in regulation of C/EBPbeta-SRF interaction. These data show that
multiple Ras effectors are required to regulate C/EBPbeta and SRF association.

PMID: 11500490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Nature. 2001 Aug 9;412(6847):647-51.

Spred is a Sprouty-related suppressor of Ras signalling.

Wakioka T(1), Sasaki A, Kato R, Shouda T, Matsumoto A, Miyoshi K, Tsuneoka M,
Komiya S, Baron R, Yoshimura A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Immunology, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Cellular proliferation, and differentiation of cells in response to extracellular
signals, are controlled by the signal transduction pathway of Ras, Raf and MAP
(mitogen-activated protein) kinase. The mechanisms that regulate this pathway are
not well known. Here we describe two structurally similar tyrosine kinase
substrates, Spred-1 and Spred-2. These two proteins contain a cysteine-rich
domain related to Sprouty (the SPR domain) at the carboxy terminus. In
Drosophila, Sprouty inhibits the signalling by receptors of fibroblast growth
factor (FGF) and epidermal growth factor (EGF) by suppressing the MAP kinase
pathway. Like Sprouty, Spred inhibited growth-factor-mediated activation of MAP
kinase. The Ras-MAP kinase pathway is essential in the differentiation of
neuronal cells and myocytes. Expression of a dominant negative form of Spred and 
Spred-antibody microinjection revealed that endogenous Spred regulates
differentiation in these types of cells. Spred constitutively associated with Ras
but did not prevent activation of Ras or membrane translocation of Raf. Instead, 
Spred inhibited the activation of MAP kinase by suppressing phosphorylation and
activation of Raf. Spred may represent a class of proteins that modulate Ras-Raf 
interaction and MAP kinase signalling.

PMID: 11493923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Anesthesiology. 2001 Jul;95(1):144-53.

Differential effects of general anesthetics on G protein-coupled inwardly
rectifying and other potassium channels.

Yamakura T(1), Lewohl JM, Harris RA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas, Austin
78712-1095, USA.

BACKGROUND: General anesthetics differentially affect various families of
potassium channels, and some potassium channels are suggested to be potential
targets for anesthetics and alcohols.
METHODS: The voltage-gated (ERG1, ELK1, and KCNQ2/3) and inwardly rectifying
(GIRK1/2, GIRK1/4, GIRK2, IRK1, and ROMK1) potassium channels were expressed in
Xenopus oocytes. Effects of volatile agents [halothane, isoflurane, enflurane, F3
(1-chloro-1,2,2-trifluorocyclobutane), and the structurally related
nonimmobilizer F6 (1,2-dichlorohexafluorocyclobutane)], as well as intravenous
(pentobarbital, propofol, etomidate, alphaxalone, ketamine), and gaseous (nitrous
oxide) anesthetics and alcohols (ethanol and hexanol) on channel function were
studied using a two-electrode voltage clamp.
RESULTS: ERG1, ELK1, and KCNQ2/3 channels were either inhibited slightly or
unaffected by concentrations corresponding to twice the minimum alveolar
concentrations or twice the anesthetic EC50 of volatile and intravenous
anesthetics and alcohols. In contrast, G protein-coupled inwardly rectifying
potassium (GIRK) channels were inhibited by volatile anesthetics but not by
intravenous anesthetics. The neuronal-type GIRK1/2 channels were inhibited by 2
minimum alveolar concentrations of halothane or F3 by 45 and 81%, respectively,
whereas the cardiac-type GIRK1/4 channels were inhibited only by F3. Conversely, 
IRK1 and ROMK1 channels were completely resistant to all anesthetics tested.
Current responses of GIRK2 channels activated by mu-opioid receptors were also
inhibited by halothane. Nitrous oxide (approximately 0.6 atmosphere) slightly but
selectively potentiated GIRK channels. Results of chimeric and multiple amino
acid mutations suggest that the region containing the transmembrane domains, but 
not the pore-forming domain, may be involved in determining differences in
anesthetic sensitivity between GIRK and IRK channels.
CONCLUSIONS: G protein-coupled inwardly rectifying potassium channels, especially
those composed of GIRK2 subunits, were inhibited by clinical concentrations of
volatile anesthetics. This action may be related to some side effects of these
agents.

PMID: 11465552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 21;276(38):35280-9. Epub 2001 Jul 19.

Altered regulation of ERK1b by MEK1 and PTP-SL and modified Elk1 phosphorylation 
by ERK1b are caused by abrogation of the regulatory C-terminal sequence of ERKs.

Yung Y(1), Yao Z, Aebersold DM, Hanoch T, Seger R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Regulation, The Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel.

ERK1b is an alternatively spliced form of ERK1, containing a 26-amino acid
insertion between residues 340 and 341 of ERK1. Although under most circumstances
the kinetics of ERK1b activation are similar to that of ERK1 and ERK2, we have
previously found several conditions under which the activation of ERK1b by
extracellular stimuli differs from that of other ERKs. We studied the molecular
mechanisms that cause this differential regulation of ERK1b and found that ERK1b 
is altered in its ability to interact with MEK1 and this influenced its
subcellular localization but not its kinetics of activation. ERK1b had a
decreased ability to phosphorylate Elk1, but this did not change much the
transcriptional activity of the latter. Importantly, the interaction of ERK1b
with PTP-SL, which can act as a MAPK phosphatase, shortly after mitogenic
stimulation, was significantly affected as well. Using mutants of ERK1b we found 
that the differential interaction of ERK1b with the three effectors is caused by 
the site of insertion that abrogates the cytosolic retention sequence/common
docking motif of ERKs, and is not dependent on the actual sequence of the insert.
Prolonged epidermal growth factor stimulation of Rat1 cells resulted in a
differential inactivation and not activation of ERK1b as compared with ERK1 and
ERK2. The reduced sensitivity to phosphatases without major differences in the
kinetics of activation or activation of substrates, suggests that ERK1b plays a
role in the transmission of extracellular signals under conditions of persistent 
stimulation, where ERK1b and MAPK phosphatases are induced, and the activity of
ERK1 and ERK2 is suppressed.

PMID: 11463794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 Aug;60(2):290-301.

Selective potentiation of paclitaxel (taxol)-induced cell death by
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase inhibition in human cancer cell lines.

McDaid HM(1), Horwitz SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York, USA.

Activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in HeLa and
Chinese hamster ovary cells after treatment with paclitaxel (Taxol) and other
microtubule interacting agents has been investigated. Using a trans-reporting
system, the phosphorylation of the nuclear transcription factors Elk-1 and c-jun 
was measured. Concentration- and time-dependent activation of the Elk-1 pathway, 
mediated primarily by the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) component
of the MAPK family, was observed. Inactive drug analogs and other cytotoxic
compounds that do not target microtubules failed to induce similar levels of
activation, thereby indicating that an interaction between these drugs and the
microtubule is essential for the activation of MAPKs. Evaluation of the
endogenous levels of MAPK expression revealed cell-dependent expression of the
ERK, c-jun N-terminal kinase, and p38 pathways. In the case of HeLa cells,
time-dependent activation of ERK coincided with increased poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) cleavage, phosphatidylserine externalization, and increased
accumulation of cells in G2/M. In both cell lines, inhibition of ERK activity
potentiated paclitaxel-induced PARP cleavage and phosphatidylserine
externalization, suggesting that ERK activity coincided with, but did not
mediate, the cytotoxic effects of paclitaxel. We evaluated the nature of the
interaction between paclitaxel and the MAPK kinase inhibitor U0126 in three cell 
lines, on the basis of a potential chemotherapeutic advantage of paclitaxel plus 
ERK inhibition. Our data confirmed additivity in those cells lines that undergo
paclitaxel-induced ERK activation, and antagonism in cells with low ERK activity,
suggesting that in tumors with high ERK activity, there may be an application for
this strategy in therapy.

PMCID: PMC4039042
PMID: 11455016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cancer Res. 2001 Jul 15;61(14):5396-401.

Extremely low-dose ionizing radiation causes activation of mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathway and enhances proliferation of normal human diploid cells.

Suzuki K(1), Kodama S, Watanabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Radiation and Life Science, Department of Health Sciences,
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki 852-8521, Japan.
kzsuzuki@neet.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

We demonstrated here that X-ray irradiation at very low doses of between 2 and 5 
cGy stimulated proliferation of normal human diploid cells and human tumor cells.
Higher doses of irradiation at >1 Gy accumulated p53 protein and induced
phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2.
Phosphorylation of ERK1/2 decreased with dose down to 50 cGy, however, doses of
between 5 cGy and 2 cGy phosphorylated ERK1/2 as efficiently as higher doses of
X-rays, whereas the p53 protein level was not changed by doses <50 cGy. We found 
that mitogen-activated protein /ERK kinase (MEK) 1 was phosphorylated with both 2
cGy and 6 Gy of X-rays, and that activated ERK1/2 augmented phosphorylation of
Elk-1 protein. The specific epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, AG1478, decreased phosphorylation of the ERK1/2 proteins induced by 2 
cGy or 6 Gy of X-rays, and similar suppressive effect was observed with MEK
inhibitor, PD98059. Suppression of ERK1/2 phosphorylation with these inhibitors
alleviated enhanced proliferation of normal human cells by low-dose irradiation. 
Furthermore, overexpression of ERK2 in NCI-H1299 human lung carcinoma cells
potentiated enhanced proliferation, whereas down-regulation of ERK2 using the
antisense ERK2 gene abrogated the stimulative effect of low-dose irradiation.
These results indicate that a limited range of low-dose ionizing radiation
differentially activates ERK1/2 kinases via activation of epidermal growth factor
receptor and MEK, which causes enhanced proliferation of cells receiving very low
doses of ionizing radiation.

PMID: 11454682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Immunol. 2001 Jul 15;167(2):827-35.

CD28 signaling augments Elk-1-dependent transcription at the c-fos gene during
antigen stimulation.

Li W(1), Whaley CD, Bonnevier JL, Mondino A, Martin ME, Aagaard-Tillery KM,
Mueller DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rheumatic and Autoimmune Diseases Section, and Center 
for Immunology, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
USA.

Untransformed CD4(+) Th1 cells stimulated with Ag and APC demonstrated a
dependence on B7- and CD28-mediated costimulatory signals for the expression and 
function of AP-1 proteins. The induction of transactivation by the c-fos gene
regulator Elk-1 mirrored this requirement for TCR and CD28 signal integration.
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) (but not extracellular signal-regulated kinase or
p38) protein kinase activity was similarly inhibited by neutralizing anti-B7
mAbs. Blockade of JNK protein kinase activity with SB 202190 prevented both Elk-1
transactivation and c-Fos induction. These results identify a unique role for B7 
costimulatory molecules and CD28 in the activation of JNK during Ag stimulation
in Th1 cells, and suggest that JNK regulates Elk-1 transactivation at the c-fos
gene to promote the formation of AP-1 complexes important to IL-2 gene
expression.

PMID: 11441089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 17;276(33):31368-75. Epub 2001 Jun 8.

Sequential activation of protein kinase C (PKC)-alpha and PKC-epsilon contributes
to sustained Raf/ERK1/2 activation in endothelial cells under mechanical strain.

Cheng JJ(1), Wung BS, Chao YJ, Wang DL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica,
11529 Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Endothelial cells (ECs) are constantly subjected to hemodynamic forces including 
cyclic pressure-induced strain. The role of protein kinase C (PKC) in cyclic
strain-treated ECs was studied. PKC activities were induced as cyclic strain was 
initiated. Cyclic strain to ECs caused activation of PKC-alpha and -epsilon. The 
translocation of PKC-alpha and -epsilon but not PKC-beta from the cytosolic to
membrane fraction was observed. An early transient activation of PKC-alpha versus
a late but sustained activation of PKC-epsilon was shown after the onset of
cyclic strain. Consistently, a sequential association of PKC-alpha and -epsilon
with the signaling molecule Raf-1 was shown. ECs treated with a PKC inhibitor
(calphostin C) abolished the cyclic strain-induced Raf-1 activation. ECs under
cyclic strain induced a sustained activation of extracellular signal-regulated
protein kinases (ERK1/2), which was inhibited by treating ECs with calphostin C. 
ECs treated with a specific Ca(2+)-dependent PKC inhibitor (Go 6976) showed an
inhibition in the early phase of ERK1/2 activation but not in the late and
sustained phase. ECs transfected with the antisense to PKC-alpha, the antisense
to PKC-epsilon, or the inhibition peptide to PKC-epsilon reduced strain-induced
ERK1/2 phosphorylation in a temporal manner. PKC-alpha mediated mainly the early 
ERK1/2 activation, whereas PKC-epsilon was involved in the sustained ERK1/2
activation. Strained ECs increased transcriptional activity of Elk1 (an ERK1/2
substrate). ECs transfected with the antisense to each PKC isoform reduced Elk1
and monocyte chemotactic protein-1 promotor activity. Our findings conclude that 
a sequential activation of PKC isoform (alpha and epsilon) contribute to
Raf/ERK1/2 activation, and PKC-epsilon appears to play a key role in endothelial 
adaptation to hemodynamic environment.

PMID: 11399752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 24;276(34):32094-100. Epub 2001 Jun 11.

Disassociation of MAPK activation and c-Fos expression in F9 embryonic carcinoma 
cells following retinoic acid-induced endoderm differentiation.

Smith ER(1), Smedberg JL, Rula ME, Hamilton TC, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Ovarian Cancer Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19111, USA.

Retinoic acid induces cell differentiation and suppresses cell growth in a wide
spectrum of cell lines, and down-regulation of activator protein-1 activity by
retinoic acid contributes to these effects. In embryonic stem cell-like F9
teratocarcinoma cells, which are widely used to study retinoic acid actions on
gene regulation and early embryonic differentiation, retinoic acid treatment for 
4 days resulted in suppression of cell growth and differentiation into primitive 
and then visceral endoderm-like cells, accompanied by a suppression of
serum-induced c-Fos expression. The MAPK (ERK) pathway was involved in mitogenic 
signaling in F9 cells stimulated with serum. Surprisingly, although c-Fos
expression was reduced, the MAPK activity was not decreased by retinoic acid
treatment. We found that retinoic acid treatment inhibited the phosphorylation of
Elk-1, a target of activated MAPK required for c-Fos transcription. In F9 cells, 
the MAPK/MEK inhibitor PD98059 suppressed Elk-1 phosphorylation and c-Fos
expression, indicating that MAPK activity is required for Elk-1
phosphorylation/activation. Phosphoprotein phosphatase 2B (calcineurin), the
major phosphatase for activated Elk-1, is not the target in the disassociation of
MAPK activation and c-Fos expression since its inhibition by cyclosporin A or
activation by ionomycin had no significant effects on serum-stimulated c-Fos
expression and Elk-1 phosphorylation. Thus, we conclude that retinoic acid
treatment to induce F9 cell differentiation uncouples Ras/MAPK activation from
c-Fos expression by reduction of Elk-1 phosphorylation through a mechanism not
involving the activation of phosphoprotein phosphatase 2B.

PMID: 11402055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2001 Jul;281(1):C350-60.

Ionomycin causes activation of p38 and p42/44 mitogen-activated protein kinases
in human neutrophils.

Elzi DJ(1), Bjornsen AJ, MacKenzie T, Wyman TH, Silliman CC.

Author information: 
(1)Bonfils Blood Center, Denver, CO 80230, USA.

Many receptor-linked agents that prime or activate the NADPH oxidase in
polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) elicit changes in cytosolic Ca2+
concentration and activate mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases. To
investigate the role of Ca2+ in the activation of p38 and p42/44 MAP kinases, we 
examined the effects of the Ca2+-selective ionophore ionomycin on priming and
activation of the PMN oxidase. Ionomycin caused a rapid rise in cytosolic Ca2+
that was due to both a release of cytosolic Ca2+ stores and Ca2+ influx.
Ionomycin also activated (2 microM) and primed (20-200 nM) the PMN oxidase. Dual 
phosphorylation of p38 MAP kinase and phosphorylation of its substrate activating
transcription factor-2 were detected at ionomycin concentrations that prime or
activate the PMN oxidase, while dual phosphorylation of p42/44 MAP kinase and
phosphorylation of its substrate Elk-1 were elicited at 0.2-2 microM. SB-203580, 
a p38 MAP kinase antagonist, inhibited ionomycin-induced activation of the
oxidase (68 +/- 8%, P < 0.05) and tyrosine phosphorylation of 105- and 72-kDa
proteins; conversely, PD-98059, an inhibitor of MAP/extracellular signal-related 
kinase 1, had no effect. Treatment of PMNs with thapsigargin resulted in priming 
of the oxidase and activation of p38 MAP kinase. Chelation of cytosolic but not
extracellular Ca2+ completely inhibited ionomycin activation of p38 MAP kinase,
whereas chelation of extracellular Ca2+ abrogated activation of p42/44 MAP
kinase. These results demonstrate the importance of changes in cytosolic Ca2+ for
MAP kinase activation in PMNs.

PMID: 11401859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Eur Cytokine Netw. 2001 Apr-Jun;12(2):331-9.

Glucose potentiates interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta)-induced p38 mitogen-activated 
protein kinase activity in rat pancreatic islets of Langerhans.

Sprinkel AM(1), Andersen NA, Mandrup-Poulsen T.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, 2 Niels Steensens vej, DK-2820 Gentofte, Denmark.

The cytokine interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta) is cytotoxic to rat pancreatic
beta-cells and has been implicated in the pathogenesis of insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus. IL-1 beta causes expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) and production of nitric oxide (NO). NO may be the mediator of the
cytotoxic effect of IL-1 beta in rat islets and beta-cell lines. Glucose has been
shown to modulate the effects of IL-1 beta on accumulated insulin release and
potentiate NO production in rat islets, but the biochemical mechanism is unknown.
IL-1 beta activates the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1/2), p38 and c-jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK)
in rat islets and beta-cells. Glucose may modulate MAPK activity although
contrasting data have been published. The aim of this study was to investigate
whether glucose potentiated IL-1 beta-induced p38 and ERK1/2 activity in rat
islets. It was shown that glucose alone increased the phosphorylation of the MAPK
substrates Elk-1 and activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2). D-glucose
potentiated the p38 activity induced by a low concentration of IL-1 beta, whereas
no effect was seen at high concentrations of IL-1 beta. Inhibition of p38
activity prevented IL-1 beta-induced nitrite production in the presence of
D-glucose. We conclude that IL-1 beta-induced NO production in the presence of
glucose is signalled by the p38 pathway.

PMID: 11399523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Biotechniques. 2001 May;30(5):1134-8, 1140.

Stable luciferase reporter cell lines for signal transduction pathway readout
using GAL4 fusion transactivators.

Hexdall L(1), Zheng CF.

Author information: 
(1)Novasite Pharmaceuticals, 3520 Dunhill Street, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.
czheng@novasite.com

While GAL4 fusion activators have been widely used for dissecting signal
transduction pathways in transient assays, there has been surprisingly little
reported on utilizing cell lines with stably integrated fusion activators. To
avoid problems with the efficiency and reproducibility inherent to transient
transfection, we describe here the generation and characterization of HeLa
reporter cell lines, which contain a stably integrated luciferase gene responsive
to stably integrated and constitutively expressed GAL4-CREB or GAL4-Elk1 fusion
activators. These cell lines exhibited extremely low basal luciferase expression 
but robust response to various extracellular stimuli or the expression of
signaling molecules that resulted in elevated MAP kinase or PKA activities. This 
integrated two-component reporter system allows one to focus specifically on
particular signaling pathway endpoints and the altered transactivation activity
of either Elk1 or CREB. With the procedures described here, many novel cell-based
assays can be developed by generating new reporter cell lines with medically
important but difficult-to-transfect cell types, and by using different reporter 
genes or different fusion transactivator genes.

PMID: 11355349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 6;276(27):24931-6. Epub 2001 May 4.

Elk-1, C/EBPalpha, and Pit-1 confer an insulin-responsive phenotype on prolactin 
promoter expression in Chinese hamster ovary cells and define the factors
required for insulin-increased transcription.

Jacob KK(1), Stanley FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 550 First
Ave., New York, NY 10016, USA.

The transcription factor(s) that mediate insulin-increased gene transcription are
not well defined. These studies use phenotypic conversion of Rat2 and Chinese
hamster ovary (CHO) cells with transcription factors to identify components
required for regulation of prolactin promoter activity and its control by
insulin. The pituitary-derived GH4 cells contain all of the transcription factors
required for insulin-increased prolactin-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) 
expression while HeLa cells require only Pit-1, a pituitary-specific factor.
However, Rat2 and CHO cells require additional factors. We had determined
previously that the transcription factor that mediates insulin-increased
prolactin gene expression was likely an Ets-related protein. Elk-1 and Sap-1 were
the only Ets-related transcription factors tested as chimeras with LexA
DNA-binding domain that were able to mediate insulin-increased expression of a
LexA-CAT reporter plasmid. Elk-1 and Sap-1 are expressed in GH4 and HeLa cells
but Rat2 and CHO cells express Sap-1, but not Elk-1. Expression of Elk-1 made
Rat2 cells (but not CHO cells) insulin responsive. C/EBPalpha also binds to the
prolactin promoter at a sequence overlapping the binding site for Elk-1.
Expression of both C/EBPalpha and Pit-1 in CHO cells is required for high basal
transcription of prolactin-CAT. Expression of Elk-1 converts CHO cells into a
phenotype in which prolactin gene expression is increased by insulin treatment.
Finally, antisense mediated reduction of Elk-1 in GH4 cells decreased
insulin-increased prolactin gene expression and confirmed the requirement for
Elk-1 for insulin-increased prolactin gene expression. Thus, both C/EBPalpha and 
Pit-1 were required for high basal transcription while insulin sensitivity
required Elk-1.

PMID: 11340077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Oncogene. 2001 Jan 11;20(2):188-97.

A novel potential effector of M-Ras and p21 Ras negatively regulates p21
Ras-mediated gene induction and cell growth.

Ehrhardt GR(1), Korherr C, Wieler JS, Knaus M, Schrader JW.

Author information: 
(1)The Biomedical Research Centre, 2222 Health Sciences Mall, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver BC, V6T 1Z3 Canada.

Here, we report the identification and characterization of a new member of the
RalGDS-family, which is widely expressed and interacts strongly and selectively
with the GTP-bound forms of M-Ras and p21 Ras. This Ras pathway modulator (RPM), 
also termed RGL3, exhibited Ras-binding and catalytic domains typical of the
RalGDS-family of guanine nucleotide exchange factors, and was most similar to Rlf
(RalGDS-like factor), but was distinguished by a unique proline-rich region with 
multiple candidate SH3-domain binding sites. RPM/RGL3 resembled AF-6 and Nore1 in
interacting strongly with constitutively active M-Ras and p21 Ras. In contrast to
Rlf, transiently expressed RPM/RGL3 did not activate an Elk-1-inducible reporter 
gene alone or in combination with activated p21 Ras, but strongly inhibited
induction of this reporter gene by co-expression of activated H-Ras or MEKK-1.
This inhibitory effect was independent of the Ras binding domain and required a
second signal provided by p21 Ras or MEKK-1, but not Raf-1 or M-Ras. Expression
of RPM/RGL3 also strongly inhibited cell growth of fibroblasts transformed by an 
activated Src Y527F. Thus, RPM/RGL3 is a novel potential effector of both p21 Ras
and M-Ras with the novel function of negatively regulating Elk-1-dependent gene
induction downstream of p21 Ras or MEKK-1.

PMID: 11313946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Oncogene. 2001 Mar 15;20(11):1357-67.

c-Fos oncogene regulator Elk-1 interacts with BRCA1 splice variants BRCA1a/1b and
enhances BRCA1a/1b-mediated growth suppression in breast cancer cells.

Chai Y(1), Chipitsyna G, Cui J, Liao B, Liu S, Aysola K, Yezdani M, Reddy ES, Rao
VN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Program of Cancer Genetics, Cancer Center, MCP
Hahnemann University, 245 North 15th Street, New College Building, M.S. 481,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

Elk-1, a c-Fos protooncogene regulator, which belongs to the ETS-domain family of
transcriptional factors, plays an important role in the induction of immediate
early gene expression in response to a variety of extracellular signals. In this 
study, we demonstrate for the first time the in vitro and in vivo interaction of 
Elk-1 with BRCA1 splice variants BRCA1a and BRCA1b using GST-pull down assays,
co-imunoprecipitations/Western blot analysis of cell extracts from breast cancer 
cells and mammalian two-hybrid assays. We have localized the BRCA1 interaction
domain of Elk-1 protein to the conserved ETS domain, a motif involved in DNA
binding and protein-protein interactions. We also observed binding of BRCA1
proteins to other ETS-domain transcription factors SAP1, ETS-1, ERG-2 and Fli-1
but not to Elk-1 splice variant DeltaElk-1 and c-Fos protooncogene. Both BRCA1a
and BRCA1b splice variants function as growth suppressors of human breast cancer 
cells. Interestingly, our studies reveal that although both Elk-1 and SAP-1 are
highly homologous members of a subfamily of ETS domain proteins called ternary
complex factors, it is only Elk-1 but not SAP-1 that can augment the growth
suppressive function of BRCA1a/1b proteins in breast cancer cells. Thus Elk-1
could be a potential downstream target of BRCA1 in its growth control pathway.
Furthermore, we have observed inhibition of c-Fos promoter activity in BRCA1a
transfected stable breast cancer cells and over expression of BRCA1a/1b
attenuates MEK-induced SRE activation in vivo. These results demonstrate for the 
first time a link between the growth suppressive function of BRCA1a/1b proteins
and signal transduction pathway involving Elk-1 protein. All these results taken 
together suggest that one of the mechanisms by which BRCA1a/1b proteins function 
as growth/tumor suppressors is through inhibition of the expression of Elk-1
target genes like c-Fos.

PMID: 11313879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Cell Biol. 2001 Apr 16;153(2):273-82.

Integrin-mediated adhesion regulates ERK nuclear translocation and
phosphorylation of Elk-1.

Aplin AE(1), Stewart SA, Assoian RK, Juliano RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA. aaplin@med.unc.edu

Integrin-mediated adhesion to the extracellular matrix permits efficient growth
factor-mediated activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs).
Points of regulation have been localized to the level of receptor phosphorylation
or to activation of the downstream components, Raf and MEK (mitogen-activated
protein kinase/ERK kinase). However, it is also well established that ERK
translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus is required for G1 phase cell
cycle progression. Here we show that phosphorylation of the nuclear ERK
substrate, Elk-1 at serine 383, is anchorage dependent in response to growth
factor treatment of NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. Furthermore, when we activated ERK in
nonadherent cells by expression of active components of the ERK cascade,
subsequent phosphorylation of Elk-1 at serine 383 and Elk-1-mediated
transactivation were still impaired compared with adherent cells. Elk-1
phosphorylation was dependent on an intact actin cytoskeleton, as discerned by
treatment with cytochalasin D (CCD). Finally, expression of active MEK failed to 
predominantly localize ERK to the nucleus in suspended cells or adherent cells
treated with CCD. These data show that integrin-mediated organization of the
actin cytoskeleton regulates localization of activated ERK, and in turn the
ability of ERK to efficiently phosphorylate nuclear substrates.

PMCID: PMC2169466
PMID: 11309409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;21(8):2802-14.

Temporal recruitment of the mSin3A-histone deacetylase corepressor complex to the
ETS domain transcription factor Elk-1.

Yang SH(1), Vickers E, Brehm A, Kouzarides T, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT,
United Kingdom.

The transcriptional status of eukaryotic genes is determined by a balance between
activation and repression mechanisms. The nuclear hormone receptors represent
classical examples of transcription factors that can regulate this balance by
recruiting corepressor and coactivator complexes in a ligand-dependent manner.
Here, we demonstrate that the equilibrium between activation and repression via a
single transcription factor, Elk-1, is altered following activation of the Erk
mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade. In addition to its C-terminal
transcriptional activation domain, Elk-1 contains an N-terminal transcriptional
repression domain that can recruit the mSin3A-histone deacetylase 1 corepressor
complex. Recruitment of this corepressor is enhanced in response to activation of
the Erk pathway in vivo, and this recruitment correlates kinetically with the
shutoff of one of its target promoters, c-fos. Elk-1 therefore undergoes temporal
activator-repressor switching and contributes to both the activation and
repression of target genes following growth factor stimulation.

PMCID: PMC86910
PMID: 11283259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;21(8):2659-70.

Thrombopoietin-mediated sustained activation of extracellular signal-regulated
kinase in UT7-Mpl cells requires both Ras-Raf-1- and Rap1-B-Raf-dependent
pathways.

Garcia J(1), de Gunzburg J, EychËne A, Gisselbrecht S, Porteu F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la SantÈ et de la Recherche MÈdicale U363, Institut
Cochin de GÈnÈtique MolÈculaire, Paris, France.

Thrombopoietin (TPO) regulates growth and differentiation of megakaryocytes. We
previously showed that extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) are required
for TPO-mediated full megakaryocytic maturation in both normal progenitors and a 
megakaryoblastic cell line (UT7) expressing the TPO receptor (Mpl). In these
cells, intensity and duration of TPO-induced ERK signal are controlled by several
regions of the cytoplasmic domain of Mpl. In this study, we explored the
signaling pathways involved in this control. We show that the small GTPases Ras
and Rap1 contribute together to TPO-induced ERK activation in UT7-Mpl cells and
that they do so by activating different Raf kinases as downstream effectors: a
Ras-Raf-1 pathway is required to initiate ERK activation while Rap1 sustains this
signal through B-Raf. Indeed, (i) in cells expressing wild-type or mutant Mpl,
TPO-induced Ras and Rap1 activation correlates with early and sustained phases of
ERK signal, respectively; (ii) interfering mutants of Ras and Rap1 both inhibit
ERK kinase activity and ERK-dependent Elk1 transcriptional activation in response
to TPO; (iii) the kinetics of activation of Raf-1 and B-Raf by TPO follow those
of Ras and Rap1, respectively; (iv) RasV12-mediated Elk1 activation was modulated
by the wild type or interfering mutants of Raf-1 but not those of B-Raf; (v) Elk1
activation mediated by a constitutively active mutant of Rap1 (Rap1V12) is
potentiated by B-Raf and inhibited by an interfering mutant of this kinase.
UT7-Mpl cells represent the second cellular model in which Ras and Rap1 act in
concert to modulate the duration of ERK signal in response to a growth factor and
thereby the differentiation program. This is also, to our knowledge, the first
evidence suggesting that Rap1 may play an active role in megakaryocytic
maturation.

PMCID: PMC86897
PMID: 11283246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Neurochem. 2001 Apr;77(1):239-52.

alpha-Synuclein forms a complex with transcription factor Elk-1.

Iwata A(1), Miura S, Kanazawa I, Sawada M, Nukina N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for CAG Repeat Diseases, Molecular Neuropathology Group, RIKEN
Brain Science Institute, Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan.

alpha-Synuclein has been identified as a component of Lewy bodies in Parkinson's 
disease and diffuse Lewy body disease, and glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs) in
multiple system atrophy (MSA). To explore the role of alpha-synuclein in the
pathogenesis, we searched for molecules interacting with alpha-synuclein and
discovered that GCIs are stained by anti-Elk-1 antibody. To seek the role of
Elk-1 in synucleinopathies, we cotransfected alpha-synuclein and Elk-1 to
cultured cells, and found small granular structure complexes where the two
molecules colocalized. Moreover, alpha-synuclein and Elk-1 were
co-immunoprecipitated from the cell lysates. For formation of the complex, the
presence of both ETS and B-box domains of Elk-1 was required. Although there was 
no evidence of direct binding between alpha-synuclein and Elk-1, we discovered
that alpha-synuclein and Elk-1 both bind to ERK-2, a MAP kinase. The effect of
alpha-synuclein on the MAP kinase pathway was assessed using the Pathdetect
system, which showed prominent attenuation of Elk-1 phosphorylation with
alpha-synuclein, and especially A53T mutant. Our results suggest that
alpha-synuclein reacts with the MAP kinase pathway, which might cause dysfunction
of neurons and oligodendrocytes and lead to neurodegeneration in Parkinson's
disease and MSA.

PMID: 11279280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 11;276(19):16379-90. Epub 2001 Jan 25.

Adenosine nucleotides acting at the human P2Y1 receptor stimulate
mitogen-activated protein kinases and induce apoptosis.

Sellers LA(1), Simon J, Lundahl TS, Cousens DJ, Humphrey PP, Barnard EA.

Author information: 
(1)Glaxo Institute of Applied Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QJ, United Kingdom.

For the widely distributed P2Y receptors for nucleotides, the transductional and 
functional responses downstream of their coupling to G proteins are poorly
characterized. Here we describe apoptotic induction and the associated
differential stimulation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase family members
by the human P2Y(1) receptor. The potent P2Y(1) receptor agonist,
2-methylthio-ADP (2-MeSADP), stimulated the extracellular-signal regulated
kinases (ERK1/2) (EC(50) approximately 5 nm) as well as several, but not all
isoforms detected, of the stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK) family.
Phospho-isoforms of p38 were unaffected. The induced kinase activity was blocked 
by the P2Y(1) receptor-selective antagonist, adenosine-2'-phosphate-5'-phosphate,
but unaffected by pertussis toxin. In addition, the endogenous ligand ADP, and
significantly also 2-MeSATP, induced concentration-dependent phosphorylation
changes in the same MAP kinase family members. The sustained activation of ERK1/2
was associated with Elk-1 phosphorylation that was abolished by the MEK1
inhibitor, PD 98059. However, the concomitant transient activation of the SAPKs
was not sufficient to induce c-Jun or ATF-2 phosphorylation. The transient phase 
of the ERK activity was partially inhibited either by the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase inhibitor, LY 294002, or the PKC inhibitor, Gˆ 6976. In addition, the
Src inhibitor, PP1, or expression of dominant negative Ras also attenuated the
transient phase of ERK phosphorylation. In contrast, inhibition of Ras or Src had
no effect on the sustained ERK activity, which was critically dependent on
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. The transient SAPK activity was suppressed by
expression of a dominant negative form of MKK4. Furthermore, this
kinase-deficient mutant inhibited 2-MeSADP-induced caspase-3 stimulation and the 
associated decrease in cell number. In conclusion, adenosine di- and triphosphate
stimulation of the human P2Y(1) receptor can transiently activate the Ras-ERK
cascade via the cooperative effects of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, Src and
PKC. The sustained ERK stimulation, via a Ras-insensitive pathway, culminates in 
Elk-1 activation without inducing a proliferation effect. The transient SAPK
activity did not evoke transcription factor phosphorylation but was required for 
the P2Y(1) receptor-mediated apoptotic function.

PMID: 11278310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Apr;15(4):614-24.

Analysis of the role of the mitogen-activated protein kinase in mediating
cyclic-adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate effects on prolactin promoter activity.

Kievit P(1), Lauten JD, Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland, Oregon 97201, USA.

The mechanisms mediating cAMP effects to stimulate transcription of the PRL gene 
have been examined. Treatments that elevate intracellular cAMP concentrations
were found to stimulate the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) in GH(3)
cells. Elevated cAMP was also found to stimulate activation of the GTP-binding
protein, Rap1. Rap1GAP1 reduced cAMP-induced phosphorylation of MAPK, offering
evidence that Rap1 may play a role in mediating activation of MAPK. Treatment of 
GH(3) cells with PD98059, an inhibitor of the MAPK pathway, reduced the ability
of forskolin to activate a PRL reporter gene, providing evidence that MAPK
contributes to cAMP-mediated effects on the PRL promoter. As previous studies
have implicated Ets factor binding sites within the PRL promoter in mediating
responses to MAPK, we expected that the Ets sites would also play a role in cAMP 
responsiveness. Surprisingly, mutation of all of the consensus Ets factor binding
sites in the proximal PRL promoter greatly reduced responsiveness to epidermal
growth factor (EGF) and TRH but did not reduce cAMP responsiveness. Experiments
using an expression vector for adenovirus 12S E1a provided evidence that the
coactivators, CREB binding protein and/or p300, probably play a role in cAMP
responsiveness of the PRL promoter. Interestingly, the ability of a GAL4-p300
fusion protein to enhance reporter gene activity was stimulated by cAMP in a
MAPK-dependent manner. These findings provide evidence for a model for
cAMP-induced PRL transcription involving Rap1-induced MAPK activity leading to
stimulation of the transcriptional coactivators, CBP and p300.

PMID: 11266512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. FEBS Lett. 2001 Mar 9;492(1-2):39-44.

Protein kinase C mu selectively activates the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) p42 pathway.

Hausser A(1), Storz P, H¸bner S, Braendlin I, Martinez-Moya M, Link G, Johannes
FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology and Immunology, University of Stuttgart, Germany.

Here we show that human protein kinase C mu (PKC mu) activates the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). Transient expression of constitutive
active PKC mu leads to an activation of Raf-1 kinase as demonstrated by in vitro 
phosphorylation of MAPK. PKC mu enhances transcriptional activity of a basal
thymidine kinase promotor containing serum response elements (SREs) as shown by
luciferase reporter gene assays. SRE driven gene activation by PKC mu is
triggered by the Elk-1 ternary complex factor. PKC mu-mediated activation of SRE 
driven transcription can be inhibited by the MEK1 inhibitor PD98059. In contrast 
to the activation of the p42/ERK1 MAPK cascade, transient expression of
constitutive active PKC mu does neither affect c-jun N-terminal kinase nor p38
MAPK.

PMID: 11248233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 2001 Jan;76(1):13-20.

[Regulation of a small GTPase Rap2].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohba Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Pathology, Department of Neurological
Disorder, Division of Neurological Science, Hokkaido University Graduate School
of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

Rap2 is a member of Ras-family G proteins and related most closely to Rap1;
however little is known about the regulation of Rap2 activity. In this study, I
have compared the regulation and function of Rap2 with those of Rap1. In 293T
cells, Rap2 was regulated by the same set of guanine nucleotide exchange factors 
(GEFs) and GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) as those which regulated Rap1. Rap2 
was localized at both plasma membrane and intracellular membrane compartments, as
Rap1 was. Rap2 bound to the Ras-binding domain of Raf and inhibited Ras-dependent
activation of Elk1 transcription factor. I have found that the GTP-bound form
exceeds 50% of total Rap2 in the cells. This observation suggests that Rap2
suppresses Ras-mediated activation of ERK/MAP kinase cascade in quiescent cells.

PMID: 11235208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Cell Biochem. 2001 Jan;216(1-2):121-8.

Homocysteine stimulates the expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in
endothelial cells leading to enhanced monocyte chemotaxis.

Sung FL(1), Slow YL, Wang G, Lynn EG, O K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Cardiovascular Science and Medicine, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

Hyperhomocysteinemia has been identified as an independent risk factor for
atherosclerosis. The infiltration of monocytes into the arterial wall is one of
the key events during atherogenesis. Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1)
is a potent chemokine that stimulates the migration of monocytes into the intima 
of the arterial wall. The mechanism by which increased monocyte infiltration
occurs in atherosclerotic lesions in patients with hyperhomocysteinemia has not
been delineated. The objective of the present study was to investigate the effect
of homocysteine on MCP-1 production in endothelial cells. Cells were incubated
with homocysteine. The secretion of MCP-1 protein was significantly increased
(195% as compared to the control) in cells treated with pathological
concentrations of homocysteine. Such effect was accompanied by an increased
expression of MCP-1 mRNA (176% as compared to the control) in endothelial cells
which resulted in enhanced monocyte chemotaxis. The p38 MAP kinase as well as
other members of the p38 MAP kinase pathway, including MKK3, MKK6, ATF-2 and
Elk-1, were activated in homocysteine-treated cells. Homocysteine-induced MCP-1
expression and subsequent monocyte chemotaxis were blocked by a p38 MAP kinase
inhibitor (SB203580) suggesting that the p38 MAP kinase pathway might be involved
in homocysteine-induced MCP-1 expression in endothelial cells. In contrast,
staurosporine, a protein kinase C inhibitor, had no effect on
homocysteine-induced MCP-1 expression. In conclusion, our results indicate that
homocysteine stimulates MCP-1 expression in endothelial cells leading to enhanced
monocyte chemotaxis.

PMID: 11216856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Cell Biochem. 2000 Nov;214(1-2):111-9.

Alpha-1 adrenergic signaling in a cardiac murine atrial myocyte (HL-1) cell line.

McWhinney CD(1), Hansen C, Robishaw JD.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma State University, College of Osteopathic Medicine, Department of
Pharmacology and Physiology, Tulsa, OK 74107-1898, USA.

Activation of alpha-1 adrenergic receptors in the heart has been shown to result 
in increased contractile activity, cardiac fetal gene re-expression, and myocyte 
hypertrophy. Three alpha-1 adrenergic receptors have been identified through
molecular cloning. Due to the limited selectivities of the currently available
alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonists, the signaling pathways activated by
specific subtypes in the heart remain unresolved. To resolve this dilemma, we
have used a molecular approach to identify the signaling pathways and downstream 
genes that are engaged in response to activation of individual alpha-1 adrenergic
subtypes in cardiac cells. We have transfected constitutively active alpha-1
adrenergic receptors (alpha1a-S290/293-AR [1] or the alpha1b-S288/294-AR [2])
subtypes into the cardiac murine myocyte cell line (HL-1) and studied the signal 
transduction pathway(s) and cardiac gene(s) activated by them. In this study, we 
demonstrate that the alpha1a-S290/293 -AR [1] subtype preferentially couples to
cardiac-specific atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) gene expression, while the
alpha1b-S288/294-AR preferentially couples to activation of mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK), Ets-like transcription factor-1 (Elk1) and serum response 
element (SRE) signaling pathways. Endogenous alpha-1 adrenergic receptors are
expressed, and stimulate phosphatidylinositol-hydrolysis upon activation with the
alpha-1 agonist, phenylephrine.

PMID: 11195782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Dec 11;95(4):404-5.

Cosegregation of T108A Elk-1 with mental retardation.

Schrˆer A, Scheer MP, Zacharias S, Schneider S, Ropers HH, Nothwang HG, Chelly J,
Hamel B, Fryns JP, Shaw P, Moraine C.

PMID: 11186900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Neurochem. 2001 Jan;76(2):401-12.

Cyclic AMP and mitogen-activated protein kinases are required for
glutamate-dependent cyclic AMP response element binding protein and Elk-1
phosphorylation in the dorsal striatum in vivo.

Choe ES(1), McGinty JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, East Carolina University School of
Medicine, Greenville, North Carolina, USA.

Dopaminergic and glutamatergic signalling cascades are integrated in striatal
medium spiny neurones by cyclic AMP response-element binding protein and Elk-1
phosphorylation. Phosphorylated cyclic AMP response-element binding protein and
phosphorylated Elk-1 contribute to c-fos expression by binding to the calcium and
cyclic AMP response-element and the serum response element, respectively, in the 
c-fos promoter. The role of cyclic AMP and mitogen-activated protein kinase
signalling cascades in glutamate-induced cyclic AMP response-element binding
protein and Elk-1 phosphorylation and Fos expression was investigated using
semiquantitative immunocytochemistry in vivo. Intracerebroventricular infusion of
the sodium channel blocker, tetrodotoxin, decreased the glutamate-induced
increase in phosphorylated cyclic AMP response-element binding protein,
phosphorylated Elk-1, and Fos immunoreactivity. Intracerebroventricular infusion 
of the mitogen-activated and extracellular signal-regulated kinase inhibitor,
PD98059, the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitor, SB203580, or the
cyclic AMP inhibitor, Rp-8-Br-cAMPS, decreased glutamate-induced phosphorylated
cyclic AMP response-element binding protein, phosphorylated Elk-1, and Fos
immunoreactivity. Simultaneous infusion of glutamate and Sp-8-Br-cAMPS, a cyclic 
AMP analogue, augmented induction of Fos immunoreactivity but not phosphorylated 
cyclic AMP response-element binding protein or phosphorylated Elk-1
immunoreactivity. These data indicate that cyclic AMP and mitogen-activated
protein kinase signalling cascades are necessary for glutamate to induce cyclic
AMP response-element binding protein and Elk-1 phosphorylation and Fos expression
in the striatum. Furthermore, neuronal activity plays an important role in
glutamate-induced signalling cascades in vivo.

PMID: 11208903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Eur J Pharmacol. 2001 Jan 19;412(1):13-20.

A bombesin receptor subtype-3 peptide increases nuclear oncogene expression in a 
MEK-1 dependent manner in human lung cancer cells.

Weber HC(1), Walters J, Leyton J, Casibang M, Purdom S, Jensen RT, Coy DH, Ellis 
C, Clark G, Moody TW.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 
02118, USA.

A synthetic peptide, (D-Phe(6), beta-Ala(11), Phe(13), Nle(14))bombesin-(6-14)
was used to investigate the signal transduction mechanisms of bombesin receptor
subtype-3. Using NCI-1299#5 human lung cancer cells stably transfected with
bombesin receptor subtype-3, 100 nM (D-Phe(6), beta-Ala(11), Phe(13),
Nle(14))bombesin-(6-14) elevated the cytosolic Ca2+ from 150 to 250 nM within 10 
s. Addition of (D-Phe(6), beta-Ala(11), Phe(13), Nle(14))bombesin-(6-14) caused
phosphorylation of mitogen activated protein kinase in a time- and
concentration-dependent manner. The mitogen activated protein kinase
phosphorylation caused by (D-Phe(6), beta-Ala(11), Phe(13),
Nle(14))bombesin-(6-14) was inhibited by 2'-amino-3'-methyoxyflavone (PD98059), a
mitogen activated protein kinase kinase (MEK-1) inhibitor. Using a luciferase
reporter gene construct, (D-Phe(6), beta-Ala(11), Phe(13),
Nle(14))bombesin-(6-14) caused Elk-1 activation after 10 min and the increase in 
Elk-1 activation caused by (D-Phe(6), beta-Ala(11), Phe(13),
Nle(14))bombesin-(6-14) was inhibited by PD98059 as well as a dominant-negative
MEK-1. (D-Phe(6), beta-Ala(11), Phe(13), Nle(14))bombesin-(6-14) caused increased
c-fos as well as c-jun mRNAs 1 h after addition to NCI-H1299#5 cells. The 47-fold
increase in c-fos mRNA caused by 100 nM (D-Phe(6), beta-Ala(11), Phe(13),
Nle(14))bombesin-(6-14) was inhibited by PD98059, a dominant-negative MEK-1 and a
substance P antagonist but not (3-phenylpropanoyl-D-Ala(24), Pro(26), Psi(26,27),
Phe(27))GRP-(20-27) (BW2258U89), a GRP receptor antagonist. These results
indicate that (D-Phe(6), beta-Ala(11), Phe(13), Nle(14))bombesin-(6-14) caused
increased nuclear oncogene expression and upstream events include mitogen
activated protein kinase phosphorylation and Elk-1 activation.

PMID: 11166731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Neurosci. 2001 Jan 15;21(2):434-43.

Differential regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinases ERK1/2 and ERK5 by
neurotrophins, neuronal activity, and cAMP in neurons.

Cavanaugh JE(1), Ham J, Hetman M, Poser S, Yan C, Xia Z.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Environmental Health and Pharmacology, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-7234, USA.

Activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 (ERK1) and ERK2 by
neurotrophins, neuronal activity, or cAMP has been strongly implicated in
differentiation, survival, and adaptive responses of neurons during development
and in the adult brain. Recently, a new member of the mitogen-activated protein
(MAP) kinase family, ERK5, was discovered. Like ERK1 and ERK2, ERK5 is expressed 
in neurons, and ERK5 stimulation by epidermal growth factor is blocked by the MAP
kinase/ERK kinase 1 (MEK1) inhibitors PD98059 and U0126. This suggests the
interesting possibility that some of the functions attributed to ERK1/2 may be
mediated by ERK5. However, the regulatory properties of ERK5 in primary cultured 
neurons have not been reported. Here we examined the regulation of ERK5 signaling
in primary cultured cortical neurons. Our data demonstrate that, similar to
ERK1/2, ERK5 is activated by neurotrophins including brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF), neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), and NT-4. BDNF stimulation of ERK5 required
the activity of MEK5. Surprisingly, ERK5 was not stimulated by cAMP or neuronal
activity induced by glutamate or membrane depolarization. In contrast to ERK1/2, 
ERK5 strongly activated the transcriptional activity of myocyte enhancer factor
2C (MEF2C) in pheochromocytoma 12 (PC12) cells and was required for neurotrophin 
stimulation of MEF2C transcription in both PC12 cells and cortical neurons.
Furthermore, ERK1/2, but not ERK5, induced transcription from Elk1 and the cAMP/ 
Ca(2+) response element in PC12 cells. Our data suggest that mechanisms for
regulation of ERK5 and downstream transcriptional pathways regulated by ERK5 are 
distinct from those of ERK1/2 in neurons. Furthermore, ERK5 is the first MAP
kinase identified whose activity is stimulated by neurotrophins but not by
neuronal activity.

PMID: 11160424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Endocrinology. 2001 Feb;142(2):767-77.

The effects of autocrine human growth hormone (hGH) on human mammary carcinoma
cell behavior are mediated via the hGH receptor.

Kaulsay KK(1), Zhu T, Bennett W, Lee KO, Lobie PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119074,
Republic of Singapore.

The human GH (hGH) antagonist B2036 combines a single amino acid substitution
impairing receptor binding site 2 (G120K) with eight additional amino acid
substitutions that improve binding site 1 affinity. B2036 does not bind,
activate, or antagonize the human PRL receptor and therefore is suitable to
determine cellular effects mediated specifically through the hGH receptor. We
have used this hGH receptor specific antagonist in MCF-7 cells stably transfected
with either the hGH gene (MCF-hGH) or a translation deficient hGH gene (MCF-MUT) 
to determine whether the effects of autocrine hGH on mammary carcinoma cell
behavior are mediated via the hGH receptor. Enhanced JAK2 tyrosine
phosphorylation observed in MCF-hGH cells compared with MCF-MUT cells is
abrogated by B2036 as is the autocrine hGH stimulated increase in total cell
number and DNA synthesis. Interestingly, autocrine hGH functions as a potent
inhibitor of apoptosis induced by serum withdrawal compared with exogenously
added hGH, and the protection against apoptosis afforded by autocrine hGH is
abrogated by B2036. B2036 also inhibited autocrine hGH stimulated transcriptional
activation mediated by either STAT5, CHOP (p38 MAP kinase specific) or Elk-1
(p44/42 MAP kinase specific). Finally, B2036 inhibited the autocrine
hGH-dependent enhancement of the rate of mammary carcinoma cell spreading on a
collagen matrix. Thus, the effects of autocrine hGH on human mammary carcinoma
cell behavior are mediated via the hGH receptor.

PMID: 11159849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Endocrinology. 2001 Feb;142(2):671-9.

Stimulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase by gonadotropin-releasing hormone
in human granulosa-luteal cells.

Kang SK(1), Tai CJ, Nathwani PS, Choi KC, Leung PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6H 3V5.

The present study investigated the activation of mitogen-activated protein
kinases (MAPKs) by a GnRH agonist (GnRHa) in human granulosa-luteal cells
(hGLCs). The phosphorylation state of p44 and p42 MAPK was examined using
antibodies that distinguish phospho-p44/42 MAPK (Thr(202)/Tyr(204)) from total
p44/42 MAPK (activated plus inactivated). Activation of MAPK by GnRHa was
observed within 5 min and was sustained for 60 min after treatment. GnRHa
stimulated MAPK activation in a dose-dependent manner, with maximum stimulation
(6.7-fold over basal levels) at 10(-7) M. Pretreatment with a protein kinase C
(PKC) inhibitor, GF109203X, completely blocked GnRHa-induced MAPK activation. In 
addition, pretreatment with a PKC activator, phorbol-12-myristate 13-acetate,
potentiated GnRH-induced MAPK activation. These results indicate that GnRHa
stimulates MAPK activation through a PKC-dependent pathway in hGLCs, possibly
coupled to G(q)alpha protein. MAPK activation was also observed in response to
8-bromo-cAMP or cholera toxin, but not pertussis toxin. Forskolin (50 microM)
substantially stimulated a rapid cAMP accumulation, whereas GnRHa (10(-7) M) or
pertussis toxin (100 mg/ml) did not affect basal intracellular cAMP levels.
Cotreatment of GnRHa (10(-7) M) did not attenuate forskolin- or hCG-stimulated
cAMP accumulation. These results suggest that the GnRH receptor is probably not
coupled to G(s)alpha or G(i)alpha in hGLCs. Finally, GnRHa (10(-7) M) stimulated 
a significant increase in Elk-1 phosphorylation and c-fos messenger RNA
expression, as revealed by an in vitro kinase assay and Northern blot analysis,
respectively. These results clearly demonstrate that GnRH activates the MAPK
cascade through a PKC-dependent pathway in the human ovary.

PMID: 11159838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 13;276(15):11590-8. Epub 2001 Jan 5.

Estrogen receptor-mediated activation of the serum response element in MCF-7
cells through MAPK-dependent phosphorylation of Elk-1.

Duan R(1), Xie W, Burghardt RC, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A & M University, 
College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USA.

17beta-Estradiol (E2) induces c-fos protooncogene expression in MCF-7 human
breast cancer cells, and deletion analysis of the c-fos promoter showed that the 
serum response element (SRE) at -325 to -296 was E2-responsive. The mechanism of 
ligand-activated estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha)-dependent activation of gene
expression through the SRE was determined by mutational analysis of the promoter,
analysis of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway activation by E2, and
transforming growth factor alpha (TGF-alpha) as a positive control. In addition, 
ERalpha-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer and Chinese hamster ovary cells were
used as reference cell lines. The results showed that transcriptional activation 
of the SRE by E2 was due to ERalpha activation of the MAPK pathway and increased 
binding of the serum response factor and Elk-1 to the SRE. Subsequent studies
with dominant negative Elk-1, wild type, and variant GAL4-Elk-1 fusion proteins
confirmed that phosphorylation of Elk-1 at serines 383 and 389 in the C-terminal 
region of Elk-1 is an important downstream target associated with activation of
an SRE by E2. Both E2 (ERalpha-dependent) and growth factors
(ERalpha-independent) activated the SRE in breast cancer cells via the Ras/MAPK
pathway; however, in ER-negative CHO cells that do not express a receptor for
TGF-alpha, only hormone-induced activation was observed in cells transfected with
ERalpha.

PMID: 11145955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Eur J Cell Biol. 2000 Dec;79(12):924-35.

Nerve growth factor- and epidermal growth factor-regulated gene transcription in 
PC12 pheochromocytoma and INS-1 insulinoma cells.

Groot M(1), Boxer LM, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Saarland Medical
School, Homburg, Germany.

PC12 and INS-1 cells both express the nerve growth factor (NGF) receptors trkA
and p75NTR and the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF). In PC12 cells, NGF
treatment initiates a signaling cascade that ultimately leads to a change of the 
genetic program of the cell. We have investigated the role of NGF in regulating
gene transcription in PC12 and INS-1 cells, in order to define if there are
NGF-regulated genes per se. Furthermore, to distinguish between growth factor
stimulation via receptor tyrosine kinases in general and NGF-specific changes in 
gene transcription, we analyzed the effects of EGF on gene transcription. First, 
we tested the biological activities of fusion proteins consisting of the
DNA-binding domain of the yeast transcription factor GAL4 and the
phosphorylation-dependent activation domains of the transcription factors Elk1,
CREB, ATF2 and c-jun in NGF- or EGF-treated PC12 cells. We found a striking
increase in the transcriptional activity of the GAL4-Elk1 fusion protein that is 
a major substrate for the extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK).
This effect was observed in NGF- as well as in EGF-treated PC12 cells. In INS-1
cells, however, the activity of the GAL4-Elk1 fusion protein was induced by NGF, 
but not by EGF. The effects of NGF and EGF on gene transcription were
subsequently studied with plasmids containing reporter genes under control of the
Egr-1, c-jun, HES-1 or Bc12 regulatory sequences. NGF stimulated Egr-1 promoter
activities in PC12 and INS-1 cells, although the effect was much more pronounced 
in PC12 cells than in INS-1 cells. EGF also stimulated Egr-1 promoter activity in
both PC12 and INS-1 cells. Stimulation of c-jun promoter activity by NGF was
observed only in PC12 cells. Deletion mutagenesis demonstrated the importance of 
the 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate response elements within the c-jun
promoter for basal and NGF-mediated transcriptional induction. Likewise, NGF
activated HES1 and Bcl2 P1 promoter activities in PC12 cells but not in INS-1
cells and EGF did not show any effects on these promoters. We conclude that in
PC12 and INS-1 cells, NGF signaling leads to an activation of the ERK subtype of 
mitogen-activated protein kinases in the nucleus and a subsequent activation of
Egr-1 gene transcription. The NGF-induced transcription of the c-jun, HES1 and
Bc12 genes is, in contrast, cell type-specific, indicating that NGF can trigger
different gene expression programs dependent on the signaling pathways present in
a particular cell type. EGF is clearly able to activate gene transcription,
suggesting that the differences in the biological activities of EGF and NGF
cannot be explained by the inability of EGF to stimulate gene transcription.

PMID: 11152283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Neurosci. 2001 Jan 1;21(1):45-52.

Blockade of NGF-induced neurite outgrowth by a dominant-negative inhibitor of the
egr family of transcription regulatory factors.

Levkovitz Y(1), O'Donovan KJ, Baraban JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience, Psychiatry, and Behavioral Sciences, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Although it is well established that members of the Egr family of transcription
regulatory factors are induced in many neuronal plasticity paradigms, it is still
unclear what role, if any, they play in this process. Because NGF stimulation of 
pheochromocytoma 12 cells elicits a robust induction of Egr family members, we
have investigated their role in mediating long-term effects elicited by NGF in
these cells by using the Egr zinc finger DNA-binding domain as a selective
antagonist of Egr family-mediated transcription. We report that expression of
this Egr inhibitor construct suppresses neurite outgrowth elicited by NGF but not
by dibutyryl cAMP. To check that this Egr inhibitor construct does not act by
blocking the MEK/ERK pathway, which is known to mediate NGF-induced neurite
outgrowth, we confirmed that the Egr inhibitor construct does not block NGF
activation of Elk1-mediated transcription, a response that is dependent on this
pathway. Conversely, inhibition of MEK does not impair Egr family-mediated
transcription. Thus, we conclude (1) that induction of Egr family members and
activation of the MEK/ERK pathway by NGF are mediated by separate signaling
pathways and (2) that both are required to trigger neurite outgrowth induced by
NGF.

PMID: 11150318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. BMC Cell Biol. 2000;1:2. Epub 2000 Dec 6.

C/EBP beta and Elk-1 synergistically transactivate the c-fos serum response
element.

Hanlon M(1), Bundy LM, Sealy L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics Vanderbilt University School
of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee USA. marry.hanlon@mcmail.vanderbilt.edu

BACKGROUND: The serum response element (SRE) in the c-fos promoter is a
convergence point for several signaling pathways that regulate induction of the
c-fos gene. Many transcription factors regulate the SRE, including serum response
factor (SRF), ternary complex factor (TCF), and CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein-beta (C/EBPbeta). Independently, the TCFs and C/EBPbeta have been shown
to interact with SRF and to respond to Ras-dependent signaling pathways that
result in transactivation of the SRE. Due to these common observations, we
addressed the possibility that C/EBPbeta and Elk-1 could both be necessary for
Ras-stimulated transactivation of the SRE.
RESULTS: In this report, we demonstrate that Elk-1 and C/EBPbeta functionally
synergize in transactivation of both a Gal4 reporter plasmid in concert with
Gal4-SRF and in transactivation of the SRE. Interestingly, this synergy is only
observed upon activation of Ras-dependent signaling pathways. Furthermore, we
show that Elk-1 and C/EBPbeta could interact both in an in vitro GST-pulldown
assay and in an in vivo co-immunoprecipitation assay. The in vivo interaction
between the two proteins is dependent on the presence of activated Ras. We have
also shown that the C-terminal domain of C/EBPbeta and the N-terminal domain of
Elk-1 are necessary for the proteins to interact.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that C/EBPbeta and Elk-1 synergize in SRF dependent 
transcription of both a Gal-4 reporter and the SRE. This suggests that SRF, TCF, 
and C/EBPbeta are all necessary for maximal induction of the c-fos SRE in
response to mitogenic signaling by Ras.

PMCID: PMC29063
PMID: 11151091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Neurology. 2001 Jan 9;56(1):87-93.

Inclusion body myositis: expression of extracellular signal-regulated kinase and 
its substrate.

Nakano S(1), Shinde A, Kawashima S, Nakamura S, Akiguchi I, Kimura J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan. snakano@isola.kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: To assess abnormal intracellular signal transduction in inclusion body
myositis (IBM).
BACKGROUND: Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) play pivotal roles in
intracellular signal transduction and regulate cell growth and differentiation.
Upon their activation, MAPKs translocate from the cytoplasm into the nucleus.
DESIGN/METHODS: The authors investigated the localization of several forms of the
MAPK family-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), c-Jun N-terminal protein
kinase (JNK), and p38 MAPK (p38)-in 10 patients with sporadic IBM and in 52
control subjects. The relationship between the localization of immunopositive
deposits and nuclei was tested with bis-benzimide.
RESULTS: Vacuolated fibers in IBM displayed very strong focal immunoreactivity of
ERK, but not of JNK or p38. The ERK-positive deposits in these vacuolated fibers 
colocalized with the nuclear substrate of ERK, Elk-1. ERK- and Elk-1-positive
deposits were located frequently on the surface of the nuclei in vacuolated
fibers in IBM. Similar findings to those of sporadic IBM were observed in three
patients with distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles, but not in eight normal or
the other 41 disease controls.
CONCLUSION: There is evidence for impaired molecular transport to the nucleus
from the cytoplasm in the vacuolated fibers in IBM. This could be due to
cytoplasmic aggregation of ERK and Elk-1 or to abnormal nuclear pore machinery
involved in the transport of ERK and its substrate upon ERK activation.

PMID: 11148241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Jan 15;29(2):479-87.

DNA-bound transcription factor complexes analysed by mass-spectrometry: binding
of novel proteins to the human c-fos SRE and related sequences.

Drewett V(1), Molina H, Millar A, Muller S, von Hesler F, Shaw PE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, D Floor, University of Nottingham Medical
School, Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

Transcription factors control eukaryotic polymerase II function by influencing
the recruitment of multiprotein complexes to promoters and their subsequent
integrated function. The complexity of the functional 'transcriptosome' has
necessitated biochemical fractionation and subsequent protein sequencing on a
grand scale to identify individual components. As a consequence, much is now
known of the basal transcription complex. In contrast, less is known about the
complexes formed at distal promoter elements. The c-fos SRE, for example, is
known to bind Serum Response Factor (SRF) and ternary complex factors such as
Elk-1. Their interaction with other factors at the SRE is implied but, to date,
none have been identified. Here we describe the use of mass-spectrometric
sequencing to identify six proteins, SRF, Elk-1 and four novel proteins, captured
on SRE duplexes linked to magnetic beads. This approach is generally applicable
to the characterisation of nucleic acid-bound protein complexes and the
post-translational modification of their components.

PMCID: PMC29679
PMID: 11139618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Diabetologia. 2000 Nov;43(11):1389-96.

TNFalpha and IFNgamma potentiate IL-1beta induced mitogen activated protein
kinase activity in rat pancreatic islets of Langerhans.

Andersen NA(1), Larsen CM, Mandrup-Poulsen T.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Gentofte, Denmark.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Interleukin-1 beta (IL-1beta) in synergy with tumour necrosis
factor alpha (TNFalpha) and interferon gamma (IFNgamma) is cytotoxic to
pancreatic beta cells. Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activity that is
induced by interleukin-1 beta has been suggested to signal nitric oxide-dependent
as well as nitric oxide-independent beta-cell destructive pathways. The aim of
this study was to investigate if TNFalpha and IFNgamma signal through
mitogen-activated protein kinases in isolated rat islets of Langerhans and if
they potentiate mitogen-activated protein kinase activity induced by IL-1beta.
METHODS: Islets of Langerhans were isolated from 5- to 7-day-old Wistar rats and 
precultured for 7 days before stimulation with IL-1beta, TNFalpha and/or IFNgamma
for 20 min followed by lysis. Kinase activity was measured with a whole cell
lysate kinase assay and after immunoprecipitation of the kinase using
immunocomplex kinase assay.
RESULTS: Exposure to IL-1beta or TNFalpha significantly increased
mitogen-activated protein kinase activity, whereas IFNgamma tended to decrease
extracellular-signal-regulated kinase activity. Further, TNFalpha and IFNgamma
were found to synergistically increase mitogen-activated protein kinase activity 
induced by IL-1beta.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: We hypothesise that the synergistic effect of
IL-1beta, TNFalpha and IFNgamma in the functional inhibition and induction of
cell death in pancreatic beta cells is signalled through a synergistic activation
of mitogen-activated protein kinase activity.

PMID: 11126408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Hepatology. 2001 Jan;33(1):159-65.

Hepatitis C virus core protein enhances the activation of the transcription
factor, Elk1, in response to mitogenic stimuli.

Fukuda K(1), Tsuchihara K, Hijikata M, Nishiguchi S, Kuroki T, Shimotohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Osaka City University Medical School,
Osaka, Japan.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways play key roles in cell
proliferation, transformation of mammalian cells, and the stress response. We and
other investigators showed that hepatitis C virus (HCV) core protein has an
oncogenic potential, but its mechanism has remained unknown. We previously
demonstrated that the MAPK-extra-cellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) kinase
(MEK)-ERK pathway and its downstream target, the serum response element (SRE), is
activated in BALB/3T3 cells producing HCV core protein. To elucidate the precise 
mechanism by which HCV core protein activates the MEK-ERK pathway, we transiently
expressed HCV core protein in several cell lines and studied the signal
transduction of the pathway, using Gal4-Elk1 luciferase assay, in vitro kinas
assay of MAPK, and Western blotting analysis. We discovered that, in the presence
of mitogenic signal, HCV core protein enhanced Elk1 activation working downstream
of MEK without affecting ERK activity and Elk1 phosphorylation. Our data suggest 
that HCV core protein may activate Elk1 through a pathway alternative to the
typical phosphorylation cascade. These findings might give new insights into the 
role of HCV in hepatocarcinogenesis.

PMID: 11124832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 16;276(11):7797-805. Epub 2000 Dec 19.

Induction of early growth response-1 gene expression by calmodulin antagonist
trifluoperazine through the activation of Elk-1 in human fibrosarcoma HT1080
cells.

Shin SY(1), Kim SY, Kim JH, Min DS, Ko J, Kang UG, Kim YS, Kwon TK, Han MY, Kim
YH, Lee YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
Yeungnam University, Daegu 705-717, South Korea.

The early growth response gene-1 (Egr-1) is a transcription factor that plays an 
important role in cell growth and differentiation. It has been known that Egr-1
expression is down-regulated in many types of tumor tissues, including human
fibrosarcoma HT1080 cells, and introduction of the Egr-1 gene into HT1080 cells
inhibits cell growth and tumorigenic potential. Trifluoperazine (TFP), a
phenothiazine class calmodulin antagonist, is known to inhibit DNA synthesis and 
cell proliferation and potentially important in antitumor activities. To
understand the regulatory mechanism of Egr-1, we investigated the effect of TFP
on expression of Egr-1 in HT1080 cells. Herein, we report that Egr-1 expression
was increased by TFP in synergy with serum at the transcriptional level. Both the
Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II inhibitor KN62 and the calcineurin 
inhibitor cyclosporin A enhanced TFP-dependent increase of Egr-1, suggesting that
the Ca(2+)/calmodulindependent pathway plays a role in regulation of Egr-1
expression in HT1080 cells. The TFP-stimulated increase of the Egr-1 protein was 
preferentially inhibited by the MEK-specific inhibitor PD98059. In addition,
activation of human Egr-1 promoter and the transcriptional activation of the
ternary complex factor Elk-1 induced by TFP were inhibited both by pretreatment
of PD98059 and by expression of the dominant-negative RasN17. These results
indicate that the Ras/MEK/Erk/Elk-1 pathway is necessary for TFP-induced Egr-1
expression. We propose that the calmodulin antagonist TFP stimulates Egr-1 gene
expression by modulating Ras/MEK/Erk and activation of the Elk-1 pathway in human
fibrosarcoma HT1080 cells.

PMID: 11121417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Neuroscience. 2000;101(3):607-17.

N-Methyl-D-aspartate receptors and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase are
required for cAMP-dependent cyclase response element binding protein and Elk-1
phosphorylation in the striatum.

Choe ES(1), McGinty JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, East Carolina University School of
Medicine, Greenville, NC 27858, USA.

In vivo cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-induced N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptor and mitogen-activated protein kinase activation was investigated in the 
dorsal striatum by semiquantitative immunocytochemistry. Intracerebroventricular 
infusion of 8-bromo-adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphorothioate, Sp isomer
(Sp-8-Br-cAMPS), increased phosphorylated cAMP-responsive element binding
protein, phosphorylated Elk-1 and Fos immunoreactivity in a dose-dependent
manner. Intracerebroventricular infusion of the N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist, 
MK801, decreased, but tetrodotoxin or the mitogen-activated
extracellular-regulated kinase inhibitor, PD98059, did not affect
Sp-8-Br-cAMPS-induced phosphorylated c-AMP-responsive element binding protein,
phosphorylated Elk-1, phosphorylated extracellular-signal-regulated kinase and
Fos immunoreactivity. The p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitor,
SB203580, decreased the Sp-8-Br-cAMPS-induced increase in all markers, except
phosphorylated extracellular-signal-regulated kinase, in a dose-dependent manner.
We suggest that N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors couple c-AMP to phosphorylation
events and immediate early gene induction in the nucleus of striatal medium spiny
neurons. These events are mediated by crosstalk between protein kinase A and
mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades in vivo.

PMID: 11113310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jan;21(1):249-59.

Biochemical and biological functions of the N-terminal, noncatalytic domain of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2.

Eblen ST(1), Catling AD, Assanah MC, Weber MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University
of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 (ERK1) and ERK2 are important components 
in signal transduction pathways involved in many cellular processes, including
cell differentiation and proliferation. These proteins consist of a central
kinase domain flanked by short N- and C-terminal noncatalytic domains. While the 
regulation of ERK2 by sequences within the kinase domain has been extensively
studied, little is known about the small regions outside of the kinase domain. We
performed mutational analysis on the N-terminal, noncatalytic domain of ERK2 in
an attempt to determine its role in ERK2 function and regulation. Deleting or
mutating amino acids 19 to 25 (ERK2-Delta19-25) created an ERK2 molecule that
could be phosphorylated in response to growth factor and serum stimulation in a
MEK (mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase or ERK kinase)-dependent manner but 
had little kinase activity and was unable to bind to MEK in vivo. Since MEK acts 
as a cytoplasmic anchor for the ERKs, the lack of a MEK interaction resulted in
the aberrant nuclear localization of ERK2-Delta19-25 mutants in serum-starved
cells. Assaying these mutants for their ability to affect ERK signaling revealed 
that ERK2-Delta19-25 mutants acted in a dominant-negative manner to inhibit
transcriptional signaling through endogenous ERKs to an Elk1-responsive promoter 
in transfected COS-1 cells. However, ERK2-Delta19-25 had no effect on the
phosphorylation of RSK2, an ERK2 cytoplasmic substrate, whereas a nonactivatable 
ERK (T183A) that retained these sequences could inhibit RSK2 phosphorylation.
These results suggest that the N-terminal domain of ERK2 profoundly affects ERK2 
localization, MEK binding, kinase activity, and signaling and identify a novel
dominant-negative mutant of ERK2 that can dissociate at least some
transcriptional responses from cytoplasmic responses.

PMCID: PMC88798
PMID: 11113199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Chem Biol. 2000 Nov;7(11):833-43.

RNA aptamers as pathway-specific MAP kinase inhibitors.

Seiwert SD(1), Stines Nahreini T, Aigner S, Ahn NG, Uhlenbeck OC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado at Boulder,
Boulder, CO 80309-0215, USA. scott.siewert@colorado.edu

BACKGROUND: In eukaryotic cells, many intracellular signaling pathways have
closely related mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) paralogs as central
components. Although MAPKs are therefore obvious targets to control the cellular 
responses resulting from the activation of these signaling pathways, the
development of inhibitors which target specific cell signaling pathways involving
MAPKs has proven difficult.
RESULTS: We used an RNA combinatorial approach to isolate RNAs that inhibit the
in vitro phosphorylation activity of extracellular regulated kinase 2 (ERK2).
These inhibitors block phosphorylation by ERK1 and ERK2, but do not inhibit Jun
N-terminal kinase or p38 MAPKs. Kinetic analysis indicates these inhibitors
function at high picomolar concentrations through the steric exclusion of
substrate and ATP binding. In one case, we identified a compact RNA structural
domain responsible for inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: RNA reagents can selectively recognize and inhibit MAPKs involved in
a single signal transduction pathway. The methodology described here is readily
generalizable, and can be used to develop inhibitors of MAPKs involved in other
signal transduction pathways. Such reagents may be valuable tools to analyze and 
distinguish homologous effectors which regulate distinct signaling responses.

PMID: 11094337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Blood. 2000 Dec 1;96(12):3696-706.

Novel nuclear target for thrombin: activation of the Elk1 transcription factor
leads to chemokine gene expression.

Li QJ(1), Vaingankar S, Sladek FM, Martins-Green M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of California,
Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

Thrombin is primarily known for its role in homeostasis and thrombosis. However, 
this enzyme also plays important roles in wound healing and pathologic situations
such as inflammation and tumorigenesis. Among the molecules stimulated by
thrombin in these latter processes are the stress response proteins, chemokines. 
Chemokines are also known for their roles in inflammatory responses and tumor
development. These correlative observations strongly suggest that chemokines may 
be mediators of some of thrombin's functions in these processes. Elucidation of
the molecular mechanisms of stimulation of chemokines by thrombin may help to
unravel the ways in which their expression can be modulated. Up-regulation of the
chemokine 9E3/cCAF by thrombin occurs via its proteolytically activated receptor 
with subsequent transactivation of the epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine 
kinase. This study shows that stimulation by thrombin very rapidly activates this
chemokine at the transcriptional level, that 2 Elk1 binding elements located
between -534 and -483 bp of the promoter are major thrombin response elements,
that activation occurs via the Elk1 transcription factor, and that the latter is 
directly activated by MEK1/ERK2. The common occurrence of Elk1 binding domains in
the promoters of immediate early response genes suggests that it may be
characteristically involved in gene activation by stress-inducing agents. (Blood.
2000;96:3696-3706)

PMID: 11090049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. FEBS Lett. 2000 Nov 10;484(3):189-93.

Cyclic AMP-elevating agents induce the expression of MAP kinase phosphatase-1 in 
PC12 cells.

Burgun C(1), Esteve L, Humblot N, Aunis D, Zwiller J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U338, Centre de Neurochimie, 5 rue Blaise Pascal, 67084, Strasbourg,
France. burgun@neurochem.u-strasbg.fr

Stimulation of pheochromocytoma PC12 cells by cAMP-elevating agents caused the
induction of the immediate early gene 3CH134, which encodes MAP kinase
phosphatase-1 (MKP-1). Forskolin was as potent as serum in stimulating MKP-1 gene
expression, whereas dibutyryl-cAMP and neuropeptide PACAP were less effective.
Induction of the MKP-1 gene was accompanied by neo-synthesis of MKP-1 protein.
MAP kinase activation was not involved in the cAMP-induced MKP-1 gene expression.
The MAP kinase inactivation, that would result from MKP-1 induction in response
to increased intracellular cAMP level, contributes to explain how hormones or
neurotransmitters signaling through cAMP influence cell growth and
differentiation.

PMID: 11078876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 16;276(7):5213-21. Epub 2000 Nov 16.

Induction-independent recruitment of CREB-binding protein to the c-fos serum
response element through interactions between the bromodomain and Elk-1.

Nissen LJ(1), Gelly JC, Hipskind RA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de GÈnÈtique MolÈculaire de Montpellier, IFR24, CNRS, 1919 Rte. de
Mende, Montpellier 34293, France.

Proliferative signals lead to the rapid and transient induction of the c-fos
proto-oncogene by targeting the ternary complex assembled on the serum response
element (SRE). Transactivation by both components of this complex, serum response
factor (SRF) and the ternary complex factor Elk-1, can be potentiated by the
coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP). We report a novel interaction between the
bromodomain of CBP, amino acids 1100-1286, and Elk-1. DNA binding and glutathione
S-transferase pull-down assays demonstrate that binding requires Elk-1(1-212) but
not the C-terminal transactivation domain. Competition and antibody controls show
that the bromocomplex involves both SRF and Elk-1 on the c-fos SRE and uniquely
Elk-1 on the E74 Ets binding site. Interestingly, methylation interference and
DNA footprinting analyses show almost indistinguishable patterns between ternary 
and bromocomplexes, suggesting that CBP-(1100-1286) interacts via Elk-1 and does 
not require specific DNA contacts. Functionally, the bromocomplex blocks
activation, because cotransfection of CBP-(1100-1286) reduces RasV12-driven
activation of SRE and E74 luciferase reporters. Repression is relieved moderately
or strongly by linking the bromodomain to the N- or C-terminal transactivation
domains of CBP, respectively. These results are consistent with a model in which 
CBP is constitutively bound to the SRE in a higher order complex that would
facilitate the rapid transcriptional activation of c-fos by signaling-driven
phosphorylation.

PMID: 11083868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 19;276(3):2132-8. Epub 2000 Oct 26.

Intracellular calcium mobilization induces immediate early gene pip92 via Src and
mitogen-activated protein kinase in immortalized hippocampal cells.

Chung KC(1), Sung JY, Ahn W, Rhim H, Oh TH, Lee MG, Ahn YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Brain Research Institute, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Korea. kchung@yumc.yonsei.ac.kr

Regulation of intracellular calcium levels plays a central role in cell survival,
proliferation, and differentiation. A cell-permeable, tumor-promoting
thapsigargin elevates the intracellular calcium levels by inhibiting endoplasmic 
reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase. The Src-tyrosine kinase family is involved in a broad
range of cellular responses ranging from cell growth and cytoskeletal
rearrangement to differentiation. The immediate early gene pip92 is induced in
neuronal cell death as well as cell growth and differentiation. To resolve the
molecular mechanism of cell growth by intracellular calcium mobilization, we have
examined the effect of thapsigargin and subsequent intracellular calcium influx
on pip92 expression in immortalized rat hippocampal H19-7 cells. An increase of
intracellular calcium ion levels induced by thapsigargin stimulated the
expression of pip92 in H19-7 cells. Transient transfection of the cells with
kinase-inactive mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) and Src kinase or
pretreatment with the chemical MEK inhibitor PD98059 significantly inhibited
pip92 expression induced by thapsigargin. When constitutively active v-Src or MEK
was overexpressed, the transcriptional activity of the pip92 gene was markedly
increased. Dominant inhibitory Raf-1 blocked the transcriptional activity of
pip92 induced by thapsigargin. The transcription factor Elk1 is activated during 
thapsigargin-induced pip92 expression. Taken together, these results suggest that
an increase of intracellular calcium ion levels by thapsigargin stimulates the
pip92 expression via Raf-MEK-extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase- as
well as Src kinase-dependent signaling pathways.

PMID: 11053438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Hepatology. 2000 Nov;32(5):958-61.

Hepatitis C virus core protein activates the MAPK/ERK cascade synergistically
with tumor promoter TPA, but not with epidermal growth factor or transforming
growth factor alpha.

Hayashi J(1), Aoki H, Kajino K, Moriyama M, Arakawa Y, Hino O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation
for Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.

Persistent hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is associated with the development
of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), although the mechanism of HCV-related
hepatocarcinogenesis remains unclear. Recently, however, the close relationships 
between the development of HCC and the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK)/extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK) cascade have been
described. In the present study, we investigated the effects of HCV core protein 
on this MAPK/ERK cascade. HCV core protein significantly activated the MAPK/ERK
cascade, including Elk1. We also examined whether HCV core protein acted
synergistically along with hepatocyte mitogen-mediated MAPK/ERK activation.
Interestingly, Elk-1 activities were further enhanced by the tumor promoter,
12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol 13-acetate (TPA), but not by hepatocyte mitogens
(epidermal growth factor [EGF] and transforming growth factor alpha [TGF-alpha]) 
in NIH3T3 cells and HepG2 cells expressing HCV core protein. Moreover, the
MAPK/ERK activation by HCV core protein was blocked in the presence of the
specific MEK1 inhibitor, PD98059. These results indicate that ERK activation by
HCV core protein may be independent of hepatocyte mitogen-mediated signaling but 
synergistic with TPA, and HCV core protein may function at MEK1 or farther
upstream of that component.

PMID: 11050045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 16;276(7):5189-96. Epub 2000 Oct 24.

Opposing roles of Elk-1 and its brain-specific isoform, short Elk-1, in nerve
growth factor-induced PC12 differentiation.

Vanhoutte P(1), Nissen JL, Brugg B, Gaspera BD, Besson MJ, Hipskind RA, Caboche
J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurochimie-Anatomie, Institut des Neurosciences, CNRS-UMR
7624, UniversitÈ Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, France.

The ternary complex factor Elk-1, a major nuclear target of extracellular
signal-regulated kinases, is a strong transactivator of serum-responsive element 
(SRE) driven gene expression. We report here that mature brain neurons and nerve 
growth factor (NGF)-differentiated PC12 cells also express a second, smaller
isoform of Elk-1, short Elk-1 (sElk-1). sElk-1 arises from an internal
translation start site in the Elk-1 sequence, which generates a protein lacking
the first 54 amino acids of the DNA-binding domain. This deletion severely
compromises the ability of sElk-1 to form complexes with serum response factor on
the SRE in vitro and to activate SRE reporter genes in the presence of activated 
Ras. Instead, sElk, but not a mutant that cannot be phosphorylated, inhibits
transactivation driven by Elk-1. More pertinent to the neuronal-specific
expression of sElk-1, we show it plays an opposite role to Elk-1 in potentiating 
NGF-driven PC12 neuronal differentiation. Overexpression of sElk-1 but not Elk-1 
increases neurite extension, an effect critically linked to its phosphorylation. 
Interestingly, in the presence of sElk-1, Elk-1 loses its strictly nuclear
localization to resemble the nuclear/cytoplasm pattern observed in the mature
brain. This is blocked by mutating a normally cryptic nuclear export signal in
Elk-1. These data provide new insights into molecular events underlying neuronal 
differentiation of PC12 cells mediated by the NGF-ERK signaling cascade.

PMID: 11050086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Thyroid. 2000 Sep;10(9):747-52.

The thyrotropin receptor is not involved in the activation of p42/p44
mitogen-activated protein kinases by thyrotropin preparations in Chinese hamster 
ovary cells expressing the human thyrotropin receptor.

CorrËze C(1), Blondeau JP, Pomerance M.

Author information: 
(1)UnitÈ de Recherche, Transduction Hormonale et RÈgulation Cellulaire, U 486
INSERM, FacultÈ de Pharmacie, Ch‚tenay-Malabry, France.

We studied whether bovine pituitary thyrotropin (bTSH) or human recombinant
thyrotropin (rhTSH) stimulated p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) 
in Chinese hamster ovary cells expressing human thyrotropin receptor (CHO-hTSHR
cells). We show that p42/p44 MAPK phosphorylation was induced by both TSH
preparations at similar levels in CHO-hTSHR cells and in wild-type CHO cells. In 
contrast, cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production was stimulated by TSH 
only in CHO-hTSHR cells, demonstrating that p42/p44 MAPK stimulation was
independent of the TSH receptor. Moreover, similar results were obtained with two
other cell lines: the FRTL-5 thyroid cell line and the CCL39 fibroblast cell
line. Maximal stimulation of p42/p44 MAPK phosphorylation was observed after a 5-
to 10-minute incubation with bTSH and rhTSH preparations. At this time, the
phosphorylation of GST-Elk1 was also increased in a time- and
concentration-dependent manner by bTSH preparations. The phosphorylation of
p42/p44 MAPKs was abolished by PD 98059 and GF 109203X, indicating the
involvement of MAPK kinases (MEK 1/2) and protein kinase C. In contrast, the
activation of p42/p44 MAPKs was insensitive to H89, to cholera toxin and to
pertussis toxin. These data suggest that the protein kinase A pathway was not
implicated in p42/p44 MAPK activation by TSH preparations. Moreover, Gs or Gi/Go 
proteins do not appear to participate in p42/p44 MAPK activation. We also showed 
that these TSH preparations failed to induce activation of c-Jun NH2 terminal
kinase. We therefore conclude that the commercial TSH preparations used in this
study contained factor(s) responsible for the specific activation of p42/p44
MAPKs by a TSH receptor-independent mechanism.

PMID: 11041451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Virol. 2000 Nov;74(21):9845-57.

Activation of transcription of the human cytomegalovirus early UL4 promoter by
the Ets transcription factor binding element.

Chen J(1), Stinski MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, Iowa 52242, USA.

The human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) early UL4 promoter has served as a useful model 
for studying the activation of early viral gene expression. Previous
transient-transfection experiments detected cis-acting elements (the NF-Y site
and site 2) upstream of the transcriptional start site (L. Huang and M. F.
Stinski, J. Virol. 69:7612-7621, 1995). The roles of two of these sites, the NF-Y
site and site 2, in the context of the viral genome were investigated further by 
comparing mRNA levels from the early UL4 promoter in human foreskin fibroblasts
infected by recombinant viruses with either wild-type or mutant cis-acting
elements. Steady-state mRNA levels from the UL4 promoter with a mutation in the
NF-Y site were comparable to that of wild type. A mutation in an Elk-1 site plus 
putative IE86 protein binding sites decreased the steady-state mRNA levels
compared to the wild type at early times after infection. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays and antibody supershifts detected the binding of cellular
transcription factor Elk-1 to site 2 DNA with infected nuclear extracts but not
with mock-infected nuclear extracts. The role of cellular transcription factors
activated by the mitogen activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase pathway in activating transcription from early viral promoters is
discussed.

PMCID: PMC102021
PMID: 11024111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 22;275(51):40588-93.

Human alpha (1,3)-fucosyltransferase IV (FUTIV) gene expression is regulated by
elk-1 in the U937 cell line.

Withers DA(1), Hakomori SI.

Author information: 
(1)Pacific Northwest Research Institute, Seattle, Washington 98122, USA.
dwithers@pnri.org

The alpha1,3-fucosyltransferase IV (FucTIV) encoded by its gene (FUTIV) is
responsible for synthesis of Le(x) (Galbeta4[Fucalpha3]GlcNAcbeta3Galbeta1,R),
which causes compaction in the morula stage of the preimplantation mouse embryo, 
as well as alpha1,3-fucosylation at multiple internal GlcNAc of unbranched
poly-N-acetyllactosamine, termed "myeloglycan," the physiological epitope of
E-selectin. Since myeloglycan-type structure is also expressed in various types
of human cancer and may mediate E-selectin-dependent metastasis, expression of
FUTIV is oncodevelopmentally regulated. The mechanisms controlling FUTIV
expression remain to be clarified. In this report, we further characterize FUTIV 
gene structure and define a non-TATA box-dependent transcriptional start region
just upstream from the translational start. FUTIV promoter/reporter fusion
constructs defined a "full-length" promoter and highly active fragments in the
macrophage-derived U937 and myeloid HL60 cell lines. One highly active fragment
contains a consensus binding site for the Ets-1 transcription factor (Withers, D.
A., and Hakomori, S. (1997) Glycoconj. J. 14, 764). Gel shift analysis shows
specific binding to this site in nuclear extracts from U937 cells. Mutation of
the Ets consensus site significantly reduces FUTIV promoter activity in both cell
lines. Gel supershift and dominant negative cotransfection experiments identified
the Ets family member Elk-1 as one component binding and regulating the FUTIV
promoter in U937 cells. The significance of FUTIV regulation by Elk-1 is
discussed.

PMID: 11006292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Eur J Haematol. 2000 Mar;64(3):164-72.

Binding of stromal derived factor-1alpha (SDF-1alpha) to CXCR4 chemokine receptor
in normal human megakaryoblasts but not in platelets induces phosphorylation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase p42/44 (MAPK), ELK-1 transcription factor and
serine/threonine kinase AKT.

Majka M(1), Ratajczak J, Kowalska MA, Ratajczak MZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

The aim of this study was to identify pathways which are involved in signal
transduction from the CXCR4 receptor stimulated by stromal derived factor-1alpha 
(SDF-1alpha) in human malignant hematopoietic cells and normal megakaryoblasts.
First, we found that activation of CXCR4 in human T cell lines (Jurkat and ATL-2)
rapidly induced phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) (p44 
ERK-1 and p42 ERK-2). Next, we became interested in CXCR4-mediated signaling in
normal hematopoietic cells, and employed human megakaryoblasts, which highly
express CXCR4 as a model. We found that stimulation of these cells with
SDF-1alpha led to the phosphorylation of MAPK and serine/threonine kinase AKT as 
well. Activation of MAPK further led to the phosphorylation of the nuclear
transcription factor ELK-1. Phosphorylation of ELK-1 in megakaryoblasts implies
that phosphorylated MAPK translocate from cytoplasm into the nucleus where they
may phosphorylate some nuclear proteins. Note that neither MAPK nor AKT was
phosphorylated in normal human platelets after stimulation by SDF-1. We conclude 
that both MAPK and AKT are involved in signal transduction pathways from the
CXCR4 receptor in malignant and normal human hematopoietic cells. The biological 
consequences of MAPK, ELK-1 and AKT phosphorylation in megakaryoblasts after
stimulation with SDF-1alpha require further studies.

PMID: 10997882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2000 Sep;8(5):378-85.

Dexamethasone inhibition of TGF beta-induced cell growth and type II collagen
mRNA expression through ERK-integrated AP-1 activity in cultured rat articular
chondrocytes.

Miyazaki Y(1), Tsukazaki T, Hirota Y, Yonekura A, Osaki M, Shindo H, Yamashita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nature Medicine, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki
University School of Medicine, Sakamoto, Nagasaki, Japan.

Intraarticular injection of dexamethasone (DEX) accelerates cartilage degradation
due to the suppression of chondrocyte proliferation and extracellular matrix
formation. The present study first demonstrated the interaction between DEX and
TGF beta, a potent growth factor for cultured rat articular chondrocytes (CRAC), 
and then investigated the molecular mechanism by which DEX counteracts TGF
beta-induced chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation through the regulation
of AP-1 activity. DEX reduced serum-deprived and TGF beta-stimulated cell growth 
and [(3)H]-thymidine incorporation of CRAC. DEX also inhibited the expression of 
(alpha)1 type II collagen with concomitant suppression of the promoter activity. 
Transfection studies using a reporter vector with AP-1 responsive elements showed
that DEX reduced TGF beta-activated but not basal luciferase activities.
Activation of 3TP-luc, another AP-1 responsive element containing reporter was
also blocked by DEX. GAL4-Elk1 studies revealed that DEX suppressed TGF
beta-induced ERK activation which led to c-fos gene expression followed by
increase in AP-1 complex formation, whereas the Smad pathway was not involved in 
DEX-dependent negative regulation of AP-1 in a reporter assay that requires
FAST1-Smad2 for the activation. DEX also eliminated TGF beta-induced c-fos mRNA
expression and ERK activation in Northern analysis and in vitro kinase assay,
respectively. Further, DNA synthesis and transactivation of type II collagen by
TGF beta were inhibited by PD98059, an inhibitor of MEK. Our results indicate
that DEX suppressed TGF beta-induced chondrocyte proliferation and type II
collagen expression, probably through selective inhibition of ERK integrated AP-1
activation.

Copyright 2000 OsteoArthritis Research Society International.

PMID: 10966845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(18):6837-48.

G protein-coupled receptor-mediated mitogen-activated protein kinase activation
through cooperation of Galpha(q) and Galpha(i) signals.

Blaukat A(1), Barac A, Cross MJ, Offermanns S, Dikic I.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Uppsala, Sweden.

G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) have been shown to stimulate extracellular
regulated kinases (ERKs) through a number of linear pathways that are initiated
by G(q/11) or G(i) proteins. We studied signaling to the ERK cascade by receptors
that simultaneously activate both G protein subfamilies. In HEK293T cells,
bradykinin B(2) receptor (B(2)R)-induced stimulation of ERK2 and transcriptional 
activity of Elk1 are dependent on Galpha(q)-mediated protein kinase C (PKC) and
on Galpha(i)-induced Ras activation, while they are independent of Gbetagamma
subunits, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and tyrosine kinases. Similar results
were obtained with m(1) and m(3) muscarinic receptors in HEK293T cells and with
the B(2)R in human and mouse fibroblasts, indicating a general mechanism in
signaling toward the ERK cascade. Furthermore, the bradykinin-induced activation 
of ERK is strongly reduced in Galpha(q/11)-deficient fibroblasts. In addition, we
found that constitutively active mutants of Galpha(q/11) or Galpha(i) proteins
alone poorly stimulate ERK2, whereas a combination of both led to synergistic
effects. We conclude that dually coupled GPCRs require a cooperation of
Galpha(i)- and G(q/11)-mediated pathways for efficient stimulation of the ERK
cascade. Cooperative signaling by multiple G proteins thus might represent a
novel concept implicated in the regulation of cellular responses by GPCRs.

PMCID: PMC86218
PMID: 10958680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 10;275(45):34901-8.

Identification of guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) for the Rap1 GTPase.
Regulation of MR-GEF by M-Ras-GTP interaction.

Rebhun JF(1), Castro AF, Quilliam LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Walther Oncology Center, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Although the Ras subfamily of GTPases consists of approximately 20 members, only 
a limited number of guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) that couple
extracellular stimuli to Ras protein activation have been identified.
Furthermore, no novel downstream effectors have been identified for the
M-Ras/R-Ras3 GTPase. Here we report the identification and characterization of
three Ras family GEFs that are most abundantly expressed in brain. Two of these
GEFs, MR-GEF (M-Ras-regulated GEF, KIAA0277) and PDZ-GEF (KIAA0313) bound
specifically to nucleotide-free Rap1 and Rap1/Rap2, respectively. Both proteins
functioned as Rap1 GEFs in vivo. A third GEF, GRP3 (KIAA0846), activated both Ras
and Rap1 and shared significant sequence homology with the calcium- and
diacylglycerol-activated GEFs, GRP1 and GRP2. Similarly to previously identified 
Rap GEFs, C3G and Smg GDS, each of the newly identified exchange factors promoted
the activation of Elk-1 in the LNCaP prostate tumor cell line where B-Raf can
couple Rap1 to the extracellular receptor-activated kinase cascade. MR-GEF and
PDZ-GEF both contain a region immediately N-terminal to their catalytic domains
that share sequence homology with Ras-associating or RalGDS/AF6 homology (RA)
domains. By searching for in vitro interaction with Ras-GTP proteins, PDZ-GEF
specifically bound to Rap1A- and Rap2B-GTP, whereas MR-GEF bound to M-Ras-GTP.
C-terminally truncated MR-GEF, lacking the GEF catalytic domain, retained its
ability to bind M-Ras-GTP, suggesting that the RA domain is important for this
interaction. Co-immunoprecipitation studies confirmed the interaction of
M-Ras-GTP with MR-GEF in vivo. In addition, a constitutively active M-Ras(71L)
mutant inhibited the ability of MR-GEF to promote Rap1A activation in a
dose-dependent manner. These data suggest that M-Ras may inhibit Rap1 in order to
elicit its biological effects.

PMID: 10934204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biochemistry. 2000 Aug 15;39(32):9901-8.

Recruitment and activation of Raf-1 kinase by nitric oxide-activated Ras.

Deora AA(1), Hajjar DP, Lander HM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New 
York, New York 10021, USA.

Nitric oxide (NO) and related species serve as cellular messengers in various
physiological and pathological processes. The monomeric G protein, Ras,
transduces multiple signaling pathways with varying biological responses. We have
previously reported that NO triggers Ras activation and recruitment of an
effector, phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase (PI3K) and Ras-dependent activation of
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases which include extracellular signal
regulated kinases (ERKs), c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK), and p38 MAP kinase. 
In this study, we further defined NO-activated Ras signaling pathways. We have
identified Raf-1 as another effector recruited by NO-activated Ras in T
lymphocytes. NO activation results in association of Ras and Raf-1 and is
biologically significant, as we observe an NO-induced increase in Raf-1 kinase
activity. Downstream to Raf-1 kinase lie MAP kinases and their subsequent
downstream targets, transcription factors. We found that treatment of T
lymphocytes with NO yielded phosphorylation of the transcription factor, Elk-1.
This phoshorylation is dependent on NO binding to the cysteine 118 residue of
Ras. By further delineating the pathway with pharmacological inhibitors, Elk-1
phosphorylation was also found to be dependent on PI3K and ERK. Moreover, NO
triggered an increase in mRNA levels of the proinflammatory cytokine, tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), which was ERK dependent. Thus, we have defined
an NO-induced signaling pathway in T lymphocytes arising at the membrane where
NO-activated Ras recruits Raf-1 and culminating in the nucleus where Elk-1 is
phosphorylated and TNF-alpha messenger RNA is induced. This NO-activated
Ras-mediated signaling pathway may play a critical role in Elk-1-induced
transcriptional activation of T lymphocytes, host defense and inflammation.

PMID: 10933809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Surgery. 2000 Aug;128(2):192-7.

The effect of protein kinase C and its alpha subtype on human vascular smooth
muscle cell proliferation, migration and fibronectin production.

Okazaki J(1), Mawatari K, Liu B, Kent KC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, New York Presbyterian
Hospital/Cornell Campus, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York,
NY 10021, USA.

BACKGROUND: Vascular smooth muscle cell (SMC) migration, proliferation and
extracellular matrix protein production are key steps in the formation of intimal
hyperplasia, a process that leads to failure of vascular reconstructions. Protein
kinase C (PKC) may be involved in all 3 cellular events. PKC consists of a family
of 11 isotypes, 8 of which we have identified in human vascular SMCs. In this
study we evaluate the role of PKCalpha as a second messenger for proliferation,
migration and fibronectin production induced by human saphenous vein SMCs.
METHODS: DNA synthesis was evaluated by using (3)H-thymidine incorporation.
Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP-K) activation was quantified by Western
blotting with an antibody to its phosphorylated substrate, Elk-1. Chemotaxis was 
evaluated by using a microchemotaxis chamber. SMC fibronectin was measured by
Western blotting. For all experiments, PKCalpha was blocked with a selective
inhibitor, Gˆ6976.
RESULTS: Gˆ6976, at concentrations that allow selective inhibition of PKCalpha,
inhibited platelet-derived growth factor-stimulated SMC proliferation and MAP-K
activation by 30% to 40% and 30% to 60%, respectively. SMC chemotaxis was
stimulated approximately 2-fold by the PKCalpha inhibitor. Neither basal nor
transforming growth factor-betaI induced fibronectin production was affected by
Gˆ6976.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that PKCalpha is a positive mediator of SMC
proliferation and MAP-K activity, a negative regulator of migration and has no
effect on SMC fibronectin production. These data suggest that modulating
activities of specific PKC isotypes might be useful in both the study and control
of intimal hyperplasia.

PMID: 10922991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2000 Aug;32(8):1447-57.

Phosphorylation of elk-1 by MEK/ERK pathway is necessary for c-fos gene
activation during cardiac myocyte hypertrophy.

Babu GJ(1), Lalli MJ, Sussman MA, Sadoshima J, Periasamy M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Cardiac hypertrophy is associated with specific alterations in myocardial gene
expression; however, the exact mechanisms responsible for altered gene expression
are poorly defined. The goal of this study was to investigate whether signaling
kinases that are activated during cardiac hypertrophy directly modulate
transcription factor activity and regulate gene expression. In an effort to
understand this process, we focused our studies on the transcriptional activation
of c-fos gene through the serum response element (SRE)/ternary complex factor
(TCF) element, during phenylephrine-induced myocyte hypertrophy. In this study,
we show that phosphorylated Elk-1, a TCF, binds to c-fos SRE and its binding to
SRE is increased upon phenylephrine stimulation. Phenylephrine treatment
activates phosphorylation of Elk-1 in the nucleus within five minutes and
Elk-1-dependent transcriptional activation is abolished by inhibitors selective
for MEK/ERK kinases. These studies implicate that phosphorylation of Elk-1 by ERK
kinase pathway is important for early gene activation during
phenylephrine-induced myocyte hypertrophy.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10900171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochemistry. 2000 Aug 1;39(30):8917-28.

Ets domain transcription factor PE1 suppresses human interstitial collagenase
promoter activity by antagonizing protein-DNA interactions at a critical AP1
element.

Bidder M(1), Loewy AP, Latifi T, Newberry EP, Ferguson G, Willis DM, Towler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

In MC3T3E1 calvarial osteoblasts, fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)
signaling elicits multiple transcriptional responses, including upregulation of
the interstitial collagenase/matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) promoter. FGF
responsiveness maps to a bipartite Ets/AP1 element at base pairs -123 to -61 in
the human MMP1 promoter. Under basal conditions, the MMP1 promoter is repressed
in part via protein-DNA interactions at the Ets cognate, and minimally two
mechanisms convey MMP1 promoter upregulation by FGF2: (a) transcriptional
activation via Fra1/c-Jun containing DNA-protein interactions at the AP1 cognate 
and (b) derepression of promoter activity regulated by the Ets cognate. To
identify osteoblast Ets repressors that potentially participate in gene
expression in the osteoblast, we performed reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of mRNA isolated from MC3T3E1 cells, using
degenerative amplimers to the conserved Ets DNA binding domain to survey the Ets 
genes expressed by these cells. Six distinct Ets mRNAs were identified: Ets2,
Fli1, GABPalpha, SAP1, Elk1, and PE1. Of these, only PE1 has extensive homology
to the known Ras-regulated Ets transcriptional repressor, ERF. Therefore, we
cloned and characterized PE1 cDNA from a mouse brain library and performed
functional analysis of this particular Ets family member. A 2 kb transcript was
isolated from brain that encodes a approximately 57 kDa protein; the predicted
protein contains the known N-terminal Ets domain of PE1 and a novel C-terminal
domain with signficant homology to murine ERF. The murine PE1 open reading frame 
(ORF) is much larger than the previously reported human PE1 ORF. Consistent with 
this, affinity-purified rabbit anti-mouse PE1 antibody specifically recognizes an
approximately 66 kDa protein present only in the nuclear fraction of MC3T3E1
osteoblasts. Recombinant PE1 binds authentic AGGAWG Ets DNA cognates, and
transient transfection studies demonstrate that PE1 represses MMP1 promoter
activity. Surprisingly, although deletion of the MMP1 Ets cognate at nucleotides 
-88 to -83 abrogates FGF2 induction, it does not prevent suppression of the
AP1-dependent MMP1 promoter by PE1. PE1 regulation maps to the MMP1 promoter
region -75 to -61, suggesting that PE1 suppresses transcription via
protein-protein interactions with AP1. Consistent with this, recombinant GST-PE1 
specifically inhibits the formation of protein-DNA interactions on the MMP1 AP1
site (-72 to -66) when present in an admixture with MC3T3E1 crude nuclear
extract. In toto, these data indicate that PE1 participates in the
transcriptional regulation of the MMP1 promoter in osteoblasts. As observed with 
other transcriptional repressors of MMP1 gene expression, transcriptional
suppression by PE1 occurs via inhibition of AP1-dependent promoter activity.

PMID: 10913304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;20(16):6074-83.

Rap2 as a slowly responding molecular switch in the Rap1 signaling cascade.

Ohba Y(1), Mochizuki N, Matsuo K, Yamashita S, Nakaya M, Hashimoto Y, Hamaguchi
M, Kurata T, Nagashima K, Matsuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Research Institute, International Medical Center of
Japan, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8655, Japan.

Rap2 is a member of the Ras family of GTPases and exhibits 60% identity to Rap1, 
but the function and regulation of Rap2 remain obscure. We found that, unlike the
other Ras family proteins, the GTP-bound active form exceeded 50% of total Rap2
protein in adherent cells. Guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) for Rap1,
C3G, Epac (or cyclic AMP [cAMP]-GEF), CalDAG-GEFI, PDZ-GEF1, and GFR efficiently 
increased the level of GTP-Rap2 both in 293T cells and in vitro.
GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) for Rap1, rap1GAPII and SPA-1, stimulated Rap2 
GTPase, but with low efficiency. The half-life of GTP-Rap2 was significantly
longer than that of GTP-Rap1 in 293T cells, indicating that low sensitivity to
GAPs caused a high GTP/GDP ratio on Rap2. Rap2 bound to the Ras-binding domain of
Raf and inhibited Ras-dependent activation of Elk1 transcription factor, as did
Rap1. The level of GTP-Rap2 in rat 3Y1 fibroblasts was decreased by the
expression of v-Src, and expression of a GTPase-deficient Rap2 mutant inhibited
v-Src-dependent transformation of 3Y1 cells. Altogether, Rap2 is regulated by a
similar set of GEFs and GAPs as Rap1 and functions as a slowly responding
molecular switch in the Rap1 signaling cascade.

PMCID: PMC86083
PMID: 10913189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2000 Jul;8(4):241-7.

Activation of specific MEK-ERK cascade is necessary for TGFbeta signaling and
crosstalk with PKA and PKC pathways in cultured rat articular chondrocytes.

Hirota Y(1), Tsukazaki T, Yonekura A, Miyazaki Y, Osaki M, Shindo H, Yamashita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nature Medicine, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: TGFbeta is a potent stimulator of cell growth in cultured rat
articular chondrocytes (CRAC). The stimulatory effect is mediated through the
immediate induction of c-fos gene by activating ERK of MAPK. The present study
was undertaken to investigate the upstream regulators involved in TGFbeta-induced
ERK activation in CRAC and to compare the results with the events in HepG2 cells.
RESULTS: In vitro kinase and trans-reporting assays showed that TGFbeta
preferentially activated ERK and JNK pathways in CRAC and HepG2, respectively.
ERK activation in CRAC was selectively inhibited by PD98059, a MEK inhibitor.
Overexpression of wild or active forms of MEKK1, the upstream activator of ERK
and JNK, decreased the TGFbeta-induced 3TP-luciferase activity in CRAC. In
contrast, in HepG2 dominant negative form of MEKK1 or SEK1 ligand-dependent
reporter activity was diminished. Transfection of TAK1, another MAPKKK, also
positively and negatively regulated 3TP transcriptional activity of HepG2 and
CRAC, respectively. Activation of PKA by 8-bromo-cyclic AMP or forskolin, and
inhibition of PKC by calphostin C, resulted in a significant decrease in 3TP
activity as well as in vitro ERK kinase activity in CRAC.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that TGFbeta transduces a predominant signal
pathway through MEK-ERK-Elk1, independent of MEKK1 or TAK1 pathway in CRAC.
However, in HepG2, activation of MEKK1 and TAK1 is essential for TGFbeta-induced 
signal transmission. The results also demonstrated that in CRAC, MEK-ERK pathway 
activated by TGFbeta is negatively regulated by PKA cascade but transactivated by
PKC.

PMID: 10903877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Immunol. 2000 Aug 1;165(3):1322-30.

TNF receptor family member BCMA (B cell maturation) associates with TNF
receptor-associated factor (TRAF) 1, TRAF2, and TRAF3 and activates NF-kappa B,
elk-1, c-Jun N-terminal kinase, and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase.

Hatzoglou A(1), Roussel J, Bourgeade MF, Rogier E, Madry C, Inoue J, Devergne O, 
Tsapis A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Endocrinology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Crete, Heraklion, Greece.

BCMA (B cell maturation) is a nonglycosylated integral membrane type I protein
that is preferentially expressed in mature B lymphocytes. Previously, we reported
in a human malignant myeloma cell line that BCMA is not primarily present on the 
cell surface but lies in a perinuclear structure that partially overlaps the
Golgi apparatus. We now show that in transiently or stably transfected cells,
BCMA is located on the cell surface, as well as in a perinulear Golgi-like
structure. We also show that overexpression of BCMA in 293 cells activates
NF-kappa B, Elk-1, the c-Jun N-terminal kinase, and the p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments performed in transfected cells 
showed that BCMA associates with TNFR-associated factor (TRAF) 1, TRAF2, and
TRAF3 adaptor proteins. Analysis of deletion mutants of the intracytoplasmic tail
of BCMA showed that the 25-aa protein segment, from position 119 to 143,
conserved between mouse and human BCMA, is essential for its association with the
TRAFs and the activation of NF-kappa B, Elk-1, and c-Jun N-terminal kinase. BCMA 
belongs structurally to the TNFR family. Its unique TNFR motif corresponds to a
variant motif present in the fourth repeat of the TNFRI molecule. This study
confirms that BCMA is a functional member of the TNFR superfamily. Furthermore,
as BCMA is lacking a "death domain" and its overexpression activates NF-kappa B
and c-Jun N-terminal kinase, we can reasonably hypothesize that upon binding of
its corresponding ligand BCMA transduces signals for cell survival and
proliferation.

PMID: 10903733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Eur J Biochem. 2000 Aug;267(15):4676-84.

Expression of immediate early gene pip92 during anisomycin-induced cell death is 
mediated by the JNK- and p38-dependent activation of Elk1.

Chung KC(1), Kim SM, Rhang S, Lau LF, Gomes I, Ahn YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Brain Research Institute, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. kchung@yumc.yonsei.ac.kr

We report here that immediate early gene pip92 is expressed during
anisomycin-induced cell death in fibroblast NIH3T3 cells. To determine the
mechanism by which this occurs and to identify downstream signaling pathways, we 
investigated the induction of the pip92 promoter. The activation of pip92 by
anisomycin is mediated by the activation of MAP kinases, such as JNK and p38
kinase, but not ERK. Deletion analysis of the pip92 promoter indicated that pip92
activation occurs primarily within the region containing a serum response element
(SRE). Further analysis of the SRE using a heterologous thymidine kinase promoter
showed that both an Ets and CArG-like site are required for anisomycin-induced
pip92 expression. Elk1, which binds to the Ets site, was phosphorylated by the
JNK- and p38-dependent pathways and the phosphorylation of Elk1-GAL4 fusion
proteins by these pathways was sufficient for the transactivation. Overall, this 
study suggested that different MAPK pathways are involved in the expression of
immediate early gene pip92 by growth factors and environmental stresses.

PMID: 10903500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2000 Jul;57(7):685-91.

Increased levels of transcription factors Elk-1, cyclic adenosine monophosphate
response element-binding protein, and activating transcription factor 2 in the
cerebellar vermis of schizophrenic patients.

Kyosseva SV(1), Elbein AD, Hutton TL, Griffin ST, Mrak RE, Sturner WQ, Karson CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, USA.

BACKGROUND: We investigated the levels of transcription factors associated with
activation of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway in
schizophrenics using postmortem brain samples. These studies were done to
determine whether our previous findings of abnormal levels of the MAP kinases in 
the cerebellar vermis were linked to additional downstream targets of this signal
transduction pathway.
METHOD: We measured the protein levels of 3 transcription factors in nuclear
fractions of postmortem samples from cerebellar vermis of 10 patients with
schizophrenia and 13 control subjects: Elk-1, cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP) response element binding protein (CREB), and activating transcription
factor 2 (ATF-2). Studies in rats examined the postmortem stability and effect of
haloperidol and risperidone on levels of Elk-1, cAMP, and ATF-2 proteins.
RESULTS: We found a significant increase in the protein levels of Elk-1 (mean+SD,
4489+/-659 vs 2915+/-583 arbitrary densitometric units [P<.001]), CREB (mean +/- 
SD, 2149 1061 vs 904+/-711 arbitrary densitometric units [P=.003]) and ATF-2
(mean+/-SD, 1421 854 vs 512+/-394 arbitrary densitometric units [P=.003]) in the 
cerebellar vermis of schizophrenic subjects. Complementary studies in rats
indicate that these findings can not be attributed to subacute treatment with
antipsychotic medications.
CONCLUSION: Taken together with the alterations of MAP kinases previously
reported, and the findings of elevations of downstream transcription targets, we 
suggest that the MAP kinase signal transduction pathway contributes to the
cerebellar abnormalities in schizophrenia.

PMID: 10891039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jul 7;275(27):20861-6.

Cellular events mediated by lipopolysaccharide-stimulated toll-like receptor 4.
MD-2 is required for activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases and Elk-1.

Yang H(1), Young DW, Gusovsky F, Chow JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Inflammatory Diseases, Eisai Research Institute, Andover,
Massachusetts 01810, USA.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulates multiple signaling events, including nuclear 
factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) activity and the mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinases, ERK, JNK, and p38 in LPS-responsive cells, resulting in transcriptional 
activation and cytokine generation. LPS-induced signaling via toll-like receptor 
4 (TLR4) results in the activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB. Since
LPS activates other signaling cascades in responsive cells, the objective of this
study was to determine whether such events are mediated by TLR4 in response to
LPS. We generated human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293) that stably express TLR4 
(HEK-TLR4) and examined their responsiveness to LPS by measuring NF-kappaB
activity and production of interleukin-8 (IL-8). A trans-reporting system was
used to measure the activity of Elk-1, an ETS-domain transcription factor
targeted by MAP kinase pathways. LPS stimulated NF-kappaB reporter activity and
IL-8 production but not Elk-1 activity in HEK-TLR4 cells. When MD-2, a protein
associated with the extracellular domain of TLR4, was expressed in these cells,
there was a marked increase in Elk-1 activity as well as ERK, JNK, and p38 MAP
kinase phosphorylation in response to LPS. TLR4-mediated NF-kappaB reporter
activity and IL-8 production was enhanced by the expression of MD-2. This study
demonstrates that expression of both TLR4 and MD-2 is required for LPS to
activate or augment the MAP kinase pathways, Elk-1 stimulation, and IL-8
generation.

PMID: 10877845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 1;275(35):27414-20.

Intersectin, an adaptor protein involved in clathrin-mediated endocytosis,
activates mitogenic signaling pathways.

Adams A(1), Thorn JM, Yamabhai M, Kay BK, O'Bryan JP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Signal Transduction, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina
27709, USA.

Intersectin is a member of a growing family of adaptor proteins that possess
conserved Eps15 homology (EH) domains as well as additional protein recognition
motifs. In general, EH domain-containing proteins play an integral role in
clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Indeed, intersectin functions in the intermediate 
stages of clathrin-coated vesicle assembly. However, recent evidence suggests
that components of the endocytic machinery also regulate mitogenic signaling
pathways. In this report, we provide several lines of evidence that intersectin
has the capacity to activate mitogenic signaling pathways. First, intersectin
overexpression activated the Elk-1 transcription factor in an MAPK-independent
manner. This ability resides within the EH domains, as expression of the tandem
EH domains was sufficient to activate Elk-1. Second, intersectin cooperated with 
epidermal growth factor to potentiate Elk-1 activation; however, a similar level 
of Elk-1 activation was obtained by expression of the tandem EH domains
suggesting that the coiled-coil region and SH3 domains act to regulate the EH
domains. Third, intersectin expression was sufficient to induce oncogenic
transformation of rodent fibroblasts. And finally, intersectin cooperated with
progesterone to accelerate maturation of Xenopus laevis oocytes. Together, these 
data suggest that intersectin links endocytosis with regulation of pathways
important for cell growth and differentiation.

PMID: 10851244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Neurosci. 2000 Jun 15;20(12):4563-72.

The MAPK/ERK cascade targets both Elk-1 and cAMP response element-binding protein
to control long-term potentiation-dependent gene expression in the dentate gyrus 
in vivo.

Davis S(1), Vanhoutte P, Pages C, Caboche J, Laroche S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie de l'Apprentissage, de la MÈmoire, et de la
Communication, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), UnitÈ Mixte
de Recherche (UMR) 8620, UniversitÈ Paris Sud, 91405 Orsay, France.

The mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(MAPK/ERK) signaling cascade contributes to synaptic plasticity and to long-term 
memory formation, yet whether MAPK/ERK controls activity-dependent gene
expression critical for long-lasting changes at the synapse and what the events
underlying transduction of the signal are remain uncertain. Here we show that
induction of long-term potentiation (LTP) in the dentate gyrus in vivo leads to
rapid phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of MAPK/ERK. Following a similar 
time course, the two downstream transcriptional targets of MAPK/ERK, cAMP
response element-binding protein (CREB) and the ternary complex factor Elk-1, a
key transcriptional-regulator of serum response element (SRE)-driven gene
expression, were hyperphosphorylated and the immediate early gene zif268 was
upregulated. The mRNA encoding MAP kinase phosphatase MKP-1 was upregulated at
the time point when MAPK/ERK phosphorylation had returned to basal levels,
suggesting a negative feedback loop to regulate deactivation of MAPK/ERK. We also
show that inhibition of the MAPK/ERK cascade by the MAPK kinase MEK inhibitor
SL327 prevented CREB and Elk-1 phosphorylation, and LTP-dependent gene induction,
resulting in rapidly decaying LTP. In conclusion, we suggest that Elk-1 forms an 
important link in the MAP kinase pathway to transduce signals from the cell
surface to the nucleus to activate the genetic machinery necessary for the
maintenance of synaptic plasticity in the dentate gyrus. Thus, MAPK/ERK
activation is required for LTP-dependent transcriptional regulation and we
suggest this is regulated by two parallel signaling pathways, the MAPK/ERK-Elk-1 
pathway targeting SRE and the MAPK/ERK-CREB pathway targeting CRE.

PMID: 10844026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2000 May;35(5):749-57.

Troglitazone inhibits mitogenic signaling by insulin in vascular smooth muscle
cells.

Goetze S(1), Kim S, Xi XP, Graf K, Yang DC, Fleck E, Meehan WP, Hsueh WA, Law RE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Hypertension, University of
California, Los Angeles, School of Medicine, 90095, USA.

Troglitazone (TRO) is an oral insulin-sensitizer that has direct effects on the
vasculature to inhibit cell growth and migration. In vascular smooth muscle cells
(VSMCs), insulin transduces a mitogenic signal that is dependent on the ERK1/2
MAP kinases. We examined the effects of TRO on this pathway and found that it
inhibits mitogenic signaling. In quiescent VSMCs, insulin (1 microM) induced a
3.2-fold increase in DNA synthesis. TRO (1-20 microM) inhibited
insulin-stimulated DNA synthesis by 72.8% at the maximal concentration. TRO at I 
and 10 microM had no significant effect on insulin-stimulated ERK1/2 activity. At
20 microM, however, TRO modestly enhanced insulin-stimulated ERK1/2 activity by
1.5-fold. ERKs transduce a mitogenic signal by phosphorylating transcription
factors such as Elk-1. which regulate critical growth-response genes. We used
GAL-Elk-1 expression plasmids to detect ERK-dependent activation of Elk-1. TRO at
1-20 microM potently inhibited insulin-stimulated, ERK1/2-dependent Elk-1
transcription factor activity. Neither early steps in insulin signaling nor the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) branch of this pathway were affected by TRO,
because it had no effect on IRS-1 phosphorylation, PI3K/IRS-1 association, or Akt
phosphorylation. Because TRO is a known ligand for the nuclear transcription
factor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma), we tested
two other ligands for this receptor, rosiglitazone (RSG) and 15-deoxy-delta12,14 
prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2). Both also inhibited insulin-induced DNA synthesis.
In summary, these data show that TRO inhibits mitogenic signaling by insulin at a
point distal of ERK1/2 activation, potentially by a PPARgamma-mediated inhibition
of ERK-dependent phosphorylation and activation of nuclear transcription factors 
that regulate cell growth.

PMID: 10813377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Endocrinol. 2000 May;165(2):443-56.

Placental lactogen-I gene activation in differentiating trophoblast cells:
extrinsic and intrinsic regulation involving mitogen-activated protein kinase
signaling pathways.

Peters TJ(1), Chapman BM, Wolfe MW, Soares MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

Trophoblast giant cells are one of the primary endocrine cell types of the rodent
placenta. Placental lactogen-I (PL-I) is the initial prolactin (PRL) family
member expressed as trophoblast giant cells differentiate. In this report, we use
the Rcho-1 trophoblast cell line as a model for studying the regulation of PL-I
gene expression during trophoblast giant cell differentiation. Evidence is
provided for trophoblast cell expression of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), ErbB2, fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1), transforming growth
factor-alpha, and heparin-binding EGF. EGF and FGF-2 stimulated PL-I mRNA and
protein accumulation and PL-I promoter activity in a concentration-dependent
manner. These latter growth factor actions on PL-I promoter activities were
specifically inhibited by cotransfection with dominant negative constructs for
EGFR and FGFRs respectively. Utilization of the mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK) pathway by EGF and FGF-2 in trophoblast cells was demonstrated by growth
factor stimulation of a Gal4 DNA binding/Elk1 transactivational domain fusion
construct, and more specifically by activation of extracellular signal regulated 
kinase and p38 MAPK. PL-I gene activation was also sensitive to disruption of
MAPK and activation protein-1 (AP-1) signaling pathways. In conclusion,
autocrine/paracrine pathways involving EGFR and FGFR1, MAPK and AP-1 are shown to
participate in the regulation of the PL-I gene in differentiating trophoblast
cells.

PMID: 10810308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 May 10;271(2):456-63.

Characterization of hPRP4 kinase activation: potential role in signaling.

Huang Y(1), Deng T, Winston BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, T2N 4N1,
Canada.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are
important proline-directed Ser/Thr kinases that play distinct roles in cell
differentiation and proliferation. hPRP4 (pre-mRNA processing gene), a human
homologue of S. pombe Prp4, is a recently isolated CDK-like kinase with homology 
to MAPKs. Little is known about the mRNA processing function of hPRP4 or about
the signaling pathways with which it is associated. hPRP4 is expressed in a
variety of human tissues with the highest expression in the brain, lung and
liver. In this paper, we characterize the activation of hPRP4 in COS-7 cells and 
show that hPRP4 also possesses a transcription factor activation function. hPRP4 
is activated by epidermal growth factor (EGF) or forskolin treatment, but not
tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate (TPA) nor ultraviolet (UV) irradiation. Activated
hPRP4 phosphorylates residue Thr-417 on Elk-1 resulting in Elk-1 activation. This
site of Elk-1 phosphorylation is distinct from that of other MAPKs. Coexpression 
of hPRP4 with an Elk-1 reporter construct causes trans activation of the
reporter. These findings suggest that hPRP4, a CDK-like kinase related to MAPKs, 
may play a distinct role in signal transduction in addition to its role in mRNA
processing.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10799319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cell Growth Differ. 2000 Apr;11(4):191-200.

Prolonged activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway is required 
for macrophage-like differentiation of a human myeloid leukemic cell line.

Hu X(1), Moscinski LC, Valkov NI, Fisher AB, Hill BJ, Zuckerman KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of South Florida and H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa 33612, USA.
hu@moffitt.usf.edu

The role of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signal transduction
pathway in the proliferation of mammalian cells has been well established.
However, there are relatively few reports concerning cell differentiation being
mediated by MAPK. The effect of phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) on cell
differentiation and signal transduction in a human myeloid leukemia cell line,
TF-1a, was investigated. When TF-1a cells were treated with 10(-6), 10(-7),
10(-8), and 10(-9) M PMA for 24 h, they underwent 98, 93, 91, and 51%
macrophage-like differentiation, respectively. PMA treatment rapidly (10 min)
induced phosphorylation of MAPK kinase (MEK and p44/42 MAPK), which persisted for
at least 24 h. p44/42 MAPK immunoprecipitates from lysates of PMA-treated cells
had increased ability to phosphorylate the transcription factor Elk-1. This is
important because phosphorylated Elk-1 can be considered an "end-product" of the 
MAPK pathway. In contrast, treatment of TF-1a cells with
granulocyte/macrophage-colony stimulating factor induced only transient
activation of MEK and p44/42 MAPK (10-20 min) and an increase (approximately 50%)
in cell proliferation, without any change in cellular differentiation. These
results suggest that macrophage-like differentiation may be dependent on
prolonged activation of the MAPK pathway. Additional support for this conclusion 
was obtained from experiments showing that treatment of TF-1a cells with
antisense oligonucleotides for MEK1 coding sequences prior to adding PMA
inhibited macrophage-like differentiation. Furthermore, transient transfection
with an inactive, dominant-negative MEK mutant also inhibited PMA-induced
differentiation, whereas transient transfection with a plasmid coding for
constitutively activated MEK led to macrophage-like differentiation in the
absence of PMA.

PMID: 10775036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Oncogene. 2000 Apr 6;19(15):1969-74.

The Ets1 proto-oncogene is upregulated by retinoic acid: characterization of a
functional retinoic acid response element in the Ets1 promoter.

Raouf A(1), Li V, Kola I, Watson DK, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, MRC group in Periodontal
Physiology, University of Toronto, and Sunnybrook and Women's College Health
Sciences Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The v-ets oncoprotein and its progenitor Ets1 belong to a family of transcription
factors that are related by an 85 amino acid conserved DNA binding domain, the
ets domain. Ets1 plays important role(s) in control of cell proliferation,
differentiation and apoptosis. Abnormal expression of Ets1 could lead to
disruption of these processes and contribute to development of malignancy.
Retinoic acid (RA) inhibits proliferation, induces differentiation and regulates 
apoptosis in many different cell types. Here, we demonstrate that RA treatment
increases the expression of Ets1 mRNA, but not that of Ets2, Elk1 or Fli1 in
MC3T3-E1 cells. Ets1 induction is detectable after 4 h, can be maintained for at 
least 14 days, and is inhibited by Actinomycin D, which suggests that RA
regulation of Ets1 occurs at the transcriptional level. The promoter region of
Ets1 contains four retinoic acid response element (RARE) half sites located at
-94, -152, -1765 and -2252 from the translation start site. We show that RARbeta 
is expressed by MC3T3-E1 cells in the presence of RA and demonstrate that it
binds to the -94 RARE half site. Furthermore, RA induces transcription of Ets1
promoter-reporter constructs containing this RARE half site.

PMID: 10773887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 2;275(22):16466-72.

IB1 reduces cytokine-induced apoptosis of insulin-secreting cells.

Bonny C(1), Oberson A, Steinmann M, Schorderet DF, Nicod P, Waeber G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics and the Department of Internal Medicine, CHUV
University Hospital, 1011 Lausanne Switzerland. christophe.bonny@chuv.hospvd.ch

IB1/JIP-1 is a scaffold protein that interacts with upstream components of the
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling pathway. IB1 is expressed at high levels 
in pancreatic beta cells and may therefore exert a tight control on signaling
events mediated by JNK in these cells. Activation of JNK by interleukin 1
(IL-1beta) or by the upstream JNK constitutive activator DeltaMEKK1 promoted
apoptosis in two pancreatic beta cell lines and decreased IB1 content by 50-60%. 
To study the functional consequences of the reduced IB1 content in beta cell
lines, we used an insulin-secreting cell line expressing an inducible IB1
antisense RNA that lead to a 38% IB1 decrease. Reducing IB1 levels in these cells
increased phosphorylation of c-Jun and increased the apoptotic rate in presence
of IL-1beta. Nitric oxide production was not stimulated by expression of the IB1 
antisense RNA. Complementary experiments indicated that overexpression of IB1 in 
insulin-producing cells prevented JNK-mediated activation of the transcription
factors c-Jun, ATF2, and Elk1 and decreased IL-1beta- and DeltaMEKK1-induced
apoptosis. These data indicate that IB1 plays an anti-apoptotic function in
insulin-producing cells probably by controlling the activity of the JNK signaling
pathway.

PMID: 10748095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 26;275(21):16064-72.

Helicobacter pylori activates mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades and
induces expression of the proto-oncogenes c-fos and c-jun.

Meyer-ter-Vehn T(1), Covacci A, Kist M, Pahl HL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Anaesthesiology, University Hospital Freiburg, Center
for Tumor Biology, P. O. Box 1120, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.

Helicobacter pylori is an etiological agent in the development of
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma and gastric adenocarcinoma. Patients
infected with H. pylori carry a 3-6-fold increased risk of developing cancer
compared with uninfected individuals. H. pylori strains expressing the
cytotoxin-associated antigen A (CagA) are more frequently associated with the
development of neoplasia than cagA-negative strains. However, the molecular
mechanism by which H. pylori causes neoplastic transformation remains unclear.
Here we report that exposure of gastric epithelial cells to H. pylori induces
activation of the transcription factor activator protein 1. Activation of the
proto-oncogenes c-fos and c-jun is strongly induced. We show that H. pylori
activates the ERK/MAP kinase cascade, resulting in Elk-1 phosphorylation and
increased c-fos transcription. H. pylori strains that do not express CagA or that
are mutated in cag genes encoded by the CagI pathogenicity island do not induce
activator protein 1, MAP kinase activity, or c-fos or c-jun activation.
Proto-oncogene activation may represent a crucial step in the pathomechanism of
H. pylori induced neoplasia.

PMID: 10747974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Nat Struct Biol. 2000 Apr;7(4):292-7.

Structure of the elk-1-DNA complex reveals how DNA-distal residues affect ETS
domain recognition of DNA.

Mo Y(1), Vaessen B, Johnston K, Marmorstein R.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

SAP-1 and Elk-1 are members of a large group of eukaryotic transcription factors 
that contain a conserved ETS DNA binding domain and that cooperate with the serum
response factor (SRF) to activate transcription of the c-fos protooncogene.
Despite the high degree of sequence similarity, which includes an identical amino
acid sequence for the DNA recognition helix within the ETS domain of these
proteins, they exhibit different DNA binding properties. Here we report the 2.1 ø
crystal structure of the ETS domain of Elk-1 bound to a high affinity E74 DNA
(E74DNA) site and compare it to a SAP-1-E74DNA complex. This comparison reveals
that the differential DNA binding properties of these proteins are mediated by
non-conserved residues distal to the DNA binding surface that function to orient 
conserved residues in the DNA recognition helix for protein-specific DNA
contacts. As a result, nearly one-third of the interactions between the protein
recognition helix and the DNA are different between the SAP-1 and Elk-1 DNA
complexes. Taken together, these studies reveal a novel mechanism for the
modulation of DNA binding specificity within a conserved DNA binding domain, and 
have implications for how highly homologous ETS proteins exhibit differential
DNA-binding properties.

PMID: 10742173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2000 Mar 10;76(1):36-46.

Learning-associated activation of nuclear MAPK, CREB and Elk-1, along with Fos
production, in the rat hippocampus after a one-trial avoidance learning:
abolition by NMDA receptor blockade.

Cammarota M(1), Bevilaqua LR, Ardenghi P, Paratcha G, Levi de Stein M, Izquierdo 
I, Medina JH.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biologia Celular y Neurociencias "Prof. Dr. Eduardo de Robertis",
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Paraguay 2155, piso 3, 1121,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

It is widely accepted that the formation of long-term memory (LTM) requires
neuronal gene expression, protein synthesis and the remodeling of synaptic
contacts. From mollusk to mammals, the cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling pathway has been
shown to play a pivotal role in the establishment of LTM. More recently, the MAPK
cascade has been also involved in memory processing. Here, we provide evidence
for the participation of hippocampal PKA/CREB and MAPK/Elk-1 pathways, via
activation of NMDA receptors, in memory formation of a one-trial avoidance
learning in rats. Learning of this task is associated with an activation of p44
and p42 MAPKs, CREB and Elk-1, along with an increase in the levels of the
catalytic subunit of PKA and Fos protein in nuclear-enriched hippocampal
fractions. These changes were blocked by the immediate posttraining
intra-hippocampal infusion of APV, a selective blocker of glutamate NMDA
receptors, which renders the animals amnesic for this task. Moreover, no changes 
were found in control-shocked animals. Thus, inhibitory avoidance training in the
rat is associated with an increase in the protein product of an IEG, c-fos, which
occurs concomitantly with the activation of nuclear MAPK, CREB and Elk-1. NMDA
receptors appear to be a necessary upstream step for the activation of these
intracellular cascades during learning.

PMID: 10719213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Neuroendocrinol. 2000 Mar;12(3):263-72.

Expression of mRNA for voltage-dependent and inward-rectifying K channels in
GH3/B6 cells and rat pituitary.

Wulfsen I(1), Hauber HP, Schiemann D, Bauer CK, Schwarz JR.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung f¸r Angewandte Physiologie, Institut f¸r Physiologie,
Universit‰tsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Universit‰t Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.

The expression of mRNA for voltage-dependent (Kv) and inward-rectifying K
channels (Kir) was studied in clonal rat somato-mammotroph cells (GH3/B6 cells)
and rat pituitary using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
In GH3/B6 cells transcripts for 16 different Kv channel alpha-subunits (seven
Shaker-related: Kv1.2, Kv1.4, Kv1.5, Kv2.1, Kv3.2, Kv4.1, Kv5.1; six EAG: eag1,
erg1, erg2, elk1-elk3; three KCNQ: KCNQ1-KCNQ3) and for five different Kir
channel alpha-subunits (Kir1.1, Kir2.3, Kir3.2, Kir3.3, Kir6.2) were found. In
addition, transcripts for a short isoform of Kvbeta2 and transcripts for Kvbeta3 
subunits were present. In rat pituitary transcripts for 21 different Kv channel
alpha-subunits (11 Shaker-related: Kv1.3, Kv1.4, Kv1.6, Kv2.1, Kv2.2, Kv3.2,
Kv3.4, Kv4.1, Kv4.2, Kv4.3, Kv6.1; seven EAG: eag1, erg1-erg3, elk1-elk3; three
KCNQ: KCNQ1-KCNQ3) and nine Kir channel alpha-subunits (Kir1.1, Kir2.2,
Kir3.1-Kir3.4, Kir4.1, Kir6.1, Kir6. 2) were found. In addition, all tested
auxiliary subunits (Kvbeta1-Kvbeta3, minK, SUR1, SUR2) are expressed in the
pituitary. The results indicate that the macroscopic K currents in GH3/B6 and
pituitary cells are presumably mediated by K channels constructed by a larger
number of K channel alpha-subunits and auxiliary beta-subunits than previously
distinguished electrophysiologically and pharmacologically.

PMID: 10718922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Mar 14;97(6):2462-7.

Ribosomal subunit kinase-2 is required for growth factor-stimulated transcription
of the c-Fos gene.

Bruning JC(1), Gillette JA, Zhao Y, Bjorbaeck C, Kotzka J, Knebel B, Avci H,
Hanstein B, Lingohr P, Moller DE, Krone W, Kahn CR, Muller-Wieland D.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik II und Poliklinik f¸r Innere Medizin and Center of Molecular Medicine
der Universit‰t zu Kˆln, Joseph Stelzmann Strasse 9, 50931 Cologne, Germany.

Ribosomal subunit kinases (Rsk) have been implicated in the regulation of
transcription by phosphorylating and thereby activating numerous transcription
factors, such as c-Fos, cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB), and
nuclear receptors. Here we describe the generation and characterization of
immortalized embryonic fibroblast cell lines from mice in which the Rsk-2 gene
was disrupted by homologous recombinant gene targeting. Rsk-2-deficient (knockout
or KO) cell lines have no detectable Rsk-2 protein, whereas Rsk-1 expression is
unaltered as compared with cell lines derived from wild-type control mice. KO
cells exhibit a major reduction in platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and
insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1-stimulated expression of the immediate-early
gene c-Fos. This results primarily from a reduced transcriptional activation of
the ternary complex factor Elk-1 and reduced activation of the serum response
factor. The reduced Elk-1 activation in KO cells occurs despite normal activation
of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway and normal PDGF- and
IGF-1-stimulated Elk-1 phosphorylation. By contrast, PDGF- and IGF-1-stimulated
phosphorylation and transcriptional activation of CREB is unaltered in KO cells. 
Thus Rsk-2 is required for growth factor-stimulated expression of c-Fos and
transcriptional activation of Elk-1 and the serum response factor, but not for
activation of CREB or the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway in response to
PDGF and IGF-1 stimulation.

PMCID: PMC15951
PMID: 10716983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2000 Mar;20(3):624-8.

Enhanced expression of osteopontin in human diabetic artery and analysis of its
functional role in accelerated atherogenesis.

Takemoto M(1), Yokote K, Nishimura M, Shigematsu T, Hasegawa T, Kon S, Uede T,
Matsumoto T, Saito Y, Mori S.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Chiba University, 
Chiba, Japan. mtakemo@intmed02.m.chiba-u.ac.jp

We have previously reported that high glucose stimulates osteopontin (OPN)
expression through protein kinase C-dependent pathways as well as hexosamine
pathways in cultured rat aortic smooth muscle cells. The finding prompted us to
study in vivo expression of OPN in diabetes mellitus. In the present study, we
found by immunohistochemistry that medial layers of the carotid arteries of
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats and the forearm arteries of diabetic
patients stained positively for OPN antibodies, whereas the staining from
arteries of control rats and nondiabetic patients was negative. We also found
that OPN stimulated the migration and enhanced platelet-derived growth factor
(PDGF)-mediated DNA synthesis of cultured rat aortic smooth muscle cells. OPN and
PDGF synergistically activated focal adhesion kinase as well as extracellular
signal-regulated kinase; this finding seems to explain the OPN-induced
enhancement of PDGF-mediated DNA synthesis. Taken together, our present results
raise a possibility that OPN plays a role in the development of diabetic vascular
complications.

PMID: 10712383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Feb 16;268(2):577-82.

Characterization of a postreceptor signaling defect that impairs cfos expression 
in cultured fibroblasts of a patient with insulin resistance.

Knebel B(1), Kotzka J, Avci H, Schiller M, Br¸ning JC, Hafner M, Krone W,
M¸ller-Wieland D.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik II und Poliklinik f¸r Innere Medizin, Zentrum f¸r Molekulare Medizin
Kˆln, Cologne, Germany.

Induction of cfos expression is a definite end point of signal transduction by
receptor tyrosine kinases via MAPK cascades. We have examined signal transduction
to transcription factor cFos in isolated fibroblasts of a patient with an
inherited syndrome of insulin resistance. MAPK phosphorylation and activity were 
unaltered, but inducibility of cfos transcription was strongly impaired by
insulin and reduced by PDGF. Induction of the cfos promoter via MAPK is mediated 
by activation of the ternary complex. Abundance of SRF or Elk-1 was unaltered,
but Elk-1 phosphorylation following stimulation was reduced. Transient
transfections with reporter genes under control of the Elk-1 binding ets/sre cis 
element or expression plasmids coding for the regulatory domain of Elk-1 fused to
heterologous DNA binding domains revealed a defect of Elk-1 activation in the
patient cells. These data identify a novel postreceptor defect of insulin and
growth factors involving activation of transcription.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10679246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Psychiatry. 2000 Jan;5(1):110-5.

Modified structure of the human serotonin transporter promoter.

Flattem NL(1), Blakely RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232-6420, USA.

Recently, several studies have reported an association between anxiety traits,
affective disorders and autism and alleles of a functional promoter polymorphism 
(5HTT-LPR) in the human serotonin transporter (5HTT, SERT).1-3 The mechanistic
basis for allelic differences in transporter transcription are presently unknown.
To explore this issue, we cloned the human 5HTT promoter region from a PAC
genomic library and now describe an unreported 381-bp insert between the
polymorphic region and the transcription start site. We verified the presence of 
this novel sequence by Southern hybridization of genomic digests and PCR
amplifications from multiple unrelated individuals. Sequence analysis of the
novel region reveals a number of canonical transcription factor binding sites (eg
AP1, Elk1, NFkappaB) that may be important in controlling the response of the
5HTT gene to regulatory factors. PCR studies of genomic templates reveal a low
level of amplification of a deleted template matching the size of the originally 
reported 5HTT promoter. This deleted template is absent from PAC amplifications, 
suggesting that the human 5HTT promoter may exhibit in vivo instability.
Molecular Psychiatry (2000) 5, 110-115.

PMID: 10673778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Circ Res. 2000 Feb 4;86(2):221-32.

Smooth muscle alpha-actin CArG elements coordinate formation of a smooth muscle
cell-selective, serum response factor-containing activation complex.

Mack CP(1), Thompson MM, Lawrenz-Smith S, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia Medical School, Charlottesville, USA.

Previous studies have shown that multiple serum response factor (SRF)-binding
CArG elements were required for smooth muscle cell (SMC)-specific regulation of
smooth muscle (SM) alpha-actin expression. However, a critical question remains
as to the mechanisms whereby a ubiquitously expressed transcription factor such
as SRF might contribute to SMC-specific expression. The goal of the present study
was to investigate the hypothesis that SMC-selective expression of SM alpha-actin
is due at least in part to (1) unique CArG flanking sequences that distinguish
the SM alpha-actin CArGs from other ubiquitously expressed CArG-dependent genes
such as c-fos, (2) cooperative interactions between CArG elements, and (3)
SRF-dependent binding of SMC-selective proteins to the CArG-containing regions of
the promoter. Results demonstrated that specific sequences flanking CArG B were
important for promoter activity in SMCs but not in bovine aortic endothelial
cells. We also provided evidence indicating that the structural orientation
between CArGs A and B was an important determinant of promoter function.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and methylation interference footprinting
demonstrated that a unique SRF-containing complex formed that was selective for
SMCs and, furthermore, that this complex was probably stabilized by
protein-protein interactions and not by specific interactions with CArG flanking 
sequences. Taken together, the results of these studies provide evidence that SM 
alpha-actin expression in SMCs is complex and may involve the formation of a
unique multiprotein initiation complex that is coordinated by SRF complexes bound
to multiple CArG elements.

PMID: 10666419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Oncogene. 1999 Dec 23;18(56):7948-57.

ERK activation induces phosphorylation of Elk-1 at multiple S/T-P motifs to high 
stoichiometry.

Cruzalegui FH(1), Cano E, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, 44 Lincoln's Inn
Fields, London WC2A 3PX, UK.

Elk-1, a member of the TCF family of Ets domain proteins, contains a C-terminal
transcriptional activation domain with multiple copies of the MAPK core consensus
sequence S/T-P. This region is phosphorylated by MAP kinases in vitro and in
vivo, but the extent and kinetics of phosphorylation at the different sites have 
not been investigated in detail. We prepared antisera against the phosphorylated 
forms of residues T353, T363, T368, S383, S389 and T417. The antisera
specifically recognize the phosphorylated Elk-1 C terminus and are specific for
their cognate sites, as assessed by peptide competition and mutagenesis
experiments. Analysis of cells stably expressing Elk-1 in vivo shows that
following serum or TPA stimulation, residues T353, T363, T368, S383, S389 and
T417 become phosphorylated with similar kinetics. Mutation of any one site does
not prevent phosphorylation of the others. Mutation to alanine of S383, F378 or
W379, which virtually abolishes transcriptional activation by Elk-1, does not
affect phosphorylation of any sites tested. Analysis of Elk-1 using
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis shows that following ERK activation Elk-1
receives at least six phosphates in addition to those present prior to
stimulation. We propose that the Elk-1 C-terminal regulatory domain becomes
stoichiometrically phosphorylated following growth factor stimulation.

PMID: 10637505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 21;275(3):2103-14.

Janus kinase 2-dependent activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase by
growth hormone. Resultant transcriptional activation of ATF-2 and CHOP,
cytoskeletal re-organization and mitogenesis.

Zhu T(1), Lobie PE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National University of Singapore, 30 
Medical Drive, Singapore 117609, Republic of Singapore.

We demonstrate here that p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase is activated 
in response to cellular stimulation by human GH (hGH) in Chinese hamster ovary
cells stably transfected with GH receptor cDNA. This activation requires the
proline-rich box 1 region of the GH receptor required for JAK2 association and is
prevented by pretreatment of cells with the JAK2-specific inhibitor AG490. ATF-2 
is both phosphorylated and transcriptionally activated by hGH, and its
transcriptional activation also requires the proline-rich box 1 region of the GH 
receptor. Expression of wild type JAK2 can further enhance hGH-induced ATF-2-,
CHOP-, and Elk-1-mediated transcriptional activation, whereas pretreatment with
AG490 is inhibitory. Use of either specific pharmacological inhibitors or
transient transfection of cells with p38alpha MAP kinase cDNA or a dominant
negative variant demonstrated that hGH-stimulated transcriptional activation of
ATF-2 and CHOP, but not Elk-1, is regulated by p38 MAP kinase. Both the p38 MAP
kinase and p44/42 MAP kinase are critical for hGH-stimulated mitogenesis, whereas
only p38 MAP kinase is required for hGH-induced actin cytoskeletal
re-organization. p38 MAP kinase is therefore an important regulator in
coordinating the pleiotropic effects of GH.

PMID: 10636915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 21;275(3):1757-62.

Dimer formation by ternary complex factor ELK-1.

Drewett V(1), Muller S, Goodall J, Shaw PE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences and Institute of Cell Signalling, University of 
Nottingham Medical School, Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham NG7 2UH, United
Kingdom.

Ternary complex factors (TCFs), a subgroup of the ets protein family, bind with a
dimer of serum response factor to the c-fos serum response element. Both DNA
binding and transcriptional activation by TCFs are regulated by mitogen-activated
protein kinases. When activated, mitogen-activated protein kinases form
homodimers that translocate to the nucleus, where they interact with TCFs via
specific docking sites. Here we show by three different criteria that Elk-1 is
capable of forming dimers in eukaryotic cells through two distinct interaction
domains. These observations are consistent with a dynamic model of TCF-promoter
interactions.

PMID: 10636872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Neurosci. 2000 Dec 1;20(23):8701-9.

Involvement of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase cascade for
cocaine-rewarding properties.

Valjent E(1), Corvol JC, Pages C, Besson MJ, Maldonado R, Caboche J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurochimie-Anatomie, Institut des Neurosciences, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, UnitÈ Mixte de Recherche 7624, UniversitÈ 
Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, France.

A central feature of drugs of abuse is to induce gene expression in discrete
brain structures that are critically involved in behavioral responses related to 
addictive processes. Although extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) has
been implicated in several neurobiological processes, including neuronal
plasticity, its role in drug addiction remains poorly understood. This study was 
designed to analyze the activation of ERK by cocaine, its involvement in
cocaine-induced early and long-term behavioral effects, as well as in gene
expression. We show, by immunocytochemistry, that acute cocaine administration
activates ERK throughout the striatum, rapidly but transiently. This activation
was blocked when SCH 23390 [a specific dopamine (DA)-D1 antagonist] but not
raclopride (a DA-D2 antagonist) was injected before cocaine. Glutamate receptors 
of NMDA subtypes also participated in ERK activation, as shown after injection of
the NMDA receptor antagonist MK 801. The systemic injection of SL327, a selective
inhibitor of the ERK kinase MEK, before cocaine, abolished the cocaine-induced
ERK activation and decreased cocaine-induced hyperlocomotion, indicating a role
of this pathway in events underlying early behavioral responses. Moreover, the
rewarding effects of cocaine were abolished by SL327 in the place-conditioning
paradigm. Because SL327 antagonized cocaine-induced c-fos expression and Elk-1
hyperphosphorylation, we suggest that the ERK intracellular signaling cascade is 
also involved in the prime burst of gene expression underlying long-term
behavioral changes induced by cocaine. Altogether, these results reveal a new
mechanism to explain behavioral responses of cocaine related to its addictive
properties.

PMID: 11102476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 7;275(1):288-96.

Sphingosine 1-phosphate-induced cell proliferation, survival, and related
signaling events mediated by G protein-coupled receptors Edg3 and Edg5.

An S(1), Zheng Y, Bleu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, California
94143-0711, USA. songzhu@itsa.ucsf.edu

Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) regulates cell proliferation, apoptosis, motility, 
and neurite retraction. Contradictory reports propose that S1P acts as either an 
intracellular second messenger or an extracellular ligand for cell-surface
receptors. Hence, the precise signaling mechanisms mediating the diverse cellular
effects of S1P remain to be determined. Here, we investigate whether S1P
stimulation of cell proliferation, survival, and related signaling events can be 
mediated by the recently cloned Edg family members of G protein-coupled
receptors. We observed that S1P treatment significantly increased proliferation
of HTC4 hepatoma cells stably transfected with human S1P receptor Edg3 or Edg5,
which was attributable to stimulation of cell growth and inhibition of apoptosis 
caused by serum starvation. Edg3 and Edg5 transduced S1P-evoked signaling events 
relevant to cell proliferation and survival, including activation of the ERK/MAP 
kinases, and immediate-early induction of c-Jun and c-Fos. Trancriptional
activation of reporter genes for the c-fos promoter and the serum response
element by Edg3 and Edg5 transfected in Jurkat cells was inhibited by pertussis
toxin and C3 exoenzyme, implicating G(i/o)- and Rho-dependent pathways. Our data 
also indicated that Edg3 and Edg5 mediated the serum response element activation 
through transcriptional factors Elk-1 and serum response factor. Thus, specific G
protein-coupled receptors Edg3 and Edg5 account for, at least in part,
S1P-induced cell proliferation, survival, and related signaling events.

PMID: 10617617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Neurochem. 2000 Jan;74(1):92-8.

Delayed and sustained activation of p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein kinase
induced by proteasome inhibitors through p21(ras) in PC12 cells.

Hashimoto K(1), Guroff G, Katagiri Y.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Growth Factors, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Proteolysis by the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway regulates the intracellular level
of several proteins, some of which control cell proliferation and cell cycle
progression. To determine what kinds of signaling cascades are activated or
inhibited by proteasome inhibition, we treated PC12 cells with specific
proteasome inhibitors and subsequently performed in-gel kinase assays.
N-Acetyl-Leu-Leu-norleucinal and lactacystin, which inhibit the activity of the
proteasome, induced the activation of p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinases [extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) 1 and 2]. In contrast,
N-acetyl-Leu-Leu-methional, which inhibits the activity of calpains, but not of
the proteasome, failed to induce ERK activation. Uniquely, the kinetics of MAP
kinase activation induced by proteasome inhibitors are very slow compared with
those resulting from activation by nerve growth factor; ERK activation is
detectable only after a 5-h treatment with the inhibitors, and its activity
remained unchanged for at least until 27 h. Proteasome inhibitor-initiated ERK
activation is inhibited by pretreatment with the ERK kinase inhibitor PD 98059,
as well as by overexpression of a dominant-negative form of Ras. Thus, proteasome
inhibitors induce sustained ERK activation in a Ras-dependent manner. Proteasome 
inhibitor-induced neurite outgrowth, however, is not inhibited by PD 98059,
indicating that sustained activation of ERKs is not the factor responsible for
proteasome inhibitor-induced morphological differentiation. Our data suggest the 
presence of a novel mechanism for activation of the MAP kinase cascade that
involves proteasome activity.

PMID: 10617109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Endocrinology. 2000 Jan;141(1):146-52.

Atypical protein kinase C-zeta stimulates thyrotropin-independent proliferation
in rat thyroid cells.

Fernandez N(1), Caloca MJ, Prendergast GV, Meinkoth JL, Kazanietz MG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia 19104-6160, USA.

Several reports have indicated that protein kinase C (PKC) is an important
regulator of proliferation in thyroid cells. Unlike TSH, the mitogenic effects of
phorbol esters are accompanied by de-differentiation. The role of individual PKC 
isoforms in thyroid cell proliferation and differentiation has not been examined.
Recent studies have implicated the atypical PKCzeta, a phorbol ester-unresponsive
isozyme, in cell proliferation, death, and survival. We overexpressed PKCzeta in 
Wistar rat thyroid (WRT) cells and determined that PKCzeta conferred
TSH-independent DNA synthesis and cell proliferation. Cells overexpressing
PKCzeta show higher levels of phosphorylated p42/p44 MAPK compared with
vector-transfected cells. Experiments using a luciferase reporter for Elk-1
revealed that PKCzeta overexpressing cells exhibit higher basal Elk-1
transcriptional activity than vector-transfected control cells. Interestingly,
stimulation of Elk-1 transcriptional activity by MEK1, a p42/p44 MAPK kinase, was
significantly enhanced in cells overexpressing PKCzeta. Strikingly, TSH retained 
the ability to stimulate Tg expression in cells expressing PKCzeta. These results
suggest that PKCzeta stimulates TSH-independent mitogenesis through a p42/p44
MAPK-dependent pathway. Unlike overexpression of Ras or phorbol ester treatment, 
PKC overexpression does not impair thyroglobulin (Tg) expression.

PMID: 10614633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Anesthesiology. 1999 Dec;91(6):1798-806.

Dibucaine and tetracaine inhibit the activation of mitogen-activated protein
kinase mediated by L-type calcium channels in PC12 cells.

Kansha M(1), Nagata T, Irita K, Takahashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Kysushu University
School of Medicine, Fukuoka, Japan. kam@kuaccm.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: An elevation of the intracellular calcium level, which is mediated by
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors and L-type Ca2+ channels both, activates the
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signaling pathway involved in synaptic
modification. It has recently been suggested that MAP kinase plays a role in
coupling the synaptic excitation to gene expression in the nucleus of
postsynaptic neurons. Because the effects of local anesthetics on cellular signal
transduction in neuronal cells are not well-known, the authors investigated
whether they affect the MAP kinase signaling pathway using PC12 cells.
METHODS: The cells were stimulated with either 50 mM KCl or 1 microM ionomycin,
and activated MAP kinase was thus immunoprecipitated. The immunocomplexes were
then subjected to an Elk1 phosphorylation assay. Both the phosphorylation of MAP 
kinase and the induction of c-Fos were detected by immunoblotting.
RESULTS: Pretreatment of the cells with 1 mM
(ethylenedioxy)-diethyl-enedinitrilotetraacetic acid or 5 micron nifedipine
blocked the MAP kinase activation induced by 50 mM KCl, whereas pretreatment with
2 microM omega-conotoxin GIVA did not. The expression of c-Fos induced by
potassium chloride was also suppressed by dibucaine, tetracaine (concentrations
that inhibited 50% of the activity of positive control [IC50s] were 16.2+/-0.2
and 73.2+/-0.7 microM, respectively), and PD 98059, a
mitogen-activated/extracellular receptor-regulated kinase inhibitor. Higher
concentrations of dibucaine and tetracaine were needed to suppress the activation
of MAP kinase induced by ionomycin (the IC50 values of dibucaine and tetracaine
were 62.5+/-2.2 and 330.5+/-32.8 microM, respectively) compared with potassium
chloride (the IC50 values of dibucaine and tetracaine were 17.7+/-1.0 and
70.2+/-1.2 microM, respectively). Although probable targets of these local
anesthetics might be L-type Ca2+ channels or components between Ca2+ and Ras in
MAP kinase pathway, the possibility that they directly affect MAP kinase still
remains.
CONCLUSIONS: Dibucaine and tetracaine at clinical concentrations were found to
inhibit the activation of MAP kinase and the expression of c-Fos mediated by
L-type Ca2+ channels in PC12 cells. The suppression of MAP kinase pathway may
thus be a potential target site for the actions of dibucaine and tetracaine,
including the modification of the synaptic functions.

PMID: 10598624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Oncogene. 1999 Nov 4;18(46):6322-9.

Rapid signalling by androgen receptor in prostate cancer cells.

Peterziel H(1), Mink S, Schonert A, Becker M, Klocker H, Cato AC.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institut f¸r Toxikologie und Genetik, Germany.

Androgens are important growth regulators in prostate cancer. Their known mode of
action in target cells requires binding to a cytoplasmic androgen receptor
followed by a nuclear translocation event and modulation of the expression of
specific genes. Here, we report another mode of action of this receptor.
Treatment of androgen responsive prostate cancer cells with dihydrotestosterone
leads to a rapid and reversible activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases
MAPKs (also called extracellular signal-regulated kinases or Erks). Transient
transfection assays demonstrated that the androgen receptor-mediated activation
of MAP kinase results in enhanced activity of the transcription factor Elk-1.
This action of the androgen receptor differs from its known transcriptional
activity since it is rapid and insensitive to androgen antagonists such as
hydroxyflutamide or casodex. Biochemical studies as well as analyses with
dominant negative mutants showed the involvement of kinases such as MAPK/Erk
kinase, phosphatidyl-inositol 3-kinase and protein kinase C in the androgen
receptor-mediated activation of MAP kinase. These results demonstrate a novel
regulatory action of the androgen receptor and prove that in addition to its
known transcriptional effects, it also uses non-conventional means to modulate
several cellular signalling processes.

PMID: 10597231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 17;274(51):36159-67.

MRG1 binds to the LIM domain of Lhx2 and may function as a coactivator to
stimulate glycoprotein hormone alpha-subunit gene expression.

Glenn DJ(1), Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland, Oregon 97201, USA.

Tissue-specific expression of the alpha-subunit gene of glycoprotein hormones
involves an enhancer element designated the pituitary glycoprotein basal element,
which interacts with the LIM homeodomain transcription factor, Lhx2. In the
present studies we have explored the function of the LIM domain of Lhx2 in
stimulating alpha-subunit transcription. When fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding
domain, the LIM domain of Lhx2 was shown to contain a transcriptional activation 
domain. Furthermore, in the context of an alpha-subunit reporter gene in which a 
GAL4-binding site replaced the pituitary glycoprotein basal element, the LIM
domain enhanced both basal and Ras-mediated transcription. In addition, a
synergistic response to Ras activation was observed when the Lhx2 LIM domain and 
the transactivation domain of Elk1 are directed to a minimal reporter gene. A
yeast two-hybrid screen identified the recently described melanocyte-specific
gene-related gene 1 (MRG1) as an Lhx2 LIM-interacting protein. MRG1 was shown to 
bind Lhx2 in vitro, and a co-immunoprecipitation assay provided evidence that
endogenous MRG1 forms a complex with Lhx2 in alphaT3-1 cells. Expression of MRG1 
in alphaT3-1 cells enhanced alpha-subunit reporter gene activity. MRG1 was also
shown to bind in vitro to the TATA-binding protein and the transcriptional
coactivator, p300. These data suggest a model in which the Lhx2 LIM domain
activates transcription through interaction with MRG1 leading to recruitment of
p300/CBP and the TATA-binding protein.

PMID: 10593900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Endocr J. 1999 Aug;46(4):545-53.

Transforming growth factor-beta stimulates articular chondrocyte cell growth
through p44/42 MAP kinase (ERK) activation.

Yonekura A(1), Osaki M, Hirota Y, Tsukazaki T, Miyazaki Y, Matsumoto T, Ohtsuru
A, Namba H, Shindo H, Yamashita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Nagasaki University School of Medicine,
Japan.

Transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) stimulates articular chondrocyte
cell proliferation and extracellular matrix formation. We reported previously
that immediate and transient expression of c-fos mRNA through protein kinase C
activation is required for the mitogenic effect of TGF-beta1 on cultured rat
articular chondrocytes (CRAC). In gel kinase assays using myelin basic protein
(MBP) showed that total cell lysates from cells treated with TGF-beta1 caused
rapid phosphorylation of MBP, which suggests the involvement of mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) activation. To identify specific MAPK pathways activated by
TGF-beta1, we performed in vitro kinase assays using specific substrates.
TGF-beta1 induced a rapid activation of extracellular signal regulated kinase
(ERK) with a peak at 5 min, which decreased to basal levels within 240 min after 
TGF-beta1 stimulation. In contrast, the c-jun N-terminal kinase activity
increased only about 2.5-fold after 240 min of stimulation and p38 MAPK activity 
did not change significantly. ERK activation by TGF-beta1 was also confirmed by
in vivo phosphorylation assays of Elk1. However, a specific MEK1 inhibitor,
PD98059, significantly decreased TGF-beta1 induced Elk1 phosphorylation in a
dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, PD98059 reduced the TGF-beta1-induced cell
growth by 40%. These results indicate that TGF-beta1 specifically activates MEK1 
and subsequent ERK pathways in CRAC, and that the activation of this MAPK pathway
plays a role in the mitogenic response to TGF-beta1.

PMID: 10580747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Am J Physiol. 1999 Nov;277(5 Pt 1):L924-31.

Activation of the EGF receptor signaling pathway in human airway epithelial cells
exposed to metals.

Wu W(1), Graves LM, Jaspers I, Devlin RB, Reed W, Samet JM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Medicine and Lung Biology, North Carolina 27711, USA.

We have previously shown that exposure to combustion-derived metals rapidly
(within 20 min) activated mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK), including
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), in the human bronchial epithelial
cell line BEAS. To study the mechanisms responsible for metal-induced activation 
of ERK, we examined the effect of noncytotoxic exposures to As, Cu, V, or Zn on
the kinases upstream of ERK in the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor
signaling pathway. Western blotting using phospho-specific ERK1/2 antibody
demonstrated the selective MEK1/2 inhibitor PD-98059 blocked metal-induced
phosphorylation of ERK1/2. Meanwhile, Western blotting using a phospho-specific
MEK1/2 antibody showed that these metals induce a rapid phosphorylation of
MEK1/2. Kinase activity assays confirmed the activation of MEK1/2 by metal
treatment. Immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated that As, Cu, V, or Zn induces
EGF receptor phosphorylation. Furthermore, the EGF receptor-specific tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (PD-153035) significantly blocked the phosphorylation of MEK1/2 
initiated by metals. Interestingly, we observed low levels of Raf-1 activity that
were not increased by metal exposure in these cells through kinase activity
assay. Finally, transfection assays showed that MEK1/2 inhibition could inhibit
trans-activation of Elk1, a transcription factor in the ERK pathway, in BEAS
cells exposed to metals. Together, these data demonstrate that As, Cu, V, and Zn 
can activate the EGF receptor signaling pathway in BEAS cells and suggest that
this mechanism may be involved in pulmonary responses to metal inhalation.

PMID: 10564177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 19;274(47):33684-90.

RIP2 is a Raf1-activated mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase.

Navas TA(1), Baldwin DT, Stewart TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrine Research, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco,
California 94080, USA.

RIP2 is a serine-threonine kinase associated with the tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
receptor complex and is implicated in the activation of NF-kappaB and cell death 
in mammalian cells. However, the function of its kinase domain is still enigmatic
as it is not required in engaging these responses. Here we show that RIP2
activates the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway and that the
kinase activity of RIP2 appears to be important in this process. RIP2 activates
AP-1 and serum response element regulated expression by inducing the activation
of the Elk1 transcription factor. RIP2 directly phosphorylates and activates ERK2
in vivo and in vitro. RIP2 in turn is activated through its interaction with
Ras-activated Raf1. Kinase-defective point and deletion variants of RIP2 also
significantly blocked the activation of ERK2 by TNFalpha but not epidermal growth
factor. These results describe a novel pathway of ERK activation and the first
catalytic function ascribed to any of the RIP-like kinases associated with the
TNF receptor superfamily.

PMID: 10559258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 15;274(42):30154-62.

CrkL mediates Ras-dependent activation of the Raf/ERK pathway through the guanine
nucleotide exchange factor C3G in hematopoietic cells stimulated with
erythropoietin or interleukin-3.

Nosaka Y(1), Arai A, Miyasaka N, Miura O.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113, Japan.

CrkL is an SH2 and SH3 domain-containing adaptor protein implicated in
pathogenesis of chronic myelogenous leukemia. Here, we demonstrate that
overexpression of CrkL enhances the erythropoietin (Epo)- or interleukin
(IL)-3-induced activation of Elk-1 and the c-fos gene promoter activity in
32D/EpoR-Wt cells. Moreover, the Epo-induced activation of ERK1 and ERK2 was
augmented and prolonged in cells inducibly overexpressing CrkL. A moderate
increase in Epo-induced activation of JNK was also observed in cells
overexpressing CrkL. Overexpression of C3G enhanced the Elk-1 activation
synergistically with CrkL, while a C3G mutant lacking the guanine nucleotide
exchange domain showed an inhibitory effect. Studies using a dominant negative
Ha-Ras mutant demonstrated that the Elk-1 and ERK2 activation enhanced by CrkL
and C3G was dependent on Ras. Consistent with this, the Epo-induced activation of
Ras was augmented in cells inducibly overexpressing CrkL. Most importantly, a
CrkL mutant defective in the SH2 or N-terminal SH3 domain showed an inhibitory
effect on the Epo-induced activation of ERK2. These data indicate that the
CrkL-C3G complex plays a role in Epo- or IL-3-induced, Ras-dependent activation
of the Raf/ERK pathway leading to the activation of Elk-1 and the c-fos gene
transcription.

PMID: 10514505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Endocrinology. 1999 Oct;140(10):4916-9.

Rat TRH receptor type 2 exhibits higher basal signaling activity than TRH
receptor type 1.

Wang W(1), Gershengorn MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York,
NY 10021-4896, USA.

Two types of rat TRH receptor (TRH-R1 and TRH-R2) have been identified and shown 
previously to exhibit similar binding and stimulated signaling activity via the
phosphoinositide-calcium transduction pathway. Since mouse TRH-R1 exhibits basal 
(or constitutive or ligand-independent) signaling activity, we compared basal
signaling by TRH-R1 and TRH-R2. Basal signaling was measured as receptor-mediated
reporter gene induction via different transcription factors. We found that TRH-R2
exhibited higher basal signaling activity than TRH-R1 via pathways mediated by
transcription factors AP-1, Elk-1 and CREB. Furthermore, CREB-mediated
transcription was directly dependent on the level of TRH-R2 expression and was
inhibited by midazolam, a specific inverse agonist of basal TRH-R signaling.
Since TRH-R1 and TRH-R2 exhibit distinct anatomic distributions in the rat, it is
possible that TRH ligand-independent signaling is more important in tissues/cells
in which TRH-R2 is expressed and less important in tissues in which TRH-R1 is
found.

PMID: 10499553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Oct;19(10):7076-87.

The net repressor is regulated by nuclear export in response to anisomycin, UV,
and heat shock.

Ducret C(1), Maira SM, Dierich A, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de GÈnÈtique et de Biologie MolÈculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, France.

The ternary complex factors (TCFs) are targets for Ras/mitogen-activated protein 
kinase signalling pathways. They integrate the transcriptional response at the
level of serum response elements in early-response genes, such as the c-fos
proto-oncogene. An important aim is to understand the individual roles played by 
the three TCFs, Net, Elk1, and Sap1a. Net, in contrast to Elk1 and Sap1a, is a
strong repressor of transcription. We now show that Net is regulated by
nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling in response to specific signalling pathways. Net is
mainly nuclear under both normal and basal serum conditions. Net contains two
nuclear localization signals (NLSs); one is located in the Ets domain, and the
other corresponds to the D box. Net also has a nuclear export signal (NES) in the
conserved Ets DNA binding domain. Net is apparently unique among Ets proteins in 
that a particular leucine in helix 1, a structural element, generates a NES.
Anisomycin, UV, and heat shock induce active nuclear exclusion of Net through a
pathway that involves c-Jun N-terminal kinase kinase and is inhibited by
leptomycin B. Nuclear exclusion relieves transcriptional repression by Net. The
specific induction of nuclear exclusion of Net by particular signalling pathways 
shows that nuclear-cytoplasmic transport of transcription factors can add to the 
specificity of the response to signalling cascades.

PMCID: PMC84702
PMID: 10490644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Biol Chem. 1999 Sep 24;274(39):27776-85.

Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel human G-protein-coupled
receptor, EDG7, for lysophosphatidic acid.

Bandoh K(1), Aoki J, Hosono H, Kobayashi S, Kobayashi T, Murakami-Murofushi K,
Tsujimoto M, Arai H, Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), together with sphingosine 1-phosphate, is a
bioactive lipid mediator that acts on G-protein-coupled receptors to evoke
multiple cellular responses, including Ca(2+) mobilization, modulation of
adenylyl cyclase, and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activation. In this 
study, we isolated a human cDNA encoding a novel G-protein-coupled receptor,
designated EDG7, and characterized it as a cellular receptor for LPA. The amino
acid sequence of the EDG7 protein is 53.7 and 48.8% identical to those of the
human functional LPA receptors EDG2 and EDG4, respectively, previously
identified. LPA (oleoyl) but not other lysophospholipids induced an increase in
the [Ca(2+)](i) of EDG7-overexpressing Sf9 cells. Other LPA receptors, EDG4 but
not EDG2, transduced the Ca(2+) response by LPA when expressed in Sf9 cells. LPAs
with an unsaturated fatty acid but not with a saturated fatty acid induced an
increase in the [Ca(2+)](i) of EDG7-expressing Sf9 cells, whereas LPAs with both 
saturated and unsaturated fatty acids elicited a Ca(2+) response in Sf9 cells
expressing EDG4. In EDG7- or EDG4-expressing Sf9 cells, LPA stimulated
forskolin-induced increase in intracellular cAMP levels, which was not observed
in EDG2-expressing cells. In PC12 cells, EDG4 but not EDG2 or EDG7 mediated the
activation of MAP kinase by LPA. Neither the EDG7- nor EDG4-transduced Ca(2+)
response or cAMP accumulation was inhibited by pertussis toxin. In conclusion,
the present study demonstrates that EDG7, a new member of the EDG family of
G-protein-coupled receptors, is a specific LPA receptor that shows distinct
properties from known cloned LPA receptors in ligand specificities, Ca(2+)
response, modulation of adenylyl cyclase, and MAP kinase activation.

PMID: 10488122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Am J Physiol. 1999 Sep;277(3 Pt 1):L479-88.

MAPK superfamily activation in human airway smooth muscle: mitogenesis requires
prolonged p42/p44 activation.

Orsini MJ(1), Krymskaya VP, Eszterhas AJ, Benovic JL, Panettieri RA Jr, Penn RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia 19107, Pennsylvania, USA.

Asthma is frequently associated with abnormal airway smooth muscle (ASM) growth
that may contribute to airway narrowing and hyperresponsiveness to contractile
agents. Although numerous hormones and cytokines have been shown to induce human 
ASM (HASM) proliferation, the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying HASM
hyperplasia are largely unknown. Here we characterize the roles of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) superfamily [p42/p44 MAPK, c-Jun
amino-terminal kinase/stress-activated protein kinase (JNK/SAPK), and p38] in
mediating hormone- and cytokine-induced HASM proliferation. Significant
enhancement of [(3)H]thymidine incorporation in HASM cultures was observed only
by treatment with agents (epidermal growth factor, platelet-derived growth
factor, thrombin, and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate) that promoted a strong and
sustained activation of p42/p44 MAPK. Significant activation of the JNK/SAPK and 
p38 pathways was only observed on stimulation with interleukin (IL)-1beta and
tumor necrosis factor-alpha, agents that did not appreciably stimulate HASM
proliferation. Two different inhibitors of MAPK/extracellular signal-regulated
kinase kinase (MEK), PD-98059 and U-0126, inhibited mitogen-induced [3H]thymidine
incorporation in a manner consistent with their ability to inhibit p42/p44
activation. Elk-1 and activator protein-1 reporter activation by mitogens was
similarly inhibited by inhibition of MEK, suggesting a linkage between p42/p44
activation, transcription factor activation, and HASM proliferation. These
findings establish a fundamental role for p42/p44 activation in regulating HASM
proliferation and provide insight into species-specific differences observed
among studies in ASM mitogenesis.

PMID: 10484455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Nature. 1999 Aug 26;400(6747):891-4.

Activation of the ERK/MAPK pathway by an isoform of rap1GAP associated with G
alpha(i)

Mochizuki N(1), Ohba Y, Kiyokawa E, Kurata T, Murakami T, Ozaki T, Kitabatake A, 
Nagashima K, Matsuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Research Institute, International Medical Center of
Japan, Tokyo.

Comment in
    Nature. 1999 Aug 26;400(6747):820-1.

Many receptors for neuropeptides and hormones are coupled with the heterotrimeric
G(i) protein, which activates the p42/44 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(ERK/MAPK) cascade through both the alpha- and betagamma-subunits of G(i). The
betagamma-subunit activates the ERK/MAPK cascade through tyrosine kinase.
Constitutively active G(alpha)i2 (gip2) isolated from adrenal and ovarian tumours
transforms Rat-1 fibroblasts and also activates the ERK/MAPK cascade by an
unknown mechanism. The ERK/MAPK pathway is activated by Ras, and is inhibited
when the low-molecular-mass GTP-binding protein Rap1 antagonizes Ras function.
Here we show that a novel isoform of Rapl GTPase-activating protein, called
rap1GAPII, binds specifically to the alpha-subunits of the G(i) family of
heterotrimeric G-proteins. Stimulation of the G(i)-coupled m2-muscarinic receptor
translocates rap1GAPII from the cytosol to the membrane and decreases the amount 
of GTP-bound Rap1. This decrease in GTP-bound Rap1 activates ERK/MAPK. Thus, the 
alpha-subunit of G(i) activates the Ras-ERK/MAPK mitogenic pathway by membrane
recruitment of rap1GAPII and reduction of GTP-bound Rap1.

PMID: 10476970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Biol Chem. 1999 Sep 10;274(37):26563-71.

Activation of the protein kinase ERK5/BMK1 by receptor tyrosine kinases.
Identification and characterization of a signaling pathway to the nucleus.

Kamakura S(1), Moriguchi T, Nishida E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan. L50174@sakura.kudpc.kyoto-u.ac.jp

ERK5 (also known as BMK1), a member of the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) superfamily, was known to be activated strongly by oxidant and osmotic
stresses. Here we have found that ERK5 is strongly activated by epidermal growth 
factor and nerve growth factor, whose receptors are tyrosine kinases. The
activation of ERK5 was inhibited by expression of dominant-negative Ras and
induced by expression of active Ras in PC12 cells, indicating a requirement for
Ras in ERK5 activation. The epidermal growth factor-induced activation of ERK5
was found to be inhibited by PD98059 and U0126 inhibitors, which were previously 
thought to act specifically on classical MAPK kinase (also known as MEK1) and
readily reversed by CL100 and MKP-3 dual-specificity phosphatases for which
classical MAPKs were previously shown to serve as preferred substrates. The
reporter assays demonstrated that the serum-induced enhancement of transcription 
from serum response element was significantly inhibited by expression of a
dominant-negative form of MEK5, which was a direct and specific activator for
ERK5 and that transcription from serum response element mediated by the
Ets-domain transcription factor Sap1a, but not by Elk1, was stimulated by
coexpression of ERK5 and active MEK5. In addition, Sap1a was shown to be
phosphorylated by ERK5 in vitro and by the activation of the ERK5 pathway in
cells. Moreover, the serum-induced c-Fos expression was markedly inhibited by
expression of dominant-negative MEK5. These results reveal a novel signaling
pathway to the nucleus mediated by ERK5 that functions downstream of receptor
tyrosine kinases to induce immediate early genes, in parallel with the classical 
MAPK cascade.

PMID: 10473620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Sep;65(3):699-708.

Polymorphic X-chromosome inactivation of the human TIMP1 gene.

Anderson CL(1), Brown CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada.

X inactivation silences most but not all of the genes on one of the two X
chromosomes in mammalian females. The human X chromosome preserves its activation
status when isolated in rodent/human somatic-cell hybrids, and hybrids retaining 
either the active or inactive X chromosome have been used to assess the
inactivation status of many X-linked genes. Surprisingly, the X-linked gene for
human tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMP1) is expressed in some but not
all inactive X-containing somatic-cell hybrids, suggesting that this gene is
either prone to reactivation or variable in its inactivation. Since many genes
that escape X inactivation are clustered, we examined the expression of four
genes (ARAF1, ELK1, ZNF41, and ZNF157) within approximately 100 kb of TIMP1. All 
four genes were expressed only from the active X chromosome, demonstrating that
the factors allowing TIMP1 expression from the inactive X chromosome are specific
to the TIMP1 gene. To determine if this variable inactivation of TIMP1 is a
function of the hybrid-cell environment or also is observed in human cells, we
developed an allele-specific assay to assess TIMP1 expression in human females.
Expression of two alleles was detected in some female cells with previously
demonstrated extreme skewing of X inactivation, indicating TIMP1 expression from 
the inactive chromosome. However, in other cells, no expression of TIMP1 was
observed from the inactive X chromosome, suggesting that TIMP1 inactivation is
polymorphic in human females.

PMCID: PMC1377976
PMID: 10441576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Circ Res. 1999 Aug 6;85(3):238-46.

Nitric oxide regulates shear stress-induced early growth response-1. Expression
via the extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway in endothelial cells.

Chiu JJ(1), Wung BS, Hsieh HJ, Lo LW, Wang DL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica,
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

Endothelial cells (ECs) subjected to shear stress constantly release nitric oxide
(NO). The effect of NO on shear stress-induced endothelial responses was
examined. ECs subjected to shear stress induced a transient and shear
force-dependent increase in early growth response-1 (Egr-1) mRNA levels.
Treatment of ECs with an NO donor, S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine (SNAP) or
3-morpholinosydnonimine (SIN-1), inhibited this shear stress-induced Egr-1
expression. Conversely, an NO synthase inhibitor to ECs,
N(G)-monomethyl-L-arginine, augmented this Egr-1 expression. NO modulation of
Egr-1 expression was demonstrated by functional analysis of Egr-1 promoter
activity using a chimera containing the Egr-1 promoter region (-698 bp) and
reporter gene luciferase. In contrast to the enhanced promoter activity after
N(G)-monomethyl-L-arginine treatment, shear stress-induced Egr-1 promoter
activity was attenuated after ECs were treated with an NO donor. ECs
cotransfected with a dominant negative mutant of Ras (RasN17), Raf-1 (Raf301), or
a catalytically inactive mutant of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-2 
(mERK) inhibited shear stress-induced Egr-1 promoter activity. NO modulation of
the signaling pathway was shown by its inhibitory effect on shear stress-induced 
ERK1/ERK2 phosphorylation and activity. This inhibitory effect was further
substantiated by the inhibition of NO on both the shear stress-induced
transcriptional activity of Elk-1 (an ERK substrate) and the promoter activity of
a reporter construct containing serum response element. NO-treated ECs resulted
in a reduction of binding of nuclear proteins to the Egr-1 binding sequences in
the platelet-derived growth factor-A promoter region. These results indicate that
shear stress-induced Egr-1 expression is modulated by NO via the ERK signaling
pathway in ECs. Our findings support the importance of NO as a negative regulator
in endothelial responses to hemodynamic forces.

PMID: 10436166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Infect Immun. 1999 Aug;67(8):4055-63.

Activation of phosphotyrosine phosphatase activity attenuates mitogen-activated
protein kinase signaling and inhibits c-FOS and nitric oxide synthase expression 
in macrophages infected with Leishmania donovani.

Nandan D(1), Lo R, Reiner NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Division of Infectious Diseases), Faculty of Medicine,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V5Z 3J5.

Intracellular protozoan parasites of the genus Leishmania antagonize host defense
mechanisms by interfering with cell signaling in macrophages. In this report, the
impact of Leishmania donovani on mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases and
nitric oxide synthase (NOS) expression in the macrophage cell line RAW 264 was
investigated. Overnight infection of cells with leishmania led to a significant
decrease in phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA)-stimulated MAP kinase activity 
and inhibited PMA-induced phosphorylation of the MAP kinase substrate and
transcription factor Elk-1. Simultaneously, leishmania infection markedly
attenuated the induction of c-FOS and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)
expression in response to PMA and gamma interferon (IFN-gamma), respectively.
These effects correlated with decreased phosphorylation of p44 and p42 MAP
kinases on tyrosine residues. Consistent with the latter finding, lysates
prepared from leishmania-infected cells contained an activity that
dephosphorylated MAP kinase in vitro, suggesting the possibility of a phosphatase
acting in vivo. Attenuation of both MAP kinase activity and c-FOS and iNOS
expression was reversed by treatment of macrophages with sodium orthovanadate
prior to infection. It was also found that the specific activity of the Src
homology 2 domain containing tyrosine phosphatase (SHP-1) toward MAP kinase was
markedly increased in leishmania-infected cells. These findings indicate that
infection with L. donovani attenuates MAP kinase signaling and c-FOS and iNOS
expression in macrophages by activating cellular phosphotyrosine phosphatases.
This may represent a novel mechanism of macrophage deactivation during
intracellular infection.

PMCID: PMC96702
PMID: 10417174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Jul;13(7):1094-104.

A role for the mitogen-activated protein kinase in mediating the ability of
thyrotropin-releasing hormone to stimulate the prolactin promoter.

Wang YH(1), Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland 97201, USA.

The hypothalamic hormone, TRH, stimulates PRL secretion and gene transcription.
We have examined the possibility that the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
may play a role in mediating TRH effects on the PRL gene. TRH was found to
stimulate sustained activation of MAPK in PRL-producing, GH3 cells, consistent
with a possible role in transcriptional regulation. A kinase-defective,
interfering MAPK kinase (MAPKK) mutant reduced TRH induction of the PRL promoter.
Treatment with the MAPKK inhibitor, PD98059, blocked TRH-induced activation of
MAPK and also reduced TRH induction of a PRL-luciferase reporter gene, confirming
that MAPK activation is necessary for TRH effects on PRL gene expression.
Previous studies have demonstrated that the PRL promoter contains binding sites
for members of the Ets family of transcription factors, which are important for
mediating MAPK responsiveness of the PRL promoter. Mutation of specific Ets sites
within the PRL promoter reduced responsiveness to both TRH and MAPK. The finding 
that DNA elements required for MAPK responsiveness of the PRL gene colocalize
with DNA elements required for TRH responsiveness further supports a role for
MAPK in mediating TRH effects on the PRL gene. We also explored the signaling
mechanisms that link the TRH receptor to MAPK induction. Occupancy of the TRH
receptor results in activation of protein kinase C (PKC) as well as increases in 
the concentration of Ca2+ due to release from intracellular stores and entry of
Ca2+ through Ca2+ channels. A PKC inhibitor, GF109203X, and an L-type Ca2+
channel blocker, nimodipine, both partially reduced TRH-induced MAPK activation
and PRL promoter activity. The effects of the two inhibitors were additive. These
studies are consistent with a signaling pathway involving PKC- and Ca2+-dependent
activation of MAPK, which leads to phosphorylation of an Ets transcription factor
and activation of the PRL promoter.

PMID: 10406461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Jul;13(7):1071-83.

A dominant role for the Raf-MEK pathway in forskolin, 12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol 
acetate, and platelet-derived growth factor-induced CREB (cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein) activation, uncoupled from serine 133 phosphorylation in
NIH 3T3 cells.

Seternes OM(1), Johansen B, Moens U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Biology, Institute of Medical Biology, University of
Troms¯, Norway.

In this study we describe that platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF),
12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-acetate (TPA), and forskolin induced CREB
(cAMP-responsive element-binding protein) Ser-133 phosphorylation with comparable
magnitude and kinetics in NIH 3T3 cells. While forskolin was the most potent
activator of CREB, TPA or PDGF modestly increased CREB activity. The role of
protein kinase C, protein kinase A, and the Raf-MEK kinase pathway in the
activation and Ser-133 phosphorylation of CREB by these three stimuli was
investigated. We found that inhibition of the Raf-MEK kinase pathway efficiently 
blocks transcriptional activation of CREB by all three stimuli. This dominant
involvement of Raf-MEK in CREB transcriptional activation seems to be uncoupled
from CREB Ser-133 phosphorylation. We further demonstrate that although
inhibition of Raf-MEK represses forskolin-induced CREB activation, forskolin by
itself failed to activate ERK1/2 and Elk-1 mediated transcription. These results 
suggest that a basal level of Raf-MEK activity is necessary for both PDGF- and
forskolin-induced CREB activation, independent of CREB Ser-133 phosphorylation.

PMID: 10406459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mol Med. 1999 Mar;5(3):147-59.

Glycine-extended gastrin exerts growth-promoting effects on human colon cancer
cells.

Stepan VM(1), Sawada M, Todisco A, Dickinson CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Medical Center, Ann Arbor
48109-0658, USA.

BACKGROUND: Since human colon cancers often contain significant quantities of
progastrin-processing intermediates, we sought to explore the possibility that
the biosynthetic precursor of fully processed amidated gastrin, glycine-extended 
gastrin, may exert trophic effects on human colonic cancer cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Binding of radiolabeled glycine-extended and amidated
gastrins was assessed on five human cancer cell lines: LoVo, HT 29, HCT 116, Colo
320DM, and T 84. Trophic actions of the peptides were assessed by increases in
[3H]thymidine incorporation and cell number. Gastrin expression was determined by
northern blot and radioimmunoassay.
RESULTS: Amidated gastrin did not bind to or stimulate the growth of any of the
five cell lines. In contrast, saturable binding of radiolabeled glycine-extended 
gastrin was seen on LoVo and HT 29 cells that was not inhibited by amidated
gastrin (10(-6) M) nor by a gastrin/CCKB receptor antagonist (PD 134308).
Glycine-extended gastrin induced a dose-dependent increase in [3H]thymidine
uptake in LoVo (143 +/- 8% versus control at 10(-10) M) and HT 29 (151 +/- 11%
versus control at 10(-10) M) cells that was not inhibited by PD 134308 or by a
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) or ERK kinase (MEK) inhibitor (PD 98509).
Glycine-extended gastrin did stimulate jun-kinase activity in LoVo and HT 29
cells. The two cell lines expressed the gastrin gene at low levels and secreted
small amounts of amidated gastrin and glycine-extended gastrin into the media.
CONCLUSIONS: Glycine-extended gastrin receptors are present on human colon cancer
cells that mediate glycine-extended gastrin's trophic effects via a
MEK-independent mechanism. This suggests that glycine-extended gastrin and its
novel receptors may play a role in colon cancer cell growth.

PMCID: PMC2230299
PMID: 10404512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jul 9;274(28):19992-20001.

Gi proteins use a novel beta gamma- and Ras-independent pathway to activate
extracellular signal-regulated kinase and mobilize AP-1 transcription factors in 
Jurkat T lymphocytes.

Hedin KE(1), Bell MP, Huntoon CJ, Karnitz LM, McKean DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, Minnesota
55905, USA. hedin@mayo.edu

Receptors coupled to pertussis toxin (PTX)-sensitive Gi proteins regulate T
lymphocyte cytokine secretion, proliferation, and chemotaxis, yet little is known
about the molecular mechanisms of Gi protein signaling in mammalian lymphocytes. 
Using the Jurkat T lymphocyte cell line, we found that a stably expressed Gi
protein-coupled receptor (the delta-opioid receptor (DOR1)) stimulates MEK-1 and 
extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1 and ERK2) and
transcriptional activity by an ERK target, Elk-1, via a mechanism requiring a
PTX-sensitive Gi protein. Levels of beta-adrenergic receptor kinase-1 C-terminal 
fragment that inhibited signaling by Gi protein beta gamma subunits in these
cells had no effect on DOR1 stimulation of either MEK-1- or Elk-1-dependent
transcription, indicating that this pathway is independent of beta gamma.
Analysis of this betagamma-independent pathway indicates a role for a herbimycin 
A-sensitive tyrosine kinase. Unlike beta gamma-mediated pathways, the beta
gamma-independent pathway was insensitive to RasN17, inhibitors of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase), and constitutive PI 3-kinase
activity. The beta gamma-independent pathway regulates downstream events, since
blocking it abrogated both Elk-1-dependent transcription and mobilization of the 
mitogenic transcription factor, AP-1, in response to DOR1 signaling. These
results characterize a novel, Ras- and PI 3kinase-independent pathway for ERK
activation by Gi protein signaling that is distinct from ERK activation by beta
gamma and may therefore be mediated by the alphai subunit.

PMID: 10391949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jul 9;274(28):19649-54.

Gab2, a new pleckstrin homology domain-containing adapter protein, acts to
uncouple signaling from ERK kinase to Elk-1.

Zhao C(1), Yu DH, Shen R, Feng GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and Walther Oncology Center,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5254, USA.

We describe a novel human adapter molecule containing a pleckstrin homolgy (PH)
domain at the N terminus that is closely related to human Grb2-associated binder 
1, Gab1, and Drosophila daughter of sevenless. We designate this protein as Gab2.
Northern blot analysis indicates that Gab2 is widely expressed and has an
overlapping but distinctive expression pattern as compared with Gab1, with high
levels of Gab2 mRNA detected in the heart, brain, placenta, spleen, ovary,
peripheral blood leukocytes, and spinal cord. Upon tyrosine phosphorylation, Gab2
physically interacts with Shp2 tyrosine phosphatase and Grb2 adapter protein.
Strikingly, Gab2 has an inhibitory effect on the activation of Elk-1-dependent
transcription triggered by a dominant active Ras mutant (RasV12) or under growth 
factor stimulation, whereas Gab1 acts to potentiate slightly the Elk-1 activity
in the same system. In contrast to the reciprocal effects of Gab1 and Gab2 in
mediating Elk-1 induction, these two molecules have a similar function in
extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation induced by either oncogenic Ras 
or growth factor stimulation. Taken together, these results argue that Gab1 and
Gab2, two closely related PH-containing adapter proteins, might have distinct
roles in coupling cytoplasmic-nuclear signal transduction. This is the first
evidence that an intracellular molecule with a PH domain operates as a negative
effector in signal relay to the regulation of gene expression.

PMID: 10391903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Periodontal Res. 1999 Apr;34(3):160-8.

Calcitonin gene-related peptide acts as a mitogen for human Gin-1 gingival
fibroblasts by activating the MAP kinase signalling pathway.

Kawase T(1), Okuda K, Wu CH, Yoshie H, Hara K, Burns DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Niigata University School of Dentistry, Japan.

In many peripheral tissues, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is released
from peptidergic sensory nerve fibres and acts like a growth factor during tissue
development and regeneration. However, the ability of CGRP to influence gingival 
tissue has not been studied. To address this question, we have now examined the
effects of CGRP on the proliferation of human gingival fibroblasts (Gin-1) in
vitro. Gin-1 cells have approximately 3100 specific CGRP-binding sites with a Kd 
of 38.6 pM on their surface. Treatment with CGRP (0.1-100 nM) significantly
stimulated cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner, with maximal effects at
1-10 nM CGRP after 2 d. As one early cellular response to CGRP, p44-MAPK protein 
(also known as the extracellular signal response kinase [ERK]) was tyrosine- and 
threonine-phosphorylated within 2 min, and this phosphorylation was sustained for
at least 1 h. The dose-response curve of MAPK activation was very similar to that
observed for CGRP's stimulation of cell proliferation. In addition, CGRP's
activation of MAPK stimulated its ability to phosphorylate the Elk-1
transcription factor. When cells were pretreated with PD98059, a selective
inhibitor of MAPK kinase (also known as MEK), CGRP not only failed to induce
phosphorylation of MAPK but also failed to stimulate Gin-1 cell proliferation.
Our present data indicate that CGRP rapidly activates the MAPK signalling
pathway, an effect which consequently stimulates the proliferation of gingival
fibroblasts. Our data demonstrate specific cellular responses to CGRP by gingival
fibroblasts and support the possibility that CGRP acts as a targeted local factor
in the regulation of development, generation and/or regeneration of gingival
tissues.

PMID: 10384404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1999 Jun;13(6):405-14.

Rapid phosphorylation of Elk-1 transcription factor and activation of MAP kinase 
signal transduction pathways in response to visual stimulation.

Kaminska B(1), Kaczmarek L, Zangenehpour S, Chaudhuri A.

Author information: 
(1)Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, Warsaw, Poland.

The AP-1 transcription factor, which is composed of various combinations of Fos
and Jun proteins, is believed to be a key participant in molecular processes that
guide activity-dependent changes in gene expression. In this study, we
investigated the activity of different MAP kinases that have been implicated in
AP-1 activation. We examined the activities of ERK, JNK/SAPK, and p38 MAPK along 
with their nuclear targets (Elk-1 and c-Jun) in rat visual cortex after light
stimulation. The transcription factor Elk-1 (a possible regulator of c-fos
expression) was found to be transiently modified by phosphorylation when visual
stimulation was applied after a period of dark rearing. In vitro kinase assay
with Elk-1 as substrate showed that light stimulation activated MAPK/ERK in
visual cortex but not frontal cortex. Furthermore, ERK activation was temporally 
matched to onset of Elk-1 phosphorylation. The activity of JNK1 (c-Jun N-terminal
kinase 1) was elevated at 2-6 h after visual exposure and was also temporally
correlated to increase of endogenous P-c-Jun levels and its appearance within the
AP-1 DNA-binding complex. The activities of p38 MAP kinases did not change
significantly. These results demonstrate the differential engagement of MAPK
signaling pathways following sensory stimulation and their relative effects upon 
AP-1 expression in the intact brain.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10383826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. FEBS Lett. 1999 May 28;451(3):337-41.

Activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase by the bradykinin B2 receptor is
independent of receptor phosphorylation and phosphorylation-triggered
internalization.

Blaukat A(1), Pizard A, Rajerison RM, Alhenc-Gelas F, M¸ller-Esterl W, Dikic I.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Uppsala, Sweden.

Recent evidence suggests that serine/threonine phosphorylation and
internalization of beta2-adrenergic receptors play critical roles in signalling
to the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade. To investigate whether this
represents a general mechanism employed by G protein-coupled receptors, we
studied the requirement of these processes in the activation of mitogen-activated
protein kinase by G alpha(q)-coupled bradykinin B2 receptors. Mutant B2 receptors
impaired in receptor phosphorylation and internalization are fully capable to
activate mitogen-activated protein kinase. Bradykinin-induced long-term effects
on mitogenic signalling monitored by measuring the transcriptional activity of
Elk1 were identical in cells expressing the wild-type or mutant B2 receptors.
Therefore, G protein-coupled bradykinin receptors activate the mitogen-activated 
protein kinase pathway independently of receptor phosphorylation and
internalization.

PMID: 10371216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 28;274(22):15454-65.

Activation of the 9E3/cCAF chemokine by phorbol esters occurs via multiple signal
transduction pathways that converge to MEK1/ERK2 and activate the Elk1
transcription factor.

Li Q(1), Vaingankar SM, Green HM, Martins-Green M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, Riverside, California 92521, 
USA.

Using primary fibroblasts in culture, we have investigated the signal
transduction mechanisms by which phorbol esters, a class of tumor promoters,
activate the 9E3 gene and its chemokine product the chicken chemotactic and
angiogenic factor. This gene is highly stimulated by phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate
(PDBu) via three pathways: (i) a small contribution through protein kinase C (the
commonly recognized pathway for these tumor promoters), (ii) a contribution
involving tyrosine kinases, and (iii) a larger contribution via pathways that can
be interrupted by dexamethasone. All three of these pathways converge into the
mitogen-activated protein kinases, MEK1/ERK2. Using a luciferase reporter system,
we show that although both the AP-1 and PDRIIkB (a NFkappaB-like factor in
chickens) response elements are capable of activation in these normal cells,
regions of the 9E3 promoter containing them are unresponsive to PDBu stimulation.
In contrast, we show for the first time that activation by PDBu occurs through a 
segment of the promoter containing Elk1 response elements; deletion and mutation 
of these elements abrogates 9E3/chicken chemotactic and angiogenic factor
expression. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and functional studies using
PathDetect systems show that stimulation of the cells by phorbol esters leads to 
activation of the Elk1 transcription factor, which binds to its element in the
9E3 promoter.

PMID: 10336436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 21;274(21):15173-80.

Stimulation of Elk1 transcriptional activity by mitogen-activated protein kinases
is negatively regulated by protein phosphatase 2B (calcineurin).

Tian J(1), Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction, Department of
Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California
92093-0636, USA.

Cellular calcium (Ca2+) and the Ca2+-binding protein calmodulin (CaM) regulate
the activities of Ca2+/CaM-dependent protein kinases and protein phosphatase 2B
(calcineurin). Functional interactions between CaM kinases and mitogen-activated 
protein (MAP) kinases were described. In this report, we describe cross-talk
between calcineurin and mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling. Calcineurin
was found to specifically down-regulate the transcriptional activity of
transcription factor Elk1, following stimulation of this activity by the ERK, Jun
N-terminal kinase, or p38 MAP kinase pathways. Expression of constitutively
activated calcineurin or activation of endogenous calcineurin by Ca2+ ionophore
decreased the phosphorylation of Elk1 at sites that positively regulate its
transcriptional activity. Calcineurin specifically dephosphorylates Elk1 at
phosphoserine 383, a site whose phosphorylation by MAP kinases makes a critical
contribution to the enhanced transcriptional activity of Elk1. The cross-talk
between calcineurin and MAP kinases is of physiological significance as low doses
of Ca2+ ionophore which by themselves are insufficient for c-fos induction can
actually inhibit induction of c-fos expression by activators of MAP kinases. Thus
through the effect of calcineurin on Elk1 phosphorylation, Ca2+ can have a
negative effect on expression of Elk1 target genes. This mechanism explains why
different levels of intracellular Ca2+ can result in very different effects on
gene expression.

PMID: 10329725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 May 10;258(2):490-6.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 inhibits MAPK-dependent Elk-1 transactivation and
DNA synthesis induced by EGF in mesangial cells.

Ghosh Choudhury G(1), Jin DC, Kim YSs, Celeste A, Ghosh-Choudhury N, Abboud HE.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, South Texas Veteran Health
Care System, San Antonio, Texas 78284, USA. choudhuryg@uthscsa.edu

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) is a member of the TGFbeta superfamily of
growth and differentiation factors. We investigated the effect of BMP-2 on
epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced mitogenic signaling in kidney glomerular
mesangial cells. BMP-2 dose-dependently inhibits EGF-induced DNA synthesis.
Maximum effect was obtained at a concentration of 100 ng/ml. BMP-2 had no
inhibitory effect on the EGF receptor (EGFR)-associated tyrosine kinase activity 
indicating that inhibition of DNA synthesis is due to regulation of post-receptor
signaling event(s). EGF stimulates MAPK activity in mesangial cells in a
time-dependent manner. Inhibition of MAPK by the MEK inhibitor PD098059 blocks
EGF-induced DNA synthesis indicating the requirement of this enzyme activity in
EGF-mediated mitogenic signaling. Furthermore, we show that exposure of mesangial
cells to BMP-2 blocks EGF-induced MAPK activity which leads to phosphorylattion
of Elk-1 transcription factor. Using a GAL-4 DNA binding-domain-Elk-1
transactivation domain fusion protein-based reporter assay, we demonstrate that
BMP-2 inhibits EGF-induced Elk-1-mediated transcription. These data provide the
first evidence that BMP-2 signaling in mesangial cells initiates a negative
regulatory cross-talk with MAPK-based transcription to inhibit EGF-induced DNA
synthesis.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10329414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. DNA Res. 1999 Feb 26;6(1):21-7.

Structural organization of the human Elk1 gene and its processed pseudogene Elk2.

Yamauchi T(1), Toko M, Suga M, Hatakeyama T, Isobe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials and Biosystem Engineering, Faculty of Engineering,
Toyama University, Toyama-city, Japan.

In the ets gene family of transcription factors, ELK1 belongs to the subfamily of
Ternary Complex Factors (TCFs) which bind to the Serum Response Element (SRE) in 
conjunction with a dimer of Serum Response Factors (SRFs). The primary structure 
of the human Elk1 gene was determined by genomic cloning. The gene structure of
Elk1 spans 15.2 kb and consists of seven exons and six introns. The coding
sequence resides on exons 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7. Sequencing of cDNA clones isolated
from human hippocampus library revealed that the second exon was often skipped by
an alternative splicing event. All introns commenced with nucleotides GT at the
5' boundary and ended with nucleotides AG at the 3' boundary, in agreement with
the proposed consensus sequence for intron spliced donor and acceptance sites.
Sequence inspection of the 5'-flanking region revealed the absence of a 'TATA'
box and the presence of putative cis-acting regulatory elements such as Sp1,
GATA-1, CCAAT, and c-Myb. Moreover, the sequence analysis of Elk2 locus on
14q32.3 confirmed that Elk2 gene corresponds to a processed pseudogene of Elk1
which has been reported between alpha 1 gene (IGHA1) and pseudo gamma gene
(IGHGP) of immunoglobulin heavy chain. Furthermore, the results of Southern
analysis using DNAs from human-mouse hybrid cell lines carrying a part of 14q32
region revealed that there is another locus hybridizing to Elk1 cDNA on 14q32.2
--> qter region in addition to Elk2 locus between IGHA1 and IGHGP loci.

PMID: 10231026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Immunol. 1999 May 1;162(9):5337-44.

NF-kappa B-inducing kinase is a common mediator of IL-17-, TNF-alpha-, and IL-1
beta-induced chemokine promoter activation in intestinal epithelial cells.

Awane M(1), Andres PG, Li DJ, Reinecker HC.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Department of Medicine, Center for the Study of
Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114,
USA.

IL-17 expression is restricted to activated T cells, whereas the IL-17R is
expressed in a variety of cell types including intestinal epithelial cells.
However, the functional responses of intestinal epithelial cells to stimulation
with IL-17 are unknown. Moreover, the signal transduction pathways activated by
the IL-17R have not been characterized. IL-17 induced NF-kappa B protein-DNA
complexes consisting of p65/p50 heterodimers in the rat intestinal epithelial
cell line IEC-6. The induction of NF-kappa B correlated with the induction of CXC
and CC chemokine mRNA expression in IEC-6 cells. IL-17 acted in a synergistic
fashion with IL-1 beta to induce the NF-kappa B site-dependent CINC promoter.
Induction of the CINC promoter by IL-17 in IEC-6 cells was TNF
receptor-associated factor-6 (TRAF6), but not TRAF2, dependent. Furthermore,
IL-17 induction of the CINC promoter could be inhibited by kinase-negative
mutants of NF-kappa B-inducing kinase and I kappa B kinase-alpha. In addition to 
activation of the NF-kappa B, IL-17 regulated the activities of extracellular
regulated kinase, c-Jun N-terminal kinase, and p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinases in IEC-6 cells. Whereas the IL-17-mediated activation of extracellular
regulated kinase mitogen-activated protein kinases was mediated through ras,
c-Jun N-terminal kinase activation was dependent on functional TRAF6. These data 
suggest that NF-kappa B-inducing kinase serves as the common mediator in the
NF-kappa B signaling cascades triggered by IL-17, TNF-alpha, and IL-1 beta in
intestinal epithelial cells.

PMID: 10228009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Cell Signal. 1999 Jan;11(1):71-6.

Involvement of protein kinase C and rho GTPase in the nuclear signalling pathway 
by transforming growth factor-beta1 in rat-2 fibroblast cells.

Choi SE(1), Choi EY, Kim PH, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environment and Life Science, Hallym University, Chun-Cheon,
South Korea.

The transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta signal-transduction cascade from the
cell membrane to the nuclear target is poorly characterised. Here we report that 
treatment with TGF-beta1 induces the levels of endogenous c-fos mRNA in Rat-2
fibroblast cells. In addition, by transient transfection analysis, TGF-beta1 was 
shown to stimulate c-fos serum response element (SRE)-driven reporter gene
activity in a dose- and time-dependent manner, suggesting that SRE is one of the 
nuclear targets of TGF-beta1. To understand the signalling cascade by which
TGF-beta1 mediates the transactivation of c-fos SRE, cells were either
pre-treated with various inhibitors or co-transfected with expression plasmids
encoding inhibitory proteins for Rho GTPase together with the SRE-luciferase
reporter gene. Our results showed that an inhibition of protein kinase C (PKC) or
RhoA selectively repressed the stimulation of c-fos SRE by TGF-beta1, implying
the possible roles of PKC and RhoA GTPase in TGF-beta1-induced signalling to
c-fos SRE.

PMID: 10206347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Circ Res. 1999 Apr 16;84(7):804-12.

Modulation of Ras/Raf/extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway by reactive
oxygen species is involved in cyclic strain-induced early growth response-1 gene 
expression in endothelial cells.

Wung BS(1), Cheng JJ, Chao YJ, Hsieh HJ, Wang DL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica,
and Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan, ROC.

Endothelial cells (ECs) exposed to cyclic strain induce gene expression. To
elucidate the signaling mechanisms involved, we studied the effects of cyclic
strain on ECs by using early growth response-1 (Egr-1) as a target gene. Cyclic
strain induced a transient increase of Egr-1 mRNA levels that resulted in an
increase of binding of nuclear proteins to the Egr-1 binding sequences in the
platelet-derived growth factor-A promoter region. ECs subjected to strain
enhanced Egr-1 transcription as revealed by promoter activities. Catalase
pretreatment inhibited this induction. ECs, transfected with a dominant positive 
mutant of Ras (RasL61), increased Egr-1 promoter activities. In contrast,
transfection with a dominant negative mutant of Ras (RasN17) attenuated this
strain inducibility. ECs transfected with a dominant negative mutant of Raf-1
(Raf301) or the catalytically inactive mutant of extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK)-2 (mERK2) diminished strain-induced promoter activities. However,
little effect on strain inducibility was observed in ECs transfected with a
dominant negative mutant of Rac (RacN17) or a catalytically inactive mutant of
JNK (JNK[K-R]). Consistently, strain-induced Egr-1 expression was inhibited after
ECs were treated with a specific inhibitor (PD98059) to mitogen-activated protein
kinase kinase. Moreover, strain to ECs induced mitogen-activated protein
kinase/ERK activity. The activation of the ERK pathway was further substantiated 
by an increase of strain-induced transcriptional activity of Elk1, an ERK
substrate. This strain-induced ERK activity was attenuated after ECs were treated
with N-acetylcysteine or catalase. Consequently, this Egr-1 gene induction was
abolished after ECs were treated with N-acetylcysteine or catalase. Deletion
analyses of the promoter region (-698 bp) indicated that cyclic strain and H2O2
shared a common serum response element. Our data clearly indicate that cyclic
strain-induced Egr-1 expression is mediated mainly via the Ras/Raf-1/ERK pathway 
and that strain-induced reactive oxygen species can modulate Egr-1 expression at 
least partially via this signaling pathway.

PMID: 10205148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Apr;13(4):619-31.

Ternary complex factors Elk-1 and Sap-1a mediate growth hormone-induced
transcription of egr-1 (early growth response factor-1) in 3T3-F442A
preadipocytes.

Clarkson RW(1), Shang CA, Levitt LK, Howard T, Waters MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University Queensland, St. Lucia,
Australia.

In our search for transcription factors induced by GH, we have analyzed immediate
early gene activation in a model of GH-dependent differentiation. Here we
describe the activation of early growth response factor-1 (egr-1) in
GH-stimulated 3T3-F442A preadipocytes and the transcription factors responsible
for its transactivation. Binding activity of egr-1 in electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) increased transiently 1 h after GH stimulation, accompanied by
a concomitant increase in egr-1 mRNA. egr-1 induction appeared not to be related 
to proliferation since it was amplified in quiescent preadipocytes at a time when
cells were refractive to GH-stimulated DNA synthesis. Truncations of the proximal
1 kb of the egr-1 promoter revealed that a 374-bp region (-624 to -250)
contributes about 80% of GH inducibility in 3T3-F442A cells and approximately 90%
inducibility in CHO-K1 cells. This region contains three juxtaposed SRE (serum
response element)/Ets site pairs known to be important for egr-1 activity in
response to exogenous stimuli. Site-specific mutations of individual SRE and Ets 
sites within this region each reduced GH inducibility of the promoter. Use of
these site-specific mutations in EMSA showed that disruption of either Ets or SRE
sites abrogated ternary complex formation at the composite sites. DNA binding of 
ternary complexes, but not binary complexes, in EMSA was rapidly and transiently 
increased by GH. EMSA supershifts indicated these ternary complexes contained
serum response factor (SRF) and the Ets factors Elk-1 and Sap-1a. Coexpression of
Sap-1a and Elk-1 resulted in a marked increase in GH induction of egr-1 promoter 
activity, although transfection with expression vectors for either Ets factor
alone did not significantly enhance the GH response. We conclude that GH
stimulates transcription of egr-1 primarily through activation of these Ets
factors at multiple sites on the promoter and that stabilization of ternary
complexes with SRF at these sites maximizes this response.

PMID: 10194767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1999 Feb;13(2):95-103.

Synoretin--A new protein belonging to the synuclein family.

Surguchov A(1), Surgucheva I, Solessio E, Baehr W.

Author information: 
(1)Moran Eye Center, University of Utah Health Science Center, 75 North Medical
Drive, Salt Lake City 84132, USA. surguchova@am.seer.wustl.edu

Aoffa-Synuclein, a presynaptic nerve terminal protein, may be an important
component of Lewy bodies in Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, and
other neurodegenerative diseases. Additionally, recent genetic studies based on
linkage analysis and cosegregation of A53T and A30P missense mutations
demonstrated that the alpha-synuclein gene may be responsible for the development
of at least some cases of familial Parkinson's disease. Despite intense interest 
in the members of the synuclein family, their function(s) and exact role in the
diseases remained unknown. Here we describe a new member of the synuclein family,
which we term synoretin, and show that it is expressed in different retinal
cells, as well as in the brain, and it may affect the regulation of signal
transduction through activation of the Elk1 pathway.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10192768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Biochem J. 1999 Apr 15;339 ( Pt 2):335-41.

Positive and negative regulatory elements in the upstream region of the rat
Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase gene.

Chang MS(1), Yoo HY, Rho HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Research Center for Cell Differentiation, 
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD1) catalyses the dismutation of superoxide
radicals and neutralizes the oxidative effects of various chemicals. Deletion
analysis of the upstream region of the rat SOD1 gene revealed that the promoter
contains a positive regulatory element (PRE) and a negative regulatory element
(NRE), which encompass the regions from -576 to -412 and from -412 to -305
respectively from the site of initiation of transcription. These DNA elements
showed enhancer and silencer activities respectively in the natural context and
in a heterologous promoter system. Using an electrophoretic-mobility-shift assay 
and a supershift assay with a specific antibody, the cis-elements of the PRE and 
NRE were identified as binding sites for transcription factors Elk1 and YY1
(Ying-Yang 1) respectively. Consistent with the presumed roles of the PRE and
NRE, Elk1 increased SOD1 gene transcription about 4-5-fold, whereas YY1 exerted a
negative effect of about 6-fold. Mutations of the Elk1- and YY1-binding sites led
to diminution and elevation respectively of transcriptional activities, both in
the natural context and in heterologous promoter systems. These results suggest
that the transcription factors Elk1 and YY1, binding in the PRE and NRE
respectively, co-ordinate the expression of the SOD1 gene.

PMCID: PMC1220162
PMID: 10191264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Genomics. 1999 Mar 15;56(3):340-3.

Cloning and characterization of UXT, a novel gene in human Xp11, which is widely 
and abundantly expressed in tumor tissue.

Schroer A(1), Schneider S, Ropers H, Nothwang H.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute fuer Molekulare Genetik, Ihnestrasse 73, D-14195
Berlin-Dahlem, Germany. nothwang@mpimgberlin-dahlem.mpg.de

Several different disease loci with unknown genetic background map to human Xp11.
In a systematic search for novel genes, we identified a novel transcript, UXT
(HGMW-approved symbol), close to the ELK1 locus in Xp11.23-p11.22. The gene is
composed of seven exons and encodes a protein of 157 amino acids, which is highly
conserved in mouse. We showed that UXT is ubiquitously expressed and subject to
X-inactivation. No homology to any known genes was found. Database surveys
indicate an abundant expression in tumor tissues.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10087202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 26;274(13):8900-9.

A differential requirement for the COOH-terminal region of the epidermal growth
factor (EGF) receptor in amphiregulin and EGF mitogenic signaling.

Wong L(1), Deb TB, Thompson SA, Wells A, Johnson GR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,
Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mediates the actions of a family of
bioactive peptides that include epidermal growth factor (EGF) and amphiregulin
(AR). Here we have studied AR and EGF mitogenic signaling in EGFR-devoid NR6
fibroblasts that ectopically express either wild type EGFR (WT) or a truncated
EGFR that lacks the three major sites of autophosphorylation (c'1000).
COOH-terminal truncation of the EGFR significantly impairs the ability of AR to
(i) stimulate DNA synthesis, (ii) elicit Elk-1 transactivation, and (iii)
generate sustained enzymatic activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase. EGFR
truncation had no significant effect on AR binding to receptor but did result in 
defective GRB2 adaptor function. In contrast, EGFR truncation did not impair EGF 
mitogenic signaling, and in c'1000 cells EGF was able to stimulate the
association of ErbB2 with GRB2 and SHC. Elk-1 transactivation was monitored when 
either ErbB2 or a truncated dominant-negative ErbB2 mutant (ErbB2-(1-813)) was
overexpressed in cells. Overexpression of full-length ErbB2 resulted in a strong 
constitutive transactivation of Elk-1 in c'1000 but only slightly stimulated
Elk-1 in WT or parental NR6 cells. Conversely, overexpression of ErbB2-(1-813)
inhibited EGF-stimulated Elk-1 transactivation in c'1000 but not in WT cells.
Thus, the cytoplasmic tail of the EGFR plays a critical role in AR mitogenic
signaling but is dispensable for EGF, since EGF-activated truncated EGFRs can
signal through ErbB2.

PMID: 10085134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Feb 16;255(2):200-7.

Overexpression of protein tyrosine phosphatase-alpha (PTP-alpha) but not
PTP-kappa inhibits translocation of GLUT4 in rat adipose cells.

Cong LN(1), Chen H, Li Y, Lin CH, Sap J, Quon MJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPases) are likely to play important roles in
insulin action. We recently demonstrated that the nontransmembrane PTPase PTP1B
can act as a negative modulator of insulin-stimulated translocation of GLUT4. We 
now examine the role of PTP-alpha and PTP-kappa (two transmembrane PTPases) in
this metabolic action of insulin. Rat adipose cells were transfected with either 
PTP-alpha or PTP-kappa and effects of these PTPases on the translocation of a
cotransfected epitope-tagged GLUT4 were studied. Cells overexpressing wild-type
PTP-alpha had significantly lower levels of cell surface GLUT4 in response to
insulin and a threefold decrease in insulin sensitivity when compared with
control cells expressing only tagged GLUT4. Co-overexpression of PTP-alpha and
PTP1B did not have additive effects, suggesting that these PTPases share common
substrates. Cells overexpressing either wild-type PTP-kappa or catalytically
inactive mutants of PTP-alpha had dose-response curves similar to those of
control cells. Since overexpression of PTP-alpha, but not PTP-kappa, had effects 
on translocation of GLUT4, our data suggest that PTPalpha may be a specific
negative modulator of insulin-stimulated glucose transport.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10049686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. EMBO J. 1999 Feb 1;18(3):664-74.

Nuclear translocation of p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein kinase is required for
growth factor-induced gene expression and cell cycle entry.

Brunet A(1), Roux D, Lenormand P, Dowd S, Keyse S, PouyssÈgur J.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UMR 6543 Centre de Biochimie, UniversitÈ de Nice, Parc Valrose, 06108
Nice, France.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) modules, composed of three protein
kinases activated by successive phosphorylation, are involved in the signal
transduction of a wide range of extracellular agents. In mammalian cells,
mitogenic stimulation triggers the translocation of p42/p44MAPK from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus, whereas the other protein kinases of the module remain 
cytosolic. Since MAPK has been shown to phosphorylate and activate nuclear
targets, such as the transcription factor Elk1, it has been proposed, but not yet
demonstrated, that MAPK nuclear translocation could represent a critical step in 
signal transduction. In this study, we sequestered p42/p44MAPK in the cytoplasm
by the expression of a catalytically inactive form of cytoplasmic MAP kinase
phosphatase (MKP-3/Pyst-1). Sequestering MAPK in the cytoplasm did not alter its 
activation or its ability to phosphorylate cytoplasmic substrates of MAPK
(p90RSK1 or an engineered cytoplasmic form of Elk1). In contrast, prevention of
MAPK nuclear translocation strongly inhibited Elk1-dependent gene transcription
and the ability of cells to reinitiate DNA replication in response to growth
factors. Thus the relocalization of MAPK to the nucleus appears to be an
important regulatory step for mitogen-induced gene expression and cell cycle
re-entry.

PMCID: PMC1171159
PMID: 9927426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Int J Oncol. 1999 Feb;14(2):327-35.

A high throughput system for the evaluation of protein kinase C inhibitors based 
on Elk1 transcriptional activation in human astrocytoma cells.

Sharif TR(1), Sharif M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Protein kinase C (PKC) designates a family of kinases that regulate many
essential functions including cell growth and differentiation. The tight
regulation of PKC activity is crucial for maintaining normal cellular
proliferation and excessive activity leads to abnormal or uncontrolled cell
growth. Recent reports indicate that malignant glioma cell lines express 100 to
1000-fold higher PKC activity when compared to non-neoplastic astrocytes. This
high activity correlates well with the proliferation of tumor cells in vitro. We 
recently reported on the anti-proliferative properties of selective PKC
inhibitors on the growth of U-373MG human astrocytoma cell line, and their
ability to block mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway activated by
substance P (SP) neuropeptide receptor signaling via a PKC-dependent mechanism.
Therefore, inhibiting PKC activity by selective PKC inhibitors may present a
promising approach for improving astroglial brain tumor therapy. For this
purpose, we constructed a high throughput model cell system to evaluate the
efficacy of PKC inhibitors. This system is based on the measurement of light
production in U-373MG cells stably transfected with the luciferase reporter gene 
whose expression depends on the transcriptional activation of GAL4-Elk1 fusion
protein by enzyme components of the MAP kinase pathway and the upstream
activation of PKC (PKC activation-->MAP kinases-->GAL4-Elk1
phosphorylation-->luciferase expression-->luciferase activity). In brief, we have
demonstrated that the PKC activator 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol 13-acetate
(TPA)-induced luciferase activity in this cell system is mediated via the MAP
kinase pathway and can be blocked in the presence of MEK1 selective inhibitors
(PD 098059 or U0126). We also demonstrated that TPA-induced luciferase activity
in U-373MG stable clones can be blocked by PKC inhibitors (CGP 41251, Go 6976,
and GF 109203X) in a concentration dependent manner. In contrast, epidermal
growth factor (EGF)-induced luciferase activity, which is independent of PKC
activation (Ras-->Raf-1-->MEK1-->MAP kinases-->GAL4-Elk1
phosphorylation-->luciferase expression-->luciferase activity) can only be
blocked using a selective EGF receptor inhibitor (AG 1478). In conclusion, we
have constructed a model cell system for the high throughput screening and
identification of PKC inhibitors potentially active against astrocytoma cells in 
culture.

PMID: 9917510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mol Cell. 1998 Dec;2(6):729-40.

Cloning of p97/Gab2, the major SHP2-binding protein in hematopoietic cells,
reveals a novel pathway for cytokine-induced gene activation.

Gu H(1), Pratt JC, Burakoff SJ, Neel BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel-Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. hgu@bidmc.harvard.edu

Several components in cytokine signaling remain unidentified. We report the
cloning and initial characterization of one such component, p97, a widely
expressed scaffolding protein distantly related to Drosophila DOS and mammalian
Gab1. Upon cytokine, growth factor, or antigen receptor stimulation, p97 becomes 
tyrosyl phosphorylated and associates with several SH2 domain-containing
proteins, including SHP2. Expression of p97 mutants unable to bind SHP2 blocks
cytokine-induced c-fos promoter activation, inhibiting Elk1-mediated and
STAT5-mediated transactivation. Surprisingly, such mutants do not inhibit MAPK
activation. Our results identify p97 as an important regulator of receptor
signaling that controls a novel pathway to immediate-early gene activation and
suggest multiple functions for SHP2 in cytokine receptor signaling.

PMID: 9885561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 15;274(3):1801-13.

Regulation of MCL1 through a serum response factor/Elk-1-mediated mechanism links
expression of a viability-promoting member of the BCL2 family to the induction of
hematopoietic cell differentiation.

Townsend KJ(1), Zhou P, Qian L, Bieszczad CK, Lowrey CH, Yen A, Craig RW.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover,
New Hampshire 03755-3835, USA.

Proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis are tightly regulated during
hematopoiesis, allowing amplification along specific lineages while preventing
excessive proliferation of immature cells. The MCL1 member of the BCL2 family is 
up-regulated during the induction of monocytic differentiation (approximately
10-fold with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA)). MCL1 has effects
similar to those of BCL2, up-regulation promoting viability, but differs from
BCL2 in its rapid inducibility and its pattern of expression. Nuclear factors
that regulate MCL1 transcription have now been identified, extending the previous
demonstration of signal transduction through mitogen-activated protein kinase. A 
162-base pair segment of the human MCL1 5'-flank was found to direct luciferase
reporter activity, allowing approximately 10-fold induction with TPA that was
suppressible upon inhibition of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
pathway. Serum response factor (SRF), Elk-1, and Sp1 bound to cognate sites
within this segment, SRF and Elk-1 acting coordinately to affect both basal
activity and TPA inducibility, whereas Sp1 affected basal activity only. Thus,
the mechanism of the TPA-induced increase in MCL1 expression seen in
myelomonocytic cells at early stages of differentiation involves signal
transduction through ERKs and transcriptional activation through SRF/Elk-1. This 
finding provides a parallel to early response genes (e.g. c-FOS and EGR1) that
affect maturation commitment in these cells and therefore suggests a means
through which enhancement of cell viability may be linked to the induction of
differentiation.

PMID: 9880563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 15;274(3):1736-44.

Characterization of the human elk-1 promoter. Potential role of a downstream
intronic sequence for elk-1 gene expression in monocytes.

Lehmann U(1), Brocke P, Dittmer J, Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut f¸r Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 30623
Hannover, Germany.

To characterize the human elk-1 promoter, we mapped the transcriptional start
site and isolated elk-1-specific genomic phage clones that contained extensive
upstream and downstream sequences. A TATA-like motif was identified immediately
upstream of the transcriptional start site. Functional analyses of DNA fragments 
containing the TATA element and the identification of a DNase I-hypersensitive
chromatin site (HS 1) in close proximity to the TATA box suggest that the
identified TATA motif is important for elk-1 transcription in vivo. Sequences
upstream and downstream from the TATA box were found to contribute to elk-1
promoter activity. A second hypersensitive site (HS 2) was identified within the 
first intron in pre-monocytic cells, which express Elk-1 only when
differentiating to monocytes. In a variety of other cell types, which display a
constitutive Elk-1 expression, HS 2 did not exist, suggesting that inducibility
of elk-1 expression is associated with the presence of HS 2. Egr-1 and the serum 
response factor were found to interact specifically with the intronic sequence at
+265 and +448, respectively. Because Egr-1 mRNA and protein levels were observed 
to increase significantly before induction of elk-1 expression, we propose that
Egr-1 is important for the regulation of elk-1 transcription in differentiating
monocytes.

PMID: 9880555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):136-46.

Glutamate induces phosphorylation of Elk-1 and CREB, along with c-fos activation,
via an extracellular signal-regulated kinase-dependent pathway in brain slices.

Vanhoutte P(1), Barnier JV, Guibert B, PagËs C, Besson MJ, Hipskind RA, Caboche
J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurochimie-Anatomie, Institut des Neurosciences-UnitÈ Mixte de
Recherche 7624, CNRS-UniverstitÈ Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, France.

In cell culture systems, the TCF Elk-1 represents a convergence point for
extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) and c-Jun N-terminal
kinase/stress-activated protein kinase (JNK/SAPK) subclasses of mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) cascades. Its phosphorylation strongly potentiates its
ability to activate transcription of the c-fos promoter through a ternary complex
assembled on the c-fos serum response element. In rat brain postmitotic neurons, 
Elk-1 is strongly expressed (V. Sgambato, P. Vanhoutte, C. PagËs, M. Rogard, R.
A. Hipskind, M. J. Besson, and J. Caboche, J. Neurosci. 18:214-226, 1998).
However, its physiological role in these postmitotic neurons remains to be
established. To investigate biochemically the signaling pathways targeting Elk-1 
and c-fos in mature neurons, we used a semi-in vivo system composed of brain
slices stimulated with the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate. Glutamate
treatment leads to a robust, progressive activation of the ERK and JNK/SAPK MAPK 
cascades. This corresponds kinetically to a significant increase in
Ser383-phosphorylated Elk-1 and the appearance of c-fos mRNA. Glutamate also
causes increased levels of Ser133-phosphorylated cyclic AMP-responsive
element-binding protein (CREB) but only transiently relative to Elk-1 and c-fos. 
ERK and Elk-1 phosphorylation are blocked by the MAPK kinase inhibitor PD98059,
indicating the primary role of the ERK cascade in mediating glutamate signaling
to Elk-1 in the rat striatum in vivo. Glutamate-mediated CREB phosphorylation is 
also inhibited by PD98059 treatment. Interestingly, KN62, which interferes with
calcium-calmodulin kinase (CaM-K) activity, leads to a reduction of
glutamate-induced ERK activation and of CREB phosphorylation. These data indicate
that ERK functions as a common component in two signaling pathways (ERK/Elk-1 and
ERK/?/CREB) converging on the c-fos promoter in postmitotic neuronal cells and
that CaM-Ks act as positive regulators of these pathways.

PMCID: PMC83872
PMID: 9858538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Physiol. 1998 Dec 15;513 ( Pt 3):647-54.

Cloning and functional expression of rat ether-‡-go-go-like K+ channel genes.

Engeland B(1), Neu A, Ludwig J, Roeper J, Pongs O.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum f¸r Molekulare Neurobiologie, Institut f¸r Neurale Signalverarbeitung,
Martinistrasse 52, D-20246 Hamburg,, Germany.

1. Screening of rat cortex cDNA resulted in cloning of two complete and one
partial orthologue of the Drosophila ether-‡-go-go-like K+ channel (elk). 2.
Northern blot and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
analysis revealed predominant expression of rat elk mRNAs in brain. Each rat elk 
mRNA showed a distinct, but overlapping expression pattern in different rat brain
areas. 3. Transient transfection of Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells with rat
elk1 or rat elk2 cDNA gave rise to voltage-activated K+ channels with novel
properties. 4. RELK1 channels mediated slowly activating sustained potassium
currents. The threshold for activation was at -90 mV. Currents were insensitive
to tetraethylammonium (TEA) and 4-aminopyridine (4-AP), but were blocked by
micromolar concentrations of Ba2+. RELK1 activation kinetics were not dependent
on prepulse potential like REAG-mediated currents. 5. RELK2 channels produced
currents with a fast inactivation component and HERG-like tail currents. RELK2
currents were not sensitive to the HERG channel blocker E4031.

PMCID: PMC2231332
PMID: 9824707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 20;273(47):31327-36.

Growth hormone stimulates phosphorylation and activation of elk-1 and expression 
of c-fos, egr-1, and junB through activation of extracellular signal-regulated
kinases 1 and 2.

Hodge C(1), Liao J, Stofega M, Guan K, Carter-Su C, Schwartz J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0622, USA.

Growth hormone (GH), a major regulator of normal body growth and metabolism,
regulates cellular gene expression. The transcription factors Elk-1 and Serum
Response Factor are necessary for GH-stimulated transcription of c-fos through
the Serum Response Element (SRE). GH stimulates the serine phosphorylation of
Elk-1, thereby enabling Elk-1 to mediate transcriptional activation. The
contribution of the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase
(MEK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway to Elk-1-mediated
transcriptional activation of the c-fos SRE in response to GH was examined. The
MEK inhibitor PD098059 attenuated GH-induced expression of the endogenous
SRE-regulated genes c-fos, egr-1, and junB as well as transcriptional activation 
mediated by the c-fos promoter. The MEK inhibitor blocked GH-stimulated
activation of MEK, phosphorylation of ERK1/ERK2, and MAP kinase activity in
3T3-F442A cells. Blocking MEK activation prevented GH-induced phosphorylation of 
Elk-1, as well as the ability of Elk-1 to mediate transcriptional activation in
response to GH. Overexpression of dominant-negative Ras or the ERK-specific
phosphatase, mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-1, blocked the
Ras/MEK/ERK pathway and abrogated GH-induced phosphorylation of Elk-1. GH failed 
to stimulate phosphorylation or activation of Jun N-terminal kinase under the
conditions used. GH slightly increased p38-mediated mitogen-activated protein
kinase-activated protein (MAPKAP) kinase-2 activity, but the p38 inhibitor
SB203580 did not attenuate GH-promoted Elk-1 phosphorylation. Wortmannin, which
inhibited GH-induced ERK phosphorylation, also attenuated transcriptional
activation of c-fos by GH. Taken together, these data suggest that GH-dependent
activation of the Ras/MEK/ERK pathway and subsequent serine phosphorylation of
Elk-1 contribute to GH-stimulated c-fos expression through the SRE.

PMID: 9813041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Gene. 1998 Oct 23;221(2):215-24.

The human elk-1 gene family: the functional gene and two processed pseudogenes
embedded in the IgH locus.

Harindranath N(1), Mills FC, Mitchell M, Meindl A, Max EE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biologics, Evaluation and Research, FDA, 8800 Rockville Pike,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Elk-1 is a transcription factor whose activation by several mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPKs) mediates the immediate early responses of the c-fos
promoter to growth factors and other stimuli. Here, we report the structure of
the human elk-1 gene, which we have localized about 6.5kb upstream of the
properdin gene on the X chromosome. The coding sequence is interrupted by four
introns; two additional introns lie within the 5' untranslated region. We have
also found two elk-1-related processed pseudogenes in the human immunoglobulin
heavy chain (IgH) locus, accounting for 'elk-2' previously visualized by in-situ 
hybridization at 14q32. A processed pseudogene evidently inserted downstream of a
primordial immunoglobulin Calpha gene and was duplicated along with part of the
IgH locus. Gene/pseudogene sequence comparisons and Southern blots of primate
DNAs suggest that both the pseudogene insertion and the locus duplication
occurred between about 30 and 60 million years ago.

PMID: 9795224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Biol Chem. 1998 Aug-Sep;379(8-9):1101-11.

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for measurement of JNK, ERK, and p38 kinase
activities.

Forrer P(1), Tamaskovic R, Jaussi R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Radiobiology of the Paul Scherrer Institute and the
University of Z¸rich, Villigen PSI, Switzerland.

A rapid enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for the enzyme activity measurement of 
three well-known mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, JNK2, ERK2, and p38 is 
described. The assay involves immobilization of the respective kinase substrates 
c-Jun, Elk1, or ATF2 on microtiter plates, addition of the kinase reaction
mixture, and measurement of substrate phosphorylation using
phospho-epitope-specific antibodies. This novel procedure represents a marked
improvement to conventional radioactive MAP kinase assays in terms of
quantification, precision, performance at physiological ATP concentration, high
throughput, time consumption and amenability to automation. In addition to the
standard solid phase assay using plastic-bound protein substrates, we developed
an alternative solution phase protocol using soluble protein substrates. By
comparing the results of the two assays, we found that MAP kinases retained much 
of their substrate specificity in the phosphorylation of immobilized protein
substrates. Interestingly, we observed a strong preference of JNK2 and p38 for
the phosphorylation of dimeric over monomeric substrates. We further
characterized the kinase inhibitory activity of olomoucine, staurosporine, and SB
203580 for JNK2, ERK2, and p38. Taken together, this assay could assist in the
biochemical characterization of MAP kinases and in identifying potent and
specific inhibitors of these enzymes.

PMID: 9792443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Neurosci. 1998 Nov 1;18(21):8814-25.

Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) controls immediate early gene
induction on corticostriatal stimulation.

Sgambato V(1), PagËs C, Rogard M, Besson MJ, Caboche J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Neurochimie-Anatomie, Institut des Neurosciences, UnitÈ Mixte de
Recherche 7624, UniversitÈ Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, France.

Activity-dependent changes in neuronal structure and synaptic remodeling depend
critically on gene regulation. In an attempt to understand how glutamate receptor
stimulation at the membrane leads to gene regulation in the nucleus, we traced
intracellular signaling pathways targeting DNA regulatory elements of immediate
early genes (IEGs). For this purpose we used an in vivo electrical stimulation of
the glutamatergic corticostriatal pathway. We show that a transient activation of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) proteins (detected by
immunocytochemistry with an anti-active antibody) is spatially coincident with
the onset of IEG induction [c-fos, zif 268, and map kinase phosphatase-1 (MKP-1) 
detected by in situ hybridization] in the striatum, bilaterally. Both Elk-1 and
CREB transcription factors (targeting SRE and CRE DNA regulatory elements,
respectively) were hyperphosphorylated in register with ERK activation and IEG
mRNA induction. However, their hyperphosphorylation occurred in different
subcellular compartments: the cytoplasm and the nucleus for Elk-1 and the nucleus
for CREB. The role of the ERK signaling cascade in gene regulation was confirmed 
after intrastriatal and unilateral injection of the specific ERK inhibitor PD
98059, which completely abolished c-fos, zif 268, and MKP-1 mRNA induction in the
injected side. Of interest, both Elk-1 and CREB hyperphosphorylation also was
impaired after PD 98059 injection. Thus two different ERK modules, one depending 
on the cytoplasmic activation of Elk-1 and the other one depending on the nuclear
activation of CREB, control IEG transcriptional regulation in our model. Our
findings provide significant insights into intracellular mechanisms underlying
synaptic plasticity in the striatum.

PMID: 9786988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Oct 13;95(21):12202-7.

Rsk-2 activity is necessary for epidermal growth factor-induced phosphorylation
of CREB protein and transcription of c-fos gene.

De Cesare D(1), Jacquot S, Hanauer A, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de GÈnÈtique et de Biologie MolÈculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
France.

Activation by growth factors of the Ras-dependent signaling cascade results in
the induction of p90 ribosomal S6 kinases (p90(rsk)). These are translocated into
the nucleus upon phosphorylation by mitogen-activated protein kinases, with which
p90(rsk) are physically associated in the cytoplasm. In humans there are three
isoforms of the p90(rsk) family, Rsk-1, Rsk-2, and Rsk-3, which are products of
distinct genes. Although these isoforms are structurally very similar, little is 
known about their functional specificity. Recently, mutations in the Rsk-2 gene
have been associated with the Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS). We have studied a
fibroblast cell line established from a CLS patient that bears a nonfunctional
Rsk-2. Here we document that in CLS fibroblasts there is a drastic attenuation in
the induced Ser-133 phosphorylation of transcription factor CREB (cAMP response
element-binding protein) in response to epidermal growth factor stimulation. The 
effect is specific, since response to serum, cAMP, and UV light is unaltered.
Furthermore, epidermal growth factor-induced expression of c-fos is severely
impaired in CLS fibroblasts despite normal phosphorylation of serum response
factor and Elk-1. Finally, coexpression of Rsk-2 in transfected cells results in 
the activation of the c-fos promoter via the cAMP-responsive element. Thus, we
establish a link in the transduction of a specific growth factor signal to
changes in gene expression via the phosphorylation of CREB by Rsk-2.

PMCID: PMC22809
PMID: 9770464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Neuroreport. 1998 Aug 24;9(12):2703-8.

Nociception activates Elk-1 and Sap1a following expression of the ORL1 receptor
in Chinese hamster ovary cells.

Bevan N(1), Scott S, Shaw PE, Lee MG, Marshall FH, Rees S.

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Systems Unit, Glaxo Wellcome Research and Development, Hertfordshire,
UK.

Nociceptin stimulation of the ORL1 receptor expressed in Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO) cells results in the activation of the extracellular signal regulated
kinases ERK1 and ERK2. ERK1/ERK2 activation is inhibited by pertussis toxin, the 
MEK inhibitor PD 98059 and by transient expression of alpha-transducin,
indicating that ORL1 up-regulation of these kinases occurs as a consequence of
the release of the G-protein betagamma complex following the activation of
pertussis-toxin sensitive Galphai-family G-proteins. Using specific reporter
genes we demonstrate that the transcription factors Elk-1 and Sapla are activated
in a pertussis toxin-sensitive manner as a consequence of ORL1 upregulation of
ERK1/ERK2 to induce changes in gene expression. The activation of these
transcription factors is also inhibited following treatment with PD 98059 and
following coexpression of alpha-transducin.

PMID: 9760105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Am J Physiol. 1998 Oct;275(4 Pt 1):C1104-12.

Hypotonicity activates transcription through ERK-dependent and -independent
pathways in renal cells.

Zhang Z(1), Yang XY, Cohen DM.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Nephrology and Molecular Medicine, Oregon Health Sciences
University and Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Portland, Oregon 97201, 
USA.

Acute hypotonic shock (50% dilution of medium with sterile water, but not with
isotonic NaCl) activated the extracellular signal response kinase (ERK)
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases in renal medullary cells, as measured by 
Western analysis with a phospho-ERK-specific antibody and by in vitro kinase
assay of epitope-tagged ERKs immunoprecipitated from stable HA-ERK transfectants.
Hypotonicity also activated the transcription factor and ERK substrate Elk-1 in a
partially PD-98059-sensitive fashion, as assessed by chimeric reporter gene
assay. Consistent with these data, hypotonic stress activated transcription of
the immediate-early gene transcription factor Egr-1 in a partially
PD-98059-sensitive fashion. Hypotonicity-inducible Egr-1 transcription was
mediated in part through 5'-flanking regions containing serum response elements
and in part through the minimal Egr-1 promoter. Elimination of the Ets motifs
adjacent to key regulatory serum response elements in the Egr-1 promoter
diminished the effect of hypotonicity but failed to abolish it. Interestingly,
hypotonicity also transiently activated p38 and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase 1, as
determined by immunoblotting with anti-phospho-MAP kinase antibodies. Taken
together, these data strongly suggest that hypotonicity activates immediate-early
gene transcription in renal medullary cells via MAP kinase kinase-dependent and
-independent mechanisms.

PMID: 9755064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Endocrinology. 1998 Oct;139(10):4147-54.

Alpha2-Heremans Schmid glycoprotein inhibits insulin-stimulated Elk-1
phosphorylation, but not glucose transport, in rat adipose cells.

Chen H(1), Srinivas PR, Cong LN, Li Y, Grunberger G, Quon MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hypertension-Endocrine Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1754, USA.

Alpha2-Heremans Schmid glycoprotein (alpha2-HSG) is a member of the fetuin family
of serum proteins whose biological functions are not completely understood. There
is a consensus that alpha2-HSG plays a role in the regulation of tissue
mineralization. However, one aspect of alpha2-HSG function that remains
controversial is its ability to inhibit the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase and 
the biological actions of insulin. Interestingly, some studies suggest that
alpha2-HSG differentially inhibits mitogenic, but not metabolic, actions of
insulin. However, these previous studies were not carried out in bona fide
insulin target cells. Therefore, in the present study we investigate the effects 
of alpha2-HSG in the physiologically relevant rat adipose cell. We studied
insulin-stimulated translocation of the insulin-responsive glucose transporter
GLUT4 in transfected rat adipose cells overexpressing human alpha2-HSG. In
addition, we measured insulin-stimulated glucose transport in adipose cells
cultured with conditioned medium from the transfected cells as well as in freshly
isolated adipose cells treated with purified human alpha2-HSG. Compared with
control cells, we were unable to demonstrate any significant effect of alpha2-HSG
on insulin-stimulated translocation of GLUT4 or glucose transport. In contrast,
we did demonstrate that overexpression of alpha2-HSG in adipose cells inhibits
both basal and insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of Elk-1 (a transcription
factor phosphorylated and activated by mitogen-activated protein kinase and other
related upstream kinases). Interestingly, we did not observe any major effects of
alpha2-HSG to inhibit insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of the insulin receptor,
insulin receptor substrate-1, -2, or -3, in either transfected or freshly
isolated adipose cells. We conclude that alpha2-HSG inhibits insulin-stimulated
Elk-1 phosphorylation, but not glucose transport, in adipose cells by a mechanism
that may involve effector molecules downstream of insulin receptor substrate
proteins.

PMID: 9751494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Biochem J. 1998 Oct 1;335 ( Pt 1):19-26.

Insulin-stimulated expression of c-fos, fra1 and c-jun accompanies the activation
of the activator protein-1 (AP-1) transcriptional complex.

Griffiths MR(1), Black EJ, Culbert AA, Dickens M, Shaw PE, Gillespie DA, TavarÈ
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medical Sciences, University of Bristol,
Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.

The activator protein-1 (AP-1) transcriptional complex is made up of members of
the Fos (c-Fos, FosB, Fra1, Fra2) and Jun (c-Jun, JunB, JunD) families and is
stimulated by insulin in several cell types. The mechanism by which insulin
activates this complex is not well understood but it is dependent on the
activation of the Erk1 and Erk2 isoforms of mitogen-activated protein kinases. In
the current study we show that the AP-1 complex isolated from insulin-stimulated 
cells contained c-Fos, Fra1, c-Jun and JunB. The activation of the AP-1 complex
by insulin was accompanied by (i) a transient increase in c-fos expression, and
the transactivation of the ternary complex factors Elk1 and Sap1a, in an
Erk1/Erk2-dependent fashion; (ii) a substantial increase in the expression of
Fra1 protein and mRNA, which was preceded by a transient decrease in its
electrophoretic mobility upon SDS/PAGE, indicative of phosphorylation; and (iii) 
a sustained increase in c-jun expression without increasing c-Jun phosphorylation
on serines 63 and 73 or activation of the stress-activated kinase JNK/SAPK. In
conclusion, insulin appears to stimulate the activity of the AP-1 complex
primarily through a change in the abundance of the components of this complex,
although there may be an additional role for Fra1 phosphorylation.

PMCID: PMC1219747
PMID: 9742208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Am J Physiol. 1998 Sep;275(3 Pt 2):F343-52.

Bradykinin stimulates the ERK-->Elk-1-->Fos/AP-1 pathway in mesangial cells.

El-Dahr SS(1), Dipp S, Baricos WH.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Tulane University
School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA.

Among its diverse biological actions, the vasoactive peptide bradykinin (BK)
induces the transcription factor AP-1 and proliferation of mesangial cells (S. S.
El-Dahr, S. Dipp, I. V. Yosipiv, and W. H. Baricos. Kidney Int. 50: 1850-1855,
1996). In the present study, we examined the role of protein tyrosine
phosphorylation and the mitogen-activated protein kinases, ERK1/2,in mediating
BK-induced AP-1 and DNA replication in cultured rat mesangial cells. BK (10(-9)
to 10(-7) M) stimulated a rapid increase in tyrosine phosphorylation of multiple 
proteins with an estimated molecular mass of 120-130, 90-95, and 44-42 kDa.
Immunoblots using antibodies specific for ERK or tyrosine-phosphorylated ERK
revealed a shifting of p42 ERK2 to a higher molecular weight that correlated
temporally with an increase in tyrosine-phosphorylated ERK2. Genistein, a
specific tyrosine kinase inhibitor, prevented the phosphorylation of ERK2 by BK. 
In-gel kinase assays indicated that BK-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of ERK2
is accompanied by fourfold activation of its phosphotransferase activity toward
the substrate PHAS-I (P < 0.05). Furthermore, BK stimulated a 2.5-fold increase
(P < 0.05) in phosphorylation of Elk-1, a transcription factor required for
growth factor-induced c-fos transcription. In accord with the stimulation of
Elk-1 phosphorylation, BK induced c-fos gene expression and the production of
Fos/AP-1 complexes. In addition, thymidine incorporation into DNA increased
twofold (P < 0. 05) following BK stimulation. Each of these effects was blocked
by tyrosine kinase inhibition with genistein or herbimycin A. Similarly,
antisense oligodeoxynucleotide targeting of ERK1/2 mRNA inhibited BK-stimulated
DNA synthesis. In contrast, protein kinase C inhibition or depletion had no
effect on BK-induced c-fos mRNA, AP-1-DNA binding activity, or DNA synthesis.
Collectively, these data demonstrate that BK activates the ERK-->Elk-1-->AP-1
pathway and that BK mitogenic signaling is critically dependent on protein
tyrosine phosphorylation.

PMID: 9729506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Physiol. 1998 Sep 15;511 ( Pt 3):675-82.

Cloning of a mammalian elk potassium channel gene and EAG mRNA distribution in
rat sympathetic ganglia.

Shi W(1), Wang HS, Pan Z, Wymore RS, Cohen IS, McKinnon D, Dixon JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, State University of New York at Stony
Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.

1. Three new members of the EAG potassium channel gene family were identified in 
rat and the complete coding sequence of one of these genes (elk1) was determined 
by cDNA cloning. 2. The elk1 gene, when expressed in Xenopus oocytes, encodes a
slowly activating and slowly deactivating potassium channel. 3. The elk1 gene is 
expressed in sympathetic ganglia and is also expressed in sciatic nerve. 4. Six
of the seven known EAG genes were found to be expressed in rat sympathetic
ganglia, suggesting an important functional role for these channels in the
sympathetic nervous system.

PMCID: PMC2231163
PMID: 9714851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Oncogene. 1998 Jul 30;17(4):527-32.

Induction of apoptosis by Elk-1 and deltaElk-1 proteins.

Shao N(1), Chai Y, Cui JQ, Wang N, Aysola K, Reddy ES, Rao VN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Allegheny University of the Health Sciences,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

Elk-1, an ets related gene codes for at least two splice variants Elk-1, which
regulates c-fos transcription and deltaElk-1, both of which function as
transcriptional activators. To investigate the role of Elk-1 and deltaElk-1
proteins in apoptosis; we have developed rat fibroblast cell lines and human
breast cancer cell lines expressing Elk-1 and deltaElk-1. The expression of Elk-1
and deltaElk-1 proteins in the Elk-1/deltaElk-1 transfectants were analysed by
immunofluorescence, immunohistochemistry, and Western blot analysis. The Elk-1
unlike deltaElk-1 transfectants showed a shortened and flattened morphology
compared to the parental cells. We have found that calcium ionophore treatment of
Rat-1 Elk-1, MCF-7 Elk-1, Rat-1 deltaElk-1 and MCF-7 deltaElk-1 transfectants
resulted in programmed cell death. These results indicate that constitutive
expression of Elk-1 and deltaElk-1 proteins triggers apoptosis in Rat-1
fibroblasts and breast cancer cells when treated with calcium ionophore.

PMID: 9696047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cell Growth Differ. 1998 Jul;9(7):523-34.

Binding of ETS family members is important for the function of the
c-sis/platelet-derived growth factor-B TATA neighboring sequence in
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-treated K562 cells.

Kujoth GC(1), Robinson DF, Fahl WE.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison
53706, USA.

The c-sis/platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-B TATA neighboring sequence (TNS)
is a promoter element that is required for the full induction of this gene in
K562 erythroleukemia cells undergoing
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-mediated megakaryoblastic differentiation.
Nuclear factors from K562 cells can bind to the c-sis/PDGF-B TNS, generating four
complexes in electrophoretic mobility shift assays. One of these complexes was
previously shown to contain Sp family members. In this work, we provide evidence 
implicating two of the remaining complexes as belonging to the ETS family of
transcription factors. This includes the identification of a novel constitutive
TNS-binding complex containing the ETS family member ELK-1. The binding of both
ETS-like complexes was disrupted by mutations in a central CCGGAA core within the
TNS and, for one of the complexes, could be promoted by bringing the sequences
flanking the core closer to a consensus ETS binding site. The molecular weights
of these TNS-binding factors were estimated by UV cross-linking analysis and
found to be consistent with those of several ETS family transcription factors,
including ELK-1. A consensus ELK-1 binding site could compete for the binding of 
both putative ETS-like factors, and the novel complex could be disrupted by the
addition of an antibody raised against ELK-1. Transient transfection analysis
using mutant TNS promoter-reporter constructs demonstrated a strong correlation
between the binding of the ETS-like factors and the transcriptional activity of
the TNS. In contrast, mutations that prevented the binding of Sp family
transcription factors had no effect on promoter activity. Thus, ETS family
members, such as ELK-1, are not only capable of binding to the TNS but seem to be
necessary for the function of this element in differentiating K562 cells.

PMID: 9690620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 7;273(32):20431-7.

The src homology 2 and phosphotyrosine binding domains of the ShcC adaptor
protein function as inhibitors of mitogenic signaling by the epidermal growth
factor receptor.

O'Bryan JP(1), Lambert QT, Der CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, CB 7365, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA. obryan@niehs.nih.gov

Upon ligand activation, the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) becomes
tyrosine-phosphorylated, thereby recruiting intracellular signaling proteins such
as Shc. EGFR binding of Shc proteins results in their tyrosine phosphorylation
and subsequent activation of the Ras and Erk pathways. Shc interaction with
activated receptor tyrosine kinases is mediated by two distinct phosphotyrosine
interaction domains, an NH2-terminal phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domain and a
COOH-terminal Src homology 2 (SH2) domain. The relative importance of these two
domains for EGFR binding was examined by determining if expression of the
isolated SH2 or PTB domain of ShcC would inhibit EGFR signaling. The SH2 domain
potently inhibited numerous aspects of EGFR signaling including activation of
Erk2 and the Elk-1 transcription factor as well as EGFR-dependent transformation.
Furthermore, the SH2 domain inhibited focus formation by the Neu oncoprotein,
another EGFR family member. Surprisingly, inhibition of the EGFR by the SH2
domain did not involve stable association with the receptor. In contrast, the PTB
domain associated quite well with the receptor yet had little effect on EGFR
signaling. Although the EGFR cytoplasmic tail contains consensus binding sites
for the PTB and SH2 domains of ShcC, and both domains of ShcC interact with the
receptor in vitro, the SH2 domain is more potent for inhibiting receptor function
in vivo. However, inhibition is not due to stable association with the receptor, 
suggesting that the SH2 domain is binding to a heretofore unknown protein(s)
necessary for proper EGFR function.

PMID: 9685397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Aug;18(8):4689-97.

CDC42 and FGD1 cause distinct signaling and transforming activities.

Whitehead IP(1), Abe K, Gorski JL, Der CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
27599-7295, USA.

Activated forms of different Rho family members (CDC42, Rac1, RhoA, RhoB, and
RhoG) have been shown to transform NIH 3T3 cells as well as contribute to Ras
transformation. Rho family guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) (also known
as Dbl family proteins) that activate CDC42, Rac1, and RhoA also demonstrate
oncogenic potential. The faciogenital dysplasia gene product, FGD1, is a Dbl
family member that has recently been shown to function as a CDC42-specific GEF.
Mutations within the FGD1 locus cosegregate with faciogenital dysplasia, a
multisystemic disorder resulting in extensive growth impairments throughout the
skeletal and urogenital systems. Here we demonstrate that FGD1 expression is
sufficient to cause tumorigenic transformation of NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. Although
both FGD1 and constitutively activated CDC42 cooperated with Raf and showed
synergistic focus-forming activity, both quantitative and qualitative differences
in their functions were seen. FGD1 and CDC42 also activated common nuclear
signaling pathways. However, whereas both showed comparable activation of c-Jun, 
CDC42 showed stronger activation of serum response factor and FGD1 was
consistently a better activator of Elk-1. Although coexpression of FGD1 with
specific inhibitors of CDC42 function demonstrated the dependence of FGD1
signaling activity on CDC42 function, FGD1 signaling activities were not always
consistent with the direct or exclusive stimulation of CDC42 function. In
summary, FGD1 and CDC42 signaling and transformation are distinct, thus
suggesting that FGD1 may be mediating some of its biological activities through
non-CDC42 targets.

PMCID: PMC109055
PMID: 9671479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Oncogene. 1998 Jun 4;16(22):2915-26.

Stress-induced immediate-early gene, egr-1, involves activation of p38/JNK1.

Lim CP(1), Jain N, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology,
National University of Singapore, Singapore.

The Ras/Raf/MAP kinase (ERK) pathway is a major signaling pathway induced by
growth factors in mammalian cells. Two other types of mammalian MAP kinases, JNK 
(SAPK) and p38 (RK, CSBP), are induced by environmental stress. Although the
immediate-early gene, egr-1, is induced by growth factors, cytokines,
differentiation signals and DNA damaging agents, less is known about its
induction by environmental stress and the mechanism involved. Here we report that
in NIH3T3 cells, egr-1 is induced by various stress treatments such as heat
shock, sodium arsenite, ultraviolet (U.V.) radiation, and anisomycin. p38 and
JNK1, but not ERK2, were activated by these stress treatments. Induction of egr-1
by anisomycin is inhibited by a specific inhibitor of p38, SB 203580. We also
show that p38 and JNK1 activated by their upstream kinases induce egr-1 promoter 
activity through activation of the ternary complex factor, Elk-1. The stress
treatments also lead to an increase in Egr-1 protein phosphorylation and its DNA 
binding activity. Together, our data suggest that induction of egr-1 gene by
growth factors and stress are mediated through different subgroups of MAP kinases
which may also differentially affect egr-1 function on its target genes.

PMID: 9671412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Jul;12(7):1002-9.

Serotonergic repression of mitogen-activated protein kinase control of the
calcitonin gene-related peptide enhancer.

Durham PL(1), Russo AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242, 
USA.

We have investigated the mechanisms underlying regulation of the calcitonin
gene-related peptide (CGRP) cell-specific enhancer. Recently, we reported that
this enhancer is inhibited by serotonin type-1 (5-HT1) agonists, similar to
currently used antimigraine drugs. We have now tested whether this repression
involves a mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway. We first demonstrate
that the CGRP enhancer is strongly (10-fold) activated by a constitutively active
MAP kinase kinase (MEK1), yielding reporter activities 100-fold above the
enhancerless control. The involvement of a MAP kinase pathway was confirmed by
down-regulation of reporter activity upon cotransfection of a dominant negative
Ras. Activation of the enhancer by MEK1 was blocked in a dose-dependent manner by
the 5-HT1 receptor agonist CGS 12066A (CGS). Since it is not known whether the
CGRP enhancer factors are immediate targets of MAP kinases, we then used EIk-1-
and c-Jun-dependent reporter genes that are directly activated by the ERK
(extracellular signal-regulated kinases) and JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) MAP
kinases. CGS treatment repressed the activation of both of these reporters,
suggesting that at least two MAP kinases are the immediate targets of
CGS-mediated repression. We further demonstrate that 5-HT1 agonists inactivate
ERK by dephosphorylation, even in the presence of constitutively activated MEK1. 
This inactivation appears to be due to a marked increase in the level of MAP
kinase phosphatase-1. These results have defined a novel and general mechanism by
which 5-HT1 receptor agonists can repress MAP kinase activation of target genes, 
such as CGRP.

PMID: 9658404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Clin Invest. 1998 Jun 1;101(11):2540-9.

Fluid shear stress activation of egr-1 transcription in cultured human
endothelial and epithelial cells is mediated via the extracellular signal-related
kinase 1/2 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.

Schwachtgen JL(1), Houston P, Campbell C, Sukhatme V, Braddock M.

Author information: 
(1)Endothelial Cell Gene Expression Group, Vascular Diseases Unit, Glaxo-Wellcome
Medicines Research Centre, Stevenage, Herts SG1 2NY England.

The primary response transcription factor, early growth response-1 (Egr-1), is
rapidly activated by a variety of extracellular stimuli. Egr-1 binds to a
sequence found in the promoters of genes involved in vascular injury, such as
PDGF-A and tissue factor, and trans-activates their expression in endothelial
cells in response to fluid shear stress. Here we show that egr-1 mRNA is
increased after 30 min of flow in human aortic endothelial cell and HeLa cell
cultures. Transient transfection of HeLa cells with reporter gene constructs
driven by the murine or human egr-1 5' flanking sequence revealed a five- and
ninefold induction, respectively, in transcriptional activity after exposure to a
shear stress of 5 dynes/cm2 for 3 h. Deletion of sequences in the murine promoter
containing two AP1 sites and an inhibitory Egr-1 binding sequence, did not reduce
shear stress inducibility. However, progressive deletion of five serum response
elements, reduced both the basal promoter activity and its capacity to be
activated by shear stress. Further examination indicated that the three upstream 
serum response elements are predominantly responsible for shear stress activation
of the egr-1 promoter. Treatment of cells with PD98059, a specific inhibitor of
mitogen-activated protein kinase-1 inhibited shear stress activation of egr-1. We
suggest that egr-1 activation by shear stress involves activation of Elk-1 but
not c-jun activity. These data, which are consistent with previous findings for
shear mediated signaling via the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade, now
implicate shear modulation of the Egr-1 transcription factor in this pathway.

PMCID: PMC508843
PMID: 9616225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Am J Physiol. 1998 Jun;274(6 Pt 1):C1521-9.

MEK inhibition augments Raf activity, but has variable effects on mitogenesis, in
vascular smooth muscle cells.

Weiss RH(1), Maga EA, Ramirez A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
California, Davis 95616, USA.

Proteins comprising the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signaling cascade 
are activated by a variety of growth factors, but the precise role of this series
of kinase reactions, especially Raf kinase and MAP kinase kinase (MEK), in
vascular smooth muscle (VSM) cell mitogenesis is not known. In this study, a
specific and selective inhibitor of MEK, PD-98059, was used to examine the role
of MEK in DNA synthesis and Raf-1 activity in VSM cells stimulated with serum as 
well as with growth factors encompassing both tyrosine kinase and G
protein-coupled receptor classes. Although significant increases in DNA synthesis
are seen after stimulation of VSM cells with either 10% serum,platelet-derived
growth factor (PDGF)-BB, or alpha-thrombin, preincubation of the cells with 50
microM PD-98059 for 1 h inhibits stimulation by PDGF and thrombin, but not by
serum. There is a dose-dependent inhibition of the mitogenic effect by PD-98059
in all cases; these results are not affected when PD-98059 is added at times
ranging from 4 h before to 2 h after growth factor addition (times at which
PD-98059 exerts its inhibitory effect). In the presence of PD-98059, stimulated
MAP kinase activity is attenuated when growth factors are added between 10 min
and 4 h, times which correspond to both early and sustained phases of MAP kinase 
activity. In addition, Raf-1 activity is markedly increased by incubation of the 
cells with PD-98059,despite attenuation of hyperphosphorylation of this kinase.
Thus growth factors coupled to both tyrosine kinase and G protein receptors
require components of the MAP kinase cascade (MEK and/or MAP kinase) for VSM cell
mitogenesis, whereas serum is capable of stimulatory effects in the absence of
active MEK and MAP kinase. Furthermore, there exists a functional feedback
stimulatory effect of inhibited MEK on its upstream activator Raf-1 in the case
of serum as well as growth factors coupled to tyrosine kinase and G protein
receptors.

PMID: 9696694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1998 Mar;30(3):551-62.

Transforming growth factor-beta1 and protein kinase C synergistically activate
the c-fos serum response element in myocardial cells.

Ueyama T(1), Kawashima S, Sakoda T, Hirata KI, Ohashi Y, Yamochi W, Akita H,
Yokoyama M.

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Internal Medicine, Kobe University School of Medicine,
7-5-1, Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, 650-0017, Japan.

We previously reported that transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1)
potentiated alpha1-adrenergic and stretch-induced c-fos mRNA expression and
norepinephrine (NE)-induced amino acid incorporation in rat cultured myocardial
cells (MCs). In the present study, we attempted to explore the mode of TGF-beta1 
action for c-fos gene expression in MCs. In the transient transfection assay,
TGF-beta1 potentiated NE- or 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-activated
c-fos promoter/enhancer, but not forskolin-activated c-fos promoter/enhancer. The
c-fos serum response element (SRE) and the TPA response element (TRE) were
responsible for TGF-beta1-induced potentiation of the NE or TPA action. Although 
TGF-beta1 activated not only the wild-type c-fos SRE, but also the mutated c-fos 
SRE, which contains an intact binding site for the serum response factor (SRF)
but lacks the ternary complex factor (TCF) binding site, TPA activated the
wild-type c-fos SRE but not the mutated c-fos SRE. TGF-beta1 did not potentiate
the effects of TPA on the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
and the phosphorylation of Elk-1 and SAP-1a, which belong to TCF at the c-fos
SRE. These results indicate that TGF-betaf potentiates the c-fos SRE activated by
PKC through the SRF binding site. TGF-beta1 is involved in the regulation of
c-fos gene expression through the c-fos SRE and is subsequently involved in the
regulation of the gene which has the TRE in the promoter/enhancer region.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press Limited

PMID: 9515031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. EMBO J. 1998 Mar 16;17(6):1740-9.

Differential targeting of MAP kinases to the ETS-domain transcription factor
Elk-1.

Yang SH(1), Whitmarsh AJ, Davis RJ, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, The Medical School, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.

The activation of MAP kinase (MAPK) signal transduction pathways results in the
phosphorylation of transcription factors by the terminal kinases in these
cascades. Different pathways are activated by mitogenic and stress stimuli, which
lead to the activation of distinct groups of target proteins. The ETS-domain
transcription factor Elk-1 is a substrate for three distinct classes of MAPKs.
Elk-1 contains a targeting domain, the D-domain, which is distinct from the
phosphoacceptor motifs and is required for efficient phosphorylation and
activation by the ERK MAPKs. In this study, we demonstrate that members of the
JNK subfamily of MAPKs are also targeted to Elk-1 by this domain. Targeting via
this domain is essential for the efficient and rapid phosphorylation and
activation of Elk-1 both in vitro and in vivo. The ERK and JNK MAPKs use
overlapping yet distinct determinants in the D-domain for targeting to Elk-1. In 
contrast, members of the p38 subfamily of MAPKs are not targeted to Elk-1 via
this domain. Our data therefore demonstrate that different classes of MAPKs
exhibit differential requirements for targeting to Elk-1.

PMCID: PMC1170521
PMID: 9501095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. EMBO J. 1998 Mar 16;17(6):1717-27.

The kinase suppressor of Ras (KSR) modulates growth factor and Ras signaling by
uncoupling Elk-1 phosphorylation from MAP kinase activation.

Sugimoto T(1), Stewart S, Han M, Guan KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-0606, USA.

The Ras GTPase plays an essential role in many cellular signal transduction
events. Activation of the mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinase is a primary
consequence of Ras activation and plays a key role in mediating Ras signal
transduction. A novel kinase, KSR, has recently been functionally isolated as a
positive regulator of Ras signaling in Caenorhabditis elegans vulval induction
and Drosophila photoreceptor differentiation. We have examined the effect of KSR 
on growth factor and Ras-induced MAP kinase signaling in mammalian cells.
Surprisingly, we observed that KSR specifically blocks EGF and Ras-induced
phosphorylation and activation of ternary complex factors (TCF), physiological
substrates of MAP kinases, without affecting the activation of MAP kinase itself.
A kinase-deficient mutant of KSR, KSR-RM, appears to function as a dominant
interfering mutant which elevates phosphorylation of Elk-1, a member of the TCF
family, and Elk-1-dependent transcription. The effect of KSR on Elk-1 was
significantly decreased by inhibition of calcineurin, a putative Elk-1
phosphatase. These observations demonstrate that KSR is capable of uncoupling the
MAP kinase activation from its target phosphorylation, and thus provide a novel
mechanism for modulating the Ras-MAP kinase signaling pathway. This study
provides the first evidence that signal output of MAP kinase cascades is subject 
to regulation at a level independent of MAP kinase activity.

PMCID: PMC1170519
PMID: 9501093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Nature. 1998 Apr 9;392(6676):622-6.

Rap1 mediates sustained MAP kinase activation induced by nerve growth factor.

York RD(1), Yao H, Dillon T, Ellig CL, Eckert SP, McCleskey EW, Stork PJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Vollum Institute for Advanced Biomedical Research, Oregon Health Sciences 
University, Portland 97201, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1998 Apr 9;392(6676):553-4.

Activation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase (also known as
extracellular-signal-regulated kinase, or ERK) by growth factors can trigger
either cell growth or differentiation. The intracellular signals that couple
growth factors to MAP kinase may determine the different effects of growth
factors: for example, transient activation of MAP kinase by epidermal growth
factor stimulates proliferation of PC12 cells, whereas they differentiate in
response to nerve growth factor, which acts partly by inducing a sustained
activation of MAP kinase. Here we show that activation of MAP kinase by nerve
growth factor involves two distinct pathways: the initial activation of MAP
kinase requires the small G protein Ras, but its activation is sustained by the
small G protein Rap1. Rap1 is activated by CRK adaptor proteins and the
guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor C3G, and forms a stable complex with B-Raf, an
activator of MAP kinase. Rap1 is required for at least two indices of neuronal
differentiation by nerve growth factor: electrical excitability and the induction
of neuron-specific genes. We propose that the activation of Rap1 by C3G
represents a common mechanism to induce sustained activation of the MAP kinase
cascade in cells that express B-Raf.

PMID: 9560161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Immunol. 1997 Dec 1;159(11):5502-8.

Differential induction of DNA-binding activities following CD19 cross-linking in 
human B lineage cells.

Weng WK(1), Shah N, O'Brien D, Van Ness B, LeBien TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine/Pathology, University of Minnesota Medical
School, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

The B cell-specific cell surface molecule CD19 is expressed at all stages of B
cell development, including normal plasma cells, and mediates signal transduction
via interaction with cytoplasmic effector proteins. Cross-linking CD19 on early
human B lineage cells induces the formation of a CD19/Vav/phosphatidylinositol-3 
kinase complex, tyrosine phosphorylation of CD19 and Vav, and activation of the
Ras pathway. To further explore the ramifications of CD19 signaling, the current 
study examined whether phosphorylation of Elk-1, activation of activator
protein-1 (AP-1), or activation of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB)
transcription factors occurred following CD19 cross-linking. The cells used were 
the BLIN-1 pre-B cell line expressing low levels of cell surface mu heavy chain
associated with surrogate light chain and the 1E8 immature B cell line expressing
cell surface mu/kappa. Lysates from CD19 cross-linked 1E8 cells induced robust
phosphorylation of an Elk-1 fusion protein in vitro, whereas no phosphorylation
of Elk-1 fusion protein occurred using lysates from CD19 cross-linked BLIN-1
cells. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay employing AP-1 and NF-kappaB
consensus oligonucleotides was used to demonstrate that AP-1 -binding activity
increased, while constitutive NF-kappaB-binding activity was not enhanced,
following 2 h of CD19 cross-linking in 1E8 cells. Supershift experiments revealed
that JunD and c-Fos proteins mediated anti-CD19 induced AP-1-binding activity in 
1E8 cells. In contrast, CD19 cross-linking in BLIN-1 cells resulted in the
induction of NF-kappaB, but had no apparent effect on AP-1-binding activity.
These data suggest that CD19-mediated signal transduction activates different
transcription factors at juxtaposed stages of B cell development that may
culminate in the activation or suppression of distinct sets of genes.

PMID: 9548490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Apr;18(4):2272-81.

Raf and fibroblast growth factor phosphorylate Elk1 and activate the serum
response element of the immediate early gene pip92 by mitogen-activated protein
kinase-independent as well as -dependent signaling pathways.

Chung KC(1), Gomes I, Wang D, Lau LF, Rosner MR.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Institute for Cancer Research and Department of Pharmacological and
Physiological Sciences, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Previous studies have shown that a mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinase
(MEK)-independent signaling pathway is required by activated Raf or
fibroblast-derived growth factor (FGF) for the differentiation of rat hippocampal
neuronal H19-7 cells. We now demonstrate that both Raf and FGF similarly induce
prolonged transcription and translation of the immediate early gene pip92 in the 
absence of activation of the MAP kinases (MAPKs) ERK1 and ERK2. To determine the 
mechanism by which this occurs and to identify novel Raf-activated signaling
pathways, we investigated the induction of the pip92 promoter by both FGF and an 
estradiol-activated Raf-1-estrogen receptor fusion protein (deltaRaf-1:ER) in
H19-7 cells. Deletion analysis of the pip92 promoter indicated that activation by
the MAPK-independent pathway occurs primarily within the region containing a
serum response element (SRE). Further analysis of the SRE by using a heterologous
thymidine kinase promoter showed that both an Ets and CArG-like site are
required. Elk1, which binds to the Ets site, was phosphorylated both in vitro and
in vivo by the MAPK-independent pathway, and phosphorylation of an Elk1-GAL4
fusion protein by this pathway was sufficient for transactivation. Finally, at
least two Elk1 kinases were fractionated by gel filtration, and analysis by an
in-gel kinase assay revealed at least three novel Raf-activated Elk1 kinases.
These results indicate that both FGF and Raf activate MAPK-independent kinases
that can stimulate Elk1 phosphorylation and immediate early gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC121477
PMID: 9528798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Kidney Int. 1998 Mar;53(3):690-7.

Three-dimensional matrix primes mesangial cells to down-regulation of
alpha-smooth muscle actin via deactivation of CArG box elements.

Kitamura M(1), Ishikawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University College London Medical School, England,
United Kingdom. m.kitamura@medicine.ucl.ac.uk

Prolonged culture of mesangial cells forms multifocal nodular structures, termed 
"hillocks," composed of cells and extracellular matrix (ECM), which may mimic the
situation in the glomerular mesangium. Mesangial cells incorporated in hillocks
show repressed expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin, a marker of mesangial
cell activation/dedifferentiation. The aim of this study is to elucidate
molecular mechanisms involved in this phenomenon, focusing on the activity of
CArG box elements located in 5'-flanking region of the alpha-smooth muscle actin 
gene. Reporter mesangial cells were created to monitor the activity of CArG
elements. These clones expressed beta-galactosidase gene (lacZ) under the control
of CArG boxes. Within the hillocks, reporter cells showed repressed expression of
lacZ as well as alpha-smooth muscle actin compared to the cells in
two-dimensional cultures. Consistent with this result, the reporter cells
embedded in collagen gel exhibited down-regulation of lacZ and alpha-smooth
muscle actin transcripts. Deactivation of CArG box elements by transfection with 
either a dominant negative mutant of serum response factor or a dominant negative
form of ternary complex factor Elk-1 led to depressed expression of alpha-smooth 
muscle actin gene. These data suggested that three-dimensional ECM primes
mesangial cells to down-regulation of alpha-smooth muscle actin via deactivation 
of CArG box elements.

PMID: 9507215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 1998 Jan;53(1):B3-10.

SRF binding to SRE in the rat heart: influence of age.

Lu XG(1), Azhar G, Liu L, Tsou H, Wei JY.

Author information: 
(1)Gerontology Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, New York, New
York, USA.

One important promoter element at the 5' end of the c-fos gene is the serum
response element (SRE). SRE is the site of attachment of the 67-kDa protein serum
response factor (SRF) and several accessory proteins (Elk1, SAP1, SAP2/NET),
termed the ternary complex factors. The binding of SRF to SRE plays an integral
role in c-fos transcription and may occur independently of the association of the
ternary complex factors. In the current study, we found that SRF protein
expression was increased in the hearts of the old vs young adult rats in the
basal condition. The hearts of old rats may have posttranslationally modified SRF
proteins that are different compared to that of the young adults. The SRF
increase was present both in the cytoplasm as well as in the nucleus in the old
hearts. To test whether SRF protein levels in response to acute stress might be
altered with age, we studied hearts of young adult and old rats during myocardial
infarction. The young adult rat hearts responded to acute ischemic stress with an
increase in both p62 and p67 SRF. The hearts of the old rats, however, did not
exhibit a significant change in SRF protein expression. These findings
demonstrate qualitative as well as quantitative age differences in SRF protein
levels, both at baseline and following stimulation. The reduced SRF expression in
response to acute cardiac ischemic stress in the old rats might contribute to the
observed age-related decrease in the induction of immediate early genes such as
c-fos in the heart.

PMID: 9467416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Genes Dev. 1997 Dec 15;11(24):3351-64.

Nuclear hormone receptor antagonism with AP-1 by inhibition of the JNK pathway.

Caelles C(1), Gonz·lez-Sancho JM, MuÒoz A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones BiomÈdicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
CientÌficas, E-28029 Madrid, Spain.

The activity of c-Jun, the major component of the transcription factor AP-1, is
potentiated by amino-terminal phosphorylation on serines 63 and 73 (Ser-63/73).
This phosphorylation is mediated by the Jun amino-terminal kinase (JNK) and
required to recruit the transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP).
AP-1 function is antagonized by activated members of the steroid/thyroid hormone 
receptor superfamily. Recently, a competition for CBP has been proposed as a
mechanism for this antagonism. Here we present evidence that hormone-activated
nuclear receptors prevent c-Jun phosphorylation on Ser-63/73 and, consequently,
AP-1 activation, by blocking the induction of the JNK signaling cascade.
Consistently, nuclear receptors also antagonize other JNK-activated transcription
factors such as Elk-1 and ATF-2. Interference with the JNK signaling pathway
represents a novel mechanism by which nuclear hormone receptors antagonize AP-1. 
This mechanism is based on the blockade of the AP-1 activation step, which is a
requisite to interact with CBP. In addition to acting directly on gene
transcription, regulation of the JNK cascade activity constitutes an alternative 
mode whereby steroids and retinoids may control cell fate and conduct their
pharmacological actions as immunosupressive, anti-inflammatory, and
antineoplastic agents.

PMCID: PMC316827
PMID: 9407028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Neurosci. 1998 Jan 1;18(1):214-26.

In vivo expression and regulation of Elk-1, a target of the
extracellular-regulated kinase signaling pathway, in the adult rat brain.

Sgambato V(1), Vanhoutte P, PagËs C, Rogard M, Hipskind R, Besson MJ, Caboche J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurochimie-Anatomie, Institut des Neurosciences-UnitÈ de
Recherche AssociÈe 1488, UniversitÈ Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, France.

The transcription factor Elk-1, a nuclear target of extracellular-regulated
kinases (ERKs), plays a pivotal role in immediate early gene induction by
external stimuli. Notably, the degree of phosphorylation of Elk-1 is tightly
correlated with the level of activation of transcription of c-fos by
proliferative signals. No data yet indicate the role of Elk-1 in the adult brain 
in vivo. To address this question, we have analyzed in the present work (1) Elk-1
mRNA and protein expression in the adult rat brain, and (2) the regulation of
Elk-1 (i.e., its phosphorylation state) in an in vivo model of immediate early
gene (IEG) induction: an electrical stimulation of the cerebral cortex leading to
c-fos and zif268 mRNA induction in the striatum. Using in situ hybridization, we 
show that Elk-1 mRNA is expressed in various brain structures of adult rat, and
that this expression is exclusively neuronal. We demonstrate by
immunocytochemistry using various specific Elk-1 antisera that the protein is not
only nuclear (as shown previously in transiently transfected cell lines) but is
also present in soma, dendrites, and axon terminals. On electrical stimulation of
the glutamatergic corticostriatal pathway, we show a strict spatiotemporal
correspondence among ERK activation, Elk-1 phosphorylation, and IEG mRNA
induction. Furthermore, both activated proteins, analyzed by immunocytochemistry,
are found in cytosolic and nuclear comparments of neuronal cells in the activated
area. Our data suggest that the ERK signaling pathway plays an important role in 
regulating genes controlled by serum response element sites via phosphorylation
of Elk-1 in vivo.

PMID: 9412502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 19;272(51):32163-8.

c-Jun NH2-terminal kinases target the ubiquitination of their associated
transcription factors.

Fuchs SY(1), Xie B, Adler V, Fried VA, Davis RJ, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

Regulatory proteins are often ubiquitinated, depending on their phosphorylation
status as well as on their association with ancillary proteins that serve as
adapters of the ubiquitination machinery. We previously demonstrated that c-Jun
is targeted for ubiquitination by its association with inactive c-Jun
NH2-terminal kinase (JNK). Phosphorylation by activated JNK protects c-Jun from
ubiquitination, thus by prolonging its half-life. In the study reported here, we 
determined the ability of JNK to target ubiquitination of its other substrates
(Elk1 and activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2)) and associated proteins (ATF2
and JunB). We demonstrate that phosphorylation by JNK protects ATF2, but not
Elk1, from JNK-targeted ubiquitination. We also show that association of inactive
JNK with JunB or ATF2 is necessary to target them for ubiquitination. Unlike its 
targeting of c-Jun, JNK requires additional cellular components, yet to be
identified, to target the ubiquitination of ATF2. Elk1 is phosphorylated by JNK, 
but JNK neither associates with nor targets Elk1 for ubiquitination. The
implications for the dual role of JNK in the regulation of ubiquitination and
stability of c-Jun, ATF2, and JunB in normally growing versus stressed cells are 
discussed.

PMID: 9405416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. FEBS Lett. 1997 Nov 17;417(3):283-6.

Inhibition of MAP kinase blocks insulin-mediated DNA synthesis and
transcriptional activation of c-fos by Elk-1 in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Xi XP(1), Graf K, Goetze S, Hsueh WA, Law RE.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Los Angeles, School of Medicine 90024, USA.

Insulin-stimulated DNA synthesis, MAP kinase (MAPK) activity and c-fos expression
in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) was blocked by the MAPK inhibitor PD
98059. Regulation of c-fos expression by the transcription factor Elk-1 at the
serum response element (SRE) is dependent on its phosphorylation by MAPK. PD
98059 also suppressed insulin-induced Elk-1 transcriptional activity through the 
SRE. These data show that MAPK plays a critical role in both insulin-mediated
growth and Elk-1-dependent induction of c-fos in VSMCs.

PMID: 9409734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Biol Chem. 1997 Nov 21;272(47):29415-8.

The calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein phosphatase calcineurin is the major
Elk-1 phosphatase.

Sugimoto T(1), Stewart S, Guan KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109, USA.

The transcription factor Elk-1 is a component of ternary complex factor and
regulates gene expression in response to a wide variety of extracellular stimuli.
Phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain of Elk-1, especially at serine 383, is
important for its transactivation activity. Recently mitogen-activated protein
kinases, such as extracellular signal-regulated kinase, stress-activated protein 
kinase, and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase have been demonstrated to be
Elk-1 kinases. However, negative regulators of Elk-1, such as protein
phosphatases, still remain to be identified. Here we report that COS cell lysates
were able to dephosphorylate an extracellular signal-regulated
kinase-phosphorylated glutathione S-transferase-Elkc fusion protein, including
serine 383. The phosphatase activity was inhibited by cyclosporin A (a
calcineurin inhibitor) but not by okadaic acid (a PP1 and PP2A inhibitor).
Purified calcineurin also could efficiently dephosphorylate glutathione
S-transferase-Elkc in vitro. Pretreatment of COS cells with cyclosporin A
significantly enhanced epidermal growth factor-induced serine 383 Elk-1
phosphorylation whereas ionomycin inhibited the Elk-1 phosphorylation. These data
provide both in vitro and in vivo evidence that calcineurin is the major Elk-1
phosphatase and plays a critical role in Elk-1 regulation. The identification of 
calcineurin as the major Elk-1 phosphatase may provide a mechanism for Elk-1
regulation by Ca2+ signals as well as a possible biochemical basis for the
neurotoxicity and nephrotoxicity of the immunosuppressant drug cyclosporin A.

PMID: 9367995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Exp Nephrol. 1997 Sep-Oct;5(5):435-8.

Functional inactivation of signalling molecules via transdominant negative
mutants.

Kitamura M(1), Ishikawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University College London Medical School, UK.
m.kitamura@medicine.ucl.ac.uk

PMID: 9386981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Am J Physiol. 1997 Oct;273(4 Pt 1):G891-8.

Molecular mechanisms for the growth factor action of gastrin.

Todisco A(1), Takeuchi Y, Urumov A, Yamada J, Stepan VM, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor 48109, USA.

We have previously observed that gastrin has a cholecystokinin B (CCK-B)
receptor-mediated growth-promoting effect on the AR42J rat pancreatic acinar cell
line and that this effect is paralleled by induction of expression of the early
response gene c-fos. We undertook these experiments to elucidate the mechanism
for induction of c-fos and the linkage of this action to the trophic effects of
gastrin. Gastrin (0.1-10 nM) dose dependently induced luciferase activity in
AR42J cells transfected with a construct consisting of a luciferase reporter gene
coupled to the serum response element (SRE) of the c-fos promoter. This effect
was blocked by the specific CCK-B receptor antagonist D2 but not by the specific 
CCK-A receptor antagonist L-364,718 or by pertussis toxin, indicating that
gastrin targets the SRE via specific CCK-B receptors through a mechanism
independent of Gi. Inhibition of protein kinase C (PKC) either by prolonged (24
h) exposure of the cells to the phorbol ester 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol
13-acetate (100 nM) or by incubation with the selective inhibitor GF-109203X (3.5
microM) resulted in an 80% reduction in luciferase activity. Similar results were
observed in the presence of the specific extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) kinase (MEK) inhibitor PD-98059 (50 microM). We measured ERK2 activity in
AR42J cells via in-gel kinase assays and observed that gastrin (1 pM-100 nM)
induced ERK2 enzyme activity in a dose-dependent manner. Addition of GF-109203X
and PD-98059, either alone or in combination, produced, respectively, partial and
total inhibition of gastrin-induced ERK2 activity. Gastrin induction of ERK2
activity also resulted in a threefold increase in the transcriptional activity of
Elk-1, a factor known to bind to the c-fos SRE and to be phosphorylated and
activated by ERK2. PD-98059 blocked the growth-promoting effect of gastrin on the
AR42J cells, demonstrating that this effect depends on activation of MEK. Our
data lead us to conclude that the trophic actions of gastrin are mediated by
ERK2-induced c-fos gene expression via PKC-dependent and -independent pathways.

PMID: 9357832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 10;272(41):25951-8.

Growth hormone regulates ternary complex factors and serum response factor
associated with the c-fos serum response element.

Liao J(1), Hodge C, Meyer D, Ho PS, Rosenspire K, Schwartz J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109-0622, USA.

For insight into the mechanisms of gene regulation by growth hormone (GH), the
regulation of transcription factors associated with the serum response element
(SRE) located upstream of c-fos was examined. The SRE can mediate induction of
reporter expression in response to GH. For insight into the mechanism by which GH
regulates transcription factors, regulation of SRE-associated proteins by GH was 
examined. In nuclear extracts from 3T3-F442A fibroblasts, several SRE-binding
complexes were identified by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. GH treatment
for 2-10 min transiently increased binding of two complexes; binding returned to 
control values within 30 min. The two GH-stimulated complexes were supershifted
by antibodies against the serum response factor (SRF), indicating that they
contained SRF or an antigenically related protein. One of the GH-stimulated
complexes was supershifted by antibody against Elk-1, suggesting that it contains
a ternary complex factor (TCF) such as Elk-1 in addition to SRF. Induction of
binding by GH was lost when the SRF binding site in the SRE was mutated, and
mutation of either the SRF or TCF binding site altered the pattern of protein
binding to the SRE. Mutation of the SRF or TCF binding site in SRE-luciferase
plasmids inhibited the ability of GH to stimulate reporter expression, supporting
a role for both SRF and TCF in GH-induced transcription of c-fos via the SRE. The
TCF family member Elk-1 is capable of mediating GH-stimulated transcription,
since GH-stimulated reporter expression was mediated by the transcriptional
activation domain of Elk-1. Consistent with this stimulation, GH rapidly and
transiently stimulated the serine phosphorylation of Elk-1. The increase was
evident within 10 min and subsided after 30 min. Taken together, these data
indicate that SRF and TCF contribute to GH-promoted transcription of c-fos via
the SRE and are consistent with GH-promoted phosphorylation of Elk-1 contributing
to GH-promoted transcriptional activation via the SRE.

PMID: 9325329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Front Biosci. 1997 Oct 15;2:d501-18.

Role of c-Src tyrosine kinase in EGF-induced mitogenesis.

Belsches AP(1), Haskell MD, Parsons SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department Of Microbiology and Cancer Center,Box 441, Health Sciences
Center,University of Virginia,Charlottesville,VA 22908, USA.

c-Src, the prototype of the cytoplasmic, membrane-associated,non-receptor
tyrosine kinases, is a co-transducer of mitogenic signals emanating from a number
of tyrosine kinase polypeptide growth factor receptors. Examples of such
receptors include those that bind the platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF),
colony stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1), and epidermal growth factor (EGF).
Investigations into the mechanisms by which c-Src contributes to receptor
signaling suggest that interactions between the two proteins are bidirectional,
i.e., that c-Src can bind, phosphorylate, and activate the receptor, and vice
versa. The consequences of these interactions appear to be enhanced
phosphorylation of specific substrates. Delineating which cellular proteins are
substrates of which tyrosine kinase and determining the consequences of tyrosine 
phosphorylation on the function of specific substrates are the goals of current
investigations. Utilizing the murine C3H10T fibroblast model, in which a panel of
wild type and mutant c-Src/EGF receptor overexpressors has been studied for
temporal and spatial second messenger responses to EGF, distinctions between
substrates of c-Src and the EGF receptor and the effects of tyrosine
phosphorylation on substrate function are beginning to emerge. In the 10T model, 
preferred substrates of c-Src are almost exclusively comprised of those molecules
that associate with the actin cytoskeleton or with focal adhesions, such as
cortactin, p190RhoGAP, and p130CAS, while preferred substrates of the EGF
receptor include the receptor itself, SHC, phospholipase C-gamma and p62DOK.
While the major mitogenic signaling pathway is thought to proceed directly from
the receptor (through SHC/GRB2/SOS/Ras/Raf/MEK/MAPkinase/Elk1), more evidence is 
accumulating to suggest that proteins involved in regulating the actin
cytoskeleton (such as c-Src substrates) also participate in mitogenesis, either
as unique transducers of growth signals and/or as monitors of anti-apoptotic
conditions (substratum attachment). How c-Src may contribute to the EGF mitogenic
response through tyrosine phosphorylation of or association with its specific
substrates is discussed. Cellular Src (c-Src), prototype for a family of
intracellular membrane-associated tyrosine kinases, is required for mitogenesis
initiated by multiple growth factor receptors, including the receptors for
epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), colony
stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1), and the basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF).
C-Src is also overexpressed and/or activated in many of the same human carcinomas
that overexpress members of the EGF receptor (EGFR) family, suggesting that the
two types of tyrosine kinases can cooperate during the genesis of human tumors.
This review focuses on the role of c-Src in EGF-dependent mitogenesis and
tumorigenesis, i.e., on the interactions between c-Src and the receptor and on
identification of c-Src substrates, their functions, and the effects of tyrosine 
phosphorylations on their functions. A synopsis of other mitogenic and signaling 
systems is also included for comparative purposes.

PMID: 9331427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Oct;17(10):5667-78.

Net-b, a Ras-insensitive factor that forms ternary complexes with serum response 
factor on the serum response element of the fos promoter.

Giovane A(1), Sobieszczuk P, Ayadi A, Maira SM, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de GÈnÈtique et de Biologie MolÈculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS, INSERM, 
ULP, Illkirch, France.

The Ras signalling pathway targets transcription factors such as the ternary
complex factors that are recruited by the serum response factor to form complexes
on the serum response element (SRE) of the fos promoter. We have identified a new
ternary complex factor, Net-b. We report the features of the net gene and show
that it produces several splice variants, net-b and net-c. net-b RNA and protein 
are expressed in a variety of tissues and cell lines. net-c RNA is expressed at
low levels, and the protein was not detected, raising the possibility that it is 
a cryptic splice variant. We have studied the composition of ternary complexes
that form on the SRE of the fos promoter with extracts from fibroblasts (NIH 3T3)
cultured under various conditions and pre-B cells (70Z/3) before and after
differentiation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The fibroblast complexes contain
mainly Net-b followed by Sap1 and Elk1. Net-b complexes, as well as Sap1 and
Elk1, are induced by epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulation of cells cultured 
in low serum. Pre-B-cell complexes contain mainly Sap1, with less of Net-b and
little of Elk1. There is little change upon LPS-induced differentiation compared 
to the increase with EGF in fibroblasts. We have also found that Net-b is a
nuclear protein that constitutively represses transcription. Net-b is not
activated by Ras signalling, in contrast to Net, Sap1a, and Elk1. We have
previously reported that down-regulation of Net proteins with antisense RNA
increases SRE activity. The increase in SRE activity is observed at low serum
levels and is even greater after serum stimulation, showing that the SRE is under
negative regulation by Net proteins and the level of repression increases during 
induction. Net-b, the predominant factor in ternary complexes in fibroblasts, may
both keep the activity of the SRE low in the absence of strong inducing
conditions and rapidly shut the activity off after stimulation.

PMCID: PMC232415
PMID: 9315625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Biochem J. 1997 Sep 1;326 ( Pt 2):333-7.

Nuclear signalling by rac GTPase: essential role of phospholipase A2.

Kim BC(1), Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Genetics, Institute of Environment and
Life Science, Hallym University, Kangwon-do, South Korea.

Rac, one member of Rho family GTPases, stimulates c-fos serum response element
(SRE)-luciferase reporter gene in Rat-2 fibroblast cells. By transient
transfection analysis, we demonstrated that the activation of phospholipase A2
(PLA2) and the subsequent production of arachidonic acid (AA) are essential for
Rac-induced c-fos SRE activation, implying a critical role for PLA2 in the
Rac-signalling pathway to the nucleus. Either pretreatment with mepacrine, a
specific inhibitor of PLA2, or co-transfection with the expression plasmid of
lipocortin-1, a proposed inhibitory protein of PLA2, selectively abolished
RacV12-induced SRE activation. Further, we demonstrated that subsequent
metabolism of AA, a major product of Rac-activated PLA2, by lipoxygenase (LO) is 
essential for Rac-induced c-fos SRE activation. In agreement with the role of the
PLA2-AA-LO cascade as a potential mediator of Rac signalling to the nucleus, the 
addition of exogenous AA stimulated c-fos SRE-luciferase activity in an
LO-dependent manner. Together, our results demonstrate that 'Rac-activated PLA2
and subsequent AA metabolism by LO' constitute a novel and specific pathway in
Rac GTPase-induced c-fos SRE activation.

PMCID: PMC1218674
PMID: 9291101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Biol Chem. 1997 Sep 12;272(37):23435-9.

Hypoxia induces c-fos transcription via a mitogen-activated protein
kinase-dependent pathway.

M¸ller JM(1), Krauss B, Kaltschmidt C, Baeuerle PA, Rupec RA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Albert-Ludwigs-Universit‰t
Freiburg, Hermann-Herder-Strasse 7, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Hypoxia is a pathophysiological condition that occurs during injury, ischemia,
and stroke. It is characterized by a decrease of reactive oxygen intermediates
and a change of the intracellular redox level. In tumors hypoxia is regarded as a
trigger for enhanced growth and metastasis. Here we report that in HeLa cells,
hypoxic conditions induce the transcriptional activation of c-fos transcription
via the serum response element. Mutations in the binding site for the ternary
complex factor Elk-1 and the serum response factor abolished this induction,
indicating that a ternary complex at the serum response element is necessary for 
the induction of the c-fos gene under hypoxia. The transcription factor Elk-1 was
covalently modified by phosphorylation in response to hypoxia. Furthermore this
hyperphosphorylation of Elk-1, the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK), and the induction of c-fos transcripts were blocked by PD98059, a
specific inhibitor of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase/extracellular
signal-regulated protein kinase kinase 1. An in vitro kinase assay with Elk-1 as 
substrate showed that MAPK is activated under hypoxia. The activation of MAPK
corresponds temporally with the phosphorylation and activation of Elk-1. Thus, a 
decrease of the intracellular reactive oxygen intermediate level by hypoxia
induces c-fos via the MAPK pathway. These results suggest that the intracellular 
redox levels may be directly coupled to tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis
via Elk-1-dependent induction of c-Fos controlled genes.

PMID: 9287359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Neurosci. 1997 Aug 15;17(16):6189-202.

Calcium controls gene expression via three distinct pathways that can function
independently of the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinases (ERKs) signaling
cascade.

Johnson CM(1), Hill CS, Chawla S, Treisman R, Bading H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurobiology, Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular
Biology, Cambridge CB2 2QH, England.

Calcium ions are the principal second messenger in the control of gene expression
by electrical activation of neurons. However, the full complexity of
calcium-signaling pathways leading to transcriptional activation and the cellular
machinery involved are not known. Using the c-fos gene as a model system, we show
here that the activity of its complex promoter is controlled by three
independently operating signaling mechanisms and that their functional
significance is cell type-dependent. The serum response element (SRE), which is
composed of a ternary complex factor (TCF) and a serum response factor (SRF)
binding site, integrates two calcium-signaling pathways. In PC12 cells,
calcium-regulated transcription mediated by the SRE requires the TCF site and is 
not inhibited by expression of the dominant-negative Ras mutant, RasN17, nor by
the MAP kinase kinase 1 inhibitor PD 98059. In contrast, TCF-dependent
transcriptional regulation by nerve growth factor or epidermal growth factor is
mediated by a Ras/MAP kinases (ERKs) pathway targeting the TCF Elk-1. In AtT20
cells and hippocampal neurons, calcium signals can stimulate transcription via a 
TCF-independent mechanism that requires the SRF binding site. The cyclic AMP
response element (CRE), which cooperates with the TCF site in growth
factor-regulated transcription, is a target of a third calcium-regulated pathway 
that is little affected by the expression of RasN17 or by PD 98059. Thus, calcium
can stimulate gene expression via a TCF-, SRF-, and CRE-linked pathway that can
operate independently of the Ras/MAP kinases (ERKs) signaling cascade in a cell
type-dependent manner.

PMID: 9236230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 1;272(31):19509-17.

p38-2, a novel mitogen-activated protein kinase with distinct properties.

Stein B(1), Yang MX, Young DB, Janknecht R, Hunter T, Murray BW, Barbosa MS.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Pharmaceuticals Inc., San Diego, California 92121, USA.
bstein@signalpharm.com

Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases are involved in many cellular processes. 
Here we describe the cloning and characterization of a new MAP kinase, p38-2.
p38-2 belongs to the p38 subfamily of MAP kinases and shares with it the TGY
phosphorylation motif. The complete p38-2 cDNA was isolated by polymerase chain
reaction. It encodes a 364-amino acid protein with 73% identity to p38. Two
shorter isoforms missing the phosphorylation motif were identified. Analysis of
various tissues demonstrated that p38-2 is differently expressed from p38.
Highest expression levels were found in heart and skeletal muscle. Like p38,
p38-2 is activated by stress-inducing signals and proinflammatory cytokines. The 
preferred upstream kinase is MEK6. Although p38-2 and p38 phosphorylate the same 
substrates, the site specificity of phosphorylation can differ as shown by
two-dimensional phosphopeptide analysis of Sap-1a. Additionally, kinetic studies 
showed that p38-2 appears to be about 180 times more active than p38 on certain
substrates such as ATF2. Both kinases are inhibited by a class of pyridinyl
imidazoles. p38-2 phosphorylation of ATF2 and Sap-1a but not Elk1 results in
increased transcriptional activity of these factors. A sequential kinetic
mechanism of p38-2 is suggested by steady state kinetic analysis. In conclusion, 
p38-2 may be an important component of the stress response required for the
homeostasis of a cell.

PMID: 9235954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jul 18;272(29):18261-6.

Specific activation of a c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase isoform and induction of
neurite outgrowth in PC-12 cells by staurosporine.

Yao R(1), Yoshihara M, Osada H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Antibiotics, The Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-01, Japan.

Staurosporine, a protein kinase inhibitor, is known to mimic the effect of nerve 
growth factor (NGF) in promoting neurite outgrowth. To elucidate the mechanism by
which staurosporine induces neurite outgrowth in PC-12 cells, we performed an
in-gel kinase assay using myelin basic protein as a substrate, and found that
staurosporine induced the activation of a kinase with an apparent molecular mass 
of 57 kDa. The dose of staurosporine required to activate this kinase was
consistent with that required to induce neurite outgrowth. Interestingly, the
staurosporine-activated kinase was immunoprecipitated by anti-c-Jun NH2-terminal 
kinase (JNK) isoforms antibody, but not by anti-JNK1-specific antibody or
anti-ERK1 antibody, raising the possibility that this kinase is a novel JNK
isoform. The substrate specificity of the kinase was distinct from those of
osmotic shock-activated JNKs and NGF-activated ERK1. The kinase phosphorylates
transcription factors including c-Jun, Elk-1, and ATF2, as well as myelin basic
protein, suggesting that it plays a role in gene induction. Furthermore,
staurosporine induced immediate-early genes including Nur77 and fos, but not jun.
The activation of the staurosporine-activated kinase, as well as the induction of
neurite outgrowth, did not require Ras function, while Ras was required for the
activation of ERKs and neurite outgrowth induced by NGF. Taken together, these
results indicate staurosporine specifically activates a JNK isoform, which may
contribute to biological activities including neurite outgrowth.

PMID: 9218464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. EMBO J. 1997 May 1;16(9):2431-40.

Molecular characterization of the B-box protein-protein interaction motif of the 
ETS-domain transcription factor Elk-1.

Ling Y(1), Lakey JH, Roberts CE, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, The Medical School, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

The ternary complex factor (TCF) subfamily of ETS-domain transcription factors
form ternary complexes with the serum response factor (SRF) and the c-fos SRE.
Extracellular signals are relayed via MAP kinase signal transduction pathways
through the TCF component of the ternary complex. Protein-protein interactions
between TCFs and SRF play an essential role in formation of this ternary complex.
A 30 amino acid sequence encompassing the TCF B-box is sufficient to mediate
interactions with SRF. In this study we have identified amino acids which are
critical for this interaction and derived a molecular model of the SRF binding
interface. Alanine scanning of the Elk-1 B-box reveals five predominantly
hydrophobic residues which are essential for binding to SRF and for ternary
complex formation in vitro and in vivo. These amino acids are predicted to lie on
one face of an alpha-helix. Peptides encompassing the B-box retain biological
activity and have helix-forming propensity. alpha-Helix and ternary complex
formation is disrupted by the introduction of helix-breaking proline residues.
Our results are consistent with a model in which the Elk-1 B-box forms an
inducible alpha-helix which presents a hydrophobic face for interaction with SRF.
We discuss the wider applicability of our results to similar short
protein-protein interaction motifs found in other transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC1169843
PMID: 9171356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 May;17(5):2360-71.

Role of p38 and JNK mitogen-activated protein kinases in the activation of
ternary complex factors.

Whitmarsh AJ(1), Yang SH, Su MS, Sharrocks AD, Davis RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester 01605, USA.

The transcription factors Elk-1 and SAP-1 bind together with serum response
factor to the serum response element present in the c-fos promoter and mediate
increased gene expression. The ERK, JNK, and p38 groups of mitogen-activated
protein (MAP) kinases phosphorylate and activate Elk-1 in response to a variety
of extracellular stimuli. In contrast, SAP-1 is activated by ERK and p38 MAP
kinases but not by JNK. The proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-1 (IL-1)
activates JNK and p38 MAP kinases and induces the transcriptional activity of
Elk-1 and SAP-1. These effects of IL-1 appear to be mediated by Rho family
GTPases. To examine the relative roles of the JNK and p38 MAP kinase pathways, we
examined the effects of IL-1 on CHO and NIH 3T3 cells. Studies of NIH 3T3 cells
demonstrated that both the JNK and p38 MAP kinases are required for
IL-1-stimulated Elk-1 transcriptional activity, while only p38 MAP kinase
contributes to IL-1-induced activation of SAP-1. In contrast, studies of CHO
cells demonstrated that JNK (but not the p38 MAP kinase) is required for
IL-1-stimulated Elk-1-dependent gene expression and that neither JNK nor p38 MAP 
kinase is required for IL-1 signaling to SAP-1. We conclude that (i) distinct MAP
kinase signal transduction pathways mediate IL-1 signaling to ternary complex
transcription factors (TCFs) in different cell types and (ii) individual TCFs
show different responses to the JNK and p38 signaling pathways. The differential 
utilization of TCF proteins and MAP kinase signaling pathways represents a
potential mechanism for the determination of cell-type-specific responses to
extracellular stimuli.

PMCID: PMC232085
PMID: 9111305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Cell. 1997 Apr 4;89(1):73-82.

cAMP activates MAP kinase and Elk-1 through a B-Raf- and Rap1-dependent pathway.

Vossler MR(1), Yao H, York RD, Pan MG, Rim CS, Stork PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Oregon Health Sciences University L-474, Portland
97201, USA.

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) has tissue-specific effects on growth,
differentiation, and gene expression. We show here that cAMP can activate the
transcription factor Elk-1 and induce neuronal differentiation of PC12 cells via 
its activation of the MAP kinase cascade. These cell type-specific actions of
cAMP require the expression of the serine/threonine kinase B-Raf and activation
of the small G protein Rap1. Rap1, activated by mutation or by the cAMP-dependent
protein kinase PKA, is a selective activator of B-Raf and an inhibitor of Raf-1. 
Therefore, in B-Raf-expressing cells, the activation of Rap1 provides a mechanism
for tissue-specific regulation of cell growth and differentiation via MAP kinase.

PMID: 9094716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Am J Physiol. 1997 Apr;272(4 Pt 1):G721-6.

Molecular mechanisms for somatostatin inhibition of c-fos gene expression.

Todisco A(1), Takeuchi Y, Yamada J, Sadoshima JI, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor 48109-0682, USA.

We reported previously that somatostatin inhibits the expression of the immediate
early gene c-fos. Accordingly, we characterized the molecular mechanisms by which
somatostatin inhibits c-fos gene expression. Because growth factors activate
c-fos through a region of its promoter known as the serum response element [SRE; 
base pairs (bp) -357 to -276] we transfected rat pituitary adenoma cells (GH3)
with plasmids containing the SRE or the SRE core fragment (bp -320 to -298)
upstream of the luciferase reporter gene. Epidermal growth factor (EGF)
stimulated SRE-luciferase activity, and this effect was inhibited by somatostatin
and by the analog MK-678. Identical results were obtained with the SRE core
plasmid, demonstrating that the sequence between bp -320 and -298 of the c-fos
promoter is a somatostatin response element. Because the extracellular
signal-regulated protein kinases (ERKs) induce the SRE via phosphorylation of
transcription factors such as Elk-1, we examined the effect of somatostatin on
ERK phosphorylation and activation. EGF stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of
ERK2, and MK-678 attenuated this effect. In experiments using in-gel kinase
assays, MK-678 also inhibited EGF-stimulated ERK activity via a pertussis toxin
sensitive pathway, and this effect resulted in inhibition of Elk-1
transcriptional activity. Our data suggest that one mechanism of somatostatin
action involves inhibition of ERK activity, Elk-1 phosphorylation and
transcriptional activation, and ultimately c-fos gene transcription.

PMID: 9142901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. EMBO J. 1997 Apr 1;16(7):1620-7.

Convergence of MAP kinase pathways on the ternary complex factor Sap-1a.

Janknecht R(1), Hunter T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Virology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

The serum response element (SRE), which is pivotal for transcriptional
up-regulation of the c-fos protooncogene, is constitutively occupied by a protein
complex comprising the serum response factor and a ternary complex factor (TCF). 
Phosphorylation of the TCFs Elk-1 and Sap-1a by the ERK and JNK subclasses of MAP
kinases triggers c-fos transcription. We demonstrate here that Elk-1 is barely
activated by a third subclass of MAP kinases (p38), most likely because the
critical residues Ser383 and Ser389 are poorly phosphorylated by p38 MAP kinase. 
In contrast, the TCF Sap-1a is efficiently phosphorylated by p38 MAP kinase in
vitro and in vivo on the homologous residues Ser381 and Ser387. Mutation of these
sites to alanine severely reduces c-fos SRE-dependent transcription mediated by
Sap-1a and p38 MAP kinase. Thus, Sap-1a may be an important target for mitogens, 
stress and apoptotic signals to elicit a nuclear response. However, signaling
from p38 MAP kinase to Sap-1a or from Sap-1a to the basal transcription machinery
does not occur in all cell types nor at promoters other than the c-fos SRE, which
may ensure the specificity of signaling.

PMCID: PMC1169766
PMID: 9130707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Mar 6;232(1):223-6.

Role of Rho GTPase in the endothelin-1-induced nuclear signaling.

Kim JH(1), Cho YS, Kim BC, Kim YS, Lee GS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular & Cellular Genetics, Hallym University, Chun-Cheon,
Korea. jhkim@sun.hallym.ac.kr

Binding of Endothelin-1 (ET-1) to its heterotrimeric G protein-coupled receptors 
stimulates various signaling cascades involving the activation of phospholipase
C-beta, phospholipase D, protein kinase C (PKC), tyrosine kinases,
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent kinase (CaMKs), and Ras, a small molecular weight
G-protein, but, the role of Rho GTPase remains unclear. In this project, we
examined whether RhoA contributes to the ET-1-induced signaling cascade to c-fos 
SRE activation in Rat-2 fibroblast cells. Our results demonstrate that Rho
activation is critical for the signal transduction of ET-1 to c-fos SRE.

PMID: 9125136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Feb 15;244(1):45-52.

Antioxidants as well as oxidants activate c-fos via Ras-dependent activation of
extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 2 and Elk-1.

M¸ller JM(1), Cahill MA, Rupec RA, Baeuerle PA, Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Albert-Ludwigs-Universit‰t, Freiburg, Germany.

Intracellular reactive oxygen intermediate (ROI) levels play an important role in
numerous physiological and pathophysiological conditions. Apart from causing
oxidative stress and damage, ROI changes differentially activate gene expression.
However the proto-oncogene encoding the AP-1 transcription factor subunit c-Fos
is induced by both prooxidants and antioxidants. Here, the transcription factor
Elk-1 is identified as being responsible for c-fos serum response element (SRE)
induction in response to changes in the cellular redox status induced by
treatment with either the oxidant H2O2 or various structurally unrelated
antioxidants. A temporal correlation is observed between changes in the
phosphorylation status of Elk-1 and the activation of the mitogen-activated
protein kinase 2 (ERK2) in response to cellular redox changes. Correspondingly,
the transcriptional response of the SRE to redox fluctuations is attenuated upon 
mutation of critical ERK2 target residues within the Elk-1 transactivation domain
to alanine. Signals elicited by antagonistic intracellular redox changes converge
at or above the level of Ras or an effector of Ras, leading to similar activation
of c-fos transcription, since an [N17]Ras mutant interfered with redox signaling.
Hence components of signaling pathways are revealed to be shared by mitogenic and
redox-dependent stimuli.

PMID: 9063444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Oncogene. 1997 Jan 16;14(2):213-21.

FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 function as ternary complex factors and ELK1 and SAP1a function
as ternary and quaternary complex factors on the Egr1 promoter serum response
elements.

Watson DK(1), Robinson L, Hodge DR, Kola I, Papas TS, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston 29425, USA.

The ETS gene products are a family of transcriptional regulatory proteins that
contain a highly conserved and structurally unique DNA binding domain, termed the
ETS domain. Several ETS proteins bind to DNA as monomers, however it has been
shown that the DNA binding activity is enhanced or modulated in the presence of
other factors. By differential display and whole genome PCR techniques, we have
recently shown that the Erg1 gene is a target for ETS proteins. The Egr1 promoter
contains multiple ETS binding sites, three of which exist as parts of two serum
response elements (SREI and SREII). The SRE is a cis-element that regulates the
expression of many growth factor responsive genes. ELK1 and SAP1a have been shown
to form ternary complexes with SRF on the SRE located in the c-fos promoter.
Similarly, we examined whether the ELK1, SAP1a, FLI1, EWS-FLI1, ETS1, ETS2, PEA3 
and PU.1 proteins can form ternary complexes with SRF on the Egr1 SREI and II.
Our results demonstrate that indeed ELK1, SAPla, FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 are able to
form ternary complexes with SRF on Egr1 SREs. In addition, ELK1 and SAP1a can
also form quarternary complexes on the Egr1 SREI. However, the proteins ETS1,
ETS2, PEA3 and PU.1 were unable to form ternary complexes with SRF on either the 
Egr1 or c-fos SREs. Our data demonstrate that FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 constitute new
members of a subgroup of ETS proteins that can function as ternary complex
factors and further implicate a novel function for these ETS transcription
factors in the regulation of the Egr1 gene. By amino acid sequence comparison we 
found that, in fact, 50% of the amino acids present in the B-box of SAP1a and
ELK1, which are required for interaction with SRF, are identical to those present
in both FLI1 (amino acids 231- 248) and EWS-FLI1 proteins. This B-box is not
present in ETS1, ETS2, PEA3 or PU.1 and these proteins were unable to form
ternary complexes with SRF and Egrl-SREs or c-fos SRE. Furthermore, deletion of
194 amino terminal amino acids of FLI1 did not interfere with its ability to
interact with SRF, in fact, this truncation increased the stability of the
ternary complex. The FLI1 protein has a unique R-domain located next to the DNA
binding region. This R-domain may modulate the interaction with SRF, providing a 
mechanism that would be unique to FLI1 and EWS-FLI1, thus implicating a novel
function for these ETS transcription factors in the regulation of the Egr1 gene.

PMID: 9010223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Exp Med. 1997 Jan 6;185(1):43-53.

Distinct Ras effector pathways are involved in Fc epsilon R1 regulation of the
transcriptional activity of Elk-1 and NFAT in mast cells.

Turner H(1), Cantrell DA.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Activation Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London,
United Kingdom.

Activation of Ras GTPases is a conserved feature of antigen receptor signaling,
including Fc epsilon R1 activation of mast cells. Antigenic cross-linking of the 
Fc epsilon R1 on mast cells results in secretion of allergic mediators and
induction of immediate early and cytokine genes. Here we examine the role of Ras 
in coupling the Fc epsilon R1 to transcriptional regulation. The transcription
factors Elk-1, an immediate early gene regulator and the nuclear factor of
activated T cells (NFAT), in the context of the IL-4 gene, are identified as Ras 
targets in mast cells. Ras mediates diverse effects via its diverse effector
pathways, which may include other members of the Ras GTPase family such as RhoA
and Rac-1. We observe that Elk-1 and NFAT are targeted by distinct Ras effector
pathways in mast cells. Activation of the "classical" Ras/Raf-1/MEK/ ERK cascade 
is necessary and sufficient for Fc epsilon R1 induction of Elk-1. Ras function is
required, but not sufficient for Fc epsilon R1 induction of NFAT. However,
activation or inhibition of Ras markedly shifts the antigen dose-response for Fc 
epsilon R1 induction of NFAT. The effector pathway for Ras activation of NFAT is 
not Raf-1/MEK. We identify that the Rac-1 GTPase is critical in Fc epsilon R1
regulation of NFAT, acting either in parallel with or as an effector of Ras.
These data place Ras in a crucial position in mast cells, regulating disparate
nuclear targets. Moreover, we identify that two GTPases, Ras and Rac-1, are
important regulators of NFAT, and therefore of cytokine expression in mast cells.

PMCID: PMC2196099
PMID: 8996240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Immunogenetics. 1997;45(6):365-70.

CpG-rich sequences close to the site of duplication within the human IGH constant
region.

Sadhu A(1), Shen ML, Hackbarth M, Hume E, McKeithan TW.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Radiation and Cellular Oncology, University of
Chicago, Chicago IL 60637, USA.

Human immunoglobulin heavy chains are encoded by a highly complex locus, IGH,
which encompasses many transcriptional units, including nine alternative constant
region genes. Much of the constant region gene cluster was duplicated during
hominoid evolution. In rodents, IGH is known to be regulated by multiple
elements, including several enhancers 3' of the alpha chain-encoding A constant
region gene, CA, the last transcribed region. Sequences downstream of the two
human CA genes, possibly containing homologous enhancer elements, have not yet
been reported. By long-range mapping of genomic DNA, a cluster of unmethylated
rare restriction sites, representing a potential CpG island, was previously
reported downstream of each CA gene, close to the 3' end of the duplicated
region. Such potential CpG islands are candidates for additional IGH regulatory
elements. We isolated bacteriophage clones containing these clusters of
methylation-sensitive restriction sites, which lie within short CpG-rich
stretches. Some of these sites showed tissue-specific methylation. 3' of the
unmethylated CpG-rich sequences, clones derived from the 5' (telomeric) copy of
the duplicated region, contained, in order, endogenous retroviral sequences, a
processed ELK1 pseudogene, and the pseudogene IGHGP. Comparison with the presumed
3' (centromeric) copy of the duplicated region showed that similarity was lost
exactly at the end of the retroviral long terminal repeat sequences. These
results imply that an endogenous retroviral integration was present immediately
3' of IGH in the common hominoid ancestor and suggest models for the duplication 
of the region.

PMID: 9089093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. EMBO J. 1996 Dec 2;15(23):6552-63.

The p38 and ERK MAP kinase pathways cooperate to activate Ternary Complex Factors
and c-fos transcription in response to UV light.

Price MA(1), Cruzalegui FH, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund Laboratories, London, 
UK.

We investigated the activation of c-fos transcription following UV irradiation, a
'stress' stimulus. In both HeLa TK- and NIH 3T3 cells the Serum Response Element 
is required for efficient UV-induced c-fos transcription, and in HeLa TK- cells
the Ternary Complex Factor (TCF) binding site contributes substantially to
activation. Consistent with this, UV irradiation activates LexA-TCF fusion
proteins more strongly in HeLa TK- than in NIH 3T3 cells. The TCF C-termini of
the TCFs are substrates for UV-induced MAP kinases: both the Elk-1 and SAP-1a
C-termini are efficiently phosphorylated by the p38 MAPK, but only the Elk-1
C-terminus is a good substrate for the SAPK/JNKs. The specificity and activation 
kinetics of TCF C-terminal kinases, and the susceptibility of transcriptional
activation by LexA-TCF fusion proteins to specific inhibitors of different MAPK
pathways, show that both the ERK and p38 MAPK pathways contribute to TCF
activation in response to UV irradiation. Activity of both these pathways is also
required for the response of the c-fos gene itself to UV stimulation.

PMCID: PMC452480
PMID: 8978682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Virol. 1996 Dec;70(12):8590-605.

Synergistic interactions between overlapping binding sites for the serum response
factor and ELK-1 proteins mediate both basal enhancement and phorbol ester
responsiveness of primate cytomegalovirus major immediate-early promoters in
monocyte and T-lymphocyte cell types.

Chan YJ(1), Chiou CJ, Huang Q, Hayward GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection is nonpermissive or persistent in many lymphoid
and myeloid cell types but can be activated in differentiated macrophages. We
have shown elsewhere that both the major immediate-early gene (MIE) and lytic
cycle infectious progeny virus expression can be induced in otherwise
nonpermissive monocyte-like U-937 cell cultures infected with either human CMV
(HCMV) or simian CMV (SCMV) by treatment with the phorbol ester
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Two multicopy basal enhancer motifs
within the SCMV MIE enhancer, namely, 11 copies of the 16-bp cyclic AMP response 
element (CRE) and 3 copies of novel 17-bp serum response factor (SRF) binding
sites referred to as the SNE (SRF/NFkappaB-like element), as well as four
classical NFkappaB sites within the HCMV version, contribute to TPA
responsiveness in transient assays in monocyte and T-cell types. The SCMV SNE
sites contain potential overlapping core recognition binding motifs for SRF,
Rel/NFkappaB, ETS, and YY1 class transcription factors but fail to respond to
either serum or tumor necrosis factor alpha. Therefore, to evaluate the mechanism
of TPA responsiveness of the SNE motifs and of a related 16-bp SEE (SRF/ETS
element) motif found in the HCMV and chimpanzee CMV MIE enhancers, we have
examined the functional responses and protein binding properties of multimerized 
wild-type and mutant elements added upstream to the SCMV MIE or simian virus 40
minimal promoter regions in the U-937, K-562, HL-60, THP-1, and Jurkat cell
lines. Unlike classical NFkappaB sites, neither the SNE nor the SEE motif
responded to phosphatase inhibition by okadaic acid. However, the TPA
responsiveness of both CMV elements proved to involve synergistic interactions
between the core SRF binding site (CCATATATGG) and the adjacent inverted ETS
binding motifs (TTCC), which correlated directly with formation of a bound
tripartite complex containing both the cellular SRF and ELK-1 proteins. This
protein complex was more abundant in U-937, K-562, and HeLa cell extracts than in
Raji, HF, BALB/c 3T3, or HL-60 cells, but the binding activity was altered only
twofold after TPA treatment. A 40-fold stimulation of chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase activity mediated by four tandem repeats of the SNE could be
induced within 2 h (and up to 250-fold within 6 h) after addition of TPA in
DNA-transfected U-937 cells, indicating that the stimulation appeared likely to
be a true protein kinase C-mediated signal transduction event rather than a
differentiation response. Slight differences in the sequence of the core SRF
binding site compared with that of the classical c-Fos promoter serum response
element, together with differences in the spacing between the SRF and ETS motifs,
appear to account for the inability of the SCMV SNEs to respond to serum
induction.

PMCID: PMC190952
PMID: 8970984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Curr Biol. 1996 Nov 1;6(11):1445-55.

Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signals activate a selective subset of
Rac/Rho-dependent effector pathways.

Reif K(1), Nobes CD, Thomas G, Hall A, Cantrell DA.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Activation Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.
reif@icrf.icnet.uk

BACKGROUND: Phosphatidylinositol 3'-hydroxyl kinase (PI 3-kinase) is activated by
many growth factor receptors and is thought to exert its cellular functions
through the elevation of phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-triphosphate levels in the 
cell. PI 3-kinase is required for growth-factor induced changes of the actin
cytoskeleton which are mediated by the GTPases Rac and Rho. Recently, a role for 
Rac and Rho in regulating gene transcription has become evident.
RESULTS: Here, we show that membrane targeting of the p110 catalytic subunit, but
not the p85 regulatory subunit, of PI 3-kinase generates a constitutively active 
enzyme that allows us to assess the relative contribution of PI 3-kinase
activation to a particular cellular response. Expression of this active PI
3-kinase induced actin reorganization in the form of Rac-mediated lamellipodia
and focal complexes, and Rho-mediated stress fibres and focal adhesions. However,
expression of active PI 3-kinase did not induce the Ras/Rac/Rho signalling
pathways that regulate gene transcription controlled by the c-fos promoter, the
c-fos serum response element or the transcription factors Elk-1 and AP-1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that PI 3-kinase induces a selective subset 
of cellular responses, but is not sufficient to stimulate the full repertoire of 
Rac- or Rho-mediated responses.

PMID: 8939609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Genome Res. 1996 Nov;6(11):1056-69.

Long-range map of a 3.5-Mb region in Xp11.23-22 with a sequence-ready map from a 
1.1-Mb gene-rich interval.

Schindelhauer D(1), Hellebrand H, Grimm L, Bader I, Meitinger T, Wehnert M, Ross 
M, Meindl A.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung f¸r P‰diatrische Genetik, Kinderpoliklinik der Universit‰t M¸nchen, 
Germany.

Most of the yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs) isolated from the Xp11.23-22
region have shown instability and chimerism and are not a reliable resource for
determining physical distances. We therefore constructed a long-range
pulsed-field gel electrophoresis map that encompasses approximately 3.5 Mb of
genomic DNA between the loci TIMP and DXS146 including a CpG-rich region around
the WASP and TFE-3 gene loci. A combined YAC-cosmid contig was constructed along 
the genomic map and was used for fine-mapping of 15 polymorphic microsatellites
and 30 expressed sequence tags (ESTs) or sequence transcribed sites (STSs),
revealing the following order: tel-(SYN-TIMP)-(DXS426-ELK1)-ZNF(CA)
n-L1-DXS1367-ZNF81-ZNF21-DXS6616- (HB3-OATL1pseudogenes-DXS6950)-DXS6949-DXS694
1-DXS7464E(MG61)-GW1E(EBP)- DXS7927E(MG81)-RBM-
DXS722-DXS7467E(MG21)-DXS1011E-WASP-DXS6940++ +-DXS7466E(MG44)-GF1-
DXS226-DXS1126-DXS1240-HB1- DXS7469E-(DXS6665-DXS1470)-TFE3-DXS7468E-+
++SYP-DXS1208-HB2E-DXS573-DXS1331- DXS6666-DXS1039-DXS
1426-DXS1416-DXS7647-DXS8222-DXS6850-DXS255++ +-CIC-5-DXS146-cen. A
sequence-ready map was constructed for an 1100-kb gene-rich interval flanked by
the markers HB3 and DXS1039, from which six novel ESTs/STSs were isolated, thus
increasing the number of markers used in this interval to thirty. This precise
ordering is a prerequisite for the construction of a transcription map of this
region that contains numerous disease loci, including those for several forms of 
retinal degeneration and mental retardation. In addition, the map provides the
base to delineate the corresponding syntenic region in the mouse, where the
mutants scurfy and tattered are localized.

PMID: 8938429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. EMBO J. 1996 Nov 1;15(21):5849-65.

Net (ERP/SAP2) one of the Ras-inducible TCFs, has a novel inhibitory domain with 
resemblance to the helix-loop-helix motif.

Maira SM(1), Wurtz JM, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de GÈnÈtique et de Biologie MolÈculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS, INSERM, 
ULP, Illkirch, France.

The three ternary complex factors (TCFs), Net (ERP/ SAP-2), ELK-1 and SAP-1, are 
highly related ets oncogene family members that participate in the response of
the cell to Ras and growth signals. Understanding the different roles of these
factors will provide insights into how the signals result in coordinate
regulation of the cell. We show that Net inhibits transcription under basal
conditions, in which SAP-1a is inactive and ELK-1 stimulates. Repression is
mediated by the NID, the Net Inhibitory Domain of about 50 amino acids, which
autoregulates the Net protein and also inhibits when it is isolated in a
heterologous fusion protein. Net is particularly sensitive to Ras activation. Ras
activates Net through the C-domain, which is conserved between the three TCFs,
and the NID is an efficient inhibitor of Ras activation. The NID, as well as more
C-terminal sequences, inhibit DNA binding. Net is more refractory to DNA binding 
than the other TCFs, possibly due to the presence of multiple inhibitory
elements. The NID may adopt a helix-loop-helix (HLH) structure, as evidenced by
homology to other HLH motifs, structure predictions, model building and
mutagenesis of critical residues. The sequence resemblance with myogenic factors 
suggested that Net may form complexes with the same partners. Indeed, we found
that Net can interact in vivo with the basic HLH factor, E47. We propose that Net
is regulated at the level of its latent DNA-binding activity by protein
interactions and/or phosphorylation. Net may form complexes with HLH proteins as 
well as SRF on specific promotor sequences. The identification of the novel
inhibitory domain provides a new inroad into exploring the different roles of the
ternary complex factors in growth control and transformation.

PMCID: PMC452333
PMID: 8918463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Nature. 1996 Oct 24;383(6602):722-5.

Bidirectional signalling through the EPH-family receptor Nuk and its
transmembrane ligands.

Holland SJ(1), Gale NW, Mbamalu G, Yancopoulos GD, Henkemeyer M, Pawson T.

Author information: 
(1)Programme in Molecular Biology and Cancer, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Receptor tyrosine kinases of the EPH class have been implicated in the control of
axon guidance and fasciculation, in regulating cell migration, and in defining
compartments in the developing embryo. Efficient activation of EPH receptors
generally requires that their ligands be anchored to the cell surface, either
through a transmembrane (TM) region or a glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI)
group. These observations have suggested that EPH receptors can transduce signals
initiated by direct cell-cell interaction. Genetic analysis of Nuk, a murine EPH 
receptor that binds TM ligands, has raised the possibility that these ligands
might themselves have a signalling function. Consistent with this, the three
known TM ligands have a highly conserved cytoplasmic region, with multiple
potential sites for tyrosine phosphorylation. Here we show that challenging cells
that express the TM ligands Elk-L or Htk-L with the clustered ectodomain of Nuk
induces phosphorylation of the ligands on tyrosine, a process that can be
mimicked both in vitro and in vivo by an activated Src tyrosine kinase.
Co-culture of cells expressing a TM ligand with cells expressing Nuk leads to
tyrosine phosphorylation of both the ligand and Nuk. These results suggest that
the TM ligands are associated with a tyrosine kinase, and are inducibly
phosphorylated upon binding Nuk, in a fashion reminiscent of cytokine receptors. 
Furthermore, we show that TM ligands, as well as Nuk, are phosphorylated on
tyrosine in mouse embryos, indicating that this is a physiological process. EPH
receptors and their TM ligands therefore mediate bidirectional cell signalling.

PMID: 8878483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 15;93(21):11563-8.

Selective response of ternary complex factor Sap1a to different mitogen-activated
protein kinase subgroups.

Strahl T(1), Gille H, Shaw PE.

Author information: 
(1)Spemann Laboratories, Max-Planck-Institut f¸r Immunbiologie, Freiburg,
Germany.

Mitogenic and stres signals results in the activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) and stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun
N-terminal kinases (SAPK/JNKs), respectively, which are two subgroups of the
mitogen-activated protein kinases. A nuclear target of mitogen-activated protein 
(MAP) kinases is the ternary complex factor Elk-1, which underlies its
involvement in the regulation of c-fos gene expression by mitogenic and stress
signals. A second ternary complex factor, Sap1a, is coexpressed with Elk-1 in
several cell types and shares attributes of Elk-1, the significance of which is
not clear. Here we show that Sap1a is phosphorylated efficiently by ERKs but not 
by SAPK/JNKs. Serum response factor-dependent ternary complex formation by Sap1a 
is stimulated by ERK phosphorylation but not by SAPK/JNKs. Moreover,
Sap1a-mediated transcription is activated by mitogenic signals but not by cell
stress. These results suggest that Sap1a and Elk-1 have distinct physiological
functions.

PMCID: PMC38097
PMID: 8876175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 4;271(40):24788-93.

Dual leucine zipper-bearing kinase (DLK) activates p46SAPK and p38mapk but not
ERK2.

Fan G(1), Merritt SE, Kortenjann M, Shaw PE, Holzman LB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0676, USA.

Because the catalytic domain of dual leucine zipper-bearing kinase (DLK) bears
sequence similarity to members of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase
kinase kinase subfamily, this protein kinase was investigated for its ability to 
activate MAP kinase pathways. When transiently transfected and overexpressed in
either COS 7 cells or NIH3T3 cells, wild type DLK potently activated p46(SAPK)
(SAPK/JNK) but had no detectable effect in activating p42/44(MAPK). DLK also
activated p38(mapk) when overexpressed in NIH3T3 cells. A catalytically inactive 
point mutant of DLK had no effect in these experiments. Consistent with its
specificity in activating SAPK, DLK activated Elk-1 but not Sap1a-mediated
transcription. In NIH3T3 cells, activation of SAPK by v-Src was markedly
attenuated by coexpression of K185A, a catalytically inactive mutant of DLK,
suggesting that this mutant could function in a dominant negative fashion in a
pathway that leads from v-Src to SAPKs. In a series of co-transfection
experiments, activation of p46(SAPK) by DLK was not inhibited by dominant
negative mutants of Rac1 and Cdc42Hs, PAK65-R, or PAK65-A, but was attenuated by 
MEKK1(K432M). DLK(K185A) did not inhibit the ability of constitutively active
MEKK1 to activate SAPK. Moreover, K185A significantly inhibited the activation of
SAPK by constitutively active V-12 Rac1 and V-12 Cdc42Hs. These results suggest
that DLK lies distal to Rac1 and/or Cdc42Hs but proximal to MEKK1 in a pathway
leading from v-Src to SAPKs activation.

PMID: 8798750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 4;271(40):24639-48.

GHF-1/Pit-1 functions as a cell-specific integrator of Ras signaling by targeting
the Ras pathway to a composite Ets-1/GHF-1 response element.

Bradford AP(1), Conrad KE, Tran PH, Ostrowski MC, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Program in Molecular Biology, and Colorado Cancer
Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, 80262, USA.

Activation of the rat prolactin (rPRL) promoter by Ras is a prototypical example 
of tissue-specific transcriptional regulation in a highly differentiated cell
type. Using a series of site-specific mutations and deletions of the proximal
rPRL promoter we have mapped the major Ras/Raf response element (RRE) to a
composite Ets-1/GHF-1 binding site located between positions -217 and -190.
Mutation of either the Ets-1 or GHF-1 binding sites inhibits Ras and Raf
activation of the rPRL promoter, and insertion of this RRE into the rat growth
hormone promoter confers Ras responsiveness. We show that Ets-1 is expressed in
GH4 cells and, consistent with their functional synergistic interaction, both
Ets-1 and GHF-1 are able to bind specifically to this bipartite RRE. We confirm
that Ets-1 or a related Ets factor is the nuclear target of the Ras pathway
leading to activation of the rPRL promoter and demonstrate that Elk-1 and Net do 
not mediate the Ras response. Thus, the pituitary-specific POU homeodomain
transcription factor, GHF-1, serves as a cell-specific signal integrator by
functionally interacting with an Ets-1-like factor, at uniquely juxtaposed
binding sites, thereby targeting an otherwise ubiquitous Ras signaling pathway to
a select subset of cell-specific GHF-1-dependent genes.

PMID: 8798730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. DNA Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;15(10):855-62.

Molecular cloning of Elk-3, a new member of the Ets family expressed during mouse
embryogenesis and analysis of its transcriptional repression activity.

Nozaki M(1), Onishi Y, Kanno N, Ono Y, Fujimura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Japan.

We isolated a cDNA clone, Elk-3, that encodes a novel Ets transcription factor
from 16-day mouse embryos. The deduced amino acid sequence of the protein was
homologous to human ELK-1 and SAP-1. This protein, ELK-1, and SAP-1 shared some
unique structural properties such as an Ets DNA-binding site in the
amino-terminal region, a serum response factor interacting domain and
phosphorylation sites of serine or threonine residues in the carboxy-terminal
region. Northern blotting weakly revealed that two transcripts of 4 and 2.1 kb
are expressed in the adult ovary and lung and a 2.1-kb transcript predominated in
8- to 14-day embryos. We assayed the transcriptional activities of Elk-3 protein 
on the cytokeratin EndoA enhancer containing Ets binding sites in endodermal
cells. Elk-3 protein strongly repressed enhancer activity but did not affect the 
activity of the basal promoter in the absence of the enhancer. Furthermore, Elk-3
can suppress the activity of Ets-2 as the transcriptional activator on the EndoA 
enhancer. These data suggested that the Elk-3 gene product plays a role in
transcriptional regulation during embryogenesis.

PMID: 8892757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 1;93(20):11242-7.

Urea-inducible Egr-1 transcription in renal inner medullary collecting duct
(mIMCD3) cells is mediated by extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation.

Cohen DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, USA.

Urea (200-400 milliosmolar) activates transcription, translation of, and
trans-activation by the immediate-early gene transcription factor Egr-1 in a
renal epithelial cell-specific fashion. The effect at the transcriptional level
has been attributed to multiple serum response elements and their adjacent Ets
motifs located within the Egr-1 promoter. Elk-1, a principal ternary complex
factor and Ets domain-containing protein, is a substrate of the extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) mitogen-activated protein kinases. In the renal
medullary mIMCD3 cell line, urea (200-400 milliosmolar) activated both ERK1 and
ERK2 as determined by in-gel kinase assay and immune-complex kinase assay of
epitope-tagged] ERK1 and ERK2. Importantly, urea did not affect abundance of
either ERK. Urea-inducible Egr-1 transcription was a consequence of ERK
activation because the ERK-specific inhibitor, PD98059, abrogated transcription
from the murine Egr-1 promoter in a luciferase reported gene assay. In addition, 
activators of protein kinase A, including forskolin and 8-Br-cAMP, which are
known to inhibit ERK-mediated events, also inhibited urea-inducible Egr-1
transcription. Furthermore, urea-inducible activation of the physiological ERK
substrate and transcription factor, Elk-1, was demonstrated through transient
cotransfection of a chimeric Elk-1/GAL4 expression plasmid and a GAL4-driven
luciferase reporter plasmid. Taken together, these data indicate that, in mIMCD3 
cells, urea activates ERKs and the ERK substrate, Elk-1, and that ERK inhibition 
abrogates urea-inducible Egr-1 transcription. These data are consistent with a
model of urea-inducible renal medullary gene expression wherein sequential
activation of ERKs and Elk-1 results in increased transcription of Egr-1 through 
serum response element/Ets motifs.

PMCID: PMC38314
PMID: 8855340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 1;93(20):10803-8.

Regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinases by a calcium/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase cascade.

Enslen H(1), Tokumitsu H, Stork PJ, Davis RJ, Soderling TR.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland 97201, USA.

Membrane depolarization of NG108 cells gives rapid (< 5 min) activation of
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV (CaM-KIV), as well as activation of
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). To investigate whether the Ca2+-dependent
activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (ERK, JNK, and p38) might be
mediated by the CaM kinase cascade, we have transfected PC12 cells, which lack
CaM-KIV, with constitutively active mutants of CaM kinase kinase and/or CaM-KIV
(CaM-KKc and CaM-KIVc, respectively). In the absence of depolarization, CaM-KKc
transfection had no effect on Elk-dependent transcription of a luciferase
reporter gene, whereas CaM-KIVc alone or in combination with CaM-KKc gave 7- to
10-fold and 60- to 80-fold stimulations, respectively, which were blocked by
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase phosphatase cotransfection. When
epitope-tagged constructs of MAP kinases were co-transfected with CaM-KKc plus
CaM-KIVc, the immunoprecipitated MAP kinases were activated 2-fold (ERK-2) and 7-
to 10-fold (JNK-1 and p38). The JNK and p38 pathways were further investigated
using specific c-Jun or ATF2-dependent transcriptional assays. We found that
c-Jun/ATF2-dependent transcriptions were enhanced 7- to 10-fold by CaM-KIVc and
20- to 30-fold by CaM-KKc plus CaM-KIVc. In the case of the Jun-dependent
transcription, this effect was not due to direct phosphorylation of c-Jun by
activated CaM-KIV, since transcription was blocked by a dominant-negative JNK and
by two MAP kinase phosphatases. Mutation of the phosphorylation site (Thr196) in 
CaM-KIV, which mediates its activation by CaM-KIV kinase, prevented activation of
Elk-1, c-Jun, and ATF2 by the CaM kinase cascade. These results establish a new
Ca2+-dependent mechanism for regulating MAP kinase pathways and resultant
transcription.

PMCID: PMC38236
PMID: 8855261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Gene. 1996 Sep 26;174(1):185-8.

Structure and organization of the mouse elk1 gene.

GrÈvin D(1), Ung S, Denhez F, Dehem M, Quatannens B, BËgue A, StÈhelin D, Martin 
P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie MolÈculaire, CNRS URA1160, Institut Pasteur, Lille,
France.

In the ets gene family of transcription factors, elk1 belongs to the subfamily of
Ternary Complex Factors (TCFs) which bind to the Serum Response Element (SRE) in 
conjunction with a dimer of Serum Response Factors (SRFs). In this communication 
we report the isolation of cDNAs from the mouse elk1 gene, containing the full
coding sequence homologous (87% identical) to the human gene, and the structure
and organization of 22 kb of the mouse elk1 locus. The coding sequence is spread 
through 5 exons (numbered 1 to 5): exons 1 to 4 range from 102 bp to 447 bp and
exon 5 is at least 620 bp. Exon 0 was not found in the 8.5 kb sequence upstream
of exon 1. The intron between exons 1 and 2 is 4 kb long and the 3 other introns 
are less than 500 bp long. This information will be useful to engineer targeted
mutations of this gene in mice and to determine the genomic structure of the
other TCF genes.

PMID: 8863747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Carcinogenesis. 1996 Sep;17(9):2073-6.

Dose rate and mode of exposure are key factors in JNK activation by UV
irradiation.

Adler V(1), Polotskaya A, Kim J, Dolan L, Davis R, Pincus M, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Carcinogenesis Program, American Health Foundation, Valhalla, NY
10595, USA.

Single exposure of cells to UVC (254 nm for 30 s) or to UVB (300 nm for 10 min)
was shown to activate jun-NH2 kinases which, in turn, phosphorylate their
substrates ELK-1, c-jun and ATF-2. While UVC (40-80 J/m2) activates JNK up to 4
h, with maximal induction after 30 min, UVB (150-300 J/m2) activates JNK over a
prolonged period, up to 24 h, with maximal induction after 6 h. UV-mediated
activation of src-related tyrosine kinases and MAPK revealed different kinetics, 
with maximal induction after 24 h. As recent studies had indicated a role of a
UVC component in mediating the ability of UVB to activate JNK, we have examined
the effect of dose rate as well as of multiplicity of exposures on the activation
of these kinases. The UVC portion found in 300 J/m2 UVB (5%, corresponding to 15 
J/m2, administered within 10 s) did not activate JNK. However, when the same dose
was administered at a lower rate (i.e. over 10 min, as needed for UVB
irradiation) it was found capable of activating JNK, MAPK and src kinases, but to
a lower degree and with different kinetics than found for UVB. Such differences
point to cellular changes which are elicited by UVB, but not UVC. Although a
single UVB exposure using a filter that blocks wavelengths below 300 nm prevented
activation of JNK, multiple exposures of filtered UVB wavelengths (mimicking
chronic exposure) were able to activate JNK. We conclude that the mode of UVB
exposure (dose rate and multiplicity) is a crucial determinant for
physiologically relevant activation of JNK.

PMID: 8824537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Genes Dev. 1996 Sep 1;10(17):2198-211.

Pax-5 (BSAP) recruits Ets proto-oncogene family proteins to form functional
ternary complexes on a B-cell-specific promoter.

Fitzsimmons D(1), Hodsdon W, Wheat W, Maira SM, Wasylyk B, Hagman J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Immunology, National Jewish Center for Immunology and
Respiratory Medicine, Denver, Colorado 80206, USA.

The paired box transcription factor Pax-5 (B-cell-specific activator protein) is 
a key regulator of lineage-specific gene expression and differentiation in
B-lymphocytes. We show that Pax-5 functions as a cell type-specific docking
protein that facilitates binding of the early B-cell-specific mb-1 promoter by
proteins of the Ets proto-oncogene family. Transcriptional activity of the mb-1
promoter in pre-B-cells is critically dependent on binding sites for Pax-5:Ets
complexes. Ternary complex assembly requires only the Pax-5 paired box and ETS
DNA-binding domains. Mutation of a single base pair in the ternary complex
binding site allows for independent binding by Ets proteins but, conversely,
inhibits the binding of Pax-5 by itself. Strikingly, the mutation reverses the
pattern of complex assembly: Ets proteins recruit Pax-5 to bind the mutated
sequence. Recruitment of Net and Elk-1, but not SAP1a, by Pax-5 defines a
functional difference between closely related Ets proteins. Replacement of a
valine (V68) in the ETS domain of SAP1a by aspartic acid (as found in c-Ets-1,
Elk-1, and Net) enhanced ternary complex formation by more than 60-fold.
Together, these observations define novel transcription factor interactions that 
regulate gene expression in B cells.

PMID: 8804314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Neurosci. 1996 Sep 1;16(17):5425-36.

Calcium influx via the NMDA receptor induces immediate early gene transcription
by a MAP kinase/ERK-dependent mechanism.

Xia Z(1), Dudek H, Miranti CK, Greenberg ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA.

The regulation of gene expression by neurotransmitters is likely to play a key
role in neuroplasticity both during development and in the adult animal.
Therefore, it is important to determine the mechanisms of neuronal gene
regulation to understand fully the mechanisms of learning, memory, and other
long-term adaptive changes in neurons. The neurotransmitter glutamate stimulates 
rapid and transient induction of many genes, including the c-fos proto-oncogene. 
The c-fos promoter contains several critical regulatory elements, including the
serum response element (SRE), that mediate glutamate-induced transcription in
neurons; however, the mechanism by which the SRE functions in neurons has not
been defined. In this study, we sought to identify transcription factors that
mediate glutamate induction of transcription through the SRE in cortical neurons 
and to elucidate the mechanism(s) of transcriptional activation by these factors.
To facilitate this analysis, we developed an improved calcium phosphate
coprecipitation procedure to transiently introduce DNA into primary neurons, both
efficiently and consistently. Using this protocol, we demonstrate that the
transcription factors serum response factor (SRF) and Elk-1 can mediate glutamate
induction of transcription through the SRE in cortical neurons. There are at
least two distinct pathways by which glutamate signals through the SRE: an
SRF-dependent pathway that can operate in the absence of Elk and an Elk-dependent
pathway. Activation of the Elk-dependent pathway of transcription seems to
require phosphorylation of Elk-1 by extracellular signal-regulated kinases
(ERKs), providing evidence for a physiological function of ERKs in glutamate
signaling in neurons. Taken together, these findings suggest that SRF, Elk, and
ERKs may have important roles in neuroplasticity.

PMID: 8757255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. FEBS Lett. 1996 Aug 12;391(3):247-51.

Analysis of SRF, SAP-1 and ELK-1 transcripts and proteins in human cell lines.

Magnaghi-Jaulin L(1), Masutani H, Lipinski M, Harel-Bellan A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorie de Biologie des Tumeurs Humaines, CNRS URA 1156, Villejuif,
France.

We have analysed the expression of the genes encoding transcription factors
involved in c-fos transcriptional regulation, i.e. the serum response factor
(SRF) and the ETS-related proteins ELK-1 and SAP-1, in a variety of human cell
lines. RNA was determined by Northern blot analysis, and proteins were detected
on Western blots: the two analyses gave essentially identical results. SRF was
expressed at similar levels in all cell lines tested. In contrast, SAP-1 and
ELK-1 expression varied from one cell line to another. Interestingly, in any
given cell line, high levels of one protein were accompained by low levels of the
other. Similar results were obtained by electro-mobility shift assays (EMSA),
using antibodies directed against the proteins. Thus, our data raise the
possibility of a coordinated regulation of the expression of these two Ets genes,
at both RNA and protein levels.

PMID: 8764983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Circ Res. 1996 Aug;79(2):162-73.

Stimulation of the stress-activated mitogen-activated protein kinase subfamilies 
in perfused heart. p38/RK mitogen-activated protein kinases and c-Jun N-terminal 
kinases are activated by ischemia/reperfusion.

Bogoyevitch MA(1), Gillespie-Brown J, Ketterman AJ, Fuller SJ, Ben-Levy R,
Ashworth A, Marshall CJ, Sugden PH.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute (Cardiac Medicine), Imperial College of
Science, University of London, UK.

It has recently been recognized that cellular stresses activate certain members
of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) superfamily. One role of these
"stress-activated" MAPKs is to increase the transactivating activity of the
transcription factors c-Jun, Elk1, and ATF2. These findings may be particularly
relevant to hearts that have been exposed to pathological stresses. Using the
isolated perfused rat heart, we show that global ischemia does not activate the
42- and 44-kD extracellular signal-regulated (protein) kinase (ERK) subfamily of 
MAPKs but rather stimulates a 38-kD activator of MAPK-activated protein kinase-2 
(MAPKAPK2). This activation is maintained during reperfusion. The molecular
characteristics of this protein kinase suggest that it is a member of the
p38/reactivating kinase (RK) group of stress-activated MAPKs. In contrast,
stress-activated MAPKs of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK/SAPKs) subfamily are
not activated by ischemia alone but are activated by reperfusion following
ischemia. Furthermore, transfection of ventricular myocytes with activated
protein kinases (MEKK1 and SEK1) that may be involved in the upstream activation 
of JNK/ SAPKs induces increases in myocyte size and transcriptional changes
typical of the hypertrophic response. We speculate that activation of multiple
parallel MAPK pathways may be important in the responses of hearts to cellular
stresses.

PMID: 8755992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. EMBO J. 1996 Jun 3;15(11):2760-70.

Selective interaction of JNK protein kinase isoforms with transcription factors.

Gupta S(1), Barrett T, Whitmarsh AJ, Cavanagh J, Sluss HK, DÈrijard B, Davis RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Moleular Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The JNK protein kinase is a member of the MAP kinase group that is activated in
response to dual phosphorylation on threonine and tyrosine. Ten JNK isoforms were
identified in human brain by molecular cloning. These protein kinases correspond 
to alternatively spliced isoforms derived from the JNK1, JNK2 and JNK3 genes. The
protein kinase activity of these JNK isoforms was measured using the
transcription factors ATF2, Elk-1 and members of the Jun family as substrates.
Treatment of cells with interleukin-1 (IL-1) caused activation of the JNK
isoforms. This activation was blocked by expression of the MAP kinase phosphatase
MKP-1. Comparison of the binding activity of the JNK isoforms demonstrated that
the JNK proteins differ in their interaction with ATF2, Elk-1 and Jun
transcription factors. Individual members of the JNK group may therefore
selectively target specific transcription factors in vivo.

PMCID: PMC450211
PMID: 8654373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1996 Apr 29;351(1339):551-9.

Integration of growth factor signals at the c-fos serum response element.

Price MA(1), Hill C, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, U.K.

A transcription factor ternary complex composed of serum response factor (SRF)
and a second factor, ternary complex factor (TCF), mediates the response of the
c-fos Serum Response Element to growth factors and mitogens. In NIH3T3
fibroblasts, TCF binding is required for transcriptional activation by the SRE in
response to activation of the Ras-Raf-ERK pathway. We compared the properties of 
three members of the TCF family, Elk-1, SAP-1 and SAP-2 (ERP/NET). Although all
the proteins contain sequences required for ternary complex formation with SRF,
only Elk-1 and SAP-1 appear to interact with the c-fos SRE efficiently in vivo.
Each TCF contains a C-terminal activation domain capable of transcriptional
activation in response to activation of the Ras-Raf-ERK pathway, and this is
dependent on the integrity of S/T-P motifs conserved between all the TCF family
members. In contrast, activation of the SRE by whole serum and the mitogenic
phospholipid LPA requires SRF binding alone. Constitutively activated members of 
the Rho subfamily of Ras-like GTPases are also capable of inducing activation of 
the SRE in the absence of TCF; unlike activated Ras itself, these proteins do not
activate the TCFs in NIH3T3 cells. At the SRE, SRF- and TCF-linked signalling
pathways act synergistically to potentiate transcription.

PMID: 8735278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Apr 1;24(7):1345-51.

Elk-1 can recruit SRF to form a ternary complex upon the serum response element.

Latinkic BV(1), Zeremski M, Lau LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The University of Illinois College of Medicine,
Chicago 60607-7170, USA.

The initial genomic response to serum growth factors is the transcriptional
activation of a set of immediate-early genes. Serum-induced transcriptional
activation of several of these genes involves the formation of a ternary complex 
that includes the serum response factor (SRF), a 62 kDa ternary complex factor
(TCF) and a serum response element (SRE). TCF alone does not bind the SRE of the 
protooncogene c-fos, but requires the prior assembly of the SRF-SRE binary
complex for it to be recruited into a ternary complex. Here we show that this
SRF-SRE binary complex is not an obligatory prerequisite for the formation of a
serum responsive ternary complex. We demonstrate that Elk-1, which has properties
of TCF can recruit SRF into a ternary complex on elements that do not support
formation of the SRF-DNA binary complex. We also show that for two
immediate-early genes, pip92 and nur77, formation of the ternary complex may
occur without the prior assembly of SRF-DNA binary complex. Finally, we show that
the ability of different sequences to support formation of Elk-l-SRF-DNA ternary 
complex in vitro correlates with their ability to respond to serum growth factors
in vivo. Our results suggest that a much broader range of DNA sequences than the 
consensus SRF and TCF binding sites can support ternary complex formation, and by
inference, serum induction. Possible implications of these results are discussed.

PMCID: PMC145793
PMID: 8614640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Mar;16(3):1094-102.

Phosphorylation-dependent formation of a quaternary complex at the c-fos SRE.

Gille H(1), Kortenjann M, Strahl T, Shaw PE.

Author information: 
(1)Spemann Laboratories, Max-Planck-Institut f¸r Immunbiologie, Freiburg,Germany.

The rapid and transient induction of the human proto-oncogene c-fos in response
to a variety of stimuli depends on the serum responses element (SRE). In vivo
footprinting experiments show that this promoter element is bound by a
multicomponent complex including the serum response factor (SRF) and a ternary
complex factor such as Elk-1. SRF is thought to recruit a ternary complex factor 
monomer into an asymmetric complex. In this report, we describe a quaternary
complex over the SRE which, in addition to an SRF dimer, contains two Elk-1
molecules. Its formation at the SRE is strictly dependent on phosphorylation of
S-383 in the Elk-1 regulatory domain and appears to involve a weak intermolecular
association between the two Elk-1 molecules. The influence of mutations in Elk-1 
on quaternary complex formation in vitro correlates with their effect on the
induction of c-fos reporter expression in response to mitogenic stimuli in vivo.

PMCID: PMC231092
PMID: 8622654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Biol Chem. 1996 Feb 9;271(6):3229-37.

Signal transduction pathways regulated by mitogen-activated/extracellular
response kinase kinase kinase induce cell death.

Johnson NL(1), Gardner AM, Diener KM, Lange-Carter CA, Gleavy J, Jarpe MB, Minden
A, Karin M, Zon LI, Johnson GL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, National Jewish Center for Immunology and
Respiratory Medicine, Denver, Colorado 80206, USA.

Mitogen-activated/extracellular response kinase kinase (MEK) kinase (MEKK) is a
serine-threonine kinase that regulates sequential protein phosphorylation
pathways, leading to the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK), 
including members of the Jun kinase (JNK)/stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK) 
family. In Swiss 3T3 and REF52 fibroblasts, activated MEKK induces cell death
involving cytoplasmic shrinkage, nuclear condensation, and DNA fragmentation
characteristic of apoptosis. Expression of activated MEKK enhanced the apoptotic 
response to ultraviolet irradiation, indicating that MEKK-regulated pathways
sensitize cells to apoptotic stimuli. Inducible expression of activated MEKK
stimulated the transactivation of c-Myc and Elk-1. Activated Raf, the
serine-threonine protein kinase that activates the ERK members of the MAPK
family, stimulated Elk-1 transactivation but not c-Myc; expression of activated
Raf does not induce any of the cellular changes associated with MEKK-mediated
cell death. Thus, MEKK selectively regulates signal transduction pathways that
contribute to the apoptotic response.

PMID: 8621725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. EMBO J. 1995 Dec 1;14(23):5957-64.

Induction of c-fos expression through JNK-mediated TCF/Elk-1 phosphorylation.

Cavigelli M(1), Dolfi F, Claret FX, Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California at
San Diego, La Jolla 92093-0636, USA.

Growth factors induce c-fos transcription by stimulating phosphorylation of
transcription factor TCF/Elk-1, which binds to the serum response element (SRE). 
Under such conditions Elk-1 could be phosphorylated by the mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPKs) ERK1 and ERK2. However, c-fos transcription and SRE
activity are also induced by stimuli, such as UV irradiation and activation of
the protein kinase MEKK1, that cause only an insignificant increase in ERK1/2
activity. However, both of these stimuli strongly activate two other MAPKs, JNK1 
and JNK2, and stimulate Elk-1 transcriptional activity and phosphorylation. We
find that the JNKs are the predominant Elk-1 activation domain kinases in
extracts of UV-irradiated cells and that immunopurified JNK1/2 phosphorylate
Elk-1 on the same major sites recognized by ERK1/2, that potentiate its
transcriptional activity. Finally, we show that UV irradiation, but not serum or 
phorbol esters, stimulate translocation of JNK1 to the nucleus. As Elk-1 is most 
likely phosphorylated while bound to the c-fos promoter, these results suggest
that UV irradiation and MEKK1 activation stimulate TCF/Elk-1 activity through JNK
activation, while growth factors induce c-fos through ERK activation.

PMCID: PMC394715
PMID: 8846788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Nov 25;23(22):4698-706.

The ETS-domain transcription factors Elk-1 and SAP-1 exhibit differential DNA
binding specificities.

Shore P(1), Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Medical School, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

The ETS DNA-binding domain is conserved amongst many eukaryotic transcription
factors. ETS-domains bind differentially to specific DNA sites containing a
central GGA trinucleotide motif. The nucleotides flanking this motif define the
binding specificity of individual proteins. In this study we have investigated
binding specificity of the ETS-domains from two members of the ternary complex
factor (TCF) subfamily, Elk-1 and SAP-1. The ETS DNA-binding domains of Elk-1
(Elk-93) and SAP-1 (SAP-92) select similar sites from random pools of double
stranded oligonucleotides based on the consensus sequence ACCGGAAGTR. However,
SAP-92 shows a more relaxed binding site selectivity and binds efficiently to a
greater spectrum of sites than does Elk-93. This more relaxed DNA binding site
selectivity is most pronounced in nucleotides located on the 3' side of the GGA
motif. This differential DNA-binding specificity is also exhibited by longer TCF 
derivatives and, indeed by the full-length proteins. Our results suggest that the
range of potential in vivo target sites for SAP-1 is likely to be greater than
for Elk-1. We discuss our results in relation to other similar studies carried
out with more divergent ETS-domains.

PMCID: PMC307446
PMID: 8524663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Oncogene. 1995 Nov 2;11(9):1745-52.

Novel members of the eph receptor tyrosine kinase subfamily expressed during
Xenopus development.

Scales JB(1), Winning RS, Renaud CS, Shea LJ, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, NICHD, NIH Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Three cDNAs encoding receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) of the eph-subfamily have
been identified based on their homology to Pagliaccio (Winning and Sargent, 1994,
Mech. Dev. 46:219-229). These have been named TCK, Xelk (Xenopus homologue of
elk), and PL7a (pag-like clone 7a). Each of these genes is expressed in a
distinctive, tissue specific manner during early development. TCK is expressed in
pre-somitic mesoderm, caudal somites, midbrain and cement gland. Xelk is
expressed in the brain and spinal cord and in the first and fourth visceral
arches. PL7a cDNA is expressed throughout the head and in the tip of the tail.
All of the genes are represented in maternal mRNA, and are expressed in adult
tissues. The Xelk cDNA encodes a protein which is 94% identical to rat elk and
therefore is likely to represent the Xenopus homologue of this gene. TCK and PL7a
are less related to previously identified eph-subfamily RTKs. The inability to
unambiguously assign TCK and PL7a as Xenopus homologues of any previously
identified eph RTK leads us to conclude that these cDNAs represent novel members 
of this family.

PMID: 7478602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Cell Sci. 1995 Nov;108 ( Pt 11):3599-609.

Neither ERK nor JNK/SAPK MAP kinase subtypes are essential for histone H3/HMG-14 
phosphorylation or c-fos and c-jun induction.

Cano E(1), Hazzalin CA, Kardalinou E, Buckle RS, Mahadevan LC.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Signalling Laboratory, Randall Institute, King's College London, UK.

The effects of EGF, TPA, UV radiation, okadaic acid and anisomycin on ERK and
JNK/SAPK MAP kinase cascades have been compared with their ability to elicit
histone H3/HMG-14 phosphorylation and induce c-fos and c-jun in C3H 10T1/2 cells.
EGF and UV radiation activate both ERKs and JNK/SAPKs but to markedly different
extents; EGF activates ERKs more strongly than JNK/SAPKs, whereas UV radiation
activates JNK/SAPKs much more strongly than ERKs. Anisomycin and okadaic acid
activate JNK/SAPKs but not ERKs, and conversely, TPA activates ERKs but not
JNK/SAPKs. Nevertheless, all these agents elicit phosphorylation of ribosomal and
pre-ribosomal S6, histone H3 and HMG-14, and the induction of c-fos and c-jun,
showing that neither cascade is absolutely essential for these responses. We then
analysed the relationship between ERKs, JNK/SAPKs and the transcription factors
Elk-1 and c-Jun, implicated in controlling c-fos and c-jun, respectively.
JNK/SAPKs bind to GST-cJun1-79, and ERKs, particularly ERK-2, to
GST-Elk1(307-428); there is no cross-specificity of binding. Further,
GST-Elk1(307-428) binds preferentially to active rather than inactive ERK-2. In
vitro, JNK/SAPKs phosphorylate both GST-cJun1-79 and GST-Elk1(307-428), whereas
ERKs phosphorylate GST-Elk1(307-428) but not GST-cJun1-79. Thus, neither ERKs nor
JNK/SAPKs are absolutely essential for nuclear signalling and c-fos and c-jun
induction. The data suggest either that activation of a single MAP kinase subtype
is sufficient to elicit a complete nuclear response, or that other
uncharacterised routes exist.

PMID: 8586671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Cell Growth Differ. 1995 Nov;6(11):1437-46.

jun-NH2-terminal kinase activation mediated by UV-induced DNA lesions in melanoma
and fibroblast cells.

Adler V(1), Fuchs SY, Kim J, Kraft A, King MP, Pelling J, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Carcinogenesis Program, American Health Foundation, Valhalla, New
York 10595, USA.

jun-NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) belongs to a family of protein kinases that
phosphorylates c-Jun, ATF2, and Elk1 in response to various forms of stress
including UV irradiation and heat shock. Although in previous studies we have
demonstrated the importance of membrane components for JNK activation by UV
irradiation, here we have elucidated the role of DNA damage in this response. We 
show that in vitro-irradiated or sonicated DNA that is added to proteins prepared
from UV-treated cells can further induce JNK activation in a dose-dependent
manner. When compared with UV-B (300 nm), UV-C (254 nm), which is better absorbed
by the DNA, is significantly more potent in activating JNK. Furthermore, when
wavelengths lower than 300 nm were filtered out, UV-B was no longer able to
activate JNK. With the aid of melanoma and fibroblast cells, which exhibit
different resistances to irradiation and require different UV doses to generate
the same number of DNA lesions, we demonstrate that above a threshold level of
0.45 lesions and up to 0.75 lesions per 1875 bp, the degree of JNK activation
correlates with the amount of lesions induced by UV-C irradiation. Finally, to
explore the role of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in mediating JNK
activation after UV irradiation, we have used cells that lacks mtDNA. Although
the lack of mtDNA did not impair the ability of UV to activate JNK, when
enucleated, these cells had lost the ability to activate JNK in response to UV
irradiation. Overall, our results suggest that DNA damage in the nuclear
compartment is an essential component that acts in concert with membrane-anchored
proteins to mediate c-Jun phosphorylation by JNK.

PMID: 8562482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Genomics. 1995 Oct 10;29(3):769-72.

Locations of the ets subfamily members net, elk1, and sap1 (ELK3, ELK1, and ELK4)
on three homologous regions of the mouse and human genomes.

Giovane A(1), Sobieszczuk P, Mignon C, Mattei MG, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de GÈnÈtique et de Biologie MolÈculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
France.

Net, Elk1, and Sap1 are related members of the Ets oncoprotein family. We show by
in situ hybridization on banded chromosomes with specific cDNA probes that their 
map positions on mouse and human chromosomes (respectively) are net, 10C-D1 and
12q22-q23 (now called ELK3), sap1, 1E3-G and 1q32 (ELK4), and elk1, XA1-A3 and
Xp11.2-p11.1 (ELK1), as well as a second locus 14q32 (ELK2) unique to the human
genome. The results for the mouse net, sap1, and elk1 and human ELK3 genes are
new. The human elk1 mapping confirms a previous study. The human ELK4
localization agrees with data published during the preparation of the manuscript.
Human ELK3 colocalizes with sap2, and we confirm that they are identical. These
results firmly establish for the first time that Net, Elk1, and Sap1 are distinct
gene products with different chromosomal localizations in both the mouse and the 
human genomes. Net, Elk1, and Sap1 are conserved and map to homologous regions of
the mouse and human chromosomes.

PMID: 8575773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. EMBO J. 1995 Oct 2;14(19):4781-93.

ERF: an ETS domain protein with strong transcriptional repressor activity, can
suppress ets-associated tumorigenesis and is regulated by phosphorylation during 
cell cycle and mitogenic stimulation.

Sgouras DN(1), Athanasiou MA, Beal GJ Jr, Fisher RJ, Blair DG, Mavrothalassitis
GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702-1201, USA.

ERF (ETS2 Repressor Factor) is a novel member of the ets family of genes, which
was isolated by virtue of its interaction with the ets binding site (EBS) within 
the ETS2 promoter. The 2.7 kb ubiquitously expressed ERF mRNA encodes a 548 amino
acid phosphoprotein that exhibits strong transcriptional repressor activity on
promoters that contain an EBS. The localization of the DNA-binding domain of the 
protein at the N-terminus and th repression domain at the C-terminus is
reminiscent of the organization of ELK1-like members of the ets family; however, 
there is no significant homology between ERF and ELK1 or any other ets member
outside the DNA-binding domain. The repressor activity of ERF can antagonize the 
activity of other ets genes that are known transcriptional activators.
Furthermore, ERF can suppress the ets-dependent transforming activity of the
gag-myb-ets fusion oncogene of ME26 virus. Although ERF protein levels remain
constant throughout the cell cycle, the phosphorylation level of the protein is
altered as a function of the cell cycle and after mitogenic stimulation. The ERF 
protein is also hyperphosphorylated in cells transformed by the activated Ha-ras 
and v-src genes and the transcription repressor activity of ERF is decreased
after co-transfection with activated Ha-ras or the kinase domain of the c-Raf-1
gene, indicating that ERF activity is probably regulated by the ras/MAPK pathway.
Consistent with the in vivo phosphorylation and inactivation by ras, ERF is
efficiently phosphorylated in vitro by Erk2 and cdc2/cyclin B kinases, at sites
similar to those detected in vivo. Furthermore, a single mutation at position 526
results in the loss of a specific phosphopeptide both in in vivo and in vitro (by
Erk2) labeling. Substitution of Thr526 for glutamic acid also decreases the
repression ability of ERF. Our data suggest a model in which modulation of ERF
activity is involved in the transcriptional regulation of genes activated during 
entry into G1 phase. Obstruction of the ERF repressor function by the
transactivating members of the ets family of genes (i.e.gag-myb-ets) may be
essential for the control of genes involved in cell proliferation and may also
underlie their tumorigenic effects.

PMCID: PMC394576
PMID: 7588608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Neurosci Res. 1995 Oct 1;42(2):199-206.

Ligands for EPH-related tyrosine kinase receptors are developmentally regulated
in the CNS.

Carpenter MK(1), Shilling H, VandenBos T, Beckmann MP, Cerretti DP, Kott JN,
Westrum LE, Davison BL, Fletcher FA.

Author information: 
(1)Immunex Research and Development Corporation, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Elk is a member of the eph family of receptor-like tyrosine kinases. Although its
function is unknown, elk is postulated to play a role in nervous system
development. Using Northern analysis, we examined the developmental regulation of
RNAs encoding elk, and several ligands for the eph family of RTKs, the LERKs.
Expression of elk, LERK-1, and LERK-2 RNAs is high in all regions examined in the
embryonic and postnatal rat brain and decreases to low levels with age. One
exception is the adult olfactory bulb which continues to express a moderate level
of LERK-2. In contrast, moderate LERK-4 expression was limited to the developing 
hippocampus and cerebral cortex. These data indicate that elk and some of the
LERKs may play a role in nervous system development, maintenance, and/or
regeneration.

PMID: 8568920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Curr Biol. 1995 Oct 1;5(10):1191-200.

Activation of ternary complex factor Elk-1 by stress-activated protein kinases.

Gille H(1), Strahl T, Shaw PE.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut f¸r Immunbiologie, Spemann Laboratories, Freiburg,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: The mammalian response to stress results in the activation of
stress-activated protein kinases (also known as cJun N-terminal kinases; SAPKs or
JNKs), which are a sub-group of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase
family. The SAPKs are involved in the upregulation of activity of the
transcription factor AP-1 by post-translational modification of two of its
components, cJun and ATF2. AP-1 activity can also be elevated by increased
expression of the Fos protein, a further AP-1 component. Elk-1 (also called
p62TCF), a transcription factor involved in the induction of the expression from 
the c-fos promoter through the promoter's serum response element, is known to be 
activated as a result of phosphorylation by the MAP kinases ERK1 and ERK2.
However, induction of c-fos expression in response to noxious agents takes place 
in the absence of ERK activation. We therefore investigated whether SAPKs
similarly upregulate c-fos expression by phosphorylating Elk-1.
RESULTS: Elk-1 is activated in response to stimuli other than mitogenic signals. 
Both p46SAPK and p54SAPK interact physically with, and phosphorylate, Elk-1. The 
capacity of Elk-1 to form a ternary complex with serum response factor in vitro
is thereby elevated. In vivo, selective activation of SAPKs stimulates formation 
of the ternary complex containing Elk-1, serum response factor and the serum
response element, and enhances Elk-1-dependent transcription. Expression of the
SAPK upstream-activator kinase, MEKK1, induces SAPK activation and c-fos
transcription in the absence of ERK activity. Phosphopeptide mapping of Elk-1
phosphorylated with p46SAPK or p54SAPK reveals Ser383, a residue critical for
ternary complex formation and transcriptional activation, to be the major
phosphorylation site.
CONCLUSION: Elk-1 responds to stress-induced, as well as mitogenic, signals by
stimulating c-fos transcription through the serum response element.
Phosphorylation of Elk-1 by SAPKs and the ensuing expression of Fos protein thus 
constitutes an additional mechanism by which cells can upregulate AP-1 activity
in response to stress.

PMID: 8548291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Sep;15(9):4930-8.

Protein synthesis inhibitors reveal differential regulation of mitogen-activated 
protein kinase and stress-activated protein kinase pathways that converge on
Elk-1.

Zinck R(1), Cahill MA, Kracht M, Sachsenmaier C, Hipskind RA, Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut f aur Klinische Chemie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Germany.

Inhibitors of protein synthesis, such as anisomycin and cycloheximide, lead to
superinduction of immediate-early genes. We demonstrate that these two drugs
activate intracellular signaling pathways involving both the mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK) cascades. The
activation of either pathway correlates with phosphorylation of the c-fos
regulatory transcription factor Elk-1. In HeLa cells, anisomycin stabilizes c-fos
mRNA when protein synthesis is inhibited to only 50%. Under these conditions,
anisomycin, in contrast to cycloheximide, rapidly induces kinase activation and
efficient Elk-1 phosphorylation. However, full inhibition of translation by
either drug leads to prolonged activation of SAPK activity, while MAPK induction 
is transient. This correlates with prolonged Elk-1 phosphorylation and c-fos
transcription. Elk-1 induction and c-fos activation are also observed in KB
cells, in which anisomycin strongly induces SAPKs but not MAPKs. Purified p54
SAPK alpha efficiently phosphorylates the Elk-1 C-terminal domain in vitro and
comigrates with anisomycin-activated kinases in in-gel kinase assays. Thus, Elk-1
provides a potential convergence point for the MAPK and SAPK signaling pathways. 
The activation of signal cascades and control of transcription factor function
therefore represent prominent processes in immediate-early gene superinduction.

PMCID: PMC230739
PMID: 7651411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jul;15(7):3672-84.

Calcium activates serum response factor-dependent transcription by a Ras- and
Elk-1-independent mechanism that involves a Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent kinase.

Miranti CK(1), Ginty DD, Huang G, Chatila T, Greenberg ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Enhanced levels of cytoplasmic Ca2+ due to membrane depolarization with elevated 
levels of KCl or exposure to the Ca2+ ionophore ionomycin stimulate serum
response element (SRE)-dependent transcription in the pheochromocytoma cell line 
PC12. By using altered binding specificity mutants of transcription factors that 
bind to the SRE, it was demonstrated that in contrast to treatment with purified 
growth factors, such as nerve growth factor, the serum response factor (SRF), but
not Elk-1, mediates Ca(2+)-regulated SRE-dependent transcription. Enhanced levels
of cytoplasmic Ca2+ were found to trigger SRE-dependent transcription via a
Ras-independent signaling pathway that appears to involve a
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent kinase (CaMK). Overexpression of a constitutively
active form of CaMKIV stimulated SRF-dependent transcription. Taken together,
these findings indicate that SRF is a versatile transcription factor that, when
bound to the SRE, can function by distinct mechanisms and can mediate
transcriptional responses to both CaMK- and Ras-dependent signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC230605
PMID: 7791774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jul;15(7):3531-9.

A role for mitogen-activated protein kinase in mediating activation of the
glycoprotein hormone alpha-subunit promoter by gonadotropin-releasing hormone.

Roberson MS(1), Misra-Press A, Laurance ME, Stork PJ, Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Oregon Health Sciences University,
Portland 97201, USA.

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) interacts with a G protein-coupled receptor
and increases the transcription of the glycoprotein hormone alpha-subunit gene.
We have explored the possibility that mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
plays a role in mediating GnRH effects on transcription. Activation of the MAPK
cascade by an expression vector for a constitutively active form of the Raf-1
kinase led to stimulation of the alpha-subunit promoter in a
concentration-dependent manner. GnRH treatment was found to increase the
phosphorylation of tyrosine residues of MAPK and to increase MAPK activity, as
determined by an immune complex kinase assay. A reporter gene assay using the
MAPK-responsive, carboxy-terminal domain of the Elk1 transcription factor was
also consistent with GnRH-induced activation of MAPK. Interference with the MAPK 
pathway by expression vectors for kinase-defective MAPKs or vectors encoding MAPK
phosphatases reduced the transcription-stimulating effects of GnRH. The DNA
sequences which are required for responses to GnRH include an Ets factor-binding 
site. An expression vector for a dominant negative form of Ets-2 was able to
reduce GnRH effects on expression of the alpha-subunit gene. These findings
provide evidence that GnRH treatment leads to activation of the MAPK cascade in
gonadotropes and that activation of MAPK contributes to stimulation of the
alpha-subunit promoter. It is likely that an Ets factor serves as a downstream
transcriptional effector of MAPK in this system.

PMCID: PMC230590
PMID: 7791760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jun 16;270(24):14587-96.

A novel mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase. Structure, expression, and 
regulation.

Misra-Press A(1), Rim CS, Yao H, Roberson MS, Stork PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland 97201, USA.

Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase lies at the convergence of various
extracellular ligand-mediated signaling pathways. It is activated by the
dual-specificity kinase, MAP kinase kinase or MEK. MAP kinase inactivation is
mediated by dephosphorylation via specific MAP kinase phosphatases (MKPs). One
MKP (MKP-1 (also known as 3CH134, Erp, or CL100)) has been reported to be
expressed in a wide range of tissues and cells. We report the identification of a
second widely expressed MKP, termed MKP-2, isolated from PC12 cells. MKP-2 showed
significant homology with MKP-1 (58.8% at the amino acid level) and, like MKP-1, 
displayed vanadate-sensitive phosphatase activity against MAP kinase in vitro.
Overexpression of MKP-2 in vivo inhibited MAP kinase-dependent gene transcription
in PC12 cells. MKP-2 differed from MKP-1 in its tissue distribution and in its
extent of induction by growth factors and agents that induce cellular stress,
suggesting that these MKPs may have distinct physiological functions.

PMID: 7782322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jun;15(6):3318-26.

Sequence-specific targeting of nuclear signal transduction pathways by
homeodomain proteins.

Grueneberg DA(1), Simon KJ, Brennan K, Gilman M.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724, USA.

Cells translate extracellular signals into specific programs of gene expression
that reflect their developmental history or identity. We present evidence that
one way this interpretation may be performed is by cooperative interactions
between serum response factor (SRF) and certain homeodomain proteins. We show
that human and Drosophila homeodomain proteins of the paired class have the
ability to recruit SRF to DNA sequences not efficiently recognized by SRF on its 
own, thereby imparting to a linked reporter gene the potential to respond to
polypeptide growth factors. This activity requires both the DNA-binding activity 
of the homeodomain and putative protein-protein contact residues on the exposed
surfaces of homeodomain helices 1 and 2. The ability of the homeodomain to impart
signal responsiveness is DNA sequence specific, and this specificity differs from
the simple DNA-binding specificity of the homeodomain in vitro. The homeodomain
imparts response to a spectrum of signals characteristic of the natural
SRF-binding site in the c-fos gene. Response to some of these signals is
dependent on the secondary recruitment of SRF-dependent ternary complex factors, 
and we show directly that a homeodomain can promote the recruitment of one such
factor, Elk1. We infer that SRF and homeodomains interact cooperatively on DNA
and that formation of SRF-homeodomain complexes permits the recruitment of
signal-responsive SRF accessory proteins. The ability to route extracellular
signals to specific target genes is a novel activity of the homeodomain, which
may contribute to the identity function displayed by many homeodomain genes.

PMCID: PMC230565
PMID: 7760827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. EMBO J. 1995 Jun 1;14(11):2589-601.

Comparative analysis of the ternary complex factors Elk-1, SAP-1a and SAP-2
(ERP/NET).

Price MA(1), Rogers AE, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

A transcription factor ternary complex composed of Serum Response Factor (SRF)
and Ternary Complex Factor (TCF) mediates the response of the c-fos Serum
Response Element (SRE) to growth factors and mitogens. Three Ets domain proteins,
Elk-1, SAP-1 and ERP/NET, have been reported to have the properties of TCF. Here 
we compare Elk-1 and SAP-1a with the human ERP/NET homologue SAP-2. All three TCF
RNAs are ubiquitously expressed at similar relative levels. All three proteins
contain conserved regions that interact with SRF and the c-fos SRE with
comparable efficiency, but in vitro complex formation by SAP-2 is strongly
inhibited by its C-terminal sequences. Similarly, only Elk-1 and SAP-1a
efficiently bind the c-fos SRE in vivo; ternary complex formation by SAP-2 is
weak and is substantially unaffected by serum stimulation or v-ras co-expression.
All three TCFs contain C-terminal transcriptional activation domains that are
phosphorylated following growth factor stimulation. Activation requires conserved
S/T-P motifs found in all the TCF family members. Each TCF activation domain can 
be phosphorylated in vitro by partially purified ERK2, and ERK activation in vivo
is sufficient to potentiate transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC398373
PMID: 7540136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Genomics. 1995 Mar 20;26(2):414-6.

Mouse Elk oncogene maps to chromosome X and a novel Elk oncogene (Elk3) maps to
chromosome 10.

Tamai Y(1), Taketo M, Nozaki M, Seldin MF.

Author information: 
(1)Banyu Tsukuba Research Institute (Merck), Japan.

The Elk protein is a member of the Ets family found in both vertebrates and
invertebrates. Human ELK1 encoded by ELK1 binds alone or together with serum
response factor to DNA and regulates gene expression in a variety of biological
processes. Using a panel of interspecific backcross mice, we have mapped the Elk 
oncogene (Elk) and a novel type Elk oncogene (Elk3), closely related to ELK1. Elk
maps to Chr X, and Elk3 maps to the proximal region of Chr 10.

PMID: 7601474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. EMBO J. 1995 Mar 1;14(5):951-62.

ERK phosphorylation potentiates Elk-1-mediated ternary complex formation and
transactivation.

Gille H(1), Kortenjann M, Thomae O, Moomaw C, Slaughter C, Cobb MH, Shaw PE.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut f¸r Immunbiologie, Spemann Laboratories, Freiburg,
Germany.

Induction of the human c-fos proto-oncogene by mitogens depends on the formation 
of a ternary complex by p62TCF with the serum response factor (SRF) and the serum
response element (SRE). We demonstrate that Elk-1, a protein closely related to
p62TCF in function, is a nuclear target of two members of the MAP kinase family, 
ERK1 and ERK2. Phosphorylation of Elk-1 increases the yield of ternary complex in
vitro. At least five residues in the C-terminal domain of Elk-1 are
phosphorylated upon growth factor stimulation of NIH3T3 cells. These residues are
also phosphorylated by purified ERK1 in vitro, as determined by a combination of 
phosphopeptide sequencing and 2-D peptide mapping. Conversion of two of these
phospho-acceptor sites to alanine impairs the formation of ternary complexes by
the resulting Elk-1 proteins. Removal of these serine residues also drastically
diminishes activation of the c-fos promoter in epidermal growth factor-treated
cells. Analogous mutations at other sites impair activation to a lesser extent
without affecting ternary complex formation in vitro. Our results indicate that
phosphorylation regulates ternary complex formation by Elk-1, which is a
prerequisite for the manifestation of its transactivation potential at the c-fos 
SRE.

PMCID: PMC398167
PMID: 7889942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Methods Enzymol. 1995;254:503-23.

Biochemical analysis of SH2 domain-mediated protein interactions.

Gish G(1), Larose L, Shen R, Pawson T.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

PMID: 8531711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Oncogene. 1994 Nov;9(11):3241-7.

LERK-2, a binding protein for the receptor-tyrosine kinase ELK, is evolutionarily
conserved and expressed in a developmentally regulated pattern.

Fletcher FA(1), Carpenter MK, Shilling H, Baum P, Ziegler SF, Gimpel S,
Hollingsworth T, Vanden Bos T, James L, Hjerrild K, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Immunex Research and Development Corporation, Seattle, Washington 98101.

We have isolated and characterized cDNA clones that encode the rat homologue of a
binding protein, LERK-2, for the receptor tyrosine kinase, elk. The cDNAs contain
an open reading frame of 1527 nucleotides capable of encoding a protein 345 amino
acid residues in length. The nucleotide sequence of the present clones is > 90%
identical to the previously identified human LERK-2 cDNA, and the predicted
proteins encoded by the rat and human clones are identical at 95% of amino acid
residues. Recombinant proteins expressed from the rat cDNAs bind to elk with high
affinity, similar to recombinant human LERK-2 and an endogenously-expressed rat
elk-binding protein. Expression of the rat LERK-2 mRNA was detected in embryonic 
brain, kidney, lung, skeletal muscle, thymus, liver, and heart, and diminished in
the early post-natal period. Significant LERK-2 mRNA expression in the young
adult rat was restricted to the lung, kidney, heart and testes.

PMID: 7936648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Genomics. 1994 Nov 1;24(1):127-32.

Genomic organization and chromosomal localization of mouse Eplg2, a gene encoding
a binding protein for the receptor tyrosine kinase elk.

Fletcher FA(1), Renshaw B, Hollingsworth T, Baum P, Lyman SD, Jenkins NA, Gilbert
DJ, Copeland NG, Davison BL.

Author information: 
(1)Immunex Research and Development Corporation, Seattle, Washington 98101.

The human gene EPLG2 (Eph ligand-2) encodes a potential ligand for the receptor
tyrosine kinase elk. High sequence conservation between the human and the rat
cDNAs and developmentally regulated expression of the rat gene suggest that the
protein encoded by EPLG2 plays an important role in mammalian development. To
facilitate analysis of the physiological role of the protein, we have cloned and 
characterized a 24-kb region of mouse genomic DNA containing the mouse homologue 
of EPLG2 (Eplg2), including 5'- and 3'-flanking sequences. Restriction mapping,
coupled with Southern blot hybridization and sequencing, was used to determine
the structural organization of the gene. The Eplg2 genomic locus spans a region
of approximately 12 kb, encoding five exons and four introns. The first intron
comprises approximately 8.5 kb of the entire 12-kb genomic sequence. Eplg2 was
mapped to the mouse X chromosome by interspecific backcross analysis and is
tightly linked to the androgen receptor (Ar) locus.

PMID: 7896266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Hum Genet. 1994 Oct;94(4):442-4.

Refined mapping of the human Ets-related gene Elk-1 to Xp11.2-p11.4, distal to
the OATL1 region.

Janz M(1), Lehmann U, Olde Weghuis D, de Leeuw B, Geurts van Kessel A,
Gilgenkrantz S, Hipskind RA, Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut f¸r Molekularbiologie, Hannover, Germany.

The gene for human Elk-1, an Ets-related transcription factor, has previously
been localized to a region that lies on the short arm of chromosome X and that is
involved in specific chromosomal translocations associated with synovial sarcoma 
and renal adenocarcinomas. We have used fluorescence in situ hybridization and a 
panel of tumor-derived somatic cell hybrids to refine the localization of Elk-1, 
in particular with regard to the rearrangements in these tumors. Elk-1 has been
assigned to Xp11.2-p11.4, distal to the OATL1 region.

PMID: 7927346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Genomics. 1994 Oct;23(3):710-1.

Mapping of the human SAP1 (SRF accessory protein 1) gene and SAP2, a gene
encoding a related protein, to chromosomal bands 1q32 and 12q23, respectively.

Shipley J(1), Sheer D, Dalton S, Treisman R, Patel K.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cytogenetics Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, United
Kingdom.

SAP1, SAP2, and ELK1 form a related subgroup of ETS-domain proteins that can form
ternary complexes with the transcription factor SRF at the c-fos serum response
element (SRE). SAP1 was identified by a genetic screen for proteins interacting
with SRF expressed in yeast, and SAP2 by its homology with SAP1; ELK1 was
previously identified by its homology to the ETS domain. cDNA probes were used to
isolate cosmid and phage clones harboring genes encoding SAP1 and SAP2. These
clones were subsequently used to map the genes to 1q32 and 12q23, respectively,
by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

PMID: 7851904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 16;269(37):23310-7.

Heterogeneity of ternary complex factors in HeLa cell nuclear extracts.

Pingoud V(1), Zinck R, Hipskind RA, Janknecht R, Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Federal Republic of 
Germany.

Ternary complex factors (TCFs) interact with the serum response factor and DNA
containing the c-fos serum response element to form a ternary complex that
mediates induction of c-fos. TCF activities were partially purified from HeLa
cell nuclear extracts by DNA-cellulose and anion-exchange chromatography followed
by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Four different protein spots (p60TCF,
p62TCF, p62.5TCF, and p64TCF) show renaturable TCF activity. One, p62TCF, was
indistinguishable from the Ets protein Elk-1 in gel shift analyses, while none of
the HeLa TCFs resembled the other cloned TCFs, SAP-1a and SAP-1b. In
two-dimensional gel analysis, Elk-1, SAP-1a, and SAP-1b displayed different pI
and M(r) values and in vitro synthesized Elk-1 comigrated with the p62TCF spot.
Both reacted with Elk-1 specific antisera, as did the major proportion of TCF
activity present in HeLa crude extracts. We conclude that p62TCF is composed of
Elk-1, whereas the identities of the other identified TCFs (p60TCF, p62.5TCF, and
p64TCF) are still unknown.

PMID: 8083237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 16;269(37):23163-70.

Transcriptional activation of the immediate early gene pip92 by serum growth
factors requires both Ets and CArG-like elements.

Latinkic BV(1), Lau LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago
60612.

pip92 is an immediate early gene that is transcriptionally activated in mouse 3T3
fibroblasts upon treatment with serum growth factors or the tumor promoter
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate. Here we show that a 73-base pair pip92
promoter fragment located between base pairs 1231 and 1158 upstream of the
transcription start site is sufficient to mediate transcriptional activation.
This promoter fragment contains two binding sites for transcription factors of
the Ets family and a low affinity binding site for the serum response factor. The
minimal sequence that mediates serum induction includes at least one copy of the 
Ets-binding site and a low affinity binding site for the serum response factor.
This sequence can interact with at least two proteins in a fibroblast nuclear
extract that have binding characteristics of an Ets family protein and a serum
response factor-like protein. These proteins can bind the pip92-inducible element
simultaneously, thus forming a ternary complex. Furthermore, the same element
interacts with recombinant serum response factor and Elk1 proteins individually
as well as simultaneously to form a ternary complex. This mode of ternary complex
formation is in contrast to the one seen in the promoter of the c-fos
protooncogene, where formation of the ternary complex is dependent on the prior
assembly of the serum response factor-DNA binary complex. The activation of a
number of immediate early genes appears to be mediated through a ternary complex 
involving members of the Ets family of transcription factors and the serum
response factor. We propose that different mechanisms can lead to the formation
of such ternary complexes.

PMID: 8083220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Anticancer Res. 1994 Sep-Oct;14(5A):1923-6.

The role of regulated phosphorylation in the biological activity of transcription
factors SRF and Elk-1/SAP-1.

Papavassiliou AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Differentiation Programme, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

The promoters of many genes whose expression is rapidly and transiently increased
upon growth factor or mitogen stimulation of susceptible cells harbor a common
regulatory element, the serum response element (SRE). The transcription factors
that interact with the SRE of these immediate-early genes are being intensively
studied so as to elucidate the signal transduction cascades that link cell
surface receptors to the SRE, and to determine the mechanisms by which
signal-dependent phosphorylation events modulate their function.

PMID: 7847828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Genes Dev. 1994 Aug 1;8(15):1803-16.

Ras/MAP kinase-dependent and -independent signaling pathways target distinct
ternary complex factors.

Hipskind RA(1), B¸scher D, Nordheim A, Baccarini M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

Transcriptional activation of the immediate early genes c-fos and egr-1 by
extracellular signals appears to be mediated by ternary complex factors (TCFs).
In BAC-1 macrophages, growth factor stimulation leads to the retardation of
protein-DNA complexes containing distinct TCFs. One TCF is recognized by Elk-1
antisera, whereas the other is immunologically related to SAP-1. The appearance
and decay of hyperphosphorylated TCF/Elk-1-containing complexes after stimulation
coincide with the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and the
induction and repression of c-fos and egr-1, whereas modified
TCF/SAP-1-containing complexes decay more slowly. Suppression of MAPK activation 
in macrophages and fibroblasts correlates with the failure to induce TCF/Elk-1
hyperphosphorylation without blocking TCF/SAP-1 modification. Accordingly the
modified Elk-1 complex is generated in vitro by activated MAPK, whereas that of
SAP-1 is not. Expression of a dominant-negative Ras mutant (RasAsn17) in BAC-1
cells does not affect CSF-1-induced TCF/SAP-1 modification while suppressing
TCF/Elk-1 phosphorylation. Neither PKC down-regulation by TPA nor inhibition of
Gi proteins by pertussis toxin pretreatment influences CSF-1-induced signaling to
TCFs. These data indicate the existence of two separate signaling pathways for
the modification of distinct TCFs: one dependent on Ras and MAPK and converging
on TCF/Elk-1, and the other targeting TCF/SAP-1 independently of Ras and MAPK.

PMID: 7958858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jul 29;269(30):19203-6.

The CAAX peptidomimetic compound B581 specifically blocks farnesylated, but not
geranylgeranylated or myristylated, oncogenic ras signaling and transformation.

Cox AD(1), Garcia AM, Westwick JK, Kowalczyk JJ, Lewis MD, Brenner DA, Der CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 27599.

Recently developed CAAX peptidomimetic compounds have been shown to be potent and
specific inhibitors of farnesyl protein transferase activity and to block the
growth of Ras-transformed cells. However, whether this growth inhibitory action
is specifically a consequence of blocking oncogenic Ras signaling has not been
determined. To address this question, we have utilized mutants of the normally
farnesylated oncogenic Ras protein (Ras-F) that are modified by alternative
lipids, a geranylgeranyl isoprenoid (Ras-GG) or the fatty acid myristate
(Myr-Ras), to determine the specificity of the CAAX peptidomimetic compound,
B581. Like Ras-F, both Ras-GG and Myr-Ras are membrane-associated and
transforming. Unexpectedly, NIH 3T3 cells transformed by each of the three Ras
mutants underwent morphological alteration to a less transformed, but not normal,
morphology. However, B581 inhibited the ability of only Ras-F-transformed cells, 
but not Ras-GG- or Myr-Ras- (or Raf-) transformed cells, to grow in soft agar.
Furthermore, although all three lipid-modified versions of Ras stimulated
mitogen-activated protein kinase activation, and both Jun and Elk-1
transcriptional activity, B581 inhibited only farnesylated Ras activation of
these three downstream components of Ras signaling. Therefore, B581 prevents the 
growth of Ras-transformed cells by specifically antagonizing Ras-mediated
signaling.

PMID: 8034681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Oncogene. 1994 Jul;9(7):1855-60.

elk-1 proteins interact with MAP kinases.

Rao VN(1), Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson Cancer Institute,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107-5541.

Mitogen activated protein kinases (MAP) or extracellular signal regulated protein
kinases (ERK) are a family of protein serine/threonine kinases that are activated
very rapidly in response to many extracellular stimuli. elk-1, an ets related
gene codes for two transcriptional factors elk-1, which regulates c-fos
transcription and delta elk-1, both of which are substrates for MAP kinases. A
part of the C-terminal transcriptional activation domain (ETA-2) which is common 
to both the proteins was previously shown to function as an activator of MAP
kinases. In this report, in an attempt to investigate the mechanism of activation
of MAP kinases, purified preparations of recombinant elk-1 and P44mpk/ERK-1/ERK-2
proteins were used to show the association of elk-1 proteins with MAP kinases.
The specific interactions of elk-1 proteins with MAP kinases were confirmed by
co-immunoprecipitation studies. Thus elk-1 proteins appear to regulate the
activity of MAP kinases by interacting with them ensuring a conformational change
and stimulating their autophosphorylation and activation property. The activation
was dependent on the presence of ATP and Mg2+. In vitro phosphorylation of elk-1 
protein was not regulatory for autonomous DNA binding activity of elk-1 protein. 
Cells which were exposed to EGF showed a rapid stimulation of an elk-1 specific
kinase activity, probably MAP kinase which phosphorylated MBP and was found to be
associated with immobilized GST-elk-1. Furthermore, dephosphorylation studies
indicate that elk-1 proteins can activate only tyrosine phosphorylated MAP
kinase. These results demonstrate the presence of an alternative
pathway/mechanism (other than MAP kinase kinase, MAPKK/Mek) for the activation of
MAP kinases with tyrosine phosphorylation occurring before serine/threonine
autophosphorylation and activation by elk-1 proteins.

PMID: 8208531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Genes Dev. 1994 Jul 1;8(13):1502-13.

Net, a new ets transcription factor that is activated by Ras.

Giovane A(1), Pintzas A, Maira SM, Sobieszczuk P, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique-Laboratoire de Genetique
Moleculaire des Eucaryotes (CNRS-LGME), Institut National de la SantÈ et de la
Recherche MÈdicale (INSERM)-U. 184, FacultÈ de MÈdecine, Strasbourg, France.

Ras signaling appears to be mediated in part by transcription factors that belong
to the ets gene family. To identify downstream targets for the Ras signal
transduction pathway, we have used Ras-transformed mouse fibroblasts to isolate a
new member of the ets gene family, net. Net has sequence similarity in three
regions with the ets factors Elk1 and SAP1, which have been implicated in the
serum response of the fos promoter. Net shares various properties with these
proteins, including the ability to bind to ets DNA motifs through the Ets domain 
of the protein and form ternary complexes with the serum response factor SRF on
the fos serum response element, SRE. However, Net differs from Elk1 and SAP1 in a
number of ways. The pattern of net RNA expression in adult mouse tissues is
different. Net has negative effects on transcription in a number of assays,
unlike Elk1. Strikingly, Ras, Src, and Mos expression switch Net activity to
positive. The study of Net should help in understanding the interplay between Net
and other members of the Elk subfamily and their contribution to signal
transduction through Ras to the nucleus.

PMID: 7958835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. FEBS Lett. 1994 Jun 13;346(2-3):229-34.

Functional divergence of the MAP kinase pathway. ERK1 and ERK2 activate specific 
transcription factors.

Chuang CF(1), Ng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

Growth factor-receptor interactions at the cell surface eventually leading to the
transcriptional activation of immediate early genes is mediated by the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP kinase/MAPK) cascade. Here we show that
overexpression of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 (ERK1) cDNA, encoding
p44mapk, results in the activation of Elk-1, the serum response factor accessory 
protein. We also show that overexpression of ERK2, encoding p42mapk, activates
Myc, but not Elk-1. Therefore, the MAP kinase cascade diverges with at least one 
specific target for each MAP kinase isoform and provides a novel mechanism for
differential regulation of this signaling pathway.

PMID: 8013639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 May;14(5):3283-91.

The transcription factors Elk-1 and serum response factor interact by direct
protein-protein contacts mediated by a short region of Elk-1.

Shore P(1), Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Medical School, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

Transcriptional induction of the c-fos gene in response to epidermal growth
factor stimulation is mediated in part by a ternary nucleoprotein complex within 
the promoter consisting of serum response factor (SRF), p62TCF/Elk-1 and the
serum response element (SRE). Both SRF and p62TCF/Elk-1 contact the DNA and bind 
in a cooperative manner to the SRE. In this study, we demonstrate that SRF and
Elk-1 interact directly in the absence of the SRE. A 30-amino-acid peptide from
Elk-1 (B-box) is both necessary and sufficient to mediate protein-protein
contacts with SRF. Moreover, the Elk-1 B-box is necessary to enable SRF-dependent
binding of an alternative ETS domain (from the transcription factor PU.1) to the 
c-fos SRE. Mutations in either the Elk-1 B-box or the C-terminal half of the SRF 
DNA-binding domain (coreSRF) which show reduced ability to form ternary complexes
also show greatly reduced protein-protein interactions in the absence of the SRE.
Our results clearly demonstrate that direct protein-protein interactions between 
the transcription factors Elk-1 and SRF, in addition to DNA contacts, contribute 
to the formation of a ternary complex on the c-fos SRE. We discuss the wider
applicability of our results in describing specific protein-protein interactions 
between short well-defined transcription factor domains.

PMCID: PMC358695
PMID: 8164681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Genomics. 1994 May 1;21(1):262-5.

Physical mapping in a YAC contig of 11 markers on the human X chromosome in
Xp11.23.

Hagemann T(1), Surosky R, Monaco AP, Lehrach H, Rosen FS, Kwan SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Rush Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60612.

By using yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) clones, we have generated a physical
map of the short arm of the human X chromosome at Xp11.23. The region analyzed
spans the distal marker UBE1 and the ARAF1/TIMP/SYN1/PFC gene cluster and further
extends proximally to include ELK1, ZNF21, ZNF81, and OATL1 in a single contig.
We have uniquely placed UBE1 and the SYN1 gene cluster in a 330-kb YAC within the
contig. In addition, the genes SYP and TFE3 are physically linked in a YAC of 400
kb from the more centromeric portion of Xp11.23. We have refined the map by using
fragmentation vectors to generate YAC deletion derivatives. These derivatives
show that ZNF81 and ZNF21 lie within an approximately 130-kb segment and that
SYN1.2 and ELK1 are less than 50 kb apart. Together these data reveal the
following order for the markers in this region:
Xpter-UBE1-ARAF1-TIMP-SYN1.2-PFC-ELK1++ +-ZNF81-ZNF21-OATL1-(SYP,TFE3)-Xcen.

PMID: 8088799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Genomics. 1994 May 1;21(1):180-7.

Clustered organization of Kr¸ppel zinc-finger genes at Xp11.23, flanking a
translocation breakpoint at OATL1: a physical map with locus assignments for
ZNF21, ZNF41, ZNF81, and ELK1.

Knight JC(1), Grimaldi G, Thiesen HJ, Bech-Hansen NT, Fletcher CD, Coleman MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, St. Thomas's Hospital, UMDS, London, United
Kingdom.

The ZNF21, ZNF41, and ZNF81 genes encode Kr¸ppel-type zinc-finger proteins (ZFPs)
and have previously been mapped to chromosome Xp. Published data describing the
clustering of ZFP genes on human autosomes led us to investigate the organization
of ZNF21, ZNF41, and ZNF81 on the X chromosome. Rodent-human hybrid analysis
sublocalized all three genes to Xp22.11-p11.23. ZNF21, ZNF41, and ZNF81 were then
shown to segregate within a series of YACs (95 to 730 kb) containing known
markers at Xp11.23, such that these YACs could be assembled into a contig
spanning approximately 1.5 Mb of DNA. Southern analysis of intact YACs and YAC
DNAs cut with rare-cutter restriction enzymes enabled us to establish the spatial
organization of the ZFP gene cluster, the OATL1 pseudogene, the recurrent t(X;18)
chromosome translocation breakpoint in synovial sarcoma, and the previously
described cluster of ARAF1, SYN1, TIMP, and PFC genes. We have assigned the
ETS-related gene ELK1 to a locus tightly linked to the PFC gene; the entire
cluster of five genes is contained within a distance of 120 kb. ZNF41 maps to a
440-kb YAC spanning this region, while a more proximal cluster comprising the
ZNF21 and ZNF81 genes lies 150 kb distal to the chromosome breakpoint associated 
with synovial sarcoma.

PMID: 8088786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Oncogene. 1994 Apr;9(4):1273-8.

Functional dissection of the transcription factor Elk-1.

Janknecht R(1), Zinck R, Ernst WH, Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

The ternary complex factor Elk-1 belongs to the Ets oncoprotein family. We
demonstrate that this transcription factor is localized predominantly in the
nucleus, for which at least two regions of Elk-1 are required. One of these
regions is part of the N-terminal ETS-domain, while the other encompasses amino
acids 137-157. In conjunction with the ETS-domain, which mediates autonomous
binding of Elk-1 to some DNA target sequences, the conserved B-region is both
necessary and sufficient for ternary complex formation with the c-fos serum
response element and the serum response factor. However, the B-region must be
linked to the ETS-domain by a spacer. Furthermore, the B-region impedes
autonomous DNA-binding, possibly by masking the ETS-domain. A point mutation
within the ETS-domain, homologous to the ts1.1 point mutation of v-Ets in the E26
virus, affects DNA-binding of Elk-1 in a temperature-dependent manner, which by
analogy might be causative for the altered phenotype of ts1.1 E26. Finally we
show that amino acids 83-428 contribute to Elk-1 mediated transactivation. In
particular, the region 376-404 is indispensable for transactivation, while
flanking amino acids on both sides are only required for enhancement of
transcriptional efficacy.

PMID: 8134131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. EMBO J. 1993 Dec 15;12(13):5097-104.

Activation of ternary complex factor Elk-1 by MAP kinases.

Janknecht R(1), Ernst WH, Pingoud V, Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

Ternary complex factors (TCFs), one of which is Elk-1, have been implicated in
mediation of c-fos induction. They have been shown to be phosphorylated by
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) in vitro. We demonstrate that
recombinant Elk-1 is hyperphosphorylated in vivo upon joint overexpression of
MAPKs and constitutively activated Raf-1 kinase, the latter serving as an
indirect in vivo activator of MAPKs. This phosphorylation is accompanied by a
conformational change and results in an elevated transactivation potential of
Elk-1. Mutation of mapped in vivo phosphorylation sites, which are potential
targets for MAPKs, reduced Elk-1-mediated transcription. Thus, MAPKs are very
probably controlling Elk-1 activity by direct phosphorylation in vivo.
Furthermore, Elk-1 was shown to stimulate transcription from both the c-fos serum
response element and also from an Ets binding site. While binding of TCFs to the 
c-fos promoter is dependent on the serum response factor, TCFs can autonomously
interact with Ets binding sites. This indicates that TCFs may participate in the 
transcriptional regulation of two different sets of genes.

PMCID: PMC413771
PMID: 8262053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Cancer Res. 1993 Aug 1;53(15):3449-54.

Elk-1 proteins are phosphoproteins and activators of mitogen-activated protein
kinase.

Rao VN(1), Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson Cancer Institute,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107-5541.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAP kinases) or meiosis-activated myelin basic
protein kinase (p44mpk) are known to be activated by a mechanism involving dual
phosphorylation at both tyrosine and serine/threonine in response to many
extracellular stimuli. There has been considerable speculation as to whether MAP 
kinases are autophosphorylated and activated by an upstream protein kinase (MAP
kinase kinase) or an activator of autophosphorylation or both. Here we report
that the ets-related proteins elk-1 and delta elk-1 to be potential physiological
substrates and activators of MAP kinases. Our results demonstrate for the first
time that MAP kinase activators can also be non-kinase proteins that enhance the 
autophosphorylation and activation of MAP kinase. These findings could establish 
a general mechanism wherein specific MAP kinase activator protein(s) may function
by interacting with MAP kinases ensuring a conformational change and stimulating 
their autophosphorylation and activation property. Our results also suggest that 
the amino-terminal truncated elk-1 proteins are better activators of MAP kinase
than full length proteins indicating the presence of a potential negative
regulatory region which may control the kinase activator function of elk-1
proteins. Our results suggest differential regulation of elk-1 and delta elk-1
proteins in fibroblasts stimulated by epidermal growth factor implicating a key
role for these proteins in the signal transduction pathway. These results
establish the presence of an alternative pathway for activation of MAP kinases.
Thus we propose that elk-1 proteins may represent key intermediates which would
transmit signals arriving at the surface of the cell from activated receptors to 
downstream MAP kinases in the cytoplasm to reach the transcriptional factors in
the nucleus.

PMID: 8339245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Cell. 1993 Apr 23;73(2):395-406.

Functional analysis of a growth factor-responsive transcription factor complex.

Hill CS(1), Marais R, John S, Wynne J, Dalton S, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, England.

Serum response factor (SRF) forms a ternary complex at the c-fos serum response
element (SRE) with an accessory factor, Elk-1. We constructed altered-binding
specificity derivatives of SRF and Elk-1 that form a ternary complex at a
mutated, inactive SRE; like Elk-1, the Elk-1 variant only binds its target as
part of a ternary complex with SRF. Simultaneous expression of these SRF and
Elk-1 derivatives restores serum-regulated activity to the mutated SRE in
transfected cells. Efficient transcriptional activation is dependent on the
regulated phosphorylation of Elk-1 C-terminal MAP kinase sites and requires the
C-terminal sequences of SRF as well as SRF sequences that mediate ternary complex
formation. These experiments provide direct evidence that SRF and Elk-1
functionally cooperate in the ternary complex at the SRE to regulate
transcription.

PMID: 8477450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Cell. 1993 Apr 23;73(2):381-93.

The SRF accessory protein Elk-1 contains a growth factor-regulated
transcriptional activation domain.

Marais R(1), Wynne J, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, England.

The Elk-1 and SRF transcription factors form a ternary complex at the c-fos serum
response element (SRE). Growth factor stimulation rapidly induces a reversible
change in the electrophoretic mobility of the ternary complex, accompanied by
increased phosphorylation of the Elk-1 C-terminal region and by the activation of
a 42 kd cellular Elk-1 kinase. Phosphorylation of Elk-1 in vitro by partially
purified p42/p44 MAP kinase induces a similar reduction in ternary complex
mobility but has little effect on the efficiency of its formation. In vitro, MAP 
kinase phosphorylates the Elk-1 C-terminal region at multiple sites, which are
also phosphorylated following growth factor stimulation in vivo. The Elk-1
C-terminal region functions as a regulated transcriptional activation domain
whose activity in vivo is dependent on the integrity of the MAP kinase sites.
These findings directly link transcriptional activation by the SRE to the growth 
factor-regulated phosphorylation of an SRE-binding protein.

PMID: 8386592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Cancer Res. 1993 Jan 15;53(2):215-20.

Delta elk-1, a variant of elk-1, fails to interact with the serum response factor
and binds to DNA with modulated specificity.

Rao VN(1), Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson Cancer Institute,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107-5541.

The ets oncogene superfamily codes for a family of transcriptional factors that
are involved in gene regulation not only by autonomous DNA binding but also by
indirect DNA binding through interaction with cellular factors. We have
previously shown that a member of this superfamily, elk-1, is a sequence specific
transcriptional activator, which forms a serum response factor (SRF) dependent
ternary complex with serum response element (SRE) similar to p62TCF. We describe 
here an alternatively spliced variant of elk-1 named delta elk-1, which has lost 
the SRF interaction domain, negative regulatory DNA binding domain, and part of
the elk-1 DNA binding domain. This variant elk-1 protein has lost the capacity to
form a SRF dependent ternary complex with SRE and to activate fos transcription. 
Since this splice variant lacks part of the ets DNA binding domain, it binds to
DNA with a specificity that is different from that of the full length elk-1
protein. Therefore differential splicing within the DNA binding and
protein-protein interaction domains of transcriptional factors can generate
proteins with modulated DNA binding specificities and transcriptional regulation.
Thus it is conceivable that variant elk-1 might function by competing for some of
the elk-1 target sequences (like SRE) and thereby block the transcriptional
activation of fos by SRF and elk-1. Alternately, variant elk-1 protein may be the
repressor, recruited by the SRE bound SRF for c-fos repression, or it may have an
altogether different function. Therefore, elk-1 appears to fall in the category
of genes that encode activators and repressors through the mechanism of
differential splicing.

PMID: 8417810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Int J Oncol. 1992 Dec;1(7):747-52.

Cytogenetic and molecular analysis of synovial sarcoma.

Knight J(1), Reeves B, Smith S, Clark J, Fisher C, Fletcher C, Gusterson B,
Cooper C.

Author information: 
(1)INST CANC RES,CELL BIOL & EXPTL PATHOL SECT,BELMONT SM2 6HZ,SURREY,ENGLAND.
INST CHILD HLTH,DEPT HAEMATOL & ONCOL,LONDON WC1N 1EH,ENGLAND. ROYAL MARSDEN
HOSP,DEPT HISTOPATHOL,LONDON SW3,ENGLAND. INST CANC RES,MOLEC CARCINOGENESIS
SECT,BELMONT SM2 6HZ,SURREY,ENGLAND.

We have carried out cytogenetic studies on a series of ten synovial sarcomas.
Five of these tumours contained the characteristic reciprocal translocation
t(X;18) (p11.2;q11.2) and a further two tumours contained complex rearrangements 
involving chromosomes X and 18. Secondary clonal alterations were seen in four
tumours. Candidate genes at Xp11.2-p11.3 have been assessed for involvement in
the translocation by Northern and Southern analysis: genes encoding transcription
factors (ELK1 and TFE3), a metalloproteinase inhibitor (TIMP-1), a
ubiquitin-activating enzyme (UBE1), a serine-threonine kinase (ARAF1) and the
neural cell phosphoprotein synapsin 1 (SYN1). We found no evidence of abnormal
transcription or rearrangements of these genes in a panel of synovial sarcoma
biopsies and cell lines, indicating that they are not directly involved in the
t(X;18) chromosome translocation.

PMID: 21584611  [PubMed]


282. Hum Mol Genet. 1992 Nov;1(8):633-7.

Localization of the synovial sarcoma t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2) breakpoint by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Knight JC(1), Reeves BR, Kearney L, Monaco AP, Lehrach H, Cooper CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell Biology and Experimental Pathology, Institute of Cancer
Research, Belmont, Surrey, UK.

A high proportion of synovial sarcomas contain a chromosome translocation
t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2). We have previously used somatic cell hybrids derived from
an established cell line, SS255, to map the X chromosome breakpoint to the
interval flanked by the markers DXS14 and DXS146. In this study we have examined 
these hybrids with thirteen additional markers located at Xp11.3-Xcen, by
Southern hybridization. Based on these results we have delimited the breakpoint
as follows Xpter-DXS228-(UBE1-OATL1-TIMP-DXS226
)-(DXS255-TFE3-ELK1-DXS146)-OATL2- X;18-(DXS14-DXS422-DXS423-DXS674-DXS679)-+
++Xcen. Confirmation of the breakpoint location has been obtained by analysis of 
two synovial sarcoma cell lines, SS255 and HA2243, using fluorescence in situ
hybridization. A 350kb YAC probe spanning the DXS423 locus hybridized only to the
derivative X chromosome, showing that it maps proximal to the breakpoint. Two YAC
probes of 300kb and 450kb, containing the OATL2 locus, hybridized to both
derivative chromosomes, indicating that these YACs span the translocation
breakpoint. Similar results were obtained with both cell lines. The
identification of YACs that span the t(X;18) breakpoint now facilitates a
strategy for cloning candidate genes from this precisely defined region.

PMID: 1338692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Oncogene. 1992 Sep;7(9):1713-9.

Genomic dispersal of the ets gene family during metazoan evolution.

Lautenberger JA(1), Burdett LA, Gunnell MA, Qi S, Watson DK, O'Brien SJ, Papas
TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

Evolutionary homologs of the ets proto-oncogene have been discovered in the
genomes of widely divergent eucaryote species from Drosophila to sea urchin to
vertebrates. The prototype mammalian ets-1 and ets-2 genes are divided into three
coding domains that differ in their rate of accumulation of sequence divergence. 
An analysis of sequence divergence of ets gene homologs in various species has
produced a phylogenetic history of the ets gene family in the context of metazoan
evolutionary radiation. A minimum of five duplication events of ets primordial
genes were evident, namely (1) a duplication that separates primitive ets genes
(Drosophila precursor of 74E, mouse PU.1 and human ELK1) from the ets-1, ets-2,
erg ancestor; (2) and (3) two duplications that established separate ets, erg and
elg/GABP-alpha lineages which occurred prior to invertebrate-vertebrate
divergence; (4) divergence of ets-1 and ets-2 gene family also associated with
vertebrate-invertebrate divergence; (5) duplication of ets-1 and ets-2 in Xenopus
laevis to produce two ets-1 genes and two ets-2 genes during genomic
tetraploidation in the recent ancestry of this species.

PMID: 1501883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Jul 11;20(13):3317-24.

Elk-1 protein domains required for direct and SRF-assisted DNA-binding.

Janknecht R(1), Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

The Ets-related Elk-1 protein can bind to purine-rich DNA target sites in a
sequence specific fashion and, in addition, can form a ternary complex with the
c-fos serum response element (SRE) and the serum response factor (SRF). We
demonstrate that Elk-1 can readily interchange between its different interaction 
partners. The amino terminal ETS-domain of Elk-1 was shown to be necessary and
sufficient for direct DNA-binding activity. For ternary complex formation with
the SRE and SRF, both the Elk-1 ETS-domain as well as flanking sequences up to
amino acid 169 were required. Removal of sequences between the ETS-domain and
amino acids 137-169 did not abolish ternary complex formation. This suggests the 
Elk-1 region spanning amino acids 137-169 to contain a protein-protein
interaction domain. Furthermore, we have shown that a single amino acid exchange 
introduced into the ETS-domain can drastically alter the direct DNA-binding
affinity of Elk-1 without severely affecting SRF-assisted binding to the SRE.
Thus, Elk-1 requires different propensities of the ETS-domain to exert its
different modes of DNA sequence recognition.

PMCID: PMC312483
PMID: 1630903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 May;11(5):2496-502.

Characterization of elk, a brain-specific receptor tyrosine kinase.

Lhot·k V(1), Greer P, Letwin K, Pawson T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The elk gene encodes a novel receptorlike protein-tyrosine kinase, which belongs 
to the eph subfamily. We have previously identified a partial cDNA encompassing
the elk catalytic domain (K. Letwin, S.-P. Yee, and T. Pawson, Oncogene
3:621-678, 1988). Using this cDNA as a probe, we have isolated cDNAs spanning the
entire rat elk coding sequence. The predicted Elk protein contains all the
hallmarks of a receptor tyrosine kinase, including an N-terminal signal sequence,
a cysteine-rich extracellular domain, a membrane-spanning segment, a cytoplasmic 
tyrosine kinase domain, and a C-terminal tail. In both amino acid sequence and
overall structure, Elk is most similar to the Eph and Eck protein-tyrosine
kinases, suggesting that the eph, elk, and eck genes encode members of a new
subfamily of receptorlike tyrosine kinases. Among rat tissues, elk expression
appears restricted to brain and testes, with the brain having higher levels of
both elk RNA and protein. Elk protein immunoprecipitated from a rat brain lysate 
becomes phosphorylated on tyrosine in an in vitro kinase reaction, consistent
with the prediction that the mammalian elk gene encodes a tyrosine kinase capable
of autophosphorylation. The characteristics of the Elk tyrosine kinase suggest
that it may be involved in cell-cell interactions in the nervous system.

PMCID: PMC360018
PMID: 2017163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Oncogene. 1990 Oct;5(10):1521-7.

Molecular organization and differential polyadenylation sites of the human ETS2
gene.

Watson DK(1), Mavrothalassitis GJ, Jorcyk CL, Smyth FE, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21701-1013.

The human ETS2 gene is a member of the ets gene family (ETS1, ETS2, ERG, ELK1 and
ELK2) with amino acid similarity to the v-ets oncogene of the avian leukemia
virus, E26. The ETS2 gene is composed of 10 exons, nine of which contribute to
the open reading frame encoding 469 amino acids. The ETS2 gene directs the
synthesis of three RNA transcripts, which differ from each other by the length of
their 3' ends. This heterogeneity of 3' end is the major reason for the size
differences between the transcripts, presumably reflecting utilization of three
different polyadenylation signals/sites. The coding regions of all of the ETS2
RNA species are the same length and, thus, should contain the same open reading
frame.

PMID: 2250910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Science. 1989 Apr 7;244(4900):66-70.

elk, tissue-specific ets-related genes on chromosomes X and 14 near translocation
breakpoints.

Rao VN(1), Huebner K, Isobe M, ar-Rushdi A, Croce CM, Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, Philadelphia, PA 19104.

The myb-ets-containing acute leukemia virus, E26, transforms myeloblasts and
erythroblasts in culture and causes a mixed erythroid and myeloid leukemia in
chicks. Genes (ets-1, ets-2, and erg) with variable relatedness to the v-ets
oncogene of the E26 virus have been identified, cloned, and characterized in
several species. Two new members (elk-1 and elk-2) of the ets oncogene
superfamily have now been identified. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the elk-1
cDNA clone revealed that this gene encodes a 428-residue protein whose predicted 
amino acid sequence showed 82% similarity to the 3' region of v-ets. The elk or
related sequences appear to be transcriptionally active in testis and lung. The
elk cDNA probe detects two loci in the human genome, elk-1 and elk-2, which map
to chromosome regions Xp11.2 and 14q32.3, respectively. These loci are near the
translocation breakpoint seen in the t(X;18) (p11.2;q11.2), which is
characteristic of synovial sarcoma, and the chromosome 14q32 breakpoints seen in 
ataxia telangiectasia and other T cell malignancies. This suggests the
possibility that rearrangements of elk loci may be involved in pathogenesis of
certain tumors.

PMID: 2539641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


