
1. P R Health Sci J. 2016 Mar;35(1):3-8.

Pathway Analysis using Gene-expression Profiles of HPV-positive and HPV-negative 
Oropharyngeal Cancer Patients in a Hispanic Population: Methodological
Procedures.

Suárez E(1), González L(2), Pérez-Mitchell C(3), Ortiz AP(4), Ramírez-Sola M(5), 
Acosta J(6), Bernabe-Dones RD(7), González-Aquino C(8), Montes-Rodríguez I(9),
Cadilla CL(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public
Health, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus, San Juan, PR.
(2)Puerto Rico Clinical and Translational Research Consortium, University of
Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus, San Juan, PR. (3)Center for Cranial Base,
Head, and Neck Surgery, HIMA Health San Pablo Group, Caguas, PR; Department of
Otolaryngology, School of Medicine, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences
Campus, San Juan, PR. (4)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Graduate
School of Public Health, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus, San
Juan, PR; University of Puerto Rico Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Juan, PR.
(5)Cancer Center of HIMA Health San Pablo Group, Caguas, PR. (6)Center for
Cranial Base, Head, and Neck Surgery, HIMA Health San Pablo Group, Caguas, PR.
(7)University of Puerto Rico Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Juan, PR; School of
Health Professions, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus, San Juan, 
PR. (8)Department of Otolaryngology, School of Medicine, University of Puerto
Rico Medical Sciences Campus, San Juan, PR. (9)Department of Chemistry,
University of Puerto Rico Mayagüez Campus. (10)Department of Biochemistry, School
of Medicine and RCMI Center for Genomics in Health Disparities and Rare Diseases,
University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus, San Juan, PR.

OBJECTIVE: The incidence of oral cavity and pharyngeal cancer in Puerto Rican men
is higher than it is in the men of any other ethnic/racial group in the United
States of America (US). The information regarding the effect of the human
papilloma virus (HPV) in the gene-expression profile among patients with this
cancer is limited in Hispanic community. We aim to describe the methodology for
future studies to identify the molecular networks for determining overrepresented
signaling and metabolic canonical pathways, based on the differential
gene-expression profiles of HPV+ and HPV- samples from patients with
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma in Puerto Rico.
METHODS: We analyzed the RNA expression of 5 tissue samples from subjects
diagnosed with oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma, 2 HPV+ and 3 HPV-, using
Affymetrix GeneChips. The relative difference between the average gene
expressions of the HPV+ and HPV- samples was assessed, based on the fold change
(log2-scale).
RESULTS: Our analysis revealed 10 up regulated molecules (Mup1, LRP1, P14KA,
ALYREF, and BHMT) and 5 down regulated ones (PSME4, KEAP1, ELK3, FAM186B, and
PRELID1), at a cutoff of 1.5-fold change. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis showed the
following biological functions to be affected in the HPV+ samples: cancer,
hematological disease, and RNA post-transcriptional modification. QRT-PCR
analysis confirmed only the differential regulation of ALYREF, KEAP1, and FAM186B
genes.
CONCLUSION: The relevant methodological procedures described are sufficient to
detect the most significant biological functions and pathways according to the
HPV status in patients with oropharyngeal cancer in Puerto Rico.

PMID: 26932277  [PubMed - in process]


2. Gene Expr. 2015;16(4):197-203. doi: 10.3727/105221615X14399878166276.

ELK3 Expression Correlates With Cell Migration, Invasion, and Membrane Type
1-Matrix Metalloproteinase Expression in MDA-MB-231 Breast Cancer Cells.

Heo SH(1), Lee JY, Yang KM, Park KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Life Science, CHA University,
Seoul, Korea.

ELK3 is a member of the Ets family of transcription factors. Its expression is
associated with angiogenesis, vasculogenesis, and chondrogenesis. ELK3 inhibits
endothelial migration and tube formation through the regulation of MT1-MMP
transcription. This study assessed the function of ELK3 in breast cancer (BC)
cells by comparing its expression between basal and luminal cells in silico and
in vitro. In silico analysis showed that ELK3 expression was higher in the more
aggressive basal BC cells than in luminal BC cells. Similarly, in vitro analysis 
showed that ELK3 mRNA and protein expression was higher in basal BC cells than in
normal cells and luminal BC cells. To investigate whether ELK3 regulates basal
cell migration or invasion, knockdown was achieved by siRNA in the basal BC cell 
line MDA-MB-231. Inhibition of ELK3 expression decreased cell migration and
invasion and downregulated MT1-MMP, the expression of which is positively
correlated with tumor cell invasion. In silico analysis revealed that ELK3
expression was associated with that of MT1-MMP in several BC cell lines (0.98
Pearson correlation coefficient). Though MT1-MMP expression was upregulated upon 
ELK3 nuclear translocation, ELK3 did not directly bind to the 1.3-kb promoter
region of the MT1-MMP gene. These results suggest that ELK3 plays a positive role
in the metastasis of BC cells by indirectly regulating MT1-MMP expression.

PMID: 26637400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Elife. 2015 Nov 21;4. pii: e10870. doi: 10.7554/eLife.10870.

ETS family transcriptional regulators drive chromatin dynamics and malignancy in 
squamous cell carcinomas.

Yang H(1), Schramek D(1), Adam RC(1), Keyes BE(1), Wang P(2), Zheng D(2,)(3),
Fuchs E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Robin Chemers Neustein Laboratory of
Mammalian Cell Biology and Development, The Rockefeller University, New York,
United States. (2)Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
New York, United States. (3)Departments of Genetics and Neuroscience, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, New York, United States.

Tumor-initiating stem cells (SCs) exhibit distinct patterns of transcription
factors and gene expression compared to healthy counterparts. Here, we show that 
dramatic shifts in large open-chromatin domain (super-enhancer) landscapes
underlie these differences and reflect tumor microenvironment. By in vivo
super-enhancer and transcriptional profiling, we uncover a dynamic
cancer-specific epigenetic network selectively enriched for binding motifs of a
transcription factor cohort expressed in squamous cell carcinoma SCs (SCC-SCs).
Many of their genes, including Ets2 and Elk3, are themselves regulated by SCC-SC 
super-enhancers suggesting a cooperative feed-forward loop. Malignant progression
requires these genes, whose knockdown severely impairs tumor growth and prohibits
progression from benign papillomas to SCCs. ETS2-deficiency disrupts the SCC-SC
super-enhancer landscape and downstream cancer genes while ETS2-overactivation in
epidermal-SCs induces hyperproliferation and SCC super-enhancer-associated genes 
Fos, Junb and Klf5. Together, our findings unearth an essential regulatory
network required for the SCC-SC chromatin landscape and unveil its importance in 
malignant progression.

PMCID: PMC4739765
PMID: 26590320  [PubMed - in process]


4. Br J Haematol. 2015 Jun 26. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13543. [Epub ahead of print]

PAX5 alterations in genetically unclassified childhood Precursor B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Stasevich I(1,)(2), Inglott S(1), Austin N(1), Chatters S(1), Chalker J(1), Addy 
D(1), Dryden C(1), Ancliff P(3), Ford A(4), Williams O(2), Kempski H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Cellular and Molecular Diagnostic Service, Great Ormond Street
Hospital, London, UK. (2)Developmental Biology and Cancer (DBC), University
College London-Institute of Child Health, London, UK. (3)Department of
Haematology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK. (4)Centre for Evolution
and Cancer, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.

Here, we report a high incidence of PAX5 abnormalities observed in 32/68 (47%) of
patients with genetically unclassified childhood precursor B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia (pre-B ALL). Various deletions, gains, mutations and
rearrangements of PAX5 comprised 45%, 12%, 29% and 14%, respectively, of the
abnormalities found. 28% of patients showed more than one abnormality of the
gene, implying bi-allelic impairment of PAX5. Novel PAX5-RHOXF2, PAX5-ELK3 and
PAX5-CBFA2T2 rearrangements, which lead to aberrant expression of PAX5, were also
identified. PAX5 rearrangements demonstrated a complex mechanism of formation
including concurrent duplications/deletions of PAX5 and its partner genes.
Finally, the splice variant c.1013-2A>G, seen in two patients with loss of one
PAX5 allele, was confirmed to be germ-line in one patient and somatic in the
other. PAX5 alterations were also found to be clinically associated with a higher
white blood cell count (P = 0·015). These findings contribute to the knowledge of
PAX5 alterations and their role in the pathogenesis of pre-B ALL.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26115422  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Clin Respir J. 2014 Dec 16. doi: 10.1111/crj.12247. [Epub ahead of print]

SMC3 may play an important role in atopic asthma development.

Cheng Q(1), Huang W(1), Chen N(1), Shang Y(1), Zhang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning, China.

INTRODUCTION: As a common disease with a complex risk, including genetic and
environmental factors, atopic asthma is prevalent but treatable. The aim of the
study was to predict the underlying mechanism of asthma and identify target genes
for the disease.
METHODS: The affymetrix chip data, GSE18965, were available from Gene Expression 
Omnibus and the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between nine atopic
asthmatic specimens and seven healthy nonatopic samples were identified by R.
Then Gene Ontology and pathway enrichment analyses were performed to these DEGs. 
Further, search tool for the retrieval of interacting genes/proteins (STRING) was
used to select protein-protein interaction (PPI) for DEGs, and then the network
was visualized by Cytoscape. Finally, transcription factor binding site analysis 
was conducted to the hot gene.
RESULTS: Total 565 DEGs were identified, including 535 upregulated and 30
downregulated genes. The upregulated genes, such as structural maintenance of
chromosome (SMC)3, significantly affected cellular component of extracellular
matrix (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.56E-04). Otherwise, DEGs were remarkably enriched in three
pathways, including transforming growth factor-beta signaling pathway
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005252649). Further, SMC3 was detected as hot gene in PPI network, and NET
(Elk3) was predicted as the significant transcription factor for this gene.
CONCLUSION: SMC3 may play an important role in atopic asthma development;
therefore, it has the potential to be the target for the disease. Moreover, our
findings provide more knowledge about the mechanism of atopic asthma and help the
researchers to explore it in future.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25515564  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Physiol Genomics. 2015 Feb;47(2):33-43. doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00107.2014. 
Epub 2014 Dec 9.

Conditional disruption of miR17-92 cluster in collagen type I-producing
osteoblasts results in reduced periosteal bone formation and bone anabolic
response to exercise.

Mohan S(1), Wergedal JE(1), Das S(2), Kesavan C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Disease Center, JLP VA Medical Center, Loma Linda, California;
and Department of Medicine, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, California.
(2)Musculoskeletal Disease Center, JLP VA Medical Center, Loma Linda, California;
and. (3)Musculoskeletal Disease Center, JLP VA Medical Center, Loma Linda,
California; and Department of Medicine, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda,
California Chandrasekhar.Kesavan@va.gov.

In this study, we evaluated the role of the microRNA (miR)17-92 cluster in
osteoblast lineage cells using a Cre-loxP approach in which Cre expression is
driven by the entire regulatory region of the type I collagen a2 gene.
Conditional knockout (cKO) mice showed a 13-34% reduction in total body bone
mineral content and area with little or no change in bone mineral density (BMD)
by DXA at 2, 4, and 8 wk in both sexes. Micro-CT analyses of the femur revealed
an 8% reduction in length and 25-27% reduction in total volume at the diaphyseal 
and metaphyseal sites. Neither cortical nor trabecular volumetric BMD was
different in the cKO mice. Bone strength (maximum load) was reduced by 10% with
no change in bone toughness. Quantitative histomorphometric analyses revealed a
28% reduction in the periosteal bone formation rate and in the mineral apposition
rate but with no change in the resorbing surface. Expression levels of periostin,
Elk3, Runx2 genes that are targeted by miRs from the cluster were decreased by
25-30% in the bones of cKO mice. To determine the contribution of the miR17-92
cluster to the mechanical strain effect on periosteal bone formation, we
subjected cKO and control mice to 2 wk of mechanical loading by four-point
bending. We found that the periosteal bone response to mechanical strain was
significantly reduced in the cKO mice. We conclude that the miR17-92 cluster
expressed in type I collagen-producing cells is a key regulator of periosteal
bone formation in mice.

PMCID: PMC4313069
PMID: 25492928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Cancer Res Ther. 2014 Nov;10 Suppl:C114-24. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.145816.

Identification of melanoma biomarkers based on network modules by integrating the
human signaling network with microarrays.

Huang C, Sheng Y, Jia J, Chen L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Melanoma is a leading cause of cancer death. Thus, accurate
prognostic biomarkers that will assist rational treatment planning need to be
identified.
METHODS: Microarray analysis of melanoma and normal tissue samples was performed 
to identify differentially expressed modules (DEMs) from the signaling network
and ultimately detect molecular markers to support histological examination.
Network motifs were extracted from the human signaling network. Then, significant
expression-correlation differential modules were identified by comparing the
network module expression-correlation differential scores under normal and
disease conditions using the gene expression datasets. Finally, we obtained DEMs 
by the Wilcoxon rank test and considered the average gene expression level in
these modules as the classification features for diagnosing melanoma.
RESULTS: In total, 99 functional DEMs were identified from the signaling network 
and gene expression profiles. The area under the curve scores for cancer module
genes, melanoma module genes, and whole network modules are 92.4%, 90.44%, and
88.45%, respectively. The classification efficiency rates for nonmodule features 
are 71.04% and 79.38%, which correspond to the features of cancer genes and
melanoma cancer genes, respectively. Finally, we acquired six significant
molecular biomarkers, namely, module 10 (CALM3, Ca 2+ , PKC, PDGFRA,
phospholipase-g, PIB5PA, and phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase), module 14 (SRC, Src 
homology 2 domain-containing [SHC], SAM68, GIT1, transcription factor-4, CBLB,
GRB2, VAV2, LCK, YES, PTCH2, downstream of tyrosine kinase [DOK], and KIT),
module 16 (ELK3, p85beta, SHC, ZFYVE9, TGFBR1, TGFBR2, CITED1, SH3KBP1, HCK, DOK,
and KIT), module 45 (RB, CCND3, CCNA2, CDK4, and CDK6), module 75 (PCNA, CDK4,
and CCND1), and module 114 (PSD93, NMDAR, and FYN).
CONCLUSION: We explored the gene expression profile and signaling network in a
global view and identified DEMs that can be used as diagnostic or prognostic
markers for melanoma.

PMID: 25450268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 17;9(11):e113050. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113050.
eCollection 2014.

The oncogenic MicroRNA Hsa-miR-155-5p targets the transcription factor ELK3 and
links it to the hypoxia response.

Robertson ED(1), Wasylyk C(1), Ye T(1), Jung AC(2), Wasylyk B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
France; Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR7104, Illkirch, France; 
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U964, Illkirch,
France; Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France. (2)Laboratoire de Biologie
Tumorale, Centre Régional de Lutte Contre le Cancer Paul Strauss, EA3430 de
l'Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

The molecular response to hypoxia is a critical cellular process implicated in
cancer, and a target for drug development. The activity of the major player,
HIF1a, is regulated at different levels by various factors, including the
transcription factor ELK3. The molecular mechanisms of this intimate connection
remain largely unknown. Whilst investigating global ELK3-chromatin interactions, 
we uncovered an unexpected connection that involves the microRNA hsa-miR-155-5p, 
a hypoxia-inducible oncomir that targets HIF1a. One of the ELK3 chromatin binding
sites, detected by Chromatin Immuno-Precipitation Sequencing (ChIP-seq) of normal
Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells (HUVEC), is located at the transcription
start site of the MIR155HG genes that expresses hsa-miR-155-5p. We confirmed that
ELK3 binds to this promoter by ChIP and quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(QPCR). We showed that ELK3 and hsa-miR-155-5p form a double-negative regulatory 
loop, in that ELK3 depletion induced hsa-miR-155-5p expression and hsa-miR-155-5p
expression decreased ELK3 expression at the RNA level through a conserved target 
sequence in its 3'-UTR. We further showed that the activities of hsa-miR-155-5p
and ELK3 are functionally linked. Pathway analysis indicates that both factors
are implicated in related processes, including cancer and angiogenesis.
Hsa-miR-155-5p expression and ELK3 depletion have similar effects on expression
of known ELK3 target genes, and on in-vitro angiogenesis and wound closure.
Bioinformatic analysis of cancer RNA-seq data shows that hsa-miR-155-5p and ELK3 
expression are significantly anti-correlated, as would be expected from
hsa-miR-155-5p targeting ELK3 RNA. Finally, hypoxia (0% oxygen) down-regulates
ELK3 mRNA in a microRNA and hsa-miR-155-5p dependent manner. These results tie
ELK3 into the hypoxia response pathway through an oncogenic microRNA and into a
circuit implicated in the dynamics of the hypoxic response. This crosstalk could 
be important for the development of new treatments for a range of pathologies.

PMCID: PMC4234625
PMID: 25401928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Jan;97(1):171-80. doi: 10.1189/jlb.4A0214-087R. Epub 2014 Oct
28.

Elk-3 is a KLF4-regulated gene that modulates the phagocytosis of bacteria by
macrophages.

Tsoyi K(1), Geldart AM(2), Christou H(2), Liu X(3), Chung SW(4), Perrella MA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, and.
(2)Department of Pediatric Newborn Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; Division of Newborn Medicine,
Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA; and. (3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, and Department of Pediatric Newborn Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; (4)Division of
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, and School of
Biological Sciences, University of Ulsan, South Korea. (5)Division of Pulmonary
and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, and Department of Pediatric
Newborn Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA; mperrella@rics.bwh.harvard.edu.

ETS family proteins play a role in immune responses. A unique member of this
family, Elk-3, is a transcriptional repressor that regulates the expression of
HO-1. Elk-3 is very sensitive to the effects of inflammatory mediators and is
down-regulated by bacterial endotoxin (LPS). In the present study, exposure of
mouse macrophages to Escherichia coli LPS resulted in decreased, full-length, and
splice-variant isoforms of Elk-3. We isolated the Elk-3 promoter and demonstrated
that LPS also decreased promoter activity. The Elk-3 promoter contains GC-rich
regions that are putative binding sites for zinc-finger transcription factors,
such as Sp1 and KLFs. Mutation of the GC-rich region from bp -613 to -603 blunted
LPS-induced down-regulation of the Elk-3 promoter. Similar to the LPS response,
coexpression of KLF4 led to repression of Elk-3 promoter activity, whereas
coexpression of Sp1 increased activity. ChIP assays revealed that KLF4 binding to
the Elk-3 promoter was increased by LPS exposure, and Sp1 binding was decreased. 
Thus, down-regulation of Elk-3 by bacterial LPS is regulated, in part, by the
transcriptional repressor KLF4. Overexpression of Elk-3, in the presence of E.
coli bacteria, resulted in decreased macrophage phagocytosis. To determine
whether limited expression of HO-1 may contribute to this response, we exposed
HO-1-deficient bone marrow-derived macrophages to E. coli and found a comparable 
reduction in bacterial phagocytosis. These data suggest that down-regulation of
Elk-3 and the subsequent induction of HO-1 are important for macrophage function 
during the inflammatory response to infection.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMCID: PMC4377825
PMID: 25351511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 9;9(9):e107048. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107048. eCollection
2014.

Elk3 deficiency causes transient impairment in post-natal retinal vascular
development and formation of tortuous arteries in adult murine retinae.

Weinl C(1), Wasylyk C(2), Garcia Garrido M(3), Sothilingam V(3), Beck SC(3),
Riehle H(1), Stritt C(1), Roux MJ(2), Seeliger MW(3), Wasylyk B(2), Nordheim
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology,
University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. (2)Institut de Génétique et de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch, France; Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Illkirch, France; Institut National de la Santé et de la 
Recherche Médicale, Illkirch, France; Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.
(3)Division of Ocular Neurodegeneration, Centre for Ophthalmology, Institute for 
Ophthalmic Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Serum Response Factor (SRF) fulfills essential roles in post-natal retinal
angiogenesis and adult neovascularization. These functions have been attributed
to the recruitment by SRF of the cofactors Myocardin-Related Transcription
Factors MRTF-A and -B, but not the Ternary Complex Factors (TCFs) Elk1 and Elk4. 
The role of the third TCF, Elk3, remained unknown. We generated a new Elk3
knockout mouse line and showed that Elk3 had specific, non-redundant functions in
the retinal vasculature. In Elk3(-/-) mice, post-natal retinal angiogenesis was
transiently delayed until P8, after which it proceeded normally. Interestingly,
tortuous arteries developed in Elk3(-/-) mice from the age of four weeks, and
persisted into late adulthood. Tortuous vessels have been observed in human
pathologies, e.g. in ROP and FEVR. These human disorders were linked to altered
activities of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in the affected eyes.
However, in Elk3(-/-) mice, we did not observe any changes in VEGF or several
other potential confounding factors, including mural cell coverage and blood
pressure. Instead, concurrent with the post-natal transient delay of radial
outgrowth and the formation of adult tortuous arteries, Elk3-dependent effects on
the expression of Angiopoietin/Tie-signalling components were observed. Moreover,
in vitro microvessel sprouting and microtube formation from P10 and adult aortic 
ring explants were reduced. Collectively, these results indicate that Elk3 has
distinct roles in maintaining retinal artery integrity. The Elk3 knockout mouse
is presented as a new animal model to study retinal artery tortuousity in mice
and human patients.

PMCID: PMC4159304
PMID: 25203538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Neurosci. 2014 Apr 30;34(18):6344-51. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2991-13.2014.

Axonal targeting of the serotonin transporter in cultured rat dorsal raphe
neurons is specified by SEC24C-dependent export from the endoplasmic reticulum.

Montgomery TR(1), Steinkellner T, Sucic S, Koban F, Schüchner S, Ogris E, Sitte
HH, Freissmuth M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Center of Physiology and Pharmacology and
Department of Molecular Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna,
Austria, and UCD Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research,
University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.

Export of the serotonin transporter (SERT) from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is
mediated by the SEC24C isoform of the coatomer protein-II complex. SERT must
enter the axonal compartment and reach the presynaptic specialization to perform 
its function, i.e., the inward transport of serotonin. Refilling of vesicles is
contingent on the operation of an efficient relay between SERT and the vesicular 
monoamine transporter-2 (VMAT2). Here, we visualized the distribution of both
endogenously expressed SERT and heterologously expressed variants of human SERT
in dissociated rat dorsal raphe neurons to examine the role of SEC24C-dependent
ER export in axonal targeting of SERT. We conclude that axonal delivery of SERT
is contingent on recruitment of SEC24C in the ER. This conclusion is based on the
following observations. (1) Both endogenous and heterologously expressed SERT
were delivered to the extensive axonal arborizations and accumulated in
bouton-like structures. (2) In contrast, SERT-(607)RI(608)-AA, in which the
binding site of SEC24C is disrupted, remained confined to the
microtubule-associated protein 2-positive somatodendritic compartment. (3) The
overexpression of dominant-negative SEC24C-D(796)V/D(797)N (but not of the
corresponding SEC24D mutant) redirected both endogenous SERT and heterologously
expressed yellow fluorescent protein-SERT from axons to the somatodendritic
region. (4) SERT-K(610)Y, which harbors a mutation converting it into an SEC24D
client, was rerouted from the axonal to the somatodendritic compartment by
dominant-negative SEC24D. In contrast, axonal targeting of the VMAT2 was
disrupted by neither dominant-negative SEC24C nor dominant-negative SEC24D. This 
suggests that SERT and VMAT2 reach the presynaptic specialization by independent 
routes.

PMCID: PMC4497811
PMID: 24790205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Int J Biol Sci. 2014 Mar 27;10(4):438-47. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.8095. eCollection
2014.

ELK3 suppresses angiogenesis by inhibiting the transcriptional activity of ETS-1 
on MT1-MMP.

Heo SH(1), Cho JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biochemistry, BK21 Plus, Research Institute for
Veterinary Science, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Ets transcription factors play important roles in vasculogenesis and
angiogenesis. Knockout of the Ets gene family members in mice resulted in
disrupted angiogenesis and malformed vascular systems. In this study, the role
and mechanism of ELK3, an Ets factor, in angiogenesis was investigated using
ELK3-specific siRNA in human vascular endothelial cells (HUVECs) and in vivo
implantation assay. The suppression of ELK3 expression resulted in the
reinforcement of VEGF-induced tube formation in HUVECs. The in vivo Matrigel plug
assay also showed that ELK3 knockdown resulted in increased angiogenesis.
Luciferase activity of the MT1-MMP promoter induced by ETS-1 factor was
attenuated ELK3 co-transfection. CHIP assay showed the binding of ELK3 on the
MT1-MMP promoter. MT1-MMP knockdown in the ELK3 knockdowned cells resulted in the
decrease of tube formation suggesting that MT1-MMP transcriptional repression is 
required for ELK3-mediated anti-angiogenesis effect. Our data also showed that
the suppressive effect of ELK3 on the angiogenesis was partly due to the
inhibitory effect of ELK3 to the ETS-1 transcriptional activity on the MT1-MMP
promoter rather than direct suppression of ELK3 on the target gene, since the
expression level of co-repressor Sin3A is low in endothelial cells. Our results
suggest that ELK3 plays a negative role of VEGF-induced angiogenesis through
indirectly inhibiting ETS-1 function.

PMCID: PMC3979996
PMID: 24719561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Gynecol Oncol. 2014 Jun;133(3):568-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2014.03.564. Epub
2014 Mar 25.

MiR-378 as a biomarker for response to anti-angiogenic treatment in ovarian
cancer.

Chan JK(1), Kiet TK(2), Blansit K(3), Ramasubbaiah R(4), Hilton JF(5), Kapp
DS(6), Matei D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and
Reproductive Sciences, University of California, San Francisco School of
Medicine, 1600 Divisadero Street, Box 1702, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Palo
Alto Medical Foundation Research Institute, 795 El Camino Real, Palo Alto, CA
94301, USA. Electronic address: chanjohn@obgyn.ucsf.edu. (2)Division of
Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive
Sciences, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine, 1600
Divisadero Street, Box 1702, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (3)Division of
Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive
Sciences, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine, 1600
Divisadero Street, Box 1702, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Palo Alto Medical
Foundation Research Institute, 795 El Camino Real, Palo Alto, CA 94301, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San
Francisco School of Medicine, UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer
Center, 185 Berry Street, Box 0560, San Francisco, CA 94143, U S A. (5)Department
of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, 980 W. Walnut Street, R3 C218D, Indianapolis, IN 46202, U S A.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford Cancer Center, 875 Blake Wilbur Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the role of miR-378 as a biomarker for anti-angiogenic
therapy response in ovarian cancer.
METHODS: Expression of miR-378 was analyzed in ovarian cancer cell lines and
human tumors vs. normal ovarian epithelial cells by qRT-PCR. After miR-378
transfection in SKOV3 cells, dysregulated genes were identified using microarray.
Data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) was utilized to correlate miR-378
expression with progression-free survival (PFS) among patients treated with
anti-angiogenic therapy by using Kaplan-Meier and Cox proportional hazards.
RESULTS: MiR-378 was overexpressed in ovarian cancer cells and tumors vs. normal 
ovarian epithelial cells. Overexpressing miR-378 in ovarian cancer cells altered 
expression of genes associated with angiogenesis (ALCAM, EHD1, ELK3, TLN1),
apoptosis (RPN2, HIPK3), and cell cycle regulation (SWAP-70, LSM14A, RDX). In the
TCGA dataset, low vs. high miR-378 expression was associated with longer PFS in a
subset of patients with recurrent ovarian cancer treated with bevacizumab (9.2
vs. 4.2months; p=0.04). On multivariate analysis, miR-378 expression was an
independent predictor for PFS after anti-angiogenic treatment (HR=2.04, 95% CI:
1.12-3.72; p=0.02). Furthermore, expression levels of two miR-378 targets (ALCAM 
and EHD1) were associated with PFS in this subgroup of patients who received
anti-angiogenic therapy (9.4 vs. 4.2months, p=0.04 for high vs. low ALCAM; 7.9
vs. 2.3months, p<0.01 for low vs. high EHD1).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that miR-378 is overexpressed in ovarian cancer
cells and tumors vs. normal ovarian epithelial cells. MiR-378 and its downstream 
targets may serve as markers for response to anti-angiogenic therapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24680769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS Genet. 2013 Aug;9(8):e1003622. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003622. Epub 2013 
Aug 29.

Comparative anatomy of chromosomal domains with imprinted and non-imprinted
allele-specific DNA methylation.

Paliwal A(1), Temkin AM, Kerkel K, Yale A, Yotova I, Drost N, Lax S, Nhan-Chang
CL, Powell C, Borczuk A, Aviv A, Wapner R, Chen X, Nagy PL, Schork N, Do C,
Torkamani A, Tycko B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York,
New York, United States of America.

Allele-specific DNA methylation (ASM) is well studied in imprinted domains, but
this type of epigenetic asymmetry is actually found more commonly at
non-imprinted loci, where the ASM is dictated not by parent-of-origin but instead
by the local haplotype. We identified loci with strong ASM in human tissues from 
methylation-sensitive SNP array data. Two index regions (bisulfite PCR
amplicons), one between the C3orf27 and RPN1 genes in chromosome band 3q21 and
the other near the VTRNA2-1 vault RNA in band 5q31, proved to be new examples of 
imprinted DMRs (maternal alleles methylated) while a third, between STEAP3 and
C2orf76 in chromosome band 2q14, showed non-imprinted haplotype-dependent ASM.
Using long-read bisulfite sequencing (bis-seq) in 8 human tissues we found that
in all 3 domains the ASM is restricted to single differentially methylated
regions (DMRs), each less than 2kb. The ASM in the C3orf27-RPN1 intergenic region
was placenta-specific and associated with allele-specific expression of a long
non-coding RNA. Strikingly, the discrete DMRs in all 3 regions overlap with
binding sites for the insulator protein CTCF, which we found selectively bound to
the unmethylated allele of the STEAP3-C2orf76 DMR. Methylation mapping in two
additional genes with non-imprinted haplotype-dependent ASM, ELK3 and CYP2A7,
showed that the CYP2A7 DMR also overlaps a CTCF site. Thus, two features of
imprinted domains, highly localized DMRs and allele-specific insulator occupancy 
by CTCF, can also be found in chromosomal domains with non-imprinted ASM. Arguing
for biological importance, our analysis of published whole genome bis-seq data
from hES cells revealed multiple genome-wide association study (GWAS) peaks near 
CTCF binding sites with ASM.

PMCID: PMC3757050
PMID: 24009515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cell Struct Funct. 2013 Jul 6;38(2):145-54. Epub 2013 May 24.

Cell density-dependent nuclear accumulation of ELK3 is involved in suppression of
PAI-1 expression.

Tanaka S(1), Nakao K, Sekimoto T, Oka M, Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Frontier Biosciences, Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences,
Osaka University, Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Cell-cell contact regulates the proliferation and differentiation of
non-transformed cells, e.g., NIH/3T3 cells show growth arrest at high cell
density. However, only a few reports described the dynamic behavior of
transcription factors involved in this process. In this study, we showed that the
mRNA levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) decreased
drastically at high cell density, and that ELK3, a member of the Ets
transcription factor family, repressed PAI-1 expression. We also demonstrated
that while ELK3 was distributed evenly throughout the cell at low cell density,
it accumulated in the nucleus at high cell density, and that binding of DNA by
ELK3 at the A domain facilitated its nuclear accumulation. Furthermore, we found 
that ETS1, a PAI-1 activator, occupied the ELK3-binding site within the PAI-1
promoter at low cell density, while it was released at high cell density. These
results suggest that at high cell density, the switching of binding of
transcription factors from ETS1 to ELK3 occurs at a specific binding site of the 
PAI-1 promoter, leading to the cell-density dependent suppression of PAI-1
expression.

PMID: 23708702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 19;288(16):11047-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.438473. Epub
2013 Feb 20.

The ETS domain transcription factor ELK1 directs a critical component of growth
signaling by the androgen receptor in prostate cancer cells.

Patki M(1), Chari V, Sivakumaran S, Gonit M, Trumbly R, Ratnam M.

Author information: 
(1)Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, Michigan 48201-2013, USA.

The androgen receptor (AR) is essential for diverse aspects of prostate
development and function. Molecular mechanisms by which prostate cancer (PC)
cells redirect AR signaling to genes that primarily support growth are unclear. A
systematic search for critical AR-tethering proteins led to ELK1, an ETS
transcription factor of the ternary complex factor subfamily. Although
genetically redundant, ELK1 was obligatory for AR-dependent growth and clonogenic
survival in both hormone-dependent PC and castration-recurrent PC cells but not
for AR-negative cell growth. AR required ELK1 to up-regulate a major subset of
its target genes that was strongly and primarily enriched for cell growth
functions. AR functioned as a coactivator of ELK1 by association through its A/B 
domain, bypassing the classical mechanism of ELK1 activation by phosphorylation
and without inducing ternary complex target genes. The ELK1-AR synergy per se was
ligand-independent, although it required ligand for nuclear localization of AR as
targeting the AR A/B domain to the nucleus recapitulated the action of hormone;
accordingly, Casodex was a poor antagonist of the synergy. ELK3, the closest
substitute for ELK1 in structure/function and genome recognition, did not
interact with AR. ELK1 thus directs selective and sustained gene induction that
is a substantial and critical component of growth signaling by AR in PC cells.
The ELK1-AR interaction offers a functionally tumor-selective drug target.

PMCID: PMC3630885
PMID: 23426362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Dev Biol. 2013 Feb 15;374(2):255-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.12.009. Epub 2012 
Dec 22.

Elk3 is essential for the progression from progenitor to definitive neural crest 
cell.

Rogers CD(1), Phillips JL, Bronner ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 139-74, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA.

Elk3/Net/Sap2 (here referred to as Elk3) is an Ets ternary complex
transcriptional repressor known for its involvement in angiogenesis during
embryonic development. Although Elk3 is expressed in various tissues, additional 
roles for the protein outside of vasculature development have yet to be reported.
Here, we characterize the early spatiotemporal expression pattern of Elk3 in the 
avian embryo using whole mount in situ hybridization and quantitative RT-PCR and 
examine the effects of its loss of function on neural crest development. At early
stages, Elk3 is expressed in the head folds, head mesenchyme, intersomitic
vessels, and migratory cranial neural crest (NC) cells. Loss of the Elk3 protein 
results in the retention of Pax7+ precursors in the dorsal neural tube that fail 
to upregulate neural crest specifier genes, FoxD3, Sox10 and Snail2, resulting in
embryos with severe migration defects. The results putatively place Elk3
downstream of neural plate border genes, but upstream of neural crest specifier
genes in the neural crest gene regulatory network (NC-GRN), suggesting that it is
critical for the progression from progenitor to definitive neural crest cell.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3558539
PMID: 23266330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48656. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048656. Epub 2012 Nov 14.

Increased adipogenesis in cultured embryonic chondrocytes and in adult bone
marrow of dominant negative Erg transgenic mice.

Flajollet S(1), Tian TV, Huot L, Tomavo N, Flourens A, Holder-Espinasse M, Le
Jeune M, Dumont P, Hot D, Mallein-Gerin F, Duterque-Coquillaud M.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Université de Lille Nord de
France, Institut Pasteur de Lille/IFR142, Lille, France.

In monolayer culture, primary articular chondrocytes have an intrinsic tendency
to lose their phenotype during expansion. The molecular events underlying this
chondrocyte dedifferentiation are still largely unknown. Several transcription
factors are important for chondrocyte differentiation. The Ets transcription
factor family may be involved in skeletal development. One family member, the Erg
gene, is mainly expressed during cartilage formation. To further investigate the 
potential role of Erg in the maintenance of the chondrocyte phenotype, we
isolated and cultured chondrocytes from the rib cartilage of embryos of
transgenic mice that express a dominant negative form of Erg (DN-Erg) during
cartilage formation. DN-Erg expression in chondrocytes cultured for up to 20 days
did not affect the early dedifferentiation usually observed in cultured
chondrocytes. However, lipid droplets accumulated in DN-Erg chondrocytes,
suggesting adipocyte emergence. Transcriptomic analysis using a DNA microarray,
validated by quantitative RT-PCR, revealed strong differential gene expression,
with a decrease in chondrogenesis-related markers and an increase in
adipogenesis-related gene expression in cultured DN-Erg chondrocytes. These
results indicate that Erg is involved in either maintaining the chondrogenic
phenotype in vitro or in cell fate orientation. Along with the in vitro studies, 
we compared adipocyte presence in wild-type and transgenic mice skeletons.
Histological investigations revealed an increase in the number of adipocytes in
the bone marrow of adult DN-Erg mice even though no adipocytes were detected in
embryonic cartilage or bone. These findings suggest that the Ets transcription
factor family may contribute to the homeostatic balance in skeleton cell
plasticity.

PMCID: PMC3498236
PMID: 23155398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Curr Biol. 2012 Nov 6;22(21):2017-26. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.08.050. Epub 2012
Oct 11.

Adhesion regulates MAP kinase/ternary complex factor exchange to control a
proliferative transcriptional switch.

Wozniak MA(1), Cheng CQ, Shen CJ, Gao L, Olarerin-George AO, Won KJ, Hogenesch
JB, Chen CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA.

BACKGROUND: The ternary complex factors (TCFs; Elk1, Net, and Sap-1) are growth
factor-responsive transcription cofactors of serum response factor (SRF) and are 
activated by MAP kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation to regulate immediate early gene
transcription. Although cell adhesion also can regulate immediate early genes and
proliferation, the mechanism for this effect has remained unexplored.
RESULTS: Restricting adhesion and spreading of G(0)-synchronized cells on
substrates with decreasing size of micropatterned islands of fibronectin
suppressed serum-induced immediate early gene expression and S phase entry.
Knockdown of Sap-1 decreased expression of the immediate early genes egr1 and fos
and subsequent proliferation normally present with high adhesion, whereas
knockdown of Net rescued egr1 and fos expression and proliferation normally
suppressed by low adhesion. Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies showed
increased occupancy of egr1 and fos promoters by Sap-1 with high adhesion,
whereas low adhesion increased Net occupancy. This switch in TCF promoter binding
was regulated by an adhesion-mediated switch in MAPK activity. Increasing
adhesion enhanced serum-induced JNK activity while suppressing p38 activity,
leading to increased Sap-1 phosphorylation and Net dephosphorylation, and
switching Net with Sap-1 at egr1 and fos promoters to support proliferation.
Microarray studies confirmed this switch in TCF regulation of proliferative genes
and uncovered novel gene targets and functions coregulated by Sap-1 and Net.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate a key role for the TCFs in adhesion-induced
transcription and proliferation and reveal a novel MAPK/TCF transcriptional
switch that controls this process.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3586562
PMID: 23063436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Neurosci. 2012 Mar 21;32(12):4092-101. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5048-11.2012.

Variant brain-derived neurotrophic factor Val66Met polymorphism alters
vulnerability to stress and response to antidepressants.

Yu H(1), Wang DD, Wang Y, Liu T, Lee FS, Chen ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, Peoples
Republic of China.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) plays important roles in cell survival, 
neural plasticity, learning, and stress regulation. However, whether the recently
found human BDNF Val66Met (BDNF(Met)) polymorphism could alter stress
vulnerability remains controversial. More importantly, the molecular and
structural mechanisms underlying the interaction between the BDNF(Met)
polymorphism and stress are unclear. We found that heterozygous BDNF(+/Met) mice 
displayed hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis hyperreactivity, increased
depressive-like and anxiety-like behaviors, and impaired working memory compared 
with WT mice after 7 d restraint stress. Moreover, BDNF(+/Met) mice exhibited
more prominent changes in BDNF levels and apical dendritic spine density in the
prefrontal cortex and amygdala after stress, which correlated with the impaired
working memory and elevated anxiety-like behaviors. Finally, the depressive-like 
behaviors in BDNF(+/Met) mice could be selectively rescued by acute
administration of desipramine but not fluoxetine. These data indicate selective
behavioral, molecular, and structural deficits resulting from the interaction
between stress and the human genetic BDNF(Met) polymorphism. Importantly,
desipramine but not fluoxetine has antidepressant effects on BDNF(+/Met) mice,
suggesting that specific classes of antidepressant may be a more effective
treatment option for depressive symptoms in humans with this genetic variant
BDNF.

PMCID: PMC3319323
PMID: 22442074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Front Mol Neurosci. 2012 Feb 10;5:8. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2012.00008. eCollection
2012.

Role of transcription factors in peripheral nerve regeneration.

Patodia S(1), Raivich G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Perinatal Brain Protection and Repair, University College London
London, UK.

Following axotomy, the activation of multiple intracellular signaling cascades
causes the expression of a cocktail of regeneration-associated transcription
factors which interact with each other to determine the fate of the injured
neurons. The nerve injury response is channeled through manifold and parallel
pathways, integrating diverse inputs, and controlling a complex transcriptional
output. Transcription factors form a vital link in the chain of regeneration,
converting injury-induced stress signals into downstream protein expression via
gene regulation. They can regulate the intrinsic ability of axons to grow, by
controlling expression of whole cassettes of gene targets. In this review, we
have investigated the functional roles of a number of different transcription
factors - c-Jun, activating transcription factor 3, cAMP response element binding
protein, signal transducer, and activator of transcription-3, CCAAT/enhancer
binding proteins ß and d, Oct-6, Sox11, p53, nuclear factor
kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cell, and ELK3 - in peripheral nerve
regeneration. Studies involving use of conditional mutants, microarrays, promoter
region mapping, and different injury paradigms, have enabled us to understand
their distinct as well as overlapping roles in achieving anatomical and
functional regeneration after peripheral nerve injury.

PMCID: PMC3277281
PMID: 22363260  [PubMed]


22. Clin Calcium. 2011 Jun;21(6):813-9. doi: CliCa1106813819.

[Joint morphogenesis and development of permanent articular cartilage].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohta Y(1), Iwamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research
Institute, PA, USA.

During limb skeletogenesis progenitor mesenchymal cells aggregate at specific
times and sites to form continuous precartilaginous condensations. With time the 
condensations undergo chondrogenesis and give rise to cartilaginous anlagen that 
exhibit incipient synovial joints at each end. A multitude of factors regulates
subdivision into discrete skeletal elements and the formation, organization,
morphogenesis and structure of the joints. This review summarizes recent advance 
of joint morphogenesis and actions of key players of joint and articular
cartilage formation. In addition, we would like to discuss possible direction to 
translate basic research findings towards treatment of joint diseases.

PMID: 21628794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Aug;1799(8):555-60. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2010.07.001.
Epub 2010 Jul 14.

SUMOylation can regulate the activity of ETS-like transcription factor 4.

Kaikkonen S(1), Makkonen H, Rytinki M, Palvimo JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine/Medical Biochemistry, University of Eastern Finland, 
Kuopio, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland.

ETS-like transcription factor 4 (ELK4) (a.k.a. serum response factor accessory
protein 1) belongs to the ternary complex factor (TCF) subfamily of E twenty-six 
(ETS) domain transcription factors. Compared to the other TCF subfamily members, 
ELK1 and ELK3 (NET), there is limited information of the mechanisms regulating
the ELK4 activity. Here, we show that the ELK4 can be covalently modified
(SUMOylated) by small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) 1 protein, an important
regulator of signaling and transcription. SUMOylation of ELK4 was reversed by
SUMO-specific proteases (SENP) 1 and 2 and stimulated by SUMO E3 ligase PIAS3.
Conserved lysine residue 167 that is located in the NET inhibitory domain of ELK4
was identified as the main site of SUMO-1 conjugation. Interestingly, mutation of
the K167 disrupting the SUMOylation markedly enhanced the transcriptional
activity of the ELK4, but weakened its repressive function on c-fos promoter. In 
conclusion, our results suggest that covalent modification by SUMO-1 can regulate
the activity of ELK4, contributing to the transcriptional repression by the ELK4.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20637912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Immunol. 2010 Jul 15;185(2):1082-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000472. Epub 2010
Jun 16.

Ternary complex factors SAP-1 and Elk-1, but not net, are functionally equivalent
in thymocyte development.

Costello P(1), Nicolas R, Willoughby J, Wasylyk B, Nordheim A, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research Institute,
Lincoln's Inn Fields Laboratories, London, United Kingdom.

The ternary complex factors (TCFs; SAP-1, Elk-1, and Net) are serum response
factor cofactors that share many functional properties and are coexpressed in
many tissues. SAP-1, the predominant thymus TCF, is required for thymocyte
positive selection. In this study, we assessed whether the different TCFs are
functionally equivalent. Elk-1 deletion, but not the hypomorphic Net(delta)
mutation, exacerbated the SAP-1 positive selection phenotype, but triply
deficient thymocytes were no more defective than SAP-1(-/-) Elk-1(-/-) cells.
Inactivation of the other TCFs did not affect SAP-1-independent processes,
including beta-selection, regulatory T cell selection, and negative selection,
although reduced marginal zone B cells were observed in SAP-1(-/-) Elk-1(-/-)
animals. Ectopic expression of Elk-1, but not Net, rescued positive selection of 
SAP-1(-/-) thymocytes; thus, SAP-1 and Elk-1 are functionally equivalent in this 
system, and the SAP-1 null selection phenotype reflects only its high expression 
in the thymus. Array analysis of TCR-stimulated double-positive cells identified 
SAP-1-dependent inducible genes whose transcription was further impaired in
SAP-1(-/-) Elk-1(-/-) cells; thus, these genes, which include Egr-1 and Egr-2,
represent candidate mediators of positive selection. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed subtly different promoter targeting between the
different TCFs. Ectopic expression of Egr-1 restored positive selection in SAP-1 
null thymocytes, establishing it (and possibly other Egr family members) as the
major effector for ERK-SAP-1 signaling in thymocyte positive selection.

PMID: 20554967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Sep;224(3):734-42. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22175.

Expression profiling of ETS and MMP factors in VEGF-activated endothelial cells: 
role of MMP-10 in VEGF-induced angiogenesis.

Heo SH(1), Choi YJ, Ryoo HM, Cho JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, Korea.

In the process of angiogenesis, working of many transcription factors at the
proper time is important to activate angiogenesis-related genes such as cytokine,
matrix protease and adhesion molecules. In this study, we searched for Ets
transcription factors and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) that respond to VEGF
in endothelial cells. We first analyzed the expression of 27 human Ets factors
and 15 human MMPs in VEGF-treated human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) 
using quantitative RT-PCR. The most abundant Ets factors in HUVEC were ETS-1,
Fli-1, ERP/NET/ELK3, and ERG. MMP-1, -2, -10, -11, -14, -15, and -16 were also
detected in HUVEC. We also found that ETV-1, Fli-1, ERG, MMP-1, -3, -7, -8, -9,
-10, -13, and -19 expression is up-regulated more than 1.5-fold in HUVEC after 2 
h of VEGF treatment. In addition, the expression of MMP-10 induced by VEGF
remained twofold higher for 24 h compared to non-treated control. The elevation
of MMP10 mRNA and protein levels was confirmed to be both time- and
dosage-dependent. In addition, MMP-10 transcription was mediated by Ets-1 but not
ERP/NET/ELK3. The inhibition of PI3K and MAPK inhibited VEGF-induced MMP-10
expression. Furthermore, transfection of MMP-10 siRNA inhibited VEGF-induced
migration and tube formation in HUVEC, and it also inhibited vessel formation in 
matrigel plugs in vivo. In conclusion, our study demonstrated induction of MMP-10
by VEGF in HUVEC and supports an angiogenic role for MMP-10 in response to VEGF
stimulation in vitro and in vivo.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20432469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 9;285(28):21223-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.121723. Epub 2010
Apr 28.

Involvement of net and Hif1alpha in distinct yet intricately linked
hypoxia-induced signaling pathways.

Serchov T(1), Dubois-Pot-Schneider H, Charlot C, Rösl F, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Mixte de Recherche 7104 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
Université de Strasbourg-U, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et
Cellulaire, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, Graffenstaden, France.

The present study compares negative Ets transcription factor (Net) and
hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF1alpha) regulation by hypoxia. Their protein 
stabilities are differently regulated by hypoxia, defining three periods in the
kinetics: normoxia (high Net levels and low HIF1alpha levels), early hypoxia
(high levels of Net and HIF1alpha), and late hypoxia (degradation of Net and
HIF1alpha). Modulators of prolyl hydroxylase domain protein (PHD) activity induce
a mobility shift of Net, similar to HIF1alpha, suggesting that post-translational
modifications of both factors depend on PHD activity. The three PHDs have
different roles in the regulation of Net protein levels; PHD1 and PHD3 are
involved in the stabilization of Net, whereas PHD2 controls its degradation in
late hypoxia. Net physically interacts with PHD2 in hypoxia, whereas PHD1 and
PHD3 bind to Net in normoxia and hypoxia. Under the same conditions, PHD2 and
PHD3 regulate both HIF1alpha stabilization in early hypoxia and its degradation
at late hypoxia, whereas PHD1 is involved in HIF1alpha degradation in late
hypoxia. We describe interconnections between the regulation of both Net and
HIF1alpha at the protein level. Evidence is provided for a direct physical
interaction between Net and HIF1alpha and indirect transcriptional regulation
loops that involve the PHDs. Taken together our results indicate that Net and
HIF1alpha are components of distinct signaling pathways that are intricately
linked.

PMCID: PMC2898408
PMID: 20427288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2010 Jun;44(2):165-77. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.03.005. Epub
2010 Mar 18.

The expression of ELK transcription factors in adult DRG: Novel isoforms,
antisense transcripts and upregulation by nerve damage.

Kerr N(1), Pintzas A, Holmes F, Hobson SA, Pope R, Wallace M, Wasylyk C, Wasylyk 
B, Wynick D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, School of Medical Sciences,
University of Bristol, Bristol BS81TD, UK.

ELK transcription factors are known to be expressed in a number of regions in the
nervous system. We show by RT-PCR that the previously described Elk1,
Elk3/Elk3b/Elk3c and Elk4 mRNAs are expressed in adult dorsal root ganglia (DRG),
together with the novel alternatively spliced isoforms Elk1b, Elk3d and
Elk4c/Elk4d/Elk4e. These isoforms are also expressed in brain, heart, kidney and 
testis. In contrast to Elk3 protein, the novel Elk3d isoform is cytoplasmic,
fails to bind ETS binding sites and yet can activate transcription by an indirect
mechanism. The Elk3 and Elk4 genes are overlapped by co-expressed Pctk2 (Cdk17)
and Mfsd4 genes, respectively, with the potential formation of Elk3/Pctaire2 and 
Elk4/Mfsd4 sense-antisense mRNA heteroduplexes. After peripheral nerve injury the
Elk3 mRNA isoforms are each upregulated approximately 2.3-fold in DRG (P<0.005), 
whereas the natural antisense Pctaire2 isoforms show only a small increase (21%, 
P<0.01) and Elk1 and Elk4 mRNAs are unchanged.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2862884
PMID: 20304071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Aug;30(8):1433-42. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp129. Epub 2009 May
29.

Increased PEA3/E1AF and decreased Net/Elk-3, both ETS proteins, characterize
human NSCLC progression and regulate caveolin-1 transcription in Calu-1 and
NCI-H23 NSCLC cell lines.

Sloan KA(1), Marquez HA, Li J, Cao Y, Hinds A, O'Hara CJ, Kathuria S, Ramirez MI,
Williams MC, Kathuria H.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
kasloan@bu.edu

Caveolin-1 protein has been called a 'conditional tumor suppressor' because it
can either suppress or enhance tumor progression depending on cellular context.
Caveolin-1 levels are dynamic in non-small-cell lung cancer, with increased
levels in metastatic tumor cells. We have shown previously that transactivation
of an erythroblastosis virus-transforming sequence (ETS) cis-element enhances
caveolin-1 expression in a murine lung epithelial cell line. Based on high
sequence homology between the murine and human caveolin-1 promoters, we proposed 
that ETS proteins might regulate caveolin-1 expression in human lung
tumorigenesis. We confirm that caveolin-1 is not detected in well-differentiated 
primary lung tumors. Polyoma virus enhancer activator 3 (PEA3), a pro-metastatic 
ETS protein in breast cancer, is expressed at low levels in well-differentiated
tumors and high levels in poorly differentiated tumors. Conversely, Net, a known 
ETS repressor, is expressed at high levels in the nucleus of well-differentiated 
primary tumor cells. In tumor cells in metastatic lymph node sites, caveolin-1
and PEA3 are highly expressed, whereas Net is now expressed in the cytoplasm. We 
studied transcriptional regulation of caveolin-1 in two human lung cancer cell
lines, Calu-1 (high caveolin-1 expressing) and NCI-H23 (low caveolin-1
expressing). Chromatin immunoprecipitation-binding assays and small interfering
RNA experiments show that PEA3 is a transcriptional activator in Calu-1 cells and
that Net is a transcriptional repressor in NCI-H23 cells. These results suggest
that Net may suppress caveolin-1 transcription in primary lung tumors and that
PEA3 may activate caveolin-1 transcription in metastatic lymph nodes.

PMCID: PMC2718075
PMID: 19483189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2008 Oct;216(2):139-47.

Growth inhibitory effect of the ternary complex factor Net on human pancreatic
carcinoma cell lines.

Li B(1), Ni P, Zhu Q, Cao H, Xu H, Zhang S, Au C, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, PR China.

Pancreatic carcinoma is one of the most aggressive malignancies and carries the
most dismal prognoses of all cancers. A better understanding of the genes
involving in tumor development may allow us to tackle this rapidly progressive
disease. The Net gene belongs to the ternary complex transcription factor (TCF)
family and is regulated by the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase-signaling
pathway. Under basal conditions, Net shows strong repressing function on
transcription of proto-oncogene gene c-fos. Moreover, the lower expression of Net
has been noted in some carcinoma cells, such as cervical cancer. To study the
effect of Net on c-fos expression and its potential role in the growth of
pancreatic carcinoma, we developed a recombinant plasmid, a pEGFP-N1-Net, which
codes for Net-EGFP fusion proteins, and stably transfected it into BxPC-3 human
pancreatic carcinoma cells. Using stable transformants, we were able to show that
overexpression of Net decreased the expression of c-fos and inhibited pancreatic 
cancer cell proliferation. Cell cycle analysis demonstrated that Net
overexpression inhibited cell cycle progression. These findings suggested that
loss of Net repression could augment c-fos expression and further trigger
neoplastic cell proliferation, which was involved in the pathogenesis of
pancreatic cancer. Therefore, Net might be a potential target for the treatment
of c-fos-positive pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 18832796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cancer Res. 2008 Mar 1;68(5):1275-83. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2674.

Inhibition of the Ras-Net (Elk-3) pathway by a novel pyrazole that affects
microtubules.

Wasylyk C(1), Zheng H, Castell C, Debussche L, Multon MC, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique/Institut National de la Sante et de la
Recherche Medicale/Université Louis Pasteur, Illkirch Cedex, France.
boh@igbmc.u-strasbg.fr

Net (Elk-3/SAP-2/Erp) is a transcription factor that is phosphorylated and
activated by the Ras-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk) signaling
pathway and is involved in wound healing, angiogenesis, and tumor growth. In a
cell-based screen for small molecule inhibitors of Ras activation of Net
transcriptional activity, we identified a novel pyrazole, XRP44X. XRP44X inhibits
fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2)-induced Net phosphorylation by the Ras-Erk
signaling upstream from Ras. It also binds to the colchicine-binding site of
tubulin, depolymerizes microtubules, stimulates cell membrane blebbing, and
affects the morphology of the actin skeleton. Interestingly, Combretastin-A4,
which produces similar effects on the cytoskeleton, also inhibits FGF-2 Ras-Net
signaling. This differs from other classes of agents that target microtubules,
which have either little effect (vincristine) or no effect (docetaxel and
nocodazole) on the Ras-Net pathway. XRP44X inhibits various cellular properties, 
including cell growth, cell cycle progression, and aortal sprouting, similar to
other molecules that bind to the tubulin colchicine site. XRP44X has the
potentially interesting property of connecting two important pathways involved in
cell transformation and may thereby represent an interesting class of molecules
that could be developed for cancer treatment.

PMID: 18316589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Oncogene. 2008 Feb 21;27(9):1333-41. Epub 2007 Aug 20.

The ternary complex factor Net/Elk-3 participates in the transcriptional response
to hypoxia and regulates HIF-1 alpha.

Gross C(1), Dubois-Pot H, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch Cedex, France.

The ternary complex factor Net/Elk3 is downregulated in hypoxia and participates 
in the induction by hypoxia of several genes, including c-fos, vascular
endothelial growth factor and egr-1. However, the global role of Net in hypoxia
remains to be elucidated. We have identified, in a large-scale analysis of RNA
expression using microarrays, more than 370 genes that are regulated by Net in
hypoxia. In order to gain insights into the role of Net in hypoxia, we have
analysed in parallel the genes regulated by HIF-1alpha, the classical factor
involved in the response to hypoxia. We identified about 190 genes that are
regulated by HIF-1alpha in hypoxia. Surprisingly, when we compare the genes
induced by hypoxia that require either Net or HIF-1alpha, the majority are the
same (75%), suggesting that the functions of both factors are closely linked.
Interestingly, in hypoxia, Net regulates the expression of several genes known to
control HIF-1alpha stability, including PHD2, PHD3 and Siah2, suggesting that Net
regulates the stability of HIF-1alpha. We found that inhibition of Net by RNAi
leads to decreased HIF-1alpha expression at the protein level in hypoxia. These
results indicate that Net participates in the transcriptional response to hypoxia
by regulation of HIF-1alpha protein stability.

PMID: 17704799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jun;27(11):4133-41. Epub 2007 Apr 2.

The ternary complex factor net is downregulated by hypoxia and regulates
hypoxia-responsive genes.

Gross C(1), Buchwalter G, Dubois-Pot H, Cler E, Zheng H, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, 1 rue Laurent Fries, BP 10142, Illkirch cedex 67404, France.

Hypoxia and the Net ternary complex factor (TCF) regulate similar processes
(angiogenesis, wound healing, and cellular migration) and genes (PAI-1, c-fos,
erg-1, NOS-2, HO-1, and vascular endothelial growth factor genes), suggesting
that they are involved in related pathways. We show here that hypoxia regulates
Net differently from the other TCFs and that Net plays a role in the hypoxic
response in vivo in mice and in cells. Hypoxia induces Net depletion from target 
promoters, nuclear export, ubiquitylation, and proteasomal degradation. Key
mediators of the hypoxic response, the prolyl-4-hydroxylases containing domain
proteins (PHDs), regulate Net. PHD downregulation in normoxia leads to Net
degradation, and PHD overexpression delays Net downregulation by hypoxia. Net
inhibition by RNA interference or mutation leads to altered regulation by hypoxia
of the Net targets PAI-1, c-fos, and egr-1. We propose that hypoxia stimulates
transcription of target promoters through removal of the repressor function of
Net. Interestingly, the hematocrit response to a chemical inducer of hypoxia-like
responses (cobalt chloride) is strongly altered in Net mutant mice. Our results
show that the Net TCF is part of the biological response to hypoxia, adding a new
component to an important pathological and physiological process.

PMCID: PMC1900010
PMID: 17403894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Jan;6(1):76-82.

Profile of Ets gene expression in human breast carcinoma.

He J(1), Pan Y, Hu J, Albarracin C, Wu Y, Dai JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Unit 951, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 25CR4.2026, 7435 Fannin St, Houston, Texas 77054, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Jan;6(1):83-4.

BACKGROUND: Ets genes encode a family of transcription factors that play key
roles in cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. Fusions of Ets genes 
with other targets have been described in Ewing's sarcoma, chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia and more recently prostate carcinoma. Ets expression in breast carcinoma
has not been comprehensively studied, and is the focus of this study.
METHODS: RT-Q-PCR was used to determine the expression of Ets genes in a panel of
ten common breast cancer cell lines, two immortalized normal breast epithelial
cell lines, and one primary culture of human mammary epithelial cells. Ets with
altered expression in cancer cell lines were verified in primary breast tumors.
RESULTS: Transcripts of 21 of the 27 Ets genes were detected in either normal or 
cancer cells. Of the 21 detectable genes, 14 were expressed at a similar level in
both normal and breast cancer cell lines. Four genes, Ehf, Elf3, Elf5 and Pdef,
were expressed at higher levels in breast cancer cells than normal epithelials.
Surprisingly, the expression of Elk3, Etsl and Flil was repressed in breast
cancer cells. The protein status of Ehf, Elf3, Pdef, Elk3, Etsl and Flil,
strongly correlated with the transcript data, suggesting that Ets expression is
regulated primarily at the transcriptional level. Similarly, Elf3, Pdef and Tel2 
were overexpressed, while Elk3, Etsl and Flil were under-expressed in primary
breast tumor specimens in comparison with normal mammary tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified a subset of Ets genes with altered expression
in breast carcinoma, implicating their roles in mammary tumorigenesis. While the 
Ets over-expression pattern is useful to uncover recurrent genetic alterations
involving Ets genes, the repressed expression of several Ets genes suggests that 
some Ets proteins may play suppressor roles during breast cancer progression. Our
results warrant detailed studies of individual Ets activity during mammary gland 
neoplasia.

PMID: 17172821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Eur J Neurol. 2006 Dec;13(12):1324-32.

Gene expression profiling in the human middle cerebral artery after cerebral
ischemia.

Vikman P(1), Edvinsson L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Vascular Research, Institution of Medicine, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. petter.vikman@med.lu.se

We have investigated the gene expression in human middle cerebral artery (MCA)
after ischemia. Ischemic stroke affects the perfusion in the affected area and
experimental cerebral ischemia results in upregulation of vasopressor receptors
in the MCA leading to the ischemic area. We obtained human MCA samples
distributing to the ischemic area, 7-10 days post-stroke. The gene expression was
examined with real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and microarray, proteins 
were studied with immunohistochemistry. We investigated genes previously shown to
be upregulated in animal models of cerebral ischemia (e.g. ET(A), ET(B), AT1,
AT2, and 5-HT(2A/1B/1D)). Their mRNA expression was increased compared with
controls, consistent with findings in experimental stroke. Immunohistochemistry
showed upregulation of the receptors localized on the smooth muscle cells. The
gene expression was profiled with microarray and seven genes chosen for further
investigation with real-time PCR; ELK3, LY64, Metallothionin IG, POU3F4, Actin
alpha2, RhoA and smoothelin. Six of these were regulated the same way when
confirming array expression with real-time PCR. Gene expression studies in the
human MCA leading to the ischemic region is similar to that seen after MCA
occlusion in rats. We found new genes that support the dynamic changes that occur
in the MCA distributing to the ischemic region.

PMID: 17116215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Virology. 2006 Sep 15;353(1):1-5. Epub 2006 Jul 24.

Adenovirus-induced alterations in host cell gene expression prior to the onset of
viral gene expression.

Granberg F(1), Svensson C, Pettersson U, Zhao H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

In this report, we have studied gene expression profiles in human primary lung
fibroblasts (IMR-90) during the very early phase of an adenovirus infection.
Eight out of twelve genes with known functions encoded transcription factors
linked to two major cellular processes; inhibition of cell growth (ATF3, ATF4,
KLF4, KLF6 and ELK3) and immune response (NR4A1 and CEBPB), indicating that the
earliest consequences of an adenovirus infection are growth arrest and induction 
of an immune response. A time course analysis showed that the induction of these 
immediate-early response genes was transient and suppressed after the onset of
the adenovirus early gene expression.

PMID: 16860366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Gynecol Oncol. 2006 Nov;103(2):654-60. Epub 2006 Jun 22.

Differential expression profiling of genes in a complete hydatidiform mole using 
cDNA microarray analysis.

Kim SJ(1), Lee SY, Lee C, Kim I, An HJ, Kim JY, Baek KH, Kim EJ, Kim JM, Lee JB, 
Lee JW, Jung WW, Chun T, Oh YK.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Gynecologic Cancer Center, CHA General Hospital, Kyonggi-Do,
South Korea.

OBJECTIVES: To gain a better understanding of the genes involved in the
pathogenesis of gestational trophoblastic diseases, we evaluated the genome-wide 
expression levels of genes in complete hydatidiform mole (H-mole) as compared to 
normal placenta using cDNA microarray technique.
METHODS: The expression profiles of complete H-mole tissues were compared with
those of normal placenta using cDNA microarray technique. The data obtained from 
10,305 human genes were normalized by the print-tip-based LOWESS method.
Significance analysis of microarray (SAM) was used to identify genes with
statistically significant changes in expression. The expression levels of genes
which showed significant differences between normal early placenta and complete
H-mole tissues were further confirmed by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: A cDNA microarray analysis consisting of 10,305 human genes revealed
significant changes in the expression of 213 genes, with 91 genes being
upregulated and 122 being downregulated. SAM revealed significant changes in gene
expression, including those associated with signal transduction, cell structure, 
transcription, and apoptosis. Further RT-PCR analysis of altered gene expression 
in mole tissues supported the microarray analysis results. We confirmed the
upregulation of TLE4, CAPZA1, PRSS25, RNF130, and USP1 in complete H-mole
tissues. Moreover, our study provides the first evidence that ELK3, LAMA3, LNK,
STAT2, and TNFRSF25 are downregulated in complete H-mole compared to normal early
placenta tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide a large body of information regarding gene
expression profiles associated with complete H-mole tumorigenesis and allow the
identification of potential targets for tumor prevention or therapy.

PMID: 16797685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2006 Oct;99(3):351-64. Epub 2006 Apr 1.

Capsaicin-induced inactivation of sensory neurons promotes a more aggressive gene
expression phenotype in breast cancer cells.

Erin N(1), Zhao W, Bylander J, Chase G, Clawson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Gittlen Cancer Research Foundation, Hershey Medical
Center, H059, Pennsylvania State University, 500 University drive, Hershey, PA
17033, USA.

Capsaicin-induced inactivation of sensory neurons has been reported to enhance
metastasis of a murine breast cancer cell line, specifically enhancing myocardial
metastases. Here we characterized changes in gene expression patterns in primary 
tumors which developed in capsaicin-treated vs. control mice. We identified a
small cohort of genes (17) which all showed significant decreases in expression
levels. All of the identified genes have been linked to cell growth,
differentiation, and/or cancer progression. Three representative genes, Caspase-7
(an executor of apoptosis), ADAM-10 (A Disintegrin and Metalloprotease), and
Elk-3 (a transcriptional repressor of the ternary factor subfamily of the Ets
factors) were further investigated. All three showed dramatic downregulation at
the protein level in primary tumors from capsaicin-treated animals compared with 
control (vehicle-treated) animals, and their expression was also lost in cell
culture. Elk-3 and Caspase-7 were not expressed in vitro in cultured cell lines, 
suggesting that their expression was induced by the tumor microenvironment. Loss 
of Caspase-7 expression can be expected to result in loss of function of
apoptotic pathways. At first glance, loss of ADAM-10 expression would be expected
to result in decreased invasive capability, due to loss of matrix metalloprotease
activity. However, just the opposite appears to be true. We found that ADAM-10
actually hydrolyzes Substance P. Specifically ADAM-10 produces the same
growth-inhibitory products from Substance P (i.e., SP (1-7)) that Neprilysin
does, so that loss of ADAM-10 expression actually results in loss of production
of growth inhibitory peptides from Substance P. Similarly, ADAM-10 also
efficiently hydrolyzes Calcitonin Gene-Related Peptide, which may act in concert 
with Substance P. Finally, overactivity of Ets transcriptional suppressor
functions has been linked to inhibition of tumorigenesis (e.g., Erf and Mef), and
in addition loss of Elk-3 expression might also be be linked to tumorigenesis via
loss of its putative anti-inflammatory activities. There is anecdotal evidence in
the literature to indicate that the rest of the down-regulated genes may also
contribute to development of a more aggressive phenotype in this breast cancer
model.

PMID: 16583263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Immunol. 2006 Feb 15;176(4):2414-20.

Endotoxin-induced down-regulation of Elk-3 facilitates heme oxygenase-1 induction
in macrophages.

Chung SW(1), Chen YH, Yet SF, Layne MD, Perrella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) is a cytoprotective enzyme that is acutely induced by
inflammatory stimuli, and the products of HO-1-mediated heme degradation have
anti-inflammatory properties. In many different pathophysiologic states, the
up-regulation of HO-1 has been shown to be beneficial in combating the
detrimental consequences of increased inflammation. Ets transcription factors are
known to be important mediators of inflammatory responses, and the ternary
complex factor subfamily of Ets proteins has both transcriptional activation and 
repression activity. The present study demonstrates that of several ternary
complex factor subfamily members, only Elk-3 represses HO-1 promoter activity in 
macrophages. Endotoxin administration to macrophages led to a dose-dependent
decrease in endogenous Elk-3 mRNA levels, and this reduction in Elk-3 preceded
the LPS-mediated up-regulation of HO-1 message. Analogous results also occurred
in lung tissue of mice exposed to endotoxin. Two putative Ets binding sites (EBS1
and EBS2) are present in the downstream region of the murine HO-1 promoter (bp
-125 and -93, respectively), and we recently showed that the EBS2 site is
essential for HO-1 induction by endotoxin. In contrast, the present study
demonstrates that the repressive effect of Elk-3 on HO-1 promoter activity is
dependent on the EBS1 site. Taken together, our data reveal that Elk-3 serves as 
an important repressor of HO-1 gene transcription and contributes to the tight
control of HO-1 gene regulation in the setting of inflammatory stimuli.

PMID: 16456000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Dec;25(24):10853-62.

The ternary complex factor Net regulates cell migration through inhibition of
PAI-1 expression.

Buchwalter G(1), Gross C, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS, INSERM,
ULP, Illkirch, France.

Net, Elk-1, and Sap-1 are members of the ternary complex factor (TCF) subfamily
of Ets transcription factors. They form ternary complexes with serum response
factor (SRF) on serum response elements of immediate early genes such as c-fos
and egr-1 and mediate responses to growth factors and mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling. Although the TCFs have been extensively studied as
intermediates in signaling cascades, surprisingly little is known about their
different target genes and physiological functions. We report that Net homozygous
mutant mouse embryonic fibroblasts have a defect in cell migration. This defect
results at least in part from increased expression of plasminogen activator
inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1), a serine protease inhibitor (serpin) that controls
extracellular proteolysis and cell matrix adhesion. The defect in cell migration 
can be reverted by the addition of a PAI-1 blocking antibody. Net represses PAI-1
promoter activity and binds to a specific region of the promoter containing Ets
binding sites in the absence of SRF. We conclude that Net is a negative regulator
of PAI-1 expression and is thereby involved in cell migration.

PMCID: PMC1316955
PMID: 16314510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 9;280(49):40857-66. Epub 2005 Sep 12.

Sp1 is a co-activator with Ets-1, and Net is an important repressor of the
transcription of CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase alpha.

Sugimoto H(1), Okamura K, Sugimoto S, Satou M, Hattori T, Vance DE, Izumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biochemistry, Gunma University Graduate School of
Medicine, Maebashi 371-8511, Japan.

Phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis via the CDP-choline pathway is primarily
regulated by CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (CT) encoded by the Pcyt1a
and Pcyt1b genes. Previously, we identified an Ets-1-binding site located at
-49/-47 in the promoter of Pcyt1a as an important transcriptional element
involved in basal CTalpha transcription (Sugimoto, H., Sugimoto, S., Tatei, K.,
Obinata, H., Bakovic, M., Izumi, T., and Vance, D. E. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 
19716-19722). In this study, we determined whether or not there were other
important elements and binding proteins for basal CTalpha transcription in the
Pcyt1a promoter, and if other Ets family proteins bind to the Ets-1-binding site.
The results indicate the formation of a ternary complex with Ets-1 binding at
-49/-47 and Sp1 binding at -58/-54 of the Pcyt1a promoter that is important for
activating CTalpha transcription. When nuclear extracts of COS-7 cells expressing
various Ets family repressors were incubated with DNA probes, binding of Net to
the probes was observed. Net dose-dependently depressed the promoter-luciferase
activity by 98%, even when co-expressed with Ets-1. RNA interference targeting
Net caused an increase of endogenous CTalpha mRNA. After synchronizing the cell
cycle in NIH3T3 cells, CTalpha mRNA increased at the S-M phase corresponding to
an increase of Ets-1 mRNA and a decrease of Net mRNA. These results indicated
that Net is an important endogenous repressor for CTalpha transcription.

PMID: 16157598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Physiol Genomics. 2005 Jul 14;22(2):257-67. Epub 2005 May 17.

Gene expression analysis of Tek/Tie2 signaling.

Chen SH(1), Babichev Y, Rodrigues N, Voskas D, Ling L, Nguyen VP, Dumont DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology Research, Sunnybrook and Women's
Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The elaboration of the vasculature during embryonic development involves
restructuring of the early vessels into a more complex vascular network. Of
particular importance to this vascular remodeling process is the requirement of
the Tek/Tie2 receptor tyrosine kinase. Mouse gene-targeting studies have shown
that the Tie2-deficient embryos succumb to embryonic death at midgestation due to
insufficient sprouting and remodeling of the primary capillary plexus. To
identify the underlying genetic mechanisms regulating the process of vascular
remodeling, transcriptomes modulated by Tie2 signaling were analyzed utilizing
serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE). Two libraries were constructed and
sequenced using embryonic day 8.5 yolk sac tissues from Tie2 wild-type and the
Tie2-null littermates. After tag extraction, 45,689 and 45,275 SAGE tags were
obtained for the Tie2 wild-type and Tie2-null libraries, respectively, yielding a
total of 21,376 distinct tags. Close to 62% of the tags were uniquely annotated, 
whereas 10% of the total tags were unknown. Using semiquantitative PCR, the
differential expression of eight genes was confirmed that included Elk3, an
important angiogenic switch gene which was upregulated in the absence of Tie2
signaling. The results of this study provide valuable insight into the potential 
association between Tie2 signaling and other known angiogenic pathways as well as
genes that might have novel functions in vascular remodeling.

PMID: 15899944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. DNA Cell Biol. 2005 Jan;24(1):35-42.

Elk3 from hamster--a ternary complex factor with strong transcriptional repressor
activity.

Hjortoe GM(1), Weilguny D, Willumsen BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Biology, University 
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Elk3 belongs to the Ets family of transcription factors, which are regulated by
the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase-signaling pathway. In the absence of
Ras, this protein is a strong inhibitor of transcription and may be directly
involved in regulation of growth by downregulating the transcription of genes
that are activated during entry into G1. We have isolated the Cricetulus griseus 
Elk3 gene from the Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell line and investigated the
transcriptional potential of this factor. Transient transfections revealed that, 
in addition to its regulation of the c-fos promoter, Elk3 from CHO cells seems to
inhibit other promoters controlling expression of proteins involved in G1/S phase
progression; Cyclin D1 and DHFR. As has been described for the Elk3 homologs Net 
(Mouse) and Sap-2 (Human), the results of the present study further indicate that
hamster Elk3 is a target of the Ras-Raf-MAPK pathway, and cotransfections with
constitutively active H-ras relieves its negative transcriptional activity. No
cells stably expressing exogenous Elk3 could be obtained, possibly due to an
unspecified toxic or growth retarding effect. These findings support a possible
role for Elk3 in growth regulation and reveal a high degree of homology for this 
protein across species.

PMID: 15684718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Radiat Res. 2004 Nov;162(5):547-53.

Hypoxia in the androgen-dependent Shionogi model for prostate cancer at three
stages.

Skov K(1), Adomat H, Bowden M, Dragowska W, Gleave M, Koch CJ, Woo J, Yapp DT.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Therapeutics, BC Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia,
V5Z 1L3, Canada.

The objective of this study was to investigate a possible relationship between
androgen status and hypoxia in the Shionogi murine prostate tumor model, which is
widely used to study the effects of androgen withdrawal on hormone resistance and
radiation response. Binding of the nitroimidazole hypoxia marker EF5 was assessed
using the Cy3-tagged monoclonal antibody ELK3-51. Three hours after injection of 
EF5 (30 mg/kg), tumors from the following three stages were excised:
androgen-dependent, regressed tumors 7 days after castration, and
androgen-independent. Half of each tumor was disaggregated for analysis by flow
cytometry and the remainder was flash frozen. Statistically significant
differences (P < 0.01) were found between androgen-dependent, regressed and
androgen-dependent tumors: approximately 30, approximately 2 and approximately
50% hypoxic cells, respectively. Frozen sections from androgen-dependent tumors
exhibited highly variable EF5 binding; regressed tumors showed very little or no 
binding; each section from androgen-dependent tumors showed high levels and
uniformly distributed binding of EF5. There was no correlation between the degree
of hypoxia and tumor weight (P > 0.1). The results from this preliminary study
indicate that hypoxia may play an important role with respect to the timing of
irradiation in prostate cancer treatments and possibly may be a useful prognostic
tool. In addition, hypoxia may also be relevant to progression in this disease
after androgen ablation.

PMID: 15624309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Cancer Biol Ther. 2004 Nov;3(11):1081-9; discussion 1090-1. Epub 2004 Nov 12.

Identification of novel highly expressed genes in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinomas through a bioinformatics analysis of expressed sequence tags.

Cao D(1), Hustinx SR, Sui G, Bala P, Sato N, Martin S, Maitra A, Murphy KM,
Cameron JL, Yeo CJ, Kern SE, Goggins M, Pandey A, Hruban RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

In most microarray experiments, a significant fraction of the differentially
expressed mRNAs identified correspond to expressed sequence tags (ESTs) and are
generally discarded from further analyses. We used careful bioinformatics
analyses to characterize those ESTs that were found to be highly overexpressed in
a series of pancreatic adenocarcinomas. cDNA was prepared from 60 non-neoplastic 
samples (normal pancreas [n = 20], normal colon [n = 10], or normal duodenal
mucosal [n = 30]) and from 64 pancreatic cancers (resected cancers [n = 50] or
cancer cell lines [n = 14]) and hybridized to the complete Affymetrix Human
Genome U133 GeneChip(R) set (arrays U133A and B) for simultaneous analysis of
45,000 fragments corresponding to 33,000 known genes and 6,000 ESTs. The
GeneExpress(R) software system Fold Change Analysis Tool was used and 60 ESTs
were identified that were expressed at levels at least 3-fold greater in the
pancreatic cancers as compared to normal tissues. Searches against the human
genomic sequence and comparative genomic analysis of human and mouse genomes was 
carried out using basic local alignment search tools (BLAST), BLASTN, and BLASTX,
for identifying protein coding genes corresponding to the ESTs. Subsequently, in 
order to pick the most relevant candidate genes for a more detailed analysis, we 
looked for domains/motifs in the open reading frames using SMART and Pfam
programs. We were able to definitively map 43 of the 60 ESTs to known or novel
genes, and 15 of the ESTs could be localized in close proximity to a gene in the 
human genome although we were unable to establish that the EST was indeed derived
from those genes. The differential expression of a subset of genes was confirmed 
at the protein level by immunohistochemical labeling of tissue microarrays
(inhibin beta A [INHBA] and CD29) and/or at the transcript level by RT-PCR
(INHBA, AKAP12, ELK3, FOXQ1, EIF5A2, and EFNA5). We conclude that bioinformatics 
tools can be used to characterize differentially overexpressed ESTs, and that
some of these ESTs may represent diagnostically and therapeutically useful
targets that might be missed using data solely from currently annotated
databases.

PMID: 15467436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Biochimie. 2004 Jan;86(1):13-9.

Microdissection, mRNA amplification and microarray: a study of pleural
mesothelial and malignant mesothelioma cells.

Mohr S(1), Bottin MC, Lannes B, Neuville A, Bellocq JP, Keith G, Rihn BH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de Recherche et de Sécurité, Avenue de Bourgogne, BP27,
54501 Vandoeuvre, France.

The studies of molecular alterations in tumor cells with microarrays are often
hampered by inherent tissue heterogeneity. The emergence of Laser Capture
Microdissection (LCM) allowed us to overcome this challenge since it gives
selective access to cancer cells that are isolated from their native tissue
environment. In this report, we microdissected mesothelial cells and malignant
mesothelioma cells of ex vivo resected specimens using LCM. Amplified RNA from
mesothelial and mesothelioma microdissected cells allowed us to measure global
gene expression with 10 K-microarrays in four independent experiments. We
screened 9850 annotated human genes, 1275 of which have satisfied our data
analysis requirements. They included 302 overexpressed genes and 160
downregulated genes in mesothelioma microdissected cells as compared to
mesothelial microdissected cells. Among them, the expression levels of eight
genes, namely BF, FTL, IGFBP7, RARRES1, RARRES2, RBP1, SAT, and TXN according to 
HUGO nomenclature, were increased, whereas six: ALOX5AP, CLNS1A, EIF4A2, ELK3,
REQ and SYPL, were found to be underexpressed in mesothelioma microdissected
cells. The ferritin light polypeptide (FTL) gene overexpression was confirmed by 
real time quantitative PCR. Our approach allowed a comprehensive in situ
examination of mesothelioma and provided an accurate way to find new marker genes
that may be useful for diagnosis and treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma.

PMID: 14987796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;24(3):1132-42.

The tumor suppressor p53 inhibits Net, an effector of Ras/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase signaling.

Nakade K(1), Zheng H, Ganguli G, Buchwalter G, Gross C, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, 67404 Illkirch cedex, France.

The tumor suppressor function of p53 is linked to its ability to repress gene
expression, but the mechanisms of specific gene repression are poorly understood.
We report that wild-type p53 inhibits an effector of the Ras
oncogene/mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway, the transcription factor
Net. Tumor-associated mutant p53s are less efficient inhibitors. p53 inhibits by 
preventing phosphorylation of Net by MAP kinases. Loss of p53 in vivo leads to
increased Net phosphorylation in response to wound healing and UV irradiation of 
skin. Our results show that p53 can repress specific gene expression by
inhibiting Net, a factor implicated in cell cycle entry.

PMCID: PMC321436
PMID: 14729959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Genes Dev. 2003 Sep 15;17(18):2283-97.

The transcription factor Net regulates the angiogenic switch.

Zheng H(1), Wasylyk C, Ayadi A, Abecassis J, Schalken JA, Rogatsch H, Wernert N, 
Maira SM, Multon MC, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, 67404 Illkirch, France.

Angiogenesis is fundamental to physiological and pathological processes. Despite 
intensive efforts, little is known about the intracellular circuits that regulate
angiogenesis. The transcription factor Net is activated by phosphorylation
induced by Ras, an indirect regulator of angiogenesis. Net is expressed at sites 
of vasculogenesis and angiogenesis during early mouse development, suggesting
that it could have a role in blood vessel formation. We show here that
down-regulation of Net inhibits angiogenesis and vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) expression in vivo, ex vivo, and in vitro. Ras-activated
phosphorylated Net (P-Net) stimulates the mouse VEGF promoter through the -80 to 
-53 region that principally binds Sp1. P-Net and VEGF are coexpressed in
angiogenic processes in wild-type mouse tissues and in human tumors. We conclude 
that Net is a regulator of angiogenesis that can switch to an activator following
induction by pro-angiogenic molecules.

PMCID: PMC196465
PMID: 12975317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 7;278(45):44935-48. Epub 2003 Aug 21.

Single-stranded DNA-binding proteins PURalpha and PURbeta bind to a purine-rich
negative regulatory element of the alpha-myosin heavy chain gene and control
transcriptional and translational regulation of the gene expression. Implications
in the repression of alpha-myosin heavy chain during heart failure.

Gupta M(1), Sueblinvong V, Raman J, Jeevanandam V, Gupta MP.

Author information: 
(1)Hope Children's Hospital, University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois 60612,
USA.

The alpha-myosin heavy chain is a principal molecule of the thick filament of the
sarcomere, expressed primarily in cardiac myocytes. The mechanism for its
cardiac-restricted expression is not yet fully understood. We previously
identified a purine-rich negative regulatory (PNR) element in the first intron of
the gene, which is essential for its cardiac-specific expression (Gupta, M., Zak,
R., Libermann, T. A., and Gupta, M. P. (1998) Mol. Cell. Biol. 18, 7243-7258). In
this study we cloned and characterized muscle and non-muscle factors that bind to
this element. We show that two single-stranded DNA-binding proteins of the PUR
family, PURalpha and PURbeta, which are derived from cardiac myocytes, bind to
the plus strand of the PNR element. In functional assays, PURalpha and PURbeta
repressed alpha-myosin heavy chain (alpha-MHC) gene expression in the presence of
upstream regulatory sequences of the gene. However, from HeLa cells an Ets family
of protein, Ets-related protein (ERP), binds to double-stranded PNR element. The 
ERP.PNR complex inhibited the activity of the basal transcription complex from
homologous as well as heterologous promoters in a PNR position-independent
manner, suggesting that ERP acts as a silencer of alpha-MHC gene expression in
non-muscle cells. We also show that PUR proteins are capable of binding to
alpha-MHC mRNA and attenuate its translational efficiency. Furthermore, we show
robust expression of PUR proteins in failing hearts where alpha-MHC mRNA levels
are suppressed. Together, these results reveal that (i) PUR proteins participate 
in transcriptional as well as translational regulation of alpha-MHC expression in
cardiac myocytes and (ii) ERP may be involved in cardiac-restricted expression of
the alpha-MHC gene by preventing its expression in non-muscle cells.

PMID: 12933792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 10;278(41):39572-7. Epub 2003 Jul 31.

Elk-3 is a transcriptional repressor of nitric-oxide synthase 2.

Chen YH(1), Layne MD, Chung SW, Ejima K, Baron RM, Yet SF, Perrella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The inducible isoform of nitric-oxide synthase (NOS2), a key enzyme catalyzing
the dramatic increase in nitric oxide by lipopolysaccharide (LPS), plays an
important role in the pathophysiology of endotoxemia and sepsis. Recent evidence 
suggests that Ets transcription factors may contribute to NOS2 induction by
inflammatory stimuli. In this study, we investigated the role of Ets
transcription factors in the regulation of NOS2 by LPS and transforming growth
factor (TGF)-beta 1. Transient transfection assays in macrophages showed that
Ets-2 produced an increase in NOS2 promoter activity, whereas the induction by
Ets-1 was modest and NERF2 had no effect. Elk-3 (Net/Erp/Sap-2a) markedly
repressed NOS2 promoter activity in a dose-dependent fashion, and overexpression 
of Elk-3 blunted the induction of endogenous NOS2 message. Mutation of the Net
inhibitory domain of Elk-3, but not the C-terminal-binding protein interaction
domain, partially alleviated this repressive effect. We also found that deletion 
of the Ets domain of Elk-3 completely abolished its repressive effect on the NOS2
promoter. LPS administration to macrophages led to a dose-dependent decrease in
endogenous Elk-3 mRNA levels, and this decrease in Elk-3 preceded the induction
of NOS2 mRNA. In a mouse model of endotoxemia, the expression of Elk-3 in kidney,
lung, and heart was significantly down-regulated after systemic administration of
LPS, and this down-regulation also preceded NOS2 induction. Moreover, TGF-beta 1 
significantly increased endogenous Elk-3 mRNA levels that had been down-regulated
by LPS in macrophages. This increase in Elk-3 correlated with a TGF-beta
1-induced down-regulation of NOS2. Taken together, our data suggest that Elk-3 is
a strong repressor of NOS2 promoter activity and mRNA levels and that endogenous 
expression of Elk-3 inversely correlates with NOS2. Thus, Elk-3 may serve as an
important mediator of NOS2 gene expression.

PMID: 12896968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Bacteriol. 2002 Aug;184(16):4536-43.

Simultaneous coexpression of Borrelia burgdorferi Erp proteins occurs through a
specific, erp locus-directed regulatory mechanism.

El-Hage N(1), Stevenson B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Kentucky College of Medicine, Lexington, Kentucky 40536-0298, USA.

An individual Borrelia burgdorferi bacterium can encode as many as 13 different
Erp (OspE/F-related) proteins from mono-and bicistronic loci that are carried on 
up to 10 separate plasmids. We demonstrate through multilabel immunofluorescence 
analyses that individual bacteria simultaneously coexpress their entire Erp
protein repertoire. While it has been proposed that B. burgdorferi controls
expression of Erp and other plasmid-encoded proteins through changes in DNA
topology, we observed regulated Erp expression in the absence of detectable
differences in DNA supercoiling. Likewise, inhibition of DNA gyrase had no
detectable effect on Erp expression. Furthermore, expression of loci physically
adjacent to erp loci was observed to be independently regulated. It is concluded 
that Erp expression is regulated by a mechanism(s) directed at erp loci and not
by a global, plasmid-wide mechanism.

PMCID: PMC135249
PMID: 12142424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Hepatogastroenterology. 2002 May-Jun;49(45):747-51.

Expression of the Ets-1 proto-oncogene is linked to cell differentiation of human
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Kanda K(1), Nakayama T, Onizuka S, Tomioka T, Kanematsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, 1-7-1
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8501, Japan. kanematu@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Ets-1 regulates the expression of a number of genes related to
remodeling of the extracellular matrix. Ets-1 is associated with the occurrence
of invasive processes, proliferation and differentiation. Less is known about the
biological functions of Ets-1 in human hepatocellular carcinoma. In an attempt at
elucidation, we examined immunohistochemically hepatocellular carcinoma followed 
by application of genetic techniques.
METHODOLOGY: We performed immunohistochemical analysis on tissue from 59 Japanese
patients undergoing surgical resection of hepatocellular carcinoma using the
antibody against human Ets-1. We compared Ets-1 expression in relation to
clinicopathological findings. In situ hybridization and reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction were also performed to confirm the
expression of Ets-1 messenger RNA in hepatocellular carcinoma tissues.
RESULTS: In specimens from 59 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, 41 (70%)
showed positive staining for Ets-1 protein. The expression of Ets-1 messenger RNA
was also observed in hepatocellular carcinoma tissues by in situ hybridization
and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. The expression of Ets-1
correlated with histological differentiation of hepatocellular carcinoma (P <
0.05). Ets-1 was positive in 2 (50%) of the 4 well-differentiated hepatocellular 
carcinomas and in 28 (64%) of the 44 moderately differentiated hepatocellular
carcinomas, whereas all the 11 poorly differentiated hepatocellular carcinomas
were positive for Ets-1 staining. Ets-1 protein was expressed more strongly at
the peripheral than the central area of the tumor. Otherwise, no particular
correlation was evident in terms of clinicopathological factors.
CONCLUSIONS: We found Ets-1 to be expressed in human hepatocellular carcinoma,
particularly at the peripheral area of the tumor. As this expression is linked to
cell differentiation, this gene may yield biological information relative to this
malignant tumor of the liver.

PMID: 12063983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Neurol Sci. 2002 May 15;197(1-2):27-35.

Sp1 and the ets-related transcription factor complex GABP alpha/beta functionally
cooperate to activate the utrophin promoter.

Gyrd-Hansen M(1), Krag TO, Rosmarin AG, Khurana TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Glostrup Hospital, University of
Copenhagen, Glostrup, Denmark.

Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a fatal neuromuscular disease caused by the 
absence of dystrophin. Utrophin is the autosomal homolog of dystrophin and
capable of compensating for the absence of dystrophin, when overexpressed. In
skeletal muscle, utrophin plays an important role in the formation of
neuromuscular junctions. This selective enrichment occurs, in part by
transcriptional regulation of the utrophin gene at the sub-synaptic nuclei in
muscle. Utrophin's complex transcriptional regulation is not yet fully
understood, however, GABP alpha / beta has recently been shown to bind the N box 
and activate the utrophin promoter in response to heregulin. In this study, we
show that the transcription factor Sp1 binds and activates the utrophin promoter 
in Drosophila S2 cells as well as define a Sp1 response element. We demonstrate
that heregulin treatment of cultured muscle cells activates the ERK pathway and
phosphorylates serine residue(s) in the consensus ERK recognition site of Sp1.
Finally, Sp1 is shown to functionally cooperate with GABP alpha / beta and cause 
a 58-fold increase of de novo utrophin promoter transcription. Taken together,
these findings help define mechanisms used for transcriptional regulation of
utrophin expression as well as identify new targets for achieving potentially
therapeutic upregulation of utrophin in DMD.

PMID: 11997063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2002 Feb;13(1):9-18.

Lymphatic endothelial regulation, lymphoedema, and lymph node metastasis.

Karkkainen MJ(1), Alitalo K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular/Cancer Biology Laboratory and Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, 
Haartman Institute, Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki University Hospital and
University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland. Marika.Karkkainen@Helsinki.Fl

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-3 (VEGFR-3) mediates lymphatic
endothelial cell (LEC) growth, migration, and survival by binding VEGF-C and
VEGF-D. Recent studies have revealed new regulators of the lymphatic endothelium,
such as the transcription factor Prox1, and the cell surface proteins podoplanin 
and lymphatic vessel endothelial hyaluronan receptor-1 (LYVE-1). Furthermore, the
isolation of LECs now allows detailed molecular studies of the factors regulating
the lymphatic vasculature. These studies are aimed at targeting the lymphatic
vasculature in the treatment of various diseases, such as tumour metastasis and
lymphoedema.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 11969367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Neurosci. 2001 Jul 1;21(13):4609-24.

Differential expression of genes encoding subthreshold-operating voltage-gated K+
channels in brain.

Saganich MJ(1), Machado E, Rudy B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Neuroscience and Department of Biochemistry, New 
York University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016.

The members of the three subfamilies (eag, erg, and elk) of the ether-a-go-go
(EAG) family of potassium channel pore-forming subunits express currents that,
like the M-current (I(M)), could have considerable influence on the subthreshold 
properties of neuronal membranes, and hence the control of excitability. A
nonradioactive in situ hybridization (NR-ISH) study of the distribution of the
transcripts encoding the eight known EAG family subunits in rat brain was
performed to identify neuronal populations in which the physiological roles of
EAG channels could be studied. These distributions were compared with those of
the mRNAs encoding the components of the classical M-current (Kcnq2 and Kcnq3).
NR-ISH was combined with immunohistochemistry to specific neuronal markers to
help identify expressing neurons. The results show that each EAG subunit has a
specific pattern of expression in rat brain. EAG and Kcnq transcripts are
prominent in several types of excitatory neurons in the cortex and hippocampus;
however, only one of these channel components (erg1) was consistently expressed
in inhibitory interneurons in these areas. Some neuronal populations express more
than one product of the same subfamily, suggesting that the subunits may form
heteromeric channels in these neurons. Many neurons expressed multiple EAG family
and Kcnq transcripts, such as CA1 pyramidal neurons, which contained Kcnq2,
Kcnq3, eag1, erg1, erg3, elk2, and elk3. This indicates that the subthreshold
current in many neurons may be complex, containing different components mediated 
by a number of channels with distinct properties and neuromodulatory responses.

PMID: 11425889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mech Dev. 2001 Apr;102(1-2):205-8.

Net, an Ets ternary complex transcription factor, is expressed in sites of
vasculogenesis, angiogenesis, and chondrogenesis during mouse development.

Ayadi A(1), Suelves M, Dollé P, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, 1 Rue Laurent Fries, BP 163, 67404 cedex, Illkirch, France.

The Net gene encodes an Ets transcription factor belonging to the ternary complex
factor subfamily. We studied Net expression during mouse development (E7.5-E18.5)
by in situ hybridization. Net is expressed at E7.5-8.5 in developing vascular
primordia, including the allantoic vessels, heart endocardium and dorsal aortae. 
Vascular endothelial cell expression persists throughout development. Additional 
sites of expression appear at E9.5-E10.5, especially in facial, branchial arch
and distal limb-bud mesenchyme. Later, expression is most conspicuous in
developing cartilage and becomes progressively restricted to perichondrium. Net
expression during mouse development correlates with vasculogenesis, angiogenesis 
and cartilage ontogeny.

PMID: 11287193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 11;276(19):16207-15. Epub 2001 Jan 17.

DNA binding by the ETS-domain transcription factor PEA3 is regulated by
intramolecular and intermolecular protein.protein interactions.

Greenall A(1), Willingham N, Cheung E, Boam DS, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Genetics, The Medical School, University of
Newcastle Upon Tyne, Newcastle Upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom.

The control of DNA binding by eukaryotic transcription factors represents an
important regulatory mechanism. Many transcription factors are controlled by
cis-acting autoinhibitory modules that are thought to act by blocking promiscuous
DNA binding in the absence of appropriate regulatory cues. Here, we have
investigated the determinants and regulation of the autoinhibitory mechanism
employed by the ETS-domain transcription factor, PEA3. DNA binding is inhibited
by a module composed of a combination of two short motifs located on either side 
of the ETS DNA-binding domain. A second type of protein, Ids, can act in trans to
mimic the effect of these cis-acting inhibitory motifs and reduce DNA binding by 
PEA3. By using a one-hybrid screen, we identified the basic
helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper transcription factor USF-1 as an interaction
partner for PEA3. PEA3 and USF-1 form DNA complexes in a cooperative manner.
Moreover, the formation of ternary PEA3.USF-1.DNA complexes requires parts of the
same motifs in PEA3 that form the autoinhibitory module. Thus the binding of
USF-1 to PEA3 acts as a switch that modifies the autoinhibitory motifs in PEA3 to
first relieve their inhibitory action, and second, promote ternary nucleoprotein 
complex assembly.

PMID: 11278941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6524-32.

Proteins of the ETS family with transcriptional repressor activity.

Mavrothalassitis G(1), Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Crete and IMBB-FORTH, Voutes, Heraklion,
Crete 714-09, Greece.

ETS proteins form one of the largest families of signal-dependent transcriptional
regulators, mediating cellular proliferation, differentiation and tumorigenesis. 
Most of the known ETS proteins have been shown to activate transcription.
However, four ETS proteins (YAN, ERF, NET and TEL) can act as transcriptional
repressors. In three cases (ERF, NET and TEL) distinct repression domains have
been identified and there are indications that NET and TEL may mediate
transcription via Histone Deacetylase recruitment. All four proteins appear to be
regulated by MAPKs, though for YAN and ERF this regulation seems to be restricted
to ERKs. YAN, ERF and TEL have been implicated in cellular proliferation although
there are indications suggesting a possible involvement of YAN and TEL in
differentiation as well. Other ETS-domain proteins have been shown to repress
transcription in a context specific manner, and there are suggestions that the
ETS DNA-binding domain may act as a transcriptional repressor. Transcriptional
repression by ETS domain proteins adds an other level in the orchestrated
regulation by this diverse family of transcription factors that often recognize
similar if not identical binding sites on DNA and are believed to regulate
critical genes in a variety of biological processes. Definitive assessment of the
importance of this novel regulatory level will require the identification of ETS 
proteins target genes and the further analysis of transcriptional control and
biological function of these proteins in defined pathways.

PMID: 11175368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Oncogene. 2000 Oct 19;19(44):5063-72.

The ternary complex factor Net contains two distinct elements that mediate
different responses to MAP kinase signalling cascades.

Ducret C(1), Maira SM, Lutz Y, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, 1 Rue Laurent Fries, BP 163, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, France.

The ternary complex factors (TCFs), Elk-1, Sap-1a and Net, are key integrators of
the transcriptional response to different signalling pathways. Classically, three
MAP kinase pathways, involving ERK, JNK, and p38, transduce various extracellular
stimuli to the nucleus. Net is a repressor that is converted into an activator by
Ras/ERK signalling. Net is also exported from the nucleus in response to stress
stimuli transduced through the JNK pathway, leading to relief from repression.
Here we show that ERK and p38 bind to the D box and that binding is required for 
phosphorylation of the adjacent C-terminally located C-domain. The D box as well 
as the phosphorylation sites in the C-domain (the DC element) are required for
transcription activation by Ras. On the other hand, JNK binds to the J box in the
middle of the protein, and binding is required for phosphorylation of the
adjacent EXport motif. Both the binding and phosphorylation sites (the JEX
element) are important for Net export. In conclusion, specific targeting of Net
by MAP kinase pathways involves two different docking sites and phosphorylation
of two different domains. These two elements, DC and JEX, mediate two distinct
functional responses.

PMID: 11042694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Jul 24;1492(2-3):341-52.

Transcription of the catalytic 180-kDa subunit gene of mouse DNA polymerase alpha
is controlled by E2F, an Ets-related transcription factor, and Sp1.

Izumi M(1), Yokoi M, Nishikawa NS, Miyazawa H, Sugino A, Yamagishi M, Yamaguchi
M, Matsukage A, Yatagai F, Hanaoka F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radioisotope Technology, RIKEN (The Institute of Physical and
CHemical Research), Saitama, Japan. mizumi@postman.riken.go.jp

We have isolated a genomic DNA fragment spanning the 5'-end of the gene encoding 
the catalytic subunit of mouse DNA polymerase alpha. The nucleotide sequence of
the upstream region was G/C-rich and lacked a TATA box. Transient expression
assays in cycling NIH 3T3 cells demonstrated that the GC box of 20 bp (at
nucleotides -112/-93 with respect to the transcription initiation site) and the
palindromic sequence of 14 bp (at nucleotides -71/-58) were essential for basal
promoter activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that Sp1 binds to
the GC box. We also purified a protein capable of binding to the palindrome and
identified it as GA-binding protein (GABP), an Ets- and Notch-related
transcription factor. Transient expression assays in synchronized NIH 3T3 cells
revealed that three variant E2F sites near the transcription initiation site (at 
nucleotides -23/-16, -1/+7 and +17/+29) had no basal promoter activity by
themselves, but were essential for growth-dependent stimulation of the gene
expression. These data indicate that E2F, GABP and Sp1 regulate the gene
expression of this principal replication enzyme.

PMID: 11004506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. EMBO J. 2000 Sep 1;19(17):4565-76.

Ezrin function is required for ROCK-mediated fibroblast transformation by the Net
and Dbl oncogenes.

Tran Quang C(1), Gautreau A, Arpin M, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Room 528, Imperial Cancer Research Fund
Laboratories, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, UK.

The small G protein RhoA and its GDP/GTP exchange factors (GEFs) Net and Dbl can 
transform NIH 3T3 fibroblasts, dependent on the activity of the RhoA effector
kinase ROCK. We investigated the role of the cytoskeletal linker protein ezrin in
this process. RhoA effector loop mutants which can bind ROCK induce
relocalization of ezrin to dorsal actin-containing cell surface protrusions, as
do Net and Dbl. Both processes are inhibited by the ROCK inhibitor Y27632, which 
also inhibits association of ezrin with the cytoskeleton, and phosphorylation of 
T567, conserved between ezrin and its relatives radixin and moesin. ROCK can
phosphorylate the ezrin C-terminus in vitro. The ezrin mutant T567A cannot be
relocalized by activated RhoA, Net or Dbl or by ROCK itself, and also inhibits
RhoA-mediated contractility and focal adhesion formation. Moreover, ezrin T567A, 
but not wild-type ezrin, restores contact inhibition to Net- and Dbl-transformed 
cells, and inhibits the activity of Net and Ras in focus formation assays. These 
results implicate ROCK-mediated ezrin C-terminal phosphorylation in
transformation by RhoGEFs.

PMCID: PMC302055
PMID: 10970850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Neuroendocrinol. 2000 Mar;12(3):263-72.

Expression of mRNA for voltage-dependent and inward-rectifying K channels in
GH3/B6 cells and rat pituitary.

Wulfsen I(1), Hauber HP, Schiemann D, Bauer CK, Schwarz JR.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Angewandte Physiologie, Institut für Physiologie,
Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Universität Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.

The expression of mRNA for voltage-dependent (Kv) and inward-rectifying K
channels (Kir) was studied in clonal rat somato-mammotroph cells (GH3/B6 cells)
and rat pituitary using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
In GH3/B6 cells transcripts for 16 different Kv channel alpha-subunits (seven
Shaker-related: Kv1.2, Kv1.4, Kv1.5, Kv2.1, Kv3.2, Kv4.1, Kv5.1; six EAG: eag1,
erg1, erg2, elk1-elk3; three KCNQ: KCNQ1-KCNQ3) and for five different Kir
channel alpha-subunits (Kir1.1, Kir2.3, Kir3.2, Kir3.3, Kir6.2) were found. In
addition, transcripts for a short isoform of Kvbeta2 and transcripts for Kvbeta3 
subunits were present. In rat pituitary transcripts for 21 different Kv channel
alpha-subunits (11 Shaker-related: Kv1.3, Kv1.4, Kv1.6, Kv2.1, Kv2.2, Kv3.2,
Kv3.4, Kv4.1, Kv4.2, Kv4.3, Kv6.1; seven EAG: eag1, erg1-erg3, elk1-elk3; three
KCNQ: KCNQ1-KCNQ3) and nine Kir channel alpha-subunits (Kir1.1, Kir2.2,
Kir3.1-Kir3.4, Kir4.1, Kir6.1, Kir6. 2) were found. In addition, all tested
auxiliary subunits (Kvbeta1-Kvbeta3, minK, SUR1, SUR2) are expressed in the
pituitary. The results indicate that the macroscopic K currents in GH3/B6 and
pituitary cells are presumably mediated by K channels constructed by a larger
number of K channel alpha-subunits and auxiliary beta-subunits than previously
distinguished electrophysiologically and pharmacologically.

PMID: 10718922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Eye (Lond). 1999 Jun;13 ( Pt 3b):438-44.

Mouse models of congenital cataract.

Graw J(1).

Author information: 
(1)GSF-Forschungszentrum für Umwelt und Gesundheit Institut für Säugetiergenetik,
Neuherberg Germany. graw@gsf.de

Mouse mutants affecting lens development are excellent models for corresponding
human disorders. The mutant aphakia has been characterised by bilaterally aphakic
eyes (Varnum and Stevens, J Hered 1968;59:147-50); the corresponding gene was
mapped to chromosome 19 (Varnum and Stevens, Mouse News Lett 1975;53:35). Recent 
investigations in our laboratory refined the linkage of 0.6 cM proximal to the
marker D19Mit10. Several candidate genes have been excluded (Chuk1, Fgf8, Lbp1,
Npm3, Pax2, Pitx3). The Cat3 mutations are characterised by vacuolated lenses
caused by alterations in the initial secondary lens fibre cell differentiation.
Secondary malformations develop at the cornea and iris, but the retina remains
unaffected. The mutation has been mapped to chromosome 10 close to the markers
D10Mit41 and D10Mit95. Several candidate genes have been excluded (Dcn, Elk3,
Ldc, Mell8, Tr2-11). The series of Cat2 mutations have been mapped close to the
gamma-crystallin genes (Cryg; Löster et al., Genomics 1994;23:240-2). The Cat2nop
mutation is characterised by a mutation in the third exon of Crygb leading to a
truncated gamma B-crystallin and the termination of lens fibre cell
differentiation. The Cat2 mutants are interesting models for human cataracts
caused by mutations in the human CRYG genes at chromosome 2q32-35.

PMID: 10627821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Oct;19(10):7076-87.

The net repressor is regulated by nuclear export in response to anisomycin, UV,
and heat shock.

Ducret C(1), Maira SM, Dierich A, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, France.

The ternary complex factors (TCFs) are targets for Ras/mitogen-activated protein 
kinase signalling pathways. They integrate the transcriptional response at the
level of serum response elements in early-response genes, such as the c-fos
proto-oncogene. An important aim is to understand the individual roles played by 
the three TCFs, Net, Elk1, and Sap1a. Net, in contrast to Elk1 and Sap1a, is a
strong repressor of transcription. We now show that Net is regulated by
nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling in response to specific signalling pathways. Net is
mainly nuclear under both normal and basal serum conditions. Net contains two
nuclear localization signals (NLSs); one is located in the Ets domain, and the
other corresponds to the D box. Net also has a nuclear export signal (NES) in the
conserved Ets DNA binding domain. Net is apparently unique among Ets proteins in 
that a particular leucine in helix 1, a structural element, generates a NES.
Anisomycin, UV, and heat shock induce active nuclear exclusion of Net through a
pathway that involves c-Jun N-terminal kinase kinase and is inhibited by
leptomycin B. Nuclear exclusion relieves transcriptional repression by Net. The
specific induction of nuclear exclusion of Net by particular signalling pathways 
shows that nuclear-cytoplasmic transport of transcription factors can add to the 
specificity of the response to signalling cascades.

PMCID: PMC84702
PMID: 10490644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. EMBO J. 1999 Jun 15;18(12):3392-403.

Net, a negative Ras-switchable TCF, contains a second inhibition domain, the CID,
that mediates repression through interactions with CtBP and de-acetylation.

Criqui-Filipe P(1), Ducret C, Maira SM, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
ECNRS/INSERM/ULP, 1 Rue Laurent Fries, BP 163, 67404 Illkirch cedex, France.

Signalling cascades are integrated at the transcriptional level by the interplay 
between factors such as the ternary complex factors (TCFs) that interact with
serum response factor (SRF) and the serum response element (SRE) of the fos
promoter. Net is a negative TCF that is switched to a positive regulator by the
Ras signal. To understand the mechanisms of repression by Net, we used a yeast
two-hybrid screen to identify factors that interact with its inhibitory domain.
We isolated mCtBP1, the murine homologue of huCtBP1, a factor implicated in
negative regulation of transformation by E1A plus Ras. We show that mCtBP1
interacts strongly with Net both in vitro and in vivo. The CtBP interaction
domain of Net, the CID, mediates repression independently of the previously
identified negative element, the NID. The CID inhibits by recruiting the
co-repressor mCtBP1. The CID and mCtBP1 need to use de-acetylase activity for
repression, whereas the NID apparently represses by other mechanisms. Finally, we
provide evidence that CtBP and de-acetylation repress the c-fos SRE in low serum 
when it is inactive, but not in high serum when it is active. These results
provide insights into the cross-talk between pathways that inhibit and stimulate 
transformation at the level of Net, a regulator of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1171419
PMID: 10369679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Neuroscience. 1999;89(4):1357-66.

Detection of hypoxic cells with the 2-nitroimidazole, EF5, correlates with early 
redox changes in rat brain after perinatal hypoxia-ischemia.

Bergeron M(1), Evans SM, Sharp FR, Koch CJ, Lord EM, Ferriero DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California at San Francisco,
94143-0114, USA.

The hypoxia-dependent activation of nitroheterocyclic drugs by cellular
nitroreductases leads to the formation of intracellular adducts between the drugs
and cellular macromolecules. Because this covalent binding is maximal in the
absence of oxygen, detection of bound adducts provides an assay for estimating
the degree of cellular hypoxia in vivo. Using a pentafluorintated derivative of
etanidazole called EF5, we studied the distribution of EF5 adducts in
seven-day-old rats subjected to different treatments which decrease the level of 
oxygen in the brain. EF5 solution was administered intraperitoneally 30 min prior
to each treatment. The effect of acute and chronic hypoxia on EF5 adduct
formation (binding) was studied in the brain of newborn rats exposed to global
hypoxia (8% O2 for 30, 90 or 150 min) and in the brain of chronically hypoxic rat
pups with congenital cardiac defects (Wistar Kyoto). The effect of combined
hypoxia-ischemia was investigated in rat pups subjected to right carotid
coagulation and concurrent exposure to 8% O2 for 30, 90 or 150 min. Brains were
frozen immediately at the end of each treatment. Using a Cy3-conjugated
monoclonal mouse antibody (ELK3-51) raised against EF5 adducts, hypoxic cells
within brain regions were visualized by fluorescence immunocytochemistry. Brains 
from controls or vehicle-injected animals showed no EF5 binding. Notably, brains 
from animals which were chronically hypoxemic as a result of congenital cardiac
defects also showed no EF5 binding. A short exposure (30 min) to hypoxia or to
combined hypoxia-ischemia resulted in increased background stain and few
scattered cells with low-intensity immunostaining. Acute hypoxia exposure of at
least 90-150 min, which in this age animal does not result in frank cellular
damage, produced patchy areas of low- to moderate-intensity fluorescence
scattered throughout the brain. In contrast, 90-150 min of hypoxia-ischemia was
associated with intense immunofluorescence in the hemisphere ipsilateral to the
carotid occlusion, with a pattern similar to that reported previously for the
histological damage seen in this model. This study provides a sensitive method
for the evaluation of the level of oxygen depletion in brain tissue after
neonatal hypoxia-ischemia at times much earlier than any method demonstrates
apoptotic or necrotic cell death Since the level of in vivo formation of
macromolecular adducts of EF5 depends on the degree of oxygen depletion in a
tissue, intracellular EF5 binding may serve as a useful marker of regional
cellular vulnerability and redox state after brain injury resulting from
hypoxia-ischemia.

PMID: 10362320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 May 11;96(10):5575-80.

Differential gene expression between developing queens and workers in the honey
bee, Apis mellifera.

Evans JD(1), Wheeler DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.
jevans@asrr.arsusda.gov

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 May 11;96(10):5348-50.

Many insects show polyphenisms, or alternative morphologies, which are based on
differential gene expression rather than genetic polymorphism. Queens and workers
are alternative forms of the adult female honey bee and represent one of the best
known examples of insect polyphenism. Hormonal regulation of caste determination 
in honey bees has been studied in detail, but little is known about the proximate
molecular mechanisms underlying this process, or any other such polyphenism. We
report the success of a molecular-genetic approach for studying queen- and
worker-specific gene expression in the development of the honey bee (Apis
mellifera). Numerous genes appear to be differentially expressed between the two 
castes. Seven differentially expressed loci described here belong to at least
five distinctly different evolutionary and functional groups. Two are
particularly promising as potential regulators of caste differentiation. One is
homologous to a widespread class of proteins that bind lipids and other
hydrophobic ligands, including retinoic acid. The second locus shows sequence
similarity to a DNA-binding domain in the Ets family of transcription factors.
The remaining loci appear to be involved with downstream changes inherent to
queen- or worker-specific developmental pathways. Caste determination in honey
bees is typically thought of as primarily queen determination; our results make
it clear that the process involves specific activation of genes in workers as
well as in queens.

PMCID: PMC21902
PMID: 10318926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Br J Cancer. 1999 Feb;79(3-4):464-71.

Quantification of tumour vasculature and hypoxia by immunohistochemical staining 
and HbO2 saturation measurements.

Fenton BM(1), Paoni SF, Lee J, Koch CJ, Lord EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Rochester School of Medicine, 
NY, USA.

Despite the possibility that tumour hypoxia may limit radiotherapeutic response, 
the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. A new methodology has been
developed in which information from several sophisticated techniques is combined 
and analysed at a microregional level. First, tumour oxygen availability is
spatially defined by measuring intravascular blood oxygen saturations (HbO2)
cryospectrophotometrically in frozen tumour blocks. Second, hypoxic development
is quantified in adjacent sections using immunohistochemical detection of a
fluorescently conjugated monoclonal antibody (ELK3-51) to a nitroheterocyclic
hypoxia marker (EF5), thereby providing information relating to both the oxygen
consumption rates and the effective oxygen diffusion distances. Third, a
combination of fluorescent (Hoechst 33342 or DiOC7(3)) and immunohistological
(PECAM-1/CD31) stains is used to define the anatomical vascular densities and the
fraction of blood vessels containing flow. Using a computer-interfaced microscope
stage, image analysis software and a 3-CCD colour video camera, multiple images
are digitized, combined to form a photo-montage and revisited after each of the
three staining protocols. By applying image registration techniques, the spatial 
distribution of HbO2 saturations is matched to corresponding hypoxic marker
intensities in adjacent sections. This permits vascular configuration to be
related to oxygen availability and allows the hypoxic marker intensities to be
quantitated in situ.

PMCID: PMC2362405
PMID: 10027314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Curr Opin Oncol. 1998 Jul;10(4):334-42.

Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors after their
genetic union.

Kovar H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute (CCRI), St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna,
Austria.

The Ewing family of tumors has been defined by the presence of an EWS-ets gene
rearrangement. Using molecular techniques for the visualization of this
aberration, several tumors of unusual location and histology were recently
identified and added to this group. Increasing experimental data suggest that
EWS-ets fusions act as transforming transcription factors. Subtractive screening 
of transgenic fibroblasts has led to the identification of potential targets. The
authentic cellular context for these aberrant gene products is still unknown and 
may be diverse, however. Clinical heterogeneity has stimulated a search for
genetic factors that may relate to treatment response. The effect of the EWS-ets 
fusion transcript structure on localized disease has been recently confirmed and 
frequent p16 tumor suppressor alterations have been described. The presence of
metastases at diagnosis as the major predictor of outcome has been assessed on a 
submicroscopic level by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. Problems
arising from these studies are discussed, although the biological basis for
variable disease extension remains obscure.

PMID: 9702401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jul;18(7):3851-61.

Differential utilization of Ras signaling pathways by macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (CSF) and granulocyte-macrophage CSF receptors during
macrophage differentiation.

Guidez F(1), Li AC, Horvai A, Welch JS, Glass CK.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Endocrinology and Metabolism and Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California
92093-0651, USA.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) independently stimulate the proliferation and
differentiation of macrophages from bone marrow progenitor cells. Although the
GM-CSF and M-CSF receptors are unrelated, both couple to Ras-dependent signal
transduction pathways, suggesting that these pathways might account for common
actions of GM-CSF and M-CSF on the expression of macrophage-specific genes. To
test this hypothesis, we have investigated the mechanisms by which GM-CSF and
M-CSF regulate the expression of the macrophage scavenger receptor A (SR-A) gene.
We demonstrate that induction of the SR-A gene by M-CSF is dependent on AP-1 and 
cooperating Ets domain transcription factors that bind to sites in an
M-CSF-dependent enhancer located 4.1 to 4.5 kb upstream of the transcriptional
start site. In contrast, regulation by GM-CSF requires a separate enhancer
located 4.5 to 4.8 kb upstream of the transcriptional start site that confers
both immediate-early and sustained transcriptional responses. Results of a
combination of DNA binding experiments and functional assays suggest that
immediate transcriptional responses are mediated by DNA binding proteins that are
constitutively bound to the GM-CSF enhancer and are activated by Ras. At 12 to 24
h after GM-CSF treatment, the GM-CSF enhancer becomes further occupied by
additional DNA binding proteins that may contribute to sustained transcriptional 
responses. In concert, these studies indicate that GM-CSF and M-CSF
differentially utilize Ras-dependent signal transduction pathways to regulate
scavenger receptor gene expression, consistent with the distinct functional
properties of M-CSF- and GM-CSF-derived macrophages.

PMCID: PMC108969
PMID: 9632769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Cancer Res. 1998 Apr 1;58(7):1478-85.

Interleukin 2 expression by tumor cells alters both the immune response and the
tumor microenvironment.

Lee J(1), Fenton BM, Koch CJ, Frelinger JG, Lord EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, New York 14642, USA.

Microenvironmental conditions within solid tumors can have marked effects on the 
growth of the tumors and their response to therapies. The disorganized growth of 
tumors and their attendant vascular systems tends to result in areas of the
tumors that are deficient in oxygen (hypoxic). Cells within these hypoxic areas
are more resistant to conventional therapies such as radiation and chemotherapy. 
Here, we examine the hypoxic state of EMT6 mouse mammary tumors and the location 
of host cells within the different areas of the tumors to determine whether such 
microenvironmental conditions might also affect their ability to be recognized by
the immune system. Hypoxia within tumors was quantified by flow cytometry and
visualized by immunohistochemistry using a monoclonal antibody (ELK3-51) against 
cellular adducts of
2-(2-nitro-1H-imidazol-1-yl)-N-(2,2,3,3,3-pentafluoropropyl)acetam ide (EF5), a
nitroimidazole compound that binds selectively to hypoxic cells. Thy-1+ cells,
quantified using a monoclonal antibody, were found only in the well-oxygenated
areas. The location of these Thy-1+ cells was also examined in EMT6 tumors that
had been transfected with the gene for interleukin-2 (IL-2) because these tumors 
contain greatly increased numbers of host cells. Surprisingly, we found that
IL-2-transfected tumors had significantly decreased hypoxia compared to parental 
tumors. Furthermore, using the fluorescent dye Hoechst 33342, an in vivo marker
of perfused vessels, combined with immunochemical staining of PECAM-1 (CD31) as a
marker of tumor vasculature, we found increased vascularization in the
IL-2-transfected tumors. Thus, expression of IL-2 at the site of tumor growth may
enhance tumor immunity not only by inducing the generation of tumor-reactive CTLs
but also by allowing increased infiltration of activated T cells into the tumors.

PMID: 9537251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Biochemistry. 1998 Feb 17;37(7):1905-9.

The human LON protease binds to mitochondrial promoters in a single-stranded,
site-specific, strand-specific manner.

Fu GK(1), Markovitz DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor 48109-0640, USA.

LON proteases, which are ATP-dependent and exhibit ATPase activity, are found in 
bacteria, yeast, and humans. In Escherichia coli, LON is known to regulate gene
expression by targeting specific regulatory proteins for degradation. The yeast
and human LON proteins are encoded in the nucleus but localize to the
mitochondrial matrix. In yeast, LON has been shown to be essential for the
maintenance of the integrity of the mitochondrial genome. E. coli Lon has long
been known to bind DNA, but we have only recently demonstrated that it binds
preferentially to a specific TG-rich double-stranded sequence. We now show that
human LON recognizes a very similar site in both the light and heavy chain
promoters of the mitochondrial genome, in a region which is involved in
regulating both DNA replication and transcription. Unlike E. coli Lon, however,
human LON specifically binds to the TG-rich element only when it is presented in 
the context of a single DNA strand. These findings suggest that the human LON
protease might regulate mitochondrial DNA replication and/or gene expression
using site-specific, single-stranded DNA binding to target the degradation of
regulatory proteins binding to adjacent sites in mitochondrial promoters.

PMID: 9485316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 1998 Jan;53(1):B3-10.

SRF binding to SRE in the rat heart: influence of age.

Lu XG(1), Azhar G, Liu L, Tsou H, Wei JY.

Author information: 
(1)Gerontology Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, New York, New
York, USA.

One important promoter element at the 5' end of the c-fos gene is the serum
response element (SRE). SRE is the site of attachment of the 67-kDa protein serum
response factor (SRF) and several accessory proteins (Elk1, SAP1, SAP2/NET),
termed the ternary complex factors. The binding of SRF to SRE plays an integral
role in c-fos transcription and may occur independently of the association of the
ternary complex factors. In the current study, we found that SRF protein
expression was increased in the hearts of the old vs young adult rats in the
basal condition. The hearts of old rats may have posttranslationally modified SRF
proteins that are different compared to that of the young adults. The SRF
increase was present both in the cytoplasm as well as in the nucleus in the old
hearts. To test whether SRF protein levels in response to acute stress might be
altered with age, we studied hearts of young adult and old rats during myocardial
infarction. The young adult rat hearts responded to acute ischemic stress with an
increase in both p62 and p67 SRF. The hearts of the old rats, however, did not
exhibit a significant change in SRF protein expression. These findings
demonstrate qualitative as well as quantitative age differences in SRF protein
levels, both at baseline and following stimulation. The reduced SRF expression in
response to acute cardiac ischemic stress in the old rats might contribute to the
observed age-related decrease in the induction of immediate early genes such as
c-fos in the heart.

PMID: 9467416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Oncogene. 1997 Dec 18;15(25):3091-102.

Ets transcription factors bind and transactivate the core promoter of the von
Willebrand factor gene.

Schwachtgen JL(1), Janel N, Barek L, Duterque-Coquillaud M, Ghysdael J, Meyer D, 
Kerbiriou-Nabias D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 143, Unité de Recherches sur l'Hémostase et la Thrombose, Hôpital de 
Bicêtre, France.

von Willebrand factor (vWF) gene expression is restricted to endothelial cells
and megakaryocytes. Previous results demonstrated that basal transcription of the
human vWF gene is mediated through a promoter located between base pairs -89 and 
+19 (cap site: +1) which is functional in endothelial and non endothelial cells. 
Two DNA repeats TTTCCTTT correlating with inverted consensus binding sites for
the Ets family of transcription factors are present in the -56/-36 sequence. In
order to analyse whether these DNA elements are involved in transcription, human 
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC), bovine calf pulmonary endothelial cell 
line (CPAE), HeLa and COS cells were transfected with constructs containing
deletions of the -89/+19 fragment, linked to the chloramphenicol acetyl
transferase (CAT) reporter gene. The -60/+19 region exhibits significant promoter
activity in HUVEC and CPAE cells only. The -42/+19 fragment is not active.
Mutations of the -60/+19 promoter fragment in the 5' (-56/-49) Ets binding site
abolish transcription in endothelial cells whereas mutations in the 3' (-43/-36) 
site does not. The -60/-33 fragment forms three complexes with proteins from
HUVEC nuclear extracts in electrophoretic mobility shift assay which are
dependent on the presence of the 5' Ets binding site. Binding of recombinant
Ets-1 protein to the -60/-33 fragment gives a complex which also depends on the
5' site. The -60/+19 vWF gene core promoter is transactivated in HeLa cells by
cotransfecting with Ets-1 or Erg (Ets-related gene) expression plasmids. In
contrast to the wild type construct, transcription of the 5' site mutants is not 
increased by these expressed proteins. The results indicate that the promoter
activity of the -60/+19 region of the vWF gene depends on transcription factors
of the Ets family of which several members like Ets-1, Ets-2 and Erg are
expressed in endothelium. Cotransfection of Ets-1 and Erg expression plasmids is 
sufficient to induce the -60/+19 vWF promoter activity in HeLa cells.

PMID: 9444957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Gen Genet. 1997 Dec;257(1):97-102.

Cat3vl and Cat3vao cataract mutations on mouse chromosome 10: phenotypic
characterization, linkage studies and analysis of candidate genes.

Löster J(1), Immervoll T, Schmitt-John T, Graw J.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of
Mammalian Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany. jana.loester@gsf.de

Cat3vl and Cat3vao are two allelic, dominant cataract mutations that arose
independently in the F1 generation after gamma-irradiation of male mice. The
cataracts are already present at birth. Examination of the eyes with a slit lamp 
revealed completely vacuolated lenses in Cat3vl mutants and anteriorly located
opacity in Cat3vao mutants. The appearance of the opacities does not differ
between the individuals or between heterozygotes and homozygotes. Penetrance of
the mutations is complete. Viability and fertility of the mutants are normal
except in the case of the Cat3vl homozygotes. Cat3vao was assigned to the distal 
part of mouse chromosome 10, 3.2 +/- 0.9 cM away from the visible marker Steel
(SlgbH). Using polymorphic markers the following locus order was found:
D10Mit230-(0.2 +/- 0.1 cM)-Cat3vao-(2.5 +/- 0.6 cM)-D10Mit70. No recombinants
were found between Cat3vao and the markers D10Mit4l and D10Mit95 among 921
offspring. The results exclude allelism of Cat3vao with CatLop or To2, which also
map to chromosome 10. Candidate genes were tested by examination of their
expression in the eye of newborn mice and by analysis of cDNA sequences. So far, 
negative results have been obtained for the genes encoding the proteoglycans
lumican and decorin, the nuclear orphan receptor Tr2-11 and the transcription
factor Elk3. Based on syntenic homology of the Cat3 region to the human
chromosome 12q, the Cat3 mutants are discussed as mouse models for cornea plana
congenita in man. The recovery of the Cat3 mutations demonstrates the importance 
of the corresponding locus for proper eye development.

PMID: 9439574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Oct;17(10):5667-78.

Net-b, a Ras-insensitive factor that forms ternary complexes with serum response 
factor on the serum response element of the fos promoter.

Giovane A(1), Sobieszczuk P, Ayadi A, Maira SM, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS, INSERM, 
ULP, Illkirch, France.

The Ras signalling pathway targets transcription factors such as the ternary
complex factors that are recruited by the serum response factor to form complexes
on the serum response element (SRE) of the fos promoter. We have identified a new
ternary complex factor, Net-b. We report the features of the net gene and show
that it produces several splice variants, net-b and net-c. net-b RNA and protein 
are expressed in a variety of tissues and cell lines. net-c RNA is expressed at
low levels, and the protein was not detected, raising the possibility that it is 
a cryptic splice variant. We have studied the composition of ternary complexes
that form on the SRE of the fos promoter with extracts from fibroblasts (NIH 3T3)
cultured under various conditions and pre-B cells (70Z/3) before and after
differentiation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The fibroblast complexes contain
mainly Net-b followed by Sap1 and Elk1. Net-b complexes, as well as Sap1 and
Elk1, are induced by epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulation of cells cultured 
in low serum. Pre-B-cell complexes contain mainly Sap1, with less of Net-b and
little of Elk1. There is little change upon LPS-induced differentiation compared 
to the increase with EGF in fibroblasts. We have also found that Net-b is a
nuclear protein that constitutively represses transcription. Net-b is not
activated by Ras signalling, in contrast to Net, Sap1a, and Elk1. We have
previously reported that down-regulation of Net proteins with antisense RNA
increases SRE activity. The increase in SRE activity is observed at low serum
levels and is even greater after serum stimulation, showing that the SRE is under
negative regulation by Net proteins and the level of repression increases during 
induction. Net-b, the predominant factor in ternary complexes in fibroblasts, may
both keep the activity of the SRE low in the absence of strong inducing
conditions and rapidly shut the activity off after stimulation.

PMCID: PMC232415
PMID: 9315625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Virol. 1997 Oct;71(10):7917-22.

A novel transcriptional element in circular DNA monomers of the duck hepatitis B 
virus.

Beckel-Mitchener A(1), Summers J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of New Mexico School of Medicine,
Albuquerque 87131, USA.

We report the presence of two elements, pet and net, that are required for proper
transcription of the duck hepatitis B virus (DHBV). These regions were previously
identified by using plasmid clones of the virus in transient expression assays
(M. Huang and J. Summers, J. Virol. 68:1564-1572, 1994). In this study, we
further analyzed these regions by using in vitro-synthesized circular DHBV DNA
monomers to mimic the authentic transcriptional template. We observed that pet
was required for pregenome transcription from circular viral monomers, and in the
absence of pet-dependent transcription, expression of the viral envelope genes
was increased. We found that deletion of net in circularized DNA monomers led to 
the production of abnormally long transcripts due to a failure to form 3' ends
during transcription. In addition, we report the presence of a net-like region in
the mammalian hepadnavirus woodchuck hepatitis virus. These results are
consistent with a model that net is a region involved in transcription
termination and that in DHBV, pet is required for transcription complexes to read
through this region during the first pass through net.

PMCID: PMC192149
PMID: 9311882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Immunol. 1997 Aug 15;159(4):1800-8.

Differential interaction of nuclear factors with the leukocyte-specific pp52
promoter in B and T cells.

Omori SA(1), Smale S, O'Shea-Greenfield A, Wall R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute and Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of California School of Medicine, Los Angeles 90095, USA.

The leukocyte-specific, cytoskeleton-binding pp52 (LSP-1, WP-34) protein is
widely expressed in multiple leukocyte lineages, including B and T lymphocytes,
granulocytes, and macrophages. We previously detected a tissue-specific promoter 
preceding the exon encoding the N terminus of the pp52 leukocyte protein. Here we
describe the functional characterization of this promoter and identification of
the factors in B and T cells that regulate its activity. The pp52 promoter
contains an initiator specifying the unique 5' terminus of pp52 mRNA, tandem
pairs of Ets and SP1 motifs, and a lone C/EBP motif. All these motifs are
essential and collectively control transcriptional activity. DNA binding studies 
and Ab supershift assays revealed that different combinations of factors interact
with these motifs in B cells vs T cells. The Ets motifs are preferentially bound 
by PU-1 in B cell extracts from all stages of development, whereas a different
Ets family member reacts with these motifs in T cell extracts. The C/EBP motif is
bound by Ig/EBP-1 in pre-B cell and T cell extracts, but is replaced by nuclear
factor-IL-6beta or a nuclear factor-IL-6beta-Ig/EBP-1 heterodimer in plasmacytoma
cell extracts. Despite its reported role as a negative regulator of
transcription, Ig/EBP-1 appears to exert a stimulatory effect on this promoter.
These findings reveal the features controlling the pp52 promoter in B and T cells
and provide the foundation for determining the regulation of this promoter in
other leukocyte lineages.

PMID: 9257843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biochem Mol Med. 1997 Aug;61(2):127-35.

Structure-function relationships of the PEA3 group of Ets-related transcription
factors.

de Launoit Y(1), Baert JL, Chotteau A, Monte D, Defossez PA, Coutte L, Pelczar H,
Leenders F.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 319 CNRS, Institut Pasteur de Lille, France. delaunoi@infobiogen.fr

The PEA3 group of transcription factors belongs to the Ets family and is composed
of PEA3, ERM, and ER81, which are more than 95% identical within the DNA-binding 
domain--the ETS domain--and which demonstrate 50% aa identity overall. We present
here a review of the current knowledge of these transcription factors, which
possess functional domains responsible for DNA-binding, DNA-binding inhibition,
and transactivation. Recent data suggest that these factors are targets for
signaling cascades, such as the Ras-dependent ones, and thus may contribute first
to the nuclear response to cell stimulation and second to Ras-induced cell
transformation. The expression of the PEA3 group members in numerous developing
murine organs, and, especially, in epithelial-mesenchymal interaction events,
suggests a key role in murine organogenesis. Moreover, their expression in
certain breast cancer cells suggests a possible involvement of these genes in the
appearance, progression, and invasion of malignant cells.

PMID: 9259977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. EMBO J. 1996 Nov 1;15(21):5849-65.

Net (ERP/SAP2) one of the Ras-inducible TCFs, has a novel inhibitory domain with 
resemblance to the helix-loop-helix motif.

Maira SM(1), Wurtz JM, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS, INSERM, 
ULP, Illkirch, France.

The three ternary complex factors (TCFs), Net (ERP/ SAP-2), ELK-1 and SAP-1, are 
highly related ets oncogene family members that participate in the response of
the cell to Ras and growth signals. Understanding the different roles of these
factors will provide insights into how the signals result in coordinate
regulation of the cell. We show that Net inhibits transcription under basal
conditions, in which SAP-1a is inactive and ELK-1 stimulates. Repression is
mediated by the NID, the Net Inhibitory Domain of about 50 amino acids, which
autoregulates the Net protein and also inhibits when it is isolated in a
heterologous fusion protein. Net is particularly sensitive to Ras activation. Ras
activates Net through the C-domain, which is conserved between the three TCFs,
and the NID is an efficient inhibitor of Ras activation. The NID, as well as more
C-terminal sequences, inhibit DNA binding. Net is more refractory to DNA binding 
than the other TCFs, possibly due to the presence of multiple inhibitory
elements. The NID may adopt a helix-loop-helix (HLH) structure, as evidenced by
homology to other HLH motifs, structure predictions, model building and
mutagenesis of critical residues. The sequence resemblance with myogenic factors 
suggested that Net may form complexes with the same partners. Indeed, we found
that Net can interact in vivo with the basic HLH factor, E47. We propose that Net
is regulated at the level of its latent DNA-binding activity by protein
interactions and/or phosphorylation. Net may form complexes with HLH proteins as 
well as SRF on specific promotor sequences. The identification of the novel
inhibitory domain provides a new inroad into exploring the different roles of the
ternary complex factors in growth control and transformation.

PMCID: PMC452333
PMID: 8918463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 4;271(40):24639-48.

GHF-1/Pit-1 functions as a cell-specific integrator of Ras signaling by targeting
the Ras pathway to a composite Ets-1/GHF-1 response element.

Bradford AP(1), Conrad KE, Tran PH, Ostrowski MC, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Program in Molecular Biology, and Colorado Cancer
Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, 80262, USA.

Activation of the rat prolactin (rPRL) promoter by Ras is a prototypical example 
of tissue-specific transcriptional regulation in a highly differentiated cell
type. Using a series of site-specific mutations and deletions of the proximal
rPRL promoter we have mapped the major Ras/Raf response element (RRE) to a
composite Ets-1/GHF-1 binding site located between positions -217 and -190.
Mutation of either the Ets-1 or GHF-1 binding sites inhibits Ras and Raf
activation of the rPRL promoter, and insertion of this RRE into the rat growth
hormone promoter confers Ras responsiveness. We show that Ets-1 is expressed in
GH4 cells and, consistent with their functional synergistic interaction, both
Ets-1 and GHF-1 are able to bind specifically to this bipartite RRE. We confirm
that Ets-1 or a related Ets factor is the nuclear target of the Ras pathway
leading to activation of the rPRL promoter and demonstrate that Elk-1 and Net do 
not mediate the Ras response. Thus, the pituitary-specific POU homeodomain
transcription factor, GHF-1, serves as a cell-specific signal integrator by
functionally interacting with an Ets-1-like factor, at uniquely juxtaposed
binding sites, thereby targeting an otherwise ubiquitous Ras signaling pathway to
a select subset of cell-specific GHF-1-dependent genes.

PMID: 8798730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. DNA Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;15(10):855-62.

Molecular cloning of Elk-3, a new member of the Ets family expressed during mouse
embryogenesis and analysis of its transcriptional repression activity.

Nozaki M(1), Onishi Y, Kanno N, Ono Y, Fujimura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Japan.

We isolated a cDNA clone, Elk-3, that encodes a novel Ets transcription factor
from 16-day mouse embryos. The deduced amino acid sequence of the protein was
homologous to human ELK-1 and SAP-1. This protein, ELK-1, and SAP-1 shared some
unique structural properties such as an Ets DNA-binding site in the
amino-terminal region, a serum response factor interacting domain and
phosphorylation sites of serine or threonine residues in the carboxy-terminal
region. Northern blotting weakly revealed that two transcripts of 4 and 2.1 kb
are expressed in the adult ovary and lung and a 2.1-kb transcript predominated in
8- to 14-day embryos. We assayed the transcriptional activities of Elk-3 protein 
on the cytokeratin EndoA enhancer containing Ets binding sites in endodermal
cells. Elk-3 protein strongly repressed enhancer activity but did not affect the 
activity of the basal promoter in the absence of the enhancer. Furthermore, Elk-3
can suppress the activity of Ets-2 as the transcriptional activator on the EndoA 
enhancer. These data suggested that the Elk-3 gene product plays a role in
transcriptional regulation during embryogenesis.

PMID: 8892757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Genes Dev. 1996 Sep 1;10(17):2198-211.

Pax-5 (BSAP) recruits Ets proto-oncogene family proteins to form functional
ternary complexes on a B-cell-specific promoter.

Fitzsimmons D(1), Hodsdon W, Wheat W, Maira SM, Wasylyk B, Hagman J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Immunology, National Jewish Center for Immunology and
Respiratory Medicine, Denver, Colorado 80206, USA.

The paired box transcription factor Pax-5 (B-cell-specific activator protein) is 
a key regulator of lineage-specific gene expression and differentiation in
B-lymphocytes. We show that Pax-5 functions as a cell type-specific docking
protein that facilitates binding of the early B-cell-specific mb-1 promoter by
proteins of the Ets proto-oncogene family. Transcriptional activity of the mb-1
promoter in pre-B-cells is critically dependent on binding sites for Pax-5:Ets
complexes. Ternary complex assembly requires only the Pax-5 paired box and ETS
DNA-binding domains. Mutation of a single base pair in the ternary complex
binding site allows for independent binding by Ets proteins but, conversely,
inhibits the binding of Pax-5 by itself. Strikingly, the mutation reverses the
pattern of complex assembly: Ets proteins recruit Pax-5 to bind the mutated
sequence. Recruitment of Net and Elk-1, but not SAP1a, by Pax-5 defines a
functional difference between closely related Ets proteins. Replacement of a
valine (V68) in the ETS domain of SAP1a by aspartic acid (as found in c-Ets-1,
Elk-1, and Net) enhanced ternary complex formation by more than 60-fold.
Together, these observations define novel transcription factor interactions that 
regulate gene expression in B cells.

PMID: 8804314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Biol Chem. 1996 Aug 9;271(32):19599-605.

Purification of the pets factor. A nuclear protein that binds to the inducible
TG-rich element of the human immunodeficiency virus type 2 enhancer.

Fu GK(1), Markovitz DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University
of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0642, USA.

The peri-ets (pets) site is a TG-rich element found immediately adjacent to two
binding sites for the ets family member Elf-1 in the human immunodeficiency virus
type 2 (HIV-2) enhancer. Enhancer activation in response to T cell stimulation by
phorbol myristate acetate, phytohemagglutinin, soluble or cross-linked antibodies
to the T cell receptor, or antigen is mediated through this site in conjunction
with its two adjacent Elf-1 binding sites, PuB1 and PuB2, and a kappaB site.
Site-specific mutation of the pets element significantly reduces inducible
activation of this enhancer but does not affect its transactivation by HIV-2 tat 
or other viral transactivators. Similar TG-rich sequences adjacent to ets-binding
sites have also been found to be functionally important in the human T-cell
leukemia virus type I and murine Moloney leukemia virus enhancers. As the
cellular factor binding to the pets site plays a significant role in regulating
the HIV-2 enhancer in both T cells and monocytes, we have purified this protein
from bovine spleens and demonstrate that it is 43 kDa in size. In addition, using
glycerol gradient centrifugation, Southwestern blotting, electrophoretic mobility
shift assays employing purified protein eluted from a gel, and a new in solution 
UV cross-linking competitive assay, we show that the dominant protein binding to 
the pets site is 43 kDa in size. These results indicate that a nuclear protein of
43 kDa binds specifically to the pets site of the HIV-2 enhancer and may mediate 
transcriptional activation of this important human pathogen in response to T cell
stimulation. As retroviruses generally expropriate important human regulatory
proteins for their own use, the 43-kDa pets factor is also likely to play a
significant role in signal transduction in T cells and in other cellular
processes.

PMID: 8702655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Int J Cancer. 1996 Jul 29;67(3):372-8.

Direct relationship between radiobiological hypoxia in tumors and monoclonal
antibody detection of EF5 cellular adducts.

Lee J(1), Siemann DW, Koch CJ, Lord EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, NY 14642, USA.

While the potential importance of hypoxia in limiting the sensitivity of tumor
cells to ionizing radiation has long been appreciated, methods for accurately
quantifying the number of radiation-resistant hypoxic cells within tumors have
been lacking. We have used the pentafluorinated derivative
[2-(2-nitro-1H-imidazol-1-yl)-N-(2,2,3,3,3-pentafluoropropyl)-acet amide] of
etanidazole (EF5), which binds selectively to hypoxic cells. The adducts formed
between EF5 and cellular proteins in the hypoxic cells were detected using the
specific monoclonal antibody (MAb), ELK3-51 conjugated to the flurochrome Cy3,
and the number of hypoxic cells was quantified by flow cytometry. To verify the
validity of this technique for the detection of hypoxic cells, mice bearing KHT
sarcomas were treated with various agents to alter tumor oxygenation and hence
vary the fraction of radiobiologically hypoxic tumor cells. The percentage of EF5
binding cells was then compared directly with the clonogenic survival of the
tumor cells following radiation treatment under the various pretreatment
conditions. The results showed that allowing the mice to breathe carbogen (5%
CO2/95% O2) prior to irradiation reduced clonogenic cell survival approx. 6-fold 
and led to an absence of cells binding high levels of EF5. In contrast,
pretreating the tumor-bearing animals with either hydralazine, which decreased
tumor blood flow, or phenylhydrazine hydrochloride, which made the mice anemic,
increased tumor cell survival following irradiation 2- to 4-fold, indicative of
an increase in the fraction of hypoxic tumor cells. EF5 measurements made under
identical conditions illustrated a shift in the cells in the tumor to high EF5
binding. Our results demonstrate that flow cytometric measurement by fluorescent 
MAb binding to EF5 adducts may relate directly to radiobiological hypoxia in KHT 
tumors measured by conventional methods.

PMID: 8707411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Br J Cancer Suppl. 1996 Jul;27:S200-3.

Immunocytochemical labelling of aerobic and hypoxic mammalian cells using a
platinated derivative of EF5.

Matthews J(1), Adomat H, Farrell N, King P, Koch C, Lord E, Palcic B, Poulin N,
Sangulin J, Skov K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, BC Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver,
Canada.

The monoclonal antibody ELK3-51 was previously developed to detect adducts of the
2-nitroimidazole EF5. Direct immunofluorescence was used to detect adducts of EF5
or of a platinated derivative cis-[PtCl2(NH3)EF5] in SCCVII cells treated under
aerobic or hypoxic conditions. Fluorescence measurements of these cells using
both image and flow cytometric methods were compared, giving similar profiles.
Platination significantly decreased immunofluorescence levels (approximately
4-fold less than EF5) after 3 h in hypoxia, but also increased levels after
exposure in air (approximately 1.5 x) such that the hypoxic ratio decreased from 
approximately 50 to approximately 13. Platinated EF5 also showed significantly
greater cytotoxicity than its parent in both aerobic and hypoxic cells. These
results are consistent with targeting of EF5 to DNA, which was confirmed
qualitatively by confocal microscopy.

PMCID: PMC2150041
PMID: 8763880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1996 Apr 29;351(1339):551-9.

Integration of growth factor signals at the c-fos serum response element.

Price MA(1), Hill C, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, U.K.

A transcription factor ternary complex composed of serum response factor (SRF)
and a second factor, ternary complex factor (TCF), mediates the response of the
c-fos Serum Response Element to growth factors and mitogens. In NIH3T3
fibroblasts, TCF binding is required for transcriptional activation by the SRE in
response to activation of the Ras-Raf-ERK pathway. We compared the properties of 
three members of the TCF family, Elk-1, SAP-1 and SAP-2 (ERP/NET). Although all
the proteins contain sequences required for ternary complex formation with SRF,
only Elk-1 and SAP-1 appear to interact with the c-fos SRE efficiently in vivo.
Each TCF contains a C-terminal activation domain capable of transcriptional
activation in response to activation of the Ras-Raf-ERK pathway, and this is
dependent on the integrity of S/T-P motifs conserved between all the TCF family
members. In contrast, activation of the SRE by whole serum and the mitogenic
phospholipid LPA requires SRF binding alone. Constitutively activated members of 
the Rho subfamily of Ras-like GTPases are also capable of inducing activation of 
the SRE in the absence of TCF; unlike activated Ras itself, these proteins do not
activate the TCFs in NIH3T3 cells. At the SRE, SRF- and TCF-linked signalling
pathways act synergistically to potentiate transcription.

PMID: 8735278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cancer Res. 1996 Mar 15;56(6):1413-7.

Mutational analysis of the candidate tumor suppressor genes TEL and KIP1 in
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Stegmaier K(1), Takeuchi S, Golub TR, Bohlander SK, Bartram CR, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

We have shown previously that loss of heterozygosity at chromosome band 12p13 is 
among the most frequent genetic abnormalities identified in acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) of childhood. Two known genes map within the critically deleted
region of 12p: TEL, the gene encoding a new member of the ETS family of
transcription factors, which is rearranged in a variety of hematological
malignancies; and KIP1, the gene encoding the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p27. Both genes are, therefore, excellent candidate tumor suppressor genes. In
this report, we determined the exon organization of the TEL gene and performed
mutational analysis of TEL and KIP1 in 33 childhood ALL patients known to have
loss of heterozygosity at this locus. No mutations in either TEL or KIP1 were
found; this suggest that neither TEL nor KIP1 is the critical 12p tumor
suppressor gene in childhood ALL.

PMID: 8640833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Curr Biol. 1996 Jan 1;6(1):16-9.

Signalling pathways: jack of all cascades.

Cahill MA(1), Janknecht R, Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

The transcription factors that bind the c-fos promoter element SRE are targeted
by multiple, independent signalling cascades; the identities of these signalling 
pathways and their modes of activation are being elucidated.

PMID: 8805215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Biol Chem. 1995 Nov 17;270(46):27773-9.

A consensus insulin response element is activated by an Ets-related transcription
factor.

Jacob KK(1), Ouyang L, Stanley FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New York University Medical Center, New York 10016,
USA.

Insulin increases expression of somatostatin-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
(CAT) constructs 10-fold and thymidine kinase-CAT constructs 5-fold in GH4 cells.
These responses are similar to our previously reported data on insulin-increased 
prolactin-CAT expression. They are also observed in HeLa cells and are thus not
cell type specific. The evidence suggests that the insulin responsiveness of
these genes is mediated by an Ets-related transcription factor. First,
linker-scanning mutations and/or deletions of the prolactin, somatostatin, and
thymidine kinase promoters suggest that their insulin responsiveness is mediated 
by the sequence CGGA. This sequence is identical with the response element of the
Ets-related transcription factors. Second, CGGA-containing sequences placed at
-88 in the delta MTV-CAT reporter plasmid conferred insulin responsiveness to the
mammary tumor virus promoter. Third, expression of the DNA-binding domain of
c-Ets-2, which acts by blocking effects mediated by Ets-related transcription
factors, inhibits the response of these promoters to insulin. Finally, the
Ets-related proteins Sap and Elk-1 bind to the prolactin, somatostatin, and
thymidine kinase insulin-response elements. An Ets-like element was found in all 
insulin-sensitive promoters examined and may serve a similar function in those
promoters.

PMID: 7499246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Oncogene. 1995 Nov 16;11(10):2135-43.

ETS1 transactivates the human GM-CSF promoter in Jurkat T cells stimulated with
PMA and ionomycin.

Thomas RS(1), Tymms MJ, Seth A, Shannon MF, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Monash University Institute of Reproduction and Development, Monash Medical
Centre, Clayton, Melbourne, Australia.

Activation of T helper cells results in coordinate expression of a number of
cytokines involved in differentiation, proliferation and activation of the
haematopoietic system. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) 
is one such cytokine whose increased expression results partly from increases in 
transcription. Cis-acting elements with NF kappa B, AP-1 and ETS-like motifs have
been identified in the promoter region of the GM-CSF gene, which are important
for transcriptional activity following PMA and ionomycin stimulation. A number of
the ETS family of transcription factors are expressed in T cells, including ETS1 
and ELF1. Here we describe the ability of these factors to interact with a site
(GM5), located within the CLE0 element, -47 to -40 upstream of the GM-CSF
transcription initiation site. Exogenous ETS1, but not ELF1, can transactivate
GM-CSF, through the GM5 site, in a PMA/ionomycin dependent manner. Other
unidentified ETS-like factors present in Jurkat cells are also capable of binding
GM5. Mutation of the core ETS binding site from -GGAA- to -GGAT- prevents the
binding of ETS-like factors with the exception of ETS1. The GM-CSF promoter,
modified in this way to be ETS1 specific, is fully responsive to PMA/ionomycin
induction, in addition to ETS1 transactivation in the presence of PMA and
ionomycin. Together these data suggest that ETS1 may be involved in mediating the
increased GM-CSF production associated with T cell activation.

PMID: 7478534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Genomics. 1995 Oct 10;29(3):769-72.

Locations of the ets subfamily members net, elk1, and sap1 (ELK3, ELK1, and ELK4)
on three homologous regions of the mouse and human genomes.

Giovane A(1), Sobieszczuk P, Mignon C, Mattei MG, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
France.

Net, Elk1, and Sap1 are related members of the Ets oncoprotein family. We show by
in situ hybridization on banded chromosomes with specific cDNA probes that their 
map positions on mouse and human chromosomes (respectively) are net, 10C-D1 and
12q22-q23 (now called ELK3), sap1, 1E3-G and 1q32 (ELK4), and elk1, XA1-A3 and
Xp11.2-p11.1 (ELK1), as well as a second locus 14q32 (ELK2) unique to the human
genome. The results for the mouse net, sap1, and elk1 and human ELK3 genes are
new. The human elk1 mapping confirms a previous study. The human ELK4
localization agrees with data published during the preparation of the manuscript.
Human ELK3 colocalizes with sap2, and we confirm that they are identical. These
results firmly establish for the first time that Net, Elk1, and Sap1 are distinct
gene products with different chromosomal localizations in both the mouse and the 
human genomes. Net, Elk1, and Sap1 are conserved and map to homologous regions of
the mouse and human chromosomes.

PMID: 8575773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Br J Cancer. 1995 Oct;72(4):869-74.

Oxygen dependence of cellular uptake of EF5
[2-(2-nitro-1H-imidazol-1-yl)-N-(2,2,3,3,3-pentafluoropropyl)a cet amide] :
analysis of drug adducts by fluorescent antibodies vs bound radioactivity.

Koch CJ(1), Evans SM, Lord EM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104-6072, USA.

The present studies were initiated to quantitate the oxygen dependence of
bioreductive metabolism-induced binding of EF5, a pentafluorinated derivative of 
the 2-nitroimidazole, etanidazole. Two different assays were compared: first,
radioactive drug incorporation into cell lysates, which provides a direct measure
of drug metabolism or uptake; second, monoclonal antibody detection of cellular
macromolecular adducts of EF5 after whole cell permeabilisation and fixing. The
antibodies (a single clone designated ELK3-51) were conjugated with the
fluorescent dye Cy3, with fluorescence determined by fluorescence microscopy and 
flow cytometry. For the two cell lines tested (V79 Chinese hamster fibroblasts
and 9L rat glioma), the oxygen dependence of binding was found to be the same for
the two techniques. Using the antibody binding technique, the fluorescence signal
was highly reproducible between experiments, resistant to light or chemical
bleaching and stable over time following cell or tissue staining. Flow cytometric
analysis of cells from rat 9L tumours treated with EF5 in vivo or in vitro showed
a distribution of fluorescent signal which was very compatible, on both a
relative and absolute basis, with the in vitro results. Our results indicate that
immunofluorescent techniques provide a quantitative assay for bioreductive drug
adducts, and therefore may be able to measure the absolute oxygen concentration
distribution in cell populations and tissues of interest.

PMCID: PMC2034014
PMID: 7547233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Oncogene. 1995 Aug 17;11(4):771-9.

Molecular characterization of the ets-related human transcription factor ER81.

Monté D(1), Coutte L, Baert JL, Angeli I, Stéhelin D, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160-Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

The PEA3 group is a homogeneous group of the ets transcription factor family and 
is composed of three known members, PEA3, ERM and ER81, which, on the amino acid 
(AA) level, are more than 95% identical within the DNA-binding domain (the Ets
domain), more than 85% within a 32 AA domain (the acidic domain) localized in the
amino-terminus and almost 50% identical overall. By screening a human kidney cDNA
library with a specific probe obtained from mouse ER81, we isolated two clones of
1.6 and 1.5 kb in length encoding a 458 AA open reading frame. When compared to
mouse ER81, the present human ER81 lacks the last 13 AA of the acidic domain and 
the 5 AA contiguous to the carboxy-terminal part of the acidic domain. Of the 458
AA of the human ER81 protein, 97% are identical to mouse ER81. Gel shift analysis
indicates that the full-length human ER81 protein is able to bind specifically to
an oligonucleotide containing the binding sites recognized by most of the Ets
proteins. By transient expression in RK13 mammalian cells, human ER81 protein
transactivated a reporter plasmid containing Ets binding sites, indicating that
this molecule is a bonafide transcriptional activator, while by expression in
Cos-1 transfected cells, we detected the presence of human ER81 protein in the
nucleus using immunocytochemistry. In human tissues, ER81 mRNA is very highly
expressed in brain, highly expressed in testis, lung and heart, moderately in
spleen, small intestine, pancreas and colon, weakly in liver, prostate and
thymus, very weakly in skeletal muscle, kidney and ovary and not in placenta and 
peripheral blood leukocytes. Analysis of human solid or haematopoietic tumour
cell lines showed that most of them did not express ER81 detectably. Database
searches revealed that ETV1 mRNA is highly similar to human ER81 described here, 
although it contains the full-length acidic domain present in mouse ER81. By
screening a genomic DNA library, we characterized the intron-exon junction within
the acidic domain of human ER81 and we showed that this junction corresponds to
the site where the remaining AA of the acidic domain of ETV1 or mouse ER81 are
inserted.

PMID: 7651741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. EMBO J. 1995 Jun 1;14(11):2589-601.

Comparative analysis of the ternary complex factors Elk-1, SAP-1a and SAP-2
(ERP/NET).

Price MA(1), Rogers AE, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

A transcription factor ternary complex composed of Serum Response Factor (SRF)
and Ternary Complex Factor (TCF) mediates the response of the c-fos Serum
Response Element (SRE) to growth factors and mitogens. Three Ets domain proteins,
Elk-1, SAP-1 and ERP/NET, have been reported to have the properties of TCF. Here 
we compare Elk-1 and SAP-1a with the human ERP/NET homologue SAP-2. All three TCF
RNAs are ubiquitously expressed at similar relative levels. All three proteins
contain conserved regions that interact with SRF and the c-fos SRE with
comparable efficiency, but in vitro complex formation by SAP-2 is strongly
inhibited by its C-terminal sequences. Similarly, only Elk-1 and SAP-1a
efficiently bind the c-fos SRE in vivo; ternary complex formation by SAP-2 is
weak and is substantially unaffected by serum stimulation or v-ras co-expression.
All three TCFs contain C-terminal transcriptional activation domains that are
phosphorylated following growth factor stimulation. Activation requires conserved
S/T-P motifs found in all the TCF family members. Each TCF activation domain can 
be phosphorylated in vitro by partially purified ERK2, and ERK activation in vivo
is sufficient to potentiate transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC398373
PMID: 7540136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Genomics. 1995 Mar 20;26(2):414-6.

Mouse Elk oncogene maps to chromosome X and a novel Elk oncogene (Elk3) maps to
chromosome 10.

Tamai Y(1), Taketo M, Nozaki M, Seldin MF.

Author information: 
(1)Banyu Tsukuba Research Institute (Merck), Japan.

The Elk protein is a member of the Ets family found in both vertebrates and
invertebrates. Human ELK1 encoded by ELK1 binds alone or together with serum
response factor to DNA and regulates gene expression in a variety of biological
processes. Using a panel of interspecific backcross mice, we have mapped the Elk 
oncogene (Elk) and a novel type Elk oncogene (Elk3), closely related to ELK1. Elk
maps to Chr X, and Elk3 maps to the proximal region of Chr 10.

PMID: 7601474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Pathol Biol (Paris). 1995 Mar;43(3):202-7.

[Transcriptional regulators of the Ets family and their implication in normal
physiological processes and carcinogenesis].

[Article in French]

Ghysdael J.

PMID: 7675547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Cancer Res. 1994 Nov 1;54(21):5683-8.

Stromal expression of c-Ets1 transcription factor correlates with tumor invasion.

Wernert N(1), Gilles F, Fafeur V, Bouali F, Raes MB, Pyke C, Dupressoir T, Seitz 
G, Vandenbunder B, Stéhelin D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

The stroma reaction has an important role in tumor growth, invasion, and
metastasis. In various invasive human carcinomas, as well as in a mouse model for
tumor invasion, transcripts encoding the transcription factor c-Ets1 were
detected within stromal fibroblasts, whereas they were absent in epithelial tumor
cells. This expression of c-Ets1 was often increased in fibroblasts directly
adjacent to neoplastic cells. Endothelial cells of stromal capillaries were also 
positive for c-Ets1 expression. In contrast, fibroblasts of corresponding
noninvasive lesions and of normal tissues were consistently negative. In cultured
human fibroblasts stimulated by basic fibroblast growth factor and tumor necrosis
factor alpha, the expression of c-Ets1 correlated with the accumulation of
transcripts for potential target genes, collagenase-1 and stromelysin-1. The same
correlation was observed in some of the invasive carcinomas investigated. These
results suggest that c-Ets1 participates in the regulation of tumor invasion in
vivo.

PMID: 7923216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. FEBS Lett. 1994 Oct 31;354(1):62-6.

Identification of two ets related genes in a marine worm, the polychaete annelid 
Nereis diversicolor.

Lelièvre-Chotteau A(1), Laudet V, Flourens A, Bègue A, Leprince D, Fontaine F.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS ER 87, Bât. SN3, Université des Sciences et Technologies de Lille,
Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.

The ETS family includes a growing number of transcription factors with a highly
conserved DNA-binding domain, the ETS domain. We have used PCR amplification with
degenerated oligonucleotides to isolate two putative ETS DNA-binding coding
domains in a primitive form of coelomate, the polychaete annelid Nereis
diversicolor. These sequences are highly related to the ETS and ERG groups of the
ets gene family. For the erg sequence an adjacent region encoding for 91 amino
acids has been characterized after library screening, and we show an expression
in cells isolated from the coelomic cavity of the animal. A phylogenic analysis
confirms that the ets-1/ets-2 and the erg/fli dichotomy arose specifically in the
vertebrate lineage.

PMID: 7957902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biochemistry. 1994 Oct 11;33(40):12139-48.

Purification and characterization of nuclear factors binding to the negative
regulatory element D of human apolipoprotein A-II promoter: a negative regulatory
effect is reversed by GABP, an Ets-related protein.

Cardot P(1), Pastier D, Lacorte JM, Mangeney M, Zannis VI, Chambaz J.

Author information: 
(1)URA CNRS 1283, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France.

We have previously shown that transcription of the human apolipoprotein A-II
(apoA-II) gene is controlled by a complex set of regulatory elements [Cardot et
al. (1993) Biochemistry 32, 9080-9093]. We have also identified previously
described, as well as new activities which bind to these elements and influence
to varying degrees the transcription of the apoA-II gene. DNA binding and
competition assays indicated that element D binds three new activities,
designated AIID1, AIID2, and AIID4, as well as an activity related to C/EBP.
Activities AIID1, AIID2, and AIID4 were purified and characterized further in
order to determine their function on the transcriptional regulation of human
apoA-II gene. SDS-PAGE analysis as well as photoaffinity cross-linking of the
affinity-purified AIID2 showed that it consists of three proteins with molecular 
masses ranging between 54 and 63 kDa. The amino acid sequence of tryptic peptides
obtained from AIID2 protein bands revealed that it is homologous to GABP, an
Ets-related protein. Similar analysis showed that affinity-purified AIID4 has an 
apparent molecular mass of 130 kDa. AIID1 activity was purified partially; in
addition to binding to the apoA-II promoter, AIID1 also binds to the regulatory
element C of apoCIII and may play a role in the transcriptional regulation of
both genes. Methylation interference of G residues and permanganate modification 
of T residues indicated that the binding sites of AIID2 and AIID4 were contiguous
on element D. However, the binding site of AIID1 overlaps with the binding sites 
of both AIID2 and AIID4. This suggests that the binding of AIID1 and AIID2 or of 
AIID1 and AIID4 may be mutually exclusive, whereas AIID2 and AIID4 may bind
simultaneously. Transcription from a minimal promoter containing elements AB, C, 
and D of apoA-II increased 1.5- to 1.6-fold when element D is deleted, as well as
by promoter mutations which eliminated the binding of both AIID1 and/or AIID4 to 
element D, but permitted the binding of AIID2/GABP. The findings suggest that
element D has a negative regulatory role on apoA-II gene transcription when it is
occupied by protein AIID1 and/or AIID4. This negative effect is reversed when
element D is occupied only by the regulatory factor AIID2/GABP.

PMID: 7918435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 30;269(39):24335-42.

In vitro interactions between nuclear proteins and uncoupling protein gene
promoter reveal several putative transactivating factors including Ets1, retinoid
X receptor, thyroid hormone receptor, and a CACCC box-binding protein.

Cassard-Doulcier AM(1), Larose M, Matamala JC, Champigny O, Bouillaud F, Ricquier
D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherches sur l'Endocrinologie Moléculaire et le Développement,
CNRS, Meudon, France.

Previous studies of rat ucp (uncoupling protein) gene organization carried out in
this laboratory identified regulatory sequences located in the 5'-flanking
region. In this work, DNase I footprint analysis of the enhancer revealed two
domains at base pairs (bp) -2444 to -2423 and bp -2352 to -2319. The former
domain can bind in vitro, in a cooperative manner, factors related to nuclear
factor 1 and Ets1; the latter domain contains a type 3 directly repeated sequence
that was shown to be able to bind the retinoid X and triiodothyronine receptors. 
Moreover, a positive effect of retinoic acid on ucp mRNA levels in immortalized
brown adipocytes was observed. DNase I footprint analysis identified two
hypersensitive regions, A and B, at bp -509 to -472 and bp -403 to -350,
respectively; region A contains a repeated CACCC box, and region B can bind
protein related to Ets1. The A box differentially binds liver and brown adipose
tissue nuclear proteins and could be involved in uncoupling protein induction.
Further analysis showed three foot-printed boxes, C-E, at bp -182 to -159, -147
to -120, and -111 to -85, able to bind in vitro proteins related to nuclear
factor 1, cAMP response element-binding protein, and Sp1, respectively.

PMID: 7929091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Aug 1;223(3):997-1006.

Involvement of Ets-related proteins in hormone-independent mammary cell-specific 
gene expression.

Welte T(1), Garimorth K, Philipp S, Jennewein P, Huck C, Cato AC, Doppler W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Chemie und Biochemie, Innsbruck, Austria.

Regulatory regions have been located in the 5' flanking sequence of the mouse
whey acidic protein gene which contribute to its tissue- and stage-specific
expression in the mammary gland. They can be functionally separated into elements
which mediate the action of lactogenic hormones prolactin and glucocorticoids and
elements which control mammary cell-specific transcription in the absence of
hormones. By mutational analysis, we have located a site in the whey acidic
protein promoter between -120 and -100 which is important for hormone-independent
promoter function. In stably transfected HC11 mammary epithelial cells, the
hormone-independent activity of the mutated promoter was reduced 40-fold, whereas
the capability to respond to lactogenic hormones was retained. The site was
specifically recognised by two nuclear factors contained in extracts of
cultivated mammary epithelial cells or mammary glands. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay, DNase I footprinting and methylation interference experiments
indicated a relation of both factors to the Ets family of DNA-binding proteins.
One of these factors also recognised a functionally important site in the mammary
cell-specific enhancer of the mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat. The
results suggest that factors related to the Ets family are important determinants
in mammary cell-specific gene expression.

PMID: 8055977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Genes Dev. 1994 Jul 1;8(13):1502-13.

Net, a new ets transcription factor that is activated by Ras.

Giovane A(1), Pintzas A, Maira SM, Sobieszczuk P, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique-Laboratoire de Genetique
Moleculaire des Eucaryotes (CNRS-LGME), Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale (INSERM)-U. 184, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

Ras signaling appears to be mediated in part by transcription factors that belong
to the ets gene family. To identify downstream targets for the Ras signal
transduction pathway, we have used Ras-transformed mouse fibroblasts to isolate a
new member of the ets gene family, net. Net has sequence similarity in three
regions with the ets factors Elk1 and SAP1, which have been implicated in the
serum response of the fos promoter. Net shares various properties with these
proteins, including the ability to bind to ets DNA motifs through the Ets domain 
of the protein and form ternary complexes with the serum response factor SRF on
the fos serum response element, SRE. However, Net differs from Elk1 and SAP1 in a
number of ways. The pattern of net RNA expression in adult mouse tissues is
different. Net has negative effects on transcription in a number of assays,
unlike Elk1. Strikingly, Ras, Src, and Mos expression switch Net activity to
positive. The study of Net should help in understanding the interplay between Net
and other members of the Elk subfamily and their contribution to signal
transduction through Ras to the nucleus.

PMID: 7958835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 May;14(5):3292-309.

ERP, a new member of the ets transcription factor/oncoprotein family: cloning,
characterization, and differential expression during B-lymphocyte development.

Lopez M(1), Oettgen P, Akbarali Y, Dendorfer U, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02215.

The ets gene family encodes a group of proteins which function as transcription
factors under physiological conditions and, if aberrantly expressed, can cause
cellular transformation. We have recently identified two regulatory elements in
the murine immunoglobulin heavy-chain (IgH) enhancer, pi and microB, which
exhibit striking similarity to binding sites for ets-related proteins. To
identify ets-related transcriptional regulators expressed in pre-B lymphocytes
that may interact with either the pi or the microB site, we have used a PCR
approach with degenerate oligonucleotides encoding conserved sequences in all
members of the ets family. We have cloned the gene for a new ets-related
transcription factor, ERP (ets-related protein), from the murine pre-B cell line 
BASC 6C2 and from mouse lung tissue. The ERP protein contains a region of high
homology with the ETS DNA-binding domain common to all members of the ets
transcription factor/oncoprotein family. Three additional smaller regions show
homology to the ELK-1 and SAP-1 genes, a subgroup of the ets gene family that
interacts with the serum response factor. Full-length ERP expresses only
negligible DNA-binding activity by itself. Removal of the carboxy terminus
enables ERP to interact with a variety of ets-binding sites including the E74
site, the IgH enhancer pi site, and the lck promoter ets site, suggesting a
carboxy-terminal negative regulatory domain. At least three ERP-related
transcripts are expressed in a variety of tissues. However, within the B-cell
lineage, ERP is highly expressed primarily at early stages of B-lymphocyte
development, and expression declines drastically upon B-cell maturation,
correlating with the enhancer activity of the IgH pi site. These data suggest
that ERP might play a role in B-cell development and in IgH gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC358696
PMID: 7909357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


