
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 3;11(3):e0150382. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150382.
eCollection 2016.

Role of CTCF in Regulating SLC45A3-ELK4 Chimeric RNA.

Qin F(1), Song Y(1), Zhang Y(2), Facemire L(1), Frierson H(1), Li H(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America. (2)Zhejiang Academy of
Medical Sciences, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (3)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
Virginia, United States of America.

The chimeric RNA, SLC45A3-ELK4, was found to be a product of cis-splicing between
the two adjacent genes (cis-SAGe). Despite the biological and clinical
significance of SLC45A3-ELK4, its generating mechanism has not been elucidated.
It was shown in one cell line that the binding of transcription factor CTCF to
the insulators located at or near the gene boundaries, inversely correlates with 
the level of the chimera. To investigate the mechanism of such cis-SAGe events,
we sequenced potential regions that may play a role in such transcriptional
read-through. We could not detect mutations at the transcription termination
site, insulator sites, splicing sites, or within CTCF itself in LNCaP cells, thus
suggesting a "soft-wired" mechanism in regulating the cis-SAGe event. To
investigate the role CTCF plays in regulating the chimeric RNA expression, we
compared the levels of CTCF binding to the insulators in different cell lines, as
well as clinical samples. Surprisingly, we did not find an inverse correlation
between CTCF level, or its bindings to the insulators and SLC45A3-ELK4 expression
among different samples. However, in three prostate cancer cell lines, different 
environmental factors can cause the expression levels of the chimeric RNA to
change, and these changes do inversely correlate with CTCF level, and/or its
bindings to the insulators. We thus conclude that CTCF and its bindings to the
insulators are not the primary reasons for differential SLC45A3-ELK4 expression
in different cell lines, or clinical cases. However, they are the likely
mechanism for the same cells to respond to different environmental cues, in order
to regulate the expression of SLC45A3-ELK4 chimeric RNA. This response to
different environmental cues is not general to other cis-SAGe events, as we only 
found one out of 16 newly identified chimeric RNAs showing a pattern similar to
SLC45A3-ELK4.

PMCID: PMC4777538
PMID: 26938874  [PubMed - in process]


2. Oncogene. 2016 Mar 3;35(9):1170-9. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.175. Epub 2015 Jun 1.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) is a key mediator for EGF-induced cell
transformation mediated through the ELK4/c-Fos signaling pathway.

Peng C(1,)(2), Zeng W(2), Su J(2), Kuang Y(2), He Y(2), Zhao S(2), Zhang J(2), Ma
W(1), Bode AM(1), Dong Z(1), Chen X(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, MN, USA. (2)The
Department of Dermatology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 
China.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) is a known regulator in the cell cycle control
of the G1/S and S/G2 transitions. However, the role of CDK2 in tumorigenesis is
controversial. Evidence from knockout mice as well as colon cancer cell lines
indicated that CDK2 is dispensable for cell proliferation. In this study, we
found that ectopic CDK2 enhances Ras (G12V)-induced foci formation and knocking
down CDK2 expression markedly decreases epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced
cell transformation mediated through the downregulation of c-fos expression.
Interestingly, CDK2 directly phosphorylates ELK4 at Thr194 and Ser387 and
regulates the ELK4 transcriptional activity, which serves as a mechanism to
regulate c-fos expression. In addition, ELK4 is overexpressed in melanoma and
knocking down the ELK4 or CDK2 expression significantly attenuated the malignant 
phenotype of melanoma cells. Taken together, our study reveals a novel function
of CDK2 in EGF-induced cell transformation and the associated signal transduction
pathways. This indicates that CDK2 is a useful molecular target for the
chemoprevention and therapy against skin cancer.

PMCID: PMC4666830 [Available on 2016-09-03]
PMID: 26028036  [PubMed - in process]


3. Dev Biol. 2015 Dec 15;408(2):269-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.03.010. Epub 2015 
Mar 27.

An in vivo screen to identify candidate neurogenic genes in the developing
Xenopus visual system.

Bestman JE(1), Huang LC(2), Lee-Osbourne J(3), Cheung P(4), Cline HT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery & Biomedical Sciences, The Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, United States. (2)The Dorris Neuroscience Center,
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, United States. (3)University 
of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, United States. (4)Dart Neuroscience,
LLC, San Diego, CA 92064, United States. (5)The Dorris Neuroscience Center, The
Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, United States. Electronic
address: cline@scripps.edu.

Neurogenesis in the brain of Xenopus laevis continues throughout larval stages of
development. We developed a 2-tier screen to identify candidate genes controlling
neurogenesis in Xenopus optic tectum in vivo. First, microarray and NanoString
analyses were used to identify candidate genes that were differentially expressed
in Sox2-expressing neural progenitor cells or their neuronal progeny. Then an in 
vivo, time-lapse imaging-based screen was used to test whether morpholinos
against 34 candidate genes altered neural progenitor cell proliferation or
neuronal differentiation over 3 days in the optic tectum of intact Xenopus
tadpoles. We co-electroporated antisense morpholino oligonucleotides against each
of the candidate genes with a plasmid that drives GFP expression in
Sox2-expressing neural progenitor cells and quantified the effects of morpholinos
on neurogenesis. Of the 34 morpholinos tested, 24 altered neural progenitor cell 
proliferation or neuronal differentiation. The candidates which were tagged as
differentially expressed and validated by the in vivo imaging screen include:
actn1, arl9, eif3a, elk4, ephb1, fmr1-a, fxr1-1, fbxw7, fgf2, gstp1, hat1, hspa5,
lsm6, mecp2, mmp9, and prkaca. Several of these candidates, including fgf2 and
elk4, have known or proposed neurogenic functions, thereby validating our
strategy to identify candidates. Genes with no previously demonstrated neurogenic
functions, gstp1, hspa5 and lsm6, were identified from the morpholino
experiments, suggesting that our screen successfully revealed unknown candidates.
Genes that are associated with human disease, such as such as mecp2 and fmr1-a,
were identified by our screen, providing the groundwork for using Xenopus as an
experimental system to probe conserved disease mechanisms. Together the data
identify candidate neurogenic regulatory genes and demonstrate that Xenopus is an
effective experimental animal to identify and characterize genes that regulate
neural progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation in vivo.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4584193 [Available on 2016-12-15]
PMID: 25818835  [PubMed - in process]


4. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 9;9(9):e107048. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107048. eCollection
2014.

Elk3 deficiency causes transient impairment in post-natal retinal vascular
development and formation of tortuous arteries in adult murine retinae.

Weinl C(1), Wasylyk C(2), Garcia Garrido M(3), Sothilingam V(3), Beck SC(3),
Riehle H(1), Stritt C(1), Roux MJ(2), Seeliger MW(3), Wasylyk B(2), Nordheim
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology,
University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. (2)Institut de Génétique et de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch, France; Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Illkirch, France; Institut National de la Santé et de la 
Recherche Médicale, Illkirch, France; Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.
(3)Division of Ocular Neurodegeneration, Centre for Ophthalmology, Institute for 
Ophthalmic Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Serum Response Factor (SRF) fulfills essential roles in post-natal retinal
angiogenesis and adult neovascularization. These functions have been attributed
to the recruitment by SRF of the cofactors Myocardin-Related Transcription
Factors MRTF-A and -B, but not the Ternary Complex Factors (TCFs) Elk1 and Elk4. 
The role of the third TCF, Elk3, remained unknown. We generated a new Elk3
knockout mouse line and showed that Elk3 had specific, non-redundant functions in
the retinal vasculature. In Elk3(-/-) mice, post-natal retinal angiogenesis was
transiently delayed until P8, after which it proceeded normally. Interestingly,
tortuous arteries developed in Elk3(-/-) mice from the age of four weeks, and
persisted into late adulthood. Tortuous vessels have been observed in human
pathologies, e.g. in ROP and FEVR. These human disorders were linked to altered
activities of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in the affected eyes.
However, in Elk3(-/-) mice, we did not observe any changes in VEGF or several
other potential confounding factors, including mural cell coverage and blood
pressure. Instead, concurrent with the post-natal transient delay of radial
outgrowth and the formation of adult tortuous arteries, Elk3-dependent effects on
the expression of Angiopoietin/Tie-signalling components were observed. Moreover,
in vitro microvessel sprouting and microtube formation from P10 and adult aortic 
ring explants were reduced. Collectively, these results indicate that Elk3 has
distinct roles in maintaining retinal artery integrity. The Elk3 knockout mouse
is presented as a new animal model to study retinal artery tortuousity in mice
and human patients.

PMCID: PMC4159304
PMID: 25203538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. OMICS. 2014 Oct;18(10):615-24. doi: 10.1089/omi.2014.0042. Epub 2014 Sep 4.

Transcription-mediated chimeric RNAs in prostate cancer: time to revisit old
hypothesis?

Ren G(1), Zhang Y, Mao X, Liu X, Mercer E, Marzec J, Ding D, Jiao Y, Qiu Q, Sun
Y, Zhang B, Yeste-Velasco M, Chelala C, Berney D, Lu YJ.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University 
Medical College , Hangzhou, China .

Chromosomal rearrangements and fusion genes play important roles in tumor
development and progression. Four high-frequency prostate cancer-specific fusion 
genes were recently reported in Chinese cases. We attempted to confirm one of the
fusion genes, USP9Y-TTTY15, by reverse transcription PCR, but detected the
presence of the USP9Y-TTTY15 fusion transcript in cancer samples, nonmalignant
prostate tissues, and normal tissues from other organs, demonstrating that it is 
a transcription-induced chimeric RNA, which is commonly produced in normal
tissues. In 105 prostate cancer samples and case-matched adjacent nonmalignant
tissues, we determined the expression level of USP9Y-TTTY15 and a previously
reported transcription-induced chimeric RNA, SLC45A3-ELK4. The expression levels 
of both chimeric RNAs vary greatly in cancer and normal cells. USP9Y-TTTY15
expression is neither higher in cancer than adjacent normal tissues, nor
correlated with features of advanced prostate cancer. Although the expression
level of SLC45A3-ELK4 is higher in cancer than normal cells, and a dramatic
increase in its expression from normal to cancer cells is correlated with
advanced disease, its expression level in cancer samples alone is not correlated 
with any clinical parameters. These data show that both chimeric RNAs contribute 
less to prostate carcinogenesis than previously reported.

PMCID: PMC4175977
PMID: 25188740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. BMC Genomics. 2014 Apr 23;15:301. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-301.

MKL1/2 and ELK4 co-regulate distinct serum response factor (SRF) transcription
programs in macrophages.

Xie L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Systems Biology Research Center, Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Tsinghua University School of Medicine, Beijing 100084, China.
xielan@tsinghua.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Serum response factor (SRF) is a widely expressed transcription
factor involved in multiple regulatory programs. It is believed that SRF can
toggle between disparate programs of gene expression through association with
different cofactors. However, the direct evidence as to how these factors
function on a genome-wide level is still lacking.
RESULTS: In the present study, I explored the functions of SRF and its
representative cofactors, megakaryoblastic leukemia 1/2 (MKL1/2) and ETS-domain
protein 4 (ELK4), during fungal infection challenge in macrophages. The knockdown
study, combined with gene expression array analysis, revealed that MKL1/2
regulated SRF-dependent genes were related to actin cytoskeleton organization,
while ELK4 regulated SRF-dependent genes were related to external stimulus
responses. Subsequent chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with massively
parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) suggested that many of these regulations were
mediated directly in cis.
CONCLUSIONS: I conclude that SRF utilizes MKL1/2 to fulfill steady state cellular
functions, including cytoskeletal organization, and utilizes ELK4 to facilitate
acute responses to external infection. Together, these findings indicate that
SRF, along with its two cofactors, are important players in both cellular
homeostasis and stress responses in macrophages.

PMCID: PMC4023608
PMID: 24758171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2014 Jan 20;369(1637):20120471. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2012.0471. Print 2014 Mar 5.

Parent-of-origin genetic background affects the transcriptional levels of
circadian and neuronal plasticity genes following sleep loss.

Tinarelli F(1), Garcia-Garcia C, Nicassio F, Tucci V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia, , via Morego, 30, 16163 Genova, Italy.

Sleep homoeostasis refers to a process in which the propensity to sleep increases
as wakefulness progresses and decreases as sleep progresses. Sleep is tightly
organized around the circadian clock and is regulated by genetic and epigenetic
mechanisms. The homoeostatic response of sleep, which is classically triggered by
sleep deprivation, is generally measured as a rebound effect of
electrophysiological measures, for example delta sleep. However, more recently,
gene expression changes following sleep loss have been investigated as biomarkers
of sleep homoeostasis. The genetic background of an individual may affect this
sleep-dependent gene expression phenotype. In this study, we investigated whether
parental genetic background differentially modulates the expression of genes
following sleep loss. We tested the progeny of reciprocal crosses of AKR/J and
DBA/2J mouse strains and we show a parent-of-origin effect on the expression of
circadian, sleep and neuronal plasticity genes following sleep deprivation. Thus,
we further explored, by in silico, specific functions or upstream mechanisms of
regulation and we observed that several upstream mechanisms involving signalling 
pathways (i.e. DICER1, PKA), growth factors (CSF3 and BDNF) and transcriptional
regulators (EGR2 and ELK4) may be differentially modulated by parental effects.
This is the first report showing that a behavioural manipulation (e.g. sleep
deprivation) in adult animals triggers specific gene expression responses
according to parent-of-origin genomic mechanisms. Our study suggests that the
same mechanism may be extended to other behavioural domains and that the
investigation of gene expression following experimental manipulations should take
seriously into account parent-of-origin effects.

PMCID: PMC3895995
PMID: 24446504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Clin Invest. 2013 May;123(5):2193-206. doi: 10.1172/JCI64201. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

Endothelial SRF/MRTF ablation causes vascular disease phenotypes in murine
retinae.

Weinl C(1), Riehle H, Park D, Stritt C, Beck S, Huber G, Wolburg H, Olson EN,
Seeliger MW, Adams RH, Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Molecular Biology, Interfaculty Institute of Cell Biology,
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Retinal vessel homeostasis ensures normal ocular functions. Consequently, retinal
hypovascularization and neovascularization, causing a lack and an excess of
vessels, respectively, are hallmarks of human retinal pathology. We provide
evidence that EC-specific genetic ablation of either the transcription factor SRF
or its cofactors MRTF-A and MRTF-B, but not the SRF cofactors ELK1 or ELK4, cause
retinal hypovascularization in the postnatal mouse eye. Inducible, EC-specific
deficiency of SRF or MRTF-A/MRTF-B during postnatal angiogenesis impaired
endothelial tip cell filopodia protrusion, resulting in incomplete formation of
the retinal primary vascular plexus, absence of the deep plexi, and persistence
of hyaloid vessels. All of these features are typical of human
hypovascularization-related vitreoretinopathies, such as familial exudative
vitreoretinopathies including Norrie disease. In contrast, conditional EC
deletion of Srf in adult murine vessels elicited intraretinal neovascularization 
that was reminiscent of the age-related human pathologies retinal angiomatous
proliferation and macular telangiectasia. These results indicate that angiogenic 
homeostasis is ensured by differential stage-specific functions of SRF target
gene products in the developing versus the mature retinal vasculature and suggest
that the actin-directed MRTF-SRF signaling axis could serve as a therapeutic
target in the treatment of human vascular retinal diseases.

PMCID: PMC3635718
PMID: 23563308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Apr 4;92(4):489-503. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.01.002. Epub
2013 Mar 27.

Functional variants at the 11q13 risk locus for breast cancer regulate cyclin D1 
expression through long-range enhancers.

French JD, Ghoussaini M, Edwards SL, Meyer KB, Michailidou K, Ahmed S, Khan S,
Maranian MJ, O'Reilly M, Hillman KM, Betts JA, Carroll T, Bailey PJ, Dicks E,
Beesley J, Tyrer J, Maia AT, Beck A, Knoblauch NW, Chen C, Kraft P, Barnes D,
González-Neira A, Alonso MR, Herrero D, Tessier DC, Vincent D, Bacot F, Luccarini
C, Baynes C, Conroy D, Dennis J, Bolla MK, Wang Q, Hopper JL, Southey MC, Schmidt
MK, Broeks A, Verhoef S, Cornelissen S, Muir K, Lophatananon A, Stewart-Brown S, 
Siriwanarangsan P, Fasching PA, Loehberg CR, Ekici AB, Beckmann MW, Peto J, dos
Santos Silva I, Johnson N, Aitken Z, Sawyer EJ, Tomlinson I, Kerin MJ, Miller N, 
Marme F, Schneeweiss A, Sohn C, Burwinkel B, Guénel P, Truong T, Laurent-Puig P, 
Menegaux F, Bojesen SE, Nordestgaard BG, Nielsen SF, Flyger H, Milne RL, Zamora
MP, Arias Perez JI, Benitez J, Anton-Culver H, Brenner H, Müller H, Arndt V,
Stegmaier C, Meindl A, Lichtner P, Schmutzler RK, Engel C, Brauch H, Hamann U,
Justenhoven C; GENICA Network, Aaltonen K, Heikkilä P, Aittomäki K, Blomqvist C, 
Matsuo K, Ito H, Iwata H, Sueta A, Bogdanova NV, Antonenkova NN, Dörk T, Lindblom
A, Margolin S, Mannermaa A, Kataja V, Kosma VM, Hartikainen JM; kConFab
Investigators, Wu AH, Tseng CC, Van Den Berg D, Stram DO, Lambrechts D, Peeters
S, Smeets A, Floris G, Chang-Claude J, Rudolph A, Nickels S, Flesch-Janys D,
Radice P, Peterlongo P, Bonanni B, Sardella D, Couch FJ, Wang X, Pankratz VS, Lee
A, Giles GG, Severi G, Baglietto L, Haiman CA, Henderson BE, Schumacher F, Le
Marchand L, Simard J, Goldberg MS, Labrèche F, Dumont M, Teo SH, Yip CH, Ng CH,
Vithana EN, Kristensen V, Zheng W, Deming-Halverson S, Shrubsole M, Long J,
Winqvist R, Pylkäs K, Jukkola-Vuorinen A, Grip M, Andrulis IL, Knight JA, Glendon
G, Mulligan AM, Devilee P, Seynaeve C, García-Closas M, Figueroa J, Chanock SJ,
Lissowska J, Czene K, Klevebring D, Schoof N, Hooning MJ, Martens JW, Collée JM, 
Tilanus-Linthorst M, Hall P, Li J, Liu J, Humphreys K, Shu XO, Lu W, Gao YT, Cai 
H, Cox A, Balasubramanian SP, Blot W, Signorello LB, Cai Q, Pharoah PD, Healey
CS, Shah M, Pooley KA, Kang D, Yoo KY, Noh DY, Hartman M, Miao H, Sng JH, Sim X, 
Jakubowska A, Lubinski J, Jaworska-Bieniek K, Durda K, Sangrajrang S, Gaborieau
V, McKay J, Toland AE, Ambrosone CB, Yannoukakos D, Godwin AK, Shen CY, Hsiung
CN, Wu PE, Chen ST, Swerdlow A, Ashworth A, Orr N, Schoemaker MJ, Ponder BA,
Nevanlinna H, Brown MA, Chenevix-Trench G, Easton DF, Dunning AM.

Analysis of 4,405 variants in 89,050 European subjects from 41 case-control
studies identified three independent association signals for
estrogen-receptor-positive tumors at 11q13. The strongest signal maps to a
transcriptional enhancer element in which the G allele of the best candidate
causative variant rs554219 increases risk of breast cancer, reduces both binding 
of ELK4 transcription factor and luciferase activity in reporter assays, and may 
be associated with low cyclin D1 protein levels in tumors. Another candidate
variant, rs78540526, lies in the same enhancer element. Risk association signal
2, rs75915166, creates a GATA3 binding site within a silencer element. Chromatin 
conformation studies demonstrate that these enhancer and silencer elements
interact with each other and with their likely target gene, CCND1.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3617380
PMID: 23540573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Science. 2013 Feb 22;339(6122):959-61. doi: 10.1126/science.1230062. Epub 2013
Jan 24.

TERT promoter mutations in familial and sporadic melanoma.

Horn S(1), Figl A, Rachakonda PS, Fischer C, Sucker A, Gast A, Kadel S, Moll I,
Nagore E, Hemminki K, Schadendorf D, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center, Im 
Neuenheimer Feld 580, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Cutaneous melanoma occurs in both familial and sporadic forms. We investigated a 
melanoma-prone family through linkage analysis and high-throughput sequencing and
identified a disease-segregating germline mutation in the promoter of the
telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) gene, which encodes the catalytic subunit
of telomerase. The mutation creates a new binding motif for Ets transcription
factors and ternary complex factors (TCFs) near the transcription start and, in
reporter gene assays, caused up to twofold increase in transcription. We then
screened the TERT promoter in sporadic melanoma and observed recurrent
ultraviolet signature somatic mutations in 125 of 168 (74%) of human cell lines
derived from metastatic melanomas, 45 of 53 corresponding metastatic tumor
tissues (85%), and 25 of 77 (33%) primary melanomas. The majority of those
mutations occurred at two positions in the TERT promoter and also generated
binding motifs for Ets/TCF transcription factors.

PMID: 23348503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Feb;138(1):37-45. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2408-2.
Epub 2013 Jan 18.

Frequent copy number gains at 1q21 and 1q32 are associated with overexpression of
the ETS transcription factors ETV3 and ELF3 in breast cancer irrespective of
molecular subtypes.

Mesquita B(1), Lopes P, Rodrigues A, Pereira D, Afonso M, Leal C, Henrique R,
Lind GE, Jerónimo C, Lothe RA, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Rua Dr. António
Bernardino de Almeida, 4200-072 Porto, Portugal.

Several ETS transcription factors are involved in the pathogenesis of human
cancers by different mechanisms. As gene copy number gain/amplification is an
alternative mechanism of oncogenic activation and 1q gain is the most common copy
number change in breast carcinoma, we investigated how that genomic change
impacts in the expression of the three 1q ETS family members ETV3, ELK4, and
ELF3. We have first evaluated 141 breast carcinomas for genome-wide copy number
changes by chromosomal CGH and showed that 1q21 and 1q32 were the two chromosome 
bands with most frequent genomic copy number gains. Second, we confirmed by FISH 
with locus-specific BAC clones that cases showing 1q gain/amplification by CGH
showed copy number increase of the ETS genes ETV3 (located in 1q21~23), ELF3, and
ELK4 (both in 1q32). Third, gene expression levels of the three 1q ETS genes, as 
well as their potential targets MYC and CRISP3, were evaluated by quantitative
real-time PCR. We here show for the first time that the most common genomic copy 
number gains in breast cancer, 1q21 and 1q32, are associated with overexpression 
of the ETS transcription factors ETV3 and ELF3 (but not ELK4) at these loci
irrespective of molecular subtypes. Among the three 1q ETS genes, ELF3 has a
relevant role in breast carcinogenesis and is also the most likely target of the 
1q copy number increase. The basal-like molecular subtype presented the worst
prognosis regarding disease-specific survival, but no additional prognostic value
was found for 1q copy number status or ELF3 expression. In addition, we show that
there is a correlation between the expression of the oncogene MYC, irrespectively
of copy number gain at its loci in 8q24, and the expression of both the
transcriptional repressor ETV3 and the androgen respondent ELK4.

PMID: 23329352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cell Res. 2013 Jan;23(1):10-2. doi: 10.1038/cr.2012.112. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

The controversial role of Sirtuins in tumorigenesis - SIRT7 joins the debate.

Li L(1), Bhatia R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematopoietic Stem cell and Leukemia Research, City of Hope
National Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

Sirtuins are NAD-dependent deacetylases that are conserved from yeast to mammals.
A new report sheds light on the function of SIRT7, the least understood member of
the Sirtuin family by identifying its locus-specific H3K18 deacetylase activity, 
and linking it to maintenance of cellular transformation in malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3541655
PMID: 22847743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cancer Discov. 2012 Jul;2(7):582-5. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0212.

SLC45A3-ELK4 chimera in prostate cancer: spotlight on cis-splicing.

Kumar-Sinha C(1), Kalyana-Sundaram S, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Discov. 2012 Jul;2(7):598-607.

Using a series of detailed experiments, Zhang and colleagues establish that the
prostate cancer RNA chimera SLC45A3-ELK4 is generated by cis-splicing between the
2 adjacent genes and does not involve DNA rearrangements or trans-splicing. The
chimera expression is induced by androgen treatment likely by overcoming the
read-through block imposed by the intergenic CCCTC insulators bound by
CCCTC-binding factor repressor protein. The chimeric transcript, but not
wild-type ELK4, is shown to augment prostate cancer cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3597435
PMID: 22787087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Nature. 2012 Jul 5;487(7405):114-8. doi: 10.1038/nature11043.

SIRT7 links H3K18 deacetylation to maintenance of oncogenic transformation.

Barber MF(1), Michishita-Kioi E, Xi Y, Tasselli L, Kioi M, Moqtaderi Z, Tennen
RI, Paredes S, Young NL, Chen K, Struhl K, Garcia BA, Gozani O, Li W, Chua KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2012 Jun 12;21(6):719-21.

Sirtuin proteins regulate diverse cellular pathways that influence genomic
stability, metabolism and ageing. SIRT7 is a mammalian sirtuin whose biochemical 
activity, molecular targets and physiological functions have been unclear. Here
we show that SIRT7 is an NAD(+)-dependent H3K18Ac (acetylated lysine 18 of
histone H3) deacetylase that stabilizes the transformed state of cancer cells.
Genome-wide binding studies reveal that SIRT7 binds to promoters of a specific
set of gene targets, where it deacetylates H3K18Ac and promotes transcriptional
repression. The spectrum of SIRT7 target genes is defined in part by its
interaction with the cancer-associated E26 transformed specific (ETS)
transcription factor ELK4, and comprises numerous genes with links to tumour
suppression. Notably, selective hypoacetylation of H3K18Ac has been linked to
oncogenic transformation, and in patients is associated with aggressive tumour
phenotypes and poor prognosis. We find that deacetylation of H3K18Ac by SIRT7 is 
necessary for maintaining essential features of human cancer cells, including
anchorage-independent growth and escape from contact inhibition. Moreover, SIRT7 
is necessary for a global hypoacetylation of H3K18Ac associated with cellular
transformation by the viral oncoprotein E1A. Finally, SIRT7 depletion markedly
reduces the tumorigenicity of human cancer cell xenografts in mice. Together, our
work establishes SIRT7 as a highly selective H3K18Ac deacetylase and demonstrates
a pivotal role for SIRT7 in chromatin regulation, cellular transformation
programs and tumour formation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3412143
PMID: 22722849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cancer Discov. 2012 Jul;2(7):598-607. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0042. Epub
2012 Jun 19.

Chimeric transcript generated by cis-splicing of adjacent genes regulates
prostate cancer cell proliferation.

Zhang Y(1), Gong M, Yuan H, Park HG, Frierson HF, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia
22908, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2012 Jul;2(7):582-5.

Gene fusion is a common event in cancer. The fusion RNA and protein products
often play causal roles in tumorigenesis and therefore represent ideal diagnostic
and therapeutic targets. Formerly, fusion chimeric products in cancer were
thought to be produced solely by chromosomal translocation. Here, we show that a 
chimeric SLC45A3-ELK4 RNA is generated in the absence of chromosomal
rearrangement. We showed that it is not a product of RNA trans-splicing, but
formed by cis-splicing of adjacent genes/read-through. The binding of
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) to the insulator sequences inversely correlates with 
the expression of the chimera transcript. The SLC45A3-ELK4 fusion, but not
wild-type, ELK4 plays important roles in regulating cell growth in both
androgen-dependent and -independent prostate cancer cells. The level of the
chimeric transcript correlates with disease progression, with the highest levels 
in prostate cancer metastases. Our results suggest that gene fusions can arise
from cis-splicing of adjacent genes without corresponding DNA
changes.SIGNIFICANCE: With the absence of corresponding DNA rearrangement,
chimeric fusion SLC45A3-ELK4 transcript in prostate cancer cells is generated by 
cis-splicing of adjacent genes/gene read-through instead of trans-splicing.
SLC45A3-ELK4 controls prostate cancer cell proliferation, and the chimera level
correlates with prostate cancer disease progression.

PMID: 22719019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Hum Pathol. 2012 Nov;43(11):1910-6. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.01.018. Epub 2012
May 7.

Rearrangement of the ETS genes ETV-1, ETV-4, ETV-5, and ELK-4 is a clonal event
during prostate cancer progression.

Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Braun M, Nikolov P, Boehm D, Scheble V, Menon R, Fend F,
Kristiansen G, Perner S, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.

ETS gene rearrangements are frequently found in prostate cancer. Several studies 
have assessed the rearrangement status of the most commonly found ETS rearranged 
gene ERG, and the less frequent genes, ETV-1, ETV-4, ETV-5, and ELK-4 in primary 
prostate cancer. However, frequency in metastatic disease is not well
investigated. Recently, we have assessed the ERG rearrangement status in both
primary and corresponding lymph node metastases and observed that ERG
rearrangement in primary prostate cancer transfers into lymph node metastases,
suggesting it to be a clonal expansion event during prostate cancer progression. 
As a continuation, we investigated in this study whether this observation is
valid for the less frequent ETS rearranged genes. Using dual-color break-apart
fluorescent in situ hybridization assays, we evaluated the status of all less
frequent ETS gene rearrangements for the first time on tissue microarrays
constructed from a large cohort of 86 patients with prostate cancer and composed 
of primary and corresponding lymph node metastases, as well as in a second cohort
composed of 43 distant metastases. ETV-1, ETV-4, ETV-5, and ELK-4 rearrangements 
were found in 8 (10%) of 81, 5 (6%) of 85, 1 (1%) of 85, and 2 (2%) of 86 of
primary prostate cancer, respectively, and in 6 (8%) of 73, 4 (6%) of 72, 1 (1%) 
of 75, and 1 (1%) of 78 of corresponding lymph node metastases, respectively.
ETV-1 and ETV-5 rearrangements were not found in the distant metastases cases,
whereas ETV-4 and ELK-4 rearrangements were found in 1 (4%) of 25 and 1 (4%) of
24, respectively. Our findings suggest that rearrangement of the less frequent
ETS genes is a clonal event during prostate cancer progression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22569213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Endod. 2011 Dec;37(12):1647-52. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2011.08.023. Epub 2011 Oct 
6.

Potential characteristics of stem cells from human exfoliated deciduous teeth
compared with bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells for mineralized
tissue-forming cell biology.

Hara K(1), Yamada Y, Nakamura S, Umemura E, Ito K, Ueda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Tissue engineering and regenerative medicine using stem cell
biology has been a promising field for treatment of local and systemic
intractable diseases. Recently, stem cells from human exfoliated deciduous teeth 
(SHED) have been identified as a novel population of stem cells. This study
focused on the characterization of SHED as compared with bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (BMMSCs).
METHODS: We investigated potential characteristics of SHED by using DNA
microarray, real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, and
immunofluorescence analysis.
RESULTS: Multiple gene expression profiles indicated that the expression of 2753 
genes in SHED had changed by =2.0-fold as compared with that in BMMSCs. One of
the most significant pathways that accelerated in SHED was that of bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) receptor signaling, which contains several cascades
such as PKA, JNK, and ASK1. When the BMP signaling pathway was stimulated by
BMP-2, the expression of BMP-2, BMP-4, Runx2, and DSPP was up-regulated
significantly in SHED than that in BMMSCs. Furthermore, the BMP-4 protein was
expressed much higher in SHED but not in BMMSCs, as confirmed by
immunofluorescence.
CONCLUSIONS: By using the gene expression profiles, this study indicates that
SHED is involved in the BMP signaling pathway and suggests that BMP-4 might play 
a crucial role in this. These results might be useful for effective cell-based
tissue regeneration, including that of bone, pulp, and dentin, by applying the
characteristics of SHED.

Copyright © 2011 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22099898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Neuro Oncol. 2011 Nov;13(11):1202-12. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nor119. Epub 2011 Aug
16.

ELK4 neutralization sensitizes glioblastoma to apoptosis through downregulation
of the anti-apoptotic protein Mcl-1.

Day BW(1), Stringer BW, Spanevello MD, Charmsaz S, Jamieson PR, Ensbey KS, Carter
JC, Cox JM, Ellis VJ, Brown CL, Walker DG, Inglis PL, Allan S, Reynolds BA,
Lickliter JD, Boyd AW.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, P.O. Royal Brisbane Hospital,
Queensland, 4029, Brisbane, Australia. bryan.day@qimr.edu.au

Glioma is the most common adult primary brain tumor. Its most malignant form,
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), is almost invariably fatal, due in part to the
intrinsic resistance of GBM to radiation- and chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. We 
analyzed B-cell leukemia-2 (Bcl-2) anti-apoptotic proteins in GBM and found
myeloid cell leukemia-1 (Mcl-1) to be the highest expressed in the majority of
malignant gliomas. Mcl-1 was functionally important, as neutralization of Mcl-1
induced apoptosis and increased chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. To determine how 
Mcl-1 was regulated in glioma, we analyzed the promoter and identified a novel
functional single nucleotide polymorphism in an uncharacterized E26
transformation-specific (ETS) binding site. We identified the ETS transcription
factor ELK4 as a critical regulator of Mcl-1 in glioma, since ELK4 downregulation
was shown to reduce Mcl-1 and increase sensitivity to apoptosis. Importantly the 
presence of the single nucleotide polymorphism, which ablated ELK4 binding in
gliomas, was associated with lower Mcl-1 levels and a greater dependence on
Bcl-xL. Furthermore, in vivo, ELK4 downregulation reduced tumor formation in
glioblastoma xenograft models. The critical role of ELK4 in Mcl-1 expression and 
protection from apoptosis in glioma defines ELK4 as a novel potential therapeutic
target for GBM.

PMCID: PMC3199151
PMID: 21846680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Sep 15;17(18):5867-77. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0737. 
Epub 2011 Aug 1.

Resection of non-small cell lung cancers reverses tumor-induced gene expression
changes in the peripheral immune system.

Kossenkov AV(1), Vachani A, Chang C, Nichols C, Billouin S, Horng W, Rom WN,
Albelda SM, Showe MK, Showe LC.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

PURPOSE: To characterize the interactions of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
tumors with the immune system at the level of mRNA and microRNA (miRNA)
expression and to define expression signatures that characterize the presence of 
a malignant tumor versus a nonmalignant nodule.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We have examined the changes of both mRNA and miRNA
expression levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) between paired
samples collected from NSCLC patients before and after tumor removal using
Illumina gene expression arrays.
RESULTS: We found that malignant tumor removal significantly changes expression
of more than 3,000 protein-coding genes, especially genes in pathways associated 
with suppression of the innate immune response, including natural killer cell
signaling and apoptosis-associated ceramide signaling. Binding sites for the ETS 
domain transcription factors ELK1, ELK4, and SPI1 were enriched in promoter
regions of genes upregulated in the presence of a tumor. Additional important
regulators included five miRNAs expressed at significantly higher levels before
tumor removal. Repressed protein-coding targets of those miRNAs included many
transcription factors, several involved in immunologically important pathways.
Although there was a significant overlap in the effects of malignant tumors and
benign lung nodules on PBMC gene expression, we identified one gene panel which
indicates a tumor or nodule presence and a second panel that can distinguish
malignant from nonmalignant nodules.
CONCLUSIONS: A tumor presence in the lung influences mRNA and miRNA expression in
PBMC and this influence is reversed by tumor removal. These results suggest that 
PBMC gene expression signatures could be used for lung cancer diagnosis.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3618688
PMID: 21807633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Int J Mol Med. 2011 Jul;28(1):89-93. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.672. Epub 2011 Apr
13.

Differential expression of ETS family members in prostate cancer tissues and
androgen-sensitive and insensitive prostate cancer cell lines.

Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Lindstrot A, Langer B, Buettner R, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, D-53127 Bonn, Germany.

The ETS family of transcription factors plays important roles in both normal and 
neoplastic cells for different biological processes such as proliferation,
differentiation, development, transformation, apoptosis, migration, invasion and 
angiogenesis. The 27 ETS factors are probably a part of complex regulatory
networks including interactions among family members. In human prostate cancer,
rearrangements have been found in several genes of the ETS family resulting in
chimeric oncoproteins. In a previous study we found that the ETS family
prototype, Ets-1 affects biological properties of PC3 prostate cancer cells. In a
first effort to understand the cooperative interactions between different ETS
factors in prostate cancer, in the present study we examined the expression
pattern of all 27 ETS members using quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) in the
androgen-sensitive VCaP and LNCaP, and the androgen-insensitive PC3 and DU-145
prostate cancer cell lines as well as in human prostate cancer tissue samples. We
further investigated whether the ETS family prototype, Ets-1, regulates other ETS
family members by examining the effect of Ets-1 blockade in PC3 cells on their
expression. We found an expression specificity of various ETS family members in
the prostate cancer cell lines which might reflect their different biological
properties. In human prostate samples only 3 among the 27 ETS family members
(Ehf, Elk-4 and Ets-2) showed significant expression differences between normal
and cancerous prostate glands. We finally demonstrate that the family prototype, 
Ets-1, regulates the family members Elf-1, Elf-2, Elk-1, Etv-5 and Spi-1 in PC3
prostate cancer cells. Chimeric oncoproteins containing ETS family members
arising due to frequent translocations in prostate cancer are probably part of a 
regulatory network involving other ETS family members as well.

PMID: 21491078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. BMC Med Genomics. 2011 Jan 24;4:11. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-4-11.

Deep RNA sequencing analysis of readthrough gene fusions in human prostate
adenocarcinoma and reference samples.

Nacu S(1), Yuan W, Kan Z, Bhatt D, Rivers CS, Stinson J, Peters BA, Modrusan Z,
Jung K, Seshagiri S, Wu TD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and Molecular Biology, Genentech, Inc, South San 
Francisco, California 94080, USA.

BACKGROUND: Readthrough fusions across adjacent genes in the genome, or
transcription-induced chimeras (TICs), have been estimated using expressed
sequence tag (EST) libraries to involve 4-6% of all genes. Deep transcriptional
sequencing (RNA-Seq) now makes it possible to study the occurrence and expression
levels of TICs in individual samples across the genome.
METHODS: We performed single-end RNA-Seq on three human prostate adenocarcinoma
samples and their corresponding normal tissues, as well as brain and universal
reference samples. We developed two bioinformatics methods to specifically
identify TIC events: a targeted alignment method using artificial exon-exon
junctions within 200,000 bp from adjacent genes, and genomic alignment allowing
splicing within individual reads. We performed further experimental verification 
and characterization of selected TIC and fusion events using quantitative RT-PCR 
and comparative genomic hybridization microarrays.
RESULTS: Targeted alignment against artificial exon-exon junctions yielded 339
distinct TIC events, including 32 gene pairs with multiple isoforms. The false
discovery rate was estimated to be 1.5%. Spliced alignment to the genome was less
sensitive, finding only 18% of those found by targeted alignment in 33-nt reads
and 59% of those in 50-nt reads. However, spliced alignment revealed 30 cases of 
TICs with intervening exons, in addition to distant inversions, scrambled genes, 
and translocations. Our findings increase the catalog of observed TIC gene pairs 
by 66%.We verified 6 of 6 predicted TICs in all prostate samples, and 2 of 5
predicted novel distant gene fusions, both private events among 54 prostate tumor
samples tested. Expression of TICs correlates with that of the upstream gene,
which can explain the prostate-specific pattern of some TIC events and the
restriction of the SLC45A3-ELK4 e4-e2 TIC to ERG-negative prostate samples, as
confirmed in 20 matched prostate tumor and normal samples and 9 lung cancer cell 
lines.
CONCLUSIONS: Deep transcriptional sequencing and analysis with targeted and
spliced alignment methods can effectively identify TIC events across the genome
in individual tissues. Prostate and reference samples exhibit a wide range of TIC
events, involving more genes than estimated previously using ESTs. Tissue
specificity of TIC events is correlated with expression patterns of the upstream 
gene. Some TIC events, such as MSMB-NCOA4, may play functional roles in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3041646
PMID: 21261984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. BMC Genomics. 2010 Dec 2;11:689. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-689.

Genome-wide binding of the orphan nuclear receptor TR4 suggests its general role 
in fundamental biological processes.

O'Geen H(1), Lin YH, Xu X, Echipare L, Komashko VM, He D, Frietze S, Tanabe O,
Shi L, Sartor MA, Engel JD, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Center, University of California at Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

BACKGROUND: The orphan nuclear receptor TR4 (human testicular receptor 4 or
NR2C2) plays a pivotal role in a variety of biological and metabolic processes.
With no known ligand and few known target genes, the mode of TR4 function was
unclear.
RESULTS: We report the first genome-wide identification and characterization of
TR4 in vivo binding. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high
throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq), we identified TR4 binding sites in 4 different 
human cell types and found that the majority of target genes were shared among
different cells. TR4 target genes are involved in fundamental biological
processes such as RNA metabolism and protein translation. In addition, we found
that a subset of TR4 target genes exerts cell-type specific functions. Analysis
of the TR4 binding sites revealed that less than 30% of the peaks from any of the
cell types contained the DR1 motif previously derived from in vitro studies,
suggesting that TR4 may be recruited to the genome via interaction with other
proteins. A bioinformatics analysis of the TR4 binding sites predicted a cis
regulatory module involving TR4 and ETS transcription factors. To test this
prediction, we performed ChIP-seq for the ETS factor ELK4 and found that 30% of
TR4 binding sites were also bound by ELK4. Motif analysis of the sites bound by
both factors revealed a lack of the DR1 element, suggesting that TR4 binding at a
subset of sites is facilitated through the ETS transcription factor ELK4. Further
studies will be required to investigate the functional interdependence of these
two factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that TR4 plays a pivotal role in fundamental
biological processes across different cell types. In addition, the identification
of cell type specific TR4 binding sites enables future studies of the pathways
underlying TR4 action and its possible role in metabolic diseases.

PMCID: PMC3019231
PMID: 21126370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Eur J Cell Biol. 2011 Jan;90(1):13-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2010.09.009. Epub 2010
Nov 11.

Differing contributions of LIMK and ROCK to TGFß-induced transcription, motility 
and invasion.

Morin P(1), Wickman G, Munro J, Inman GJ, Olson MF.

Author information: 
(1)Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Garscube Estate, Switchback Road,
Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.

The ability of transforming growth factor ß (TGFß) to induce
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is mediated by SMAD-dependent and
SMAD-independent pathways such as the activation of Rho GTPase signalling. Upon
activation, GTP-bound Rho stimulates the ROCK kinases, which in turn
phosphorylate numerous substrates including the LIM kinases (LIMK). The net
result of ROCK activation is increased actin-myosin contractile force generation,
with a contribution from LIMK-induced actin filament stabilisation. In this
study, we made use of siRNA-mediated knockdown and selective inhibitors to
determine the contributions of ROCK and LIMK to TGFß-induced responses. We find
that both ROCK and LIMK are required for TGFß stimulation of serum-response
factor (SRF) transcriptional activity and actin stress fibre formation during
EMT. In contrast, although LIMK inhibition had little effect on cell motility in 
scratch wound and Transwell migration assays, ROCK inhibition actually promoted
TGFß-induced cell motility by helping individual cells to break free from the
epithelial sheet. Furthermore, we demonstrate that selective inhibition of LIMK, 
but not ROCK, effectively blocked TGFß driven invasion through a layer of
matrigel extracellular matrix protein. These results indicate that the roles of
LIMK and ROCK in the Rho signalling pathway downstream of TGFß are not identical 
and suggest that LIMK represents an attractive therapeutic target in TGFß driven 
organ fibrosis and metastatic cancer spread.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21074289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Med Invest. 2010 Aug;57(3-4):219-23.

Identification of important regulatory region of Th-POK.

Shamsul Alam M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Parasitology, Institute of Health Biosciences,
the University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.

CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells develop from CD4(+)CD8(+) thymocytes. Although it has
been reported that expression of the transcription factor Th-POK is important for
CD4(+) T cell development, the detailed mechanism regulating Th-POK expression is
still obscure. By comparing the promoter regions of the Th-POK gene between human
and mouse, I found that the region 3600 base pairs (bps) upstream from the
transcription initiation site of the Th-POK gene was highly conserved. To
identify the important element(s) regulating Th-POK expression in CD4(+) T cells,
I investigated the promoter activity of this region using a luciferase assay in
the human T cell line Jurkat. I identified a positive regulatory element in this 
region 22 bps in length located 600 bp upstream from the transcription initiation
site. This 22 bp element had a consensus binding sequence for SAP-1, which is
encoded by the Elk4 gene and is activated by the Erk pathway. These data suggest 
that the 22 bp element might positively regulate Th-POK expression through
Erk-SAP-1 signaling.

PMID: 20847520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mod Pathol. 2010 Nov;23(11):1492-8. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.149. Epub 2010
Aug 6.

ETS family-associated gene fusions in Japanese prostate cancer: analysis of 194
radical prostatectomy samples.

Miyagi Y(1), Sasaki T, Fujinami K, Sano J, Senga Y, Miura T, Kameda Y, Sakuma Y, 
Nakamura Y, Harada M, Tsuchiya E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology and Genetics Division, Kanagawa Cancer Center Research
Institute, Yokohama, Japan. miyagi@gancen.asahi.yokohama.jp

The incidence and clinical significance of the TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusion in
prostate cancer has been investigated with contradictory results. It is now
common knowledge that significant variability in gene alterations exists
according to ethnic background in various kinds of cancer. In this study, we
evaluated gene fusions involving the ETS gene family in Japanese prostate cancer.
Total RNA from 194 formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded prostate cancer samples
obtained by radical prostatectomy was subjected to reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction to detect the common TMPRSS2:ERG T1-E4 and T1-E5 fusion
transcripts and five other non-TMPRSS2:ERG fusion transcripts. We identified 54
TMPRSS2:ERG-positive cases (54/194, 28%) and two HNRPA2B1:ETV1-positive cases
(2/194, 1%). The SLC45A3-ELK4 transcript, a fusion transcript without structural 
gene rearrangement, was detectable in five cases (5/194, 3%). The frequencies of 
both TMPRSS2:ERG- and non-TMPRSS2:ERG-positive cases were lower than those
reported for European, North American or Brazilian patients. Internodular
heterogeneity of TMPRSS2:ERG was observed in 5 out of 11 multifocal cases (45%); 
a frequency similar to that found in European and North American cases. We found 
a positive correlation between the TMPRSS2:ERG fusion and a Gleason score of =7
and patient age, but found no relationship with pT stage or plasma
prostate-specific antigen concentration. To exclude the possibility that Japanese
prostate cancer displays novel TMPRSS2:ERG transcript variants or has unique 5'
fusion partners for the ETS genes, we performed 5' RACE using fresh-frozen
prostate cancer samples. We identified only the normal 5' cDNA ends for ERG, ETV1
and ETV5 in fusion-negative cases. Because we identified a relatively low
frequency of TMPRSS2:ERG and other fusions, further evaluation is required before
this promising molecular marker should be introduced into the management of
Japanese prostate cancer patients.

PMID: 20693979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Aug;1799(8):555-60. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2010.07.001.
Epub 2010 Jul 14.

SUMOylation can regulate the activity of ETS-like transcription factor 4.

Kaikkonen S(1), Makkonen H, Rytinki M, Palvimo JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine/Medical Biochemistry, University of Eastern Finland, 
Kuopio, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland.

ETS-like transcription factor 4 (ELK4) (a.k.a. serum response factor accessory
protein 1) belongs to the ternary complex factor (TCF) subfamily of E twenty-six 
(ETS) domain transcription factors. Compared to the other TCF subfamily members, 
ELK1 and ELK3 (NET), there is limited information of the mechanisms regulating
the ELK4 activity. Here, we show that the ELK4 can be covalently modified
(SUMOylated) by small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) 1 protein, an important
regulator of signaling and transcription. SUMOylation of ELK4 was reversed by
SUMO-specific proteases (SENP) 1 and 2 and stimulated by SUMO E3 ligase PIAS3.
Conserved lysine residue 167 that is located in the NET inhibitory domain of ELK4
was identified as the main site of SUMO-1 conjugation. Interestingly, mutation of
the K167 disrupting the SUMOylation markedly enhanced the transcriptional
activity of the ELK4, but weakened its repressive function on c-fos promoter. In 
conclusion, our results suggest that covalent modification by SUMO-1 can regulate
the activity of ELK4, contributing to the transcriptional repression by the ELK4.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20637912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Immunol. 2010 Jul 15;185(2):1082-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000472. Epub 2010
Jun 16.

Ternary complex factors SAP-1 and Elk-1, but not net, are functionally equivalent
in thymocyte development.

Costello P(1), Nicolas R, Willoughby J, Wasylyk B, Nordheim A, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research Institute,
Lincoln's Inn Fields Laboratories, London, United Kingdom.

The ternary complex factors (TCFs; SAP-1, Elk-1, and Net) are serum response
factor cofactors that share many functional properties and are coexpressed in
many tissues. SAP-1, the predominant thymus TCF, is required for thymocyte
positive selection. In this study, we assessed whether the different TCFs are
functionally equivalent. Elk-1 deletion, but not the hypomorphic Net(delta)
mutation, exacerbated the SAP-1 positive selection phenotype, but triply
deficient thymocytes were no more defective than SAP-1(-/-) Elk-1(-/-) cells.
Inactivation of the other TCFs did not affect SAP-1-independent processes,
including beta-selection, regulatory T cell selection, and negative selection,
although reduced marginal zone B cells were observed in SAP-1(-/-) Elk-1(-/-)
animals. Ectopic expression of Elk-1, but not Net, rescued positive selection of 
SAP-1(-/-) thymocytes; thus, SAP-1 and Elk-1 are functionally equivalent in this 
system, and the SAP-1 null selection phenotype reflects only its high expression 
in the thymus. Array analysis of TCR-stimulated double-positive cells identified 
SAP-1-dependent inducible genes whose transcription was further impaired in
SAP-1(-/-) Elk-1(-/-) cells; thus, these genes, which include Egr-1 and Egr-2,
represent candidate mediators of positive selection. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed subtly different promoter targeting between the
different TCFs. Ectopic expression of Egr-1 restored positive selection in SAP-1 
null thymocytes, establishing it (and possibly other Egr family members) as the
major effector for ERK-SAP-1 signaling in thymocyte positive selection.

PMID: 20554967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. RNA. 2010 Jun;16(6):1156-66. doi: 10.1261/rna.2019810. Epub 2010 Apr 20.

A variant of the KLK4 gene is expressed as a cis sense-antisense chimeric
transcript in prostate cancer cells.

Lai J(1), Lehman ML, Dinger ME, Hendy SC, Mercer TR, Seim I, Lawrence MG, Mattick
JS, Clements JA, Nelson CC.

Author information: 
(1)Australian Prostate Cancer Research Centre-Queensland, Queensland University
of Technology and Princess Alexandra Hospital, Woolloongabba, Queensland 4102,
Australia.

In humans, more than 30,000 chimeric transcripts originating from 23,686 genes
have been identified. The mechanisms and association of chimeric transcripts
arising from chromosomal rearrangements with cancer are well established, but
much remains unknown regarding the biogenesis and importance of other chimeric
transcripts that arise from nongenomic alterations. Recently, a SLC45A3-ELK4
chimera has been shown to be androgen-regulated, and is overexpressed in
metastatic or high-grade prostate tumors relative to local prostate cancers.
Here, we characterize the expression of a KLK4 cis sense-antisense chimeric
transcript, and show other examples in prostate cancer. Using non-protein-coding 
microarray analyses, we initially identified an androgen-regulated antisense
transcript within the 3' untranslated region of the KLK4 gene in LNCaP cells. The
KLK4 cis-NAT was validated by strand-specific linker-mediated RT-PCR and Northern
blotting. Characterization of the KLK4 cis-NAT by 5' and 3' rapid amplification
of cDNA ends (RACE) revealed that this transcript forms multiple fusions with the
KLK4 sense transcript. Lack of KLK4 antisense promoter activity using reporter
assays suggests that these transcripts are unlikely to arise from a
trans-splicing mechanism. 5' RACE and analyses of deep sequencing data from LNCaP
cells treated +/-androgens revealed six high-confidence sense-antisense chimeras 
of which three were supported by the cDNA databases. In this study, we have shown
complex gene expression at the KLK4 locus that might be a hallmark of cis
sense-antisense chimeric transcription.

PMCID: PMC2874168
PMID: 20406994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2010 Jun;44(2):165-77. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.03.005. Epub
2010 Mar 18.

The expression of ELK transcription factors in adult DRG: Novel isoforms,
antisense transcripts and upregulation by nerve damage.

Kerr N(1), Pintzas A, Holmes F, Hobson SA, Pope R, Wallace M, Wasylyk C, Wasylyk 
B, Wynick D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, School of Medical Sciences,
University of Bristol, Bristol BS81TD, UK.

ELK transcription factors are known to be expressed in a number of regions in the
nervous system. We show by RT-PCR that the previously described Elk1,
Elk3/Elk3b/Elk3c and Elk4 mRNAs are expressed in adult dorsal root ganglia (DRG),
together with the novel alternatively spliced isoforms Elk1b, Elk3d and
Elk4c/Elk4d/Elk4e. These isoforms are also expressed in brain, heart, kidney and 
testis. In contrast to Elk3 protein, the novel Elk3d isoform is cytoplasmic,
fails to bind ETS binding sites and yet can activate transcription by an indirect
mechanism. The Elk3 and Elk4 genes are overlapped by co-expressed Pctk2 (Cdk17)
and Mfsd4 genes, respectively, with the potential formation of Elk3/Pctaire2 and 
Elk4/Mfsd4 sense-antisense mRNA heteroduplexes. After peripheral nerve injury the
Elk3 mRNA isoforms are each upregulated approximately 2.3-fold in DRG (P<0.005), 
whereas the natural antisense Pctaire2 isoforms show only a small increase (21%, 
P<0.01) and Elk1 and Elk4 mRNAs are unchanged.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2862884
PMID: 20304071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 16;285(16):11765-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.067447. Epub
2010 Feb 9.

Characterization of the human insulin-induced gene 2 (INSIG2) promoter: the role 
of Ets-binding motifs.

Fernández-Alvarez A(1), Soledad Alvarez M, Cucarella C, Casado M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas), Valencia, Spain.

Insulin-induced gene 2 (INSIG2) and its homolog INSIG1 encode closely related
endoplasmic reticulum proteins that regulate the proteolytic activation of sterol
regulatory element-binding proteins, transcription factors that activate the
synthesis of cholesterol and fatty acids in animal cells. Several studies have
been carried out to identify INSIG2 genetic variants associated with metabolic
diseases. However, few data have been published regarding the regulation of
INSIG2 gene expression. Two Insig2 transcripts have been described in rodents
through the use of different promoters that produce different noncoding first
exons that splice into a common second exon. Herein we report the cloning and
characterization of the human INSIG2 promoter and the detection of an
INSIG2-specific transcript homologous to the Insig2b mouse variant in human
liver. Deletion analyses on 3 kb of 5'-flanking DNA of the human INSIG2 gene
revealed the functional importance of a 350-bp region upstream of the
transcription start site. Mutated analyses, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays,
and RNA interference analyses unveiled the significance of an Ets-consensus motif
in the proximal region and the interaction of the Ets family member SAP1a (serum 
response factor (SRF) accessory protein-1a) with this region of the human INSIG2 
promoter. Moreover, our findings suggest that insulin activated the human INSIG2 
promoter in a process mediated by phosphorylated SAP1a. Overall, these results
map the functional elements in the human INSIG2 promoter sequence and suggest an 
unexpected regulation of INSIG2 gene expression in human liver.

PMCID: PMC2852912
PMID: 20145255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Exp Mol Pathol. 2010 Feb;88(1):52-7. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2009.10.006. Epub 2009 
Oct 27.

Disruption of actin cytoskeleton mediates loss of tensile stress induced early
phenotypic modulation of vascular smooth muscle cells in organ culture.

Zheng JP(1), Ju D, Shen J, Yang M, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Aorta organ culture has been widely used as an ex vivo model for studying vessel 
pathophysiology. Recent studies show that the vascular smooth muscle cells
(VSMCs) in organ culture undergo drastic dedifferentiation within the first few
hours (termed early phenotypic modulation). Loss of tensile stress to which aorta
is subject in vivo is the cause of this early phenotypic modulation. However, no 
underlying molecular mechanism has been discovered thus far. The purpose of the
present study is to identify intracellular signals involved in the early
phenotypic modulation of VSMC in organ culture. We find that the drastic VSMC
dedifferentiation is accompanied by accelerated actin cytoskeleton dynamics and
downregulation of SRF and myocardin. Among the variety of signal pathways
examined, increasing actin polymerization by jasplakinolide is the only one
hindering VSMC dedifferentiation in organ culture. Moreover, jasplakinolide
reverses actin dynamics during organ culture. Latrunculin B (disrupting actin
cytoskeleton) and jasplakinolide respectively suppressed and enhanced the
expression of VSMC markers, SRF, myocardin, and CArG-box-mediated SMC promoters
in PAC1, a VSMC line. These results identify actin cytoskeleton degradation as a 
major intracellular signal for loss of tensile stress-induced early phenotypic
modulation of VSMC in organ culture. This study suggests that disrupting actin
cytoskeleton integrity may contribute to the pathogenesis of vascular diseases.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC2815224
PMID: 19874818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nature. 2009 Aug 6;460(7256):705-10. doi: 10.1038/nature08195. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

miR-145 and miR-143 regulate smooth muscle cell fate and plasticity.

Cordes KR(1), Sheehy NT, White MP, Berry EC, Morton SU, Muth AN, Lee TH, Miano
JM, Ivey KN, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, California
94158, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are regulators of myriad cellular events, but evidence for a
single miRNA that can efficiently differentiate multipotent stem cells into a
specific lineage or regulate direct reprogramming of cells into an alternative
cell fate has been elusive. Here we show that miR-145 and miR-143 are
co-transcribed in multipotent murine cardiac progenitors before becoming
localized to smooth muscle cells, including neural crest stem-cell-derived
vascular smooth muscle cells. miR-145 and miR-143 were direct transcriptional
targets of serum response factor, myocardin and Nkx2-5 (NK2 transcription factor 
related, locus 5) and were downregulated in injured or atherosclerotic vessels
containing proliferating, less differentiated smooth muscle cells. miR-145 was
necessary for myocardin-induced reprogramming of adult fibroblasts into smooth
muscle cells and sufficient to induce differentiation of multipotent neural crest
stem cells into vascular smooth muscle. Furthermore, miR-145 and miR-143
cooperatively targeted a network of transcription factors, including Klf4
(Kruppel-like factor 4), myocardin and Elk-1 (ELK1, member of ETS oncogene
family), to promote differentiation and repress proliferation of smooth muscle
cells. These findings demonstrate that miR-145 can direct the smooth muscle fate 
and that miR-145 and miR-143 function to regulate the quiescent versus
proliferative phenotype of smooth muscle cells.

PMCID: PMC2769203
PMID: 19578358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Br J Cancer. 2009 Jul 7;101(1):132-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605111. Epub 2009 Jun 
16.

Death-associated protein 3 is overexpressed in human thyroid oncocytic tumours.

Jacques C(1), Fontaine JF, Franc B, Mirebeau-Prunier D, Triau S, Savagner F,
Malthiery Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U694, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire d'Angers, Laboratoire de
Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Angers, France.
caroline.jacques@univ-angers.fr

BACKGROUND: The human death-associated protein 3 (hDAP3) is a GTP-binding
constituent of the small subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome with a
pro-apoptotic function.
METHODS: A search through publicly available microarray data sets showed 337
genes potentially coregulated with the DAP3 gene. The promoter sequences of these
337 genes and 70 out of 85 mitochondrial ribosome genes were analysed in silico
with the DAP3 gene promoter sequence. The mitochondrial role of DAP3 was also
investigated in the thyroid tumours presenting various mitochondrial contents.
RESULTS: The study revealed nine transcription factors presenting enriched motifs
for these gene promoters, five of which are implicated in cellular growth (ELK1, 
ELK4, RUNX1, HOX11-CTF1, TAL1-ternary complex factor 3) and four in mitochondrial
biogenesis (nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), GABPA, PPARG-RXRA and
estrogen-related receptor alpha (ESRRA)). An independent microarray data set
showed the overexpression of ELK1, RUNX1 and ESRRA in the thyroid oncocytic
tumours. Exploring the thyroid tumours, we found that DAP3 mRNA and protein
expression is upregulated in tumours presenting a mitochondrial biogenesis
compared with the normal tissue. ELK1 and ESRRA were also showed upregulated with
DAP3.
CONCLUSION: ELK1 and ESRRA may be considered as potential regulators of the DAP3 
gene expression. DAP3 may participate in mitochondrial maintenance and play a
role in the balance between mitochondrial homoeostasis and tumourigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2713694
PMID: 19536094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 1;69(7):2734-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4926. Epub
2009 Mar 17.

SLC45A3-ELK4 is a novel and frequent erythroblast transformation-specific fusion 
transcript in prostate cancer.

Rickman DS(1), Pflueger D, Moss B, VanDoren VE, Chen CX, de la Taille A, Kuefer
R, Tewari AK, Setlur SR, Demichelis F, Rubin MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Chromosomal rearrangements account for all erythroblast transformation-specific
(ETS) family member gene fusions that have been reported in prostate cancer and
have clinical, diagnostic, and prognostic implications. Androgen-regulated genes 
account for the majority of the 5' genomic regulatory promoter elements fused
with ETS genes. TMPRSS2-ERG, TMPRSS2-ETV1, and SLC45A3-ERG rearrangements account
for roughly 90% of ETS fusion prostate cancer. ELK4, another ETS family member,
is androgen regulated, involved in promoting cell growth, and highly expressed in
a subset of prostate cancer, yet the mechanism of ELK4 overexpression is unknown.
In this study, we identified a novel ETS family fusion transcript, SLC45A3-ELK4, 
and found it to be expressed in both benign prostate tissue and prostate cancer. 
We found high levels of SLC45A3-ELK4 mRNA restricted to a subset of prostate
cancer samples. SLC45A3-ELK4 transcript can be detected at high levels in urine
samples from men at risk for prostate cancer. Characterization of the fusion mRNA
revealed a major variant in which SLC45A3 exon 1 is fused to ELK4 exon 2. Based
on quantitative PCR analyses of DNA, unlike other ETS fusions described in
prostate cancer, the expression of SLC45A3-ELK4 mRNA is not exclusive to cases
harboring a chromosomal rearrangement. Treatment of LNCaP cancer cells with a
synthetic androgen (R1881) revealed that SLC45A3-ELK4, and not endogenous ELK4,
mRNA expression is androgen regulated. Altogether, our findings show that
SLC45A3-ELK4 mRNA expression is heterogeneous, highly induced in a subset of
prostate cancers, androgen regulated, and most commonly occurs through a
mechanism other than chromosomal rearrangement (e.g., trans-splicing).

PMCID: PMC4063441
PMID: 19293179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Nature. 2009 Mar 5;458(7234):97-101. doi: 10.1038/nature07638. Epub 2009 Jan 11.

Transcriptome sequencing to detect gene fusions in cancer.

Maher CA(1), Kumar-Sinha C, Cao X, Kalyana-Sundaram S, Han B, Jing X, Sam L,
Barrette T, Palanisamy N, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Ann Arbor, USA.

Recurrent gene fusions, typically associated with haematological malignancies and
rare bone and soft-tissue tumours, have recently been described in common solid
tumours. Here we use an integrative analysis of high-throughput long- and
short-read transcriptome sequencing of cancer cells to discover novel gene
fusions. As a proof of concept, we successfully used integrative transcriptome
sequencing to 're-discover' the BCR-ABL1 (ref. 10) gene fusion in a chronic
myelogenous leukaemia cell line and the TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion in a prostate
cancer cell line and tissues. Additionally, we nominated, and experimentally
validated, novel gene fusions resulting in chimaeric transcripts in cancer cell
lines and tumours. Taken together, this study establishes a robust pipeline for
the discovery of novel gene chimaeras using high-throughput sequencing, opening
up an important class of cancer-related mutations for comprehensive
characterization.

PMCID: PMC2725402
PMID: 19136943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Oncogene. 2008 Aug 21;27(36):4865-76. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.125. Epub 2008 May
12.

Identification of ETS-like transcription factor 4 as a novel androgen receptor
target in prostate cancer cells.

Makkonen H(1), Jääskeläinen T, Pitkänen-Arsiola T, Rytinki M, Waltering KK, Mättö
M, Visakorpi T, Palvimo JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine/Medical Biochemistry, University of Kuopio, Kuopio,
Finland.

Transcriptional control by androgens via androgen receptor (AR) is strongly
involved in prostate cancer development, but the critical target genes have
remained elusive. We have characterized E twenty-six-like transcription factor 4 
(ELK4) (also known as serum response factor accessory protein 1) as a novel AR
target in human prostate cancer cells. In-silico screening identified three
putative AR response elements (AREs) within -10 kb from the transcription start
site of ELK4. Both ARE1 at -167/-153 and ARE2 at -481/-467 bound AR in vitro and 
mediated androgen induction as isolated elements in transcription assays in
non-prostate cells. However, merely the ARE2 that cooperates with a proximal
forkhead box A1-binding site was critical for the AR-dependent activation of ELK4
promoter in prostate cancer cells. Preferential loading of holo-AR onto the ARE2 
and concomitant recruitment of RNA polymerase II onto the ELK4 promoter was
confirmed in prostate cancer cells by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Database
searches indicated that the expression of ELK4 is markedly increased in prostate 
cancers relative to normal prostates. Moreover, prostate cancer tissue
immunostainings showed that nuclear ELK4 levels are significantly increased in
androgen-refractory prostate cancers compared to untreated tumours. Reduction of 
the amount of ELK4 in LNCaP cells by RNAi retarded cell growth. In conclusion,
ELK4 is a direct AR target in prostate cancer cells. Androgens may thus
contribute to the growth of prostate cancer via influencing ELK4 levels.

PMID: 18469865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Immunol. 2007 Nov 15;179(10):6836-44.

Raf signaling but not the ERK effector SAP-1 is required for regulatory T cell
development.

Willoughby JE(1), Costello PS, Nicolas RH, Robinson NJ, Stamp G, Powrie F,
Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Cancer Research United Kingdom London Research
Institute, Lincoln's Inn Fields Laboratories, London, United Kingdom.

Regulatory T cells (T(reg)) play an important role in immune regulation. Their
development in the thymus requires TCR activation and recognition of peptide-MHC,
although the downstream signals controlling commitment to the lineage are
unclear. To compare the requirements for positive selection and T(reg)
development, we studied knockout and transgenic mice defective in Raf signaling
and the ERK effector SRF accessory protein 1 (SAP-1), a member of the ternary
complex factor family of Ets domain transcription factors. Although SAP-1
deficient mice display a severe defect in thymocyte positive selection, T(reg)
development was unimpaired as assessed by expression of Foxp3 and the activation 
markers CD25, GITR, CTLA4, and CD103 in the CD4(+) cell population. In contrast, 
inhibition of Raf signaling by the interfering dominant negative Raf derivative
reduced both Foxp3(+) and Foxp3(-) CD4(+) populations. In SAP-1-deficient
CD4(+)CD25(+) T(reg) cells, TCR crosslinking efficiently induced ERK activation, 
but transcriptional induction of the immediate early gene Egr-1 was impaired.
Nevertheless, neither deletion of SAP-1 nor expression of a dominant negative Raf
derivative affected the ability of CD4(+)CD25(+) T(reg) cells to suppress
CD4(+)CD25(-) cell proliferation in vitro. Finally the suppressive activity of
CD4(+)CD25(+) T(reg) cells lacking SAP-1 in an in vivo colitis model was not
significantly impaired. The signaling requirements for development of T(reg)
cells in the thymus are thus distinct from those required for "conventional" T
cell positive selection, and ERK signaling to SAP-1 is not required for the
suppressive activity of T(reg) cells.

PMCID: PMC2515877
PMID: 17982074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Jan 31;129(4):738-9.

Fly-casting in protein-DNA binding: frustration between protein folding and
electrostatics facilitates target recognition.

Levy Y(1), Onuchic JN, Wolynes PG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, University of California at San
Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.
koby.levy@weizmann.ac.il

PMID: 17243791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Tsitologiia. 2006;48(11):935-47.

[Dynamic of DNA-binding activity of transcription factors in A431 cells during
their spreading on immobilized ligands].

[Article in Russian]

Emel'ianov AN, Petukhova OA, Turoverova LV, Kropacheva IV, Pinaev GP.

Dynamics of actin cytoskeleton in A431 cells and specific NF-kappaB SRF and AP-1 
DNA-binding activities were studied during a 2 h spreading of these cells on
fibronectin, laminin-2/4 or an antibody to epidermal growth factor receptor. Cell
spreading was shown to be accompanied by sequential formation of actin
cytoskeleton structures, whose spatial organization depends on the type of
immobilized ligand. We have determined the time intervals, within which certain
forms of cytoskeleton do not change qualitatively and are specific for dominant
part of cell population. It has been shown that DNA-binding activities of the
above transcription factors studied oscillate during cell spreading. The cycles
of DNA-binding activity were found to be equel to 15-40 min. The character of
oscillations depends on both transcription factor and ligand type. The temporal
comparison of presses of actin cytoskeleton formation and DNA-binding activity of
NF-kappaB and SRF times suggest that actin cytoskeleton reorganization may be
presumably associated with activation of NF-KppaB and SRF.

PMID: 17233479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Genome Res. 2007 Feb;17(2):136-44. Epub 2007 Jan 2.

Serum response factor binding sites differ in three human cell types.

Cooper SJ(1), Trinklein ND, Nguyen L, Myers RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305-5120, USA.

The serum response factor (SRF) is essential for embryonic development and
maintenance of muscle cells and neurons. The mechanism by which this factor
controls these divergent pathways is unclear. Here we present a genome-wide view 
of occupancy of SRF at its binding sites with a focus on those that vary with
cell type. We used chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) in combination with human
promoter microarrays to identify 216 putative SRF binding sites in the human
genome. We performed independent quantitative PCR validation at over half of
these sites that resulted in 146 sites we assert to be true binding sites at over
90% confidence. Nearly half of the sites are bound by SRF in only one of the
three cell types we tested, providing strong evidence for the diverse roles for
SRF in different cell types. We also explore possible mechanisms controlling
differential binding of SRF in these cell types by assaying cofactor binding, DNA
methylation, histone methylation, and histone acetylation at a subset of sites
bound preferentially in smooth muscle cells. Although we did not see a strong
correlation between SRF binding and epigenetics modifications, at these sites, we
propose that SRF cofactors may play an important role in determining
cell-dependent SRF binding sites. ELK4 (previously known as SAP-1 [SRF-associated
protein-1]) is ubiquitously expressed. Therefore, we expected it to occupy sites 
where SRF binding is common in all cell types. Indeed, 90% of SRF sites also
bound by ELK4 were common to all three cell types. Together, our data provide a
more complete understanding of the regulatory network controlled by SRF.

PMCID: PMC1781345
PMID: 17200232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Differentiation. 2006 Feb;74(1):30-9.

Serum response factor, its cofactors, and epithelial-mesenchymal signaling in
urinary bladder smooth muscle formation.

Li J(1), Shiroyanagi Y, Lin G, Haqq C, Lin CS, Lue TF, Willingham E, Baskin LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology University of California 400 Parnassus Avenue, ACC-610
California 94143-0738 San Francisco, USA.

Little is known about the mechanism of bladder smooth muscle differentiation. We 
hypothesize that epithelial-mesenchymal signaling induces the expression of
smooth muscle proteins in bladder mesenchyme resulting in smooth muscle
differentiation. We confirmed that smooth muscle differentiation in the mouse
urinary bladder occurs first at gestational day 14 (E14) based upon
immunohistochemical localization of smooth muscle alpha-actin (SMAA). To
investigate murine bladder smooth muscle differentiation and
epithlelial-mesenchymal signaling in the developing bladder, we analyzed gene
expression profiles of intact embryonic murine bladders and separated epithelial 
and mesenchymal components at embryonic days E13, E14, E15, E16, and postnatal
day 1 (P1). Using cDNA microarray, we identified regulators of vascular smooth
muscle differentiation in bladder mesenchyme, including serum response factor
(SRF) and its cofactors, ELK1 and SRF accessory protein (SAP)1, as well as two
SRF-associated pathways, angiotension receptor II and transforming growth factor-
beta2. Immunohistochemistry showed diffuse expression of SRF in the bladder at
E12 with localization of expression to the peripheral mesenchyme at E13 and E14. 
Our results suggest that bladder smooth muscle differentiation may share a
similar gene expression program as occurs during vascular smooth muscle
differentiation. The unique structure of the urinary bladder makes it an ideal
model for studies of smooth muscle differentiation and epithelial-mesenchymal
signaling.

PMID: 16466398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Aug;125(2):230-8.

Stratifin-induced matrix metalloproteinase-1 in fibroblast is mediated by c-fos
and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase activation.

Lam E(1), Kilani RT, Li Y, Tredget EE, Ghahary A.

Author information: 
(1)Wound Healing Research Group, Department of Surgery, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, AB, Canada.

Previously, we have demonstrated that keratinocyte releasable stratifin, also
known as 14-3-3 sigma protein, stimulates matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1
expression in dermal fibroblasts. In this study, we showed that stratifin induced
fibroblast MMP-1 messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) and protein levels through p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). Our data indicated that treatment of
dermal fibroblasts with stratifin resulted in rapid and transient upregulation of
c-jun and c-fos mRNA levels. We also demonstrated that SB203580 (SB), a specific 
inhibitor of p38 MAPK activity, inhibited the activation of fibroblast MMP-1 mRNA
expression by stratifin. Subsequently, western blot analysis revealed
phosphorylation of p38 at 90 min after stratifin stimulation and this was
decreased to approximately 50% of the maximum value by 120 min. Stratifin was
demonstrated to increase MMP-1 protein levels starting at 4 h and reaching its
peak at 12-24 h. Furthermore, SB significantly blocked the stratifin induction of
MMP-1 protein levels (***p<0.005, n=3). Microarray analysis of stratifin-treated 
fibroblasts shows an increase in Elk4/Sap1 mRNA expression and this finding was
confirmed by northern blot analysis. Our results indicate that stratifin markedly
increase Elk4/Sap1 mRNA expression in a time-dependent fashion. In conclusion,
stratifin stimulates fibroblast MMP-1 levels through the activation of c-fos and 
MAPK pathway.

PMID: 16098031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Plant J. 2005 Jul;43(2):165-80.

ERECTA receptor-like kinase and heterotrimeric G protein from Arabidopsis are
required for resistance to the necrotrophic fungus Plectosphaerella cucumerina.

Llorente F(1), Alonso-Blanco C, Sánchez-Rodriguez C, Jorda L, Molina A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biotecnología-UPM, E.T.S. Ingenieros Agrónomos, Avda.
Complutense, E-28040 Madrid, Spain.

Arabidopsis resistance to the necrotrophic fungus Plectosphaerella cucumerina is 
complex and depends on the ethylene, jasmonic acid and salicylic acid signaling
pathways. A quantitative trait loci (QTL) analysis of resistance to this fungus
was performed using two populations of recombinant inbred lines. Three loci
QRP1-QRP3 (for Quantitative Resistance to Plectosphaerella) were identified and
mapped on chromosome 2 (QRP1 and QRP2) and 5 (QRP3). QRP1, the locus showing the 
strongest effect, was found to correspond to the ERECTA (ER) gene that encodes a 
receptor-like-kinase (RLK), which has been previously implicated in plant
development, and resistance to the bacterium Ralstonia solanacearum. The
leucine-rich repeat and the kinase domains of ERECTA were specifically required
for resistance to P. cucumerina, as er mutant alleles impaired in any of these
domains showed enhanced susceptibility to this fungus, but not to other virulent 
pathogens. The involvement of the ER-signaling pathway in resistance to P.
cucumerina was supported by the fact that three mutants defective in this
pathway, elk2, elk5 and elk4 (agb1-1), which encodes the beta-subunit of
Arabidopsis heterotrimeric G protein, were also impaired in their resistance to
this fungus. The putative function of the Arabidopsis heterotrimeric G protein in
resistance to P. cucumerina suggested by the enhanced susceptibility of agb1-1
was corroborated by the demonstration that a null allele (gpa1-4) of the G
protein alpha-subunit showed enhanced resistance to this pathogen. Deposition of 
beta-1,3-glucan callose at infection sites was specifically impaired in er-1 and 
agb1-1 mutants upon P. cucumerina inoculation. Taken together, these data suggest
a putative function of ERECTA and heterotrimeric G protein in P. cucumerina
perception.

PMID: 15998304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Mol Biol. 2005 Apr 22;348(1):75-83.

Modulating the DNA affinity of Elk-1 with computationally selected mutations.

Park S(1), Boder ET, Saven JG.

Author information: 
(1)Makineni Theoretical Laboratories, Department of Chemistry, University of
Pennsylvania, 231 South 34th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

In order to regulate gene expression, transcription factors must first bind their
target DNA sequences. The affinity of this binding is determined by both the
network of interactions at the interface and the entropy change associated with
the complex formation. To study the role of structural fluctuation in fine-tuning
DNA affinity, we performed molecular dynamics simulations of two highly
homologous proteins, Elk-1 and SAP-1, that exhibit different sequence
specificity. Simulation studies show that several residues in Elk have
significantly higher main-chain root-mean-square deviations than their
counterparts in SAP. In particular, a single residue, D69, may contribute to
Elk's lower DNA affinity for P(c-fos) by structurally destabilizing the carboxy
terminus of the recognition helix. While D69 does not contact DNA directly, the
increased mobility in the region may contribute to its weaker binding. We
measured the ability of single point mutants of Elk to bind P(c-fos) in a
reporter assay, in which D69 of wild-type Elk has been mutated to other residues 
with higher helix propensity in order to stabilize the local conformation. The
gains in transcriptional activity and the free energy of binding suggested from
these measurements correlate well with stability gains computed from helix
propensity and charge-macrodipole interactions. The study suggests that residues 
that are distal to the binding interface may indirectly modulate the binding
affinity by stabilizing the protein scaffold required for efficient DNA
interaction.

PMID: 15808854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 4;280(5):3286-94. Epub 2004 Nov 16.

Loss of net as repressor leads to constitutive increased c-fos transcription in
cervical cancer cells.

van Riggelen J(1), Buchwalter G, Soto U, De-Castro Arce J, zur Hausen H, Wasylyk 
B, Rösl F.

Author information: 
(1)Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Im Neuenheimer
Feld 242, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

We have investigated the expression of c-fos in cervical carcinoma cells and in
somatic cell hybrids derived therefrom. In malignant cells, c-fos was
constitutively expressed even after serum starvation. Dissection of the c-fos
promoter showed that expression was mainly controlled by the SRE motif, which was
active in malignant cells, but repressed in their non-malignant counterparts.
Constitutive SRE activity was not mediated by sustained mitogen-activated protein
kinase activity but because of inefficient expression of the ternary complex
factor Net, which was either very low or even barely discernible. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Net directly binds to the SRE
nucleoprotein complex in non-tumorigenic cells, but not in malignant segregants. 
Small interfering RNA targeted against Net resulted in enhanced c-fos
transcription, clearly illustrating its repressor function. Conversely, stable
ectopic expression of Net in malignant cells negatively regulated endogenous
c-fos, resulting in a disappearance of the c-Fos protein from the AP-1
transcription complex. These data indicate that loss of Net and constitutive
c-fos expression appear to be a key event in the transformation of cervical
cancer cells.

PMID: 15548518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Nat Immunol. 2004 Mar;5(3):289-98. Epub 2004 Feb 8.

Ternary complex factor SAP-1 is required for Erk-mediated thymocyte positive
selection.

Costello PS(1), Nicolas RH, Watanabe Y, Rosewell I, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute,
Lincoln's Inn Fields Laboratories, 44 Lincoln's Fields, London WC2A 3PX, UK.

Thymocyte selection and differentiation requires extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (Erk) signaling, but transcription factor substrates of Erk in thymocytes 
are unknown. We have characterized the function of SAP-1 (Elk4), an Erk-regulated
transcription factor, in thymocyte development. Early thymocyte development was
normal, but single-positive thymocyte and peripheral T cell numbers were reduced,
reflecting a T cell-autonomous defect. T cell receptor-induced activation of
SAP-1 target genes such as Egr1 was substantially impaired in double-positive
thymocytes, although Erk activation was normal. Analysis of T cell receptor
transgenes showed that positive selection was reduced by 80-90% in
SAP-1-deficient mice; heterozygous mice showed a moderate defect. Negative
selection was unimpaired. SAP-1 thus directly links Erk signaling to the
transcriptional events required for thymocyte positive selection.

PMID: 14770179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 19;279(12):11281-92. Epub 2003 Dec 8.

Changes in the expression of many Ets family transcription factors and of
potential target genes in normal mammary tissue and tumors.

Galang CK(1), Muller WJ, Foos G, Oshima RG, Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)Oncodevelopmental Biology Program, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Interfering with Ets transcription factor function reverses multiple aspects of
the transformed phenotype of mouse or human tumor cells. However, the unknown
number of individual Ets factors expressed in any cellular context and the
similar DNA binding specificities of Ets family members complicates the
identification of those that mediate transformation. By utilizing quantitative
PCR assays for 25 mouse Ets factors, we analyzed the expression of essentially
the entire Ets family in normal mammary tissue, mammary-related cell lines, and
mammary tumors. In normal mammary tissue, 24 Ets factors were expressed. Even
clonal derived cell lines expressed 14-20 Ets members. The most abundant Ets
factor mRNAs measured in normal mammary tissue were Elk4, Elf1, and Ets2.
Subtractive analysis of mammary tissue identified which Ets factors were
predominantly expressed in the myeloid/lymphoid or epithelial cell compartments. 
Comparison of Ets factor expression in normal mammary tissue and mammary tumors
identified significantly elevated expression of Pse/PDEF, Ese2/Elf5, Ese3/Ehf,
TEL/Etv6, and Elf2/NERF in mammary tumors and confirmed previously reported
alterations in expression of Ese1/Elf3 and the PEA3 subfamily. Expression of 13
Ets target genes, implicated in various aspects of tumor progression, was also
analyzed. Altered expression of particular Ets target genes was significantly
correlated with particular Ets factors (e.g. maspin and Ese2), suggesting
specific in vivo regulatory roles. Together, this comprehensive analysis revealed
unexpectedly diverse Ets family gene expression, characterized novel Ets factor
changes in mammary tumors, and implicated specific Ets factors in the regulation 
of multiple genes involved in mammary tumor progression.

PMID: 14662758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Oncogene. 2003 Aug 28;22(36):5554-61.

Akt negatively regulates translation of the ternary complex factor Elk-1.

Figueroa C(1), Vojtek AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-0606, USA.

Cross-talk between signaling pathways plays an important role in regulation of
cell growth, differentiation, survival, and death. Here, we show that Akt
regulates the Elk-1 transcription factor, independent of its negative regulation 
of Raf kinases. Using a constitutively active Mek1 to bypass the regulation of
Raf by Akt, we find that the Elk-1 and Sap1a proteins are dramatically decreased 
in the presence of activated Akt. Akt catalytic activity is required. Also,
Mek-dependent activation of a TCF (Elk-1/Sap-1a)-dependent c-fos reporter is
decreased by activated Akt. Neither the level of Elk-1 mRNA nor the stability of 
the Elk-1 protein is altered by activated Akt. Instead, the rate of incorporation
of labeled methionine into Elk-1 protein is decreased in the presence of Akt. In 
addition, the level of the Elk-1 protein but not GFP is significantly decreased
in the presence of activated Akt, when GFP is expressed from an IRES element in a
bicistronic message with Elk-1. We conclude that Akt negatively regulates
translation of the Elk-1 mRNA. A coding region determinant that maps within the
first 279 nts of the Elk-1 message is necessary and sufficient for Akt-mediated
regulation of Elk-1.

PMID: 12944902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Aug 15;31(16):4717-28.

Regulation of TCF ETS-domain transcription factors by helix-loop-helix motifs.

Stinson J(1), Inoue T, Yates P, Clancy A, Norton JD, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Stopford Building, University of Manchester,
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

DNA binding by the ternary complex factor (TCF) subfamily of ETS-domain
transcription factors is tightly regulated by intramolecular and intermolecular
interactions. The helix-loop-helix (HLH)-containing Id proteins are trans-acting 
negative regulators of DNA binding by the TCFs. In the TCF, SAP-2/Net/ERP,
intramolecular inhibition of DNA binding is promoted by the cis-acting NID region
that also contains an HLH-like motif. The NID also acts as a transcriptional
repression domain. Here, we have studied the role of HLH motifs in regulating DNA
binding and transcription by the TCF protein SAP-1 and how Cdk-mediated
phosphorylation affects the inhibitory activity of the Id proteins towards the
TCFs. We demonstrate that the NID region of SAP-1 is an autoinhibitory motif that
acts to inhibit DNA binding and also functions as a transcription repression
domain. This region can be functionally replaced by fusion of Id proteins to
SAP-1, whereby the Id moiety then acts to repress DNA binding in cis.
Phosphorylation of the Ids by cyclin-Cdk complexes results in reduction in
protein-protein interactions between the Ids and TCFs and relief of their
DNA-binding inhibitory activity. In revealing distinct mechanisms through which
HLH motifs modulate the activity of TCFs, our results therefore provide further
insight into the role of HLH motifs in regulating TCF function and how the
inhibitory properties of the trans-acting Id HLH proteins are themselves
regulated by phosphorylation.

PMCID: PMC169972
PMID: 12907712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 15;278(33):30642-51. Epub 2003 Jun 3.

Transcriptional regulation of the cytosolic chaperonin theta subunit gene, Cctq, 
by Ets domain transcription factors Elk-1, Sap-1a, and Net in the absence of
serum response factor.

Yamazaki Y(1), Kubota H, Nozaki M, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University, 53 Shogoin Kawaharacho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8397,
Japan.

The chaperonin-containing t-complex polypeptide 1 (CCT) is a molecular chaperone 
that facilitates protein folding in eukaryotic cytosol, and the expression of CCT
is highly dependent on cell growth. We show here that transcription of the gene
encoding the theta subunit of mouse CCT, Cctq, is regulated by the ternary
complex factors (TCFs), Elk-1, Sap-1a, and Net (Sap-2). Reporter gene assay using
HeLa cells indicated that the Cctq gene promoter contains a cis-acting element of
the CCGGAAGT sequence (CQE1) at -36 bp. The major CQE1-binding proteins in HeLa
cell nuclear extract was recognized by anti-Elk-1 or anti-Sap-1a antibodies in
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, and recombinant Elk-1, Sap-1a, or Net
specifically recognized CQE1. The CQE1-dependent transcriptional activity in HeLa
cells was virtually abolished by overexpression of the DNA binding domains of
TCFs. Overexpression of full-length TCFs with Ras indicated that exogenous TCFs
can regulate the CQE1-dependent transcription in a Ras-dependent manner. PD98059,
an inhibitor of MAPK, significantly repressed the CQE1-dependent transcription.
However, no serum response factor was detected by electrophoretic mobility shift 
assay using the CQE1 element. These results indicate that transcription of the
Cctq gene is regulated by TCFs under the control of the Ras/MAPK pathway,
probably independently of serum response factor.

PMID: 12788937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Immunol. 2003 Jan 1;170(1):315-24.

Induction of the early growth response gene 1 promoter by TCR agonists and
partial agonists: ligand potency is related to sustained phosphorylation of
extracellular signal-related kinase substrates.

Xi H(1), Kersh GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Responses to partial agonist TCR signals include positive selection of
thymocytes, survival of naive T cells, and homeostatic proliferation. As part of 
an effort to understand the molecular basis of these processes, we have
determined how agonist and partial agonist ligands act differently to induce a
change in gene expression. We have found that the early growth response gene 1
(Egr1) promoter is activated by agonist and partial agonist ligands, but the
partial agonist induces 10-fold lower promoter activity. Both agonist and partial
agonist ligands require all six serum response elements in the Egr1 promoter to
reach maximum induction. Although slightly fewer cells respond to the partial
agonist, all of the responding cells have reduced activity compared with the
cells responding to agonist. The factors binding to the serum response elements
of the Egr1 promoter form a ternary complex (TC) consisting of serum response
factor and either Elk-1 or serum response factor accessory protein-1a. Formation 
of a stable TC and inducible promoter activity are both dependent on
extracellular signal-related kinase activation. Examination of TC formation over 
time reveals that this complex is induced well by partial agonist ligands, but it
is not sustained, whereas agonist stimulation induces longer lived TCs.
Therefore, the data suggest that both agonist and partial agonist ligands can
induce formation of multiple TC on the Egr1 promoter, but the ability of the
agonist ligand to maintain these complexes for an extended time results in the
increased potency of the agonist.

PMID: 12496415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Mol Biol. 2001 Nov 30;314(3):495-506.

Crystal structure of a ternary SAP-1/SRF/c-fos SRE DNA complex.

Mo Y(1), Ho W, Johnston K, Marmorstein R.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

Combinatorial DNA binding by proteins for promoter-specific gene activation is a 
common mode of DNA regulation in eukaryotic organisms, and occurs at the promoter
of the c-fos proto-oncogene. The c-fos promoter contains a serum response element
(SRE) that mediates ternary complex formation with the Ets proteins SAP-1 or
Elk-1 and the MADS-box protein, serum response factor (SRF). Here, we report the 
crystal structure of a ternary SAP-1/SRF/c-fos SRE DNA complex containing the
minimal DNA-binding domains of each protein. The structure of the complex reveals
that the SAP-1 monomer and SRF dimer are bound on opposite faces of the DNA, and 
that the DNA recognition helix of SAP-1 makes direct contact with the DNA
recognition helix of one of the two SRF subunits. These interactions facilitate
an 82 degrees DNA bend around SRF and a modulation of protein-DNA contacts by
each protein when compared to each of the binary DNA complexes. A comparison with
a recently determined complex containing SRF, an idealized DNA site, and a SAP-1 
fragment containing a SRF-interacting B-box region, shows a similar overall
architecture but also shows important differences. Specifically, the comparison
suggests that the B-box region of the Ets protein does not significantly
influence DNA recognition by either of the proteins, and that the sequence of the
DNA target effects the way in which the two proteins cooperate for DNA
recognition. These studies have implications for how DNA-bound SRF may modulate
the DNA-binding properties of other Ets proteins such as Elk-1, and for how other
Ets proteins may modulate the DNA-binding properties of other DNA-bound accessory
factors to facilitate promoter-specific transcriptional responses.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11846562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):9896-903. Epub 2002 Jan 10.

Specificity determinants in MAPK signaling to transcription factors.

Barsyte-Lovejoy D(1), Galanis A, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT,
United Kingdom.

One critical component in determining the specificity, fidelity, and efficiency
of MAPK substrate phosphorylation is the presence of distinct docking domains in 
the substrate proteins. These docking domains are found in a range of substrates,
including the transcription factors myocyte enhancer factor-2A and SAP-1.
However, the sequences of these motifs differ, as does their targeting
preferences by MAPKs, with SAP-1 being targeted by both the ERK and p38 isoforms,
whereas myocyte enhancer factor-2A is targeted only by certain members of the p38
subfamily. Here, we have investigated the specificity determinants within these
motifs and generated a model for how specificity is generated. We demonstrate
that residues throughout the docking domains play important roles in the
recognition process. However, residues located at different positions are
important for discriminating between ERK and p38 MAPKs. Furthermore, the docking 
domains can be further subdivided into submotifs, which are differentially
required for phosphorylation by ERK or p38 MAPKs. We have used loss- and
gain-of-function mutagenesis to identify residues that discriminate between ERK
and p38 MAPKs, residues that act to promote suboptimal interactions, and regions 
that are differentially required depending on the kinase involved. A model is
proposed to explain how specificity is generated within these short docking
domains.

PMID: 11786537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Plant Cell. 2001 Dec;13(12):2631-41.

A mutant Arabidopsis heterotrimeric G-protein beta subunit affects leaf, flower, 
and fruit development.

Lease KA(1), Wen J, Li J, Doke JT, Liscum E, Walker JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia,
Missouri 65211, USA.

A genetic screen was performed to find new mutants with an erecta (er) phenotype 
and to identify genes that may function with ER, a receptor-like kinase. These
mutants were named elk (for erecta-like) and were placed into five
complementation groups. We positionally cloned ELK4 and determined that it
encodes AGB1, a putative heterotrimeric G-protein beta subunit. Therefore, elk4
was renamed agb1. agb1-1 plants express similar fruit phenotypes, as seen in er
plants, but differ from er in that the stem is only slightly shorter than that in
the wild type, the pedicel is slightly longer than that in the wild type, and the
leaves are rounder than those in er mutants. Molecular analysis of agb1-1
indicates that it is likely a null allele. AGB1 mRNA is expressed in all tissues 
tested but is highest in the silique. Analysis of agb1-1 er double mutants
suggests that AGB1 may function in an ER developmental pathway regulating silique
width but that it functions in parallel pathways affecting silique length as well
as leaf and stem development. The finding that AGB1 is involved in the control of
organ shape suggests that heterotrimeric G-protein signaling is a developmental
regulator in Arabidopsis.

PMCID: PMC139478
PMID: 11752377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biomol Screen. 2001 Feb;6(1):19-27.

Development of a homogeneous MAP kinase reporter gene screen for the
identification of agonists and antagonists at the CXCR1 chemokine receptor.

Rees S(1), Martin DP, Scott SV, Brown SH, Fraser N, O'Shaughnessy C, Beresford
IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Discovery Research Unit, Glaxo Wellcome Medicines Research Centre,
Hertfordshire, UK. esr1353@glaxowellcome.co.uk

Agonist activity at G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) that regulate
heterotrimeric G proteins of the Galpha(i/o) or Galpha(q) families has been shown
to result in activation of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascade. To
facilitate compound screening for these classes of GPCR, we have developed a
reporter gene that detects the activation of the ternary complex transcription
factor Sap1a following MAP kinase activation. In contrast to other reporter gene 
assays for Galpha(i/o)-coupled GPCRs, the MAP kinase reporter generates an
increase in signal in the presence of agonist. The reporter gene has been
transfected into Chinese hamster ovary cells to generate a "host" reporter
gene-containing cell line. The Galpha(i)-coupled human CXCR1 chemokine receptor
was subsequently transfected into this cell line in order to develop a 384-well
format screen for both agonists and antagonists of this receptor. Agonists
activated the reporter gene with the expected rank order of potency and with
similar concentration dependence as seen with the regulation of other signal
transduction cascades in mammalian cells: interleukin-8 (IL-8) (pEC(50) = 7.0 +/-
0.1) > GCP-2 (pEC(50) = 6.3 +/- 0.1) > NAP-2 (pEC(50) < 6). CXCR1-mediated
activation of MAP kinase was inhibited by pertussis toxin and the MEK inhibitor
PD98059, demonstrating that receptor activation of MAP kinase is due to pertussis
toxin-sensitive Galpha(i/o)-family G proteins to cause the activation of MEK
kinase. Using the 384-well format, assay performance was unaffected by solvent
concentrations of 0.5% ethanol, 0.15% glycerol, or 1% DMSO. Signal crosstalk
between adjacent wells was less than 1%. The assay exhibited a Z factor of 0.53
and a coefficient of variation of response to repeated application of IL-8 (100
nM) of 15.9%.

PMID: 11679162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 12;276(2):965-73.

Selective targeting of MAPKs to the ETS domain transcription factor SAP-1.

Galanis A(1), Yang SH, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT
and the School of Biochemistry and Genetics, Medical School, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom.

MAPK pathways play important roles in regulating the key cellular processes of
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. There are multiple MAPK pathways, 
which are subject to different regulatory cues. It is important that these
pathways maintain specificity in signaling to elicit the activation of a specific
program of gene expression. MAPK-docking domains in several transcription factors
have been shown to play important roles in determining the specificity and
efficiency of their phosphorylation by MAPKs. Here we investigate the mechanisms 
by which MAPKs are targeted to the ETS domain transcription factor SAP-1. We
demonstrate that SAP-1 contains two different domains that are required for its
efficient phosphorylation in vitro and activation in vivo by ERK2 and a subset of
p38 MAPKs. The D-domain is closely related to other MAPK-docking domains, but
exhibits a novel specificity and serves to promote selective targeting of ERK2,
p38alpha, and p38beta(2) to SAP-1. A second important region, the FXF motif, also
plays an important role in directing MAPKs to phosphorylate SAP-1. The FXF motif 
promotes targeting by ERK2 and, to a lesser extent, p38alpha, but not p38beta(2).
Our data therefore demonstrate that a modular system of motifs is responsible for
directing specific MAPK subtypes to SAP-1, but also point to important
distinctions in the mechanism of action of the D-domain and FXF motif.

PMID: 11029469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Nat Struct Biol. 2000 Apr;7(4):292-7.

Structure of the elk-1-DNA complex reveals how DNA-distal residues affect ETS
domain recognition of DNA.

Mo Y(1), Vaessen B, Johnston K, Marmorstein R.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

SAP-1 and Elk-1 are members of a large group of eukaryotic transcription factors 
that contain a conserved ETS DNA binding domain and that cooperate with the serum
response factor (SRF) to activate transcription of the c-fos protooncogene.
Despite the high degree of sequence similarity, which includes an identical amino
acid sequence for the DNA recognition helix within the ETS domain of these
proteins, they exhibit different DNA binding properties. Here we report the 2.1 ¿
crystal structure of the ETS domain of Elk-1 bound to a high affinity E74 DNA
(E74DNA) site and compare it to a SAP-1-E74DNA complex. This comparison reveals
that the differential DNA binding properties of these proteins are mediated by
non-conserved residues distal to the DNA binding surface that function to orient 
conserved residues in the DNA recognition helix for protein-specific DNA
contacts. As a result, nearly one-third of the interactions between the protein
recognition helix and the DNA are different between the SAP-1 and Elk-1 DNA
complexes. Taken together, these studies reveal a novel mechanism for the
modulation of DNA binding specificity within a conserved DNA binding domain, and 
have implications for how highly homologous ETS proteins exhibit differential
DNA-binding properties.

PMID: 10742173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Circ Res. 2000 Feb 4;86(2):221-32.

Smooth muscle alpha-actin CArG elements coordinate formation of a smooth muscle
cell-selective, serum response factor-containing activation complex.

Mack CP(1), Thompson MM, Lawrenz-Smith S, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia Medical School, Charlottesville, USA.

Previous studies have shown that multiple serum response factor (SRF)-binding
CArG elements were required for smooth muscle cell (SMC)-specific regulation of
smooth muscle (SM) alpha-actin expression. However, a critical question remains
as to the mechanisms whereby a ubiquitously expressed transcription factor such
as SRF might contribute to SMC-specific expression. The goal of the present study
was to investigate the hypothesis that SMC-selective expression of SM alpha-actin
is due at least in part to (1) unique CArG flanking sequences that distinguish
the SM alpha-actin CArGs from other ubiquitously expressed CArG-dependent genes
such as c-fos, (2) cooperative interactions between CArG elements, and (3)
SRF-dependent binding of SMC-selective proteins to the CArG-containing regions of
the promoter. Results demonstrated that specific sequences flanking CArG B were
important for promoter activity in SMCs but not in bovine aortic endothelial
cells. We also provided evidence indicating that the structural orientation
between CArGs A and B was an important determinant of promoter function.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and methylation interference footprinting
demonstrated that a unique SRF-containing complex formed that was selective for
SMCs and, furthermore, that this complex was probably stabilized by
protein-protein interactions and not by specific interactions with CArG flanking 
sequences. Taken together, the results of these studies provide evidence that SM 
alpha-actin expression in SMCs is complex and may involve the formation of a
unique multiprotein initiation complex that is coordinated by SRF complexes bound
to multiple CArG elements.

PMID: 10666419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 21;275(3):1757-62.

Dimer formation by ternary complex factor ELK-1.

Drewett V(1), Muller S, Goodall J, Shaw PE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences and Institute of Cell Signalling, University of 
Nottingham Medical School, Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham NG7 2UH, United
Kingdom.

Ternary complex factors (TCFs), a subgroup of the ets protein family, bind with a
dimer of serum response factor to the c-fos serum response element. Both DNA
binding and transcriptional activation by TCFs are regulated by mitogen-activated
protein kinases. When activated, mitogen-activated protein kinases form
homodimers that translocate to the nucleus, where they interact with TCFs via
specific docking sites. Here we show by three different criteria that Elk-1 is
capable of forming dimers in eukaryotic cells through two distinct interaction
domains. These observations are consistent with a dynamic model of TCF-promoter
interactions.

PMID: 10636872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Apr;13(4):619-31.

Ternary complex factors Elk-1 and Sap-1a mediate growth hormone-induced
transcription of egr-1 (early growth response factor-1) in 3T3-F442A
preadipocytes.

Clarkson RW(1), Shang CA, Levitt LK, Howard T, Waters MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University Queensland, St. Lucia,
Australia.

In our search for transcription factors induced by GH, we have analyzed immediate
early gene activation in a model of GH-dependent differentiation. Here we
describe the activation of early growth response factor-1 (egr-1) in
GH-stimulated 3T3-F442A preadipocytes and the transcription factors responsible
for its transactivation. Binding activity of egr-1 in electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) increased transiently 1 h after GH stimulation, accompanied by
a concomitant increase in egr-1 mRNA. egr-1 induction appeared not to be related 
to proliferation since it was amplified in quiescent preadipocytes at a time when
cells were refractive to GH-stimulated DNA synthesis. Truncations of the proximal
1 kb of the egr-1 promoter revealed that a 374-bp region (-624 to -250)
contributes about 80% of GH inducibility in 3T3-F442A cells and approximately 90%
inducibility in CHO-K1 cells. This region contains three juxtaposed SRE (serum
response element)/Ets site pairs known to be important for egr-1 activity in
response to exogenous stimuli. Site-specific mutations of individual SRE and Ets 
sites within this region each reduced GH inducibility of the promoter. Use of
these site-specific mutations in EMSA showed that disruption of either Ets or SRE
sites abrogated ternary complex formation at the composite sites. DNA binding of 
ternary complexes, but not binary complexes, in EMSA was rapidly and transiently 
increased by GH. EMSA supershifts indicated these ternary complexes contained
serum response factor (SRF) and the Ets factors Elk-1 and Sap-1a. Coexpression of
Sap-1a and Elk-1 resulted in a marked increase in GH induction of egr-1 promoter 
activity, although transfection with expression vectors for either Ets factor
alone did not significantly enhance the GH response. We conclude that GH
stimulates transcription of egr-1 primarily through activation of these Ets
factors at multiple sites on the promoter and that stabilization of ternary
complexes with SRF at these sites maximizes this response.

PMID: 10194767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. EMBO J. 1999 Feb 15;18(4):968-76.

Id helix-loop-helix proteins inhibit nucleoprotein complex formation by the TCF
ETS-domain transcription factors.

Yates PR(1), Atherton GT, Deed RW, Norton JD, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, The Medical School, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH.

The Id subfamily of helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins plays a fundamental role in
the regulation of cellular proliferation and differentiation. Id proteins are
thought to inhibit differentiation mainly through interaction with other HLH
proteins and by blocking their DNA-binding activity. Members of the ternary
complex factor (TCF) subfamily of ETS-domain proteins have key functions in
regulating immediate-early gene expression in response to mitogenic stimulation. 
TCFs form DNA-bound complexes with the serum response factor (SRF) and are direct
targets of MAP kinase (MAPK) signal transduction cascades. In this study we
demonstrate functional interactions between Id proteins and TCFs. Ids bind to the
ETS DNA-binding domain and disrupt the formation of DNA-bound complexes between
TCFs and SRF on the c-fos serum response element (SRE). Inhibition occurs by
disrupting protein-DNA interactions with the TCF component of this complex. In
vivo, the Id proteins cause down-regulation of the transcriptional activity
mediated by the TCFs and thereby block MAPK signalling to SREs. Therefore, our
results demonstrate a novel facet of Id function in the coordination of mitogenic
signalling and cell cycle entry.

PMCID: PMC1171189
PMID: 10022839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 15;274(3):1736-44.

Characterization of the human elk-1 promoter. Potential role of a downstream
intronic sequence for elk-1 gene expression in monocytes.

Lehmann U(1), Brocke P, Dittmer J, Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 30623
Hannover, Germany.

To characterize the human elk-1 promoter, we mapped the transcriptional start
site and isolated elk-1-specific genomic phage clones that contained extensive
upstream and downstream sequences. A TATA-like motif was identified immediately
upstream of the transcriptional start site. Functional analyses of DNA fragments 
containing the TATA element and the identification of a DNase I-hypersensitive
chromatin site (HS 1) in close proximity to the TATA box suggest that the
identified TATA motif is important for elk-1 transcription in vivo. Sequences
upstream and downstream from the TATA box were found to contribute to elk-1
promoter activity. A second hypersensitive site (HS 2) was identified within the 
first intron in pre-monocytic cells, which express Elk-1 only when
differentiating to monocytes. In a variety of other cell types, which display a
constitutive Elk-1 expression, HS 2 did not exist, suggesting that inducibility
of elk-1 expression is associated with the presence of HS 2. Egr-1 and the serum 
response factor were found to interact specifically with the intronic sequence at
+265 and +448, respectively. Because Egr-1 mRNA and protein levels were observed 
to increase significantly before induction of elk-1 expression, we propose that
Egr-1 is important for the regulation of elk-1 transcription in differentiating
monocytes.

PMID: 9880555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Biochem J. 1998 Oct 15;335 ( Pt 2):267-75.

Cloning and characterization of GETS-1, a goldfish Ets family member that
functions as a transcriptional repressor in muscle.

Goldman D(1), Sapru MK, Stewart S, Plotkin J, Libermann TA, Wasylyk B, Guan K.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health Research Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109,
USA.

An Ets transcription factor family member, GETS-1, was cloned from a goldfish
retina cDNA library. GETS-1 contains a conserved Ets DNA-binding domain at its
N-terminus and is most similar to ternary complex factor (TCF)
serum-response-factor protein-1a (SAP-1a). GETS-1 is expressed in many tissues,
but is enriched in retina and brain. As with the TCFs SAP-1a and ets-related
protein (ERP), overexpression of the GETS-1 promoter suppresses nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor epsilon-subunit gene expression in cultured muscle cells. 
A consensus Ets binding site sequence in the promoter of the epsilon-subunit gene
is required for GETS-1-mediated repression. GETS-1 repressor activity is
abrogated by overexpression of an activated Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAP kinase) or by mutation of Ser-405, a MAP kinase phosphorylation site in
GETS-1. Fusion proteins created between GETS-1 and the Gal4 DNA-binding domain
show that, like other TCFs, GETS-1 contains a C-terminal activation domain that
is activated by a Ras/MAP kinase signalling cascade. Interestingly, mutation of
Ser-405 located within this activation domain abrogated transcriptional
activation of the fusion protein.

PMCID: PMC1219778
PMID: 9761723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Neuroreport. 1998 Aug 24;9(12):2703-8.

Nociception activates Elk-1 and Sap1a following expression of the ORL1 receptor
in Chinese hamster ovary cells.

Bevan N(1), Scott S, Shaw PE, Lee MG, Marshall FH, Rees S.

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Systems Unit, Glaxo Wellcome Research and Development, Hertfordshire,
UK.

Nociceptin stimulation of the ORL1 receptor expressed in Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO) cells results in the activation of the extracellular signal regulated
kinases ERK1 and ERK2. ERK1/ERK2 activation is inhibited by pertussis toxin, the 
MEK inhibitor PD 98059 and by transient expression of alpha-transducin,
indicating that ORL1 up-regulation of these kinases occurs as a consequence of
the release of the G-protein betagamma complex following the activation of
pertussis-toxin sensitive Galphai-family G-proteins. Using specific reporter
genes we demonstrate that the transcription factors Elk-1 and Sapla are activated
in a pertussis toxin-sensitive manner as a consequence of ORL1 upregulation of
ERK1/ERK2 to induce changes in gene expression. The activation of these
transcription factors is also inhibited following treatment with PD 98059 and
following coexpression of alpha-transducin.

PMID: 9760105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Mol Cell. 1998 Aug;2(2):201-12.

Structures of SAP-1 bound to DNA targets from the E74 and c-fos promoters:
insights into DNA sequence discrimination by Ets proteins.

Mo Y(1), Vaessen B, Johnston K, Marmorstein R.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Department of Chemistry, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia 19104, USA.

SAP-1 is a member of the Ets transcription factors and cooperates with SRF
protein to activate transcription of the c-fos protooncogene. The crystal
structures of the conserved ETS domain of SAP-1 bound to DNA sequences from the
E74 and c-fos promoters reveal that a set of conserved residues contact a GGA
core DNA sequence. Discrimination for sequences outside this core is mediated by 
DNA contacts from conserved and nonconserved protein residues and
sequence-dependent DNA structural properties characteristic of A-form DNA
structure. Comparison with the related PU.1/DNA and GABPalpha/beta/DNA complexes 
provides general insights into DNA discrimination between Ets proteins. Modeling 
studies of a SAP-1/SRF/DNA complex suggest that SRF may modulate SAP-1 binding to
DNA by interacting with its ETS domain.

PMID: 9734357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1998 Mar;30(3):551-62.

Transforming growth factor-beta1 and protein kinase C synergistically activate
the c-fos serum response element in myocardial cells.

Ueyama T(1), Kawashima S, Sakoda T, Hirata KI, Ohashi Y, Yamochi W, Akita H,
Yokoyama M.

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Internal Medicine, Kobe University School of Medicine,
7-5-1, Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, 650-0017, Japan.

We previously reported that transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1)
potentiated alpha1-adrenergic and stretch-induced c-fos mRNA expression and
norepinephrine (NE)-induced amino acid incorporation in rat cultured myocardial
cells (MCs). In the present study, we attempted to explore the mode of TGF-beta1 
action for c-fos gene expression in MCs. In the transient transfection assay,
TGF-beta1 potentiated NE- or 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-activated
c-fos promoter/enhancer, but not forskolin-activated c-fos promoter/enhancer. The
c-fos serum response element (SRE) and the TPA response element (TRE) were
responsible for TGF-beta1-induced potentiation of the NE or TPA action. Although 
TGF-beta1 activated not only the wild-type c-fos SRE, but also the mutated c-fos 
SRE, which contains an intact binding site for the serum response factor (SRF)
but lacks the ternary complex factor (TCF) binding site, TPA activated the
wild-type c-fos SRE but not the mutated c-fos SRE. TGF-beta1 did not potentiate
the effects of TPA on the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
and the phosphorylation of Elk-1 and SAP-1a, which belong to TCF at the c-fos
SRE. These results indicate that TGF-betaf potentiates the c-fos SRE activated by
PKC through the SRF binding site. TGF-beta1 is involved in the regulation of
c-fos gene expression through the c-fos SRE and is subsequently involved in the
regulation of the gene which has the TRE in the promoter/enhancer region.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press Limited

PMID: 9515031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. EMBO J. 1998 Mar 16;17(6):1717-27.

The kinase suppressor of Ras (KSR) modulates growth factor and Ras signaling by
uncoupling Elk-1 phosphorylation from MAP kinase activation.

Sugimoto T(1), Stewart S, Han M, Guan KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-0606, USA.

The Ras GTPase plays an essential role in many cellular signal transduction
events. Activation of the mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinase is a primary
consequence of Ras activation and plays a key role in mediating Ras signal
transduction. A novel kinase, KSR, has recently been functionally isolated as a
positive regulator of Ras signaling in Caenorhabditis elegans vulval induction
and Drosophila photoreceptor differentiation. We have examined the effect of KSR 
on growth factor and Ras-induced MAP kinase signaling in mammalian cells.
Surprisingly, we observed that KSR specifically blocks EGF and Ras-induced
phosphorylation and activation of ternary complex factors (TCF), physiological
substrates of MAP kinases, without affecting the activation of MAP kinase itself.
A kinase-deficient mutant of KSR, KSR-RM, appears to function as a dominant
interfering mutant which elevates phosphorylation of Elk-1, a member of the TCF
family, and Elk-1-dependent transcription. The effect of KSR on Elk-1 was
significantly decreased by inhibition of calcineurin, a putative Elk-1
phosphatase. These observations demonstrate that KSR is capable of uncoupling the
MAP kinase activation from its target phosphorylation, and thus provide a novel
mechanism for modulating the Ras-MAP kinase signaling pathway. This study
provides the first evidence that signal output of MAP kinase cascades is subject 
to regulation at a level independent of MAP kinase activity.

PMCID: PMC1170519
PMID: 9501093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Oncogene. 1997 Oct 2;15(14):1661-9.

Activation of the c-fos SRE through SAP-1a.

Masutani H(1), Magnaghi-Jaulin L, Ait-Si-Ali S, Groisman R, Robin P, Harel-Bellan
A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie des Tumeurs Humaines, CNRS URA 1156, Institut Gustave 
Roussy, Villejuif, France.

Erratum in
    Oncogene 1999 Sep 16;18(37):5246. Ait Si Ali S [corrected to Ait-Si-Ali S].

TCFs, which are members of the Ets family of transcription factors, are recruited
to the Serum Response Element (SRE) in the c-fos promoter by SRF. These Ets
proteins, which are substrates for the MAP kinases, are direct targets of the
Ras/MAP kinase signal transduction pathway. In this paper, we demonstrate that
one of the TCFs, SAP-1a, displays a significant level of autonomous binding to
the SRE Ets box. In contrast to previous observations, deletion of the SRF
binding domain did not modulate the autonomous binding of SAP-1a. Also, the
autonomous binding was not modulated by the phosphorylation of SAP-1a by MAP
kinases. The autonomous binding was also detected in live cells: transfected
SAP-1a was able to restore the response of a CArG-less SRE in PC12 cells. The
response occurred in the absence of SRF recruitment since a mutant of SAP-1a in
which the B-box, a domain required for interaction with SRF, had been deleted was
still able to transactivate the CArG-less SRE. The transactivation was repressed 
by a Ras transdominant negative mutant, indicating the involvement of the Ras/MAP
kinase pathway. Taken together, these data demonstrate that SAP-1a is capable of 
binding to the c-fos SRE in the absence of SRF.

PMID: 9349499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biochem Soc Trans. 1997 May;25(2):153S.

The regulation of TCF transcription factors by MAP kinase cascades.

Yang S(1), Yates PR, Whitmarsh AJ, Davis RJ, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Medical School, University of
Newcastle, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.

PMID: 9191197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. EMBO J. 1997 Apr 1;16(7):1620-7.

Convergence of MAP kinase pathways on the ternary complex factor Sap-1a.

Janknecht R(1), Hunter T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Virology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

The serum response element (SRE), which is pivotal for transcriptional
up-regulation of the c-fos protooncogene, is constitutively occupied by a protein
complex comprising the serum response factor and a ternary complex factor (TCF). 
Phosphorylation of the TCFs Elk-1 and Sap-1a by the ERK and JNK subclasses of MAP
kinases triggers c-fos transcription. We demonstrate here that Elk-1 is barely
activated by a third subclass of MAP kinases (p38), most likely because the
critical residues Ser383 and Ser389 are poorly phosphorylated by p38 MAP kinase. 
In contrast, the TCF Sap-1a is efficiently phosphorylated by p38 MAP kinase in
vitro and in vivo on the homologous residues Ser381 and Ser387. Mutation of these
sites to alanine severely reduces c-fos SRE-dependent transcription mediated by
Sap-1a and p38 MAP kinase. Thus, Sap-1a may be an important target for mitogens, 
stress and apoptotic signals to elicit a nuclear response. However, signaling
from p38 MAP kinase to Sap-1a or from Sap-1a to the basal transcription machinery
does not occur in all cell types nor at promoters other than the c-fos SRE, which
may ensure the specificity of signaling.

PMCID: PMC1169766
PMID: 9130707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Biol Chem. 1997 Feb 14;272(7):4219-24.

Activation of the Sap-1a transcription factor by the c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK) mitogen-activated protein kinase.

Janknecht R(1), Hunter T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Virology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Ternary complex factors (TCFs) bind to the serum response element in the c-fos
promoter and mediate its activation by many extracellular stimuli. Some of these 
stimuli activate the ERK subclass of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs)
that target the TCF Sap-1a. We show that Sap-1a is also phosphorylated by the
stress-activated JNK subclass of MAPKs leading to stimulation of both c-fos serum
response element and E74-site-dependent transcription in RK13 cells. Several
JNK-1 phosphorylation sites were mapped within Sap-1a, and mutation of these
sites affected the transactivation mediated by Sap-1a and JNK-1. The impact of
these phosphorylation sites varied at different promoters and was dependent on
whether Sap-1a was stimulated by ERK-1 or JNK-1. Additionally, a comparison of
Sap-1a with another TCF, Elk-1, revealed that these proteins behaved differently 
to stimulation by ERK-1 and JNK-1. Furthermore, activation of Sap-1a by JNK-1 was
inhibited by the p38(MAPK) in RK13 cells, possibly by competition for a common
upstream activator. Altogether, our data suggest that Sap-1a plays an important
role in the nuclear response elicited by cellular stress.

PMID: 9020136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Oncogene. 1997 Jan 16;14(2):213-21.

FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 function as ternary complex factors and ELK1 and SAP1a function
as ternary and quaternary complex factors on the Egr1 promoter serum response
elements.

Watson DK(1), Robinson L, Hodge DR, Kola I, Papas TS, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston 29425, USA.

The ETS gene products are a family of transcriptional regulatory proteins that
contain a highly conserved and structurally unique DNA binding domain, termed the
ETS domain. Several ETS proteins bind to DNA as monomers, however it has been
shown that the DNA binding activity is enhanced or modulated in the presence of
other factors. By differential display and whole genome PCR techniques, we have
recently shown that the Erg1 gene is a target for ETS proteins. The Egr1 promoter
contains multiple ETS binding sites, three of which exist as parts of two serum
response elements (SREI and SREII). The SRE is a cis-element that regulates the
expression of many growth factor responsive genes. ELK1 and SAP1a have been shown
to form ternary complexes with SRF on the SRE located in the c-fos promoter.
Similarly, we examined whether the ELK1, SAP1a, FLI1, EWS-FLI1, ETS1, ETS2, PEA3 
and PU.1 proteins can form ternary complexes with SRF on the Egr1 SREI and II.
Our results demonstrate that indeed ELK1, SAPla, FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 are able to
form ternary complexes with SRF on Egr1 SREs. In addition, ELK1 and SAP1a can
also form quarternary complexes on the Egr1 SREI. However, the proteins ETS1,
ETS2, PEA3 and PU.1 were unable to form ternary complexes with SRF on either the 
Egr1 or c-fos SREs. Our data demonstrate that FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 constitute new
members of a subgroup of ETS proteins that can function as ternary complex
factors and further implicate a novel function for these ETS transcription
factors in the regulation of the Egr1 gene. By amino acid sequence comparison we 
found that, in fact, 50% of the amino acids present in the B-box of SAP1a and
ELK1, which are required for interaction with SRF, are identical to those present
in both FLI1 (amino acids 231- 248) and EWS-FLI1 proteins. This B-box is not
present in ETS1, ETS2, PEA3 or PU.1 and these proteins were unable to form
ternary complexes with SRF and Egrl-SREs or c-fos SRE. Furthermore, deletion of
194 amino terminal amino acids of FLI1 did not interfere with its ability to
interact with SRF, in fact, this truncation increased the stability of the
ternary complex. The FLI1 protein has a unique R-domain located next to the DNA
binding region. This R-domain may modulate the interaction with SRF, providing a 
mechanism that would be unique to FLI1 and EWS-FLI1, thus implicating a novel
function for these ETS transcription factors in the regulation of the Egr1 gene.

PMID: 9010223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 13;271(50):32438-46.

Biosynthesis, processing, and targeting of sphingolipid activator protein (SAP
)precursor in cultured human fibroblasts. Mannose 6-phosphate
receptor-independent endocytosis of SAP precursor.

Vielhaber G(1), Hurwitz R, Sandhoff K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie und Biochemie, Universität Bonn, D-53121 Bonn, 
Germany. sandhoff@uni-bonn.de

Sphingolipid activator proteins (SAPs) are essential cofactors for the lysosomal 
degradation of glycosphingolipids with short oligosaccharide chains by acidic
exohydrolases. SAP-A, -B, -C, and -D derive from proteolysis of a 73-kDa
glycoprotein, the SAP precursor. In the present publication, we studied the
intracellular transport and the endocytosis of SAP precursor in human skin
fibroblasts. Our data indicate that SAP precursor bears phosphate residues on
noncomplex carbohydrate chains linked to the SAP-C and the SAP-D domain and
sulfate residues on complex carbohydrate chains located within the SAP-A, -C, and
possibly the SAP-D domain. Treatment of fibroblasts with either bafilomycin A1 or
3-methyladenine indicates that proteolytic cleavage of SAP precursor begins as
early as in the late endosomes. To determine whether targeting of SAP precursor
depends on mannose 6-phosphate residues, we analyzed the processing of SAP
precursor in I-cell disease fibroblasts. In these cells nearly normal amounts of 
newly synthesized SAP-C were found, although secretion of SAP precursor was
enhanced 2-3-fold. Moreover, SAP-C could be localized to lysosomal structures by 
indirect immunofluorescence in normal and in I-cell disease fibroblasts. Mannose 
6-phosphate was not found to interfere significantly with endocytosis of SAP
precursor. Normal fibroblasts internalized SAP precursor secreted from I-cells
nearly as efficiently as the protein secreted from normal cells. To our surprise,
deglycosylated SAP precursor was taken up by mannose 6-phosphate receptor double 
knock out mouse fibroblasts more efficiently than the glycosylated protein. We
propose that intracellular targeting of SAP precursor to lysosomes is only
partially dependent on mannose 6-phosphate residues, whereas its endocytosis
occurs in a carbohydrate-independent manner.

PMID: 8943309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. EMBO J. 1996 Dec 2;15(23):6552-63.

The p38 and ERK MAP kinase pathways cooperate to activate Ternary Complex Factors
and c-fos transcription in response to UV light.

Price MA(1), Cruzalegui FH, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund Laboratories, London, 
UK.

We investigated the activation of c-fos transcription following UV irradiation, a
'stress' stimulus. In both HeLa TK- and NIH 3T3 cells the Serum Response Element 
is required for efficient UV-induced c-fos transcription, and in HeLa TK- cells
the Ternary Complex Factor (TCF) binding site contributes substantially to
activation. Consistent with this, UV irradiation activates LexA-TCF fusion
proteins more strongly in HeLa TK- than in NIH 3T3 cells. The TCF C-termini of
the TCFs are substrates for UV-induced MAP kinases: both the Elk-1 and SAP-1a
C-termini are efficiently phosphorylated by the p38 MAPK, but only the Elk-1
C-terminus is a good substrate for the SAPK/JNKs. The specificity and activation 
kinetics of TCF C-terminal kinases, and the susceptibility of transcriptional
activation by LexA-TCF fusion proteins to specific inhibitors of different MAPK
pathways, show that both the ERK and p38 MAPK pathways contribute to TCF
activation in response to UV irradiation. Activity of both these pathways is also
required for the response of the c-fos gene itself to UV stimulation.

PMCID: PMC452480
PMID: 8978682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. EMBO J. 1996 Nov 1;15(21):5849-65.

Net (ERP/SAP2) one of the Ras-inducible TCFs, has a novel inhibitory domain with 
resemblance to the helix-loop-helix motif.

Maira SM(1), Wurtz JM, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS, INSERM, 
ULP, Illkirch, France.

The three ternary complex factors (TCFs), Net (ERP/ SAP-2), ELK-1 and SAP-1, are 
highly related ets oncogene family members that participate in the response of
the cell to Ras and growth signals. Understanding the different roles of these
factors will provide insights into how the signals result in coordinate
regulation of the cell. We show that Net inhibits transcription under basal
conditions, in which SAP-1a is inactive and ELK-1 stimulates. Repression is
mediated by the NID, the Net Inhibitory Domain of about 50 amino acids, which
autoregulates the Net protein and also inhibits when it is isolated in a
heterologous fusion protein. Net is particularly sensitive to Ras activation. Ras
activates Net through the C-domain, which is conserved between the three TCFs,
and the NID is an efficient inhibitor of Ras activation. The NID, as well as more
C-terminal sequences, inhibit DNA binding. Net is more refractory to DNA binding 
than the other TCFs, possibly due to the presence of multiple inhibitory
elements. The NID may adopt a helix-loop-helix (HLH) structure, as evidenced by
homology to other HLH motifs, structure predictions, model building and
mutagenesis of critical residues. The sequence resemblance with myogenic factors 
suggested that Net may form complexes with the same partners. Indeed, we found
that Net can interact in vivo with the basic HLH factor, E47. We propose that Net
is regulated at the level of its latent DNA-binding activity by protein
interactions and/or phosphorylation. Net may form complexes with HLH proteins as 
well as SRF on specific promotor sequences. The identification of the novel
inhibitory domain provides a new inroad into exploring the different roles of the
ternary complex factors in growth control and transformation.

PMCID: PMC452333
PMID: 8918463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 15;93(21):11563-8.

Selective response of ternary complex factor Sap1a to different mitogen-activated
protein kinase subgroups.

Strahl T(1), Gille H, Shaw PE.

Author information: 
(1)Spemann Laboratories, Max-Planck-Institut für Immunbiologie, Freiburg,
Germany.

Mitogenic and stres signals results in the activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) and stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun
N-terminal kinases (SAPK/JNKs), respectively, which are two subgroups of the
mitogen-activated protein kinases. A nuclear target of mitogen-activated protein 
(MAP) kinases is the ternary complex factor Elk-1, which underlies its
involvement in the regulation of c-fos gene expression by mitogenic and stress
signals. A second ternary complex factor, Sap1a, is coexpressed with Elk-1 in
several cell types and shares attributes of Elk-1, the significance of which is
not clear. Here we show that Sap1a is phosphorylated efficiently by ERKs but not 
by SAPK/JNKs. Serum response factor-dependent ternary complex formation by Sap1a 
is stimulated by ERK phosphorylation but not by SAPK/JNKs. Moreover,
Sap1a-mediated transcription is activated by mitogenic signals but not by cell
stress. These results suggest that Sap1a and Elk-1 have distinct physiological
functions.

PMCID: PMC38097
PMID: 8876175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. DNA Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;15(10):855-62.

Molecular cloning of Elk-3, a new member of the Ets family expressed during mouse
embryogenesis and analysis of its transcriptional repression activity.

Nozaki M(1), Onishi Y, Kanno N, Ono Y, Fujimura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Japan.

We isolated a cDNA clone, Elk-3, that encodes a novel Ets transcription factor
from 16-day mouse embryos. The deduced amino acid sequence of the protein was
homologous to human ELK-1 and SAP-1. This protein, ELK-1, and SAP-1 shared some
unique structural properties such as an Ets DNA-binding site in the
amino-terminal region, a serum response factor interacting domain and
phosphorylation sites of serine or threonine residues in the carboxy-terminal
region. Northern blotting weakly revealed that two transcripts of 4 and 2.1 kb
are expressed in the adult ovary and lung and a 2.1-kb transcript predominated in
8- to 14-day embryos. We assayed the transcriptional activities of Elk-3 protein 
on the cytokeratin EndoA enhancer containing Ets binding sites in endodermal
cells. Elk-3 protein strongly repressed enhancer activity but did not affect the 
activity of the basal promoter in the absence of the enhancer. Furthermore, Elk-3
can suppress the activity of Ets-2 as the transcriptional activator on the EndoA 
enhancer. These data suggested that the Elk-3 gene product plays a role in
transcriptional regulation during embryogenesis.

PMID: 8892757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. FEBS Lett. 1996 Aug 12;391(3):247-51.

Analysis of SRF, SAP-1 and ELK-1 transcripts and proteins in human cell lines.

Magnaghi-Jaulin L(1), Masutani H, Lipinski M, Harel-Bellan A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorie de Biologie des Tumeurs Humaines, CNRS URA 1156, Villejuif,
France.

We have analysed the expression of the genes encoding transcription factors
involved in c-fos transcriptional regulation, i.e. the serum response factor
(SRF) and the ETS-related proteins ELK-1 and SAP-1, in a variety of human cell
lines. RNA was determined by Northern blot analysis, and proteins were detected
on Western blots: the two analyses gave essentially identical results. SRF was
expressed at similar levels in all cell lines tested. In contrast, SAP-1 and
ELK-1 expression varied from one cell line to another. Interestingly, in any
given cell line, high levels of one protein were accompained by low levels of the
other. Similar results were obtained by electro-mobility shift assays (EMSA),
using antibodies directed against the proteins. Thus, our data raise the
possibility of a coordinated regulation of the expression of these two Ets genes,
at both RNA and protein levels.

PMID: 8764983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Clin Invest. 1996 Jul 1;98(1):78-89.

Oxidized low density lipoprotein inhibits lipopolysaccharide-induced binding of
nuclear factor-kappaB to DNA and the subsequent expression of tumor necrosis
factor-alpha and interleukin-1beta in macrophages.

Ohlsson BG(1), Englund MC, Karlsson AL, Knutsen E, Erixon C, Skribeck H, Liu Y,
Bondjers G, Wiklund O.

Author information: 
(1)The Wallenberg Laboratory for Cardiovascular Research, Sahlgren's Hospital,
University of Göteborg, Sweden.

A large body of evidence suggests that oxidized LDL (oxLDL) has a role in
atherogenesis. One effect is the impact on macrophage function. We have studied
the effects of oxLDL and oxysterols on the binding of the transcription factors
nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB and AP-1 to DNA. These transcription factors are
involved in the regulation of several genes and expressed during activation of
macrophages, for example by endotoxin (LPS). OxLDL did not induce binding of
NF-kappaB. However, the LPS-induced response to NF-kappaB was substantially
reduced after preincubation with oxLDL. Medium and highly oxidized LDL also
decreased the constitutive DNA-binding of AP-1. Similar effects on AP-1-binding
were seen with the oxysterols, 7beta-hydroxycholesterol, 24- hydroxy-,
25-hydroxy-, and 27-hydroxy-cholesterol. Our data therefore suggest an effect of 
oxLDL on the DNA-binding of AP-1, which might be mediated by the oxysterol
content of oxLDL. A decreased LPS-induced TNF-alpha and IL-1beta mRNA and protein
expression were found in macrophages incubated with oxLDL before LPS-exposure.
These observations suggest that macrophages that internalize extensively oxidized
LDL are suppressed in their response to inflammatory stimulation.

PMCID: PMC507403
PMID: 8690807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jul;16(7):3338-49.

Determinants of DNA-binding specificity of ETS-domain transcription factors.

Shore P(1), Whitmarsh AJ, Bhaskaran R, Davis RJ, Waltho JP, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, The Medical School, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

Several mechanisms are employed by members of transcription factor families to
achieve sequence-specific DNA recognition. In this study, we have investigated
how members of the ETS-domain transcription factor family achieve such
specificity. We have used the ternary complex factor (TCF) subfamily as an
example. ERK2 mitogen-activated protein kinase stimulates serum response
factor-dependent and autonomous DNA binding by the TCFs Elk-1 and SAP-la.
Phosphorylated Elk-1 and SAP-la exhibit specificities of DNA binding similar to
those of their isolated ETS domains. The ETS domains of Elk-1 and SAP-la and
SAP-2 exhibit related but distinct DNA-binding specificities. A single residue,
D-69 (Elk-1) or V-68 (SAP-1), has been identified as the critical determinant for
the differential binding specificities of Elk-1 and SAP-1a, and an additional
residue, D-38 (Elk-1) or Q-37 (SAP-1), further modulates their DNA binding.
Creation of mutations D38Q and D69V is sufficient to confer SAP-la DNA-binding
specificity upon Elk-1 and thereby allow it to bind to a greater spectrum of
sites. Molecular modelling indicates that these two residues (D-38 and D-69) are 
located away from the DNA-binding interface of Elk-1. Our data suggest a
mechanism in which these residues modulate DNA binding by influencing the
interaction of other residues with DNA.

PMCID: PMC231328
PMID: 8668149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1996 Apr 29;351(1339):551-9.

Integration of growth factor signals at the c-fos serum response element.

Price MA(1), Hill C, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, U.K.

A transcription factor ternary complex composed of serum response factor (SRF)
and a second factor, ternary complex factor (TCF), mediates the response of the
c-fos Serum Response Element to growth factors and mitogens. In NIH3T3
fibroblasts, TCF binding is required for transcriptional activation by the SRE in
response to activation of the Ras-Raf-ERK pathway. We compared the properties of 
three members of the TCF family, Elk-1, SAP-1 and SAP-2 (ERP/NET). Although all
the proteins contain sequences required for ternary complex formation with SRF,
only Elk-1 and SAP-1 appear to interact with the c-fos SRE efficiently in vivo.
Each TCF contains a C-terminal activation domain capable of transcriptional
activation in response to activation of the Ras-Raf-ERK pathway, and this is
dependent on the integrity of S/T-P motifs conserved between all the TCF family
members. In contrast, activation of the SRE by whole serum and the mitogenic
phospholipid LPA requires SRF binding alone. Constitutively activated members of 
the Rho subfamily of Ras-like GTPases are also capable of inducing activation of 
the SRE in the absence of TCF; unlike activated Ras itself, these proteins do not
activate the TCFs in NIH3T3 cells. At the SRE, SRF- and TCF-linked signalling
pathways act synergistically to potentiate transcription.

PMID: 8735278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Curr Biol. 1996 Jan 1;6(1):16-9.

Signalling pathways: jack of all cascades.

Cahill MA(1), Janknecht R, Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

The transcription factors that bind the c-fos promoter element SRE are targeted
by multiple, independent signalling cascades; the identities of these signalling 
pathways and their modes of activation are being elucidated.

PMID: 8805215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1996;387:77-84.

The transcription factor TCF/Elk-1: a nuclear sensor of changes in the cellular
redox status.

Müller JM(1), Cahill MA, Nordheim A, Baeuerle PA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Albert-Ludwig-University, Freiburg, Germany.

PMID: 8794197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Nov 25;23(22):4698-706.

The ETS-domain transcription factors Elk-1 and SAP-1 exhibit differential DNA
binding specificities.

Shore P(1), Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Medical School, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

The ETS DNA-binding domain is conserved amongst many eukaryotic transcription
factors. ETS-domains bind differentially to specific DNA sites containing a
central GGA trinucleotide motif. The nucleotides flanking this motif define the
binding specificity of individual proteins. In this study we have investigated
binding specificity of the ETS-domains from two members of the ternary complex
factor (TCF) subfamily, Elk-1 and SAP-1. The ETS DNA-binding domains of Elk-1
(Elk-93) and SAP-1 (SAP-92) select similar sites from random pools of double
stranded oligonucleotides based on the consensus sequence ACCGGAAGTR. However,
SAP-92 shows a more relaxed binding site selectivity and binds efficiently to a
greater spectrum of sites than does Elk-93. This more relaxed DNA binding site
selectivity is most pronounced in nucleotides located on the 3' side of the GGA
motif. This differential DNA-binding specificity is also exhibited by longer TCF 
derivatives and, indeed by the full-length proteins. Our results suggest that the
range of potential in vivo target sites for SAP-1 is likely to be greater than
for Elk-1. We discuss our results in relation to other similar studies carried
out with more divergent ETS-domains.

PMCID: PMC307446
PMID: 8524663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Genomics. 1995 Oct 10;29(3):769-72.

Locations of the ets subfamily members net, elk1, and sap1 (ELK3, ELK1, and ELK4)
on three homologous regions of the mouse and human genomes.

Giovane A(1), Sobieszczuk P, Mignon C, Mattei MG, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
France.

Net, Elk1, and Sap1 are related members of the Ets oncoprotein family. We show by
in situ hybridization on banded chromosomes with specific cDNA probes that their 
map positions on mouse and human chromosomes (respectively) are net, 10C-D1 and
12q22-q23 (now called ELK3), sap1, 1E3-G and 1q32 (ELK4), and elk1, XA1-A3 and
Xp11.2-p11.1 (ELK1), as well as a second locus 14q32 (ELK2) unique to the human
genome. The results for the mouse net, sap1, and elk1 and human ELK3 genes are
new. The human elk1 mapping confirms a previous study. The human ELK4
localization agrees with data published during the preparation of the manuscript.
Human ELK3 colocalizes with sap2, and we confirm that they are identical. These
results firmly establish for the first time that Net, Elk1, and Sap1 are distinct
gene products with different chromosomal localizations in both the mouse and the 
human genomes. Net, Elk1, and Sap1 are conserved and map to homologous regions of
the mouse and human chromosomes.

PMID: 8575773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Science. 1995 Jul 21;269(5222):403-7.

Integration of MAP kinase signal transduction pathways at the serum response
element.

Whitmarsh AJ(1), Shore P, Sharrocks AD, Davis RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester 01605, USA.

The ternary complex factor (TCF) subfamily of ETS-domain transcription factors
bind with serum response factor (SRF) to the serum response element (SRE) and
mediate increased gene expression. The TCF protein Elk-1 is phosphorylated by the
JNK and ERK groups of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases causing increased
DNA binding, ternary complex formation, and transcriptional activation. Activated
SRE-dependent gene expression is induced by JNK in cells treated with
interleukin-1 and by ERK after treatment with phorbol ester. The Elk-1
transcription factor therefore integrates MAP kinase signaling pathways in vivo
to coordinate biological responses to different extracellular stimuli.

PMID: 7618106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. EMBO J. 1995 Jun 1;14(11):2589-601.

Comparative analysis of the ternary complex factors Elk-1, SAP-1a and SAP-2
(ERP/NET).

Price MA(1), Rogers AE, Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

A transcription factor ternary complex composed of Serum Response Factor (SRF)
and Ternary Complex Factor (TCF) mediates the response of the c-fos Serum
Response Element (SRE) to growth factors and mitogens. Three Ets domain proteins,
Elk-1, SAP-1 and ERP/NET, have been reported to have the properties of TCF. Here 
we compare Elk-1 and SAP-1a with the human ERP/NET homologue SAP-2. All three TCF
RNAs are ubiquitously expressed at similar relative levels. All three proteins
contain conserved regions that interact with SRF and the c-fos SRE with
comparable efficiency, but in vitro complex formation by SAP-2 is strongly
inhibited by its C-terminal sequences. Similarly, only Elk-1 and SAP-1a
efficiently bind the c-fos SRE in vivo; ternary complex formation by SAP-2 is
weak and is substantially unaffected by serum stimulation or v-ras co-expression.
All three TCFs contain C-terminal transcriptional activation domains that are
phosphorylated following growth factor stimulation. Activation requires conserved
S/T-P motifs found in all the TCF family members. Each TCF activation domain can 
be phosphorylated in vitro by partially purified ERK2, and ERK activation in vivo
is sufficient to potentiate transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC398373
PMID: 7540136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Oncogene. 1995 Mar 16;10(6):1209-16.

SAP1a is a nuclear target of signaling cascades involving ERKs.

Janknecht R(1), Ernst WH, Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

The Ets protein SAP1a has been shown to interact with the c-fos serum response
element upon recruitment by the serum response factor. We demonstrate that SAP1a 
is a nuclear protein stimulating transcription via the c-fos serum response
element, and additionally via an Ets binding site independently of the serum
response factor. However, transactivation has only been observed under conditions
leading to the activation of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases
(ERKs). The transcriptional activation domain of SAP1a resides within the
C-terminal region, the function of which may be impeded by the N-terminus.
Several potential ERK consensus sites within the C-terminal region of SAP1a can
modulate its transactivation efficacy, implicating that SAP1a is a direct target 
of ERKs. Since ERKs are activated by a broad range of signals, SAP1a may play an 
important role in the transformation of extracellular stimuli into a nuclear
response.

PMID: 7700646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Genomics. 1994 Oct;23(3):710-1.

Mapping of the human SAP1 (SRF accessory protein 1) gene and SAP2, a gene
encoding a related protein, to chromosomal bands 1q32 and 12q23, respectively.

Shipley J(1), Sheer D, Dalton S, Treisman R, Patel K.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cytogenetics Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, United
Kingdom.

SAP1, SAP2, and ELK1 form a related subgroup of ETS-domain proteins that can form
ternary complexes with the transcription factor SRF at the c-fos serum response
element (SRE). SAP1 was identified by a genetic screen for proteins interacting
with SRF expressed in yeast, and SAP2 by its homology with SAP1; ELK1 was
previously identified by its homology to the ETS domain. cDNA probes were used to
isolate cosmid and phage clones harboring genes encoding SAP1 and SAP2. These
clones were subsequently used to map the genes to 1q32 and 12q23, respectively,
by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

PMID: 7851904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Anticancer Res. 1994 Sep-Oct;14(5A):1923-6.

The role of regulated phosphorylation in the biological activity of transcription
factors SRF and Elk-1/SAP-1.

Papavassiliou AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Differentiation Programme, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

The promoters of many genes whose expression is rapidly and transiently increased
upon growth factor or mitogen stimulation of susceptible cells harbor a common
regulatory element, the serum response element (SRE). The transcription factors
that interact with the SRE of these immediate-early genes are being intensively
studied so as to elucidate the signal transduction cascades that link cell
surface receptors to the SRE, and to determine the mechanisms by which
signal-dependent phosphorylation events modulate their function.

PMID: 7847828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Genes Dev. 1994 Aug 1;8(15):1803-16.

Ras/MAP kinase-dependent and -independent signaling pathways target distinct
ternary complex factors.

Hipskind RA(1), Büscher D, Nordheim A, Baccarini M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

Transcriptional activation of the immediate early genes c-fos and egr-1 by
extracellular signals appears to be mediated by ternary complex factors (TCFs).
In BAC-1 macrophages, growth factor stimulation leads to the retardation of
protein-DNA complexes containing distinct TCFs. One TCF is recognized by Elk-1
antisera, whereas the other is immunologically related to SAP-1. The appearance
and decay of hyperphosphorylated TCF/Elk-1-containing complexes after stimulation
coincide with the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and the
induction and repression of c-fos and egr-1, whereas modified
TCF/SAP-1-containing complexes decay more slowly. Suppression of MAPK activation 
in macrophages and fibroblasts correlates with the failure to induce TCF/Elk-1
hyperphosphorylation without blocking TCF/SAP-1 modification. Accordingly the
modified Elk-1 complex is generated in vitro by activated MAPK, whereas that of
SAP-1 is not. Expression of a dominant-negative Ras mutant (RasAsn17) in BAC-1
cells does not affect CSF-1-induced TCF/SAP-1 modification while suppressing
TCF/Elk-1 phosphorylation. Neither PKC down-regulation by TPA nor inhibition of
Gi proteins by pertussis toxin pretreatment influences CSF-1-induced signaling to
TCFs. These data indicate the existence of two separate signaling pathways for
the modification of distinct TCFs: one dependent on Ras and MAPK and converging
on TCF/Elk-1, and the other targeting TCF/SAP-1 independently of Ras and MAPK.

PMID: 7958858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1994 Feb;4(1):96-101.

Ternary complex factors: growth factor regulated transcriptional activators.

Treisman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

Members of a family of Ets domain proteins, the ternary complex factors (TCFs),
are recruited to the c-fos serum response element by interaction with the serum
response factor. Recent findings indicate that phosphorylation of TCFs occurs in 
response to activation of the MAP kinase pathway, and that regulation of TCF
activity is an important mechanism by which the serum response element responds
to growth factor signals.

PMID: 8193547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cell. 1994 Jan 28;76(2):411.

Characterization of SAP-1, a protein recruited by serum response factor to the
c-fos serum response element.

Dalton S, Treisman R.

Erratum for
    Cell. 1992 Feb 7;68(3):597-612.

PMID: 8293474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oncogene. 1993 Dec;8(12):3459-64.

Transcriptional activation domains of elk-1, delta elk-1 and SAP-1 proteins.

Bhattacharya G(1), Lee L, Reddy ES, Rao VN.

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Cancer Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19107-5541.

elk-1, an ets related gene codes for a sequence specific DNA binding
transcriptional activator which in association with serum response factor (SRF)
forms a ternary complex at the c-fos serum response element (SRE). Recently the
C-terminal region of both elk-1 and delta elk-1 proteins was shown to undergo
phosphorylation by MAP kinases and function as an activator of MAP kinases. Here 
we show that delta elk-1 and two other elk-1 related proteins SAP-1a and SAP-1b, 
like elk-1, can function as transcriptional activators. In this report we have
localized the transcriptional activation domain of the SAP-1 proteins (STA) to a 
large portion of the carboxy terminal region and have identified two autonomous
transcriptional activation domains in the elk-1 protein, one at the amino (ETA-1)
and the other at the carboxy terminal region (ETA-2). delta elk-1 protein
contains only the ETA-2 domain indicating differential usage of activation
domains as a result of alternative splicing. We can speculate that the ETA-1
domain can function in vivo independent of ETA-2, but the ETA-2 domain can
function either in the absence of ETA-1 (as seen in delta elk-1) or in the
presence of accessory proteins like SRF. The role of SRF in the activation of the
ternary complex might be to bind to the ETA-1 domain, somehow conceal it's
activation domain and in the process unmask the ETA-2 domain (for phosphorylation
by MAP kinases) and activate transcription. The ETA-1 domain may be functioning
as a negative regulatory transcriptional activation domain for ETA-2. These
observations suggest that the elk-1 family of proteins may not only regulate fos 
and MAP kinases but also other elk-1 target genes that are essential for cellular
growth control.

PMID: 8247551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. EMBO J. 1992 Dec;11(12):4631-40.

Spatial flexibility in ternary complexes between SRF and its accessory proteins.

Treisman R(1), Marais R, Wynne J.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, Lincoln's Inn Fields,
London, UK.

We investigated the sequence requirements for ternary complex formation by the
transcription factor SRF and its Ets domain accessory factors Elk-1 and SAP-1.
Ternary complex formation is specified by an SRF consensus site CC(A/T)6GG and a 
neighbouring Ets motif (C/A)(C/A)GGA(A/T), which is contacted by Elk-1/SAP-1.
Both the spacing of these sequences and their relative orientation can be
substantially altered with little effect on the efficiency of ternary complex
formation. Efficient ternary complex formation by Elk-1 is mediated by the B box,
a conserved 21 amino acid region located 50 residues C-terminal to the Ets
domain, which also acts to inhibit autonomous DNA binding. Binding studies with
the isolated Ets domains indicate that ternary complex formation compensates for 
low affinity Ets domain-DNA interactions. Several naturally occurring SREs
containing Ets motifs at different locations to that in the human c-fos SRE allow
SAP-1 and Elk-1 recruitment in vitro. We discuss the mechanism of ternary complex
formation.

PMCID: PMC557039
PMID: 1425594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cell. 1992 Feb 7;68(3):597-612.

Characterization of SAP-1, a protein recruited by serum response factor to the
c-fos serum response element.

Dalton S(1), Treisman R.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, England.

Erratum in
    Cell. 1994 Jan 28;76(2):411.

We used a yeast genetic screen to isolate cDNAs that encode a protein, SRF
accessory protein-1 (SAP-1), that is recruited to the c-fos serum response
element (SRE) as part of a ternary complex that includes serum response factor
(SRF). SAP-1 requires DNA-bound SRF for ternary complex formation and makes
extensive DNA contacts to the 5' side of SRF, but does not bind DNA autonomously.
Ternary complex formation by SAP-1 requires only the DNA-binding domain of SRF,
which can be replaced by that of the related yeast protein MCM1. We isolated
cDNAs encoding two forms of SAP-1 protein, SAP-1a and SAP-1b, which differ at
their C termini. Both SAP-1 proteins contain three regions of striking homology
with the elk-1 protein, including an N-terminal ets domain. Ternary complex
formation by SAP-1 requires both the ets domain and a second conserved region 50 
amino acids to its C-terminal side. SAP-1 has similar DNA binding properties to
the previously characterized HeLa cell protein p62/TCF.

PMID: 1339307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


