
1. J Bone Miner Res. 2016 Mar 11. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2833. [Epub ahead of print]

Rare EN1 Variants and Pediatric Bone Mass.

Mitchell JA(1,)(2), Chesi A(3), McCormack SE(2,)(4), Roy SM(4), Cousminer DL(3), 
Kalkwarf HJ(5), Lappe JM(6), Gilsanz V(7), Oberfield SE(8), Shepherd JA(9), Kelly
A(2,)(4), Zemel BS(1,)(2), Grant SF(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, The Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. (3)Division of
Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia. (4)Division of
Endocrinology and Diabetes, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia. (5)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati. (6)Division of
Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Creighton University, Omaha. (7)Department
of Radiology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles. (8)Division of
Pediatric Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics,
Columbia University Medical Center, New York. (9)Department of Radiology,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco.

A recent whole-genome sequencing study in search of variation associated with
adult areal bone mineral density (aBMD) identified rare variants near EN1, with
markedly large effect sizes, and a common variant near SOX6. To understand the
developmental effects of these loci, we sought to determine if they were
associated with pediatric dual energy X-ray absorptiometry-derived aBMD and bone 
mineral content (BMC), and if the associations were modified by sex. Our sample
comprised 733 females and 685 males of European ancestry enrolled in the
longitudinal 'Bone Mineral Density in Childhood Study' (up to 7 annual study
visits). Sex and age-specific Z-scores, adjusted for height, were calculated for 
the total hip, femoral neck, spine and distal radius. Total body less head (TBLH)
BMC Z-scores were also calculated. The previously reported single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) near EN1 and SOX6 were derived from our imputed dataset.
Linear mixed effects models were used to test associations between each SNP and
bone Z-scores plus interactions with sex were explored. The rare T allele of lead
EN1 SNP rs11692564 was associated with higher aBMD Z-score for total hip
(beta<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.62, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>9.0<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-4) ) and femoral neck (beta<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.53, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.010). In
sex-stratified analyses, this variant was associated with higher bone Z-scores in
females only, with the associations being strongest for total hip (sex
interaction P<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.9<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-4) ; beta females<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.86, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>6.6<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-6) ) and
femoral neck (sex interaction P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.016; beta females<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.73, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). The
common G allele of SOX6 SNP rs11024028 was associated with higher aBMD Z-score
for total hip (beta<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.12, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009), femoral neck (beta<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.13, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003) and
TBLH-BMC (beta<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.09, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007); furthermore this association strengthened in
males in the sex stratified analyses. Our findings reveal that rare genetic
variation near EN1 and common variation near SOX6 operates in childhood and has
implications for the lifelong risk of osteoporosis and fracture. The sex
differences observed need to be independently replicated. This article is
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26970088  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Cancer. 2016 Mar 8. doi: 10.1002/cncr.29959. [Epub ahead of print]

In-depth characterization of the salivary adenoid cystic carcinoma transcriptome 
with emphasis on dominant cell type.

Bell D(1,)(2), Bell AH(3), Bondaruk J(1), Hanna EY(2), Weber RS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. (2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (3)Lone Star College, Houston, Texas.

BACKGROUND: Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC), 1 of the most common salivary gland
malignancies, arises from the intercalated ducts, which are composed of inner
ductal epithelial cells and outer myoepithelial cells. The objective of this
study was to determine the genomic subtypes of ACC with emphasis on dominant cell
type to identify potential specific biomarkers for each subtype and to improve
the understanding of this disease.
METHODS: A whole-genome expression study was performed based on 42 primary
salivary ACCs and 5 normal salivary glands. RNA from these specimens was
subjected to expression profiling with RNA sequencing, and results were analyzed 
to identify transcripts in epithelial-dominant ACC (E-ACC),
myoepithelial-dominant ACC (M-ACC), and all ACC that were expressed
differentially compared with the transcripts in normal salivary tissue.
RESULTS: In total, the authors identified 430 differentially expressed
transcripts that were unique to E-ACC, 392 that were unique to M-ACC, and 424
that were common to both M-ACC and E-ACC. The sets of E-ACC-specific and
M-ACC-specific transcripts were sufficiently large to define and differentiate
E-ACC from M-ACC. Ingenuity pathway analysis identified known cancer-related
genes for 60% of the E-ACC transcripts, 69% of the M-ACC transcripts, and 68% of 
the transcripts that were common in both E-ACC and M-ACC. Three sets of highly
expressed candidate genes-distal-less homeobox 6 (DLX6) for E-ACC; protein
keratin 16 (KRT16), SRY box 11 (SOX11), and v-myb avian myeloblastosis viral
oncogene homolog (MYB) for M-ACC; and engrailed 1 (EN1) and statherin (STATH),
which are common to both E-ACC and M-ACC)-were further validated at the protein
level.
CONCLUSIONS: The current results enabled the authors to identify novel potential 
therapeutic targets and biomarkers in E-ACC and M-ACC individually, with the
implication that EN1, DLX6, and OTX1 (orthodenticle homeobox 1) are potential
drivers of these cancers. Cancer 2016. © 2016 American Cancer Society.

© 2016 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 26953815  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Dev Neurobiol. 2016 Feb 23. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22388. [Epub ahead of print]

En1 is necessary for survival of neurons in the ventral nuclei of the lateral
lemniscus.

Altieri SC(1), Zhao T(1), Jalabi W(2), Romito-DiGiacomo RR(2), Maricich
SM(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Richard King Mellon Institute for Pediatric Research, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA, 15224.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Case, Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio,
USA, 44106. (3)Childrens' Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA, 15224.

The ventral nuclei of the lateral lemniscus (VNLL) are part of the central
auditory system thought to participate in temporal sound processing. While the
timing and location of VNLL neurogenesis have been determined, the genetic
factors that regulate VNLL neuron development are unknown. Here, we use genetic
fate-mapping techniques to demonstrate that all glycinergic and
glycinergic/GABAergic VNLL neurons derive from a cellular lineage that expresses 
the homeobox transcription factor Engrailed 1 (En1). We also show that En1
deletion does not affect migration or adoption of a neuronal cell fate but does
lead to VNLL neuron death during development. Furthermore, En1 deletion blocks
expression of the transcription factor FoxP1 in a subset of VNLL neurons.
Together, these data identify En1 as a gene important for VNLL neuron development
and survival. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26914477  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Neural Plast. 2016;2016:6097107. doi: 10.1155/2016/6097107. Epub 2015 Dec 31.

Neuroprotective Transcription Factors in Animal Models of Parkinson Disease.

Blaudin de Thé FX(1), Rekaik H(1), Prochiantz A(1), Fuchs J(1), Joshi RL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology (CIRB), Labex Memolife, CNRS 
UMR 7241, INSERM U1050, Collège de France, 11 place Marcelin Berthelot, 75231
Paris Cedex 05, France.

A number of transcription factors, including En1/2, Foxa1/2, Lmx1a/b, Nurr1,
Otx2, and Pitx3, with key roles in midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neuron
development, also regulate adult mDA neuron survival and physiology. Mouse models
with targeted disruption of some of these genes display several features
reminiscent of Parkinson disease (PD), in particular the selective and
progressive loss of mDA neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc). The
characterization of these animal models has provided valuable insights into
various mechanisms of PD pathogenesis. Therefore, the dissection of the
mechanisms and survival signalling pathways engaged by these transcription
factors to protect mDA neuron from degeneration can suggest novel therapeutic
strategies. The work on En1/2-mediated neuroprotection also highlights the
potential of protein transduction technology for neuroprotective approaches in
PD.

PMCID: PMC4736191
PMID: 26881122  [PubMed - in process]


5. Biol Open. 2016 Feb 15;5(3):279-88. doi: 10.1242/bio.015032.

Engrailed 1 shapes the dopaminergic and serotonergic landscape through proper
isthmic organizer maintenance and function.

Kouwenhoven WM(1), Veenvliet JV(1), van Hooft JA(1), van der Heide LP(1), Smidt
MP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, P.O. Box
94215, 1090 GE Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Swammerdam Institute for Life
Sciences, University of Amsterdam, P.O. Box 94215, 1090 GE Amsterdam, The
Netherlands m.p.smidt@uva.nl.

The isthmic organizer (IsO) is a signaling center that specifies the correct and 
distinct embryonic development of the dopaminergic midbrain and serotonergic
hindbrain. The IsO is a linear boundary between the two brain regions, emerging
at around embryonic day 7-8 of murine embryonic development, that shapes its
surroundings through the expression of instructive signals such as Wnt and growth
factors. Homeobox transcription factor engrailed 1 (En1) is present in midbrain
and rostral hindbrain (i.e. rhombomere 1, R1). Its expression spans the IsO, and 
it is known to be an important survival factor for both dopaminergic and
serotonergic neurons. Erroneous composition of dopaminergic neurons in the
midbrain or serotonergic neurons in the hindbrain is associated with severe
pathologies such as Parkinson's disease, depression or autism. Here we
investigated the role of En1 in early mid-hindbrain development, using multiple
En1-ablated mouse models as well as lineage-tracing techniques, and observed the 
appearance of ectopic dopaminergic neurons, indistinguishable from midbrain
dopaminergic neurons based on molecular profile and intrinsic
electrophysiological properties. We propose that this change is the direct result
of a caudal relocation of the IsO as represented by ectopic presence of Fgf8,
Otx2, Wnt1 and canonical Wnt-signalling. Our work suggests a newly-discovered
role for En1: the repression of Otx2, Wnt1 and canonical Wnt-signaling in R1.
Overall, our results suggest that En1 is essential for proper IsO maintenance and
function.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26879466  [PubMed]


6. Nat Commun. 2016 Jan 6;7:10129. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10129.

Sequence variants in the PTCH1 gene associate with spine bone mineral density and
osteoporotic fractures.

Styrkarsdottir U(1), Thorleifsson G(1), Gudjonsson SA(1), Sigurdsson A(1), Center
JR(2,)(3,)(4,)(5), Lee SH(6), Nguyen TV(2,)(5,)(7), Kwok TC(8), Lee JS(8), Ho
SC(9), Woo J(8), Leung PC(10), Kim BJ(6), Rafnar T(1), Kiemeney LA(11),
Ingvarsson T(12,)(13), Koh JM(6), Tang NL(14), Eisman JA(2,)(3,)(4,)(5,)(15),
Christiansen C(16), Sigurdsson G(17,)(18), Thorsteinsdottir U(1,)(18), Stefansson
K(1,)(18).

Author information: 
(1)deCODE genetics/Amgen, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland. (2)Osteoporosis and Bone
Biology, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New South Wales 2010,
Australia. (3)School of Medicine Sydney, University of Notre Dame Australia,
Sydney, New South Wales 2010, Australia. (4)Clinical School, St Vincent's
Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales 2010, Australia. (5)Faculty of Medicine,
University of New South Wales (UNSW), Sydney, New South Wales 2010, Australia.
(6)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Asan Medical Center, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, 138-736 Seoul, South Korea. (7)Centre for Health
Technologies, University of Technology, Sydney, New South Wales 2010, Australia. 
(8)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (9)JC School of Public Health and
Primary Care, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, China. (10)Jockey Club Centre for Osteoporosis Care and Control, Faculty of
Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (11)Radboud
University Medical Center, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, 6500 HB
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (12)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Akureyri
Hospital, 603 Akureyri, Iceland. (13)Institution of Health Science, University of
Akureyri, 603 Akureyri, Iceland. (14)Department of Chemical Pathology, and
Laboratory for Genetics of Disease Susceptibility, Li Ka Shing Institute of
Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, China. (15)Clinical Translation and Advanced Education, Garvan Institute of
Medical Research, Sydney, New South Wales 2010, Australia. (16)Nordic Bioscience 
A/S, 2730 Herlev, Denmark. (17)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Landspitali, The National University Hospital of Iceland, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland.
(18)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland.

Bone mineral density (BMD) is a measure of osteoporosis and is useful in
evaluating the risk of fracture. In a genome-wide association study of BMD among 
20,100 Icelanders, with follow-up in 10,091 subjects of European and East-Asian
descent, we found a new BMD locus that harbours the PTCH1 gene, represented by
rs28377268 (freq. 11.4-22.6%) that associates with reduced spine BMD (P=1.0 ×
10(-11), ß=-0.09). We also identified a new spine BMD signal in RSPO3,
rs577721086 (freq. 6.8%), that associates with increased spine BMD (P=6.6 ×
10(-10), ß=0.14). Importantly, both variants associate with osteoporotic
fractures and affect expression of the PTCH1 and RSPO3 genes that is in line with
their influence on BMD and known biological function of these genes. Additional
new BMD signals were also found at the AXIN1 and SOST loci and a new lead SNP at 
the EN1 locus.

PMCID: PMC4729819
PMID: 26733130  [PubMed - in process]


7. Dev Biol. 2015 Dec 1;408(1):99-108. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.10.008. Epub 2015
Nov 2.

En1 directs superior olivary complex neuron positioning, survival, and expression
of FoxP1.

Altieri SC(1), Jalabi W(2), Zhao T(1), Romito-DiGiacomo RR(2), Maricich SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Richard King Mellon Institute for Pediatric Research, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15224, USA. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. (3)Richard
King Mellon Institute for Pediatric Research, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15224, USA; Children's Hospital of
Pittsburgh of UPMC, Pittsburgh, PA 15224, USA. Electronic address:
stephen.maricich@chp.edu.

Little is known about the genetic pathways and transcription factors that control
development and maturation of central auditory neurons. En1, a gene expressed by 
a subset of developing and mature superior olivary complex (SOC) cells, encodes a
homeodomain transcription factor important for neuronal development in the
midbrain, cerebellum, hindbrain and spinal cord. Using genetic fate-mapping
techniques, we show that all En1-lineal cells in the SOC are neurons and that
these neurons are glycinergic, cholinergic and GABAergic in neurotransmitter
phenotype. En1 deletion does not interfere with specification or neural fate of
these cells, but does cause aberrant positioning and subsequent death of all
En1-lineal SOC neurons by early postnatal ages. En1-null cells also fail to
express the transcription factor FoxP1, suggesting that FoxP1 lies downstream of 
En1. Our data define important roles for En1 in the development and maturation of
a diverse group of brainstem auditory neurons.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4688081 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26542008  [PubMed - in process]


8. BMC Cancer. 2015 Oct 29;15:816. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1777-9.

Exploring DNA methylation changes in promoter, intragenic, and intergenic regions
as early and late events in breast cancer formation.

Rauscher GH(1), Kresovich JK(2), Poulin M(3), Yan L(4), Macias V(5), Mahmoud
AM(6), Al-Alem U(7), Kajdacsy-Balla A(8), Wiley EL(9), Tonetti D(10), Ehrlich
M(11).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Illinois-Chicago,
School of Public Health, M/C 923, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA. garthr@uic.edu.
(2)Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Illinois-Chicago,
School of Public Health, M/C 923, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA. jkreso2@uic.edu.
(3)EpigenDx, Inc., Hopkinton, MA, USA. mpoulin@epigendx.com. (4)EpigenDx, Inc.,
Hopkinton, MA, USA. lyan@epigendx.com. (5)Department of Pathology, University of 
Illinois-Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. vmacias@uic.edu. (6)Department of Pathology, 
University of Illinois-Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. amahmo4@uic.edu. (7)Division of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Illinois-Chicago, School of Public 
Health, M/C 923, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA. ualale2@uic.edu. (8)Department of
Pathology, University of Illinois-Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. aballa@uic.edu.
(9)Department of Pathology, University of Illinois-Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
ewiley@uic.edu. (10)Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Illinois-Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. dtonetti@uic.edu. (11)Human Genetics Program,
Tulane Cancer Center, and Center for Bioinformatics and Genomics, Tulane
University Health Sciences Center, 1430 Tulane Ave., New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.
ehrlich@tulane.edu.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer formation is associated with frequent changes in DNA
methylation but the extent of very early alterations in DNA methylation and the
biological significance of cancer-associated epigenetic changes need further
elucidation.
METHODS: Pyrosequencing was done on bisulfite-treated DNA from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded sections containing invasive tumor and paired samples of
histologically normal tissue adjacent to the cancers as well as control reduction
mammoplasty samples from unaffected women. The DNA regions studied were promoters
(BRCA1, CD44, ESR1, GSTM2, GSTP1, MAGEA1, MSI1, NFE2L3, RASSF1A, RUNX3, SIX3 and 
TFF1), far-upstream regions (EN1, PAX3, PITX2, and SGK1), introns (APC, EGFR,
LHX2, RFX1 and SOX9) and the LINE-1 and satellite 2 DNA repeats. These choices
were based upon previous literature or publicly available DNA methylome profiles.
The percent methylation was averaged across neighboring CpG sites.
RESULTS: Most of the assayed gene regions displayed hypermethylation in cancer
vs. adjacent tissue but the TFF1 and MAGEA1 regions were significantly
hypomethylated (p =0.001). Importantly, six of the 16 regions examined in a large
collection of patients (105 - 129) and in 15-18 reduction mammoplasty samples
were already aberrantly methylated in adjacent, histologically normal tissue vs. 
non-cancerous mammoplasty samples (p =0.01). In addition, examination of
transcriptome and DNA methylation databases indicated that methylation at three
non-promoter regions (far-upstream EN1 and PITX2 and intronic LHX2) was
associated with higher gene expression, unlike the inverse associations between
cancer DNA hypermethylation and cancer-altered gene expression usually reported. 
These three non-promoter regions also exhibited normal tissue-specific
hypermethylation positively associated with differentiation-related gene
expression (in muscle progenitor cells vs. many other types of normal cells). The
importance of considering the exact DNA region analyzed and the gene structure
was further illustrated by bioinformatic analysis of an alternative
promoter/intron gene region for APC.
CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed the frequent DNA methylation changes in invasive breast
cancer at a variety of genome locations and found evidence for an extensive field
effect in breast cancer. In addition, we illustrate the power of combining
publicly available whole-genome databases with a candidate gene approach to study
cancer epigenetics.

PMCID: PMC4625569
PMID: 26510686  [PubMed - in process]


9. FEBS Lett. 2015 Dec 21;589(24 Pt A):3786-94. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.10.002. 
Epub 2015 Oct 13.

Dissecting the role of Engrailed in adult dopaminergic neurons - Insights into
Parkinson disease pathogenesis.

Rekaik H(1), Blaudin de Thé FX(1), Prochiantz A(1), Fuchs J(2), Joshi RL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology (CIRB), Labex Memolife, CNRS 
UMR 7241, INSERM U1050, Collège de France, 11 place Marcelin Berthelot, 75231
Paris Cedex 05, France. (2)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology
(CIRB), Labex Memolife, CNRS UMR 7241, INSERM U1050, Collège de France, 11 place 
Marcelin Berthelot, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France. Electronic address:
julia.fuchs@college-de-france.fr. (3)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in
Biology (CIRB), Labex Memolife, CNRS UMR 7241, INSERM U1050, Collège de France,
11 place Marcelin Berthelot, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France. Electronic address:
rajiv.joshi@college-de-france.fr.

The homeoprotein Engrailed (Engrailed-1/Engrailed-2, collectively En1/2) is not
only a survival factor for mesencephalic dopaminergic (mDA) neurons during
development, but continues to exert neuroprotective and physiological functions
in adult mDA neurons. Loss of one En1 allele in the mouse leads to progressive
demise of mDA neurons in the ventral midbrain starting from 6weeks of age. These 
mice also develop Parkinson disease-like motor and non-motor symptoms. The
characterization of En1 heterozygous mice have revealed striking parallels to
central mechanisms of Parkinson disease pathogenesis, mainly related to
mitochondrial dysfunction and retrograde degeneration. Thanks to the ability of
homeoproteins to transduce cells, En1/2 proteins have also been used to protect
mDA neurons in various experimental models of Parkinson disease. This
neuroprotection is partly linked to the ability of En1/2 to regulate the
translation of certain nuclear-encoded mitochondrial mRNAs for complex I
subunits. Other transcription factors that govern mDA neuron development (e.g.
Foxa1/2, Lmx1a/b, Nurr1, Otx2, Pitx3) also continue to function for the survival 
and maintenance of mDA neurons in the adult and act through partially overlapping
but also diverse mechanisms.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26459030  [PubMed - in process]


10. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 7;10(10):e0139697. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139697.
eCollection 2015.

Otx2 Requires Lmx1b to Control the Development of Mesodiencephalic Dopaminergic
Neurons.

Sherf O(1), Nashelsky Zolotov L(1), Liser K(1), Tilleman H(1), Jovanovic VM(1),
Zega K(1), Jukic MM(1), Brodski C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, 
Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be'erSheva 84105,
Israel.

Studying the development of mesodiencephalic dopaminergic (mdDA) neurons provides
an important basis for better understanding dopamine-associated brain functions
and disorders and is critical for establishing cell replacement therapy for
Parkinson's disease. The transcription factors Otx2 and Lmx1b play a key role in 
the development of mdDA neurons. However, little is known about the genes
downstream of Otx2 and Lmx1b in the pathways controlling the formation of mdDA
neurons in vivo. Here we report on our investigation of Lmx1b as downstream
target of Otx2 in the formation of mdDA neurons. Mouse mutants expressing Otx2
under the control of the En1 promoter (En1+/Otx2) showed increased Otx2
expression in the mid-hindbrain region, resulting in upregulation of Lmx1b and
expansion of mdDA neurons there. In contrast, Lmx1b-/- mice showed decreased
expression of Otx2 and impairments in several aspects of mdDA neuronal formation.
To study the functional interaction between Otx2 and Lmx1b, we generated compound
mutants in which Otx2 expression was restored in mice lacking Lmx1b
(En1+/Otx2;Lmx1b-/-). In these animals Otx2 was not sufficient to rescue any of
the aberrations in the formation of mdDA neurons caused by the loss of Lmx1b, but
rescued the loss of ocular motor neurons. Gene expression studies in Lmx1b-/-
embryos indicated that in these mutants Wnt1, En1 and Fgf8 expression are induced
but subsequently lost in the mdDA precursor domain and the mid-hindbrain
organizer in a specific, spatio-temporal manner. In summary, we demonstrate that 
Otx2 critically depends on Lmx1b for the formation of mdDA neurons, but not for
the generation of ocular motor neurons. Moreover, our data suggest that Lmx1b
precisely maintains the expression pattern of Wnt1, Fgf8 and En1, which are
essential for mid-hindbrain organizer function and the formation of mdDA neurons.

PMCID: PMC4596855
PMID: 26444681  [PubMed - in process]


11. J Exp Bot. 2016 Jan;67(1):143-55. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erv442. Epub 2015 Oct 1.

Founder-cell-specific transcription of the DORNRÖSCHEN-LIKE promoter and
integration of the auxin response.

Comelli P(1), Glowa D(1), Chandler JW(1), Werr W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, Biocenter Cologne, University of Cologne, 
Zuelpicher Str. 47b, 50674 Cologne, Germany. (2)Institute of Developmental
Biology, Biocenter Cologne, University of Cologne, Zuelpicher Str. 47b, 50674
Cologne, Germany Werr@uni-koeln.de.

Transcription of the DORNRÖSCHEN (DRNL) promoter marks lateral-organ founder
cells throughout Arabidopsis development, from cotyledons to flowers or floral
organs. In the inflorescence apex, DRNL::GFP depicts incipient floral phyllotaxy,
and organs in the four floral whorls are differentially prepatterned: the sepals 
unidirectionally along an abaxial-adaxial axis, the four petals and two lateral
stamens in two putative morphogenetic fields, and the medial stamens subsequently
in a ring-shaped domain, before two groups of carpel founder cells are specified.
The dynamic DRNL transcription pattern is controlled by three enhancer elements, 
which redundantly and synergistically control qualitative or quantitative aspects
of expression, and differentially integrate the auxin response in Arabidopsis
inflorescence and floral meristems. The high sequence conservation of all three
enhancer elements among the Brassicaceae is striking, which suggests that densely
packed cis-regulatory elements are conserved to recruit multiple transcription
factors, including auxin response factors, into higher-order enhanceosome
complexes. The spatial organization of the enhancers is also conserved, by a
microsynteny that extends beyond the Brassicaceae, which relates to enhancer
sharing, as the distal element En1 bidirectionally serves DRNL and the upstream
At1g24600 gene; the genes are transcribed in opposite directions and possibly
comprise a conserved functional chromatin domain.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26428063  [PubMed - in process]


12. Nature. 2015 Oct 1;526(7571):112-7. doi: 10.1038/nature14878. Epub 2015 Sep 14.

Whole-genome sequencing identifies EN1 as a determinant of bone density and
fracture.

Zheng HF, Forgetta V, Hsu YH, Estrada K, Rosello-Diez A, Leo PJ, Dahia CL,
Park-Min KH, Tobias JH, Kooperberg C, Kleinman A, Styrkarsdottir U, Liu CT, Uggla
C, Evans DS, Nielson CM, Walter K, Pettersson-Kymmer U, McCarthy S, Eriksson J,
Kwan T, Jhamai M, Trajanoska K, Memari Y, Min J, Huang J, Danecek P, Wilmot B, Li
R, Chou WC, Mokry LE, Moayyeri A, Claussnitzer M, Cheng CH, Cheung W,
Medina-Gómez C, Ge B, Chen SH, Choi K, Oei L, Fraser J, Kraaij R, Hibbs MA,
Gregson CL, Paquette D, Hofman A, Wibom C, Tranah GJ, Marshall M, Gardiner BB,
Cremin K, Auer P, Hsu L, Ring S, Tung JY, Thorleifsson G, Enneman AW, van Schoor 
NM, de Groot LC, van der Velde N, Melin B, Kemp JP, Christiansen C, Sayers A,
Zhou Y, Calderari S, van Rooij J, Carlson C, Peters U, Berlivet S, Dostie J,
Uitterlinden AG, Williams SR, Farber C, Grinberg D, LaCroix AZ, Haessler J,
Chasman DI, Giulianini F, Rose LM, Ridker PM, Eisman JA, Nguyen TV, Center JR,
Nogues X, Garcia-Giralt N, Launer LL, Gudnason V, Mellström D, Vandenput L, Amin 
N, van Duijn CM, Karlsson MK, Ljunggren Ö, Svensson O, Hallmans G, Rousseau F,
Giroux S, Bussière J, Arp PP, Koromani F, Prince RL, Lewis JR, Langdahl BL,
Hermann AP, Jensen JE, Kaptoge S, Khaw KT, Reeve J, Formosa MM, Xuereb-Anastasi
A, Åkesson K, McGuigan FE, Garg G, Olmos JM, Zarrabeitia MT, Riancho JA, Ralston 
SH, Alonso N, Jiang X, Goltzman D, Pastinen T, Grundberg E, Gauguier D, Orwoll
ES, Karasik D, Davey-Smith G; AOGC Consortium, Smith AV, Siggeirsdottir K, Harris
TB, Zillikens MC, van Meurs JB, Thorsteinsdottir U, Maurano MT, Timpson NJ,
Soranzo N, Durbin R, Wilson SG, Ntzani EE, Brown MA, Stefansson K, Hinds DA,
Spector T, Cupples LA, Ohlsson C, Greenwood CM; UK10K Consortium, Jackson RD,
Rowe DW, Loomis CA, Evans DM, Ackert-Bicknell CL, Joyner AL, Duncan EL, Kiel DP, 
Rivadeneira F, Richards JB.

The extent to which low-frequency (minor allele frequency (MAF) between 1-5%) and
rare (MAF<U+2009>=<U+2009>1%) variants contribute to complex traits and disease in the general 
population is mainly unknown. Bone mineral density (BMD) is highly heritable, a
major predictor of osteoporotic fractures, and has been previously associated
with common genetic variants, as well as rare, population-specific, coding
variants. Here we identify novel non-coding genetic variants with large effects
on BMD (ntotal<U+2009>=<U+2009>53,236) and fracture (ntotal<U+2009>=<U+2009>508,253) in individuals of
European ancestry from the general population. Associations for BMD were derived 
from whole-genome sequencing (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>2,882 from UK10K (ref. 10); a population-based 
genome sequencing consortium), whole-exome sequencing (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>3,549), deep
imputation of genotyped samples using a combined UK10K/1000 Genomes reference
panel (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>26,534), and de novo replication genotyping (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>20,271). We
identified a low-frequency non-coding variant near a novel locus, EN1, with an
effect size fourfold larger than the mean of previously reported common variants 
for lumbar spine BMD (rs11692564(T), MAF<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.6%, replication effect size<U+2009>=<U+2009>+0.20 
s.d., Pmeta<U+2009>=<U+2009>2<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-14)), which was also associated with a decreased risk of
fracture (odds ratio<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.85; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>2<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-11); ncases<U+2009>=<U+2009>98,742 and
ncontrols<U+2009>=<U+2009>409,511). Using an En1(cre/flox) mouse model, we observed that
conditional loss of En1 results in low bone mass, probably as a consequence of
high bone turnover. We also identified a novel low-frequency non-coding variant
with large effects on BMD near WNT16 (rs148771817(T), MAF<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.2%, replication
effect size<U+2009>=<U+2009>+0.41 s.d., Pmeta<U+2009>=<U+2009>1<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-11)). In general, there was an excess
of association signals arising from deleterious coding and conserved non-coding
variants. These findings provide evidence that low-frequency non-coding variants 
have large effects on BMD and fracture, thereby providing rationale for
whole-genome sequencing and improved imputation reference panels to study the
genetic architecture of complex traits and disease in the general population.

PMCID: PMC4755714
PMID: 26367794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2015 Oct;24(10):1607-13. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-15-0388. Epub 2015 Aug 12.

DNA Methylation Predicts Progression of Human Gastric Lesions.

Schneider BG(1), Mera R(2), Piazuelo MB(2), Bravo JC(3), Zabaleta J(4), Delgado
AG(2), Bravo LE(5), Wilson KT(6), El-Rifai W(7), Peek RM Jr(2), Correa P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee. barbara.schneider@vanderbilt.edu.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee. (3)Fundación Valle del Lili, Cali,
Colombia. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center and Stanley Scott Cancer Center, New Orleans, Louisiana. (5)Department of 
Pathology, School of Medicine, Universidad del Valle, Cali, Colombia. (6)Division
of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee. Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System
and Office of Medical Research, Department of Veterans Affairs, Nashville,
Tennessee. (7)Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System and Office of
Medical Research, Department of Veterans Affairs, Nashville, Tennessee.
Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee.

BACKGROUND: Development of the intestinal subtype of gastric adenocarcinoma is
marked by a progression of histopathologic lesions. Residents of the Andean
regions of Colombia are at high risk for gastric cancer.
METHODS: A cohort of 976 Colombian subjects was followed over 16 years examining 
effects of Helicobacter pylori eradication and treatment with antioxidants on
progression of lesions. We performed methylation analysis of DNA from baseline
antral biopsies from 104 subjects for whom follow-up data were available for at
least 12 years. Methylation was quantitated for AMPH, CDKN2A, CDH1, EN1, EMX1,
NKX6-1, PCDH10, RPRM, RSPO2, SORCS3, ZIC1, and ZNF610 genes, using
Pyrosequencing.
RESULTS: Levels of DNA methylation were associated with baseline diagnosis for
AMPH, EMX1, RPRM, RSPO2, SORCS3, and ZNF610. After adjusting for baseline
diagnosis and H. pylori infection, methylation levels of AMPH, PCDH10, RSPO2, and
ZNF610 had progression coefficients that increased and P values that decreased
over 6, 12, and 16 years. Methylation for SORCS3 was associated with progression 
at all 3 time points but without the continual strengthening of the effect.
Scores for mononuclear leukocytes, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, or
intraepithelial lymphocytes were unrelated to progression.
CONCLUSIONS: Methylation levels of AMPH, PCDH10, RSPO2, SORCS3, and ZNF610
predict progression of gastric lesions independent of the effect of duration of
H. pylori infection, baseline diagnosis, gender of the patient, or scores for
mononuclear leukocytes, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, or intraepithelial
lymphocytes.
IMPACT: DNA methylation levels in AMPH, PCDH10, RSPO2, SORCS3, and ZNF610 may
contribute to identification of persons with gastric lesions likely to progress.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4592454 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26269563  [PubMed - in process]


14. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Aug 11;112(32):9932-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1511680112. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

A genetic basis of variation in eccrine sweat gland and hair follicle density.

Kamberov YG(1), Karlsson EK(2), Kamberova GL(3), Lieberman DE(4), Sabeti PC(2),
Morgan BA(5), Tabin CJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; Department
of Dermatology, Harvard Medical School and Cutaneous Biology Research Center,
Mass General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129; The Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142; Department of Human Evolutionary Biology, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA 02138; Center for Systems Biology, Department of
Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138;
(2)The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142; Center for
Systems Biology, Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA 02138; (3)Department of Computer Science, Hofstra
University, Hempstead, NY 11549. (4)Department of Human Evolutionary Biology,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138; (5)Department of Dermatology, Harvard
Medical School and Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Mass General Hospital,
Charlestown, MA 02129; tabin@genetics.med.harvard.edu
bruce.morgan@cbrc2.mgh.harvard.edu. (6)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115; tabin@genetics.med.harvard.edu
bruce.morgan@cbrc2.mgh.harvard.edu.

Among the unique features of humans, one of the most salient is the ability to
effectively cool the body during extreme prolonged activity through the
evapotranspiration of water on the skin's surface. The evolution of this novel
physiological ability required a dramatic increase in the density and
distribution of eccrine sweat glands relative to other mammals and a concomitant 
reduction of body hair cover. Elucidation of the genetic underpinnings for these 
adaptive changes is confounded by a lack of knowledge about how eccrine gland
fate and density are specified during development. Moreover, although reciprocal 
changes in hair cover and eccrine gland density are required for efficient
thermoregulation, it is unclear if these changes are linked by a common genetic
regulation. To identify pathways controlling the relative patterning of eccrine
glands and hair follicles, we exploited natural variation in the density of these
organs between different strains of mice. Quantitative trait locus mapping
identified a large region on mouse Chromosome 1 that controls both hair and
eccrine gland densities. Differential and allelic expression analysis of the
genes within this interval coupled with subsequent functional studies
demonstrated that the level of En1 activity directs the relative numbers of
eccrine glands and hair follicles. These findings implicate En1 as a newly
identified and reciprocal determinant of hair follicle and eccrine gland density 
and identify a pathway that could have contributed to the evolution of the unique
features of human skin.

PMCID: PMC4538659
PMID: 26195765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Bioimpacts. 2015;5(2):97-102. doi: 10.15171/bi.2015.07. Epub 2015 Apr 6.

The role of dopaminergic and serotonergic systems in neurodevelopmental
disorders: a focus on epilepsy and seizure susceptibility.

Tripathi PP(1), Bozzi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropathology, Center for Integrative Biology
(CIBIO), University of Trento, Trento, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: The embryonic development of the vertebrate Central Nervous System 
(CNS) requires the induction of transcription factors regulating the expression
of specific subsets of genes in restricted CNS regions. Among these transcription
factors, homeobox-containing proteins play a crucial role, and altered expression
of these factors can impact the embryonic as well as adult CNS functions.
Importantly, the homeobox-containing genes Otx2, Engrailed-1 (En1), and
Engrailed-2 (En2) have been described to crucially regulate differentiation of
dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons during vertebrate CNS development.
Dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons, located in midbrain and hindbrain regions 
respectively, diffusely innervate several forebrain areas including limbic
system, contributing in regulating several physiological functions. Understanding
the embryonic development of these neuronal populations is crucial to elucidate
their physiological function including brain excitability in the adult brain. New
evidence is emerging about the impact of an altered embryonic development of
dopamine and serotonin neurons onto seizure susceptibility in the adult life.
METHODS: In this mini-review, we summarized our kainic acid (KA) induced seizure 
susceptibility in adult mutant mouse lines with targeted manipulation of Otx2,
En1, and En2 genes.
RESULTS: Our results demonstrated that altered development of dopamine (DA)
neurons does not interfere with KA seizure susceptibility, while increased
serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) hyperinnervation leads to resistance to
KA-induced seizure.
CONCLUSION: We propose that developmental alterations of serotonergic but not
dopaminergic circuits play a crucial role in controlling seizure susceptibility
in the adult life.

PMCID: PMC4492191
PMID: 26191504  [PubMed]


16. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2015 Nov;51(10):1003-11. doi:
10.1007/s11626-015-9930-y. Epub 2015 Jul 7.

Expression of developmental genes in brown fat cells grown in vitro is linked
with lipid accumulation.

Singh S(1), Rajput YS(2), Barui AK(3), Sharma R(3), Grover S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biochemistry Division, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal,
Haryana, 132001, India. (2)Animal Biochemistry Division, National Dairy Research 
Institute, Karnal, Haryana, 132001, India. ys_rajput@rediffmail.com. (3)Dairy
Chemistry Division, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana, 132001,
India. (4)Dairy Microbiology Division, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal,
Haryana, 132001, India.

En1, Nr2f1, Gpc4, Sfrp2, Shox2, Tbx15 and Thbd are among the genes involved in
development process of an organism in a number of tissues, in particular adipose 
tissue. Considering the involvement of isobutyl-methyl-xanthine (IBMX),
indomethacin, dexamethasone (DEX), triiodothyronine (T3), and insulin in
adipocyte differentiation, we propose that these differentiation-inducing agents 
may regulate differentiation in brown adipose tissue through a developmental
process. Stromavascular cells isolated from interscapular brown fat of mice were 
cultured in DMEM-LG medium. Proliferating brown preadipocytes were differentiated
in the presence of IBMX, indomethacin, DEX, T3 and insulin. Pref1 (marker of
proliferation stage) and uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1, marker for differentiation
stage) were upregulated during proliferation and differentiation, respectively.
Relative expression of Pref1, UCP1 and developmental genes was determined in
different stages of adipogenesis. En1, Gpc4, Nr2f1, Sfrp2 and Shox2 were
upregulated during differentiation. Differentiation of preadipocytes in the
absence of IBMX, indomethacin, and DEX resulted in drastic reduction in fat
accumulation in differentiated adipocytes with simultaneous decrease in En1,
Gpc4, Nr2f1, Sfrp2, Shox2 and Tbx15 gene expression. T3 upregulated the
expression of En1, Gpc4, Sfrp2 and Tbx15 genes during differentiation and
downregulated Shox2 expression as compared to proliferated state. Insulin
upregulated the expression of Shox2.

PMID: 26148884  [PubMed - in process]


17. Stem Cells Int. 2015;2015:647437. doi: 10.1155/2015/647437. Epub 2015 Apr 30.

Neural Progenitor Cells Derived from Human Embryonic Stem Cells as an Origin of
Dopaminergic Neurons.

Noisa P(1), Raivio T(2), Cui W(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Institute of Agricultural Technology, Suranaree
University of Technology, Nakhon Ratchasima 30000, Thailand ; Institute of
Biomedicine, Department of Physiology, University of Helsinki, 00290 Helsinki,
Finland. (2)Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Physiology, University of
Helsinki, 00290 Helsinki, Finland ; Children's Hospital, Helsinki University
Central Hospital, 00290 Helsinki, Finland. (3)Institute of Reproductive and
Developmental Biology, Department of Surgery and Cancer, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Campus, London W12 0NN, UK.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are able to proliferate in vitro indefinitely 
without losing their ability to differentiate into multiple cell types upon
exposure to appropriate signals. Particularly, the ability of hESCs to
differentiate into neuronal subtypes is fundamental to develop cell-based
therapies for several neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease,
Huntington's disease, and Parkinson's disease. In this study, we differentiated
hESCs to dopaminergic neurons via an intermediate stage, neural progenitor cells 
(NPCs). hESCs were induced to neural progenitor cells by Dorsomorphin, a small
molecule that inhibits BMP signalling. The resulting neural progenitor cells
exhibited neural bipolarity with high expression of neural progenitor genes and
possessed multipotential differentiation ability. CBF1 and bFGF responsiveness of
these hES-NP cells suggested their similarity to embryonic neural progenitor
cells. A substantial number of dopaminergic neurons were derived from hES-NP
cells upon supplementation of FGF8 and SHH, key dopaminergic neuron inducers.
Importantly, multiple markers of midbrain neurons were detected, including NURR1,
PITX3, and EN1, suggesting that hESC-derived dopaminergic neurons attained the
midbrain identity. Altogether, this work underscored the generation of neural
progenitor cells that retain the properties of embryonic neural progenitor cells.
These cells will serve as an unlimited source for the derivation of dopaminergic 
neurons, which might be applicable for treating patients with Parkinson's
disease.

PMCID: PMC4430666
PMID: 26064138  [PubMed]


18. Cell Rep. 2015 Jun 16;11(10):1549-63. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.05.011. Epub
2015 Jun 4.

Somatic Cell Fusions Reveal Extensive Heterogeneity in Basal-like Breast Cancer.

Su Y(1), Subedee A(2), Bloushtain-Qimron N(3), Savova V(4), Krzystanek M(5), Li
L(6), Marusyk A(1), Tabassum DP(2), Zak A(7), Flacker MJ(8), Li M(3), Lin JJ(1), 
Sukumar S(8), Suzuki H(9), Long H(6), Szallasi Z(10), Gimelbrant A(4), Maruyama
R(11), Polyak K(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215,
USA; Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215,
USA; BBS Program, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Department of
Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215,
USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Department of Systems Biology, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kongens
Lyngby, Denmark. (6)Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute Boston, MA 02215, USA. (7)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215, USA. (8)Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. (9)Department of Molecular Biology, Sapporo
Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan. (10)Department of
Systems Biology, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark;
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (11)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Medicine,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Molecular Biology,
Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.
Electronic address: reomaru@sapmed.ac.jp. (12)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Medicine,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; BBS Program, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, 
USA; The Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. Electronic address:
kornelia_polyak@dfci.harvard.edu.

Basal-like and luminal breast tumors have distinct clinical behavior and
molecular profiles, yet the underlying mechanisms are poorly defined. To
interrogate processes that determine these distinct phenotypes and their
inheritance pattern, we generated somatic cell fusions and performed integrated
genetic and epigenetic (DNA methylation and chromatin) profiling. We found that
the basal-like trait is generally dominant and is largely defined by epigenetic
repression of luminal transcription factors. Definition of super-enhancers
highlighted a core program common in luminal cells but a high degree of
heterogeneity in basal-like breast cancers that correlates with clinical outcome.
We also found that protein extracts of basal-like cells are sufficient to induce 
a luminal-to-basal phenotypic switch, implying a trigger of basal-like
autoregulatory circuits. We determined that KDM6A might be required for
luminal-basal fusions, and we identified EN1, TBX18, and TCF4 as candidate
transcriptional regulators of the luminal-to-basal switch. Our findings highlight
the remarkable epigenetic plasticity of breast cancer cells.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26051943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Oct;82:32-45. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.05.015. Epub 2015 Jun
3.

A WNT1-regulated developmental gene cascade prevents dopaminergic
neurodegeneration in adult En1(+/-) mice.

Zhang J(1), Götz S(2), Vogt Weisenhorn DM(3), Simeone A(4), Wurst W(5), Prakash
N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Deutsches
Forschungszentrum für Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH), Ingolstädter Landstr. 1,
D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany. Electronic address: Jingzhong.Zhang@mdc-berlin.de.
(2)Institute of Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Deutsches
Forschungszentrum für Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH), Ingolstädter Landstr. 1,
D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany. Electronic address:
sebastian.goetz@helmholtz-muenchen.de. (3)Institute of Developmental Genetics,
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Gesundheit und Umwelt 
(GmbH), Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany; Technische
Universität München-Weihenstephan, Lehrstuhl für Entwicklungsgenetik c/o
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany; 
Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen (DZNE) Standort München,
Schillerstr. 44, D-80336 München, Germany. Electronic address:
daniela.vogt@helmholtz-muenchen.de. (4)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics "A.
Buzzati-Traverso", I-80131 Naples, Italy; IRCCS Neuromed, I-86077 Pozzilli, IS,
Italy. Electronic address: antonio.simeone@igb.cnr.it. (5)Institute of
Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Deutsches Forschungszentrum
für Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH), Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, D-85764 Neuherberg,
Germany; Technische Universität München-Weihenstephan, Lehrstuhl für
Entwicklungsgenetik c/o Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1,
D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany; Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen
(DZNE) Standort München, Schillerstr. 44, D-80336 München, Germany; Munich
Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Adolf-Butenandt-Institut,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Schillerstrasse 44, D-80336 München,
Germany. Electronic address: wurst@helmholtz-muenchen.de. (6)Institute of
Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Deutsches Forschungszentrum
für Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH), Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, D-85764 Neuherberg,
Germany; Technische Universität München-Weihenstephan, Lehrstuhl für
Entwicklungsgenetik c/o Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1,
D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany. Electronic address: nilima.prakash@hshl.de.

The protracted and age-dependent degeneration of dopamine (DA)-producing neurons 
of the Substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) and ventral tegmental area (VTA) in
the mammalian midbrain is a hallmark of human Parkinson's Disease (PD) and of
certain genetic mouse models of PD, such as mice heterozygous for the homeodomain
transcription factor Engrailed 1 (En1(+/-) mice). Neurotoxin-based animal models 
of PD, in contrast, are characterized by the fast and partly reversible
degeneration of the SNc and VTA DA neurons. The secreted protein WNT1 was
previously shown to be strongly induced in the neurotoxin-injured adult ventral
midbrain (VM), and to protect the SNc and VTA DA neurons from cell death in this 
context. We demonstrate here that the sustained and ectopic expression of Wnt1 in
the SNc and VTA DA neurons of En1(+/Wnt1) mice also protected these genetically
affected En1 heterozygote (En1(+/-)) neurons from their premature degeneration in
the adult mouse VM. We identified a developmental gene cascade that is
up-regulated in the adult En1(+/Wnt1) VM, including the direct WNT1/ß-catenin
signaling targets Lef1, Lmx1a, Fgf20 and Dkk3, as well as the indirect targets
Pitx3 (activated by LMX1A) and Bdnf (activated by PITX3). We also show that the
secreted neurotrophin BDNF and the secreted WNT modulator DKK3, but not the
secreted growth factor FGF20, increased the survival of En1 mutant dopaminergic
neurons in vitro. The WNT1-mediated signaling pathway and its downstream targets 
BDNF and DKK3 might thus provide a useful means to treat certain genetic and
environmental (neurotoxic) forms of human PD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26049140  [PubMed - in process]


20. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(12):1799-808. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1036209.

The evolutionarily conserved transcription factor PRDM12 controls sensory neuron 
development and pain perception.

Nagy V(1), Cole T, Van Campenhout C, Khoung TM, Leung C, Vermeiren S, Novatchkova
M, Wenzel D, Cikes D, Polyansky AA, Kozieradzki I, Meixner A, Bellefroid EJ,
Neely GG, Penninger JM.

Author information: 
(1)IMBA-Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Vienna, Austria; UNSW Medicine, Sydney, Australia.

Erratum in
    Cell Cycle. 2015;14(19):3203.

PR homology domain-containing member 12 (PRDM12) belongs to a family of conserved
transcription factors implicated in cell fate decisions. Here we show that PRDM12
is a key regulator of sensory neuronal specification in Xenopus. Modeling of
human PRDM12 mutations that cause hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy
(HSAN) revealed remarkable conservation of the mutated residues in evolution.
Expression of wild-type human PRDM12 in Xenopus induced the expression of sensory
neuronal markers, which was reduced using various human PRDM12 mutants. In
Drosophila, we identified Hamlet as the functional PRDM12 homolog that controls
nociceptive behavior in sensory neurons. Furthermore, expression analysis of
human patient fibroblasts with PRDM12 mutations uncovered possible downstream
target genes. Knockdown of several of these target genes including
thyrotropin-releasing hormone degrading enzyme (TRHDE) in Drosophila sensory
neurons resulted in altered cellular morphology and impaired nociception. These
data show that PRDM12 and its functional fly homolog Hamlet are evolutionary
conserved master regulators of sensory neuronal specification and play a critical
role in pain perception. Our data also uncover novel pathways in multiple species
that regulate evolutionary conserved nociception.

PMCID: PMC4613559 [Available on 2016-04-18]
PMID: 25891934  [PubMed - in process]


21. Science. 2015 Apr 17;348(6232):aaa2151. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa2151.

Skin fibrosis. Identification and isolation of a dermal lineage with intrinsic
fibrogenic potential.

Rinkevich Y(1), Walmsley GG(2), Hu MS(2), Maan ZN(3), Newman AM(4), Drukker M(4),
Januszyk M(3), Krampitz GW(4), Gurtner GC(3), Lorenz HP(3), Weissman IL(5),
Longaker MT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Departments of
Pathology and Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA. ryuval@stanford.edu irv@stanford.edu
longaker@stanford.edu. (2)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Departments of Pathology and Developmental Biology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Hagey Laboratory for Pediatric
Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (3)Hagey
Laboratory for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery, Plastic
and Reconstructive Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA. (4)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine,
Departments of Pathology and Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (5)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Departments of Pathology and Developmental Biology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Ludwig Center
for Cancer Stem Cell Biology and Medicine, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. ryuval@stanford.edu irv@stanford.edu
longaker@stanford.edu. (6)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Departments of Pathology and Developmental Biology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Hagey Laboratory for Pediatric
Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
ryuval@stanford.edu irv@stanford.edu longaker@stanford.edu.

Comment in
    Science. 2015 Apr 17;348(6232):284-5.

Dermal fibroblasts represent a heterogeneous population of cells with diverse
features that remain largely undefined. We reveal the presence of at least two
fibroblast lineages in murine dorsal skin. Lineage tracing and transplantation
assays demonstrate that a single fibroblast lineage is responsible for the bulk
of connective tissue deposition during embryonic development, cutaneous wound
healing, radiation fibrosis, and cancer stroma formation. Lineage-specific cell
ablation leads to diminished connective tissue deposition in wounds and reduces
melanoma growth. Using flow cytometry, we identify CD26/DPP4 as a surface marker 
that allows isolation of this lineage. Small molecule-based inhibition of
CD26/DPP4 enzymatic activity during wound healing results in diminished cutaneous
scarring. Identification and isolation of these lineages hold promise for
translational medicine aimed at in vivo modulation of fibrogenic behavior.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 25883361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2015 Apr 15;246(8):862-7. doi: 10.2460/javma.246.8.862.

Urine protein-to-creatinine concentration ratio in samples collected by means of 
cystocentesis versus manual compression in cats.

Vilhena HC(1), Santos RR, Sargo TJ, Lima TB, Dias SS, Pastorinho MR, Queiroga FL,
Silvestre-Ferreira AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Escola Universitária Vasco da Gama, Campus 
Universitário Lordemão, 3020-210 Coimbra, Portugal., Hospital Veterinário do
Baixo Vouga, EN1, 355, 3750-742 Segadães-Águeda, Portugal., Centro de Ciencia
Animal e Veterinária (CECAV), Universidade de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Quinta
de Prados, 5000-801 Vila Real, Portugal.

Objective-To compare urine protein-to-creatinine concentration (UPC) ratios in
samples collected by means of cystocentesis versus manual compression in cats.
Design-Evaluation study. Animals-43 client-owned cats requiring urinalysis.
Procedures-In all cats, 5 mL of urine from the midstream phase of micturition was
collected by means of manual compression and, subsequently, an additional 5 mL of
urine was obtained by means of ultrasound-guided cystocentesis. A complete
urinalysis was performed on all samples, and UPC ratios were determined.
Results-Cats were classified on the basis of the International Renal Interest
Society substaging system as being free from proteinuria (UPC ratio, < 0.2; n =
19) or as having borderline proteinuria (UPC ratio, 0.2 to 0.4; 7) or proteinuria
(UPC ratio, > 0.4; 17). None of the cats had postrenal proteinuria. A significant
linear correlation was identified between UPC ratios in urine samples obtained by
means of manual compression and ratios in samples obtained by means of
cystocentesis. For all cats, UPC ratios for samples obtained by the 2 collection 
methods resulted in classification in the same IRIS substage. Conclusions and
Clinical Relevance-Results suggested that collection of a urine sample from the
midstream phase of micturition by manual compression would be a reliable
alternative to cystocentesis for the determination of UPC ratio in cats, provided
that postrenal proteinuria was excluded by means of urine sediment analysis. Once
postrenal proteinuria was ruled out, the method used to collect urine samples did
not appear to influence the quantification of urine protein concentration.

PMID: 25835170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Apr 17;459(4):655-61. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.166. Epub 2015 Mar 10.

Direct conversion of human fibroblasts into dopaminergic neural progenitor-like
cells using TAT-mediated protein transduction of recombinant factors.

Mirakhori F(1), Zeynali B(2), Rassouli H(3), Salekdeh GH(4), Baharvand H(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology, College of Science, Tehran University, P.O. Box 14155-6455,
Tehran, Iran; Department of Stem Cells and Developmental Biology at Cell Science 
Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR,
1998777494, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: mirakhori@ut.ac.ir. (2)School of
Biology, College of Science, Tehran University, P.O. Box 14155-6455, Tehran,
Iran. Electronic address: bzeynali@khayam.ut.ac.ir. (3)Department of Molecular
Systems Biology at Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell
Biology and Technology, ACECR, P.O. Box 19395-4644, Tehran, Iran. Electronic
address: rassouli59@gmail.com. (4)Department of Molecular Systems Biology at Cell
Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology,
ACECR, P.O. Box 19395-4644, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
hsalekdeh@yahoo.com. (5)School of Biology, College of Science, Tehran University,
P.O. Box 14155-6455, Tehran, Iran; Department of Developmental Biology,
University of Science and Culture, ACECR, P.O. Box 19395-4644, Tehran, Iran.
Electronic address: baharvand@royaninstitute.org.

Recent progress in the generation of induced neural progenitor cells (iNPCs)
holds tremendous potential for regenerative medicine. However, a major limitation
is the lack of a reliable source for cell replacement therapy in neurological
diseases such as Parkinson's disease (PD). Here, we show that the combination of 
small molecules (SM) and TAT-mediated protein transduction of SOX2 and LMX1a in a
3D sphere culture directly convert human fibroblasts to induced dopaminergic
neural progenitor-like cells (iDPCs). The generated iDPCs expressed various NPC
markers (SOX2, PAX6, NESTIN, OLIG2) and midbrain progenitor markers (EN1, LMX1a, 
FOXA2, WNT1) as detected by immunostaining and real-time PCR. Following
differentiation, the majority of cells expressed neuronal dopaminergic markers as
indicated by co-expression of TH with NURR1, and/or PITX3. We found that SOX2 and
LMX1a TAT-mediated protein transduction in the combination of SM could directly
convert human fibroblasts to self-renewal iDPCs. In conclusion, to our best
knowledge, this is the first report of generation of safe DPCs and may suggest an
alternative strategy for cell therapy for the treatment of neurodegenerative
disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25767075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 24;10(2):e0118505. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118505.
eCollection 2015.

Engrailed 1 mediates correct formation of limb innervation through two distinct
mechanisms.

Huettl RE(1), Luxenhofer G(1), Bianchi E(1), Haupt C(2), Joshi R(3), Prochiantz
A(3), Huber AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München (GmbH)-German
Research Center for Environmental Health, Munich, Germany. (2)Institute of
Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München (GmbH)-German Research Center
for Environmental Health, Munich, Germany; Institute of Physiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany. (3)Collège de France,
Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology, Paris, France.

Engrailed-1 (En1) is expressed in the ventral ectoderm of the developing limb
where it plays an instructive role in the dorsal-ventral patterning of the
forelimb. Besides its well-described role as a transcription factor in regulating
gene expression through its DNA-binding domain, En1 may also be secreted to form 
an extracellular gradient, and directly impact on the formation of the
retinotectal map. We show here that absence of En1 causes mispatterning of the
forelimb and thus defects in the dorsal-ventral pathfinding choice of motor axons
in vivo. In addition, En1 but not En2 also has a direct and specific repulsive
effect on motor axons of the lateral aspect of the lateral motor column (LMC) but
not on medial LMC projections. Moreover, an ectopic dorsal source of En1 pushes
lateral LMC axons to the ventral limb in vivo. Thus, En1 controls the
establishment of limb innervation through two distinct molecular mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4340014
PMID: 25710467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Dent Res. 2015 Jun;94(6):843-52. doi: 10.1177/0022034515570316. Epub 2015 Feb
11.

Human periapical cyst-mesenchymal stem cells differentiate into neuronal cells.

Marrelli M(1), Paduano F(2), Tatullo M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Maxillofacial Surgery, Calabrodental, Crotone, Italy. (2)Tecnologica
Research Institute, Biomedical Section, Crotone, Italy. (3)Tecnologica Research
Institute, Biomedical Section, Crotone, Italy marco.tatullo@tecnologicasrl.com.

It was recently reported that human periapical cysts (hPCys), a commonly
occurring odontogenic cystic lesion of inflammatory origin, contain mesenchymal
stem cells (MSCs) with the capacity for self-renewal and multilineage
differentiation. In this study, periapical inflammatory cysts were compared with 
dental pulp to determine whether this tissue may be an alternative accessible
tissue source of MSCs that retain the potential for neurogenic differentiation.
Flow cytometry and immunofluorescence analysis indicated that hPCy-MSCs and
dental pulp stem cells spontaneously expressed the neuron-specific protein ß-III 
tubulin and the neural stem-/astrocyte-specific protein glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP) in their basal state before differentiation occurs. Furthermore,
undifferentiated hPCy-MSCs showed a higher expression of transcripts for neuronal
markers (ß-III tubulin, NF-M, MAP2) and neural-related transcription factors
(MSX-1, Foxa2, En-1) as compared with dental pulp stem cells. After exposure to
neurogenic differentiation conditions (neural media containing epidermal growth
factor [EGF], basic fibroblast growth factor [bFGF], and retinoic acid), the
hPCy-MSCs showed enhanced expression of ß-III tubulin and GFAP proteins, as well 
as increased expression of neurofilaments medium, neurofilaments heavy, and
neuron-specific enolase at the transcript level. In addition, neurally
differentiated hPCy-MSCs showed upregulated expression of the neural
transcription factors Pitx3, Foxa2, Nurr1, and the dopamine-related genes
tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine transporter. The present study demonstrated for
the first time that hPCy-MSCs have a predisposition toward the neural phenotype
that is increased when exposed to neural differentiation cues, based on
upregulation of a comprehensive set of proteins and genes that define neuronal
cells. In conclusion, these results provide evidence that hPCy-MSCs might be
another optimal source of neural/glial cells for cell-based therapies to treat
neurologic diseases.

© International & American Associations for Dental Research 2015.

PMID: 25672890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Mar;53(3):247-55. doi: 10.5414/CP202236.

Effects of advanced age and renal dysfunction on the single- and repeated-dose
pharmacokinetics of modified-release flupirtine.

de Mey C, Gatchev E, Deliyska B, Terhaag B.

BACKGROUND: Flupirtine is a nonopioid, central analgesic without antipyretic or
antiphlogistic properties. Flupirtine-MR is an oral modified-release formulation 
with a 100 mg fast-input and a 300 mg portion with slow protracted release.
METHODS: Single- (D01) and repeated-dose (D03-D09) pharmacokinetics of 400 mg
flupirtine-MR were investigated in patients with severe renal dysfunction (REN:
N: 12; 21 50 years of age; creatinine clearance (CLCr)=30 mL/min per 1.73 m2 body
surface area (BSA)) and healthy older subjects (EN1: N: 8; 60-69 years; CLCr=80
mL/min and EN2: N: 8; =70 years, CLCr=60 mL/min) vs. young healthy control
subjects (YN: N: 12; 21-40 years; CLCr=90 mL/min).
RESULTS: Renal dysfunction led to a relatively small average increase in systemic
exposure to flupirtine: on D09, the REN : YN-ratios were 1.37 (95% confidence
interval (CI): 1.03-1.82), 1.21 (CI: 1.01-1.45), and 1.34 (CI: 1.09-1.64) for
Css,0, Css,max, and Css,av, respectively. A similar increase in exposure was
observed in older subjects: the respective EN1:YN-ratios were 1.30 (CI:
0.95-1.79), 1.23 (CI: 1.01-1.49), and 1.23 (CI: 0.98-1.54); the EN2:YN-ratios
were 1.50 (CI: 1.10-2.04), 1.16 (CI: 0.85-1.41), and 1.41 (CI: 1.12-1.79),
respectively. Neither age nor renal function was a predominant factor of
pharmacokinetic variability. Single and repeated doses of flupirtine-MR were very
well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: The average renal and age effects were small, but the use of a lower
starting dose (1/2 tablet) is recommended since some of these subjects might have
relatively high exposure levels.

PMID: 25613539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Transl Oncol. 2014 Dec;7(6):780-7. doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2014.10.003.

Fatty Acid binding protein 7 is a molecular marker in adenoid cystic carcinoma of
the salivary glands: implications for clinical significance.

Phuchareon J(1), Overdevest JB(2), McCormick F(3), Eisele DW(1), van Zante A(4), 
Tetsu O(5).

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology-Head
and Neck Surgery, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco,
CA, USA; UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. (2)Head and Neck
Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery,
School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. (3)UCSF
Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University
of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, School of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. (5)Head and Neck
Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery,
School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; UCSF Helen 
Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: otetsu@ohns.ucsf.edu.

Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is an aggressive malignant neoplasm of the
salivary glands. Its diagnosis is difficult due to overlapping features with
other salivary tumors. Gene expression analysis may complement traditional
diagnostic methods. We searched gene expression patterns in the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) database and in our tumor and normal samples. The biologic and
prognostic potential of the identified genes was analyzed. The GEO data set of
primary xenografted ACCs revealed that expression of five genes, engrailed
homeobox 1 (EN1), fatty acid binding protein 7 (FABP7), hemoglobin epsilon 1,
MYB, and versican (VCAN), was dramatically increased. mRNA expression of EN1,
FABP7, MYB, and VCAN distinguished our sporadic ACCs from normal tissues and
benign tumors. FABP7 expression appeared to be regulated differently from EN1 and
MYB and was crossly correlated with poor prognosis in our ACC cohort.
Immunohistochemistry showed that FABP7 protein was predominantly expressed in the
nucleus of myoepithelial cells of both tubular and cribriform subtypes. In
contrast, in the solid subtype, which is often associated with a lower survival
rate, FABP7 protein was uniformly expressed in cancerous cells. One case with
cribriform architecture and the highest level of FABP7 mRNA showed strong FABP7
staining in both duct-type epithelial and myoepithelial cells, suggesting that
diffuse expression of FABP7 protein might be related to aggressive tumor behavior
and poor prognosis. We propose FABP7 as a novel biomarker in ACC. The molecule
may be useful in diagnosis and for identifying more effective therapies targeting
this protein or upstream molecules that regulate it.

Copyright © 2014 Neoplasia Press, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4311037
PMID: 25500088  [PubMed]


28. Mol Biotechnol. 2015 Feb;57(2):184-94. doi: 10.1007/s12033-014-9814-5.

Efficient differentiation of human embryonic stem cells toward dopaminergic
neurons using recombinant LMX1A factor.

Fathi A(1), Rasouli H, Yeganeh M, Salekdeh GH, Baharvand H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Systems Biology at the Cell Science Research Center,
Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran.

Direct differentiation of dopaminergic (DA) neurons from human pluripotent stem
cells (hPSCs) in the absence of gene manipulation is the most desired alternative
to clinical treatment of Parkinson disease. Protein transduction-based methods
could be efficient, safe approaches to enhance direct differentiation of human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) to DA neurons. In the present study, we compared the
differentiation efficiency of DA neurons from hESCs with and without the
application of LIM homeobox transcription factor 1 alpha (LMX1A), a master
regulatory protein in the development of the midbrain neurons and SHH proteins.
The results obtained revealed that the treatment of hESCs with recombinant LMX1A 
(rLMX1A) protein along with dual SMAD inhibition led to higher expression of
LMX1B, LMX1A, FOXA2, PITX3, EN1, and WNT1 effector endogenous genes and two-fold 
expression of PITX3. Moreover, the highest expression level of PITX3 and TH was
observed when rLMX1A was added to the induction medium supplemented with SHH. To 
our best knowledge, this is the first report demonstrating the application of
TAT-LMX1A recombinant protein to enhance hESC differentiation to DA as shown by
the expression of DA specific makers. These findings pave the way for enhancing
the differentiation of hESCs to DA neurons safely and efficiently without genetic
modification.

PMID: 25380985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Analyst. 2014 Dec 7;139(23):6178-84. doi: 10.1039/c4an01641f.

eMethylsorb: rapid quantification of DNA methylation in cancer cells on
screen-printed gold electrodes.

Koo KM(1), Sina AA, Carrascosa LG, Shiddiky MJ, Trau M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Personalized Nanomedicine, Australian Institute for Bioengineering 
and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland, Qld 4072, Australia.
lgcarrascosa@uq.edu.au m.shiddiky@uq.edu.au m.trau@uq.edu.au.

Simple, sensitive and inexpensive regional DNA methylation detection
methodologies are imperative for routine patient diagnostics. Herein, we describe
eMethylsorb, an electrochemical assay for quantitative detection of regional DNA 
methylation on a single-use and cost-effective screen-printed gold electrode
(SPE-Au) platform. The eMethylsorb approach is based on the inherent differential
adsorption affinity of DNA bases to gold (i.e. adenine > cytosine = guanine >
thymine). Through bisulfite modification and asymmetric PCR of DNA, methylated
and unmethylated DNA in the sample becomes guanine-enriched and adenine-enriched 
respectively. Under optimized conditions, adenine-enriched unmethylated DNA
(higher affinity to gold) adsorbs more onto the SPE-Au surface than methylated
DNA. Higher DNA adsorption causes stronger coulombic repulsion and hinders
reduction of ferricyanide [Fe(CN)6](3-)ions on the SPE-Au surface to give a lower
electrochemical response. Hence, the response level is directly proportional to
the methylation level in the sample. The applicability of this methodology was
tested by detecting the regional methylation status in a cluster of eight CpG
sites within the engrailed (EN1) gene promoter of the MCF7 breast cancer cell
line. A 10% methylation level sensitivity with good reproducibility (RSD = 5.8%, 
n = 3) was achieved rapidly in 10 min. Furthermore, eMethylsorb also has
advantages over current methylation assays such as being inexpensive, rapid and
does not require any electrode surface modification. We thus believe that the
eMethylsorb assay could potentially be a rapid and accurate diagnostic assay for 
point-of-care DNA methylation analysis.

PMID: 25318073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Front Neural Circuits. 2014 Sep 12;8:109. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2014.00109.
eCollection 2014.

Development of glycinergic innervation to the murine LSO and SPN in the presence 
and absence of the MNTB.

Altieri SC(1), Zhao T(2), Jalabi W(3), Maricich SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Richard King Mellon Foundation Institute for Pediatric Research and Department
of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, PA, USA ; Department of
Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (2)Richard King
Mellon Foundation Institute for Pediatric Research and Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Case
Western Reserve University Cleveland, OH, USA.

Neurons in the superior olivary complex (SOC) integrate excitatory and inhibitory
inputs to localize sounds in space. The majority of these inhibitory inputs have 
been thought to arise within the SOC from the medial nucleus of the trapezoid
body (MNTB). However, recent work demonstrates that glycinergic innervation of
the SOC persists in Egr2; En1(CKO) mice that lack MNTB neurons, suggesting that
there are other sources of this innervation (Jalabi et al., 2013). To study the
development of MNTB- and non-MNTB-derived glycinergic SOC innervation, we
compared immunostaining patterns of glycine transporter 2 (GlyT2) at several
postnatal ages in control and Egr2; En1(CKO) mice. GlyT2 immunostaining was
present at birth (P0) in controls and reached adult levels by P7 in the superior 
paraolivary nucleus (SPN) and by P12 in the lateral superior olive (LSO). In
Egr2; En1(CKO) mice, glycinergic innervation of the LSO developed at a similar
rate but was delayed by one week in the SPN. Conversely, consistent reductions in
the number of GlyT2(+) boutons located on LSO somata were seen at all ages in
Egr2; En1(CKO) mice, while these numbers reached control levels in the SPN by
adulthood. Dendritic localization of GlyT2+ boutons was unaltered in both the LSO
and SPN of adult Egr2; En1(CKO) mice. On the postsynaptic side, adult Egr2;
En1(CKO) mice had reduced glycine receptor a1 (GlyRa1) expression in the LSO but 
normal levels in the SPN. GlyRa2 was not expressed by LSO or SPN neurons in
either genotype. These findings contribute important information for
understanding the development of MNTB- and non-MNTB-derived glycinergic pathways 
to the mouse SOC.

PMCID: PMC4162373
PMID: 25309335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Jan;73:70-82. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.09.012. Epub 2014 Oct
2.

Progressive nigrostriatal terminal dysfunction and degeneration in the engrailed1
heterozygous mouse model of Parkinson's disease.

Nordström U(1), Beauvais G(2), Ghosh A(2), Pulikkaparambil Sasidharan BC(2),
Lundblad M(3), Fuchs J(4), Joshi RL(4), Lipton JW(5), Roholt A(6), Medicetty
S(6), Feinstein TN(7), Steiner JA(2), Escobar Galvis ML(2), Prochiantz A(4),
Brundin P(8).

Author information: 
(1)Neuronal Survival Unit, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Department of
Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, BMC B11, 221 84 Lund, Sweden.
(2)Laboratory of Translational Parkinson's Disease Research, Center for
Neurodegenerative Science, Van Andel Research Institute, 333 Bostwick Ave, N.E., 
Grand Rapids, MI 49503, USA. (3)Developmental and Regenerative Neurobiology,
Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund 
University, BMC A11, 221 84 Lund, Sweden. (4)Collège de France, Center for
Interdisciplinary Research in Biology (CIRB), Paris, France; Centre National de
la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7241, Paris, France; Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U1050, Labex Memolife, Paris,
France. (5)Department of Translational Science and Molecular Medicine, Michigan
State University, Grand Rapids, MI 49503, USA; The Udall Center of Excellence in 
Parkinson's Disease Research, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI 49503, 
USA. (6)Renovo Neural, Inc., 10000 Cedar Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.
(7)Confocal Microscopy and Quantitative Imaging Core Facility, Van Andel Research
Institute, 333 Bostwick Ave, N.E., Grand Rapids, MI 49503, USA. (8)Neuronal
Survival Unit, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Department of Experimental Medical
Science, Lund University, BMC B11, 221 84 Lund, Sweden; Laboratory of
Translational Parkinson's Disease Research, Center for Neurodegenerative Science,
Van Andel Research Institute, 333 Bostwick Ave, N.E., Grand Rapids, MI 49503,
USA. Electronic address: Patrik.Brundin@vai.org.

Current research on Parkinson's disease (PD) pathogenesis requires relevant
animal models that mimic the gradual and progressive development of neuronal
dysfunction and degeneration that characterizes the disease. Polymorphisms in
engrailed 1 (En1), a homeobox transcription factor that is crucial for both the
development and survival of mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons, are associated
with sporadic PD. This suggests that En1 mutant mice might be a promising
candidate PD model. Indeed, a mouse that lacks one En1 allele exhibits decreased 
mitochondrial complex I activity and progressive midbrain dopamine neuron
degeneration in adulthood, both features associated with PD. We aimed to further 
characterize the disease-like phenotype of these En1(+/-) mice with a focus on
early neurodegenerative changes that can be utilized to score efficacy of future 
disease modifying studies. We observed early terminal defects in the dopaminergic
nigrostriatal pathway in En1(+/-) mice. Several weeks before a significant loss
of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra could be detected, we found that 
striatal terminals expressing high levels of dopaminergic neuron markers TH,
VMAT2, and DAT were dystrophic and swollen. Using transmission electron
microscopy, we identified electron dense bodies consistent with abnormal
autophagic vacuoles in these terminal swellings. In line with these findings, we 
detected an up-regulation of the mTOR pathway, concurrent with a downregulation
of the autophagic marker LC3B, in ventral midbrain and nigral dopaminergic
neurons of the En1(+/-) mice. This supports the notion that autophagic protein
degradation is reduced in the absence of one En1 allele. We imaged the
nigrostriatal pathway using the CLARITY technique and observed many fragmented
axons in the medial forebrain bundle of the En1(+/-) mice, consistent with axonal
maintenance failure. Using in vivo electrochemistry, we found that nigrostriatal 
terminals in the dorsal striatum were severely deficient in dopamine release and 
reuptake. Our findings support a progressive retrograde degeneration of En1(+/-) 
nigrostriatal neurons, akin to what is suggested to occur in PD. We suggest that 
using the En1(+/-) mice as a model will provide further key insights into PD
pathogenesis, and propose that axon terminal integrity and function can be
utilized to estimate dopaminergic neuron health and efficacy of experimental PD
therapies.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25281317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015 Mar;40(4):839-48. doi: 10.1038/npp.2014.244. Epub
2014 Sep 22.

Abnormal development of monoaminergic neurons is implicated in mood fluctuations 
and bipolar disorder.

Jukic MM(1), Carrillo-Roa T(2), Bar M(1), Becker G(1), Jovanovic VM(1), Zega
K(1), Binder EB(3), Brodski C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, 
Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be'er Sheva,
Israel. (2)1] The Department of Translational Research in Psychiatry, Max-Planck 
Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany [2] Faculty of Biology,
Ludwig-Maximilian University of Munich, Munich, Germany. (3)The Department of
Translational Research in Psychiatry, Max-Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich,
Germany.

Subtle mood fluctuations are normal emotional experiences, whereas drastic mood
swings can be a manifestation of bipolar disorder (BPD). Despite their importance
for normal and pathological behavior, the mechanisms underlying endogenous mood
instability are largely unknown. During embryogenesis, the transcription factor
Otx2 orchestrates the genetic networks directing the specification of
dopaminergic (DA) and serotonergic (5-HT) neurons. Here we behaviorally
phenotyped mouse mutants overexpressing Otx2 in the hindbrain, resulting in an
increased number of DA neurons and a decreased number of 5-HT neurons in both
developing and mature animals. Over the course of 1 month, control animals
exhibited stable locomotor activity in their home cages, whereas mutants showed
extended periods of elevated or decreased activity relative to their individual
average. Additional behavioral paradigms, testing for manic- and depressive-like 
behavior, demonstrated that mutants showed an increase in intra-individual
fluctuations in locomotor activity, habituation, risk-taking behavioral
parameters, social interaction, and hedonic-like behavior. Olanzapine, lithium,
and carbamazepine ameliorated the behavioral alterations of the mutants, as did
the mixed serotonin receptor agonist quipazine and the specific 5-HT2C receptor
agonist CP-809101. Testing the relevance of the genetic networks specifying
monoaminergic neurons for BPD in humans, we applied an interval-based enrichment 
analysis tool for genome-wide association studies. We observed that the genes
specifying DA and 5-HT neurons exhibit a significant level of aggregated
association with BPD but not with schizophrenia or major depressive disorder. The
results of our translational study suggest that aberrant development of
monoaminergic neurons leads to mood fluctuations and may be associated with BPD.

PMCID: PMC4330498
PMID: 25241801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Anal Chem. 2014 Oct 21;86(20):10179-85. doi: 10.1021/ac502214z. Epub 2014 Sep 29.

Methylsorb: a simple method for quantifying DNA methylation using DNA-gold
affinity interactions.

Sina AA(1), Carrascosa LG, Palanisamy R, Rauf S, Shiddiky MJ, Trau M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Personalised Nanomedicine, Australian Institute for Bioengineering 
and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland , Corner College and
Cooper Roads (Building 75), Brisbane QLD 4072, Australia.

The analysis of DNA methylation is becoming increasingly important both in the
clinic and also as a research tool to unravel key epigenetic molecular mechanisms
in biology. Current methodologies for the quantification of regional DNA
methylation (i.e., the average methylation over a region of DNA in the genome)
are largely affected by comprehensive DNA sequencing methodologies which tend to 
be expensive, tedious, and time-consuming for many applications. Herein, we
report an alternative DNA methylation detection method referred to as
"Methylsorb", which is based on the inherent affinity of DNA bases to the gold
surface (i.e., the trend of the affinity interactions is adenine > cytosine =
guanine > thymine).1 Since the degree of gold-DNA affinity interaction is highly 
sequence dependent, it provides a new capability to detect DNA methylation by
simply monitoring the relative adsorption of bisulfite treated DNA sequences onto
a gold chip. Because the selective physical adsorption of DNA fragments to gold
enable a direct read-out of regional DNA methylation, the current requirement for
DNA sequencing is obviated. To demonstrate the utility of this method, we present
data on the regional methylation status of two CpG clusters located in the EN1
and MIR200B genes in MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. The methylation status of these
regions was obtained from the change in relative mass on gold surface with
respect to relative adsorption of an unmethylated DNA source and this was
detected using surface plasmon resonance (SPR) in a label-free and real-time
manner. We anticipate that the simplicity of this method, combined with the high 
level of accuracy for identifying the methylation status of cytosines in DNA,
could find broad application in biology and diagnostics.

PMID: 25226077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. PLoS Genet. 2014 Aug 28;10(8):e1004468. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004468.
eCollection 2014.

Sp6 and Sp8 transcription factors control AER formation and dorsal-ventral
patterning in limb development.

Haro E(1), Delgado I(1), Junco M(1), Yamada Y(2), Mansouri A(3), Oberg KC(4), Ros
MA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria (CSIC-UC-SODERCAN),
Santander, Spain. (2)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Biology, NIDCR,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Am Fassberg, Göttingen, Germany; Department of Clinical Neurophysiology,
University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany; Genome and Stem Cell Center, GENKOK,
Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey. (4)Department of Pathology and Human
Anatomy, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, California, United States of America.
(5)Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria (CSIC-UC-SODERCAN),
Santander, Spain; Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de Cantabria, Santander, Spain.

The formation and maintenance of the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) is critical
for the outgrowth and patterning of the vertebrate limb. The induction of the AER
is a complex process that relies on integrated interactions among the Fgf, Wnt,
and Bmp signaling pathways that operate within the ectoderm and between the
ectoderm and the mesoderm of the early limb bud. The transcription factors Sp6
and Sp8 are expressed in the limb ectoderm and AER during limb development. Sp6
mutant mice display a mild syndactyly phenotype while Sp8 mutants exhibit severe 
limb truncations. Both mutants show defects in AER maturation and in
dorsal-ventral patterning. To gain further insights into the role Sp6 and Sp8
play in limb development, we have produced mice lacking both Sp6 and Sp8 activity
in the limb ectoderm. Remarkably, the elimination or significant reduction in
Sp6;Sp8 gene dosage leads to tetra-amelia; initial budding occurs, but neither
Fgf8 nor En1 are activated. Mutants bearing a single functional allele of Sp8
(Sp6-/-;Sp8+/-) exhibit a split-hand/foot malformation phenotype with double
dorsal digit tips probably due to an irregular and immature AER that is not
maintained in the center of the bud and on the abnormal expansion of Wnt7a
expression to the ventral ectoderm. Our data are compatible with Sp6 and Sp8
working together and in a dose-dependent manner as indispensable mediators of
Wnt/ßcatenin and Bmp signaling in the limb ectoderm. We suggest that the function
of these factors links proximal-distal and dorsal-ventral patterning.

PMCID: PMC4148220
PMID: 25166858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2014 Sep 26;369(1652). pii: 20130518. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2013.0518.

Postnatal signalling with homeoprotein transcription factors.

Prochiantz A(1), Fuchs J(2), Di Nardo AA(2).

Author information: 
(1)CIRB, CNRS UMR 7241/INSERM U1050, College de France, 11 place Marcelin
Berthelot, Paris Cedex 05 75231, France alain.prochiantz@college-de-france.fr.
(2)CIRB, CNRS UMR 7241/INSERM U1050, College de France, 11 place Marcelin
Berthelot, Paris Cedex 05 75231, France.

Homeoprotein (HP) transcription factors were originally identified for their
embryonic cell-autonomous developmental functions. In this review, we discuss
their postnatal and adult physiological functions based on the study of Otx2,
Engrailed-1 and Engrailed-2 (collectively Engrailed). For Engrailed, we discuss
its function in the cell-autonomous regulation of ventral midbrain dopaminergic
neuron survival and physiology and in the non-cell-autonomous maintenance of
axons. For Otx2, we describe how the protein is expressed in the choroid plexus
and transported into cortical parvalbumin cells where it regulates plasticity in 
the visual cortex. These two examples illustrate how the understanding of HP
postnatal and adult functions, including signalling functions, may lead to the
identification of disease-associated genetic pathways and to the development of
original therapeutic strategies.

© 2014 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4142039
PMID: 25135979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;31(4):466-8. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2014.04.011.

[The function of transcription factor P63 and its signaling pathway during limb
development].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma W(1), Tian W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hand Surgery, Beijing Jishuitan Hospital, The Fourth Clinical
College of Peking University, Beijing 100035, P.R. China. wentiansyz@hotmail.com.

The development of human limb is controlled by several transcription factors and 
signaling pathways, which are organized in precise time- and space-restricted
manners. Recent studies showed that P63 and its signaling pathway play important 
roles in this process. Transcription factor P63, one member of the P53 family, is
characterized by a similar amino acid domain, plays a crucial role in the
development of limb and ectoderm differentiation, especially with its DNA binding
domain, and sterile alpha motif domains. Mutated P63 gene may produce abnormal
transcription factor P63 which can affect the signaling pathway. Furthermore,
defective signaling protein in structure and/or quantity is synthesized though
the pathway. Eventually, members of the signaling protein family are involved in 
the regulation of differentiation and development of stem cell, which causes
deformity of limbs. In brief, three signaling pathways are related to the digit
formation along three axes, including SHH-ZPA, FGFs-AER and Lmx1B-Wnt7a-En1. Each
contains numerous signaling molecules which are integrated in self-regulatory
modules that assure the acquisition or the correct digit complements. These
finding has brought new clues for deciphering the etiology of congenital limb
malformation and may provide alternatives for both prevention and treatment.

PMID: 25119911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Forensic Sci Int. 2014 Sep;242:9-15. doi: 10.1016/j.forsciint.2014.06.007. Epub
2014 Jun 13.

The role of clinical, genetic and segregation evaluation in sudden infant death.

Campuzano O(1), Allegue C(2), Sarquella-Brugada G(3), Coll M(2), Mates J(2),
Alcalde M(2), Ferrer-Costa C(4), Iglesias A(2), Brugada J(3), Brugada R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Genetics Center, University of Girona-IdIBGi, Girona, Spain.
Electronic address: oscar@brugada.org. (2)Cardiovascular Genetics Center,
University of Girona-IdIBGi, Girona, Spain. (3)Arrhythmias Unit, Hospital Sant
Joan de Déu, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Gendiag SL, Barcelona,
Spain.

Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) is the leading cause of death in the first
year of life. Several arrhythmogenic genes have been associated with cardiac
pathologies leading to infant sudden cardiac death (SCD). Our aim was to take
advantage of next generation sequencing (NGS) technology to perform a thorough
genetic analysis of a SIDS case. A SIDS case was referred to our institution
after negative autopsy. We performed a genetic analysis of 104 SCD-related genes 
using a custom panel. Confirmed variants in index case were also analyzed in
relatives. Clinical evaluation of first-degree family members was performed.
Relatives did not show pathology. NGS identified seven variants. Two previously
described as pathogenic. Four previously catalogued without clinical
significance. The seventh variation was novel. Familial segregation showed that
the index case's mother carried all same genetic variations except one, which was
inherited from the father. The sister of the index case carried three variants.
We believe that molecular autopsy should be included in current forensic
protocols after negative autopsy. In addition to NGS technologies, familial
genetic testing should be also performed to clarify potential pathogenic role of 
new variants and to identify genetic carriers at risk of SCD.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25016126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Glia. 2014 Oct;62(10):1713-23. doi: 10.1002/glia.22710. Epub 2014 Jun 25.

Growth and differentiation factor 10 (Gdf10) is involved in Bergmann glial cell
development under Shh regulation.

Mecklenburg N(1), Martinez-Lopez JE, Moreno-Bravo JA, Perez-Balaguer A, Puelles
E, Martinez S.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias de Alicante, Universidad Miguel Hernandez, Consejo 
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (UMH-CSIC), E-03550, Alicante, Spain;
Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, D-13125, Berlin, Germany.

Growth differentiation factor 10 (Gdf10), also known as Bmp3b, is a member of the
transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß superfamily. Gdf10 is expressed in Bergmann
glial cells, which was investigated by single-cell transcriptional profiling
(Koirala and Corfas, (2010) PLoS ONE 5: e9198). Here we provide a detailed
characterization of Gdf10 expression from E14, the stage at which Gdf10 is
expressed for the first time in the cerebellum, until P28. We detected Gdf10
expression in both germinal zones: in the ventricular zone (VZ) of the 4th
ventricle as well as in the rhombic lip (RL). The VZ has been postulated to give 
rise to GABAergic neurons and glial cells, whereas the RL gives rise to
glutamatergic neurons. Thus, it was very surprising to discover a gene that is
expressed exclusively in glial cells and is not restricted to an expression in
the VZ, but is also present in the RL. At postnatal stages Gdf10 was distributed 
equally in Bergmann glial cells of the cerebellum. Furthermore, we found Gdf10 to
be regulated by Sonic hedgehog (Shh), which is secreted by Purkinje cells of the 
cerebellum. In the conditional Shh mutants, glial cells showed a reduced
expression of Gdf10, whereas the expression of Nestin and Vimentin was unchanged.
Thus, we show for the first time, that Gdf10, expressed in Bergmann glial cells, 
is affected by the loss of Shh as early as E18.5, suggesting a regulation of
glial development by Shh.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24963847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Nat Commun. 2014 Jun 20;5:4181. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5181.

Snf2h-mediated chromatin organization and histone H1 dynamics govern cerebellar
morphogenesis and neural maturation.

Alvarez-Saavedra M(1), De Repentigny Y(2), Lagali PS(2), Raghu Ram EV(3), Yan
K(2), Hashem E(1), Ivanochko D(4), Huh MS(2), Yang D(5), Mears AJ(6), Todd MA(4),
Corcoran CP(2), Bassett EA(7), Tokarew NJ(7), Kokavec J(8), Majumder R(9),
Ioshikhes I(5), Wallace VA(10), Kothary R(1), Meshorer E(3), Stopka T(8),
Skoultchi AI(9), Picketts DJ(11).

Author information: 
(1)1] Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6 [2] Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5. (2)Regenerative Medicine
Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6.
(3)Department of Genetics, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences,
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel. (4)1] Regenerative
Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H
8L6 [2] Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5. (5)1] Department of Biochemistry,
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H
8M5 [2] Institute of Systems Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada K1H 8M5. (6)Vision Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6. (7)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5. (8)Institute
of Pathologic Physiology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in
Prague, Prague 12853, Czech Republic. (9)Department of Cell Biology, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA. (10)1] Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada K1H 8M5 [2] Vision Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6. (11)1] Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital
Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6 [2] Department of Cellular
and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5 [3]
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5.

Chromatin compaction mediates progenitor to post-mitotic cell transitions and
modulates gene expression programs, yet the mechanisms are poorly defined. Snf2h 
and Snf2l are ATP-dependent chromatin remodelling proteins that assemble,
reposition and space nucleosomes, and are robustly expressed in the brain. Here
we show that mice conditionally inactivated for Snf2h in neural progenitors have 
reduced levels of histone H1 and H2A variants that compromise chromatin fluidity 
and transcriptional programs within the developing cerebellum. Disorganized
chromatin limits Purkinje and granule neuron progenitor expansion, resulting in
abnormal post-natal foliation, while deregulated transcriptional programs
contribute to altered neural maturation, motor dysfunction and death. However,
mice survive to young adulthood, in part from Snf2l compensation that restores
Engrailed-1 expression. Similarly, Purkinje-specific Snf2h ablation affects
chromatin ultrastructure and dendritic arborization, but alters cognitive skills 
rather than motor control. Our studies reveal that Snf2h controls chromatin
organization and histone H1 dynamics for the establishment of gene expression
programs underlying cerebellar morphogenesis and neural maturation.

PMCID: PMC4083431
PMID: 24946904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jul 1;23(13):1535-47. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0442. Epub 2014 
Apr 3.

Engineering of midbrain organoids containing long-lived dopaminergic neurons.

Tieng V(1), Stoppini L, Villy S, Fathi M, Dubois-Dauphin M, Krause KH.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pathology and Immunology, University Medical Center,
University of Geneva , Geneva, Switzerland .

The possibility to generate dopaminergic (DA) neurons from pluripotent stem cells
represents an unlimited source of material for tissue engineering and cell
therapy for neurodegenerative disease. We set up a protocol based on the
generation of size-calibrated neurospheres for a rapid production (3 weeks) of a 
high amount of DA neurons (>60%) oriented toward a midbrain-like phenotype,
characterized by the expression of FOXA2, LMX1A, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH),
NURR1, and EN1. By using <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitors and varying culture time of
neurospheres, we controlled maturation and cellular composition of a
three-dimensional (3D) engineered nervous tissue (ENT). ENT contained neurons and
glial cells expressing various markers of maturity, such as synaptophysin,
neuronal nuclei-specific protein (NeuN), and glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP), and were electrophysiologically active. We found that 3-week-old
neurospheres were optimal to generate 3D tissue containing DA neurons with
typical A9 morphology. ENT generated from 4-week-old neurospheres launched glial 
cell type since astrocytes and myelin could be detected massively at the expense 
of TH-immunoreactive neurons. All <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitors were not equivalent;
compound E was more efficient than DAPT in generating DA neurons. This DA tissue 
provides a tool for drug screening, and toxicology. It should also become a
useful biomaterial for studies on Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 24576173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Oct;229(10):1369-77. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24570.

Midbrain cues dictate differentiation of human dental pulp stem cells towards
functional dopaminergic neurons.

Kanafi M(1), Majumdar D, Bhonde R, Gupta P, Datta I.

Author information: 
(1)Manipal Institute of Regenerative Medicine, Manipal University, Bangalore,
Karnataka, India.

Dental pulp originating from the neural crest is considered a better source of
postnatal stem cells for cell-based therapies in neurodegenerative diseases.
Dental Pulp Stem Cells (DPSCs) have been shown to differentiate into cell-types
of cranial neural crest ontology; however, their ability to differentiate to
functional neurons of the central nervous system remains to be studied. We
hypothesized that midbrain cues might commit DPSCs to differentiate to functional
dopaminergic cell-type. As expected, DPSCs in their naïve state spontaneously
expressed early and mature neuronal markers like nestin, musashi12, ß tubulin
III, and Map2ab. On exposure to midbrain cues (sonic hedgehog, fibroblast growth 
factor 8 and basic fibroblast growth factor), DPSCs showed upregulation of
dopaminergic neuron-specific transcription factors Nuclear Receptor related
protein 1 (Nurr1), Engrailed 1 (En1) and paired-like homeodomain transcription
factor 3 (Pitx3) as revealed by real-time RT-PCR. Immunofluorescence and flow
cytometry analysis showed enhanced expression of mature neuronal marker Map2ab
and dopaminergic-neuronal markers [tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), En1, Nurr1, and
Pitx3], with nearly 77% of the induced DPSCs positive for TH. Functional studies 
indicated that the induced DPSCs could secrete dopamine constitutively and upon
stimulation with potassium chloride (KCl) and adenosine triphosphate (ATP), as
measured by dopamine ELISA. Additionally, the induced DPSCs showed intracellular 
Ca(2+) influx in the presence of KCl, unlike control DPSCs. ATP-stimulated Ca(2+)
influx was observed in control and induced DPSCs, but only the induced cells
secreted dopamine. Our data clearly demonstrate for the first time that DPSCs in 
the presence of embryonic midbrain cues show efficient propensity towards
functional dopaminergic cell-type.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24477667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Neurosci. 2014 Jan 15;34(3):922-31. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3476-13.2014.

Shp2-dependent ERK signaling is essential for induction of Bergmann glia and
foliation of the cerebellum.

Li K(1), Leung AW, Guo Q, Yang W, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut 06030-6403 and Department of Orthopedics, 
Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island 0912.

Folding of the cortex and the persistence of radial glia (RG)-like cells called
Bergmann glia (BG) are hallmarks of the mammalian cerebellum. Similar to basal RG
in the embryonic neocortex, BG maintain only basal processes and continuously
express neural stem cell markers. Past studies had focused on the function of BG 
in granule cell migration and how granule cell progenitors (GCP) regulate
cerebellar foliation. The molecular control of BG generation and its role in
cerebellar foliation are less understood. Here, we have analyzed the function of 
the protein tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 in mice by deleting its gene Ptpn11 in the 
entire cerebellum or selectively in the GCP lineage. Deleting Ptpn11 in the
entire cerebellum by En1-cre blocks transformation of RG into BG but preserves
other major cerebellar cell types. In the absence of BG, inward invagination of
GCP persists but is uncoupled from the folding of the Purkinje cell layer and the
basement membrane, leading to disorganized lamination and an absence of
cerebellar folia. In contrast, removing Ptpn11 in the GCP lineage by Atoh1-cre
has no effect on cerebellar development, indicating that Shp2 is not cell
autonomously required in GCP. Furthermore, we demonstrate that Ptpn11 interacts
with Fgf8 and is essential for ERK activation in RG and nascent BG. Finally,
expressing constitutively active MEK1 rescues BG formation and cerebellar
foliation in Shp2-deficient cerebella. Our results demonstrate an essential role 
of Shp2 in BG specification via fibroblast growth factor/extracellular
signal-regulated protein kinase signaling, and reveal a crucial function of BG in
organizing cerebellar foliation.

PMCID: PMC3891967
PMID: 24431450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Neuroscience. 2014 Mar 7;261:173-83. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.12.045.
Epub 2013 Dec 30.

Increased dopaminergic innervation in the brain of conditional mutant mice
overexpressing Otx2: effects on locomotor behavior and seizure susceptibility.

Tripathi PP(1), Di Giovannantonio LG(2), Sanguinetti E(3), Acampora D(4), Allegra
M(1), Caleo M(3), Wurst W(5), Simeone A(4), Bozzi Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, CNR, Pisa, Italy; Laboratory of Neurobiology,
Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy. (2)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics
'A. Buzzati-Traverso', CNR, Naples, Italy. (3)Institute of Neuroscience, CNR,
Pisa, Italy. (4)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics 'A. Buzzati-Traverso', CNR, 
Naples, Italy; IRCCS Neuromed, 86077 Pozzilli, Isernia, Italy. (5)Institute of
Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum and Max-Planck-Institute of Psychiatry,
Molecular Neurogenetics, Munich, Germany. (6)Institute of Neuroscience, CNR,
Pisa, Italy; Laboratory of Molecular Neuropathology, Centre for Integrative
Biology, University of Trento, Italy. Electronic address: bozzi@science.unitn.it.

The homeobox-containing transcription factor Otx2 controls the identity, fate and
proliferation of mesencephalic dopaminergic (mesDA) neurons. Transgenic mice, in 
which Otx2 was conditionally overexpressed by a Cre recombinase expressed under
the transcriptional control of the Engrailed1 gene (En1(Cre/+); tOtx2(ov/+)),
show an increased number of mesDA neurons during development. In adult mice, Otx2
is expressed in a subset of neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and its
overexpression renders mesDA more resistant to
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-HCl (MPTP) neurotoxin. Here we
further investigated the neurological consequences of the increased number of
mesDA neurons in En1(Cre/+); tOtx2(ov/+) adult mice. Immunohistochemistry for the
active, glycosylated form of the dopamine transporter (glyco-Dat) showed that
En1(Cre/+); tOtx2(ov/+) adult mice display an increased density of mesocortical
DAergic fibers, as compared to control animals. Increased glyco-Dat staining was 
accompanied by a marked hypolocomotion in En1(Cre/+); tOtx2(ov/+) mice, as
detected in the open field test. Since conditional knockout mice lacking Otx2 in 
mesDA precursors (En1(Cre/+); Otx2(floxv/flox) mice) show a marked resistance to 
kainic acid (KA)-induced seizures, we investigated the behavioral response to KA 
in En1(Cre/+); tOtx2(ov/+) and control mice. No difference was observed between
mutant and control mice, but En1(Cre/+); tOtx2(ov/+) mice showed a markedly
different c-fos mRNA induction profile in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus
after KA seizures, as compared to controls. Accordingly, an increased density of 
parvalbumin (PV)-positive inhibitory interneurons was detected in the deep layers
of the frontal cortex of naïve En1(Cre/+); tOtx2(ov/+) mice, as compared to
controls. These data indicate that Otx2 overexpression results in increased
DAergic innervation and PV cell density in the fronto-parietal cortex, with
important consequences on spontaneous locomotor activity and seizure-induced gene
expression. Our results strengthen the notion that Otx2 mutant mouse models are a
powerful genetic tool to unravel the molecular and behavioral consequences of
altered development of the DAergic system.

Copyright © 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24384227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(12):e1003973. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003973. Epub 2013 Dec
12.

An Lmx1b-miR135a2 regulatory circuit modulates Wnt1/Wnt signaling and determines 
the size of the midbrain dopaminergic progenitor pool.

Anderegg A(1), Lin HP(1), Chen JA(2), Caronia-Brown G(1), Cherepanova N(1), Yun
B(1), Joksimovic M(1), Rock J(3), Harfe BD(3), Johnson R(4), Awatramani R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Department of Neurology
and Center for Genetic Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department
of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, United States of America. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas,
United States of America.

MicroRNAs regulate gene expression in diverse physiological scenarios. Their role
in the control of morphogen related signaling pathways has been less studied,
particularly in the context of embryonic Central Nervous System (CNS)
development. Here, we uncover a role for microRNAs in limiting the spatiotemporal
range of morphogen expression and function. Wnt1 is a key morphogen in the
embryonic midbrain, and directs proliferation, survival, patterning and
neurogenesis. We reveal an autoregulatory negative feedback loop between the
transcription factor Lmx1b and a newly characterized microRNA, miR135a2, which
modulates the extent of Wnt1/Wnt signaling and the size of the dopamine
progenitor domain. Conditional gain of function studies reveal that Lmx1b
promotes Wnt1/Wnt signaling, and thereby increases midbrain size and dopamine
progenitor allocation. Conditional removal of Lmx1b has the opposite effect, in
that expansion of the dopamine progenitor domain is severely compromised. Next,
we provide evidence that microRNAs are involved in restricting dopamine
progenitor allocation. Conditional loss of Dicer1 in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) 
results in expanded Lmx1a/b+ progenitors. In contrast, forced elevation of
miR135a2 during an early window in vivo phenocopies the Lmx1b conditional
knockout. When En1::Cre, but not Shh::Cre or Nes::Cre, is used for recombination,
the expansion of Lmx1a/b+ progenitors is selectively reduced. Bioinformatics and 
luciferase assay data suggests that miR135a2 targets Lmx1b and many genes in the 
Wnt signaling pathway, including Ccnd1, Gsk3b, and Tcf7l2. Consistent with this, 
we demonstrate that this mutant displays reductions in the size of the Lmx1b/Wnt1
domain and range of canonical Wnt signaling. We posit that microRNA modulation of
the Lmx1b/Wnt axis in the early midbrain/isthmus could determine midbrain size
and allocation of dopamine progenitors. Since canonical Wnt activity has recently
been recognized as a key ingredient for programming ESCs towards a dopaminergic
fate in vitro, these studies could impact the rational design of such protocols.

PMCID: PMC3861205
PMID: 24348261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 23;8(10):e78759. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078759.
eCollection 2013.

DNA-dependent protein kinase is a context dependent regulator of Lmx1a and
midbrain specification.

Hunt CP(1), Fabb SA, Pouton CW, Haynes JM.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Biology, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash
University (Parkville), Melbourne, Australia.

The identification of small molecules capable of directing pluripotent cell
differentiation towards specific lineages is highly desirable to both reduce
cost, and increase efficiency. Within neural progenitors, LIM homeobox
transcription factor 1 alpha (Lmx1a) is required for proper development of roof
plate and cortical hem structures of the forebrain, as well as the development of
floor plate and midbrain dopaminergic neurons. In this study we generated
homologous recombinant cell lines expressing either luciferase or ß-lactamase
under the control of the Lmx1a promoter, and used these cell lines to investigate
kinase-mediated regulation of Lmx1a activity during neuronal differentiation. A
screen of 143 small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors yielded 16 compounds that
positively or negatively modulated Lmx1a activity. Inhibition of EGF, VEGF and
DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) signaling significantly upregulated Lmx1a
activity whereas MEK inhibition strongly downregulated its activity. Quantitative
FACS analysis revealed that the DNA-PK inhibitor significantly increased the
number of Lmx1a+ progenitors while subsequent qPCR showed an upregulation of
Notch effectors, the basic helix-loop-helix genes, Hes5 and Hey1. FACS further
revealed that DNA-PK-mediated regulation of Lmx1a+ cells is dependent on the
rapamycin-sensitive complex, mTORC1. Interestingly, this DNA-PK inhibitor effect 
was preserved in a co-culture differentiation protocol. Terminal differentiation 
assays showed that DNA-PK inhibition shifted development of neurons from
forebrain toward midbrain character as assessed by Pitx3/TH immunolabeling and
corresponding upregulation of midbrain (En1), but not forebrain (FoxG1)
transcripts. These studies show that Lmx1a signaling in mouse embryonic stem
cells contributes to a molecular cascade establishing neuronal specification. The
data presented here identifies a novel regulatory pathway where signaling from
DNA-PK appears to suppress midbrain-specific Lmx1a expression.

PMCID: PMC3806860
PMID: 24194952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2013 Nov;95(8):545-51. doi:
10.1308/003588413X13629960049432.

The effectiveness of hyaluronic acid intra-articular injections in managing
osteoarthritic knee pain.

Trigkilidas D(1), Anand A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Warwick, 103 Linden Gardens, Enfield EN1 4DY, UK.
diotrigkilidas@hotmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Knee osteoarthritis (OA) is a common and progressive joint disease.
Treatment options for knee OA vary from simple analgesia in mild cases to knee
replacement for advanced disease. Knee pain due to moderate OA can be targeted
with intra-articular injections. Steroid injections have been used widely in
managing acute flare-ups of the disease. In recent years, viscosupplementation
has been used as a therapeutic modality for the management of knee OA. The
principle of viscosupplementation is based on the physiological properties of the
hyaluronic acid (HA) in the synovial joint. Despite a sound principle and
promising in vitro studies, clinical studies have been less conclusive on the
effectiveness of HA in managing osteoarthritic knee pain. The aim of this
systematic review was to assess the effectiveness of HA intra-articular
injections in the management of osteoarthritic knee pain.
METHODS: A systematic review of the literature was performed using MEDLINE®,
Embase and CINAHL® (Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature).
The databases were searched for randomised controlled trials available on the
effectiveness of HA intra-articular injections in managing osteoarthritic knee
pain.
RESULTS: The search yielded 188 studies. Of these, 14 met the eligibility
criteria and were reviewed in chronological order.
CONCLUSIONS: HA intra-articular injections have a modest effect on early to
moderate knee OA. The effect peaks at around 6-8 weeks following administration, 
with a doubtful effect at 6 months.

PMCID: PMC4311527
PMID: 24165334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Oncogene. 2014 Sep 25;33(39):4767-77. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.422. Epub 2013 Oct
21.

Novel role of Engrailed 1 as a prosurvival transcription factor in basal-like
breast cancer and engineering of interference peptides block its oncogenic
function.

Beltran AS(1), Graves LM(1), Blancafort P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA. (2)1] Department of Pharmacology, The University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA [2] Cancer Epigenetics Group,
School of Anatomy, Physiology and Human Biology, The University of Western
Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia.

Basal-like breast tumors are aggressive cancers associated with high
proliferation and metastasis. Chemotherapy is currently the only treatment
option; however, resistance often occurs resulting in recurrence and patient
death. Some extremely aggressive cancers are also associated with hypoxia,
inflammation and high leukocyte infiltration. Herein, we discovered that the
neural-specific transcription factor, Engrailed 1 (EN1), is exclusively
overexpressed in these tumors. Short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated knockdown of
EN1 triggered potent and selective cell death. In contrast, ectopic
overexpression of EN1 in normal cells activated survival pathways and conferred
resistance to chemotherapeutic agents. Exogenous expression of EN1 cDNA
reprogrammed the breast epithelial cells toward a long-lived, neural-like
phenotype displaying dopaminergic markers. Gene expression microarrays
demonstrated that the EN1 cDNA altered transcription of a high number of
inflammatory molecules, notably chemokines and chemokine receptors, which could
mediate prosurvival pathways. To block EN1 function, we engineered synthetic
interference peptides (iPeps) comprising the EN1-specific sequences that mediate 
essential protein-protein interactions necessary for EN1 function and an
N-terminal cell-penetrating peptide/nuclear localization sequence. These
EN1-iPeps rapidly mediated a strong apoptotic response in tumor cells
overexpressing EN1, with no toxicity to normal or non EN1-expressing cells.
Delivery of EN1-iPeps into basal-like cancer cells significantly decreased the
fifty percent inhibitory concentrations (IC50) of chemotherapeutic drugs
routinely used to treat breast cancer. Lastly, matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry and immunoprecipitation
assays demonstrated that EN1-iPeps captured targets involved in transcriptional
and post-transcriptional regulation. Importantly, the EN1-iPeps bound the
glutamyl-prolyl tRNA synthetase (EPRS) target, which has been associated with the
transcript-specific translational control of inflammatory proteins and activation
of amino-acid stress pathways. This work unveils EN1 as an activator of intrinsic
inflammatory pathways associated with prosurvival in basal-like breast cancer. We
further build upon these results and describe the engineering of iPeps targeting 
EN1 (EN1-iPeps) as a novel and selective therapeutic strategy to combat these
lethal forms of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4184217
PMID: 24141779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Epigenetics. 2013 Nov;8(11):1153-61. doi: 10.4161/epi.26072. Epub 2013 Aug 22.

Virulence of infecting Helicobacter pylori strains and intensity of mononuclear
cell infiltration are associated with levels of DNA hypermethylation in gastric
mucosae.

Schneider BG(1), Piazuelo MB(1), Sicinschi LA(2), Mera R(1), Peng DF(3), Roa
JC(4), Romero-Gallo J(1), Delgado AG(1), de Sablet T(1), Bravo LE(5), Wilson
KT(6), El-Rifai W(7), Peek RM Jr(1), Correa P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology; Department of Medicine; Vanderbilt University
Medical Center; Nashville, TN USA. (2)Division of Gastroenterology; Department of
Medicine; Vanderbilt University Medical Center; Nashville, TN USA; Holmes
Regional Medical Center; Melbourne, FL USA. (3)Department of Surgery; Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center; Nashville, TN USA. (4)Department of Pathology; School 
of Medicine; Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile; Santiago, Chile.
(5)Department of Pathology; School of Medicine; Universidad del Valle; Cali,
Colombia. (6)Division of Gastroenterology; Department of Medicine; Vanderbilt
University Medical Center; Nashville, TN USA; Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley
Healthcare System and Office of Medical Research; Department of Veterans Affairs;
Nashville, TN USA. (7)Department of Surgery; Vanderbilt University Medical
Center; Nashville, TN USA; Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System
and Office of Medical Research; Department of Veterans Affairs; Nashville, TN
USA.

DNA methylation changes are known to occur in gastric cancers and in premalignant
lesions of the gastric mucosae. In order to examine variables associated with
methylation levels, we quantitatively evaluated DNA methylation in tumors,
non-tumor gastric mucosae, and in gastric biopsies at promoters of 5 genes with
methylation alterations that discriminate gastric cancers from non-tumor
epithelia (EN1, PCDH10, RSPO2, ZIC1, and ZNF610). Among Colombian subjects at
high and low risk for gastric cancer, biopsies from subjects from the high-risk
region had significantly higher levels of methylation at these 5 genes than
samples from subjects in the low risk region (p = 0.003). When results were
stratified by Helicobacter pylori infection status, infection with a cagA
positive, vacA s1m1 strain was significantly associated with highest methylation 
levels, compared with other strains (p = 0.024 to 0.001). More severe gastric
inflammation and more advanced precancerous lesions were also associated with
higher levels of DNA methylation (p = 0.001). In a multivariate model, location
of residence of the subject and the presence of cagA and vacA s1m1 in the H.
pylori strain were independent variables associated with higher methylation in
all 5 genes. High levels of mononuclear cell infiltration were significantly
related to methylation in PCDH10, RSPO2, and ZIC1 genes. These results indicate
that for these genes, levels of methylation in precancerous lesions are related
to H. pylori virulence, geographic region and measures of chronic inflammation.
These genes seem predisposed to sustain significant quantitative changes in DNA
methylation at early stages of the gastric precancerous process.

PMCID: PMC3927747
PMID: 24128875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Neurosci. 2013 Sep 18;33(38):15044-9. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2604-13.2013.

Sound localization ability and glycinergic innervation of the superior olivary
complex persist after genetic deletion of the medial nucleus of the trapezoid
body.

Jalabi W(1), Kopp-Scheinpflug C, Allen PD, Schiavon E, DiGiacomo RR, Forsythe ID,
Maricich SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
44106, Department of Cell Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Leicester,
Leicester, LE1 9HN, United Kingdom, Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy,
University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14642, and Richard King Mellon
Institute for Pediatric Research, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15224.

The medial nucleus of the trapezoid body (MNTB) in the superior olivary complex
(SOC) is an inhibitory hub considered critical for binaural sound localization.
We show that genetic ablation of MNTB neurons in mice only subtly affects this
ability by prolonging the minimum time required to detect shifts in sound
location. Furthermore, glycinergic innervation of the SOC is maintained without
an MNTB, consistent with the existence of parallel inhibitory inputs. These
findings redefine the role of MNTB in sound localization and suggest that the
inhibitory network is more complex than previously thought.

PMCID: PMC3858601
PMID: 24048834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Tissue Eng Part A. 2014 Feb;20(3-4):656-62. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2012.0657. Epub 
2013 Oct 19.

Nestin-expressing stem cells from the hair follicle can differentiate into motor 
neurons and reduce muscle atrophy after transplantation to injured nerves.

Liu F(1), Zhang C, Hoffman RM.

Author information: 
(1)1 AntiCancer, Inc., San Diego, California.

We have previously shown that nestin-expressing hair follicle stem cells from the
mouse and human are multipotent and can differentiate into many cell types,
including neurons and glial cells. The nestin-expressing hair follicle stem cells
can effect nerve and spinal cord repair upon transplantation in mouse models. In 
the present study, nestin-expressing hair follicle stem cells expressing red
fluorescent protein (RFP) were induced by retinoic acid and fetal bovine serum to
differentiate and then transplanted together with Matrigel into the transected
distal sciatic or tibial nerve stump of transgenic nude mice ubiquitously
expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP). Control mice were transplanted with
Matrigel only. The transplanted cells appeared neuron like, with large round
nuclei and long extensions. Immunofluorescence staining showed that some of the
transplanted cells in the distal nerve stump expressed the neuron marker Tuj1 as 
well as motor neuron markers Isl 1/2 and EN1. These transplanted cells contacted 
each other as well as host nerve fibers. Two weeks post-transplantation, nerve
fibers in the distal sciatic nerve stump of the transplanted mice had greater
expression of motor neuron markers and neurotrophic factor-3 than those in the
Matrigel-only transplanted mice. Muscle fiber areas in the nestin-expressing stem
cell plus Matrigel-transplanted animals were much bigger than that in the
Matrigel-only transplanted animals after 4 weeks. The present results suggest
that transplanted nestin-expressing hair follicle stem cells can differentiate
into motor neurons and reduce muscle atrophy after sciatic nerve transection.
This study demonstrates a new and accessible neuron source to reduce muscle
atrophy after nerve injury.

PMCID: PMC3927650
PMID: 24020586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. BJU Int. 2014 Apr;113(4):535-40. doi: 10.1111/bju.12269. Epub 2013 Aug 13.

Importance of HOX genes in normal prostate gland formation, prostate cancer
development and its early detection.

Javed S(1), Langley SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Royal Surrey County Hospital, Guildford, UK.

The aims of this paper were to review the published literature on the role of HOX
genes in the development of the normal prostate gland and in prostate cancer and 
to discuss the potential role of the HOX family member, Engrailed-2 (EN2), as a
diagnostic test of PCa. Hox genes were first described in the fruit fly Drosphila
melanogaster, where they specify the body plan and control the formation of body 
segments. They belong to a family of homeodomain-containing transcription factors
that determine cell and tissue identity during normal embryonic development. They
have been shown to be re-expressed by several different types of cancers. Studies
have shown that different Hox genes are responsible for the development of the
separate lobes of the prostate gland, the seminal vesicles and the epididymis.
All HOX13 paralogues are expressed in the adult human prostate, suggesting the
possibility of similarities between the function and expression of HOX genes
within urological structures at similar anterior-posterior positions. The
oncogenic and tumour suppressor signalling pathways associated with PCa converge 
on the HOX gene network, which ultimately controls gene expression, affecting
tumour formation and metastatic progression. The Engrailed genes (EN1 and EN2)
from the HOX gene family show a very high degree of functional conservation
during embryonic development. Urinary EN2 is being investigated as a potential
diagnostic marker of early PCa. It is secreted into the urine by PCa cells but
not by normal prostatic tissue. A recent study has shown an association between
urinary EN2 levels and cancer volume in radical prostatectomy specimens. The
ability to predict tumour volume could inform the treatment decision-making
process for patients with localized PCa choosing between active surveillance and 
radical treatment options.

© 2013 The Authors. BJU International © 2013 BJU International.

PMID: 23937390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Development. 2013 Aug;140(16):3373-84. doi: 10.1242/dev.094565. Epub 2013 Jul 17.

Specification of dopaminergic subsets involves interplay of En1 and Pitx3.

Veenvliet JV(1), Dos Santos MT, Kouwenhoven WM, von Oerthel L, Lim JL, van der
Linden AJ, Koerkamp MJ, Holstege FC, Smidt MP.

Author information: 
(1)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 
904, 3511 PG, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Development. 2013 Oct;140(19):4116.

Mesodiencephalic dopaminergic (mdDA) neurons control locomotion and emotion and
are affected in multiple psychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases, including
Parkinson's disease (PD). The homeodomain transcription factor Pitx3 is pivotal
in mdDA neuron development and loss of Pitx3 results in programming deficits in a
rostrolateral subpopulation of mdDA neurons destined to form the substantia nigra
pars compacta (SNc), reminiscent of the specific cell loss observed in PD. We
show here that in adult mice in which the gene encoding a second homeoprotein,
engrailed 1 (En1), has been deleted, dramatic loss of mdDA neurons and striatal
innervation defects were observed, partially reminiscent of defects observed in
Pitx3(-/-) mice. We then continue to reveal developmental crosstalk between En1
and Pitx3 through genome-wide expression analysis. During development, both En1
and Pitx3 are required to induce expression of mdDA genes in the rostrolateral
subset destined to form the SNc. By contrast, Pitx3 and En1 reciprocally regulate
a separate gene cluster, which includes Cck, demarcating a caudal mdDA subset in 
wild-type embryos. Whereas En1 is crucial for induction of this caudal phenotype,
Pitx3 antagonizes it rostrolaterally. The combinatorial action of En1 and Pitx3
is potentially realized through at least three levels of molecular interaction:
(1) influencing each other's expression level, (2) releasing histone
deacetylase-mediated repression of Nurr1 target genes and (3) modulating En1
activity through Pitx3-driven activation of En1 modulatory proteins. These
findings show how two crucial mediators of mdDA neuronal development, En1 and
Pitx3, interact in dopaminergic subset specification, the importance of which is 
exemplified by the specific vulnerability of the SNc found in PD.

PMID: 23863478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Behav Brain Res. 2013 Nov 1;256:51-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.06.030. Epub 2013
Jun 27.

Loss of rostral brainstem cholinergic activity results in decreased ultrasonic
vocalization behavior and altered sensorimotor gating.

Machold RP(1).

Author information: 
(1)New York University School of Medicine, Smilow Neuroscience Program, 522 First
Avenue, Smilow 506, New York, NY 10016, United States. Electronic address:
robert.machold@nyumc.org.

The parabigeminal (PBG), pedunculopontine (PPTg), and laterodorsal tegmental
(LDTg) nuclei located in the rostral brainstem are the primary sources of the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh) for the midbrain and thalamus, and as part
of the ascending reticular activating system, these cholinergic signaling
pathways regulate mouse behavioral responses to sensory stimuli. Here, I report
that mice harboring a conditional deletion of ACh synthesis specifically within
these nuclei (ChAT(En1 KO)) exhibit decreased ultrasonic vocalizations both as
pups and adults, consistent with their previously reported hypoactivity when
exploring the novel environment of the open field arena. Furthermore, in prepulse
inhibition (PPI) tests, ChAT(En1 KO) animals exhibited increased sensorimotor
gating in comparison to control littermates. These data suggest that ACh
signaling arising from the rostral brainstem modulates animal behavior in part by
tuning the levels of sensorimotor gating. Thus, the net effect of this
cholinergic activity is to increase sensitivity to environmental stimuli, and
loss of this pathway contributes to the hypoactivity in these mutants by raising 
the sensory threshold for eliciting exploratory behaviors.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23810416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2013 Spring;43(2):151-3.

Analysis of PITX3 gene in patients with multisystem atrophy, progressive
supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration.

Jamrozik Z(1), Berdynski M, Zekanowski C, Baranczyk-Kuzma A, Slawek J,
Kuzma-Kozakiewicz M, Maruszak A, Kwiecinski H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
zygmunt.jamrozik@wum.edu.pl

Erratum in
    Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2014 Winter;44(1):110.

Interactions of transcriptions factors Nurr1, Pitx3, and EN1 are involved in the 
maturation and survival of adult midbrain dopaminergic neurons during a lifetime.
The aim of the study was to evaluate the presence of mutations and single
nucleotide polymorphisms in PITX3 gene in clinically diagnosed multisystem
atrophy (MSA), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), and corticobasal
degeneration (CBD). In the group of 77 patients with MSA, 44 with PSP, and 6 with
CBD, no pathogenic mutations were identified.

PMID: 23694789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Gene Expr Patterns. 2013 Oct;13(7):255-64. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2013.05.001. Epub
2013 May 15.

Establishment of crown-root domain borders in mouse incisor.

Juuri E(1), Saito K, Lefebvre S, Michon F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Developmental Biology Program, University of
Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.

Teeth are composed of two domains, the enamel-covered crown and the enamel-free
root. The understanding of the initiation and regulation of crown and root domain
formation is important for the development of bioengineered teeth. In most teeth 
the crown develops before the root, and erupts to the oral cavity whereas the
root anchors the tooth to the jawbone. However, in the continuously growing mouse
incisor the crown and root domains form simultaneously, the crown domain forming 
the labial and the root domain the lingual part of the tooth. While the
crown-root border on the incisor distal side supports the distal enamel extent,
reflecting an evolutionary diet adaptation, on the incisor mesial side the
root-like surface is necessary for the attachment of the interdental ligament
between the two incisors. Therefore, the mouse incisor exhibits a functional
distal-mesial asymmetry. Here, we used the mouse incisor as a model to understand
the mechanisms involved in the crown-root border formation. We analyzed the
cellular origins and gene expression patterns leading to the development of the
mesial and distal crown-root borders. We discovered that Barx2, En1, Wnt11, and
Runx3 were exclusively expressed on the mesial crown-root border. In addition,
the distal border of the crown-root domain might be established by cells from a
different origin and by an early Follistatin expression, factor known to be
involved in the root domain formation. The use of different mechanisms to
establish domain borders gives indications of the incisor functional asymmetry.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23684768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Stem Cells. 2013 Aug;31(8):1548-62. doi: 10.1002/stem.1415.

Improved cell therapy protocols for Parkinson's disease based on differentiation 
efficiency and safety of hESC-, hiPSC-, and non-human primate iPSC-derived
dopaminergic neurons.

Sundberg M(1), Bogetofte H, Lawson T, Jansson J, Smith G, Astradsson A, Moore M, 
Osborn T, Cooper O, Spealman R, Hallett P, Isacson O.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroregeneration Laboratories, Harvard Medical School/McLean Hospital,
Belmont, Massachusetts, USA.

The main motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease are due to the loss of
dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the ventral midbrain (VM). For the future treatment 
of Parkinson's disease with cell transplantation it is important to develop
efficient differentiation methods for production of human iPSCs and hESCs-derived
midbrain-type DA neurons. Here we describe an efficient differentiation and
sorting strategy for DA neurons from both human ES/iPS cells and non-human
primate iPSCs. The use of non-human primate iPSCs for neuronal differentiation
and autologous transplantation is important for preclinical evaluation of safety 
and efficacy of stem cell-derived DA neurons. The aim of this study was to
improve the safety of human- and non-human primate iPSC (PiPSC)-derived DA
neurons. According to our results, NCAM(+) /CD29(low) sorting enriched VM DA
neurons from pluripotent stem cell-derived neural cell populations. NCAM(+)
/CD29(low) DA neurons were positive for FOXA2/TH and EN1/TH and this cell
population had increased expression levels of FOXA2, LMX1A, TH, GIRK2, PITX3,
EN1, NURR1 mRNA compared to unsorted neural cell populations. PiPSC-derived
NCAM(+) /CD29(low) DA neurons were able to restore motor function of
6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) lesioned rats 16 weeks after transplantation. The
transplanted sorted cells also integrated in the rodent brain tissue, with robust
TH+/hNCAM+ neuritic innervation of the host striatum. One year after autologous
transplantation, the primate iPSC-derived neural cells survived in the striatum
of one primate without any immunosuppression. These neural cell grafts contained 
FOXA2/TH-positive neurons in the graft site. This is an important proof of
concept for the feasibility and safety of iPSC-derived cell transplantation
therapies in the future.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3775937
PMID: 23666606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Sep;97(18):8173-82. doi:
10.1007/s00253-013-4927-5. Epub 2013 May 8.

Discovery of (hemi-) cellulase genes in a metagenomic library from a biogas
digester using 454 pyrosequencing.

Yan X(1), Geng A, Zhang J, Wei Y, Zhang L, Qian C, Wang Q, Wang S, Zhou Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Institute of Plant Physiology and
Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Fenglin Rd 300, Shanghai, 200032, China.

In this study, 341, 246, and 386 positive clones with endo-ß-1,4-glucanase,
ß-glucosidase, and endo-ß-1,4-xylanase activities, respectively, were identified 
by screening from a metagenomic fosmid library constructed from a biogas
digester. Subsequently, pools of 4, 10, and 16 positive clones were subjected to 
454 pyrosequencing in different subruns. In total, 21 unique glycosyl hydrolase
(GH) genes were predicted by bioinformatic analysis, which showed similarities to
their nearest neighbors from 39 % to 72 %. In addition to bioinformatics
prediction, nine GH genes were expressed and purified to identify their activity 
with four kinds of substrates. The activities of the most expressed proteins were
consistent with their annotation based on bioinformatics prediction; however,
three GH genes belonging to the GH5 family showed different activities from their
annotation. An efficient acidic cellulase En1 had an optimal condition at 55 °C, 
pH 5.5, with a specific activity toward carboxymethylcellulose at 118 U/mg and K 
m at 12.8 g/L. This study demonstrated that there are diverse GHs in the biogas
digester system with potential industrial application in lignocellulose
hydrolysis, and their activities should be investigated with different substrates
before their application. Additionally, pool sequencing of positive fosmid clones
might be a cost-effective approach to obtain functional genes from metagenomic
libraries.

PMID: 23653123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2013 Mar;1279:71-9. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12092.

Imaging spinal neuron ensembles active during locomotion with genetically encoded
calcium indicators.

Hinckley CA(1), Pfaff SL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk
Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Advances in molecular-genetic tools for labeling neuronal subtypes, and the
emerging development of robust genetic probes for neural activity, are likely to 
revolutionize our understanding of the functional organization of neural
circuits. In principle, these tools should be able to detect activity at cellular
resolution for large ensembles of identified neuron types as they participate in 
specific behaviors. This report describes the use of genetically encoded calcium 
indicators (GECIs), combined with two-photon microscopy, to characterize V1
interneurons, known to be critical for setting the duration of the step cycle.
All V1 interneurons arise from a common precursor population and express
engrailed-1 (En1). Our data show that although neighboring interneurons that
arise from the same developmental lineage and share many features, such as
projection patterns and neurotransmitter profiles, they are not irrevocably
committed to having the same pattern of activity.

© 2013 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMCID: PMC3908931
PMID: 23531004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Brain Struct Funct. 2014 May;219(3):777-92. doi: 10.1007/s00429-013-0534-6. Epub 
2013 Mar 14.

Role of Shh in the development of molecularly characterized tegmental nuclei in
mouse rhombomere 1.

Moreno-Bravo JA(1), Perez-Balaguer A, Martinez-Lopez JE, Aroca P, Puelles L,
Martinez S, Puelles E.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias, UMH-CSIC, Campus de San Juan, Av. Ramón y Cajal
S/N, Sant Joan d'Alacant, 03550, Alicante, Spain.

Hindbrain rhombomeres in general are differentially specified molecularly by
unique combinations of Hox genes with other developmental genes. Rhombomere 1
displays special features, including absence of Hox gene expression. It lies
within the hindbrain range of the Engrailed genes (En1, En2), controlled by the
isthmic organizer via diffusion of FGF8. It is limited rostrally by the isthmus
territory, and caudally by rhombomere 2. It is double the normal size of any
other rhombomere. Its dorsal part generates the cerebellar hemispheres and its
ventral part gives rise to several populations, such as some raphe nuclei, the
interpeduncular nucleus, the rhabdoid nucleus, anterior, dorsal, ventral and
posterodorsal tegmental nuclei, the cholinergic pedunculopontine and laterodorsal
tegmental nuclei, rostral parts of the hindbrain reticular formation, the locus
coeruleus, and part of the lateral lemniscal and paralemniscal nuclei, among
other formations. Some of these populations migrate tangentially before reaching 
their final positions. The morphogen Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is normally released
from the local floor plate and underlying notochord. In the present report we
explore, first, whether Shh is required in the specification of these r1
populations, and, second, its possible role in the guidance of tangentially
migrating neurons that approach the midline. Our results indicate that when Shh
function is altered selectively in a conditional mutant mouse strain, most
populations normally generated in the medial basal plate of r1 are completely
absent. Moreover, the relocation of some neurons that normally originate in the
alar plate and migrate tangentially into the medial basal plate is variously
altered. In contrast, neurons that migrate radially (or first tangentially and
then radially) into the lateral basal plate were not significantly affected.

PMID: 23494735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cells. 2013 Apr;35(4):298-304. doi: 10.1007/s10059-013-2302-0. Epub 2013 Feb 
26.

Hypermethylation of EBF3 and IRX1 genes in synovial fibroblasts of patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis.

Park SH(1), Kim SK, Choe JY, Moon Y, An S, Park MJ, Kim DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Arthritis and Autoimmunity Research
Center, School of Medicine, Catholic University of Daegu, Daegu 705-718, Korea.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, systemic inflammatory disease of unknown 
origin, which exhibits a complex heterogeneity in its pathophysiological
background, resulting in differential responses to a range of therapies and poor 
long-term prognosis. RA synovial fibroblasts (RASFs) are key player cells in RA
pathogenesis. Identification of DNA methylation biomarkers is a field that
provides potential for improving the process of diagnosis and prognosis of
various human diseases. We utilized a genome-wide technique, methylated DNA
isolation assay (MeDIA), in combination with a high resolution CpG microarray for
discovery of novel hypermethylated genes in RASFs. Thirteen genes (APEX1, EBF3,
EGR2, EN1, IRX1, IRX6, KIF12, LHX2, MIPOL1, SGTA, SIN3A, TOLLIP, and ZHX2) with
three consecutive hypermethylated probes were isolated as candidate genes through
two CpG microarrays. Pyrosequencing assay was performed to validate the
methylation status of TGF-ß signaling components, EBF3 and IRX1 genes in RASFs
and osteoarthritis (OA) SFs. Hypermethylation at CpG sites in the EBF3 and IRX1
genes was observed with a high methylation index (MI) in RASFs (52.5% and 41.4%, 
respectively), while a lower MI was observ ed in OASFs and h ealthy SFs (13.2%
for EBF3 and 4.3% for IRX1). In addition, RT-PCR analysis showed a remarkable
decrease in their mRNA expression in the RA group, compared with the OA or
healthy control, and their reduction levels correlated with MI. The current
findings suggest that methylation-associated down-regulation of EBF3 and IRX1
genes may play an important role in a pathogenic effect of TGF-ß on RASFs.
However, further clinical validation with large numbers of patients is needed in 
order to confirm our findings.

PMCID: PMC3887890
PMID: 23456299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Development. 2013 Mar;140(6):1342-52. doi: 10.1242/dev.080630.

Dynamic temporal requirement of Wnt1 in midbrain dopamine neuron development.

Yang J(1), Brown A, Ellisor D, Paul E, Hagan N, Zervas M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Division of
Biology and Medicine, Brown University, 70 Ship Street, Providence, RI 02903,
USA.

Wnt1-expressing progenitors generate midbrain dopamine (MbDA) and cerebellum (Cb)
neurons in distinct temporal windows and from spatially discrete progenitor
domains. It has been shown that Wnt1 and Lmx1a participate in a cross-regulatory 
loop that is utilized during MbDA neuron development. However, Wnt1 expression
dynamically changes over time and precedes that of Lmx1a. The spatial and
temporal requirements of Wnt1 in development and specifically its requirement for
MbDA neurons remain to be determined. To address these issues, we generated a
conditional Wnt1 allele and temporally deleted Wnt1 coupled with genetic lineage 
analysis. Using this approach, we show that patterning of the midbrain (Mb) and
Cb by Wnt1 occurs between the one-somite and the six- to eight-somite stages and 
is solely dependent on Wnt1 function in the Mb, but not in the Cb. Interestingly,
an En1-derived domain persists after the early deletion of Wnt1 and mutant cells 
express OTX2. However, the En1-derived Wnt1-mutant domain does not contain
LMX1a-expressing progenitors, and MbDA neurons are depleted. Thus, we demonstrate
an early requirement of Wnt1 for all MbDA neurons. Subsequently, we deleted Wnt1 
in the ventral Mb and show a continued late requirement for Wnt1 in MbDA neuron
development, but not in LMX1a-expressing progenitors. Specifically, Wnt1 deletion
disrupts the birthdating of MbDA neurons and causes a depletion of MbDA neurons
positioned medially and a concomitant expansion of MbDA neurons positioned
laterally during embryogenesis. Collectively, our analyses resolve the spatial
and temporal function of Wnt1 in Mb and Cb patterning and in MbDA neuron
development in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3585666
PMID: 23444360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Dev Neurobiol. 2013 May;73(5):384-98. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22069. Epub 2013 Feb 27.

Embryonic origins of the mouse superior olivary complex.

Marrs GS(1), Morgan WJ, Howell DM, Spirou GA, Mathers PH.

Author information: 
(1)Sensory Neuroscience Research Center, West Virginia University School of
Medicine, Morgantown, WV 26508, USA.

Many areas of the central nervous system are organized into clusters of cell
groups, with component cell groups exhibiting diverse but related functions. One 
such cluster, the superior olivary complex (SOC), is located in the ventral
auditory brainstem in mammals. The SOC is an obligatory contact point for most
projection neurons of the ventral cochlear nucleus and plays central roles in
many aspects of monaural and binaural information processing. Despite their
important interrelated functions, little is known about the embryonic origins of 
SOC nuclei, due in part to a paucity of developmental markers to distinguish
individual cell groups. In this report, we present a collection of novel markers 
for the developing SOC nuclei in mice, including the transcription factors FoxP1,
MafB, and Sox2, and the lineage-marking transgenic line En1-Cre. We use these
definitive markers to examine the rhombic lip and rhombomeric origins of SOC
nuclei and demonstrate that they can serve to uniquely identify SOC nuclei and
subnuclei in newborn pups. The markers are also useful in identifying distinct
nuclear domains within the presumptive SOC as early as embryonic day (E) 14.5,
well before morphological distinction of individual nuclei is evident. These
findings indicate that the mediolateral and dorsoventral position of SOC nuclei
characteristic of the adult brainstem is established during early neurogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4217651
PMID: 23303740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Stem Cells. 2013 Apr;31(4):652-65. doi: 10.1002/stem.1295.

Conditional induction of Math1 specifies embryonic stem cells to cerebellar
granule neuron lineage and promotes differentiation into mature granule neurons.

Srivastava R(1), Kumar M, Peineau S, Csaba Z, Mani S, Gressens P, El Ghouzzi V.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U676, Paris, France.

Directing differentiation of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) to specific neuronal
subtype is critical for modeling disease pathology in vitro. An attractive means 
of action would be to combine regulatory differentiation factors and extrinsic
inductive signals added to the culture medium. In this study, we have generated
mature cerebellar granule neurons by combining a temporally controlled transient 
expression of Math1, a master gene in granule neuron differentiation, with
inductive extrinsic factors involved in cerebellar development. Using a
Tetracyclin-On transactivation system, we overexpressed Math1 at various stages
of ESCs differentiation and found that the yield of progenitors was considerably 
increased when Math1 was induced during embryonic body stage. Math1 triggered
expression of Mbh1 and Mbh2, two target genes directly involved in granule neuron
precursor formation and strong expression of early cerebellar territory markers
En1 and NeuroD1. Three weeks after induction, we observed a decrease in the
number of glial cells and an increase in that of neurons albeit still immature.
Combining Math1 induction with extrinsic factors specifically increased the
number of neurons that expressed Pde1c, Zic1, and GABAa6R characteristic of
mature granule neurons, formed "T-shaped" axons typical of granule neurons, and
generated synaptic contacts and action potentials in vitro. Finally, in vivo
implantation of Math1-induced progenitors into young adult mice resulted in cell 
migration and settling of newly generated neurons in the cerebellum. These
results show that conditional induction of Math1 drives ESCs toward the
cerebellar fate and indicate that acting on both intrinsic and extrinsic factors 
is a powerful means to modulate ESCs differentiation and maturation into a
specific neuronal lineage.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23225629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Isr Med Assoc J. 2012 Oct;14(10):633-6.

Why do geriatric patients attend otolaryngology emergency rooms?

Dagan E(1), Wolf M, Migirov LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, affiliated
with Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND: With an aging population, health care of the elderly population is
becoming increasingly important; however, the principles of geriatric medicine
and issues of concern specific to geriatric otolaryngologic patients have not
been widely applied.
OBJECTIVES: To qualitatively analyze otolaryngological (EN1) emergencies in a
geriatric population in an ENT emergency department (ED).
METHODS: In this retrospective study the medical records of patients > or = 65
years of age who attended our ENT-ED between 3 pm and 8 am and who were observed 
and/or treated by the on-call otorhinolaryngologist at Sheba Medical Center in
2009 were reviewed for age, gender, main complaint, and preliminary diagnosis.
Allergic reactions, balance disorders, epistaxis, head/facial trauma and
swallowing-related complaints were considered true emergencies.
RESULTS: The staff in the ENT-ED examined and treated 1-10 geriatric patients
daily (mean 2.35). A total of 597 subjects met the study entry criteria (median
age 75 years); 16.6% were > or = 85 years old. There was approximately equal
gender representation. More elderly patients presented to the ENT-ED on the
weekends (37.9% of the total) compared to weekdays (62.1%). There were 393
patients (65.8%) with true emergencies, of which epistaxis, balance disorders and
head and facial trauma were the most common diagnoses (20.1%, 15.75% and 13.7%,
respectively), while 46.5% of all vestibulopathy cases involved benign paroxysmal
positional vertigo.
CONCLUSIONS: More than 65% of visits of the elderly presenting to ENT-ED involve 
true emergencies. This growing population may benefit from the presence of
geriatric specialists in emergency departments.

PMID: 23193786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Clin Pathol. 2013 Mar;66(3):192-7. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-201123. Epub
2012 Nov 7.

Genetic and epigenetic markers in the evaluation of pancreatic masses.

Ginestà MM(1), Mora J, Mayor R, Farré A, Peinado MA, Busquets J, Serrano T,
Capellá G, Fabregat J.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Laboratory, Hereditary Cancer Program, Institut Català 
d´Oncologia-IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Methylation markers have shown promise in the early diagnosis of
pancreatic carcinoma. The aim of this study was to assess the diagnostic utility 
of hypermethylation status of candidate genes in combination with KRAS mutation
detection in the evaluation of pancreatic masses.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Sixty-one fine needle aspirates of pancreatic masses (43
pancreatic adenocarcinomas and 18 chronic pancreatitis) were studied. Methylation
status of HRH2, EN1, SPARC, CDH13 and APC were analysed using melting curve
analysis after DNA bisulfite treatment. KRAS mutations were also analysed.
RESULTS: The methylation panel had a sensitivity of 73% (27 of 37, CI 95% 56 to
86%) and a specificity of 100% whenever two or more promoters were found
hypermethylated. KRAS mutations showed a sensitivity of 77% (33 of 43, CI 95% 62 
to 88%) and a specificity of 100%. Both molecular analyses added useful
information to cytology by increasing the number of informative cases. When
genetic and epigenetic analyses were combined sensitivity was 84% (36 of 43 CI
95% 69 to 93%) maintaining a 100% specificity.
CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of hypermethylation status of a panel of genes and KRAS
mutation detection offer a similar diagnostic yield in the evaluation of
pancreatic masses. The combined molecular analysis increases the number of
informative cases without diminishing specificity.

PMID: 23135349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Dev Biol. 2013 Jan 1;373(1):176-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.10.022. Epub 2012
Oct 29.

Otx2 selectively controls the neurogenesis of specific neuronal subtypes of the
ventral tegmental area and compensates En1-dependent neuronal loss and MPTP
vulnerability.

Di Giovannantonio LG(1), Di Salvio M, Acampora D, Prakash N, Wurst W, Simeone A.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate and SEMM European School of Molecular
Medicine-Naples site, Via Gaetano Salvatore 486, 80145 Naples, Italy.

Understanding the molecular basis underlying the neurogenesis of
mesencephalic-diencephalic Dopaminergic (mdDA) neurons is a major task fueled by 
their relevance in controlling locomotor activity and emotion and their
involvement in neurodegenerative and psychiatric diseases. Increasing evidence
suggests that mdDA neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) and
ventral tegmental area (VTA) represent two main distinct neuronal populations,
which, in turn, include specific neuronal subsets. Relevant studies provided
important results on mdDA neurogenesis, but, nevertheless, have not yet clarified
how the identity of mdDA neuronal subtypes is established and, in particular,
whether neurogenic factors may direct progenitors towards the differentiation of 
specific mdDA neuronal subclasses. The transcription factor Otx2 is required for 
the neurogenesis of mesencephalic DA (mesDA) neurons and to control neuron
subtype identity and sensitivity to the MPTP neurotoxin in the adult VTA. Here we
studied whether Otx2 is required in mdDA progenitors for the generation of
specific mdDA neuronal subtypes. We found that although expressed in virtually
all mdDA progenitors, Otx2 is required selectively for the differentiation of VTA
neuronal subtypes expressing Ahd2 and/or Calb but not for those co-expressing
Girk2 and glyco-Dat. Moreover, mild over-expression of Otx2 in SNpc progenitors
and neurons is sufficient to rescue En1 haploinsufficiency-dependent defects,
such as progressive loss and increased MPTP sensitivity of SNpc neurons.
Collectively, these data suggest that mdDA progenitors exhibit differential
sensitivity to Otx2, which selectively influences the generation of a large and
specific subset of VTA neurons. In addition, these data suggest that Otx2 and En1
may share similar properties and control survival and vulnerability to MPTP
neurotoxin respectively in VTA and SNpc.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23117062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Dev Biol. 2012 Dec 15;372(2):249-62. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.09.019. Epub 2012 
Oct 4.

Genetic dissection of midbrain dopamine neuron development in vivo.

Ellisor D(1), Rieser C, Voelcker B, Machan JT, Zervas M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Division of
Biology and Medicine, Brown University, 70 Ship St., Providence, RI 02903, USA.

Midbrain dopamine (MbDA) neurons are partitioned into medial and lateral cohorts 
that control complex functions. However, the genetic underpinnings of MbDA neuron
heterogeneity are unclear. While it is known that Wnt1-expressing progenitors
contribute to MbDA neurons, the role of Wnt1 in MbDA neuron development in vivo
is unresolved. We show that mice with a spontaneous point mutation in Wnt1 have a
unique phenotype characterized by the loss of medial MbDA neurons concomitant
with a severe depletion of Wnt1-expressing progenitors and diminished
LMX1a-expressing progenitors. Wnt1 mutant embryos also have alterations in a
hierarchical gene regulatory loop suggesting multiple gene involvement in the
Wnt1 mutant MbDA neuron phenotype. To investigate this possibility, we
conditionally deleted Gbx2, Fgf8, and En1/2 after their early role in patterning 
and asked whether these genetic manipulations phenocopied the depletion of MbDA
neurons in Wnt1 mutants. The conditional deletion of Gbx2 did not result in
re-positioning or distribution of MbDA neurons. The temporal deletion of Fgf8 did
not result in the loss of either LMX1a-expressing progenitors nor the initial
population of differentiated MbDA neurons, but did result in a complete loss of
MbDA neurons at later stages. The temporal deletion and species specific
manipulation of En1/2 demonstrated a continued and species specific role of
Engrailed genes in MbDA neuron development. Notably, our conditional deletion
experiments revealed phenotypes dissimilar to Wnt1 mutants indicating the unique 
role of Wnt1 in MbDA neuron development. By placing Wnt1, Fgf8, and En1/2 in the 
context of their temporal requirement for MbDA neuron development, we further
deciphered the developmental program underpinning MbDA neuron progenitors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3502751
PMID: 23041116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Neurosci. 2012 Sep 19;32(38):13292-308.

A unilateral negative feedback loop between miR-200 microRNAs and Sox2/E2F3
controls neural progenitor cell-cycle exit and differentiation.

Peng C(1), Li N, Ng YK, Zhang J, Meier F, Theis FJ, Merkenschlager M, Chen W,
Wurst W, Prakash N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Deutsches
Forschungszentrum für Umwelt und Gesundheit, and Technische Universität
München-Weihenstephan, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany.

MicroRNAs have emerged as key posttranscriptional regulators of gene expression
during vertebrate development. We show that the miR-200 family plays a crucial
role for the proper generation and survival of ventral neuronal populations in
the murine midbrain/hindbrain region, including midbrain dopaminergic neurons, by
directly targeting the pluripotency factor Sox2 and the cell-cycle regulator E2F3
in neural stem/progenitor cells. The lack of a negative regulation of Sox2 and
E2F3 by miR-200 in conditional Dicer1 mutants (En1(+/Cre); Dicer1(flox/flox)
mice) and after miR-200 knockdown in vitro leads to a strongly reduced cell-cycle
exit and neuronal differentiation of ventral midbrain/hindbrain (vMH) neural
progenitors, whereas the opposite effect is seen after miR-200 overexpression in 
primary vMH cells. Expression of miR-200 is in turn directly regulated by Sox2
and E2F3, thereby establishing a unilateral negative feedback loop required for
the cell-cycle exit and neuronal differentiation of neural stem/progenitor cells.
Our findings suggest that the posttranscriptional regulation of Sox2 and E2F3 by 
miR-200 family members might be a general mechanism to control the transition
from a pluripotent/multipotent stem/progenitor cell to a postmitotic and more
differentiated cell.

PMCID: PMC3752087
PMID: 22993445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Oct;158A(10):2463-72. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35565. Epub 2012
Sep 10.

Evaluation of genes involved in limb development, angiogenesis, and coagulation
as risk factors for congenital limb deficiencies.

Browne ML(1), Carter TC, Kay DM, Kuehn D, Brody LC, Romitti PA, Liu A, Caggana M,
Druschel CM, Mills JL.

Author information: 
(1)Congenital Malformations Registry, New York State Department of Health, Troy, 
USA. mlb10@health.state.ny.us

We conducted a population-based case-control study of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in selected genes to find common variants that play a role
in the etiology of limb deficiencies (LDs). Included in the study were 389
infants with LDs of unknown cause and 980 unaffected controls selected from all
births in New York State (NYS) for the years 1998-2005. We used cases identified 
from the NYS Department of Health (DOH) Congenital Malformations Registry.
Genotypes were obtained for 132 SNPs in genes involved in limb development (SHH, 
WNT7A, FGF4, FGF8, FGF10, TBX3, TBX5, SALL4, GREM1, GDF5, CTNNB1, EN1, CYP26A1,
CYP26B1), angiogenesis (VEGFA, HIF1A, NOS3), and coagulation (F2, F5, MTHFR).
Genotype call rates were >97% and SNPs were tested for departure from
Hardy-Weinberg expectations by race/ethnic subgroups. For each SNP, odds ratios
(OR)s and confidence intervals (CI)s were estimated and corrected for multiple
comparisons for all LDs combined and for LD subtypes. Among non-Hispanic white
infants, associations between FGF10 SNPs rs10805683 and rs13170645 and all LDs
combined were statistically significant following correction for multiple testing
(OR = 1.99; 95% CI = 1.43-2.77; uncorrected P = 0.000043 for rs10805683
heterozygous genotype, and OR = 2.37; 95% CI = 1.48-3.78; uncorrected P = 0.00032
for rs13170645 homozygous minor genotype). We also observed suggestive evidence
for associations with SNPs in other genes including CYP26B1 and WNT7A. Animal
studies have shown that FGF10 induces formation of the apical ectodermal ridge
and is necessary for limb development. Our data suggest that common variants in
FGF10 increase the risk for a wide range of non-syndromic limb deficiencies.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3448837
PMID: 22965740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Dec;1823(12):2190-200. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.08.005. Epub 2012 Aug 12.

Bax inhibitor-1 enhances survival and neuronal differentiation of embryonic stem 
cells via differential regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinases
activities.

Jeon K(1), Lim H, Kim JH, Han D, Lee ER, Yang GM, Song MK, Kim JH, Cho SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology (BK21), Animal Resources Research Center,
and SMART-IABS, Konkuk University, Seoul 143-702, Republic of Korea.

Bax inhibitor-1 (BI-1), a member of the BI-1 family of integral membrane
proteins, was originally identified as an inhibitor of stress-induced cell death 
in mammalian cells. Previous studies have shown that the withdrawal of leukemia
inhibitory factor (LIF) results in differentiation of the majority of mouse
embryonic stem (mES) cells into various cell lineages, while some ES cells die
within 3days. Thus, to investigate the function of BI-1 in ES cell survival and
neuronal differentiation, we generated mES cell lines that overexpress BI-1 or a 
carboxy-terminal BI-1<U+0394>C mutant. Overexpression of BI-1 in mES cells significantly
increased cell viability and resistance to apoptosis induced by LIF withdrawal,
while the control vector or BI-1<U+0394>C-overexpressing mES cells had no effect.
Moreover, overexpression of BI-1 produced significant inhibition of the p38
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) pathway in response to LIF withdrawal,
while activity of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)/c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK) MAPK pathway was increased. Interestingly, we found that 
BI-1-overexpressing cells showed higher expression levels of neuroectodermal
markers (Otx1, Lmx1b, En1, Pax2, Wnt1, Sox1, and Nestin) and greater neuronal
differentiation efficiency than control or BI-1<U+0394>C-overexpressing mES cells did.
Considering these findings, our results indicated that BI-1-modulated MAPK
activity plays a key role in protecting mES cells from LIF-withdrawal-induced
apoptosis and in promoting their differentiation toward neuronal lineages.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22906541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Nov 15;318(19):2446-59. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.07.018. Epub
2012 Aug 2.

Human midbrain precursors activate the expected developmental genetic program and
differentiate long-term to functional A9 dopamine neurons in vitro. Enhancement
by Bcl-X(L).

Seiz EG(1), Ramos-Gómez M, Courtois ET, Tønnesen J, Kokaia M, Liste Noya I,
Martínez-Serrano A.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Biología Molecular and Centro de Biología Molecular Severo
Ochoa, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid-C.S.I.C, Cantoblanco, 28049-Madrid, Spain. 
egonzalez@cbm.uam.es

Understanding the molecular programs of the generation of human dopaminergic
neurons (DAn) from their ventral mesencephalic (VM) precursors is of key
importance for basic studies, progress in cell therapy, drug screening and
pharmacology in the context of Parkinson's disease. The nature of human DAn
precursors in vitro is poorly understood, their properties unstable, and their
availability highly limited. Here we present positive evidence that human VM
precursors retaining their genuine properties and long-term capacity to generate 
A9 type Substantia nigra human DAn (hVM1 model cell line) can be propagated in
culture. During a one month differentiation, these cells activate all key genes
needed to progress from pro-neural and pro-dopaminergic precursors to mature and 
functional DAn. For the first time, we demonstrate that gene cascades are
correctly activated during differentiation, resulting in the generation of mature
DAn. These DAn have morphological and functional properties undistinguishable
from those generated by VM primary neuronal cultures. In addition, we have found 
that the forced expression of Bcl-X(L) induces an increase in the expression of
key developmental genes (MSX1, NGN2), maintenance of PITX3 expression temporal
profile, and also enhances genes involved in DAn long-term function, maintenance 
and survival (EN1, LMX1B, NURR1 and PITX3). As a result, Bcl-X(L) anticipates and
enhances DAn generation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22884477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Neurochem Res. 2012 Sep;37(9):1982-92. doi: 10.1007/s11064-012-0819-9. Epub 2012 
Jun 22.

Dopaminergic neuronal conversion from adult rat skeletal muscle-derived stem
cells in vitro.

Yang J(1), Wang X, Wang Y, Guo ZX, Luo DZ, Jia J, Wang XM.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Disease of Education Ministry, Department
of Physiology and Neurobiology, Capital Medical University, 10# Youanmen, Beijing
100069, People's Republic of China.

Muscle-derived stem cells reside in the skeletal muscle tissues and are known for
their multipotency to differentiate toward the mesodermal lineage. Recent studies
have demonstrated their capacity of neuroectodermal differentiation, including
neurons and astrocytes. In this study, we investigated the possibility of
dopaminergic neuronal conversion from adult rat skeletal muscle-derived stem
cells. Using a neurosphere protocol, muscle-derived stem cells form
neurosphere-like cell clusters after cultivation as a suspension, displaying an
obvious expression of nestin and a remarkable down-regulation of myogenic
associated factors desmin, MyoD, Myf5 and myogenin. Subsequently, these
neurosphere-like cell clusters were further directed to dopaminergic
differentiation through two major induction steps, patterning to midbrain
progenitors with sonic hedgehog and fibroblast growth factor 8, followed by the
differentiation to dopaminergic neurons with neurotrophic factors (glial cell
line-derived neurotrophic factor) and chemicals (ascorbic acid, forskolin). After
the differentiation, these cells expressed tyrosine hydroxylase, dopamine
transporter, dopamine D1 receptor and synapse-associated protein synapsin I.
Several genes, Nurr1, Lmx1b, and En1, which are critically related with the
development of dopaminergic neurons, were also significantly up-regulated. The
present results indicate that adult skeletal muscle-derived stem cells could
provide a promising cell source for autologous transplantation for
neurodegenerative diseases in the future, especially the Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 22723079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Eur J Neurosci. 2012 Jun;35(12):1837-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2012.08139.x.

Engrailed signaling in axon guidance and neuron survival.

Fuchs J(1), Stettler O, Alvarez-Fischer D, Prochiantz A, Moya KL, Joshi RL.

Author information: 
(1)Collège de France, Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology (CIRB),
CNRS unité mixte de recherche 7241/INSERM U1050, Development and
Neuropharmacology, 11 place Marcelin Berthelot, Paris F-75005, France.

Several homeoproteins can function in a direct cell non-autonomous fashion to
control various biological processes. In the developing nervous system, this mode
of signaling has been well documented for Engrailed in the guidance of retinal
ganglion cell axons and retino-tectal patterning. Engrailed is also a key factor 
for mesencephalic dopaminergic (mDA) neurons, not only during development but
also in the adult. Haplodeficiency for Engrailed1 leads to progressive
adult-onset loss of mDA neurons and several phenotypic alterations reminiscent of
Parkinson's disease (PD). Thanks to its transduction properties, Engrailed has
been shown to confer neuroprotection in several experimental models of PD. Study 
of the mechanisms underlying these two Engrailed-mediated effects has revealed a 
key role of the translation regulation by Engrailed and uncovered an unsuspected 
link between a homeoprotein and mitochondrial activity. These studies highlight
the crucial role of cellular energetic metabolism in neuron development, survival
and neurodegeneration, and may help to identify novel therapeutic targets.

© 2012 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience © 2012 Federation of
European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22708594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Stem Cells. 2012 Aug;30(8):1655-63. doi: 10.1002/stem.1152.

Specification of midbrain dopamine neurons from primate pluripotent stem cells.

Xi J(1), Liu Y, Liu H, Chen H, Emborg ME, Zhang SC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Institutes of Biomedical
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

By sequentially applying sonic hedgehog (C25II) and CHIR99021 (GSK3ß inhibitor)
to induce the midbrain floor plate (FP) progenitors and fibroblast growth factor 
8 (FGF8) to promote dopaminergic differentiation in a chemically defined medium, 
we have established a robust system for the generation of midbrain dopamine (DA) 
neurons from human and rhesus monkey embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent
stem cells (PSCs). We found that CHIR99021 specifies diencephalon to hind brain
fates in a concentration-dependent manner and only a narrow concentration range
of CHIR99021 at a particular window is necessary to induce the midbrain FP
progenitors, expressing Corin, En1, FoxA2, and Lmx1a. FGF8 enhances the
dopaminergic fate of the progenitors, thus generating DA neurons with midbrain
characteristics, including expression of tyrosine hydroxylase, Lmx1a/b, FoxA2,
FoxP1, Nurr1, and En1 as well as typical electrophysiological properties. More
than half of these DA neurons expressed A9 DA neuron markers Girk2 and ALDH1a1.
The new strategy will allow generation of enriched populations of functional
midbrain DA neurons from both human and monkey PSCs for disease modeling, drug
testing, and potential cell therapy.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3405174
PMID: 22696177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Neurosci. 2012 Jun 6;32(23):7832-42. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5829-11.2012.

Engrailed is required in maturing serotonin neurons to regulate the
cytoarchitecture and survival of the dorsal raphe nucleus.

Fox SR(1), Deneris ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

Analysis of constitutive Engrailed (En) null mice previously implicated the two
En homeobox paralogs in the development of serotonin (5-HT) neurons. An
unresolved question is whether En plays intrinsic roles in these neurons. Here,
we show that En1 and En2 are expressed in maturing 5-HT neurons that will form
the dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) and part of the median raphe nucleus. Although En1
expression in 5-HT neurons persists postnatally, En2 expression is extinguished
by embryonic day 17.5. To investigate intrinsic serotonergic functions for En1/2,
we generated compound conditional En mutants with floxed alleles and a cre
recombinase line that becomes active in postmitotic fetal 5-HT neurons. We
present evidence in support of a requirement for En1/2 in the maturation of DRN
cytoarchitecture. The disruption of DRN cytoarchitecture appears to result from a
defect in secondary migration of serotonergic cell bodies toward the midline
rather than disruption of their primary ventral migration away from the
ventricular zone. Furthermore, En1/2 are required for perinatal maintenance of
serotonergic identity and postnatal forebrain 5-HT levels. Increased numbers of
caspase-3-expressing cells and loss of significant numbers of 5-HT neuron cell
bodies, indicative of apoptosis, occurred after loss of serotonergic identity.
Analysis of an allelic series of conditional mutants showed that En1 is the
predominant functional En paralog in maturing 5-HT neurons, although a small
contribution from En2 was reproducibly detected. Together, our findings reveal
complex intrinsic functions for En in maturing 5-HT neurons, hence necessitating 
a reinterpretation of their roles in 5-HT system development.

PMCID: PMC3521159
PMID: 22674259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Dev Biol. 2012 Jul 1;367(1):25-39. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.04.018. Epub 2012
Apr 28.

The engrailed homeobox genes are required in multiple cell lineages to coordinate
sequential formation of fissures and growth of the cerebellum.

Orvis GD(1), Hartzell AL, Smith JB, Barraza LH, Wilson SL, Szulc KU, Turnbull DH,
Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue,
New York, NY 10065, USA.

The layered cortex of the cerebellum is folded along the anterior-posterior axis 
into lobules separated by fissures, allowing the large number of cells needed for
advanced cerebellar functions to be packed into a small volume. During
development, the cerebellum begins as a smooth ovoid structure with two
progenitor zones, the ventricular zone and upper rhombic lip, which give rise to 
distinct cell types in the mature cerebellum. Initially, the cerebellar
primordium is divided into five cardinal lobes, which are subsequently further
subdivided by fissures. The cellular processes and genes that regulate the
formation of a normal pattern of fissures are poorly understood. The engrailed
genes (En1 and En2) are expressed in all cerebellar cell types and are critical
for regulating formation of specific fissures. However, the cerebellar cell types
that En1 and En2 act in to control growth and/or patterning of fissures has not
been determined. We conditionally eliminated En2 or En1 and En2 either in both
progenitor zones and their descendents or in the two complementary sets of cells 
derived from each progenitor zone. En2 was found to be required only transiently 
in the progenitor zones and their immediate descendents to regulate formation of 
three fissures and for general growth of the cerebellum. In contrast, En1 and En2
have overlapping functions in the cells derived from each progenitor zone in
regulating formation of additional fissures and for extensive cerebellar growth. 
Furthermore, En1/2 function in ventricular zone-derived cells plays a more
significant role in determining the timing of initiation and positioning of
fissures, whereas in upper rhombic lip-derived cells the genes are more important
in regulating cerebellar growth. Our studies reveal the complex manner in which
the En genes control cerebellar growth and foliation in distinct cell types.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4038292
PMID: 22564796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Development. 2012 Apr;139(7):1346-58. doi: 10.1242/dev.076729.

Regulation of cranial morphogenesis and cell fate at the neural crest-mesoderm
boundary by engrailed 1.

Deckelbaum RA(1), Holmes G, Zhao Z, Tong C, Basilico C, Loomis CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, 550 1st
Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA. ron.deckelbaum@regeneron.com

The characterization of mesenchymal progenitors is central to understanding
development, postnatal pathology and evolutionary adaptability. The precise
identity of the mesenchymal precursors that generate the coronal suture, an
important structural boundary in mammalian skull development, remains unclear. We
show in mouse that coronal suture progenitors originate from hedgehog-responsive 
cephalic paraxial mesoderm (Mes) cells, which migrate rapidly to a supraorbital
domain and establish a unidirectional lineage boundary with neural crest (NeuC)
mesenchyme. Lineage tracing reveals clonal and stereotypical expansion of
supraorbital mesenchymal cells to form the coronal suture between E11.0 and
E13.5. We identify engrailed 1 (En1) as a necessary regulator of cell movement
and NeuC/Mes lineage boundary positioning during coronal suture formation. In
addition, we provide genetic evidence that En1 functions upstream of fibroblast
growth factor receptor 2 (Fgfr2) in regulating early calvarial osteogenic
differentiation, and postulate that it plays an additional role in precluding
premature osteogenic conversion of the sutural mesenchyme.

PMCID: PMC3294437
PMID: 22395741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Mar 2;419(1):110-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.01.142. Epub 2012 Feb 4.

Human cord blood-derived multipotent stem cells (CB-SCs) treated with
all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) give rise to dopamine neurons.

Li X(1), Li H, Bi J, Chen Y, Jain S, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Jinan Central Hospital, Shandong University, 105
Jiefang Road, Jinan 250013, PR China.

Parkinson's disease (PD) results from the chronic degeneration of dopaminergic
neurons. A replacement for these neurons has the potential to provide a clinical 
cure and/or lasting treatment for symptoms of the disease. Human cord
blood-derived multipotent stem cells (CB-SCs) display embryonic stem cell
characteristics, including multi-potential differentiation. To explore their
therapeutic potential in PD, we examined whether CB-SCs could be induced to
differentiate into dopamine neurons in the presence of all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA). Prior to treatment, CB-SCs expressed mRNA and protein for the key
dopaminergic transcription factors Nurr1, Wnt1, and En1. Following treatment with
10 µM ATRA for 12 days, CB-SCs displayed elongated neuronal-like morphologies.
Immunocytochemistry revealed that 48 ± 11% of ATRA-treated cells were positive
for tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), and 36 ± 9% of cells were positive for dopamine
transporter (DAT). In contrast, control CB-SCs (culture medium only) expressed
only background levels of TH and DAT. Finally, ATRA-treated CB-SCs challenged
with potassium released increased levels of dopamine compared to control. These
data demonstrate that ATRA induces differentiation of CB-SCs into dopaminergic
neurons. This finding may lead to the development of an alternative approach to
stem cell therapy for Parkinson's disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22330803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Dev Biol. 2012 Mar 1;363(1):247-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.037. Epub 2012
Jan 3.

Smad1/Smad5 signaling in limb ectoderm functions redundantly and is required for 
interdigital programmed cell death.

Wong YL(1), Behringer RR, Kwan KM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, PR
China.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are secreted signals that regulate apical
ectodermal ridge (AER) functions and interdigital programmed cell death (PCD) of 
developing limb. However the identities of the intracellular mediators of these
signals are unknown. To investigate the role of Smad proteins in BMP-regulated
AER functions in limb development, we inactivated Smad1 and Smad5 selectively in 
AER and ventral ectoderm of developing limb, using Smad1 or/and Smad5 floxed
alleles and an En1(Cre/+) knock-in allele. Single inactivation of either Smad1 or
Smad5 did not result in limb abnormalities. However, the Smad1/Smad5 double
mutants exhibited syndactyly due to a reduction in interdigital PCD and an
increase in interdigital cell proliferation. Cell tracing experiments in the
Smad1/Smad5 double mutants showed that ventral ectoderm became thicker and the
descendents of ventral En1(Cre/+) expressing ectodermal cells were located at
dorsal interdigital regions. At the molecular level, Fgf8 expression was
prolonged in the interdigital ectoderm of embryonic day (E) 13 Smad1/Smad5 double
mutants, suggesting that the ectopic Fgf8 expression may serve as a survival
signal for interdigital epithelial and mesenchymal cells. Our result suggests
that Smad1 and Smad5 are required and function redundantly as intracellular
mediators for BMP signaling in the AER and ventral ectoderm. Smad1/Smad5
signaling in the AER and ventral ectoderm regulates interdigital tissue
regression of developing limb. Our mutants with defects in interdigital PCD could
also serve as a valuable model for investigation of PCD regulation machinery.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22240098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2012 Mar;159B(2):236-42. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32020. Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Clinical improvement of the aggressive neurobehavioral phenotype in a patient
with a deletion of PITX3 and the absence of L-DOPA in the cerebrospinal fluid.

Derwinska K(1), Mierzewska H, Goszczanska A, Szczepanik E, Xia Z, Kusmierska K,
Tryfon J, Kutkowska-Kazmierczak A, Bocian E, Mazurczak T, Obersztyn E,
Stankiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.

The development of midbrain dopamine (DA) neurons is regulated by several
transcription factors, including Nurr1, Wnt1, Lmx1a/1b, En1, En2, Foxa1, Foxa2,
and Pitx3. PITX3 is an upstream co-activator of the TH (tyrosine hydroxylase)
promoter. Pitx3(-/-) mice have a selective loss of dopaminergic neurons in the
substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area, leading to the significantly reduced
DA levels in the nigrostriatal pathway and in the dorsal striatum and manifest
anomalous striatum-dependent cognitive impairment and neurobehavioral activity.
Treatment with L-DOPA, dopamine, or dopamine receptor agonists in these mice
reversed several of their sensorimotor impairments. Heterozygous missense
mutations in PITX3 have been reported in patients with autosomal dominant
congenital cataract and anterior segment (ocular) mesenchymal dysgenesis (ASMD)
whereas homozygous missense mutations have been found in patients with
microphthalmia and neurological impairment. Using a clinical oligonucleotide
array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), we have identified an ~317 kb
hemizygous deletion in 10q24.32, involving PITX3 in a 17-year-old male with a
Smith-Magenis syndrome-like phenotype, including mild intellectual impairment,
sleep disturbance, hyperactivity, and aggressive and self-destructive behavior.
Interestingly, no eye anomalies were found in our patient. Analysis of
neurotransmitters in his cerebrospinal fluid revealed an absence of L-DOPA and
significantly decreased levels of catecholamine metabolites. Importantly, L-DOPA 
treatment of our patient has led to mild mitigation of his aggressive behavior
and mild improvement of his attention span, extended time periods of
concentration, and better sleep.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22223473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Development. 2012 Jan;139(1):215-24. doi: 10.1242/dev.063875.

Engrailed homeoprotein recruits the adenosine A1 receptor to potentiate ephrin A5
function in retinal growth cones.

Stettler O(1), Joshi RL, Wizenmann A, Reingruber J, Holcman D, Bouillot C,
Castagner F, Prochiantz A, Moya KL.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS Unité mixte de Recherche 7241/INSERM U1050, Equipe FRM, Center for
Interdisciplinary Research in Biology, Collège de France, 11, place Marcelin
Berthelot, 75005 Paris, France.

Engrailed 1 and engrailed 2 homeoprotein transcription factors (collectively
Engrailed) display graded expression in the chick optic tectum where they
participate in retino-tectal patterning. In vitro, extracellular Engrailed guides
retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons and synergises with ephrin A5 to provoke the
collapse of temporal growth cones. In vivo disruption of endogenous extracellular
Engrailed leads to misrouting of RGC axons. Here we characterise the signalling
pathway of extracellular Engrailed. Our results show that Engrailed/ephrin A5
synergy in growth cone collapse involves adenosine A1 receptor activation after
Engrailed-dependent ATP synthesis, followed by ATP secretion and hydrolysis to
adenosine. This is, to our knowledge, the first evidence for a role of the
adenosine A1 receptor in axon guidance. Based on these results, together with
higher expression of the adenosine A1 receptor in temporal than nasal growth
cones, we propose a computational model that illustrates how the interaction
between Engrailed, ephrin A5 and adenosine could increase the precision of the
retinal projection map.

PMID: 22147955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Gynecol Oncol. 2012 Mar;124(3):582-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2011.11.026. Epub 2011
Nov 22.

Prognostic and diagnostic significance of DNA methylation patterns in high grade 
serous ovarian cancer.

Montavon C(1), Gloss BS, Warton K, Barton CA, Statham AL, Scurry JP, Tabor B,
Nguyen TV, Qu W, Samimi G, Hacker NF, Sutherland RL, Clark SJ, O'Brien PM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney NSW
2010, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Altered DNA methylation patterns hold promise as cancer biomarkers. In
this study we selected a panel of genes which are commonly methylated in a
variety of cancers to evaluate their potential application as biomarkers for
prognosis and diagnosis in high grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC); the most 
common and lethal subtype of ovarian cancer.
METHODS: The methylation patterns of 10 genes (BRCA1, EN1, DLEC1, HOXA9, RASSF1A,
GATA4, GATA5, HSULF1, CDH1, SFN) were examined and compared in a cohort of 80
primary HGSOC and 12 benign ovarian surface epithelium (OSE) samples using
methylation-specific headloop suppression PCR.
RESULTS: The genes were variably methylated in primary HGSOC, with HOXA9
methylation observed in 95% of cases. Most genes were rarely methylated in benign
OSE, with the exception of SFN which was methylated in all HGSOC and benign OSE
samples examined. Methylation of DLEC1 was associated with disease recurrence,
independent of tumor stage and suboptimal surgical debulking (HR 3.5 (95%
CI:1.10-11.07), p=0.033). A combination of the methylation status of HOXA9 and
EN1 could discriminate HGSOC from benign OSE with a sensitivity of 98.8% and a
specificity of 91.7%, which increased to 100% sensitivity with no loss of
specificity when pre-operative CA125 levels were also incorporated.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides further evidence to support the feasibility of
detecting altered DNA methylation patterns as a potential diagnostic and
prognostic approach for HGSOC.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22115852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Development. 2011 Dec;138(23):5213-22. doi: 10.1242/dev.071704.

Retinoic acid-dependent and -independent gene-regulatory pathways of Pitx3 in
meso-diencephalic dopaminergic neurons.

Jacobs FM(1), Veenvliet JV, Almirza WH, Hoekstra EJ, von Oerthel L, van der
Linden AJ, Neijts R, Koerkamp MG, van Leenen D, Holstege FC, Burbach JP, Smidt
MP.

Author information: 
(1)Rudolf Magnus Institute, Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, UMC
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Development of meso-diencephalic dopamine (mdDA) neurons requires the combined
actions of the orphan nuclear receptor Nurr1 and the paired-like homeobox
transcription factor Pitx3. Whereas all mdDA neurons require Nurr1 for expression
of Th and survival, dependence on Pitx3 is displayed only by the mdDA
subpopulation that will form the substantia nigra (SNc). Previously, we have
demonstrated that Pitx3(-/-) embryos lack the expression of the retinoic acid
(RA)-generating enzyme Ahd2, which is normally selectively expressed in the
Pitx3-dependent DA neurons of the SNc. Restoring RA signaling in Pitx3(-/-)
embryos revealed a selective dependence of SNc neurons on the presence of RA for 
differentiation into Th-positive neurons and maintenance throughout embryonic
development. Whereas these data are suggestive of an important developmental role
for RA in neurons of the SNc, it remained unclear whether other Nurr1 and Pitx3
target genes depend on RA signaling in a manner similar to Th. In the search for 
genes that were affected in Pitx3-deficient mdDA neurons and restored upon
embryonic RA treatment, we provide evidence that Delta-like 1, D2R (Drd2) and Th 
are regulated by Pitx3 and RA signaling, which influences the mdDA terminal
differentiated phenotype. Furthermore, we show that regulation of Ahd2-mediated
RA signaling represents only one aspect of the Pitx3 downstream cascade, as
Vmat2, Dat, Ahd2 (Aldh1a1), En1, En2 and Cck were unaffected by RA treatment and 
are (subset) specifically modulated by Pitx3. In conclusion, our data reveal
several RA-dependent and -independent aspects of the Pitx3-regulated gene
cascade, suggesting that Pitx3 acts on multiple levels in the molecular
subset-specification of mdDA neurons.

PMID: 22069189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Feb 1;21(3):609-22. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr495. Epub 2011 Oct
31.

MicroRNA-mediated dysregulation of neural developmental genes in HPRT deficiency:
clues for Lesch-Nyhan disease?

Guibinga GH(1), Hrustanovic G, Bouic K, Jinnah HA, Friedmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Neural Circuits and Behavior and Rady
Children's Hospital, School of Medicine, University of California San Diego, San 
Diego, CA 92093-0634, USA.

Mutations in the gene encoding the purine biosynthetic enzyme
hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) cause the intractable
neurodevelopmental Lesch-Nyhan disease (LND) associated with aberrant development
of brain dopamine pathways. In the current study, we have identified an increased
expression of the microRNA miR181a in HPRT-deficient human dopaminergic SH-SY5Y
neuroblastoma cells. Among the genes potentially regulated by miR181a are several
known to be required for neural development, including Engrailed1 (En1),
Engrailed2 (En2), Lmx1a and Brn2. We demonstrate that these genes are
down-regulated in HPRT-deficient SH-SY5Y cells and that over-expression of
miR181a significantly reduces endogenous expression of these genes and inhibits
translation of luciferase plasmids bearing the En1/2 or Lmx1a 3'UTR miRNA-binding
elements. Conversely, inhibition of miR181a increases the expression of these
genes and enhances translation of luciferase constructs bearing the En1/2 and
Lmx1a 3'UTR miRNA-binding sequences. We also demonstrate that key
neurodevelopmental genes (e.g. Nurr1, Pitx3, Wnt1 and Mash1) known to be
functional partners of Lmx1a and Brn2 are also markedly down-regulated in SH-SY5Y
cells over-expressing miR181a and in HPRT-deficient cells. Our findings in
SH-SY5Y cells demonstrate that HPRT deficiency is accompanied by dysregulation of
some of the important pathways that regulate the development of dopaminergic
neurons and dopamine pathways and that this defect is associated with and
possibly due at least partly to aberrant expression of miR181a. Because aberrant 
expression of miR181a is not as apparent in HPRT-deficient LND fibroblasts, the
relevance of the SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells to human disease remains to be
proven. Nevertheless, we propose that these pleiotropic neurodevelopment effects 
of miR181a may play a role in the pathogenesis of LND.

PMCID: PMC3259014
PMID: 22042773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Jan 6;506(1):22-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.10.038. Epub
2011 Oct 21.

Permanent expression of midbrain dopaminergic neurons traits in differentiated
amniotic epithelial cells.

Niknejad H(1), Deihim T, Ahmadiani A, Jorjani M, Peirovi H.

Author information: 
(1)Nanomedicine and Tissue Engineering Research Center, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. niknejad@sbmu.ac.ir

Amniotic epithelial cells (AECs) have been the subject of interest due to their
stem cells characteristics. Pluripotency, lack of teratoma formation, low
immunogenicity and no ethical issues make them an alternative source of stem
cells for generation of dopaminergic neurons in vitro. AECs may differentiate
into midbrain dopaminergic neurons in the presence of induction factors which
trigger pathway naturally occurring in the mesencephalon during embryogenesis. In
this study, we examined whether FGF8 and Sonic hedgehog (Shh) can induce AECs to 
express permanently midbrain dopaminergic neurons traits. We found that fresh
isolated AECs temporarily expressed some neural markers which decreased 7 days
after culture. Co-treatment of cells with FGF8 and Shh had synergistic effect on 
expression of TH, DAT, Pax2, Lmx1b and En1. Shh ceased differentiation in
dopaminergic state and decreased DßH. HPLC analysis revealed that dopamine was
released into the medium upon depolarization, indicating that functional
dopaminergic neurons were present in the culture. These results demonstrate that 
AECs have capability to differentiate into dopaminergic neurons and can be a
candidate for cell replacement therapy of Parkinson's disease.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22037229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Nat Neurosci. 2011 Sep 27;14(10):1221-2. doi: 10.1038/nn.2939.

Regulation of complex I by Engrailed is complex too.

Sanders LH(1), Greenamyre JT.

Author information: 
(1)Pittsburgh Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases and Department of
Neurology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
USA.

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2011 Oct;14(10):1260-6.

PMID: 21952262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Nat Neurosci. 2011 Sep 4;14(10):1260-6. doi: 10.1038/nn.2916.

Engrailed protects mouse midbrain dopaminergic neurons against mitochondrial
complex I insults.

Alvarez-Fischer D(1), Fuchs J, Castagner F, Stettler O, Massiani-Beaudoin O, Moya
KL, Bouillot C, Oertel WH, Lombès A, Faigle W, Joshi RL, Hartmann A, Prochiantz
A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière
University Pierre and Marie Curie/Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale, Unité Mixte de Recherche S 975, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2011 Oct;14(10):1221-2.

Mice heterozygous for the homeobox gene Engrailed-1 (En1) display progressive
loss of mesencephalic dopaminergic (mDA) neurons. We report that exogenous
Engrailed-1 and Engrailed-2 (collectively Engrailed) protect mDA neurons from
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), a mitochondrial complex I
toxin used to model Parkinson's disease in animals. Engrailed enhances the
translation of nuclearly encoded mRNAs for two key complex I subunits, Ndufs1 and
Ndufs3, and increases complex I activity. Accordingly, in vivo protection against
MPTP by Engrailed is antagonized by Ndufs1 small interfering RNA. An association 
between Engrailed and complex I is further confirmed by the reduced expression of
Ndufs1 and Ndufs3 in the substantia nigra pars compacta of En1 heterozygous mice.
Engrailed also confers in vivo protection against 6-hydroxydopamine and
a-synuclein-A30P. Finally, the unilateral infusion of Engrailed into the midbrain
increases striatal dopamine content, resulting in contralateral
amphetamine-induced turning. Therefore, Engrailed is both a survival factor for
adult mDA neurons and a regulator of their physiological activity.

© 2011 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21892157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cancer. 2012 Mar 1;118(5):1288-92. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26412. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

Developmental transcription factor EN1--a novel biomarker in human salivary gland
adenoid cystic carcinoma.

Bell D(1), Bell A, Roberts D, Weber RS, El-Naggar AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. diana.bell@mdanderson.org

Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC), a rare and progressive salivary malignancy, is
characterized by histogenetic, morphologic, and clinical heterogeneity. Extensive
efforts to characterize the molecular events associated with these tumors have
included the identification of biomarkers for prognostication and post-therapy
assessment. In a previous study of genome-wide methylation screening, the authors
of the current report identified a limited number of differentially methylated
gene regions in ACC, and significant hypermethylation was observed at the
transcriptional start sites of genes that encode for the transcription factor
engrailed homeobox 1 (EN1). Clinicopathologic correlation analyses indicated that
EN1 methylation status is correlated with histologic tumor grade, tumor location,
and final patient outcome. To ascertain definitively whether aberrant EN1
expression accompanies human salivary ACC, the authors used an
immunohistochemical technique to directly evaluate EN1 protein expression in ACC 
of the salivary gland. The data revealed increased EN1 protein expression in
solid type ACC, which was correlated with a significantly lower survival rate.
The current results validated EN1 as a potential biomarker in a large cohort of
patients with salivary ACC. Immunohistochemical analysis of EN1 in biopsy
specimens obtained for diagnostic purposes and/or surgically resected material
may reveal that EN1 is a biologic predictor of poor prognosis in patients with
salivary ACC.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC3208084
PMID: 21800291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Nat Protoc. 2011 Jul 28;6(8):1229-40. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2011.380.

Efficient derivation of NPCs, spinal motor neurons and midbrain dopaminergic
neurons from hESCs at 3% oxygen.

Stacpoole SR(1), Bilican B, Webber DJ, Luzhynskaya A, He XL, Compston A,
Karadottir R, Franklin RJ, Chandran S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 
srls2@cam.ac.uk

This protocol has been designed to generate neural precursor cells (NPCs) from
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) using a physiological oxygen (O(2)) level of
3% (previously termed hypoxia) and chemically defined conditions. The first stage
involves suspension culture of hESC colonies at 3% O(2), where they acquire a
neuroepithelial identity over a period of 2 weeks. This timescale is comparable
to that observed at 20% O(2), but survival is enhanced. Sequential application of
retinoic acid and purmorphamine (PM), from day 14 to day 28, directs
differentiation toward spinal motor neurons. Alternatively, addition of
fibroblast growth factor-8 and PM generates midbrain dopaminergic neurons. OLIG2 
(encoding oligodendrocyte lineage transcription factor 2) induction in motor
neuron precursors is twofold greater than that at 20% O(2), whereas EN1 (encoding
engrailed homeobox 1) expression is enhanced fivefold. NPCs (at 3% O(2)) can be
differentiated into all three neural lineages, and such cultures can be
maintained long term in the absence of neurotrophins. The ability to generate
defined cell types at 3% O(2) should represent a significant advancement for in
vitro disease modeling and potentially for cell-based therapies.

PMCID: PMC3433269
PMID: 21799491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Neurosci. 2011 Jul 27;31(30):11055-69. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0479-11.2011.

Ascl1 genetics reveals insights into cerebellum local circuit assembly.

Sudarov A(1), Turnbull RK, Kim EJ, Lebel-Potter M, Guillemot F, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York
10065, USA.

Comment in
    Cerebellum. 2012 Dec;11(4):829-33.

Two recently generated targeted mouse alleles of the neurogenic gene Ascl1 were
used to characterize cerebellum circuit formation. First, genetic inducible fate 
mapping (GIFM) with an Ascl1(CreER) allele was found to specifically mark all
glial and neuron cell types that arise from the ventricular zone (vz). Moreover, 
each cell type has a unique temporal profile of marking with Ascl1(CreER) GIFM.
Of great utility, Purkinje cells (Pcs), an early cohort of Bergmann glia, and
four classes of GABAergic interneurons can be genetically birth dated during
embryogenesis using Ascl1(CreER) GIFM. Astrocytes and oligodendrocytes, in
contrast, express Ascl1(CreER) throughout their proliferative phase in the white 
matter. Interestingly, the final position each neuron type acquires differs
depending on when it expresses Ascl1. Interneurons (including candelabrum) attain
a more outside position the later they express Ascl1, whereas Pcs have distinct
settling patterns each day they express Ascl1. Second, using a conditional Ascl1 
allele, we discovered that Ascl1 is differentially required for generation of
most vz-derived cells. Mice lacking Ascl1 in the cerebellum have a major decrease
in three types of interneurons with a tendency toward a loss of later-born
interneurons, as well as an imbalance of oligodendrocytes and astrocytes.
Double-mutant analysis indicates that a related helix-loop-helix protein, Ptf1a, 
functions with Ascl1 in generating interneurons and Pcs. By fate mapping
vz-derived cells in Ascl1 mutants, we further discovered that Ascl1 plays a
specific role during the time period when Pcs are generated in restricting vz
progenitors from becoming rhombic lip progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3153985
PMID: 21795554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Cancer. 2011 Jul 1;117(13):2898-909. doi: 10.1002/cncr.25818. Epub 2011 Jan 11.

CpG island methylation profiling in human salivary gland adenoid cystic
carcinoma.

Bell A(1), Bell D, Weber RS, El-Naggar AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cancer Institute, The University of Mississippi
Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi, USA. abell2@umc.edu

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is a fundamental epigenetic event associated with
physiologic and pathologic conditions, including cancer. Hypermethylation of CpG 
islands at active gene promoters leads to transcriptional repression, whereas
hypomethylation is associated with gene overexpression. The aim of this study was
to identify genes in adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of salivary gland strongly
deregulated by epigenetic CpG island methylation, to validate selected genes by
conventional techniques, and to correlate the findings with clinicopathologic
factors.
METHODS: The authors analyzed 16 matched normal and tumor tissues for aberrant
DNA methylation using the methylated CpG island amplification and microarray
method and the pyrosequencing technique.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis showed hypomethylation in 7 and hypermethylation in 
32 CpG islands. Hypomethylation was identified in CpG islands near FBXO17, PHKG1,
LOXL1, DOCK1, and PARVG. Hypermethylation was identified near genes encoding
predominantly transcription factors (EN1, FOXE1, GBX2, FOXL1, TBX4, MEIS1, LBX2, 
NR2F2, POU3F3, IRX3, TFAP2C, NKX2-4, PITX1, NKX2-5), and 13 genes with different 
functions (MT1H, EPHX3, AQPEP, BCL2L11, SLC35D3, S1PR5, PNLIPRP1, CLIC6, RASAL,
XRN2, GSTM5, FNDC1, INSRR). Four CpG islands by EN1, FOXE1, TBX4, and PITX1 were 
validated by pyrosequencing.
CONCLUSIONS: The highly methylated genes in tumor versus normal tissue are linked
to developmental, apoptotic, and other fundamental cellular pathways, suggesting 
that down-regulation of these genes is associated with ACC development and
progression. With EN1 hypermethylation showing potential as a possible biomarker 
for ACC in salivary gland, the biological and therapeutic implications of these
findings require further preclinical investigations.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC3123690
PMID: 21692051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Int Med Res. 2011;39(1):161-71.

A method of utrophin up-regulation through RNAi-mediated knockdown of the
transcription factor EN1.

Wang Q(1), Cao DH, Jin CL, Lin CK, Ma HW, Wu YY.

Author information: 
(1)Senior Profession College, Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical
University, Shenyang, China.

The aim of this study was to induce up-regulation of the dystrophin-related gene 
UTRN that encodes the protein utrophin, to determine whether this could
compensate for the lack of dystrophin function in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
The human UTRN promoter, which contains two putative binding sites for homeobox
protein engrailed-1 (EN1), was analysed. It was found that EN1 binding site 2 in 
the UTRN gene promoter directly interacted with transcription factor EN1 in
vitro. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays of the EN1-UTRN promoter complex from
rhabdomyosarcoma and HeLa cell lines confirmed that endogenous EN1 interacted
with this region in vivo. The findings suggest that EN1 directly interacts with
the UTRN promoter. Small interfering RNA was used to inhibit EN1 gene expression.
Higher utrophin mRNA levels were observed in EN1-inhibited cells compared with
controls. The increase in utrophin mRNA in rhabdomyosarcoma cells and HeLa cells 
may have resulted from inhibition of EN1 expression.

PMID: 21672318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. BMC Neurol. 2011 Jun 2;11:64. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-11-64.

Cluster analysis of behavioural and event-related potentials during a contingent 
negative variation paradigm in remitting-relapsing and benign forms of multiple
sclerosis.

Gonzalez-Rosa JJ(1), Vazquez-Marrufo M, Vaquero E, Duque P, Borges M,
Gomez-Gonzalez CM, Izquierdo G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Seville, Seville, Spain. 
javgonros@us.es

BACKGROUND: Event-related potentials (ERPs) may be used as a highly sensitive way
of detecting subtle degrees of cognitive dysfunction. On the other hand,
impairment of cognitive skills is increasingly recognised as a hallmark of
patients suffering from multiple sclerosis (MS). We sought to determine the
psychophysiological pattern of information processing among MS patients with the 
relapsing-remitting form of the disease and low physical disability considered as
two subtypes: 'typical relapsing-remitting' (RRMS) and 'benign MS' (BMS).
Furthermore, we subjected our data to a cluster analysis to determine whether MS 
patients and healthy controls could be differentiated in terms of their
psychophysiological profile.
METHODS: We investigated MS patients with RRMS and BMS subtypes using
event-related potentials (ERPs) acquired in the context of a Posner
visual-spatial cueing paradigm. Specifically, our study aimed to assess ERP brain
activity in response preparation (contingent negative variation -CNV) and stimuli
processing in MS patients. Latency and amplitude of different ERP components (P1,
eN1, N1, P2, N2, P3 and late negativity -LN) as well as behavioural responses
(reaction time -RT; correct responses -CRs; and number of errors) were analyzed
and then subjected to cluster analysis.
RESULTS: Both MS groups showed delayed behavioural responses and enhanced latency
for long-latency ERP components (P2, N2, P3) as well as relatively preserved ERP 
amplitude, but BMS patients obtained more important performance deficits (lower
CRs and higher RTs) and abnormalities related to the latency (N1, P3) and
amplitude of ERPs (eCNV, eN1, LN). However, RRMS patients also demonstrated
abnormally high amplitudes related to the preparation performance period of CNV
(cCNV) and post-processing phase (LN). Cluster analyses revealed that RRMS
patients appear to make up a relatively homogeneous group with moderate deficits 
mainly related to ERP latencies, whereas BMS patients appear to make up a rather 
more heterogeneous group with more severe information processing and attentional 
deficits.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings are suggestive of a slowing of information processing
for MS patients that may be a consequence of demyelination and axonal
degeneration, which also seems to occur in MS patients that show little or no
progression in the physical severity of the disease over time.

PMCID: PMC3128001
PMID: 21635741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Tumour Biol. 2011 Aug;32(4):653-9. doi: 10.1007/s13277-011-0165-6. Epub 2011 Apr 
6.

Detection of viral DNA sequences in sporadic colorectal cancers in relation to
CpG island methylation and methylator phenotype.

Karpinski P(1), Myszka A, Ramsey D, Kielan W, Sasiadek MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, ul. Marcinkowskiego 1,
50-368, Wroclaw, Poland. polemiraza@poczta.fm

There is evidence that insertion of viral DNA into a mammalian genome can lead to
alterations of methylation patterns. The aim of the present study was to examine 
the presence of DNA sequences of five human DNA viruses (assessed by PCR): JC
polyoma virus (JCV), human adenovirus (AdV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), Kaposi
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV/HHV8) and human papillomavirus (HPV) in a
cohort of 186 sporadic colorectal cancers (CRCs) and related these data with the 
methylation status of six CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)-specific genes
(MLH1, CACNA1G, NEUROG1, IGF2, SOCS1, RUNX3) and seven cancer-related genes
markers (p16, MINT1, MINT2, MINT31, EN1, SCTR and INHBB) assessed by
methylation-specific PCR in 186 and 134 CRC cases, respectively. The AdV, KSHV
and HPV were detected in four (2%), two (1%) and zero CRC cases, respectively,
and thus were excluded from further analyses. Although 19% and 9% of the CRCs
were positive for EBV and JCV, respectively, no associations between virus
presence and CpG island methylation were found after correction for multiple
testing. Our results demonstrate that the presence of DNA sequences of JCV and
EBV in CRC is unrelated to the methylation of the 13 cancer-related CpG islands
and CIMP.

PMCID: PMC3131518
PMID: 21625944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. FASEB J. 2011 Sep;25(9):2898-910. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-181958. Epub 2011 May 18.

Pten ablation in adult dopaminergic neurons is neuroprotective in Parkinson's
disease models.

Domanskyi A(1), Geissler C, Vinnikov IA, Alter H, Schober A, Vogt MA, Gass P,
Parlato R, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive age-related movement disorder that
results primarily from the selective loss of midbrain dopaminergic (DA) neurons. 
Symptoms of PD can be induced by genetic mutations or by DA neuron-specific
toxins. A specific ablation of an essential factor controlling ribosomal RNA
transcription, TifIa, in adult mouse DA neurons represses mTOR signaling and
leads to progressive neurodegeneration and PD-like phenotype. Using an inducible 
Cre system in adult mice, we show here that the specific ablation of Pten in
adult mouse DA neurons leads to activation of mTOR pathway and is neuroprotective
in genetic (TifIa deletion) and neurotoxin-induced (MPTP or 6OHDA) mouse models
of PD. Adult mice with DA neuron-specific Pten deletion exhibit elevated
expression of tyrosine hydroxylase, a rate-limiting enzyme in the dopamine
biosynthesis pathway, associated with increased striatal dopamine content, and
increased mRNA levels of Foxa2, Pitx3, En1, Nurr1, and Lmx1b-the essential
factors for maintaining physiological functions of adult DA neurons. Pten
deletion attenuates the loss of tyrosine hydroxylase-positive cells after 6OHDA
treatment, restores striatal dopamine in TifIa-knockout and MPTP-treated mice,
and rescues locomotor impairments caused by TifIa loss. Inhibition of
Pten-dependent functions in adult DA neurons may represent a promising PD
therapy.

PMID: 21593433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Neural Dev. 2011 May 10;6:23. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-6-23.

En1 and Wnt signaling in midbrain dopaminergic neuronal development.

Alves dos Santos MT(1), Smidt MP.

Author information: 
(1)Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, Department of Neurosciences and
Pharmacology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Dopaminergic neurons of the ventral mesodiencephalon are affected in significant 
health disorders such as Parkinson's disease, schizophrenia, and addiction. The
ultimate goal of current research endeavors is to improve the clinical treatment 
of such disorders, such as providing a protocol for cell replacement therapy in
Parkinson's disease that will successfully promote the specific differentiation
of a stem cell into a dopaminergic neuronal phenotype. Decades of research on the
developmental mechanisms of the mesodiencephalic dopaminergic (mdDA) system have 
led to the identification of many signaling pathways and transcription factors
critical in its development. The unraveling of these pathways will help fill in
the pieces of the puzzle that today dominates neurodevelopment research: how to
make and maintain a mdDA neuron. In the present review, we provide an overview of
the mdDA system, the processes and signaling molecules involved in its genesis,
with a focus on the transcription factor En1 and the canonical Wnt pathway,
highlighting recent findings on their relevance--and interplay--in the
development and maintenance of the mdDA system.

PMCID: PMC3104484
PMID: 21569278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Yi Chuan. 2011 Apr;33(4):347-52.

[The regulation of UTROPHIN expression by EN1].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Q(1), Cao DH, Lin CK, Wang ZD, Cui WT, Jin CL.

Author information: 
(1)Higher Profession School, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China.
wangqian529@163.com

To investigate possible factors up-regulating the expression of UTROPHIN,
potential regulatory elements in the promoter of the human UTROPHIN was predicted
by P-match software and verified by EMSA and ChIP. The mechanism of EN1
regulation of the human UTROPHIN expression was evaluated by RNA interference and
real-time PCR analyses. Two potential EN1 binding sites in UTROPHIN promoter
region were predicted by P-Match software but only the second site was verified
to interact directly with EN1 by EMSA and ChIP. The results from RNA interference
and real-time PCR showed that the mRNA level of UTROPHIN increased in HeLa cells 
after EN1 was knockdowned by siRNA. It indicated that EN1 might be a negative
regulatory factor for UTROPHIN. Our study suggested that UTROPHIN might be a new 
target for DMD therapy.

PMID: 21482524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cerebellum. 2011 Sep;10(3):356-72. doi: 10.1007/s12311-011-0254-5.

Spatially restricted and developmentally dynamic expression of engrailed genes in
multiple cerebellar cell types.

Wilson SL(1), Kalinovsky A, Orvis GD, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10065, USA.

The cerebellum is a highly organized structure partitioned into lobules along the
anterior-posterior (A-P) axis and into striped molecular domains along the
medial-lateral (M-L) axis. The Engrailed (En) homeobox genes are required for
patterning the morphological and molecular domains along both axes, as well as
for the establishment of the normal afferent topography required to generate a
fully functional cerebellum. As a means to understand how the En genes regulate
multiple levels of cerebellum construction, we characterized En1 and En2
expression around birth and at postnatal day (P) 21 during the period when the
cerebellum undergoes a remarkable transformation from a smooth ovoid structure to
a highly foliated structure. We show that both En1 and En2 are expressed in many 
neuronal cell types in the cerebellum, and expression persists until at least
P21. En1 and En2 expression, however, undergoes profound changes in their
cellular and spatial distributions between embryonic stages and P21, and their
expression domains become largely distinct. Comparison of the distribution of
En-expressing Purkinje cells relative to early- and late-onset Purkinje cell M-L 
stripe proteins revealed that although En1- and En2-expressing Purkinje cell
domains do not strictly align with those of ZEBRINII at P21, a clear pattern
exists that is most evident at E17.5 by an inverse correlation between the level 
of En2 expression and PLCß4 and EPHA4.

PMCID: PMC3170510
PMID: 21431469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cereb Cortex. 2011 Sep;21(9):2177-86. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr006. Epub 2011 Feb
17.

Fezf2 regulates telencephalic precursor differentiation from mouse embryonic stem
cells.

Wang ZB(1), Boisvert E, Zhang X, Guo M, Fashoyin A, Du ZW, Zhang SC, Li XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

The mechanisms by which transcription factors control stepwise lineage
restriction during the specification of cortical neurons remain largely unknown. 
Here, we investigated the role of forebrain embryonic zinc finger like (Fezf2) in
this process by generating Fezf2 knockdown and tetracycline-inducible Fezf2
overexpression mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC) lines. The overexpression of
Fezf2 at early time points significantly increased the generation of rostral
forebrain progenitors (Foxg1(+), Six3(+)) and inhibited the expression of
transcription factors which are expressed by the midbrain and caudal diencephalon
(En1(+), Irx(+)). This effect was partially achieved by the regulation of Wnt
signaling during this critical early time window. The role of Fezf2 in regulating
the rostrocaudal patterning was further confirmed by the significant decrease in 
the expression of Foxg1 and Six3 and the increase in the expression of En1 when
Fezf2 was knocked down. In addition, Fezf2 overexpression at later time points
had little effect on the expression of Foxg1 and Six3. Instead, Fezf2 promotes
the generation of dorsal telencephalic progenitors and deep-layer cortical
neurons at later stages. Collectively, our data suggest that Fezf2 controls the
specification of telencephalic progenitors from mESCs through differentially
regulating the expression of rostrocaudal and dorsoventral patterning genes.

PMCID: PMC3155607
PMID: 21330470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Neurotox Res. 2011 Aug;20(2):170-81. doi: 10.1007/s12640-010-9232-9. Epub 2010
Nov 23.

Behavioral, neurochemical, and electrophysiological changes in an early
spontaneous mouse model of nigrostriatal degeneration.

Sgadò P(1), Viaggi C, Pinna A, Marrone C, Vaglini F, Pontis S, Mercuri NB,
Morelli M, Corsini GU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Section of Pharmacology, University of Pisa, Pisa,
Italy. sgado@science.unitn.it

In idiopathic Parkinson's disease, clinical symptoms do not emerge until
consistent neurodegeneration has occurred. The late appearance of symptoms
implies the existence of a relatively long preclinical period during which
several disease-induced neurochemical changes take place to mask the existence of
the disease and delay its clinical manifestations. The aim of this study was to
examine the neurochemical, neurophysiological, and behavioral changes induced by 
the loss of nigrostriatal innervation in the En1+/-;En2-/- mouse, in the
10 months following degeneration, compared to En2 null mutant mice. Behavioral
analysis (Pole-test, Beam-walking test, and Inverted grid test) and field
potential recordings in the striatum indicated that loss of ~70% of nigrostriatal
neurons produced no significant functional effects until 8 months of age, when
En1+/-;En2-/- animals started to show frank motor deficits and
electrophysiological alterations in corticostriatal plasticity. Similarly,
alterations in dopamine homeostasis, dopamine turnover, and dopamine innervation 
were observed in aged animals compared to young En1+/-;En2-/- mice. These data
suggests that in En1+/-;En2-/- mice nigrostriatal degeneration in the substantia 
nigra is functionally compensated.

PMID: 21104462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2011 Jan;20(1):148-59. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-10-0719. Epub 2010 Nov 23.

Epigenetic deregulation across chromosome 2q14.2 differentiates normal from
prostate cancer and provides a regional panel of novel DNA methylation cancer
biomarkers.

Devaney J(1), Stirzaker C, Qu W, Song JZ, Statham AL, Patterson KI, Horvath LG,
Tabor B, Coolen MW, Hulf T, Kench JG, Henshall SM, Pe Benito R, Haynes AM, Mayor 
R, Peinado MA, Sutherland RL, Clark SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Group, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, NSW,
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Previously, we showed that gene suppression commonly occurs across
chromosome 2q14.2 in colorectal cancer, through a process of long-range
epigenetic silencing (LRES), involving a combination of DNA methylation and
repressive histone modifications. We now investigate whether LRES also occurs in 
prostate cancer across this 4-Mb region and whether differential DNA methylation 
of 2q14.2 genes could provide a regional panel of prostate cancer biomarkers.
METHODS: We used highly sensitive DNA methylation headloop PCR assays that can
detect 10 to 25 pg of methylated DNA with a specificity of at least 1:1,000, and 
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays to investigate regional epigenetic
remodeling across 2q14.2 in prostate cancer, in a cohort of 195 primary prostate 
tumors and 90 matched normal controls.
RESULTS: Prostate cancer cells exhibit concordant deacetylation and methylation
of histone H3 Lysine 9 (H3K9Ac and H3K9me2, respectively), and localized DNA
hypermethylation of EN1, SCTR, and INHBB and corresponding loss of H3K27me3. EN1 
and SCTR were frequently methylated (65% and 53%, respectively), whereas INHBB
was less frequently methylated.
CONCLUSIONS: Consistent with LRES in colorectal cancer, we found regional
epigenetic remodeling across 2q14.2 in prostate cancer. Concordant methylation of
EN1 and SCTR was able to differentiate cancer from normal (P < 0.0001) and
improved the diagnostic specificity of GSTP1 methylation for prostate cancer
detection by 26%.
IMPACT: For the first time we show that DNA methylation of EN1 and SCTR promoters
provide potential novel biomarkers for prostate cancer detection and in
combination with GSTP1 methylation can add increased specificity and sensitivity 
to improve diagnostic potential.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21098650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Development. 2010 Dec;137(23):3973-84. doi: 10.1242/dev.056473. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

Role of canonical Wnt signaling/ß-catenin via Dermo1 in cranial dermal cell
development.

Tran TH(1), Jarrell A, Zentner GE, Welsh A, Brownell I, Scacheri PC, Atit R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106,
USA.

Cranial dermis develops from cephalic mesoderm and neural crest cells, but what
signal(s) specifies the dermal lineage is unclear. Using genetic tools to fate
map and manipulate a cranial mesenchymal progenitor population in the
supraorbital region, we show that the dermal progenitor cells beneath the surface
ectoderm process canonical Wnt signaling at the time of specification. We show
that Wnt signaling/ß-catenin is absolutely required and sufficient for Dermo1
expression and dermal cell identity in the cranium. The absence of the Wnt
signaling cue leads to formation of cartilage in craniofacial and ventral trunk
regions at the expense of dermal and bone lineages. Dermo1 can be a direct
transcription target and may mediate the functional role of Wnt signaling in
dermal precursors. This study reveals a lineage-specific role of canonical Wnt
signaling/ß-catenin in promoting dermal cell fate in distinct precursor
populations.

PMCID: PMC2976281
PMID: 20980404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Genes Immun. 2011 Mar;12(2):110-5. doi: 10.1038/gene.2010.52. Epub 2010 Oct 14.

Replication of top markers of a genome-wide association study in multiple
sclerosis in Spain.

Cavanillas ML(1), Fernández O, Comabella M, Alcina A, Fedetz M, Izquierdo G,
Lucas M, Cénit MC, Arroyo R, Vandenbroeck K, Alloza I, García-Barcina M,
Antigüedad A, Leyva L, Gómez CL, Olascoaga J, Otaegui D, Blanco Y, Saiz A,
Montalbán X, Matesanz F, Urcelay E.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Department Hospital Clínico S. Carlos, Madrid, Spain.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous 
system with presumed autoimmune origin, triggered by genetic and environmental
risk factors. A recent genome-wide association study conducted on MS identified
new biallelic markers outside the HLA (human leucocyte antigen) region involved
in disease susceptibility: rs1109670 (DDEF2); rs1458175 (PDZRN4); rs1529316 and
rs2049306 (CSMD1); rs16914086 (TBC1D2); rs1755289 (SH3GL2); rs1841770 (ZIC1);
rs651477 (EN1); rs7607490 (TRIB2); rs397020 (C20orf46); rs908821 (SLC25A36);
rs7672826 (MGC45800) and rs9523762 (GPC5). We aimed at replicating these top
association signals in a Spanish cohort of 2863 MS patients and 2930 sex- and
age-matched controls. Only rs9523762 mapping in the GPC5 gene was significantly
associated (G allele, P=1.6 × 10(-5); odds ratio (95% confidence interval)=1.23
(1.12-1.36)), supporting a role for this proteoglycan in MS predisposition. The
independent replication of association signals to validate data generated by
genome-wide association scans is a first step in the effort to improve patient
care.

PMID: 20944657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Dev Dyn. 2010 Oct;239(10):2647-58. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22403.

Autotaxin controls caudal diencephalon-mesencephalon development in the chick.

Ohuchi H(1), Fukui H, Matsuyo A, Tomonari S, Tanaka M, Arai H, Noji S, Aoki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Systems, Institute of Technology and Science, The
University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.
hohuchi@bio.tokushima-u.ac.jp

The diencephalon is the embryonic anlagen of the higher integration centers of
the brain. Recent studies have elucidated how the cells in the rostral
diencephalon acquire their regional identities. However, the understanding of the
mechanisms under which the caudal diencephalon is formed is still limited. Here
we focus on the role of Autotaxin (ATX), a lysophospholipid-generating exoenzyme,
whose mRNA is detected in the caudal diencephalon. RNA interference against ATX
altered the expression pattern of Pax6-regualted genes, Tcf4, Lim1, and En1,
implying that ATX is required for the maintenance of the regional identity of the
caudal diencephalon and the diencephalon-mesencephalon boundary (DMB).
Furthermore, ATX-RNAi inhibited neuroepithelial cell proliferation on both sides 
of the DMB. We propose a dual role of ATX in chick brain development, in which
ATX not only contributes to the formation of caudal diencephalon as a short-range
signal, but also regulates the growth of mesencephalon as a long-range signal.

PMID: 20737506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Neurosci. 2010 Jul 28;30(30):10015-24. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0653-10.2010.

Engrailed homeobox genes regulate establishment of the cerebellar afferent
circuit map.

Sillitoe RV(1), Vogel MW, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue,
New York, NY 10021, USA. roy.sillitoe@einstein.yu.edu

The spatial organization of the cerebellar afferent map has remarkable
correspondence to two aspects of intrinsic patterning within the cerebellum
embodied by a series of lobules and Purkinje cell (PC)-striped gene expression.
Using male and female mice, we tested whether the Engrailed (En) homeobox genes
are a common genetic substrate regulating all three systems, since they are
expressed in spatially restricted domains within the cerebellum and are critical 
for patterning PC gene expression and foliation. Indeed, we discovered that En1/2
are necessary for the precise targeting of mossy fibers to distinct lobules, as
well as their subsequent resolution into discrete parasagittal bands. Moreover,
each En gene coordinately regulates afferent targeting and the striped pattern of
PC protein expression (e.g., ZebrinII/AldolaseC) independent of regulating
foliation. We further found that En1/2, rather than the presence of a full
complement of lobules, are critical for generating PC protein stripes and mossy
fiber bands, and that PC striped gene expression is determined before afferent
banding. Thus, the En transcription factors not only regulate cerebellum circuit 
topography, but they also link afferent and efferent neurons precisely enough
that alterations in PC protein expression can be used as a read out for
underlying defects in circuitry. In summary, our data suggest that En1/2 are
master regulators of three-dimensional organization of the cerebellum and
coordinately regulate morphology, patterned gene expression, and afferent
topography.

PMCID: PMC2921890
PMID: 20668186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 2010 Nov;35(9):715-20. doi: 10.1177/1753193410378954. Epub
2010 Jul 21.

Dorsal dimelia: report of two cases with an emphasis on the variation of
phenotypic expression and a search for candidate causative genes.

Al-Qattan MM(1), Almazyad M, Shamseldin H, Alkuraya FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia. moqattan@hotmail.com

Dorsal dimelia is a form of duplication along the dorsoventral axis of the
developing limb. Previous authors reporting on this rare entity have stated that 
the essential feature of the deformity is the presence of double or
circumferential nail at the tip of the finger and that the aetiology is probably 
related to a mutation of Engrailed-1 (En-1). In this paper we report on two cases
to demonstrate that the deformity in humans may be fully or partially expressed, 
with or without the double nail deformity, respectively. We also reviewed
reported cases in humans and experimental animals and searched our two cases for 
candidate causative genes within the En-1 pathway.

PMID: 20659967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Neuroscience. 2010 Oct 13;170(2):417-28. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.07.023.
Epub 2010 Jul 17.

Differentiation of non-mesencephalic neural stem cells towards dopaminergic
neurons.

Rössler R(1), Boddeke E, Copray S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, A. Deusinglaan 1, 9713AV Groningen, The Netherlands.

Neural stem cells (NSCs), either isolated from fetal or adult human brain or
derived from induced pluripotent stem cells, are now considered major candidates 
for in vitro generation of transplantable dopaminergic (DA) neurons and modeling 
of Parkinson's disease. It is generally thought that in vitro differentiation of 
neural stem cells into meso-diencephalic dopaminergic neurons, requires
recapitulation of dopaminergic differentiation pathway normally occurring in the 
ventral mesencephalon during embryogenesis. This dopaminergic pathway is
partially activated by a combination of the extracellular induction factors Sonic
Hedgehog (Shh), Fibroblast Growth Factor 8 (FGF8) and Wnt1 that trigger specific 
intracellular transcription cascades. In vitro mimicking of these embryonic
ventral mesencephalic conditions has been successful for dopaminergic
differentiation of embryonic stem cells and ventral mesencephalic NSCs.
Dopaminergic differentiation of non-mesencephalic NSCs (nmNSCs), however, is
considered arduous. Here we examine whether Shh, FGF8 and Wnt1 can activate
typical dopaminergic transcription factors, such as Lmx1a, Msx1 and Otx2 in
nmNSCs. We found that Shh, FGF8 and Wnt1 induced the expression of Lmx1a and Otx2
in nmNSCs resulting in the differentiation of up to 39% of the nmNSCs into
neurons expressing Pitx3. However, only a low number ( approximately 13%) of
these cells became more DA-like neurons also expressing tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH). The histone deacetylase (HDAC)-inhibitor trichostatin A combined with Shh, 
FGF8 and Wnt1 caused orchestrated induction of Lmx1a, Otx2, Msx1 plus the early
DA transcription factor En1. Now significantly increased numbers of TH (
approximately 22%) and Pitx3 ( approximately 33%) neurons were observed. Most of 
these cells coexpressed the DA markers DAT and Vmat2. Taken together, we
demonstrate that nmNSCs indeed can be differentiated towards DA-like neurons, but
this differentiation is far from complete in comparison to ventral mesencephalic 
NSCs and embryonic stem cells; most likely, the nmNSCs lack the proper "primed"
epigenetic state of these cells for DA differentiation facilitating the induction
of DA specific transcription factors.

Copyright 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20643196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2010 Sep;45(1):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.05.003. Epub 2010
May 21.

Bmp5/7 in concert with the mid-hindbrain organizer control development of
noradrenergic locus coeruleus neurons.

Tilleman H(1), Hakim V, Novikov O, Liser K, Nashelsky L, Di Salvio M, Krauthammer
M, Scheffner O, Maor I, Mayseless O, Meir I, Kayam G, Sela-Donenfeld D, Simeone
A, Brodski C.

Author information: 
(1)Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Department of Morphology, Division of Basic
Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be'er
Sheva, Israel.

The locus coeruleus (LC) which is the major noradrenergic nucleus in the brain
develops under the influence of Bmps secreted by the roof plate and Fgf8 emitted 
from the mid-hindbrain organizer. We studied the development of the LC in
different Bmp mouse mutants and report the absence of this nucleus in
Bmp5(-/-);Bmp7(-/-) double knockouts. Notably, genes marking organizers and
neuronal populations adjacent to the LC precursor field are unperturbed in
Bmp5(-/-);Bmp7(-/-) animals. In addition, we found that in En1(+/Otx2) mutants in
which the caudal Otx2 expression domain and thereby the mid-hindbrain organizer
are shifted caudally, LC neurons are concomitantly reduced along with Bmp5/7.
Complementing these results, Otx1(-/-);Otx2(+/-) mutants, in which the
mid-hinbrain organizer is shifted rostrally, show a rostrally extended Bmp5
expression area and an increase in LC neurons. Taken together, our data indicate 
that LC development requires either Bmp5 or Bmp7, and one is able to compensate
for the loss of the other. In addition, we conclude that the position of the
mid-hindbrain organizer determines the size of the LC and propose that Bmp5/7
play an important role in mediating this organizer function.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20493948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cell Transplant. 2010;19(9):1085-101. doi: 10.3727/096368910X505468. Epub 2010
May 4.

Ectopic dopaminergic progenitor cells from En1(+/Otx2lacZ) transgenic mice
survive and functionally reinnervate the striatum following transplantation in a 
rat model of Parkinson's disease.

Hackl C(1), Papazoglou A, Ganser C, Klein A, Prakash N, Wurst W, Nikkhah G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stereotactic and Functional Neurosurgery, Laboratory of
Molecular Neurosurgery, Neurocenter, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.

Cell-based therapies for Parkinson's disease (PD) using neural stem cells to
replace the lost dopamine neurons is currently an intense area of research. In
this study we have evaluated the restorative potential of ectopic dopaminergic
(DA) neurons derived from the rostral hindbrain (RH) of En1(+/Otx2lacZ)
transgenic mice. The genetic modification of the DA progenitor domain in the
En1(+/Otx2lacZ) mice is a gain of function, resulting in the enlargement of the
area containing DA neurons, as well as an increase in their absolute number in
the midbrain/hindbrain region. Amphetamine-induced rotation performed after cell 
transplantation into the unilaterally 6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rat striatum
revealed that animals with transgenic RH-derived DA grafts exhibited functional
recovery similar to transgenic and wild-type ventral mesencephalon (VM)-derived
DA grafts. Morphological analyses revealed equivalent numbers of surviving DA
neurons from both homotopic VM- and ectopic RH-derived grafts from transgenic
donors with low numbers of surviving serotonergic (5-HT) neurons. Conversely,
grafts derived from wild-type donors contained predominantly surviving DA neurons
or 5-HT neurons when they were prepared from the VM or RH, respectively. The
study demonstrates the pattern of survival and functional potential of ectopic DA
neurons derived from the RH of En1(+/Otx2lacZ) transgenic mice and that cell
transplantation is an important neurobiological tool to characterize newly
generated DA neural stem cells in vivo.

PMID: 20447348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cancer Res. 2010 Apr 1;70(7):2718-27. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3631. Epub
2010 Mar 16.

CpG island hypermethylation in human astrocytomas.

Wu X(1), Rauch TA, Zhong X, Bennett WP, Latif F, Krex D, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 
Duarte, CA, USA.

Astrocytomas are common and lethal human brain tumors. We have analyzed the
methylation status of over 28,000 CpG islands and 18,000 promoters in normal
human brain and in astrocytomas of various grades using the methylated CpG island
recovery assay. We identified 6,000 to 7,000 methylated CpG islands in normal
human brain. Approximately 5% of the promoter-associated CpG islands in the
normal brain are methylated. Promoter CpG island methylation is inversely
correlated whereas intragenic methylation is directly correlated with gene
expression levels in brain tissue. In astrocytomas, several hundred CpG islands
undergo specific hypermethylation relative to normal brain with 428 methylation
peaks common to more than 25% of the tumors. Genes involved in brain development 
and neuronal differentiation, such as BMP4, POU4F3, GDNF, OTX2, NEFM, CNTN4, OTP,
SIM1, FYN, EN1, CHAT, GSX2, NKX6-1, PAX6, RAX, and DLX2, were strongly enriched
among genes frequently methylated in tumors. There was an overrepresentation of
homeobox genes and 31% of the most commonly methylated genes represent targets of
the Polycomb complex. We identified several chromosomal loci in which many
(sometimes more than 20) consecutive CpG islands were hypermethylated in tumors. 
Seven such loci were near homeobox genes, including the HOXC and HOXD clusters,
and the BARHL2, DLX1, and PITX2 genes. Two other clusters of hypermethylated
islands were at sequences of recent gene duplication events. Our analysis offers 
mechanistic insights into brain neoplasia suggesting that methylation of the
genes involved in neuronal differentiation, in cooperation with other oncogenic
events, may shift the balance from regulated differentiation towards
gliomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC2848870
PMID: 20233874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent. 2010 Feb;30(1):83-7.

Anorganic bovine bone (Bio-Oss) regulates miRNA of osteoblast-like cells.

Palmieri A(1), Pezzetti F, Brunelli G, Martinelli M, Lo Muzio L, Scarano A,
Scapoli L, Arlotti M, Guerzoni L, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Histology, University of Bologna and Center of Molecular
Genetics, CARISBO Foundation, Bologna, Italy.

Bio-Oss (Geistlich) is composed of an organic bovine bone and has been widely
used in several bone regeneration procedures during oral surgery. However, how
this biomaterial enhances osteoblast activity to promote bone formation is not
completely understood. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) represent a class of small, functional,
noncoding RNAs of 19 to 23 nucleotides that regulate the transcription of
messenger RNAs (mRNAs) in proteins. In this study, the miRNA microarray technique
was used to investigate translation regulation in an osteoblast-like cell line
(MG63) exposed to Bio-Oss. Nine up-regulated miRNAs (mir-423, mir-492, mir-191,
mir-23a, mir-377, mir-494, mir-214, mir-193b, mir-320) and 4 down-regulated
miRNAs (mir-27a, mir-24, mir-188, let-7c) were identified. Because each miRNA
regulates 100 mRNAs, only mRNAs related to bone formation were analyzed. The vast
majority of detected mRNAs are down-regulated, including some homeobox genes
(genes that regulate the morphogenesis of an entire segment of the body), such as
noggin and EN1. An indirect positive effect was demonstrated on bone
morphogenetic protein-4. To the authors' knowledge, the data reported here are
the first on translation regulation in osteoblasts exposed to Bio-Oss. This study
may be relevant in better understanding the molecular mechanism of bone
regeneration and used as a potential tool for analyzing the combined use of
cytokines.

PMID: 20224834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2010 May;18(5):872-8. doi: 10.1038/oby.2009.512. Epub
2010 Jan 28.

Adipose depots possess unique developmental gene signatures.

Yamamoto Y(1), Gesta S, Lee KY, Tran TT, Saadatirad P, Kahn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Erratum in
    Obesity (Silver Spring). 2010 May;18(5):1064.

We have previously demonstrated that subcutaneous and intra-abdominal adipose
tissue show different patterns of expression for developmental genes (Shox2, En1,
Tbx15 Hoxa5, Hoxc8, and Hoxc9), and that the expression level of Tbx15 and Hoxa5 
in humans correlated with the level of obesity and fat distribution. To further
explore the role of these developmental genes in adipose tissue, we have
characterized their expression in different adipose depots in mice, and studied
their regulation in obesity and by fasting. Developmental and adipogenic gene
expression was compared in two subcutaneous and three intra-abdominal white
adipose tissue (WAT) depots as well as brown adipose tissue (BAT) from lean or
obese mice in a fed or fasting state. Each of these six adipose depots display a 
unique pattern of developmental gene expression, whereas expression of adipogenic
transcription factors PPARgamma2 C/EBPalpha, beta, and Delta showed constant
expression levels in all depots. Expression levels of developmental genes were
similar in obese (ob/ob and high-fat diet (HFD)) and lean mice in most depots.
Fasting systematically decreased expression of Hoxc8, PPARgamma2, and increased
C/EBPDelta in both lean and ob/ob mice, but produced only variable changes in the
expression of other developmental and adipogenic genes. These data indicate that 
each fat depot has a unique developmental gene expression signature, which is
largely independent of nutritional state. This finding further supports a
fundamental role of developmental genes in fat distribution and the development
and/or function of specific adipose tissue depots.

PMCID: PMC4377838
PMID: 20111017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 26;285(13):9881-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.054312. Epub 2010
Jan 27.

In vitro and in vivo enhanced generation of human A9 dopamine neurons from neural
stem cells by Bcl-XL.

Courtois ET(1), Castillo CG, Seiz EG, Ramos M, Bueno C, Liste I, Martínez-Serrano
A.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Molecular Biology Severo Ochoa (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas-UAM), Department of Molecular Biology, Autonomous University of
Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

Human neural stem cells derived from the ventral mesencephalon (VM) are powerful 
research tools and candidates for cell therapies in Parkinson disease. Previous
studies with VM dopaminergic neuron (DAn) precursors indicated poor growth
potential and unstable phenotypical properties. Using the model cell line hVM1
(human ventral mesencephalic neural stem cell line 1; a new human fetal VM stem
cell line), we have found that Bcl-X(L) enhances the generation of DAn from VM
human neural stem cells. Mechanistically, Bcl-X(L) not only exerts the expected
antiapoptotic effect but also induces proneural (NGN2 and NEUROD1) and
dopamine-related transcription factors, resulting in a high yield of DAn with the
correct phenotype of substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc). The expression of key
genes directly involved in VM/SNpc dopaminergic patterning, differentiation, and 
maturation (EN1, LMX1B, PITX3, NURR1, VMAT2, GIRK2, and dopamine transporter) is 
thus enhanced by Bcl-X(L). These effects on neurogenesis occur in parallel to a
decrease in glia generation. These in vitro Bcl-X(L) effects are paralleled in
vivo, after transplantation in hemiparkinsonian rats, where hVM1-Bcl-X(L) cells
survive, integrate, and differentiate into DAn, alleviating behavioral motor
asymmetry. Bcl-X(L) then allows for human fetal VM stem cells to stably generate 
mature SNpc DAn both in vitro and in vivo and is thus proposed as a helpful
factor for the development of cell therapies for neurodegenerative conditions,
Parkinson disease in particular.

PMCID: PMC2843236
PMID: 20106970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Development. 2010 Feb;137(3):519-29. doi: 10.1242/dev.027045.

The Engrailed homeobox genes determine the different foliation patterns in the
vermis and hemispheres of the mammalian cerebellum.

Cheng Y(1), Sudarov A, Szulc KU, Sgaier SK, Stephen D, Turnbull DH, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, 
USA.

Little is known about the genetic pathways and cellular processes responsible for
regional differences in cerebellum foliation, which interestingly are accompanied
by regionally distinct afferent circuitry. We have identified the Engrailed (En) 
homeobox genes as being crucial to producing the distinct medial vermis and
lateral hemisphere foliation patterns in mammalian cerebella. By producing a
series of temporal conditional mutants in En1 and/or En2, we demonstrate that
both En genes are required to ensure that folia exclusive to the vermis or
hemispheres form in the appropriate mediolateral position. Furthermore, En1/En2
continue to regulate foliation after embryonic day 14, at which time Fgf8 isthmic
organizer activity is complete and the major output cells of the cerebellar
cortex have been specified. Changes in spatially restricted gene expression occur
prior to foliation in mutants, and foliation is altered from the onset and is
accompanied by changes in the thickness of the layer of proliferating granule
cell precursors. In addition, the positioning and timing of fissure formation are
altered. Thus, the En genes represent a new class of genes that are fundamental
to patterning cerebellum foliation throughout the mediolateral axis and that act 
late in development.

PMCID: PMC2858911
PMID: 20081196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Dev Biol. 2010 Mar 15;339(2):429-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.01.002. Epub 2010 
Jan 11.

Lymph heart musculature is under distinct developmental control from lymphatic
endothelium.

Peyrot SM(1), Martin BL, Harland RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Division of Genetics, Genomics, and 
Development, Center for Integrative Genomics, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA 94720-3204, USA.

Lymph hearts are pulsatile organs, present in lower vertebrates, that function to
propel lymph into the venous system. Although they are absent in mammals, the
initial veno-lymphatic plexus that forms during mammalian jugular lymph sac
development has been described as the vestigial homologue of the nascent stage of
ancestral anterior lymph hearts. Despite the widespread presence of lymph hearts 
among vertebrate species and their unique function, extremely little is known
about lymph heart development. We show that Xenopus anterior lymph heart muscle
expresses skeletal muscle markers such as myoD and 12/101, rather than cardiac
markers. The onset of lymph heart myoblast induction can be visualized by
engrailed-1 (en1) staining in anterior trunk somites, which is dependent on
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling. In the absence of Hh signaling and upon en1 knockdown,
lymph heart muscle fails to develop, despite the normal development of the
lymphatic endothelium of the lymph heart, and embryos develop edema. These
results suggest a mechanism for the evolutionary transition from anterior lymph
hearts to jugular lymph sacs in mammals.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2845526
PMID: 20067786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Neuroreport. 2010 Feb 17;21(3):163-7. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e328331558a.

Auditory development in the absence of hearing in infancy.

Gordon KA(1), Valero J, Jewell SF, Ahn J, Papsin BC.

Author information: 
(1)Archie's Cochlear Implant Laboratory, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, M5G 1X8, Canada. karen.gordon@utoronto.ca

The auditory brainstem pathways require stimulation to mature, but do they
develop in the absence of auditory input? To answer this, peaks of the
electrically evoked auditory nerve (wave eN1) and brainstem response (eII, eIII, 
and eV) were measured in 117 children with early-onset deafness who had received 
cochlear implants. Data were collected at cochlear implant activation. In the
absence of significant input, the interpeak latency eN1-eIII decreased over the
first year of life but remained constant thereafter. Chronic cochlear implant
stimulation was required to promote significant reduction in eIII-eV interpeak
latency. Thus, activity-independent changes occurring in infancy are concentrated
in the caudal auditory brainstem and likely involve the auditory nerve. Changes
requiring input are most prevalent in rostral brainstem.

PMID: 20042902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Yi Chuan. 2009 Dec;31(12):1214-20.

[The functions of GLI3 and EN1 genes in idiopathic congenital talipes
equinovarus].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao DH(1), Wang Q, Lin CK, Wang ZD, Zhang X, Jin CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001,
China. dhcao427@sina.com

To investigate the role of gene Gli3 in idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus
(ICTEV), we constructed the Gli3 luciferase reporter gene expression vectors to
analyze the promoter activity of the rat gene Gli3. The regulatory element in the
promoter region of the rat Gli3 was predicted using P-Match software and further 
verified by ChIP experiment. Meanwhile, the correlation between the rat En1 and
ICTEV was evaluated by RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry, and Western blotting
analyses. The result from P-Match software prediction showed that only one of the
three possible En1 binding sites in Gli3 promoter region was interacted directly 
with En1 in vivo, which was confirmed by ChIP analysis. The results from RT-PCR, 
immunohistochemistry and Western blotting analyses suggested that En1 was
down-regulated in ICTEV model rats compared to the controls. Our results
indicated that En1 might be the negative regulatory element in the upstream of
Gli3. The low expression level of EN1 in ICTEV could contribute to the
up-regulation of GLI3, which led to the genesis of ICTEV.

PMID: 20042388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Cells Tissues Organs. 2010;191(4):289-300. doi: 10.1159/000260063. Epub 2009 Nov 
19.

Dynamic expression and heterogeneous intracellular location of En-1 during late
mouse embryonic development.

Zhong SC(1), Chen XS, Cai QY, Luo X, Chen XH, Liu J, Yao ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, Republic of China.

Engrailed-1 (En-1) is a transcription factor involved in the development of the
midbrain/hindbrain during mouse early embryogenesis. Although En-1 is expressed
from embryogenesis to adulthood, there has been no detailed description of its
expression during late mouse embryonic development. Here we report the expression
pattern of En-1 in the mouse embryo from E10.5 to the neonatal state. With
immunohistochemistry we found that En-1 was expressed in the central nervous
system (CNS) from E10.5 to the neonatal state, mostly restricted to the
midbrain/hindbrain junction. Outside the CNS, En-1 is dynamically expressed in
several neural crest-associated structures including the cranial mesenchyme, the 
mandibular arches, the vagus nerve, the dorsal root ganglia, the sympathetic
ganglia, the somites, the heart and the cloaca. Additionally, we found that in
the CNS, most of the En-1 was located in the nuclei, while outside the CNS, En-1 
was mainly expressed in the cytoplasm. These findings provided additional
evidence that En-1 may be involved in the development of neural crest cells.

PMID: 19940436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Neuron. 2009 Nov 12;64(3):355-66. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.09.018.

Extracellular Engrailed participates in the topographic guidance of retinal axons
in vivo.

Wizenmann A(1), Brunet I, Lam JS, Sonnier L, Beurdeley M, Zarbalis K,
Weisenhorn-Vogt D, Weinl C, Dwivedy A, Joliot A, Wurst W, Holt C, Prochiantz A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, Neuherberg,
Germany.

Engrailed transcription factors regulate the expression of guidance cues that
pattern retinal axon terminals in the dorsal midbrain. They also act directly to 
guide axon growth in vitro. We show here that an extracellular En gradient exists
in the tectum along the anterior-posterior axis. Neutralizing extracellular
Engrailed in vivo with antibodies expressed in the tectum causes temporal axons
to map aberrantly to the posterior tectum in chick and Xenopus. Furthermore,
posterior membranes from wild-type tecta incubated with anti-Engrailed antibodies
or posterior membranes from Engrailed-1 knockout mice exhibit diminished
repulsive activity for temporal axons. Since EphrinAs play a major role in
anterior-posterior mapping, we tested whether Engrailed cooperates with EphrinA5 
in vitro. We find that Engrailed restores full repulsion to axons given
subthreshold doses of EphrinA5. Collectively, our results indicate that
extracellular Engrailed contributes to retinotectal mapping in vivo by modulating
the sensitivity of growth cones to EphrinA.

PMCID: PMC4603356
PMID: 19914184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Dev Neurosci. 2009;31(6):511-22. doi: 10.1159/000243715. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

Detailed expression pattern of Foxp1 and its possible roles in neurons of the
spinal cord during embryogenesis.

Morikawa Y(1), Komori T, Hisaoka T, Senba E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama,
Japan. yoshim@wakayama-med.ac.jp

A member of winged-helix/forkhead transcription factors, Foxp1, is expressed in
the developing spinal cord during mouse embryogenesis. To shed light on the
potential role of Foxp1 in neurons of the developing spinal cord, we investigated
the detailed expression pattern of Foxp1 between embryonic day (E) 9.5 and E17.5.
At E10.25, some postmitotic neurons with strong expression of Foxp1 (Foxp1(high))
were first detected in the ventral half of the brachial spinal cord. By E11.5,
Foxp1(high) neurons increased in the ventral spinal cord at the limb levels. All 
of Foxp1(high) neurons at the limb levels were Islet2(+)/Lhx3(-) motor neurons
(MNs) of the lateral motor column and some neurons that expressed Foxp1 weakly
(Foxp1(low)) at the thoracic level were MNs of the preganglionic motor column.
Between E12.5 and E17.5, Foxp1(low) neurons were also observed in the
intermediate zone throughout the ventral spinal cord, all of which were Pax2(+), 
En1(+), Evx1(-), Chx10(-), Gata3(-), and Lhx3(-) V1 interneurons. Interestingly, 
no colocalization of Foxp1 with Lhx3 was observed in the developing spinal cord. 
In addition, overexpression of Foxp1 markedly attenuated the endogenous
expression of Lhx3 in a neuroendocrine cell line. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays in a neuronal cell line and E13.5 spinal cords revealed an interaction
between Foxp1 and the consensus motif in the Lhx3 promoter. These results suggest
that Foxp1 may play some important roles in the determination of neuronal fates
of the ventral spinal cord, possibly through the suppression of Lhx3 expression.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19797899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2009;651:66-72.

Transcriptional regulation of their survival: the Engrailed homeobox genes.

Simon HH(1), Alavian KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Interdisciplinary Center for Neuroscience (IZN),
University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 307, 69120 Heidelberg.
horst.simon@urz.uni-heidelberg.de

PMID: 19731551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Oct;9(7):475-89. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2009.07.007. Epub
2009 Jul 16.

Comparative analysis of conditional reporter alleles in the developing embryo and
embryonic nervous system.

Ellisor D(1), Koveal D, Hagan N, Brown A, Zervas M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Division of
Biology and Medicine, Brown University, 70 Ship St., Providence, RI 02903, USA.

A long-standing problem in development is understanding how progenitor cells
transiently expressing genes contribute to complex anatomical and functional
structures. In the developing nervous system an additional level of complexity
arises when considering how cells of distinct lineages relate to newly
established neural circuits. To address these problems, we used both cumulative
marking with Cre/loxP and Genetic Inducible Fate Mapping (GIFM), which
permanently and heritably marks small populations of progenitors and their
descendants with fine temporal control using CreER/loxP. A key component used in 
both approaches is a conditional phenotyping allele that has the potential to be 
expressed in all cell types, but is quiescent because of a loxP flanked Stop
sequence, which precedes a reporter allele. Upon recombination, the resulting
phenotyping allele is 'turned on' and then constitutively expressed. Thus, the
reporter functions as a high fidelity genetic lineage tracer in vivo. Currently
there is an array of reporter alleles that can be used in marking strategies, but
their recombination efficiency and applicability to a wide array of tissues has
not been thoroughly described. To assess the recombination/marking potential of
the reporters, we utilized CreER(T) under the control of a Wnt1 transgene
(Wnt1-CreER(T)) as well as a cumulative, non-inducible En1(Cre) knock-in line in 
combination with three different reporters: R26R (LacZ reporter), Z/EG (EGFP
reporter), and Tau-Lox-STOP-Lox-mGFP-IRES-NLS-LacZ (membrane-targeted GFP/nuclear
LacZ reporter). We marked the Wnt1 lineage using each of the three reporters at
embryonic day (E) 8.5 followed by analysis at E10.0, E12.5, and in the adult. We 
also compared cumulative marking of cells with a history of En1 expression at the
same stages. We evaluated the reporters by whole-mount and section analysis and
ascertained the strengths and weaknesses of each of the reporters. Comparative
analysis with the reporters elucidated complexities of how the Wnt1 and En1
lineages contribute to developing embryos and to axonal projection patterns of
neurons derived from these lineages.

PMCID: PMC2855890
PMID: 19616131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Genesis. 2009 Oct;47(10):667-73. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20546.

Misexpression of Gbx2 throughout the mesencephalon by a conditional
gain-of-function transgene leads to deletion of the midbrain and cerebellum in
mice.

Sunmonu NA, Chen L, Li JY.

The mouse homeobox gene, Gbx2, is expressed in discreet domains in the neural
tube and plays a key role in forebrain and hindbrain development. Previous
studies have demonstrated that mutual inhibition between Gbx2 and Otx2, which are
respectively expressed in the anterior and posterior parts of the neural plate,
positions the prospective midbrain-hindbrain junction. We describe here a
conditional Gbx2 gain-of-function transgenic mouse line, Gbx2-GOF, which
expresses Gbx2 and red fluorescence protein, mCherry, upon Cre-mediated
recombination. In the absence of Cre, beta-galactosidase is broadly expressed in 
mouse embryos and adult brains carrying the transgene. By combining Gbx2-GOF and 
En1(Cre) knock-in allele, we activated expression of Gbx2 and mCherry throughout 
the mesencephalon (mes) and rhombomere 1 (r1). The ectopic expression of Gbx2
causes an anterior shift of the mes/r1 junction at embryonic day 10.5.
Interestingly, we found that persistent expression of Gbx2 throughout the mes/r1 
region largely abolishes expression of the isthmic organizer gene Fgf8, leading
to deletion of the midbrain and cerebellum at later stages. Our data suggest that
the juxtaposition of the expression domains of Gbx2 and Otx2 within the mes/r1
area is essential for the maintenance of Fgf8 expression. Furthermore, the
Gbx2-GOF transgenic line is suitable for functional study of Gbx2 during
development.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2783588
PMID: 19603509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Anal Chem. 2009 Aug 1;81(15):6467-73. doi: 10.1021/ac900841c.

Analysis of bacteria on steel surfaces using reflectance micro-Fourier transform 
infrared spectroscopy.

Ojeda JJ(1), Romero-González ME, Banwart SA.

Author information: 
(1)Cell-Mineral Research Center, Kroto Research Institute, The University of
Sheffield, Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ, UK. j.ojeda@sheffield.ac.uk

Reflectance micro-Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) analysis has been applied to
characterize biofilm formation of Aquabacterium commune, a common microorganism
present on drinking water distribution systems, onto the increasingly popular
pipe material stainless steel EN1.4307. The applicability of the reflectance
micro-FT-IR technique for analyzing the bacterial functional groups is discussed,
and the results are compared to spectra obtained using more conventional FT-IR
techniques: transmission micro-FT-IR, attenuated transmitted reflectance (ATR),
and KBr pellets. The differences between the infrared spectra of wet and dried
bacteria, as well as free versus attached bacteria, are also discussed. The
spectra obtained using reflectance micro-FT-IR spectroscopy were comparable to
those obtained using other FT-IR techniques. The absence of sample preparation,
the potential to analyze intact samples, and the ability to characterize opaque
and thick samples without the need to transfer the bacterial samples to an
infrared transparent medium or produce a pure culture were the main advantages of
reflectance micro-FT-IR spectroscopy.

PMID: 19580254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Neuroscience. 2009 Sep 15;162(4):1150-62. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.05.022. Epub 2009 May 20.

Characterization of Foxp2-expressing cells in the developing spinal cord.

Morikawa Y(1), Hisaoka T, Senba E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1,
Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan. yoshim@wakayama-med.ac.jp

Two members of winged-helix/forkhead transcription factors, Foxp1 and Foxp2, are 
expressed in the developing and adult CNS, including the striatum, cerebral
cortex, and thalamus. In a previous study, we have demonstrated that Foxp1 is
expressed in a subpopulation of V1 interneurons in addition to motor neurons of
the spinal cord during mouse embryogenesis. However, the detailed expression
pattern of Foxp2 and its relationship with Foxp1 in the developing spinal cord
remains to be elucidated. To shed light on the potential roles of Foxp1 and Foxp2
in the developing spinal cord, we characterized Foxp2-expressing cells during
mouse embryogenesis. At embryonic day (E) 11.0, Foxp2-expressing cells were first
observed in the ventral spinal cord, which were Pax6(-), p27(+), and
neuron-specific class III beta-tubulin(+) postmitotic neurons. Between E13.5 and 
E15.5, high expression of Foxp2 was observed in both medial and lateral parts of 
the ventral spinal cord. Double-immunofluorescence staining for Foxp2 with some
homeodomain transcription factors revealed that Foxp2-expressing neurons were
Pax2(+), En1(+), Evx1(-), Chx10(-), Gata3(-), and Lhx3(-) V1 interneurons in the 
intermediate zone throughout the ventral spinal cord, indicating that
Foxp2-expressing neurons were also V1 interneurons with the same phenotypes as
Foxp1-expressing interneurons. In addition, neither Foxp1 nor Foxp2 was expressed
in ventral calbindin(+) Renshaw cells. However, Foxp2 did not colocalize with
Foxp1 in interneurons of the ventral spinal cord. These findings suggest that
Foxp1 and Foxp2 are expressed in the distinct subsets of V1 interneurons that
belong to non-Renshaw cells in the ventral spinal cord during embryogenesis.
Thus, Foxp1 and Foxp2 may be involved in the determination of the cell type
identities during late embryogenesis: the classes of neurotransmitters and the
functional subtypes of non-Renshaw cells, such as Ia and Ib inhibitory
interneurons.

PMID: 19463901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Med Genet. 2009 Nov;46(11):730-5. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.066027. Epub 2009 May
7.

Genetic screening of 202 individuals with congenital limb malformations and
requiring reconstructive surgery.

Furniss D(1), Kan SH, Taylor IB, Johnson D, Critchley PS, Giele HP, Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK.

BACKGROUND: Congenital limb malformations (CLMs) are common and present to a
variety of specialties, notably plastic and orthopaedic surgeons, and clinical
geneticists. The authors aimed to characterise causative mutations in an
unselected cohort of patients with CLMs requiring reconstructive surgery.
METHODS: 202 patients presenting with CLM were recruited. The authors obtained
G-banded karyotypes and screened EN1, GLI3, HAND2, HOXD13, ROR2, SALL1, SALL4,
ZRS of SHH, SPRY4, TBX5, TWIST1 and WNT7A for point mutations using denaturing
high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and direct sequencing. Multiplex
ligation dependent probe amplification (MLPA) kits were developed and used to
measure copy number in GLI3, HOXD13, ROR2, SALL1, SALL4, TBX5 and the ZRS of SHH.
RESULTS: Within the cohort, causative genetic alterations were identified in 23
patients (11%): mutations in GLI3 (n = 5), HOXD13 (n = 5), the ZRS of SHH (n =
4), and chromosome abnormalities (n = 4) were the most common lesions found.
Clinical features that predicted the discovery of a genetic cause included a
bilateral malformation, positive family history, and having increasing numbers of
limbs affected (all p<0.01). Additionally, specific patterns of malformation
predicted mutations in specific genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on higher mutation prevalence the authors propose that GLI3,
HOXD13 and the ZRS of SHH should be prioritised for introduction into molecular
genetic testing programmes for CLM. The authors have developed simple criteria
that can refine the selection of patients by surgeons for referral to clinical
geneticists. The cohort also represents an excellent resource to test for
mutations in novel candidate genes.

PMCID: PMC2764122
PMID: 19429598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mamm Genome. 2009 May;20(5):296-304. doi: 10.1007/s00335-009-9184-7. Epub 2009
Apr 23.

An N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea mutagenesis recessive screen identifies two candidate
regions for murine cardiomyopathy that map to chromosomes 1 and 15.

Fernandez L(1), Marchuk DA, Moran JL, Beier DR, Rockman HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, DUMC, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU) mutagenesis screens have been successful for
identifying genes that affect important biological processes and diseases.
However, for heart-related phenotypes, these screens have been employed
exclusively for developmental phenotypes, and to date no adult
cardiomyopathy-causing genes have been discovered through a mutagenesis screen.
To identify novel disease-causing and disease-modifying genes for cardiomyopathy,
we performed an ENU recessive mutagenesis screen in adult mice. Using noninvasive
echocardiography to screen for abnormalities in cardiac function, we identified a
heritable cardiomyopathic phenotype in two families. To identify the chromosomal 
regions where the mutations are localized, we used a single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) panel for genetic mapping of mouse mutations. This panel
provided whole-genome linkage information and identified the mutagenized
candidate regions at the proximal end of chromosome 1 (family EN1), and at the
distal end of chromosome 15 (family EN25). We have identified 94 affected mice in
family EN1 and have narrowed the candidate interval to 1 Mb. We have identified
20 affected mice in family EN25 and have narrowed the candidate interval to 12
Mb. The identification of the genes responsible for the observed phenotype in
these families will be strong candidates for disease-causing or disease-modifying
genes in patients with heart failure.

PMCID: PMC2743897
PMID: 19387734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Br J Cancer. 2009 May 19;100(10):1534-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605045. Epub 2009
Apr 21.

Long-range epigenetic silencing at 2q14.2 affects most human colorectal cancers
and may have application as a non-invasive biomarker of disease.

Mayor R(1), Casadomé L, Azuara D, Moreno V, Clark SJ, Capellà G, Peinado MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Medicina Predictiva i Personalitzada del Càncer (IMPPC), Badalona,
Catalonia, Spain.

Large chromosomal regions can be suppressed in cancer cells as denoted by
hypermethylation of neighbouring CpG islands and downregulation of most genes
within the region. We have analysed the extent and prevalence of long-range
epigenetic silencing at 2q14.2 (the first and best characterised example of
coordinated epigenetic remodelling) and investigated its possible applicability
as a non-invasive diagnostic marker of human colorectal cancer using different
approaches and biological samples. Hypermethylation of at least one of the CpG
islands analysed (EN1, SCTR, INHBB) occurred in most carcinomas (90%), with EN1
methylated in 73 and 40% of carcinomas and adenomas, respectively. Gene
suppression was a common phenomenon in all the tumours analysed and affected both
methylated and unmethylated genes. Detection of methylated EN1 using bisulfite
treatment and melting curve (MC) analysis from stool DNA in patients and controls
resulted in a predictive capacity of, 44% sensitivity in positive patients (27%
of overall sensitivity) and 97% specificity. We conclude that epigenetic
suppression along 2q14.2 is common to most colorectal cancers and the presence of
a methylated EN1 CpG island in stool DNA might be used as biomarker of neoplastic
disease.

PMCID: PMC2696749
PMID: 19384295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Neurobiol Aging. 2011 Feb;32(2):302-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.02.015.
Epub 2009 Apr 3.

Association of transcription factor polymorphisms PITX3 and EN1 with Parkinson's 
disease.

Haubenberger D(1), Reinthaler E, Mueller JC, Pirker W, Katzenschlager R,
Froehlich R, Bruecke T, Daniel G, Auff E, Zimprich A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20,
A-1090 Vienna, Austria. dietrich.haubenberger@meduniwien.ac.at

The transcription factors PITX3 and Engrailed 1 (EN1), among others, have been
shown to play a crucial role in the maturation and survival of midbrain
dopaminergic neurons. The degeneration of those neurons is the pathological
hallmark in Parkinson's disease (PD). In a hypothesis-driven candidate gene
approach, it has been recently shown that polymorphisms in the genes coding for
PITX3 and EN1 are associated with sporadic PD. In a study on 365 patients with PD
and 418 controls, we genotyped nine single nucleotide polymorphisms spanning the 
entire genomic region of PITX3 and EN1. Furthermore, we analyzed whether the
genotype of these SNPs associate with the age of onset in PD. We found a strong
association between the PITX3 promoter rs3758549 polymorphism and PD (p=0.0001), 
as well as an association between EN1 rs1438852 and PD (p=0.046). In particular, 
our highly significant findings regarding the association of rs3758549 reproduce 
the results of the initial report on transcription factor gene variants,
providing further evidence for PITX3 and EN1 polymorphisms as potential genetic
risk factors for sporadic PD.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19345444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jul 1;18(13):2317-27. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp164. Epub 2009 Apr 
2.

Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase regulates early developmental
programming of dopamine neurons: implications for Lesch-Nyhan disease
pathogenesis.

Ceballos-Picot I(1), Mockel L, Potier MC, Dauphinot L, Shirley TL, Torero-Ibad R,
Fuchs J, Jinnah HA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Paris Descartes University, 75006 Paris, France.
irene.ceballos@nck.aphp.fr

Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) deficiency results in
Lesch-Nyhan disease (LND), where affected individuals exhibit a characteristic
neurobehavioral disorder that has been linked with dysfunction of dopaminergic
pathways of the basal ganglia. Since the functions of HPRT, a housekeeping enzyme
responsible for recycling purines, have no direct relationships with the
dopaminergic pathways, the mechanisms whereby HPRT deficiency affect them remain 
unknown. The current studies demonstrate that HPRT deficiency influences early
developmental processes controlling the dopaminergic phenotype, using several
different cell models for HPRT deficiency. Microarray methods and quantitative
PCR were applied to 10 different HPRT-deficient (HPRT(-)) sublines derived from
the MN9D cell line. Despite the variation inherent in such mutant sublines,
several consistent abnormalities were evident. Most notable were increases in the
mRNAs for engrailed 1 and 2, transcription factors known to play a key role in
the specification and survival of dopamine neurons. The increases in mRNAs were
accompanied by increases in engrailed proteins, and restoration of HPRT reverted 
engrailed expression towards normal levels, demonstrating a functional
relationship between HPRT and engrailed. The functional relevance of the abnormal
developmental molecular signature of the HPRT(-) MN9D cells was evident in
impoverished neurite outgrowth when the cells were forced to differentiate
chemically. To verify that these abnormalities were not idiosyncratic to the MN9D
line, HPRT(-) sublines from the SK-N-BE(2) M17 human neuroblastoma line were
evaluated and an increased expression of engrailed mRNAs was also seen.
Over-expression of engrailed occurred even in primary fibroblasts from patients
with LND in a manner that suggested a correlation with disease severity. These
results provide novel evidence that HPRT deficiency may affect dopaminergic
neurons by influencing early developmental mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2694685
PMID: 19342420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biosci Bioeng. 2009 Apr;107(4):447-54. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2008.12.013.

Differentiation of dopaminergic neurons from human embryonic stem cells:
modulation of differentiation by FGF-20.

Shimada H(1), Yoshimura N, Tsuji A, Kunisada T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tissue and Organ Development, Regeneration and Advanced Medical 
Science, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu, Japan.

Derivation of midbrain dopaminergic (DA) neurons from human embryonic stem (hES) 
cells has been of particular interest because of the clinical potential for DA
neuron transplantation in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD). Several
protocols for DA neuron differentiation from mouse embryonic stem cells and hES
cells have been reported: however, protocols involving hES cells have yet to be
improved. Here, we used a slightly modified stromal cell-derived inducing
activity method, consisting four different culture stages, to show that KhES-1
cells differentiate into tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-positive DA neurons.
Quantitative real-time PCR analysis showed a marked induction of the DA neuron
marker genes NURR1, paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 3 (PITX3), LIM
homeobox transcription- factor 1, beta (LMX1B), engrailed-1 (EN1), dopamine
transporter (DAT), and aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) during
differentiation. Treatment with fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-20 and FGF-2 at
the final differentiation stage induced the increase of DA neuron
development-related transcription factors such as NURR1, PITX3, LMX1B, and EN1.
FGF-20 and FGF-2 enhanced DA neuron differentiation from hES cell-derived neural 
progenitor cells directly without any soluble factors from PA6 cells. These
results provide valuable information that will assist in efficient DA neuron
differentiation from hES cells and for future transplant application.

PMID: 19332307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Stem Cells Dev. 2009 May;18(4):629-39. doi: 10.1089/scd.2008.0215.

Human GPM6A is associated with differentiation and neuronal migration of neurons 
derived from human embryonic stem cells.

Michibata H(1), Okuno T, Konishi N, Kyono K, Wakimoto K, Aoki K, Kondo Y, Takata 
K, Kitamura Y, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Medical Research Laboratory, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation,
Osaka, Japan.

Glycoprotein M6A (GPM6A) is known as a transmembrane protein and an abundant cell
surface protein on neurons in the central nervous system (CNS). However, the
function of GPM6A in the differentiation of neurons derived from human embryonic 
stem (ES) cells is unknown. To investigate the function of GPM6A in neural
differentiation, we generated human ES cell lines with overexpressed (B2h-oeM6A) 
or suppressed (B2h-shM6A) human GPM6A. Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
showed that overexpression of GPM6A markedly increased the expression of
neuroectodermal-associated genes (OTX1, Lmx1b, En1, Pax2, Sox2, and Wnt1), and
the number of neural stem cells (NSCs) derived from B2h-oeM6A cells compared to
control vector transfected human ES cells (B2h-Mock1). Our results show an
increase in the number of differentiated neuronal cells (cholinergic,
catecholaminergic, and GABAergic neurons) from NSCs derived from B2h-oeM6A cells.
On the other hand, suppression of human GPM6A expression using a short hairpin
RNA (shRNA) in human ES cells led to a decrease in both the expression of
neuroectodermal-associated genes and the number of NSCs derived from B2h-shM6A
cells. In addition, our results show a decrease in the number of differentiated
neuronal cells from NSCs in B2h-shM6A cells compared to control vector
transfected human ES cells (B2h-shNSP1). Moreover, overexpression or suppression 
of human GPM6A in human ES cells led to an increase or decrease, respectively, of
neuronal migration. Hence, our findings suggest that expression level of GPM6A
is, directly or indirectly, associated with the differentiation and neuronal
migration of neurons derived from undifferentiated human ES cells.

PMID: 19298174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Neural Dev. 2009 Mar 16;4:11. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-4-11.

Elevated P75NTR expression causes death of engrailed-deficient midbrain
dopaminergic neurons by Erk1/2 suppression.

Alavian KN(1), Sgadò P, Alberi L, Subramaniam S, Simon HH.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Centre for Neuroscience, Department of Neuroanatomy,
Ruprecht-Karls-Universität, Heidelberg, Germany. kambiz.alavian@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The homeodomain transcription factors Engrailed-1 and Engrailed-2 are
required for the survival of mesencephalic dopaminergic (mesDA) neurons in a
cell-autonomous and gene-dose-dependent manner. Homozygote mutant mice, deficient
of both genes (En1-/-;En2-/-), die at birth and exhibit a loss of all mesDA
neurons by mid-gestation. In heterozygote animals (En1+/-;En2-/-), which are
viable and fertile, postnatal maintenance of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic
system is afflicted, leading to a progressive degeneration specific to this
subpopulation and Parkinson's disease-like molecular and behavioral deficits.
RESULTS: In this work, we show that the dose of Engrailed is inversely correlated
to the expression level of the pan-neurotrophin receptor gene P75NTR (Ngfr). Loss
of mesDA neurons in the Engrailed-null mutant embryos is caused by elevated
expression of this neurotrophin receptor: Unusually, in this case, the cell death
signal of P75NTR is mediated by suppression of Erk1/2
(extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 1/2) activity. The reduction in expression
of Engrailed, possibly related to the higher levels of P75NTR, also decreases
mitochondrial stability. In particular, the dose of Engrailed determines the
sensitivity to cell death induced by the classic Parkinson-model toxin MPTP and
to inhibition of the anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family of proteins.
CONCLUSION: Our study links the survival function of the Engrailed genes in
developing mesDA neurons to the regulation of P75NTR and the sensitivity of these
neurons to mitochondrial insult. The similarities to the disease etiology in
combination with the nigral phenotype of En1+/-;En2-/- mice suggests that
haplotype variations in the Engrailed genes and/or P75NTR that alter their
expression levels could, in part, determine susceptibility to Parkinson's
disease.

PMCID: PMC2667502
PMID: 19291307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. BMC Neurosci. 2009 Mar 3;10:16. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-10-16.

Neural differentiation potential of human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal
cells: misleading marker gene expression.

Montzka K(1), Lassonczyk N, Tschöke B, Neuss S, Führmann T, Franzen R, Smeets R, 
Brook GA, Wöltje M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
kmontzka@ukaachen.de

BACKGROUND: In contrast to pluripotent embryonic stem cells, adult stem cells
have been considered to be multipotent, being somewhat more restricted in their
differentiation capacity and only giving rise to cell types related to their
tissue of origin. Several studies, however, have reported that bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are capable of
transdifferentiating to neural cell types, effectively crossing normal lineage
restriction boundaries. Such reports have been based on the detection of
neural-related proteins by the differentiated MSCs. In order to assess the
potential of human adult MSCs to undergo true differentiation to a neural lineage
and to determine the degree of homogeneity between donor samples, we have used
RT-PCR and immunocytochemistry to investigate the basal expression of a range of 
neural related mRNAs and proteins in populations of non-differentiated MSCs
obtained from 4 donors.
RESULTS: The expression analysis revealed that several of the commonly used
marker genes from other studies like nestin, Enolase2 and microtubule associated 
protein 1b (MAP1b) are already expressed by undifferentiated human MSCs.
Furthermore, mRNA for some of the neural-related transcription factors, e.g.
Engrailed-1 and Nurr1 were also strongly expressed. However, several other
neural-related mRNAs (e.g. DRD2, enolase2, NFL and MBP) could be identified, but 
not in all donor samples. Similarly, synaptic vesicle-related mRNA, STX1A could
only be detected in 2 of the 4 undifferentiated donor hMSC samples. More
significantly, each donor sample revealed a unique expression pattern,
demonstrating a significant variation of marker expression.
CONCLUSION: The present study highlights the existence of an inter-donor
variability of expression of neural-related markers in human MSC samples that has
not previously been described. This donor-related heterogeneity might influence
the reproducibility of transdifferentiation protocols as well as contributing to 
the ongoing controversy about differentiation capacities of MSCs. Therefore,
further studies need to consider the differences between donor samples prior to
any treatment as well as the possibility of harvesting donor cells that may be
inappropriate for transplantation strategies.

PMCID: PMC2655300
PMID: 19257891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Aug;17(8):1024-33. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.2. Epub 2009 Feb 
18.

Characterization of two ectrodactyly-associated translocation breakpoints
separated by 2.5 Mb on chromosome 2q14.1-q14.2.

David D(1), Marques B, Ferreira C, Vieira P, Corona-Rivera A, Ferreira JC, van
Bokhoven H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, National Institute of Health Dr Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa,
Portugal. dezso.david@insa.min-saude.pt

Split hand-split foot malformation or ectrodactyly is a heterogeneous congenital 
defect of digit formation. The aim of this study is the mapping of the
breakpoints and a detailed molecular characterization of the candidate genes for 
an isolated and syndromic form of ectrodactyly, both associated with de novo
apparently balanced chromosome translocations involving the same chromosome 2
band, [t(2;11)(q14.2;q14.2)] and [t(2;4)(q14.1;q35)], respectively. Breakpoints
were mapped by fluorescence in situ hybridization using bacterial artificial
chromosome clones. Where possible, these breakpoints were further delimited.
Candidate genes were screened for pathogenic mutations and the expression levels 
of two of them analysed. The isolated bilateral split foot
malformation-associated chromosome 2 breakpoint was localized at 120.9 Mb,
between the two main candidate genes, encoding GLI-Kruppel family member GLI2 and
inhibin-betaB. The second breakpoint associated with holoprosencephaly,
hypertelorism and ectrodactyly syndrome was mapped 2.5 Mb proximal at 118.4 Mb
and the candidate genes identified from this region were the insulin-induced
protein 2 and the homeobox protein engrailed-1. No clear pathogenic mutations
were identified in any of these genes. The breakpoint between INHBB and GLI2
coincides with a previously identified translocation breakpoint associated with
ectrodactyly. We propose a mechanism by which translocations in the 2q14.1-q14.2 
region disrupt the specific arrangement of long-range regulatory elements that
control the tight quantitative spatiotemporal expression of one or more genes
from the breakpoint region.

PMCID: PMC2986556
PMID: 19223936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Dev Biol. 2009 Mar 15;327(2):516-23. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.01.004. Epub 2009 
Jan 13.

In the limb AER Bmp2 and Bmp4 are required for dorsal-ventral patterning and
interdigital cell death but not limb outgrowth.

Maatouk DM(1), Choi KS, Bouldin CM, Harfe BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and the Genetics Institute, 
University of Florida, College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.

The apical ectodermal ridge (AER) in the vertebrate limb is required for limb
outgrowth and patterning. To investigate the role BMP ligands expressed in the
AER play in limb development we selectively inactivated both Bmp2 and Bmp4 in
this tissue. The autopods of mice lacking both of these genes contained extra
digits, digit bifurcations and interdigital webbing due to a decrease in
programmed cell death and an increase in cell proliferation in the underlying
mesoderm. Upon removal of Bmp2 and Bmp4 in the AER, no defects in proximal-distal
patterning were observed. At the molecular level, removal of Bmp2 and Bmp4 in the
AER caused an increase in Fgf expression, which correlated with an increase in
both the width and length of the AER. Investigation of Engrailed-1 (En1)
expression in the AER of limb buds in which Bmp2 and Bmp4 had been removed
indicated that En1 expression was absent from this tissue. Our data suggests that
AER expression of Bmp2 and Bmp4 is required for digit and dorsal-ventral
patterning but surprisingly not for limb outgrowth.

PMID: 19210962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Development. 2008 Dec;135(24):4153-64. doi: 10.1242/dev.026807.

A differential developmental pattern of spinal interneuron apoptosis during
synaptogenesis: insights from genetic analyses of the protocadherin-gamma gene
cluster.

Prasad T(1), Wang X, Gray PA, Weiner JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Although the role of developmental apoptosis in shaping the complement and
connectivity of sensory and motoneurons is well documented, the extent to which
cell death affects the 13 cardinal classes of spinal interneurons is unclear.
Using a series of genetic manipulations in vivo, we demonstrate for the first
time a differential pattern of developmental apoptosis in molecularly identified 
spinal interneuron populations, and implicate the adhesion molecule family
encoded by the 22-member protocadherin-gamma (Pcdh-gamma) gene cluster in its
control. In constitutive Pcdh-gamma null mouse embryos, many interneuron
populations undergo increased apoptosis, but to differing extents: for example,
over 80% of En1-positive V1 neurons are lost, whereas only 30% of Chx10-positive 
V2a neurons are lost and there is no reduction in the number of V1-derived
Renshaw cells. We show that this represents an exacerbation of a normal,
underlying developmental pattern: the extent of each population's decrease in
Pcdh-gamma mutants is precisely commensurate both with the extent of its loss
during normal embryogenesis and with the extent of its increase in Bax(-/-) mice,
in which apoptosis is genetically blocked. Interneuron apoptosis begins during
the first wave of synaptogenesisis in the spinal cord, occurring first among
ventral populations (primarily between E14 and E17), and only later among dorsal 
populations (primarily after P0). Utilizing a new, conditional Pcdh-gamma mutant 
allele, we show that the gamma-Pcdhs can promote survival non-cell-autonomously: 
mutant neurons can survive if they are surrounded by normal neurons, and normal
neurons can undergo apoptosis if they are surrounded by mutant neurons.

PMCID: PMC2755264
PMID: 19029045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Neurosci. 2008 Nov 19;28(47):12150-62. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2059-08.2008.

Engrailed homeobox genes determine the organization of Purkinje cell sagittal
stripe gene expression in the adult cerebellum.

Sillitoe RV(1), Stephen D, Lao Z, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York
10021, USA.

Underlying the seemingly uniform cellular composition of the adult mammalian
cerebellum (Cb) are striking parasagittal stripes of gene expression along the
medial-lateral (ML) axis that are organized with respect to the lobules that
divide the Cb along the anterior-posterior (AP) axis. Although there is a clear
correlation between the organization of gene expression stripes and Cb activity
patterns, little is known about the genetic pathways that determine the intrinsic
stripe molecular code. Here we establish that ML molecular code patterning is
highly dependent on two homeobox transcription factors, Engrailed1 (En1) and En2,
both of which are also required for patterning the lobules. Gene expression
analysis of an allelic series of En1/2 mutant mice that have an intact Purkinje
cell layer revealed severe patterning defects using three known components of the
ML molecular code and a new marker of Hsp25 negative stripes (Neurofilament heavy
chain, Nfh). Importantly, the complementary expression of ZebrinII/PhospholipaseC
beta4 and Hsp25/Nfh changes in unison in each mutant. Furthermore, each En gene
has unique as well as overlapping functions in patterning the ML molecular code
and each En protein has dominant functions in different AP domains (subsets of
lobules). Remarkably, in En1/2 mutants with almost normal foliation, ML molecular
code patterning is severely disrupted. Thus, independent mechanisms that use
En1/2 must pattern foliation and spatial gene expression separately. Our studies 
reveal that En1/2 are fundamental components of the genetic pathways that pattern
the two intersecting coordinate systems of the Cb, morphological divisions and
the molecular code.

PMCID: PMC2864318
PMID: 19020009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Psychiatr Genet. 2008 Dec;18(6):295-301. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e3283060fa5.

Polymorphisms of coding trinucleotide repeats of homeogenes in neurodevelopmental
psychiatric disorders.

Laroche F(1), Ramoz N, Leroy S, Fortin C, Rousselot-Paillet B, Philippe A,
Colleaux L, Bresson JL, Mogenet A, Golse B, Mouren-Simeoni MC, Gorwood P, Galli
T, Simonneau M, Krebs MO, Robel L.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM AVENIR, Institut Jacques Monod UMR7592, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVES: Autism (MIM#209850) and schizophrenia (MIM#181500) are both
neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders characterized by a highly genetic
component. Homeogenes and forkhead genes encode transcription factors, which have
been involved in brain development and cell differentiation. Thus, they are
relevant candidate genes for psychiatric disorders. Genetic studies have reported
an association between autism and DLX2, HOXA1, EN2, ARX, and FOXP2 genes whereas 
only three studies of EN2, OTX2, and FOXP2 were performed on schizophrenia.
Interestingly, most of these candidate genes contain trinucleotide repeats coding
for polyamino acid stretch in which instability can be the cause of
neurodevelopmental disorders. Our goal was to identify variations of coding
trinucleotide repeats in schizophrenia, autism, and idiopathic mental
retardation.
METHODS: We screened the coding trinucleotide repeats of OTX1, EN1, DLX2, HOXA1, 
and FOXP2 genes in populations suffering from schizophrenia (247 patients),
autism (98 patients), and idiopathic mental retardation (56 patients), and
compared them with control populations (112 super controls and 202 healthy
controls).
RESULTS: Novel deletions and insertions of coding trinucleotide repeats were
found in the DLX2, HOXA1, and FOXP2 genes. Most of these variations were detected
in controls and no difference in their distribution was observed between patient 
and control groups. Two different polymorphisms in FOXP2 were, however, found
only in autistic patients and the functional consequences of these variations of 
repeats have to be characterized and correlated to particular clinical features.
CONCLUSION: This study did not identify specific disease risk variants of
trinucleotide repeats in OTX1, EN1, DLX2, HOXA1, and FOXP2 candidate genes in
neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders.

PMID: 19018235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Front Neuroanat. 2007 Dec 30;1:4. doi: 10.3389/neuro.05.004.2007. eCollection
2007.

Fibroblast growth factor-20 increases the yield of midbrain dopaminergic neurons 
derived from human embryonic stem cells.

Correia AS(1), Anisimov SV, Roybon L, Li JY, Brundin P.

Author information: 
(1)Neuronal Survival Unit, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund
University, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Lund Sweden.

In the central nervous system, fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-20 has been
reported to act preferentially on midbrain dopaminergic neurons. It also promotes
the dopaminergic differentiation of stem cells. We have analyzed the effects of
FGF-20 on human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) differentiation into dopaminergic
neurons. We induced neuronal differentiation of hESCs by co-culturing those with 
PA6 mouse stromal cells for 3 weeks. When we supplemented the culture medium with
FGF-20, the number of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-expressing neurons increased
fivefold, from 3% to 15% of the hESC-derived cells. The cultured cells also
expressed other midbrain dopaminergic markers (PITX3, En1, Msx1, and Aldh1),
suggesting that some had differentiated into midbrain dopaminergic neurons. We
observed no effect of FGF-20 on the size of the soma area or neurite length of
the TH-immunopositive neurons. Regardless of whether FGF-20 had been added or
not, 17% of the hESC-derived cells expressed the pan-neuronal marker
b-III-Tubulin. The proportion of proliferating cells positive for Ki-67 was also 
not affected by FGF-20 (7% of the hESC-derived cells). By contrast, after 3 weeks
in culture FGF-20 significantly reduced the proportion of cells undergoing cell
death, as revealed by immunoreactivity for cleaved caspase-8, Bcl-2 associated X 
protein (BAX) and cleaved caspase-3 (2.5% to 1.2% of cleaved caspase-3-positive
cells out of the hESC-derived cells). Taken together, our results indicate that
FGF-20 specifically increases the yield of dopaminergic neurons from hESCs grown 
on PA6 feeder cells and at least part of this effect is due to a reduction in
cell death.

PMCID: PMC2525922
PMID: 18958198  [PubMed]


141. J Neurosci. 2008 Sep 10;28(37):9271-6. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2208-08.2008.

Serotonin hyperinnervation abolishes seizure susceptibility in Otx2 conditional
mutant mice.

Tripathi PP(1), Di Giovannantonio LG, Viegi A, Wurst W, Simeone A, Bozzi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Neuroscienze del Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Laboratorio
di Neurobiologia della Scuola Normale Superiore, 56100 Pisa, Italy.

The homeobox-containing transcription factor Otx2 is crucially involved in fate
determination of midbrain neurons. Mutant mice, in which Otx2 was conditionally
inactivated by a Cre recombinase expressed under the transcriptional control of
the Engrailed1 (En1) gene (En1(cre/+); Otx2(flox/flox)), show a reduced number of
dopaminergic neurons and an increased number of serotonergic neurons in the
ventral midbrain. Despite these developmental anatomical alterations, En1(cre/+);
Otx2(flox/flox) adult mice display normal motor function. Here, we further
investigated the neurological consequences of Otx2 inactivation in adult
En1(cre/+); Otx2(flox/flox) mice. Adult En1(cre/+); Otx2(flox/flox) mice showed
increased serotonin (5-HT) levels in the pons, ventral midbrain, hippocampus (CA3
subfield), and cerebral cortex, as indicated by HPLC and immunohistochemistry.
Conversely, SERT (5-HT transporter) levels were decreased in conditional mutant
brains. As a consequence of this increased 5-HT hyperinnervation, En1(cre/+);
Otx2(flox/flox) mice were resistant to generalized seizures induced by the
glutamate agonist kainic acid (KA). Indeed, prolonged pretreatment of En1(cre/+);
Otx2(flox/flox) mice with the 5-HT synthesis inhibitor para-chlorophenylalanine
(pCPA) restored brain 5-HT content to control levels, fully reestablishing KA
seizure susceptibility. Accordingly, c-fos mRNA induction after KA was restricted
to the hippocampus in En1(cre/+); Otx2(flox/flox) mice, whereas a widespread
c-fos mRNA labeling was observed throughout the brain of En1(cre/+);
Otx2(flox/flox) mice pretreated with pCPA. These results clearly show that
increased brain 5-HT levels are responsible for seizure resistance in En1(cre/+);
Otx2(flox/flox) mice and confirm the important role of 5-HT in the control of
seizure spread.

PMID: 18784307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2008 Sep;18(9):751-9. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e32830162bc.

Model-based gene selection shows engrailed 1 is associated with antipsychotic
response.

Webb BT(1), Sullivan PF, Skelly T, van den Oord EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomarker Research and Personalized Medicine, Department of
Pharmacy, Medical College of Virginia Campus, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, VA 23298, USA. btwebb@vcu.edu

OBJECTIVES: Schizophrenia is an highly heritable complex disorder with a
significant impact on public health. A variety of antipsychotics are available
for treatment of the disorder and individual response to treatment is variable.
To date, only a limited number of potential candidate genes have been examined
for genetic association with treatment response. As there is lack of
understanding of disease etiology and variation in treatment response, a large
number of additional genes are potential targets for investigation. A variety of 
strategies for selecting candidate genes for further investigation are available 
and in most cases information used is weighed and ranked intuitively by the
investigator. We sought to find genes that may influence treatment response in a 
less biased manner, after integrating heterogeneous data sources related to
schizophrenia.
METHODS: A method to select liability and treatment response candidate genes for 
schizophrenia using multiple data sets was constructed. The method successfully
selected DTNBP1, a strong candidate gene for schizophrenia. We then evaluated
novel genes picked by the method. Thirty-six single nucleotide polymorphisms in
two genes engrailed 1 (EN1) and secretin receptor (SCTR) were genotyped in the
Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness study sample.
Outcomes analyzed were the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale and six different
neurocognitive measures.
RESULTS: Several of the seven single nucleotide polymorphisms genotyped in the
EN1 gene were associated with schizophrenia symptoms (smallest P value=0.0061)
and the effects of antipsychotics on symptoms (smallest P value=2.4x10). The
estimated probabilities of being a false discovery were 0.14 for symptoms and
0.0012 for drug response.
CONCLUSION: These findings show that EN1 may influence individual variation in
response to antipsychotics. In addition, model-based data integration of
schizophrenia-related data seems to improve the prior probability of selecting
genes that have an effect on antipsychotics response.

PMID: 18698228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2008;14 Suppl 2:S107-11. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2008.04.007. Epub 2008 Jun 27.

Progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the ventral midbrain of adult mice
heterozygote for Engrailed1: a new genetic model for Parkinson's disease?

Le Pen G(1), Sonnier L, Hartmann A, Bizot JC, Trovero F, Krebs MO, Prochiantz A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U894, Laboratory of Pathophysiology of Psychiatric Diseases, University
Paris Descartes, Faculty of Medecine Paris Descartes, Sainte-Anne Hospital,
Paris, France. Gwenaelle.Le-Pen@inserm.fr

Engrailed1 is a developmental gene of the homeogene family that controls the
survival of midbrain dopaminergic neurons throughout life. Since these neurons
have been crucially implicated in Parkinson's disease (PD), transgenic mice
lacking one En1 allele could be of particular interest for the development of an 
animal model for PD. We showed in En1+/- mice, some traits reminiscent of PD such
as (1) a progressive loss of mesencephalic dopaminergic (DA) neurons, and (2)
motor deficits, anhedonia, decreased social interactions and depression-like
behaviours. Further validation is needed, but these first results suggest that
En1+/- mice could provide a promising model for the study of PD.

PMID: 18585951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2008;14 Suppl 2:S103-6. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2008.04.011. Epub 2008 Jun 27.

Characterization of the Engrailed mutant mice as experimental models for
Parkinson's disease.

Sgadò P(1), Viaggi C, Fantacci C, Corsini GU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pisa School of Medicine, Via Roma
55, Pisa, Italy. p.sgado@meyer.it

Engrailed genes are homeodomain-containing transcription factors necessary for
the development and maintenance of mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons. Deletion
in the Engrailed genes has been shown to affect the survival of mesencephalic
dopaminergic neurons both during development and in the adult. Here we describe
for the first time a significant reduction in striatal dopamine levels in
En1+/-;En2+/- mice compared with their En2+/- littermates, accompanied by a
modest reduction in the number of nigral DA neurons. Our results strengthen
previous evidence indicating Engrailed genes as survival factors for mature
dopaminergic neurons. Furthermore, our data suggest a role for these
transcription factors in the maintenance of synaptic dopaminergic
neurotransmission in adult neurons.

PMID: 18585948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Prosthodont. 2008 Oct;17(7):522-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-849X.2008.00331.x. Epub 
2008 Jun 20.

PerioGlas regulates osteoblast RNA interfering.

Palmieri A(1), Pezzetti F, Spinelli G, Arlotti M, Avantaggiato A, Scarano A,
Scapoli L, Zollino I, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Histology, University of Bologna and Center of Molecular
Genetics, CARISBO Foundation, Bologna, Italy.

PURPOSE: PerioGlas (PG) is an alloplastic material that has been used for
grafting periodontal osseous defects since the 1990s. In animal models, it has
been proven that PG achieves histologically good repairs of surgically created
defects. In clinical trials, PG is effective as an adjunct to conventional
surgery in the treatment of intrabony defects; however, how PG alters osteoblast 
activity to promote bone formation is poorly understood. We therefore attempted
to address this question by using microRNA (miRNA) microarray techniques to
investigate the translation process in osteoblasts exposed to PG.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: By using miRNA microarrays containing 329 probes designed 
from human miRNA sequences, we identified several miRNA whose expression was
significantly modified in osteoblast-like cell lines (MG-63) cultured with PG.
RESULTS: There were ten up-regulated miRNA (mir-337, mir-377, mir-9, mir-516,
mir-515-3p, mir-496, mir-200b, mir-489, mir-25, mir-423) and two down-regulated
miRNA (mir-26a, mir-30d).
CONCLUSION: PG acts on miRNAs, which in turn regulate several messengers. Among
them there are mRNAs related to bone formation and skeletal and cartilage
development. The vast majority of detected genes are down-regulated, and some are
homeobox genes like NOG, EN1, and CHRD. Other down-regulated genes are receptors 
(like GHRHR) and extracellular matrix proteins (like COMP). Although the exact
mechanism of PG action on osteoblasts is still incompletely understood, these
data demonstrate that PG has not only an osteoconductive effect, but also
regulates bone formation.

PMID: 18573151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Stem Cells Dev. 2008 Aug;17(4):641-51. doi: 10.1089/scd.2008.0088.

Inhibition of mouse GPM6A expression leads to decreased differentiation of
neurons derived from mouse embryonic stem cells.

Michibata H(1), Okuno T, Konishi N, Wakimoto K, Kyono K, Aoki K, Kondo Y, Takata 
K, Kitamura Y, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Medical Research Laboratory, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation,
16-89 Kashima-3-chome, Yodogawa-ku, Osaka, Japan.

Glycoprotein M6A (GPM6A) is known as a transmembrane protein and an abundant cell
surface protein on neurons in the central nervous system (CNS). However, the
function of GPM6A is still unknown in the differentiation of neurons derived from
embryonic stem (ES) cells. To investigate the function of GPM6A, we generated
knockdown mouse ES cell lines (D3m-shM6A) using a short hairpin RNA (shRNA)
expression vector driven by the U6 small nuclear RNA promoter, which can
significantly suppress the expression of mouse GPM6A mRNA. Real-time polymerase
chain reaction (real-time PCR) and immunocytochemical analysis showed that
expression of shRNA against GPM6A markedly reduced the expression of
neuroectodermal-associated genes (OTX1, Lmx1b, En1, Pax2, Pax5, Sox1, Sox2, and
Wnt1), and also the number of neural stem cells (NSC) derived from D3mshM6A cells
compared to control vector-transfected mouse ES cells (D3m-Mock). Moreover, our
results show a decrease in both the number of neuronal markers and the number of 
differentiating neuronal cells (cholinergic, catecholaminergic, and GABAergic
neurons) from NSC in D3m-shM6A cells. Hence, our findings suggest that expression
level of GPM6A is directly or indirectly associated with the differentiation of
neurons derived from undifferentiated ES cells.

PMID: 18522499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Neurosci. 2008 May 7;28(19):4938-48. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0229-08.2008.

Loss of apoptosis-inducing factor results in cell-type-specific neurogenesis
defects.

Ishimura R(1), Martin GR, Ackerman SL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine 
04609, USA.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is commonly associated with neurodegeneration in the
aging brain. In addition, the importance of mitochondrial function during brain
development is illustrated by the neurological deficits observed in infants with 
mitochondrial complex deficiencies. However, the extent to which abnormalities in
mitochondrial function might impact neurogenesis during brain development is not 
well understood. Previously, we demonstrated that adult harlequin (Hq) mutant
mice, which have an 80% reduction in the mitochondrial protein apoptosis-inducing
factor (AIF), exhibited signs of oxidative stress and progressive loss of adult
cerebellar and retinal neurons. To assess whether in addition to its role in
postmitotic neuron survival Aif is also necessary for cerebellar development, we 
analyzed embryos in which Aif was deleted in the prospective midbrain and
cerebellum at a very early stage of development using an En1 (engrailed 1)
promoter-driven cre recombinase gene. These mutant mice, which died at birth, had
midbrain defects and dramatic deficits in cerebellar Purkinje and granule cell
precursors. Additional analysis revealed that Aif-null Purkinje cell precursors
prematurely entered S-phase, but most failed to undergo mitosis and ultimately
died via apoptosis. In contrast, proliferation of mutant granule cell precursors 
was blocked before S-phase. Mice in which Aif was deleted later in embryogenesis 
using a nestin promoter-driven cre gene survive for several days after birth, and
postnatal granule cell precursors in these mice also failed to enter S-phase. Our
results indicate that the loss of Aif results in cell cycle abnormalities in a
neuron-specific manner during cerebellar development.

PMCID: PMC3505110
PMID: 18463247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Apr;6(4):585-91. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-2158.

The CpG island methylator phenotype correlates with long-range epigenetic
silencing in colorectal cancer.

Karpinski P(1), Ramsey D, Grzebieniak Z, Sasiadek MM, Blin N.

Author information: 
(1)Departament of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, ul. Marcinkowskiego 1,
50-368 Wroclaw, Poland.

The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP), characterized by an exceptionally
high frequency of methylation of discrete CpG islands, is observed in 18% to 25% 
of sporadic colorectal cancers. Another hypermethylation pattern found in
colorectal cancers, termed long-range epigenetic silencing, is associated with
DNA/histone methylation in three distinct gene clusters at chromosome 2q14.2,
showing that DNA hypermethylation can span larger chromosomal domains and lead to
the silencing of flanking, unmethylated genes. We investigated whether these two 
phenotypes are interrelated in colorectal cancers. The CIMP status of 148
sporadic colorectal cancers was determined by methylation-specific PCR. We
determined the BRAF V600E mutation by mutant allele-specific PCR amplification.
The methylation status of the MLH1 gene and of three CpG islands (EN1, SCTR, and 
INHBB), corresponding to three distinct clusters along 2q14.2, was determined by 
methylation-specific PCR. The average number of sites showing methylation in
CIMP+ tumors was 2.21, compared with 1.22 for CIMP- individuals, and this
difference was highly significant (P = 3.6 x 10(-8), Mann-Whitney test).
Moreover, all CIMP+ tumors showed hypermethylation of at least one of these loci,
in contrast to CIMP- tumors, where 18 (16%) samples remained unmethylated. The
mean number of simultaneously hypermethylated CpG islands at 2q14.2 differs
significantly between CIMP- and CIMP+ tumors, suggesting varying effects of
domain silencing in this region. Given that the number of hypermethylated loci at
2q14.2 likely affects the range of silenced flanking genes, high frequency of
simultaneous hypermethylation of three CpG islands (EN1, SCTR, and INHBB) may
have potential influence on specific characteristics of CIMP+ colorectal cancers.

PMID: 18403637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Brain Res. 2008 Apr 24;1206:33-43. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.01.100. Epub 2008
Mar 17.

Differential and dose-dependent regulation of gene expression at the
mid-hindbrain boundary by Ras-MAP kinase signaling.

Vennemann A(1), Agoston Z, Schulte D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Max-Planck-Institute for Brain Research,
Deutschordenstr. 46, 60528 Frankfurt, Germany.

Recent experiments suggest that activation of the Ras-MAP kinase pathway at the
mid-hindbrain boundary (MHB) induces cerebellar development, whereas tectal
development occurs in the absence of Ras-MAP kinase activity. To test this model 
we have stimulated or inhibited Ras-MAP kinase signaling in chick embryos through
targeted misexpression of a constitutive active (Ras(V12)) or dominant negative
(Ras(N17)) form of Ras. The consequence of these manipulations on the expression 
of several genes that are expressed in distinct patterns at or around the MHB
organizer, including En1, Pax2, Pax3, Pax5, Wnt1, Meis2, and ephrin-A2, -A5, and 
-B1, was assessed. Extending previous findings we show that inhibition of Ras-MAP
kinase signaling differently affects Pax3 expression in different regions of the 
mid-hindbrain territory, inhibiting its expression in the midbrain but inducing
it in the MHB region. Expression of the midbrain specific marker gene Meis2 was
not affected by Ras(N17) at first but later upregulated concomitantly with the
morphological transformation of hindbrain to midbrain. In addition, we show that 
different dosages of Ras-MAP kinase activity are required for transcriptional
activation of Wnt1 and En1 at the MHB. Collectively, these results validate and
extend previous findings on the molecular changes associated with Fgf8
loss-of-function or gain-of-function phenotypes at the MHB, demonstrate that gene
expression at the MHB is regulated by Ras-MAP kinase signaling in a spatially and
temporally distinct manner and provide evidence for a dosage dependent function
of Fgf8 signaling at the MHB.

PMID: 18343356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Shanghai Kou Qiang Yi Xue. 2007 Dec;16(6):640-3.

[Comparison of translucency between enamel, dentin and Vita veneer porcelain].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiong F(1), Chao YL, Zhu ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Technology, West China College of Stomatology, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041, Sichuan Province, China.

PURPOSE: To compare the translucency between enamel, dentin and dental porcelain.
METHODS: 32 newly extracted vital human central incisors were collected and cut
into 0.8mm enamel slices and 1.0 mm dentin slices. 1.0 mm dental porcelain
specimen were made with different Vita veneer porcelain, EN1, EN2, T4, Window,
A1, A2, A3, A3.5, A4, B2, C2, D2, 3 samples for each kind. The transmittance and 
reflectance of tooth slices and porcelain specimen were measured by PR-650
spectra scan spectrocolorimeter. The transmittance coefficients were also
calculated. The 95% confidence interval was obtained by SPSS 12.0 software
package. SNK method was used to compare the transmittance coefficients of
different dentin porcelains.
RESULTS: The transmittance coefficient of tooth enamel ranged from 0.0817 mm(-1) 
to 0.1009 mm(-1), which was higher than that of two kinds of enamel porcelain
(0.0507 mm(-1) for EN1 and 0.0408 mm(-1) for EN2). The transmittance coefficient 
of dentin (0.0418-0.0482 mm(-1)) was also higher than that of dentin porcelain
(0.016-0.027 mm(-1)). The transmittance coefficient of dentin porcelain decreased
with the increasing of chroma (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Prominent difference exists between translucency of tooth tissue and
dental porcelain, especially between enamel and enamel porcelain.

PMID: 18278420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Evol Dev. 2008 Jan-Feb;10(1):29-36. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-142X.2007.00210.x.

Development of the carapacial ridge: implications for the evolution of genetic
networks in turtle shell development.

Moustakas JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Museum of Paleontology, University of
California, 1101 Valley Life Sciences Building, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
moustakas@berkeley.edu

Paleontologists and neontologists have long looked to development to understand
the homologies of the dermal bones that form the "armor" of turtles, crocodiles, 
armadillos, and other vertebrates. This study shows molecular evidence supporting
a dermomyotomal identity for the mesenchyme of the turtle carapacial ridge. The
mesenchyme of the carapace primordium expresses Pax3, Twist1, Dermo1, En1, Sim1, 
and Gremlin at early stages and before overt ossification expresses Pax1. A
hypothesis is proposed that this mesenchyme forms dermal bone in the turtle
carapace. A comparison of regulatory gene expression in the primordia of the
turtle carapace, the vertebrate limb, and the vertebral column implies the
exaptation of key genetic networks in the development of the turtle shell. This
work establishes a new role for this mesodermal compartment and highlights the
importance of changes in genetic regulation in the evolution of morphology.

PMID: 18184355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 2007 Aug;32(4):479. Epub 2007 Jun 4.

Re: Description of congenital hand anomalies: a personal view.

Al-Qattan MM.

Comment on
    J Hand Surg Br. 2006 Oct;31(5):489-97.

PMID: 17950203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Neurochem Int. 2008 Mar-Apr;52(4-5):688-700. Epub 2007 Sep 4.

9-Methyl-beta-carboline up-regulates the appearance of differentiated
dopaminergic neurones in primary mesencephalic culture.

Hamann J(1), Wernicke C, Lehmann J, Reichmann H, Rommelspacher H, Gille G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Technical University of Dresden, Fetscherstr. 74,
01307 Dresden, Germany.

beta-Carbolines (BCs) derive from tryptophan and its derivatives. They are formed
endogenously in humans and mammals and occur inter alia in cooked meat and
tobacco smoke. They have been detected in human brain, cerebrospinal fluid, and
plasma. Up to now they were predominantly identified as compounds exhibiting
neurotoxic actions. Since significantly higher amounts are present in
parkinsonian patients, they are regarded as potential pathogenetic factors in
Parkinson's disease. We identified for the first time a BC (9-methyl-BC; 9-me-BC)
exerting neuroprotective and neuron-differentiating effects. Treatment of primary
mesencephalic dopaminergic cultures with 9-me-BC inhibited the basal release of
lactate dehydrogenase and reduced the number of cells stained with propidium
iodide. Caspase-3 activity was decreased, the total protein content was unchanged
and ATP content was increased. Furthermore, the expression of
inflammation-related genes was reduced. The number of differentiated dopaminergic
neurones was significantly increased and a wide array of
neurotrophic/transcription factors (Shh, Wnt1, Wnt5a, En1, En2, Nurr1, Pitx3) and
marker genes (Th, Dat, Aldh1a1) decisive for dopaminergic differentiation was
stimulated. Consistently, the dopamine content was slightly, although
non-significantly, increased and the dopamine uptake capacity was elevated. An
anti-proliferative effect was observed in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells which
is consistent with a reduced incorporation of bromodesoxyuridine into the DNA of 
primary mesencephalic cells. Whether the additional dopaminergic neurones in
primary culture derive from dopaminergic precursor cells, previously tyrosine
hydroxylase negative dopaminergic neurones or are the result of a
transdifferentiation process remains to be established.

PMID: 17913302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Development. 2007 Jun;134(12):2325-35.

Genetic subdivision of the tectum and cerebellum into functionally related
regions based on differential sensitivity to engrailed proteins.

Sgaier SK(1), Lao Z, Villanueva MP, Berenshteyn F, Stephen D, Turnbull RK, Joyner
AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine,
New York University School of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016,
USA.

The genetic pathways that partition the developing nervous system into functional
systems are largely unknown. The engrailed (En) homeobox transcription factors
are candidate regulators of this process in the dorsal midbrain (tectum) and
anterior hindbrain (cerebellum). En1 mutants lack most of the tectum and
cerebellum and die at birth, whereas En2 mutants are viable with a smaller
cerebellum and foliation defects. Our previous studies indicated that the
difference in phenotypes is due to the earlier expression of En1 as compared with
En2, rather than differences in protein function, since knock-in mice expressing 
En2 in place of En1 have a normal brain. Here, we uncovered a wider spectrum of
functions for the En genes by generating a series of En mutant mice. First, using
a conditional allele we demonstrate that En1 is required for cerebellum
development only before embryonic day 9, but plays a sustained role in forming
the tectum. Second, by removing the endogenous En2 gene in the background of En1 
knock-in alleles, we show that Drosophila en is not sufficient to sustain
midbrain and cerebellum development in the absence of En2, whereas En2 is more
potent than En1 in cerebellum development. Third, based on a differential
sensitivity to the dose of En1/2, our studies reveal a genetic subdivision of the
tectum into its two functional systems and the medial cerebellum into four
regions that have distinct circuitry and molecular coding. Our study suggests
that an ;engrailed code' is integral to partitioning the tectum and cerebellum
into functional domains.

PMCID: PMC2840613
PMID: 17537797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Int J STD AIDS. 2007 Apr;18(4):274-5.

Test Not Talk screening for asymptomatic men.

Pittrof R(1), McLellan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive and Sexual Health Care, Town Clinic, Wenlock House,
33 Eaton Road, Enfield EN1 1NJ, UK. rudiger.pittrof@enfield.nhs.uk

This audit reviews the first year's experience within a rapid comprehensive
sexually transmitted infection (STI) and HIV screening for asymptomatic men in a 
small-integrated sexual health clinic in outer London. Men requesting STI/HIV
screening only were offered symptom self-assessment, blood tests for syphilis and
HIV, and first void urine tests for chlamydia and gonorrhoea. Of 468 available
appointments, 337 were made (72%) and 303 were kept (80%). Of the 303
attendances, 264 (87%) were first-ever attendances. Of the 303 men seen, 295
(97.4%) underwent chlamydia and gonorrhoea testing, while 246 (80.9%) were tested
for syphilis and HIV. No new HIV diagnoses were made. One patient was diagnosed
with late latent syphilis and one had asymptomatic gonorrhoea, while 20 (6.6%)
diagnoses of chlamydia were made. We believe that Test Not Talk clinics offer a
good approach to rapid screening of asymptomatic men and to meet their sexual
health needs.

PMID: 17509179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Eur J Neurosci. 2007 Apr;25(7):1971-81.

Enhancement of dopaminergic properties and protection mediated by neuronal
activation of Ras in mouse ventral mesencephalic neurones.

Chakrabarty K(1), Serchov T, Mann SA, Dietzel ID, Heumann R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiochemistry, NC7/174, Ruhr University, 44780
Bochum, Germany.

The poor differentiation and survival of dopaminergic neurones are practical
constraints in their therapeutic applications. Here we explored the role of
neuronally activated Ras in ventral mesencephalon-derived neurospheres generated 
from synRas mouse embryos. The expression of Val12 Ha-Ras transgene and enhanced 
Ras activity was evident after differentiation of the neurospheres with a
corresponding activating phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinase.
Phosphorylation of Akt/PKB, the target kinase of phosphoinositide 3-kinase, along
with phosphorylation of Bad and CREB were enhanced in synRas-derived
differentiated neurosphere cultures. Furthermore, increased Nurr1 expression was 
associated with elevated numbers of dopaminergic neurones in synRas-derived
cultures compared with the wild-type. Correspondingly, tyrosine hydroxylase
promoter assays revealed enhanced transcriptional activation of the promoter in
synRas-derived cultures. synRas-derived dopaminergic neurones were greatly
resistant to degeneration induced by various noxious stimuli. Consistently, the
transgenic expression of activated Ras attenuated the adverse 6-hydroxydopamine
effects on dopaminergic neurones. Dopaminergic neurones derived from both
wild-type and synRas cultures expressed voltage-gated potassium and sodium
currents, fired action potentials and exhibited electrical network activity.
Thus, expression of the transgene promotes survival and enhances differentiation 
towards a dopaminergic cell fate without altering their basic electrical
properties. Our results suggest that intracellular cell therapy mimicking trophic
signalling may offer potential benefit in models of human disease associated with
dopamine neurone dysfunction.

PMID: 17439485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2007 Jun;35(2):230-6. Epub 2007 Mar 3.

Dendritic localization and activity-dependent translation of Engrailed1
transcription factor.

Di Nardo AA(1), Nedelec S, Trembleau A, Volovitch M, Prochiantz A, Montesinos ML.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8542, Développement et Neuropharmacologie, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 
46 rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France.

Engrailed1 (En1) is a homeoprotein transcription factor expressed throughout
adulthood in several midbrain cells, including the dopaminergic neurons of the
substantia nigra. Here we report the presence of Engrailed protein and En1 mRNA
in proximal dendrites of these neurons and of En1 mRNA in ventral midbrain
synaptoneurosomes. We show that the 3' untranslated region of En1 mRNA contains a
functional cytoplasmic polyadenylation element (CPE), suggesting that its
dendritic localization is regulated by CPE binding protein (CPEB). In order to
evaluate activity-regulated translation, conditions were developed using primary 
midbrain neurons. With this in vitro model, En1 mRNA translation is increased by 
depolarization in a polyadenylation dependent manner. Furthermore, En1
translation is prevented by rapamycin, implicating the mTOR pathway, which is
known to regulate dendritic translation. Together, these results suggest an
activity-dependent role for Engrailed in midbrain dopaminergic neuron physiology.

PMID: 17399993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Neurosci. 2007 Jan 31;27(5):1063-71.

Progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the ventral midbrain of adult mice
heterozygote for Engrailed1.

Sonnier L(1), Le Pen G, Hartmann A, Bizot JC, Trovero F, Krebs MO, Prochiantz A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 8542,
Development and Evolution of the Nervous System, Group Development and
Neuropharmacology, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Engrailed1 and Engrailed2 (En1 and En2) are two developmental genes of the
homeogene family expressed in the developing midbrain. En1 and, to a lesser
degree, En2 also are expressed in the adult substantia nigra (SN) and ventral
tegmental area (VTA), two dopaminergic (DA) nuclei of the ventral midbrain. In an
effort to study En1/2 adult functions, we have analyzed the phenotype of mice
lacking one En1 allele in an En2 wild-type context. We show that in this mutant
the number of DA neurons decreases slowly between 8 and 24 weeks after birth to
reach a stable 38 and 23% reduction in the SN and VTA, respectively, and that
neuronal loss can be antagonized by En2 recombinant protein infusions in the
midbrain. These loss and gain of function experiments firmly establish that En1/2
is a true survival factor for DA neurons in vivo. Neuronal death in the mutant is
paralleled by a 37% decrease in striatal DA, with no change in serotonin content.
Using established protocols, we show that, compared with their wild-type
littermates, En1+/- mice have impaired motor skills, an anhedonic-like behavior, 
and an enhanced resignation phenotype; they perform poorly in social
interactions. However, these mice do not differ from their wild-type littermates 
in anxiety-measuring tests. Together, these results demonstrate that En1/2 genes 
have important adult physiological functions. They also suggest that mice lacking
only one En1 allele could provide a novel model for the study of diseases
associated with progressive DA cell death.

PMID: 17267560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Cell Biol Int. 2007 Mar;31(3):299-303. Epub 2006 Nov 19.

In vitro differentiation of cord blood unrestricted somatic stem cells expressing
dopamine-associated genes into neuron-like cells.

Fallahi-Sichani M(1), Soleimani M, Najafi SM, Kiani J, Arefian E, Atashi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University College of Science, University of
Tehran, Tehran 14155-6455, Iran.

An intensive study is underway to evaluate different potential candidates for
cell therapy of neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's disease (PD).
Availability and lower immunogenicity compared to other sources for stem cell
therapy such as bone marrow have made human umbilical cord blood stem cells a
considerable source for cell therapy. The present study aimed to investigate
differentiation of recently introduced pluripotent cord blood stem cells, known
as unrestricted somatic stem cells (USSCs), into cells with neural features in
serum-withdrawal medium. Using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
and immunocytochemistry assays, we have shown the expression of neuron-specific
genes following a 2week treatment of USSCs in serum-withdrawal induction medium. 
In addition, we have found that USSCs and USSC-derived neuron-like cells express 
transcripts of genes associated with development and/or survival of dopaminergic 
mesencephalic neurons including En1, En2, Nurr1, Ptx3, Pax2, Wnt1 and Wnt3a. The 
expression of dopamine-associated genes suggests that these cells may be
potential candidates to be used for cell therapy of PD.

PMID: 17196845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Development. 2007 Jan;134(2):317-25. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

Lmx1b is essential for Fgf8 and Wnt1 expression in the isthmic organizer during
tectum and cerebellum development in mice.

Guo C(1), Qiu HY, Huang Y, Chen H, Yang RQ, Chen SD, Johnson RL, Chen ZF, Ding
YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Key Laboratory of Neurobiology, Shanghai
Institute for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, 
China.

Secreted factors FGF8 and WNT1 are essential either for the inductive activity of
the isthmus organizer or for the regionalization of the midbrain-hindbrain
boundary (MHB). However, transcriptional regulation of these secreted factors
during development remains to be elucidated. Here we show that the LIM homeobox
gene Lmx1b is expressed in the anterior embryo as early as E7.5 and its
expression becomes progressively restricted to the isthmus at E9.0. Analysis of
gene expression in the MHB of the mutant embryos showed that many genes were lost
by E9.5. In the MHB of Lmx1b-/- embryos, the expression of Fgf8, which normally
occurs at the 4-somite stage, was completely absent, whereas Wnt1 was
downregulated before the 4-somite stage. Moreover, transcription factors En1 and 
Pax2 were also downregulated prior to the 4-somite stage, whereas Gbx2
downregulation occurred at the 4-somite stage. By contrast, Otx2 and Pax6
expression was not affected in Lmx1b-/- embryos. The requirement of specific
Lmx1b expression in the MHB was further confirmed by Wnt1-Cre-mediated
region-specific conditional knockout of Lmx1b. As a result of these molecular
defects, the development of the tectum and cerebellum was severely impaired in
Lmx1b-/- mice. Taken together, our results indicate that Lmx1b plays an essential
role in the development of the tectum and cerebellum by regulating expression of 
Fgf8, Wnt1 and several isthmus-related transcription factors in the MHB, and is a
crucial component of a cross-regulatory network required for the induction
activity of the isthmic organizer in the MHB.

PMID: 17166916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Exp Neurol. 2007 Feb;203(2):472-80. Epub 2006 Oct 27.

Chronic cocaine administration modulates the expression of transcription factors 
involved in midbrain dopaminergic neuron function.

Leo D(1), di Porzio U, Racagni G, Riva MA, Fumagalli F, Perrone-Capano C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A. Buzzati Traverso, CNR, Via Pietro
Castellino, 111, 80131-Naples, Italy.

Chronic cocaine use leads to pronounced alterations in neuronal functions in
brain circuits associated with reward. In the present study, we examined in the
rat midbrain the effects of acute, subchronic (5 days) and chronic cocaine
treatments (14 days) on the gene expression of transcription factors involved in 
the development and maintenance of dopaminergic neurons. We show that chronic,
but not acute or subchronic, cocaine administration downregulates Nurr1 and Pitx3
transcripts whereas En1 transcripts are upregulated. Conversely, Lmx1b and En2
transcripts are not affected by the drug treatment, indicating that the
modulation of the midbrain transcription factors analyzed is highly selective.
Interestingly, modification of the gene expression for these transcription
factors persists in midbrain as long as two weeks after the last drug
administration, suggesting that it may account for some of the enduring
alterations in midbrain dopaminergic circuits associated with chronic cocaine
use.

PMID: 17070804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Behav Brain Res. 2007 Jan 10;176(1):121-32. Epub 2006 Oct 20.

The mouse Engrailed genes: a window into autism.

Kuemerle B(1), Gulden F, Cherosky N, Williams E, Herrup K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Case Western Reserve School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

The complex behavioral symptoms and neuroanatomical abnormalities observed in
autistic individuals strongly suggest a multi-factorial basis for this perplexing
disease. Although not the perfect model, we believe the Engrailed genes provide
an invaluable "window" into the elusive etiology of autism spectrum disorder. The
Engrailed-2 gene has been associated with autism in genetic linkage studies. The 
En2 knock-out mouse harbors cerebellar abnormalities that are similar to those
found in autistic individuals and, as we report here, has a distinct anterior
shift in the position of the amygdala in the cerebral cortex. Our initial
analysis of background effects in the En1 mouse knock-out provides insight as to 
possible molecular mechanisms and gender differences associated with autism.
These findings further the connection between Engrailed and autism and provide
new avenues to explore in the ongoing study of the biological basis of this
multifaceted disease.

PMCID: PMC2791532
PMID: 17055592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Neural Transm Suppl. 2006;(70):57-60.

The role of Pitx3 in survival of midbrain dopaminergic neurons.

Smits SM(1), Smidt MP.

Author information: 
(1)Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, Department of Pharmacology and
Anatomy, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Dopamine belongs to the most intensively studied neurotransmitters of the brain, 
because of its implications in psychiatric and neurological disorders. Although, 
clinical relevance of midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons is well recognized and 
dopaminergic dysfunction may have a genetic component, the genetic cascades
underlying developmental processes are still largely unknown. With the advances
in molecular biology, mDA neurons and their involvement in psychiatric and
neurological disorders are now subject of studies that aim to delineate the
fundamental neurobiology of these neurons. These studies are concerned with
developmental processes, cell-specific gene expression and regulation, molecular 
pharmacology, and genetic association of dopamine-related genes and
mDA-associated disorders. Several transcription factors implicated in the
post-mitotic mDA development, including Nurr1, Lmx1b, Pitx3, and En1/En2 have
contributed to the understanding of how mDA neurons are generated in vivo.
Furthermore, these studies provide insights into new strategies for future
therapies of Parkinson's Disease (PD) using stem cells for engineering DA neurons
in vitro. Here, we will discuss the role of Pitx3 in molecular mechanisms
involved in the regional specification, neuronal specification and
differentiation of mDA neurons.

PMID: 17017509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Oct 10;103(41):15242-7. Epub 2006 Oct 2.

Slow progressive degeneration of nigral dopaminergic neurons in postnatal
Engrailed mutant mice.

Sgadò P(1), Albéri L, Gherbassi D, Galasso SL, Ramakers GM, Alavian KN, Smidt MP,
Dyck RH, Simon HH.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Center for Neuroscience, Department of Neuroanatomy,
Ruprecht-Karls Universität Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The homeobox transcription factors Engrailed-1 and Engrailed-2 are required for
the survival of mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons in a cell-autonomous and
gene-dose-dependent manner. Because of this requirement, the cells die by
apoptosis when all four alleles of the Engrailed genes are genetically ablated
(En1-/-;En2-/-). In the present study, we show that viable and fertile mice,
heterozygous null for Engrailed-1 and homozygous null for Engrailed-2
(En1+/-;En2-/-), have an adult phenotype that resembles key pathological features
of Parkinson's disease. Specifically, postnatal mutant mice exhibit a progressive
degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra during the first 3
mo of their lives, leading to diminished storage and release of dopamine in the
caudate putamen, motor deficits similar to akinesia and bradykinesia, and a lower
body weight. This genetic model may provide access to the molecular etiology for 
Parkinson's disease and could assist in the development of novel treatments for
this neurodegenerative disorder.

PMCID: PMC1622807
PMID: 17015829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Brain Res. 2007 Apr 6;1140:170-8. Epub 2006 Aug 1.

A genetic study of the suppressors of the Engrailed-1 cerebellar phenotype.

Murcia CL(1), Gulden FO, Cherosky NA, Herrup K.

Author information: 
(1)Alzheimer Research Laboratory, Department of Neuroscience, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

The mouse Engrailed genes, En1 and En2, play an important role in the development
of the cerebellum from its inception at the mid/hindbrain boundary in early
embryonic development through cell type specification events and beyond. In the
absence of En1, the cerebellum and caudal midbrain fail to develop normally--a
phenotype that we have previously reported to be strain dependent. On the 129/S1 
strain background, En1 null alleles lead to mid/hindbrain failure, whereas on the
C57BL/6 background, En1 deficiency is compatible with near normal cerebellar
development. We have pursued this dramatic effect of genetic background by
performing a genetic modifier screen through F1 backcross and F1 intercross
matings. The backcross has yielded two strong candidate intervals with suggestive
linkage to a third region. Moreover, variations in rescue frequency among
subgroups within the backcross indicate gender and parent of origin influences on
rescue penetrance. The intercross data reveal locus heterogeneity of the En1
modifiers, with more than one compliment of C57BL/6 and 129/S1 alleles capable of
mediating the rescue phenotype. These findings highlight the complexity and
plasticity of gene networks involved in brain development.

PMID: 16884697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Stem Cells. 2006 Jul;24(7):1695-706.

Induction of midbrain dopaminergic neurons from primate embryonic stem cells by
coculture with sertoli cells.

Yue F(1), Cui L, Johkura K, Ogiwara N, Sasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Organ Technology, Institute of Organ Transplants,
Reconstructive Medicine and Tissue Engineering, Shinshu University Graduate
School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Nagano, Japan. yuefm@sch.md.shinshu-u.ac.jp

The aim of this study was to produce dopaminergic neurons from primate embryonic 
stem (ES) cells following coculture with mouse Sertoli cells. After 3 weeks of
induction, immunostaining revealed that 90% +/- 9% of the colonies contained
tyrosine hydroxylase-positive (TH(+)) neurons, and 60% +/- 7% of the tubulin beta
III-positive (Tuj III(+)) neurons were TH(+). Reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction analyses showed that Sertoli-induced neurons expressed midbrain
dopaminergic neuron markers, including TH, dopamine transporter, aromatic amino
acid decarboxylase (AADC), receptors such as TrkB and TrkC, and transcription
factors NurrI and Lmx1b. Neurons that had been differentiated on Sertoli cells
were positive for Pax2, En1, and AADC, midbrain-related markers, and negative for
dopamine-beta-hydroxylase, a marker of noradrenergic neurons. These Sertoli
cell-induced dopaminergic cells can release dopamine when depolarized by high
K(+). Sertoli cell-conditioned medium contained glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and supported neuronal differentiation. After
pretreatment with anti-GDNF antibody, the percentage of Tuj III(+) colonies was
reduced to 14%. Thus, GDNF contributed significantly to inducing primate ES cells
into dopaminergic neurons. When transplanted into a 6-hydroxydopamine-treated
Parkinson's disease model, primate-derived dopaminergic neurons integrated into
the mouse striatum. Two weeks after transplantation, surviving TH(+) cells were
present. These TH(+) cells survived for 2 months. Therefore, the induction method
of coculture ES cells with Sertoli cells provides an unlimited source of primate 
cells for the study of pathogenesis and transplantation in Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 16822882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Dev Biol. 2006 Aug 1;296(1):164-76. Epub 2006 Apr 21.

Beta-catenin activation is necessary and sufficient to specify the dorsal dermal 
fate in the mouse.

Atit R(1), Sgaier SK, Mohamed OA, Taketo MM, Dufort D, Joyner AL, Niswander L,
Conlon RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, 
USA. rpa5@po.cwru.edu

Dorsal dermis and epaxial muscle have been shown to arise from the central
dermomyotome in the chick. En1 is a homeobox transcription factor gene expressed 
in the central dermomyotome. We show by genetic fate mapping in the mouse that
En1-expressing cells of the central dermomyotome give rise to dorsal dermis and
epaxial muscle and, unexpectedly, to interscapular brown fat. Thus, the
En1-expressing central dermomyotome normally gives rise to three distinct fates
in mice. Wnt signals are important in early stages of dermomyotome development,
but the signal that acts to specify the dermal fate has not been identified.
Using a reporter transgene for Wnt signal transduction, we show that the
En1-expressing cells directly underneath the surface ectoderm transduce Wnt
signals. When the essential Wnt transducer beta-catenin is mutated in En1 cells, 
it results in the loss of Dermo1-expressing dorsal dermal progenitors and dermis.
Conversely, when beta-catenin was activated in En1 cells, it induces Dermo1
expression in all cells of the En1 domain and disrupts muscle gene expression.
Our results indicate that the mouse central dermomyotome gives rise to dermis,
muscle, and brown fat, and that Wnt signalling normally instructs cells to select
the dorsal dermal fate.

PMID: 16730693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Dev Dyn. 2006 Jul;235(7):1884-94.

Establishment of the epaxial-hypaxial boundary in the avian myotome.

Ahmed MU(1), Cheng L, Dietrich S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, Guy's Hospital,
London Bridge, London, United Kingdom.

Trunk skeletal muscles are segregated into dorsomedial epaxial and ventrolateral 
hypaxial muscles, separated by a myoseptum. In amniotes, they are generated from 
a transient structure, the dermomyotome, which lays down muscle, namely the
myotome underneath. However, the dermomyotome and myotome are dorsoventrally
continuous, with no morphologically defined epaxial-hypaxial boundary. The
transcription factors En1 and Sim1 have been shown to molecularly subdivide the
amniote dermomyotome, with En1 labeling the epaxial dermomyotome and Sim1 the
hypaxial counterpart. Here, we demonstrate that En1 and Sim1 expression persists 
in cells leaving the dermomyotome, superimposing the expression boundary onto
muscle and skin. En1-expressing cells colonize the myotome initially from the
rostral and caudal lips, and slightly later, directly from the de-epithelializing
dermomyotomal center. En1 expression in the myotome is concomitant with the
appearance of Fgfr4/Pax7-expressing mitotically active myoblasts. This finding
suggests that Fgfr4+/Pax7+/En1+ cells carry their expression with them when
entering the myotome. Furthermore, it suggests that the epaxial-hypaxial boundary
of the myotome is established through the late arising, mitotically active
myoblasts.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16680727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Clin Calcium. 2006 May;16(5):773-80.

[Roles of the BMP family in pattern formation of the vertebrate limb].

[Article in Japanese]

Wada N(1), Nohno T, Noji S.

Author information: 
(1)Kawasaki Medical School, Department of Molecular Biology.

In the process of limb development, various signaling molecules are produced in
the organizing center of the limb bud. These molecules regulate pattern formation
and the morphogenesis of the limb. Members of the bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP) family and their receptors are expressed in the limb bud in spatiotemporal 
specific patterns. BMP signaling regulates chondrogenesis of limb mesenchyme, and
promotes apoptosis of the interdigital soft tissue. Recently, this signaling was 
found to be involved in establishment of dorsoventral polarity of the limb bud
and in regulation of limb growth via maintenance of the apical ectodermal ridge. 
BMPs also regulate digit morphology. In these events, BMPs work together with
other signaling molecules, but they sometimes act as negative regulators of these
other molecules so that limb morphogenesis can proceed normally.

PMID: 16679618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Exp Neurol. 2006 May;199(1):209-21. Epub 2006 Apr 19.

Murine embryonic EGF-responsive ventral mesencephalic neurospheres display
distinct regional specification and promote survival of dopaminergic neurons.

Moses D(1), Teper Y, Gantois I, Finkelstein DI, Horne MK, Drago J.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Florey Institute of Experimental Physiology and Medicine, The
University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia.

Similar to embryonic forebrain, the embryonic mesencephalon contains Fibroblast
Growth Factor 2 (FGF2)- and Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF)-responsive progenitors 
that can be isolated as neurospheres. Developmentally, the FGF2-responsive
population appears first and is thought to give rise to EGF-responsive neural
stem cells. It is not known whether following this developmental switch of growth
factor responsiveness ventral mesencephalic (VM)-derived neural stem cells
display distinct region-specific properties. We found that murine VM- and dorsal 
mesencephalic (DM)-derived primary neurospheres isolated with EGF at embryonic
day 14.5 differed with respect to neurosphere formation efficacy and size. VM-
but not DM-derived spheres expressed En1, the molecular marker of isthmic
organizer, and contained transcripts of BDNF, FGF2, IGF-I and NT-3. Both VM and
DM primary neurospheres were self-renewing and gave rise to astroglial cells, but
20% of VM spheres also generated neurons. According to in vitro properties, DM-
and majority of VM-derived EGF-responsive progenitors represent glial precursors.
VM- but not DM-derived primary neurospheres enriched their respective conditioned
medium with factors that promoted the survival of dopaminergic neurons in vitro, 
suggesting that ventral mesencephalic EGF-responsive progenitors are endowed with
the potential to provide trophic support to nearby nascent dopaminergic neurons. 
These data may have implications in the treatment of Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 16626706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Neurotoxicology. 2006 Jul;27(4):547-57. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

Arsenic-induced gene expression changes in the neural tube of folate transport
defective mouse embryos.

Wlodarczyk BJ(1), Cabrera RM, Hill DS, Bozinov D, Zhu H, Finnell RH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental and Genetic Medicine, Institute of Biosciences and
Technology, Texas A&M University System Health Science Center, Houston, 77030,
USA. bwlodarczyk@ibt.tamhsc.edu

Arsenic injected intraperitoneally (i.p.) during early organogenesis to small
pregnant laboratory rodents (mouse, rat, and hamster) induces several congenital 
defects in the progeny. Among those abnormalities consistently and predominantly 
observed are exencephaly and encephalocele. These severe defects of the central
nervous system originate from a corrupted process of neurulation and are better
known as neural tube defects (NTDs). In order to understand the mechanism of
arsenate-induced NTDs, we designed studies in which highly sensitive Folr2
nullizygous mice were injected intraperitoneally with sodium arsenate at the
beginning of the neural tube formation process. This specific knockout mouse and 
the arsenic exposure conditions were chosen as they were known to provide a high 
incidence of exencephaly in exposed embryos. We have applied gene expression
technology to the anterior neural tube. This allowed us to study arsenic-induced 
changes in patterns of gene expression that may contribute to the development of 
neural tube defects in these mice. Using extensive data analysis approaches
including hierarchical clustering and gene ontology analysis, we identified
several candidate genes as well as important ontology groups that may be
responsible for arsenic's teratogenicity. Changes in the expression of several
genes in response to arsenic treatment in our model had previously been
demonstrated by other investigators to also induce NTDs in murine model systems. 
These include: engrailed 1 (En-1), platelet derived growth factor receptor alpha 
(Pdgfralpha) and ephrinA7 (EphA7). We also found several gene ontology groups
that could be implicated in arsenic's underlying teratogenicity: morphogenesis,
oxidative phosporylation, redox response, and regulation of I-kappaB
kinase/NF-kappaB cascade. Additionally, we revealed new target genes which may be
responsible for arsenic disrupted oxidative phosphorylation.

PMID: 16620997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mol Biol Cell. 2006 Jun;17(6):2572-80. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Engrailed-1 negatively regulates beta-catenin transcriptional activity by
destabilizing beta-catenin via a glycogen synthase kinase-3beta-independent
pathway.

Bachar-Dahan L(1), Goltzmann J, Yaniv A, Gazit A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Microbiology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

The Wnt signaling pathway plays a major role in development, and upon
deregulation it is implicated in neoplasia. The hallmark of the canonical Wnt
signal is the protection of beta-catenin from ubiquitination and proteasomal
degradation induced by glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3beta inhibition. The
stabilized beta-catenin translocates to the nucleus where it binds to T-cell
factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) transcription factors, activating the
expression of Wnt target genes. In the absence of Wnt signal, TCF/LEF bind to
Groucho (Gro)/TLE corepressors and repress Wnt target genes. Gro/TLE bind also to
Engrailed (En) transcription factors mediating En-repressive activity on En
target genes. Here, we present data suggesting that En-1 serves also as a
negative regulator of beta-catenin transcriptional activity; however, its
repressive effect is independent of Gro/TLE. Our data suggest that En-1 acts by
destabilizing beta-catenin via a proteasomal degradation pathway that is
GSK-3beta-independent. Moreover, because En-1-mediated beta-catenin degradation
is also Siah independent, our data imply that En-1 exerts its repressive effect
by a novel mechanism negatively controlling the level of beta-catenin.

PMCID: PMC1474795
PMID: 16571670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Eur J Hum Genet. 2006 Jun;14(6):739-43.

Deletions of 2q14 that include the homeobox engrailed 1 (EN1) transcription
factor are compatible with a normal phenotype.

Barber JC(1), Maloney VK, Bewes B, Wakeling E.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury Health Care NHS Trust,
Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, UK. john.barber@salisbury.nhs.uk

A novel transmitted 2-3 Mb deletion of 2q14.1-q14.2 was found in an affected boy 
from a consanguineous family with a possible diagnosis of PEHO syndrome (OMIM
260565). BAC FISH showed that the deletion included a minimum of 20 genes
including the homeobox engrailed 1 gene (EN1). However, the same deletion was
also found in his phenotypically normal father and brother (family 1). The
phenotype of the proband may, therefore, have been coincidental to the deletion, 
a result of a recessive condition within or outside the deleted segment or
possibly due to variable dosage compensation of EN1 by the paralogous EN2 gene at
7q36. BAC FISH also showed that this deletion overlapped with a previously
reported transmitted deletion of 2q13-q14.1 that had no phenotypic consequences
(family 2). The deleted regions contained a total of 32 genes and comprise the
final 5.25 Mb of the ancestral chromosome 2B from which chromosome 2 was formed
in man. These families provide further evidence that heterozygous deletions of
regions of low gene density are compatible with a normal phenotype.

PMID: 16552425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Dev Biol. 2006 May 1;293(1):13-24. Epub 2006 Mar 10.

Loss of orphan nuclear receptor GCNF function disrupts forebrain development and 
the establishment of the isthmic organizer.

Chung AC(1), Xu X, Niederreither KA, Cooney AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The isthmic organizer, which is located at the midbrain-hindbrain boundary, is
important for midbrain development. The mechanism by which the development of the
organizer is initiated and maintained is not well understood. Inactivation of the
gene encoding the orphan nuclear receptor, GCNF, diminishes the expression of
secreted signaling molecules, Fgf8 and Wnt1, the paired box genes Pax2/5, En1/2, 
and homeodomain transcription factor Gbx2; all of which are essential for isthmic
organizer function. In addition, full neuronal differentiation is not observed in
the midbrain region of GCNF-/- embryos. Increased cell death may contribute to
the loss of midbrain structure in GCNF-/- embryos. These results indicate that
GCNF is required for establishment of the isthmic organizer, thereby regulating
the midbrain development.

PMID: 16530751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Nature. 2006 Mar 9;440(7081):215-9.

V1 spinal neurons regulate the speed of vertebrate locomotor outputs.

Gosgnach S(1), Lanuza GM, Butt SJ, Saueressig H, Zhang Y, Velasquez T,
Riethmacher D, Callaway EM, Kiehn O, Goulding M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2006 Mar 9;440(7081):158-9.

The neuronal networks that generate vertebrate movements such as walking and
swimming are embedded in the spinal cord. These networks, which are referred to
as central pattern generators (CPGs), are ideal systems for determining how
ensembles of neurons generate simple behavioural outputs. In spite of efforts to 
address the organization of the locomotor CPG in walking animals, little is known
about the identity and function of the spinal interneuron cell types that
contribute to these locomotor networks. Here we use four complementary genetic
approaches to directly address the function of mouse V1 neurons, a class of local
circuit inhibitory interneurons that selectively express the transcription factor
Engrailed1. Our results show that V1 neurons shape motor outputs during
locomotion and are required for generating 'fast' motor bursting. These findings 
outline an important role for inhibition in regulating the frequency of the
locomotor CPG rhythm, and also suggest that V1 neurons may have an evolutionarily
conserved role in controlling the speed of vertebrate locomotor movements.

PMID: 16525473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Dev Neurosci. 2006;28(1-2):102-17.

Notch1 signaling influences v2 interneuron and motor neuron development in the
spinal cord.

Yang X(1), Tomita T, Wines-Samuelson M, Beglopoulos V, Tansey MG, Kopan R, Shen
J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Program in
Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The Notch signaling pathway plays a variety of roles in cell fate decisions
during development. Previous studies have shown that reduced Notch signaling
results in premature differentiation of neural progenitor cells, while increased 
Notch activities promote apoptotic death of neural progenitor cells in the
developing brain. Whether Notch signaling is involved in the specification of
neuronal subtypes is unclear. Here we examine the role of Notch1 in the
development of neuronal subtypes in the spinal cord using conditional knockout
(cKO) mice lacking Notch1 specifically in neural progenitor cells. Notch1
inactivation results in accelerated neuronal differentiation in the ventral
spinal cord and gradual disappearance of the ventral central canal. These changes
are accompanied by reduced expression of Hes1 and Hes5 and increased expression
of Mash1 and Neurogenin 1 and 2. Using markers (Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, Olig2, Pax6 and
Dbx1) for one or multiple progenitor cell types, we found reductions of all
subtypes of progenitor cells in the ventral spinal cord of Notch1 cKO mice.
Similarly, using markers (Islet1/2, Lim3, Sim1, Chox10, En1 and Evx1/2) specific 
for motor neurons and distinct classes of interneurons, we found increases in the
number of V0-2 interneurons in the ventral spinal cord of Notch1 cKO mice.
Specifically, the number of Lim3+/Chox10+ V2 interneurons is markedly increased
while the number of Lim3+/Islet+motor neurons is decreased in the Notch1 cKO
spinal cord, suggesting that V2 interneurons are generated at the expense of
motor neurons in the absence of Notch1. These results provide support for a role 
of Notch1 in neuronal subtype specification in the ventral spinal cord.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16508308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Neurosci Res. 2006 Mar;83(4):668-79.

Influence of retinoic acid and lithium on proliferation and dopaminergic
potential of human NT2 cells.

Misiuta IE(1), Saporta S, Sanberg PR, Zigova T, Willing AE.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence for Aging and Brain Repair, University of South Florida, 
Tampa, Florida, USA.

Our laboratory is working with the human NTera2/D1 (NT2) cell line, which has
properties similar to those of progenitor cells in the central nervous system
(CNS). These neural-like precursor cells can differentiate into all three major
lineages, neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes. The pure neuronal
population, hNT neurons, possess characteristics of dopamine (DA) cells. First,
we analyzed whether the retinoic acid (RA)-treated hNT neurons and the NT2
precursor cells expressed two transcription factors required for development of
the midbrain DA neurons. We report that NT2 cells endogenously expressed
Engrailed-1 and Ptx3, whereas RA-treated hNT neurons did not express Engrailed-1 
or Ptx3. Next we examined the influence of lithium treatment on Engrailed-1 and
Ptx3 as well as another critical transcription factor, Nurr1. Previous research
has shown that lithium can mimic the Wnt pathway, which is important for the
induction of these transcription factors. Finally, we investigated the effect of 
lithium treatment on the viability and proliferation of NT2 cells, because
lithium has been shown to stimulate neurogenesis in adult neural precursors.
Lithium treatment increased the viability and proliferation of NT2 cells. The
expression of transcription factors essential for the induction and maintenance
of the DA phenotype was not increased in NT2 after lithium treatment. We conclude
that the NT2 cell line is an excellent in vitro model system for studying the
influence of pharmalogical agents on proliferation, differentiation, and
apoptosis of a human neural progenitor cell line.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16408307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Development. 2006 Jan;133(1):63-74. Epub 2005 Nov 30.

The homeoprotein engrailed 1 has pleiotropic functions in calvarial
intramembranous bone formation and remodeling.

Deckelbaum RA(1), Majithia A, Booker T, Henderson JE, Loomis CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, MSB room
614, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The membranous bones of the mammalian skull vault arise from discrete
condensations of neural crest- and mesodermally-derived cells. Recently, a number
of homeodomain transcription factors have been identified as critical regulators 
of this process. Here, we show that the homeoprotein engrailed 1 (EN1) is
expressed during embryonic and perinatal craniofacial bone development, where it 
localizes to the skeletogenic mesenchyme, and, subsequently, to calvarial
osteoblasts and osteoprogenitors. Mice lacking En1 exhibit generalized calvarial 
bone hypoplasia and persistent widening of the sutural joints. A reduction in
calvarial membranous bone deposition and mineralization (osteopenia) is coupled
to enhanced osteolytic resorption in En1 mutants. Consistent with these
observations, expression of established osteoblast differentiation markers
reveals that En1 function is required for both early and late phases of calvarial
osteogenesis. Further analysis shows that EN1 regulates FGF signaling in
calvarial osteoblasts. Moreover, EN1 indirectly influences calvarial osteoclast
recruitment and bone resorption by regulating the expression of receptor
activator of NFkappaB ligand (RANKL) in osteoblasts. Thus, during intramembranous
bone formation, EN1 acts both cell autonomously and non-cell autonomously. In
summary, this study identifies EN1 as a novel modulator of calvarial osteoblast
differentiation and proliferation, processes that must be exquisitely balanced to
ensure proper skull vault formation.

PMID: 16319118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2006 Feb;31(2):293-302. Epub 2005 Oct 26.

Altered dopaminergic innervation and amphetamine response in adult Otx2
conditional mutant mice.

Borgkvist A(1), Puelles E, Carta M, Acampora D, Ang SL, Wurst W, Goiny M, Fisone 
G, Simeone A, Usiello A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Retzius väg 8, S-17177
Stockholm, Sweden.

Here, we have investigated the neurological consequences of restricted
inactivation of Otx2 in adult En1(cre/+); Otx2(flox/flox) mice. In agreement with
the crucial role of Otx2 in midbrain patterning, the mutants had a substantial
reduction in tyrosine hydroxylase containing neurons. Although the reduction in
the number of DAergic neurons was comparable between the SNc and the VTA, we
found an unexpected selectivity in the deinnervation of the terminal fields
affecting preferentially the ventral striatum and the olfactory tubercle.
Interestingly, the mutants showed no abnormalities in exploratory activity or
motor coordination. However, the absence of normal DA tone generated significant 
alterations in DA D1-receptor signalling as indicated by increased mutant
striatal levels of phosphorylated DARPP-32 and by an altered motor response to
amphetamine. Therefore, we suggest that the En1(cre/+); Otx2(flox/flox) mutant
mouse model represents a genetic tool for investigating molecular and behavioural
consequences of developmental neuronal dysfunction in the DAergic system.

PMID: 16256364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 2005 Sep;49(2):120-6. Epub 2005 Jan 21.

Isthmus organizer for midbrain and hindbrain development.

Nakamura H(1), Katahira T, Matsunaga E, Sato T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Graduate School of Life Sciences and
Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, 
Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. nakamura@idac.tohoku.ac.jp

Classical transplantation studies showed that the isthmus has an organizing
activity upon the tectum and cerebellum. Since Fgf8 is expressed in the isthmus
and mimics functionally isthmic grafts, it is accepted that Fgf8 plays pivotal
role in the isthmic organizing activity. The fate of brain vesicles is determined
by the combinations of transcription factors. The neural tube region where Otx2, 
Pax2, and En1 are expressed early on acquires midbrain identity. Pax3/7 forces
the midbrain to differentiate into tectum. En1/2, Pax2/5, and Fgf8 form a
positive feedback loop for their expression, thus misexpression of one of these
molecules turns on the loop and forces presumptive diencephalon to differentiate 
into tectum. The isthmic organizer signal, Fgf8, stabilizes or changes the
expression of the transcription factors in mid/hindbrain region. A strong Fgf8
signal activates the Ras-ERK signaling pathway, which in turn activates Irx2 in a
rostrodorsal part of the hindbrain, and forces this tissue to differentiate into 
cerebellum.

PMID: 16111543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. FASEB J. 2005 Sep;19(11):1537-9. Epub 2005 Jun 21.

Serotonergic-like progenitor cells propagated from neural stem cells in vitro:
survival with SERT protein expression following implantation into brains of mice 
lacking SERT.

Ren-Patterson RF(1), Kim DK, Zheng X, Sherrill S, Huang SJ, Tolliver T, Murphy
DL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Science, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH,
Bethesda, MD 20892-1264, USA. renpatr@intra.nimh.nih.gov

Neural stem cells (NSCs) obtained from the midbrain region of embryonic (E14)
mice were initially cultured with basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), Sonic
hedgehog, and FGF-8 in a serum-free N-2 culture medium to foster differentiation 
into a serotonergic-like phenotype. During the initial differentiating phase,
these progenitor cells expressed En1, Pax3, and Pax5 mRNA. Subsequently, a single
serotonin [5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)] and tryptophan hydroxylase-positive clone 
was isolated, which gave rise to cells that developed serotonergic properties.
Sixty percent of these progenitor cells expressed the serotonin transporter
(SERT), as indicated by specific ligand binding of [125I]-RTI-55. To further
evaluate SERT functionality, we showed that these progenitor cells possessed
specific [3H]-5-HT uptake activity. Implantation of the serotonergic-like
progenitors into the hippocampus of adult mice genetically lacking SERT was
followed by migration of these cells into adjacent brain regions, and survival of
the cells at 8 weeks was accompanied by a gradual increase in density of SERT
protein expression, which was not found in vehicle-injected, control mice. These 
findings suggest that this serotonergic-like NSC model will be a useful
contribution to the development of cell biotechnology in regard to the expression
of missing genes such as SERT in the adult brain.

PMID: 15972295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Stem Cells. 2005 Jun-Jul;23(6):781-90.

Directed differentiation of dopaminergic neuronal subtypes from human embryonic
stem cells.

Yan Y(1), Yang D, Zarnowska ED, Du Z, Werbel B, Valliere C, Pearce RA, Thomson
JA, Zhang SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1500 Highland Avenue, 
Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA.

How dopamine (DA) neuronal subtypes are specified remains unknown. In this study 
we show a robust generation of functional DA neurons from human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) through a specific sequence of application of fibroblast growth
factor 8 (FGF8) and sonic hedgehog (SHH). Treatment of hESC-derived Sox1+
neuroepithelial cells with FGF8 and SHH resulted in production of tyrosine
hydroxylase (TH)-positive neurons that were mostly bipolar cells, coexpression
with gamma-aminobutyric acid, and lack of midbrain marker engrailed 1 (En1)
expression. However, FGF8 treatment of precursor cells before Sox1 expression led
to the generation of a similar proportion of TH+ neurons characteristic of
midbrain projection DA neurons with large cell bodies and complex processes and
coexpression of En1. This suggests that one mechanism of generating neuronal
subtypes is temporal availability of morphogens to a specific group of
precursors. The in vitro-generated DA neurons were electrophysiologically active 
and released DA in an activity-dependent manner. They may thus provide a
renewable source of functional human DA neurons for drug screening and
development of sustainable therapeutics for disorders affecting the DA system.

PMCID: PMC2707939
PMID: 15917474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Int J Dev Biol. 2005;49(2-3):231-5.

Isthmus organizer and regionalization of the mesencephalon and metencephalon.

Nakamura H(1), Watanabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Graduate School of Life Sciences and
Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
nakamura@idac.tohoku.ac.jp

The brain vesicles that are formed at an early stage of neural development are
the fundamentals of the brain plan. Heterotopic transplantation revealed that the
diencephalon could change its fate when juxtaposed to the isthmus
(mes-metencephalic boundary), which indicated that the isthmus functions as an
organizer for the mesencephalon and metencephalon. Fgf8 is identified as an
isthmus organizing signal. Misexpression of Fgf8a and Fgf8b indicated that a
strong Fgf8 signal organizes cerebellar development. The transcription factors
define the fate of the region. Overlapping expression of Otx2, En1 and Pax2 may
define the mesencephalic region and additional expression of Pax3/7 may instruct 
the mesencephalic region to differentiate into the tectum. The di-mesencephalic
boundary is determined by repressive interaction between Pax6 and En1/Pax2 and
the mes-metencephalic boundary is defined by repressive interaction between Otx2 
and Gbx2. Fgf8 is induced at the border of the Otx2 and Gbx2 expression domain,
overlapping with Gbx2 expression.

PMID: 15906236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jun;233(2):288-300.

Studies on epidermal growth factor receptor signaling in vertebrate limb
patterning.

Omi M(1), Fisher M, Maihle NJ, Dealy CN.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Limb and Skeletal Development, Department of BioStructure and
Function, School of Dental Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, Connecticut 06030, USA.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) regulates multiple patterning events 
in Drosophila limb development, but its role in vertebrate limb morphogenesis has
received little attention. The EGFR and several of its ligands are expressed in
developing vertebrate limbs in manners consistent with potential patterning
roles. To gain insight into functions of EGFR signaling in vertebrate limb
development, we expressed a constitutively active EGFR in developing chick limbs 
in ovo. Expression of activated EGFR causes pre- and postaxial polydactyly,
including mirror-image-type digit duplication, likely due to induction of ectopic
expression and/or modulation of genes involved in anterior-posterior (AP)
patterning such as Sonic hedgehog (Shh), dHand, Patched (Ptc), Gli3, Hoxd13,
Hoxd11, bone morphogenetic protein 2 (Bmp2), Gremlin, and FGF4. Activation of
EGFR signaling dorsalizes the limb and alters expression of the dorsal-ventral
(DV) patterning genes Wnt7a, Lmx, and En1. Ectopic and/or extended FGF8
expressing apical ectodermal ridges (AERs) are also seen. Interdigital regression
is inhibited and the digits fail to separate, leading to syndactyly, likely due
to antiapoptotic and pro-proliferative effects of activated EGFR signaling on
limb mesoderm, and/or attenuation of interdigital Bmp4 expression. These findings
suggest potential roles for EGFR signaling in AP and DV patterning, AER
formation, and cell survival during limb morphogenesis.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 15778992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Neurochem. 2005 Mar;92(5):1265-76.

In vitro and in vivo analyses of human embryonic stem cell-derived dopamine
neurons.

Park CH(1), Minn YK, Lee JY, Choi DH, Chang MY, Shim JW, Ko JY, Koh HC, Kang MJ, 
Kang JS, Rhie DJ, Lee YS, Son H, Moon SY, Kim KS, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul,
Korea.

Human embryonic stem (hES) cells, due to their capacity of multipotency and
self-renewal, may serve as a valuable experimental tool for human developmental
biology and may provide an unlimited cell source for cell replacement therapy.
The purpose of this study was to assess the developmental potential of hES cells 
to replace the selectively lost midbrain dopamine (DA) neurons in Parkinson's
disease. Here, we report the development of an in vitro differentiation protocol 
to derive an enriched population of midbrain DA neurons from hES cells. Neural
induction of hES cells co-cultured with stromal cells, followed by expansion of
the resulting neural precursor cells, efficiently generated DA neurons with
concomitant expression of transcriptional factors related to midbrain DA
development, such as Pax2, En1 (Engrailed-1), Nurr1, and Lmx1b. Using our
procedure, the majority of differentiated hES cells (> 95%) contained neuronal or
neural precursor markers and a high percentage (> 40%) of TuJ1+ neurons was
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)+, while none of them expressed the undifferentiated ES 
cell marker, Oct 3/4. Furthermore, hES cell-derived DA neurons demonstrated
functionality in vitro, releasing DA in response to KCl-induced depolarization
and reuptake of DA. Finally, transplantation of hES-derived DA neurons into the
striatum of hemi-parkinsonian rats failed to result in improvement of their
behavioral deficits as determined by amphetamine-induced rotation and
step-adjustment. Immunohistochemical analyses of grafted brains revealed that
abundant hES-derived cells (human nuclei+ cells) survived in the grafts, but none
of them were TH+. Therefore, unlike those from mouse ES cells, hES cell-derived
DA neurons either do not survive or their DA phenotype is unstable when grafted
into rodent brains.

PMID: 15715675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Prog Brain Res. 2005;148:21-7.

The genetics of early cerebellar development: networks not pathways.

Herrup K(1), Murcia C, Gulden F, Kuemerle B, Bilovocky N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve School of Medicine, 10900
Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. kxh26@cwru.edu

PMID: 15661178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Neuron. 2005 Jan 6;45(1):27-40.

Morphogenetic and cellular movements that shape the mouse cerebellum; insights
from genetic fate mapping.

Sgaier SK(1), Millet S, Villanueva MP, Berenshteyn F, Song C, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 540
First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

We used the cerebellum as a model to study the morphogenetic and cellular
processes underlying the formation of elaborate brain structures from a simple
neural tube, using an inducible genetic fate mapping approach in mouse. We
demonstrate how a 90 degrees rotation between embryonic days 9 and 12 converts
the rostral-caudal axis of dorsal rhombomere 1 into the medial-lateral axis of
the wing-like bilateral cerebellar primordium. With the appropriate use of
promoters, we marked specific medial-lateral domains of the cerebellar primordium
and derived a positional fate map of the murine cerebellum. We show that the
adult medial cerebellum is produced by expansion, rather than fusion, of the thin
medial primordium. Furthermore, ventricular-derived cells maintain their original
medial-lateral coordinates into the adult, whereas rhombic lip-derived granule
cells undergo lateral to medial posterior transverse migrations during foliation.
Thus, we show that progressive changes in the axes of the cerebellum underlie its
genesis.

PMID: 15629700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids. 2004;23(12):1865-74.

Phosphorylation of isocarbostyril- and difluorophenyl-nucleoside thymidine mimics
by the human deoxynucleoside kinases.

Al-Madhoun AS(1), Eriksson S, Wang ZX, Naimi E, Knaus EE, Wiebe LI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Vascular Biology Laboratory, University of Ottawa
Heart Institute, Ottawa, Canada.

The thymidine mimics isocarbostyril nucleosides and difluorophenyl nucleosides
were tested as deoxynucleoside kinase substrates using recombinant human
cytosolic thymidine kinase (TK1) and deoxycytidine kinase (dCK), and
mitochondrial thymidine kinase (TK2) and deoxyguanosine kinase (dGK). The
isocarbostyril nucleoside compound
1-(2-deoxy-beta-D-ribofuranosyl)-isocarbostyril (EN1) was a poor substrate with
all the enzymes. The phosphorylation rates of EN1 with TK1 and TK2 were <1%
relative to Thd, where as the phosphorylation rates for EN1 were 1.4% and 1.1%
with dCK and dGK relative to dCyd and dGuo, respectively. The analogue
1-(2-deoxy-beta-D-ribofuranosyl)-7-iodoisocarbostyril (EN2) showed poor
relative-phosphorylation efficiencies (kcat/Km) with both TK1 and dGK, but not
with TK2. The kcat/Km value for EN2 with TK2 was 12.6% relative to that for Thd. 
Of the difluorophenyl nucleosides,
5-(1'-(2'-deoxy-beta-D-ribofuranosyl))-2,4-difluorotoluene (JW1) and
1-(1'-(2'-deoxy-beta-D-ribofuranosyl))-2,4-difluoro-5-iodobenzene (JW2) were
substrates for TK1 with phosphorylation efficiencies of about 5% relative to that
for Thd. Both analogues were considerably more efficient substrates for TK2, with
kcat/Km values of 45% relative to that for Thd.
2,5-Difluoro-4-[1-(2-deoxy-beta-L-ribofuranosyl)]-aniline (JW5), a L-nucleoside
mimic, was phosphorylated up to 15% as efficiently as deoxycytidine by dCK. These
data provide a possible explanation for the previously reported lack of
cytotoxicity of the isocarbostyril- and difluorophenyl nucleosides, but potential
mitochondrial effects of EN2, JW1 and JW2 should be further investigated.

PMID: 15628745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Jan;28(1):96-105.

Engrailed genes control developmental fate of serotonergic and noradrenergic
neurons in mid- and hindbrain in a gene dose-dependent manner.

Simon HH(1), Scholz C, O'Leary DD.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Center for Neuroscience, Department of Neuroanatomy,
University of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
horst.simon@urz.uni-heidelberg.de

In vertebrates and insects, the homeobox transcription factors of the engrailed
family have a dual function. They take part in regionalization during early
embryogenesis and later in neuronal specification. In mammals, two engrailed
homologues exist, engrailed-1 and engrailed-2, which are expressed in a broad
band around the isthmus at an age when the serotonergic and noradrenergic neurons
in mid/hindbrain are generated. The analysis of engrailed-1 and -2 double mutant 
mice revealed a specific, redundant, and gene dose-dependent requirement of the
two transcription factors for the development of the serotonergic dorsal raphe
nucleus and the noradrenergic locus caeruleus. Both nuclei are lost in engrailed 
double mutant mice; however, directly adjacent nuclei of the same
neurotransmitter phenotype are not affected. An almost identical phenotype is
found in mutant mice null for Wnt1, indicating that the engrailed genes provide
essential positional information for the development of the two nuclei during
early embryogenesis.

PMID: 15607945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Feb;42(2):170-8.

Activation of HLXB9 by juxtaposition with MYB via formation of t(6;7)(q23;q36) in
an AML-M4 cell line (GDM-1).

Nagel S(1), Kaufmann M, Scherr M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Department of
Human and Animal Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.

Mutation or dysregulation of related homeobox genes occurs in leukemia. Using
RT-PCR, we screened members of the EHG family of homeobox genes, comprising EN1
(at 2q14), GBX2 (at 2q36), and EN2, GBX1, and HLXB9 (at 7q36), for dysregulation 
in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines indicated by chromosomal breakpoints
at these sites. Only one EHG-family gene was expressed, HLXB9, in cell line GDM-1
(AML-M4). Karyotypic analysis of GDM-1 revealed a unique t(6;7)(q23;q35), also
present in the patient. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis showed
chromosomal breakpoints close to the region upstream of HLXB9, at 7q36, a region 
rearranged in certain AML patients, and at 6q23 upstream of MYB, a gene activated
in leukemia. Detailed expression analysis suggested ectopic activation of HLXB9
occurred via juxtaposition with regions upstream of MYB, which was highly
expressed in GDM-1. Our data identified a cell line model for a novel leukemic
translocation involving MYB with HLXB9, further implicating HLXB9 in
leukemogenesis.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15540222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Genet Couns. 2004;15(3):321-8.

Joubert syndrome co-existing with partial Xp trisomy: review of the literature.

Güven GS(1), Fenerci EY, Deviren A, Ozkiliç A, Yüksel A, Hacihanefioglu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, Turkey. gsguven@istanbul.edu.tr

We report a five-year-old girl who has been clinically diagnosed as Joubert
syndrome. Her cytogenetic analysis showed 46,XX,der(2)add(2q37) karyotype.
Cytogenetic analysis of her mother and maternal grandmother revealed a karyogram 
designated as 46,X,t (X;2)(p11.2;q37). The proband's derivative chromosome was
further confirmed to be a translocation chromosome 2 carrying segments from
chromosome X, which originated from a segregation event of the maternal
grandmother's balanced translocation passed on as a balanced translocation to the
proband's mother either. So far, a number of candidate genes including EN1 on 2q 
were analyzed for Joubert syndrome. Based on our proband's abnormal karyotype, we
suggest that further mapping studies for the syndrome should also be directed
towards the chromosome X segments present on the derivative chromosome 2 of our
proband.

PMID: 15517825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Dev Biol. 2004 Oct 15;274(2):348-69.

The epaxial-hypaxial subdivision of the avian somite.

Cheng L(1), Alvares LE, Ahmed MU, El-Hanfy AS, Dietrich S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, London Bridge, 
London SE1 9RT, UK.

In all jaw-bearing vertebrates, three-dimensional mobility relies on segregated, 
separately innervated epaxial and hypaxial skeletal muscles. In amniotes, these
muscles form from the morphologically continuous dermomyotome and myotome, whose 
epaxial-hypaxial subdivision and hence the formation of distinct epaxial-hypaxial
muscles is not understood. Here we show that En1 expression labels a central
subdomain of the avian dermomyotome, medially abutting the expression domain of
the lead-lateral or hypaxial marker Sim1. En1 expression is maintained when cells
from the En1-positive dermomyotome enter the myotome and dermatome, thereby
superimposing the En1-Sim1 expression boundary onto the developing musculature
and dermis. En1 cells originate from the dorsomedial edge of the somite. Their
development is under positive control by notochord and floor plate (Shh), dorsal 
neural tube (Wnt1) and surface ectoderm (Wnt1-like signalling activity) but
negatively regulated by the lateral plate mesoderm (BMP4). This dependence on
epaxial signals and suppression by hypaxial signals places En1 into the epaxial
somitic programme. Consequently, the En1-Sim1 expression boundary marks the
epaxial-hypaxial dermomyotomal or myotomal boundary. In cell aggregation assays, 
En1- and Sim1-expressing cells sort out, suggesting that the En1-Sim1 expression 
boundary may represent a true compartment boundary, foreshadowing the
epaxial-hypaxial segregation of muscle.

PMID: 15385164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Cell Tissue Res. 2004 Oct;318(1):53-61. Epub 2004 Sep 1.

Midbrain dopaminergic neurons: control of their cell fate by the engrailed
transcription factors.

Simon HH(1), Thuret S, Alberi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Interdisciplinary Center of Neuroscience,
University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 307, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
horst.simon@urz.uni-heidelberg.de

As for any other cell population, the development, cell fate, and properties of
mesencephalic dopaminergic (mesDA) neurons are ultimately controlled at the
transcriptional level. The genes for two transcription factors Engrailed-1 ( En1)
and Engrailed-2 ( En2) play an essential role in the development and maintenance 
of these cells. They belong to a family of genes that have been investigated in
Drosophila for more than half a century. The products of these genes are all
characterized by homeotic tissue transformation and a highly conserved protein
sequence, the homeobox. En1 and En2 act upon at least two steps of the
differentiation of mesDA neurons. They take part in the regionalization event,
which gives rise to the neuroepithelium that provides the precursor cells in the 
ventral midbrain with the fibroblast growth factor 8 signal necessary for their
induction. Additionally, these genes are required in postmitotic mesDA neurons in
which they are expressed from embryonic day 12 continuously into adulthood. In
mutant mice homozygous null for En1 and En2, the neurons are generated in the
ventral midbrain, become postmitotic, and begin to express their neurotransmitter
phenotype. However, thereafter, they rapidly die by apoptosis. Cell mixing
experiments in vitro and in vivo have demonstrated that the engrailed requirement
for the survival of mesDA neurons is cell-autonomous. The inactivation of
engrailed by RNA interference induces apoptosis in less than 24 h. These data
suggest that the engrailed genes control an essential mechanism for the survival 
of mesDA neurons.

PMID: 15340832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Aug 24;101(34):12543-8. Epub 2004 Aug 13.

Derivation of midbrain dopamine neurons from human embryonic stem cells.

Perrier AL(1), Tabar V, Barberi T, Rubio ME, Bruses J, Topf N, Harrison NL,
Studer L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell and Tumor Biology, Division of Neurosurgery and
Developmental Biology Program, and Cell Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering
Institute, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Human embryonic stem (hES) cells are defined by their extensive self-renewal
capacity and their potential to differentiate into any cell type of the human
body. The challenge in using hES cells for developmental biology and regenerative
medicine has been to direct the wide differentiation potential toward the
derivation of a specific cell fate. Within the nervous system, hES cells have
been shown to differentiate in vitro into neural progenitor cells, neurons, and
astrocytes. However, to our knowledge, the selective derivation of any given
neuron subtype has not yet been demonstrated. Here, we describe conditions to
direct hES cells into neurons of midbrain dopaminergic identity. Neuroectodermal 
differentiation was triggered on stromal feeder cells followed by regional
specification by means of the sequential application of defined patterning
molecules that direct in vivo midbrain development. Progression toward a midbrain
dopamine (DA) neuron fate was monitored by the sequential expression of key
transcription factors, including Pax2, Pax5, and engrailed-1 (En1), measurements 
of DA release, the presence of tetrodotoxin-sensitive action potentials, and the 
electron-microscopic visualization of tyrosinehydroxylase-positive synaptic
terminals. High-yield DA neuron derivation was confirmed from three independent
hES and two monkey embryonic stem cell lines. The availability of unlimited
numbers of midbrain DA neurons is a first step toward exploring the potential of 
hES cells in preclinical models of Parkinson's disease. This experimental system 
also provides a powerful tool to probe the molecular mechanisms that control the 
development and function of human midbrain DA neurons.

PMCID: PMC515094
PMID: 15310843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Org Lett. 2004 Aug 5;6(16):2693-6.

Allyl, methallyl, prenyl, and methylprenyl ethers as protected alcohols: their
selective cleavage with diphenyldisulfone under neutral conditions.

Markovic D(1), Vogel P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology, EPFL-BCH, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Diphenyldisulfone is a mild and efficient reagent for selective cleavage of
methylprenyl (2,3-dimethylbut-2-en-1-yl), prenyl (3-methylbut-2-en1-yl), and
methallyl (2-methylallyl) ethers. These reaction conditions are compatible with
the presence of other protecting groups such as acetals, acetates, and allyl,
benzyl, and TBDMS ethers. Exposure of 2,3-dimethylbut-2-en-1-yl and
3-methylbut-2-en1-yl ethers to diphenyldisulfone led to the formation of
2,3-dimethylbuta-1,3-diene and isoprene, respectively. 2-Methylallyl ethers
undergo isomerization to 2-methylpropenyl ethers, which are easily hydrolyzed
into the corresponding free alcohols and isobutyraldehyde. [reaction: see text]

PMID: 15281746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Aug 15;298(2):369-87.

Wnt-4 activates the canonical beta-catenin-mediated Wnt pathway and binds
Frizzled-6 CRD: functional implications of Wnt/beta-catenin activity in kidney
epithelial cells.

Lyons JP(1), Mueller UW, Ji H, Everett C, Fang X, Hsieh JC, Barth AM, McCrea PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The Wnt signaling pathway is central to the development of all animals and to
cancer progression, yet largely unknown are the pairings of secreted Wnt ligands 
to their respective Frizzled transmembrane receptors or, in many cases, the
relative contributions of canonical (beta-catenin/LEF/TCF) versus noncanonical
Wnt signals. Specifically, in the kidney where Wnt-4 is essential for the
mesenchymal to epithelial transition that generates the tissue's collecting
tubules, the corresponding Frizzled receptor(s) and downstream signaling
mechanism(s) are unclear. In this report, we addressed these issues using
Madin-Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) cells, which are competent to form tubules in
vitro. Employing established reporter constructs of canonical Wnt/beta-catenin
pathway activity, we have determined that MDCK cells are highly responsive to
Wnt-4, -1, and -3A, but not to Wnt-5A and control conditions, precisely
reflecting functional findings from Wnt-4 null kidney mesenchyme ex vivo rescue
studies. We have confirmed that Wnt-4's canonical signaling activity in MDCK
cells is mediated by downstream effectors of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway using
beta-Engrailed and dnTCF-4 constructs that suppress this pathway. We have further
found that MDCK cells express the Frizzled-6 receptor and that Wnt-4 forms a
biochemical complex with the Frizzled-6 CRD. Since Frizzled-6 did not appear to
transduce Wnt-4's canonical signal, data supported recently by Golan et al.,
there presumably exists another as yet unknown Frizzled receptor(s) mediating
Wnt-4 activation of beta-catenin/LEF/TCF. Finally, we report that canonical
Wnt/beta-catenin signals cells help maintain cell growth and survival in MDCK
cells but do not contribute to standard HGF-induced (nonphysiologic) tubule
formation. Our results in combination with work from Xenopus laevis (not shown)
lead us to believe that Wnt-4 binds both canonical and noncanonical Frizzled
receptors, thereby activating Wnt signaling pathways that may each contribute to 
kidney tubulogenesis.

PMID: 15265686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Dev Biol. 2004 Aug 1;272(1):134-44.

En1 and Wnt7a interact with Dkk1 during limb development in the mouse.

Adamska M(1), MacDonald BT, Sarmast ZH, Oliver ER, Meisler MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109-0618,
USA.

Wnt signaling plays an essential role in induction and development of the limb.
Missing digits are one consequence of the reduced Wnt signaling in Wnt7a null
mice, while extra digits result from excess Wnt signaling in mice null for the
Wnt antagonist Dkk1. The extra digits and expanded apical ectodermal ridge (AER) 
of Dkk1-deficient mice closely resemble En1 null mice. To evaluate the in vivo
interaction between En1 and the canonical Wnt signaling pathway, we generated
double and triple mutants combining the hypomorphic doubleridge allele of Dkk1
with null alleles of En1 and Wnt7a. Reducing Dkk1 expression in Dkk1d/+Wnt7a-/-
double mutants prevented digit loss, indicating that Wnt7a acts through the
canonical pathway during limb development. Reducing Dkk1 levels in Dkk1d/dEn1-/- 
double mutants resulted in severe phenotypes not seen in either single mutant,
including fused bones in the autopod, extensive defects of the zeugopod, and loss
of the ischial bone. The subsequent elimination of Wnt7a in Dkk1d/dEn1-/-Wnt7a-/-
triple mutants resulted in correction of most, but not all, of these defects. The
failure of Wnt7a inactivation to completely correct the limb defects of
Dkk1d/dEn1-/- double mutants indicates that Wnt7a is not the only gene regulated 
by En1 during development of the mouse limb.

PMID: 15242796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Pediatr Res. 2004 Sep;56(3):391-5. Epub 2004 Jul 7.

Sudden infant death syndrome: case-control frequency differences at genes
pertinent to early autonomic nervous system embryologic development.

Weese-Mayer DE(1), Berry-Kravis EM, Zhou L, Maher BS, Curran ME, Silvestri JM,
Marazita ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Rush Children's Hospital at Rush University Medical 
Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. Debra_E_Weese-Mayer@rsh.net

Comment in
    Pediatr Res. 2004 Sep;56(3):321-2.

We have previously identified polymorphisms in the serotonin transporter gene
promoter region and in intron 2 that were more common among sudden infant death
syndrome (SIDS) cases compared with control subjects. To elucidate further the
genetic profile that might increase an infant's vulnerability to SIDS, we focused
on the recognized relationship between autonomic nervous system (ANS)
dysregulation and SIDS. We therefore studied genes pertinent to early embryologic
development of the ANS, including MASH1, BMP2, PHOX2a, PHOX2b, RET, ECE1, EDN1,
TLX3, and EN1 in 92 probands with SIDS and 92 gender- and ethnicity-matched
control subjects. Eleven protein-changing rare mutations were identified in 14 of
92 SIDS cases among the PHOX2a, RET, ECE1, TLX3, and EN1 genes. Only 1 of these
mutations (TLX3) was identified in 2 of 92 control subjects. Black infants
accounted for 10 of these mutations in SIDS cases and 2 control subjects. Four
protein-changing common polymorphisms were identified in BMP2, RET, ECE1, and
EDN1, but the allele frequency did not differ between SIDS cases and control
subjects. However, among SIDS cases, the allele frequency for the BMP2 common
polymorphism demonstrated ethnic differences; among control subjects, the allele 
frequency for the BMP2 and the ECE1 common polymorphisms also demonstrated ethnic
differences. These data represent further refinement of the genetic profile that 
might place an infant at risk for SIDS.

PMID: 15240857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2004 Jun;26(2):308-21.

Forced expression of platelet-derived growth factor B in the mouse cerebellar
primordium changes cell migration during midline fusion and causes cerebellar
ectopia.

Andrae J(1), Afink G, Zhang XQ, Wurst W, Nistér M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Rudbeck Laboratory, 
SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

The platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and receptors are expressed in the
developing central nervous system and in brain tumors. To investigate the role of
PDGF during normal cerebellar development, we created transgenic mice where
PDGF-B was introduced into the endogenous Engrailed1 locus (En1). These mice
expressed PDGF-B in all types of cells that constitute the developing cerebellum,
with localized high expression in the ventral midline of the cerebellar anlage.
This affected cell migration in the midline during fusion of the cerebellar
anlage and caused misplacement of midline structures. PDGFR-alpha- and laminin
alpha1-positive meningeal cells migrated inwards, attracted by the ectopic
transgene expression in the ventral neuroepithelium. Other cells followed the
meningeal cells and in the adult mouse, cells from all cortical cell layers were 
found misplaced in the midline. Moreover, the transgene caused an enhancement of 
capillary vessels. The findings indicate that normal PDGF signaling is important 
for proper neural tube fusion. It also illustrates that meningeal structures can 
influence the process.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 15207855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Neurosci. 2004 Jun 2;24(22):5258-68.

Functional integration of embryonic stem cell-derived neurons in vivo.

Wernig M(1), Benninger F, Schmandt T, Rade M, Tucker KL, Büssow H, Beck H,
Brüstle O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, University of Bonn Medical Center
and Hertie Foundation, University of Bonn, D-53105 Bonn, Germany.

Pluripotency and the potential for continuous self-renewal make embryonic stem
(ES) cells an attractive donor source for neuronal cell replacement. Despite
recent encouraging results in this field, little is known about the functional
integration of transplanted ES cell-derived neurons on the single-cell level. To 
address this issue, ES cell-derived neural precursors exhibiting neuron-specific 
enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) expression were introduced into the
developing brain. Donor cells implanted into the cerebral ventricles of embryonic
rats migrated as single cells into a variety of brain regions, where they
acquired complex morphologies and adopted excitatory and inhibitory
neurotransmitter phenotypes. Synaptic integration was suggested by the expression
of PSD-95 (postsynaptic density-95) on donor cell dendrites, which in turn were
approached by multiple synaptophysin-positive host axon terminals.
Ultrastructural and electrophysiological data confirmed the formation of synapses
between host and donor cells. Ten to 21 d after birth, all EGFP-positive donor
cells examined displayed active membrane properties and received glutamatergic
and GABAergic synaptic input from host neurons. These data demonstrate that, at
the single-cell level, grafted ES cell-derived neurons undergo morphological and 
functional integration into the host brain circuitry. Antibodies to the
region-specific transcription factors Bf1, Dlx, En1, and Pax6 were used to
explore whether functional donor cell integration depends on the acquisition of a
regional phenotype. Our data show that incorporated neurons frequently exhibit a 
lacking or ectopic expression of these transcription factors. Thus, the lack of
an appropriate regional "code" does not preclude morphological and synaptic
integration of ES cell-derived neurons.

PMID: 15175396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Development. 2004 Jul;131(13):3229-36. Epub 2004 Jun 2.

Engrailed genes are cell-autonomously required to prevent apoptosis in
mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons.

Albéri L(1), Sgadò P, Simon HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Interdisciplinary Center of Neuroscience,
University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 307, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The neuropathological hallmark of Parkinson's disease is the loss of dopaminergic
neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta, presumably mediated by apoptosis. 
The homeobox transcription factors engrailed 1 and engrailed 2 are expressed by
this neuronal population from early in development to adulthood. Despite a large 
mid-hindbrain deletion in double mutants null for both genes, mesencephalic
dopaminergic (mDA) neurons are induced, become postmitotic and acquire their
neurotransmitter phenotype. However, at birth, no mDA neurons are left. We show
that the entire population of these neurons is lost by E14 in the mutant animals,
earlier than in any other described genetic model system for Parkinson's disease.
This disappearance is caused by apoptosis revealed by the presence of activated
caspase 3 in the dying tyrosine hydroxylase-positive mutant cells. Furthermore,
using in vitro cell mixing experiments and RNA interference on primary cell
culture of ventral midbrain we were able to show that the demise of mDA neurons
in the mutant mice is due to a cell-autonomously requirement of the engrailed
genes and not a result of the missing mid-hindbrain tissue. Gene silencing in the
postmitotic neurons by RNA interference activates caspase 3 and induces apoptosis
in less than 24 hours. This rapid induction of cell death in mDA neurons suggests
that the engrailed genes participate directly in the regulation of apoptosis, a
proposed mechanism for Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 15175251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mamm Genome. 2004 May;15(5):352-60.

Dissecting complex genetic interactions that influence the Engrailed-1 limb
phenotype.

Murcia CL(1), Bilovocky NA, Herrup K.

Author information: 
(1)Alzheimer Research Laboratory, Department of Neuroscience, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA. clr12@cwru.edu

Engrailed-1, a homeobox containing transcriptional repressor, is known to play an
important role in the development of the vertebrate limb. In its absence, mouse
limbs develop with improper specification of dorsal identity and digit
abnormalities. We report here that specific malformations in the mutant limb are 
dependent on strain background. We have subdivided these defects on the basis of 
morphology to define five independent traits. Each of these shows marked
differences in prevalence among the 129/S1 and C57BL/6J strains carrying the
En1(hd) mutation. In a genome-wide scan using SSLP markers, we have determined
the location of one significant modifier and several additional suggestive loci
responsible for these traits, each a facet of the En1(-/-) phenotype. We propose 
this type of sensitized genetic screen as a model approach for the discovery and 
mapping of quantitative loci that affect the subtle details of limb pattern
formation.

PMID: 15170224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2004 May;26(1):101-11.

Effects of Wnt1 signaling on proliferation in the developing mid-/hindbrain
region.

Panhuysen M(1), Vogt Weisenhorn DM, Blanquet V, Brodski C, Heinzmann U, Beisker
W, Wurst W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Genetics, GSF-Research Center for Environment and
Health, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany.

The secreted glycoprotein WNT1 is expressed in the caudal midbrain and is
essential for proper development of the entire mid-/hindbrain region. To get
better insights into Wnt1 function in the mid-/hindbrain region, we ectopically
expressed Wnt1 under the control of the endogenous En1 promoter, thereby
extending Wnt1 expression rostrally into the anterior midbrain and caudally into 
rhombomere 1. In these transgenic mice, the position of the mid-/hindbrain
organizer is not altered and pattern formation is not changed. During
midgestation, ectopic Wnt1 induced strong overproliferation of precursor cells
only in the caudal midbrain in a gene dosage-dependent manner. Enhanced
proliferation is at least in part mediated by shortening of the cell cycle
length. In adults, Wnt1 exhibited a cell size promoting effect specifically on
neurons. We suggest that Wnt1 acts as a regulator of proliferation of specific
precursor populations in the developing mid-/hindbrain region and is only
secondarily involved in maintenance of the mid-/hindbrain organizer.

PMID: 15121182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Development. 2004 May;131(9):2037-48.

Otx2 regulates the extent, identity and fate of neuronal progenitor domains in
the ventral midbrain.

Puelles E(1), Annino A, Tuorto F, Usiello A, Acampora D, Czerny T, Brodski C, Ang
SL, Wurst W, Simeone A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, New Hunt's House, 4th Floor, King's
College London, Guy's Campus, London Bridge, London SE1 1UL, UK.

The specification of distinct neuronal cell-types is controlled by inducing
signals whose interpretation in distinct areas along the central nervous system
provides neuronal progenitors with a precise and typical expression code of
transcription factors. To gain insights into this process, we investigated the
role of Otx2 in the specification of identity and fate of neuronal progenitors in
the ventral midbrain. To achieve this, Otx2 was inactivated by Cre recombinase
under the transcriptional control of En1. Lack of Otx2 in the ventrolateral and
posterior midbrain results in a dorsal expansion of Shh expression and in a
dorsal and anterior rotation of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary and Fgf8
expression. Indeed, in this mutant correct positioning of the ventral site of
midbrain-hindbrain boundary and Fgf8 expression are efficiently controlled by
Otx1 function, thus allowing the study of the identity and fate of neuronal
progenitors of the ventral midbrain in the absence of Otx2. Our results suggest
that Otx2 acts in two ways: by repressing Nkx2.2 in the ventral midbrain and
maintaining the Nkx6.1-expressing domain through dorsal antagonism on Shh.
Failure of this control affects the identity code and fate of midbrain
progenitors, which exhibit features in common with neuronal precursors of the
rostral hindbrain even though the midbrain retains its regional identity and
these neuronal precursors are rostral to Fgf8 expression. Dopaminergic neurons
are greatly reduced in number, red nucleus precursors disappear from the ventral 
midbrain where a relevant number of serotonergic neurons are generated. These
results indicate that Otx2 is an essential regulator of the identity, extent and 
fate of neuronal progenitor domains in the ventral midbrain and provide novel
insights into the mechanisms by which neuronal diversity is generated in the
central nervous system.

PMID: 15105370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2004 Jan;33(1):45-8.

[Effect of gastrodia elata on learning and memory impairment induced by aluminum 
in rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Niu Q(1), Niu P, He S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan 030001, China.

OBJECTIVE: In order to investigate the mechanism of the improvement of Gastrodia 
elata (G.E.) on learning and memory impairment of rats exposed to aluminum.
METHODS: 36 SD rats, adult and healthy, were divided into 6 groups at random: 1. 
normal saline, 2. Al3+ 5 mg/kg, 3. Al3+ 10 mg/kg, 4. normal saline +G.E., 5. Al3+
5 mg/kg +G.E. and 6. Al3+ 10 mg/kg +G.E. Then, they were exposed to AlCl3 by
intraperitioneal injection at a dose of 0.2 ml/d, 60 d. G.E. was administered by 
drinking water at a dose of 0.4 g/kg body weight.
RESULTS: The results of learning and memory were recorded by Step-Down Test. It
was showed that compared with the normal saline group, in the group of Al3+ 5
mg/kg, the content of brain cortex aluminum and EN1 increased significantly; the 
latency (LT) was shortened obviously(P < 0.01); the activity of AChE decreased
and the activity of MAO increased (P < 0.01). In the group of Al3+ 10 mg/kg, the 
content of brain cortex aluminum, EN1 and EN2 increased significantly(P < 0.01), 
the LT is shortened obviously (P < 0.01), the activity of AChE decreased and the 
activity of MAO increased (P < 0.01). Compared with the group of Al3+ 5 mg/kg, in
the group of Al3+ 5 mg/kg +G.E., EN1 decreased significantly (P < 0.05); the LT
is prolonged obviously(P < 0.01), the activity of AChE increased(P < 0.05) and
the activity of MAO decreased (P < 0.01). Compared with the group of Al3+ 10
mg/kg, in the group of Al3+ 10 mg/kg +G.E., both EN1 and EN2 decreased
significantly(P < 0.01); the LT is prolonged obviously(P < 0.01), the activity of
AChE increased (P < 0.01) and the activity of MAO decreased (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: It is suggested that G.E. might decrease the content of brain cortex 
aluminum of rats. However it might improve the learning and memory ability
possibly through regulating the cholinergic system and the monoaminergic system.

PMID: 15098477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2004 Apr;71(2):80-8.

Methanol exposure during gastrulation causes holoprosencephaly, facial
dysgenesis, and cervical vertebral malformations in C57BL/6J mice.

Rogers JM(1), Brannen KC, Barbee BD, Zucker RM, Degitz SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Toxicology Division, National Health and Environmental Effects
Research Laboratory, Office of Research and Development, United States
Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27711,
USA. rogers.john@epa.gov

BACKGROUND: Exposure of pregnant outbred CD-1 mice to methanol during the period 
of gastrulation results in exencephaly, cleft palate, and cervical vertebra
malformations [Rogers and Mole, Teratology 55: 364, 1997], while inbred C57BL/6J 
mice are sensitive to the teratogenicity of ethanol. C57BL/6J fetuses exhibit the
holoprosencephaly spectrum of malformations after maternal exposure to ethanol
during gastrulation, but the sensitivity of C57BL/6J mice to methanol-induced
teratogenesis has not been previously described.
METHODS: Pregnant C57BL/6J mice were administered two i.p. injections totaling
3.4 or 4.9 g/kg methanol or distilled water four hrs apart on gestation day 'GD' 
7. On GD 17, litters were examined for numbers of live, dead and resorbed
conceptuses, fetuses were weighed as a litter and examined externally, and all
fetuses were double stained for skeletal analysis.
RESULTS: No maternal intoxication was apparent, but the high dosage level caused 
a transient deficit in maternal weight gain. The number of live fetuses per
litter was reduced at both dosages of methanol, and fetal weight was lower in the
high dosage group. Craniofacial defects were observed in 55.8% of fetuses in the 
low dosage group and 91.0% of fetuses in the high dosage group, including
micro/anophthalmia, holoprosencephaly, facial clefts and gross facial angenesis. 
Skeletal malformations, particularly of the cervical vertebrae, were observed at 
both dosages of methanol, and were similar to those previously reported in the
CD-1 mouse following methanol exposure.
CONCLUSIONS: The types of craniofacial malformations induced in the C57BL/6J
mouse by methanol indicate that methanol and ethanol have common targets and may 
have common modes of action.

PMID: 15098201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Cerebellum. 2004;3(1):16-20.

Retinoids and binding proteins in the cerebellum during lifetime.

Parenti R(1), Cicirata F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
parenti@mbox.unict.it

The vertebrate nervous system is one of the main sites where retinoids and
related binding proteins play their critical roles. The cerebellum is subjected
to the effects of retinoids over its lifetime. The retinoid binding proteins are 
differently expressed during life: CRBP I, expressed in the adult cerebellum, is 
possibly involved in plasticity during memory processes. CRABP I, expressed in
the embryonic cerebellum, is involved in the development of the organ and in
cellular differentiation. In particular, since the expression of CRABP I
coincides with earliest cerebellar differentiation, it is probably involved in
this critical step, participating in a complex network of regulatory genes
expressed in the mes/methencephalon such as Fgf8, Wnt1, En1/2, Pax2/5, Otx2 and
Gbx2. Finally, the way for metabolic synchronization of isthmic cell populations 
and the putative existence of alternative pathways for CRABP I to regulate RA are
discussed.

PMID: 15072263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Neurobiol. 2004 Apr;59(1):48-56.

Polarity and laminar formation of the optic tectum in relation to retinal
projection.

Nakamura H(1), Sugiyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Graduate School of Life Sciences and
Institute of Development Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1,
Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. nakamura@idac.tohoku.ac.jp

The mes-metencephalic boundary (isthmus) works as an organizer for the tectum,
and the organizing molecule may be Fgf8. The region where Otx2, En1, and Pax2 are
expressed overlappingly may differentiate into the mesencephalon. The
di-mesencephalic and mes-metencephalic boundaries are determined by repressive
interaction of Pax6 and En1/Pax2 and of Otx2 and Gbx2, respectively. The optic
tectum is a visual center in lower vertebrates. The tectum and the retina should 
be regionalized and be positionally specialized for the proper retinotopic
projection. Gradient of En2 plays a crucial role in rostrocaudal polarity
formation of the tectum. En2 confers caudal characteristics of the retina by
inducing ephrinA2 and A5, which are the repellant molecules for the growth cones 
of temporal retinal ganglion cells. Grg4 antagonizes the isthmus-related genes,
and is involved in the formation of di-mesencephalic boundary and tectal polarity
formation at an early phase of development. Then, Grg4 plays a role in tectal
laminar formation by controlling the migration pathway. Migration pathway of
tectal postmitotic cells changes after E5. The late migratory cells split the
early migratory neurons to form laminae h-j of SGFS. Grg4 is expressed in the
ventricular layer after E5, and forces postmitotic cells to follow the late
migratory pathway, though retinal fibers terminate at laminae a-f of SGFS.
Misexpression of Grg4 disrupts the lamina g, and in such tecta retinal arbors
invade deep into the tectal layer, indicating that lamina g is a nonpermissive
lamina for the retinal arbors.

Copyright 2004 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Neurobiol 59: 48-56, 2004

PMID: 15007826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Neurosci. 2004 Feb 4;24(5):1255-64.

Pax6 and engrailed 1 regulate two distinct aspects of renshaw cell development.

Sapir T(1), Geiman EJ, Wang Z, Velasquez T, Mitsui S, Yoshihara Y, Frank E,
Alvarez FJ, Goulding M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Many of the interneuron cell types present in the adult spinal cord contribute to
the circuits that control locomotion and posture. Little is known, however, about
the embryonic origin of these cell types or the molecular mechanisms that control
their differentiation. Here we provide evidence that V1 interneurons (INs), an
embryonic class of interneurons that transiently express the En1 transcription
factor, differentiate as local circuit inhibitory interneurons and form synapses 
with motor neurons. Furthermore, we show that a subset of V1 INs differentiates
as Renshaw cells, the interneuronal cell type that mediates recurrent inhibition 
of motor neurons. We analyze the role that two V1 IN-related transcription factor
genes play in Renshaw cell development. Pax6 (paired box gene 6) is necessary for
an early step in Renshaw cell development, whereas Engrailed 1 (En1), which is
genetically downstream of Pax6, regulates the formation of inhibitory synapses
between Renshaw cells and motor neurons. Together, these results show that Pax6
and En1 have essential roles in establishing the recurrent inhibitory circuit
between motor neurons and Renshaw cells.

PMCID: PMC2997484
PMID: 14762144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Ear Hear. 2003 Dec;24(6):485-500.

Activity-dependent developmental plasticity of the auditory brain stem in
children who use cochlear implants.

Gordon KA(1), Papsin BC, Harrison RV.

Author information: 
(1)Cochlear Implant Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology, The Hospital for
Sick Children, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5G 1X8.
karen.gordon@utoronto.ca

OBJECTIVES: 1) To determine if a period of early auditory deprivation influences 
neural activity patterns as revealed by human auditory brain stem potentials
evoked by electrical stimulation from a cochlear implant. 2) To examine the
potential for plasticity in the human auditory brain stem. Specifically, we asked
if electrically evoked auditory potentials from the auditory nerve and brain stem
in children show evidence of development as a result of implant use. 3) To assess
whether a sensitive or critical period exists in auditory brain stem development.
Specifically, is there an age of implantation after which there are no longer
developmental changes in auditory brain stem activity as revealed by electrically
evoked potentials?
DESIGN: The electrically evoked compound potential of the auditory nerve (ECAP)
and the electrically evoked auditory brain stem response (EABR) were recorded
repeatedly during the first year of implant use in each of 50 children. The
children all had pre- or peri-lingual onset of severe to profound sensorineural
hearing loss and received their implants at ages ranging from 12 mo to 17 yr. All
children received Nucleus cochlear implant devices. All children were in therapy 
and in school programs that emphasized listening and required the children to
wear their implants consistently.
RESULTS: Initial stimulation from the cochlear implant evoked clear responses
from the auditory nerve and auditory brain stem in most children. There was no
correlation between minimum latency, maximum amplitude, or slope of amplitude
growth of initial responses with age at implantation for ECAP eN1, EABR eIII and 
eV components (p > 0.05). During the first year of implant use, minimum latency
of these waves significantly decreased (p < 0.01, p < 0.0001, p < 0.0001,
respectively). Neural conduction time, measured using the interwave latency of
ECAP eN1-EABR eIII for lower brain stem and EABR eIII-eV for upper brain stem,
decreased during the period of 6 to 12 mo of cochlear implant use (p < 0.01
(lower), p < 0.0001(upper)). The ECAP wave eN1 and the EABR wave eV showed
significant increases in amplitude during time of implant use (p < 0.05 and p <
0.01, respectively). There were no correlations between the rate of interwave
latency decrease and the rate of amplitude increases and the age at which
children underwent implantation (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Activity in the auditory pathways to the level of the midbrain can
be evoked by acute stimulation from a cochlear implant. EABR measures are not
influenced by any period of auditory deprivation. Auditory development proceeds
once the implant is activated and involves improvements in neural conduction
velocity and neural synchrony. Underlying mechanisms likely include improvements 
in synaptic efficacy and possibly increased myelination. The developmental
plasticity that we have shown in the human auditory brain stem does not appear
from EABR data to be limited by a critical period during childhood.

PMID: 14663348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Eur J Pharmacol. 2003 Nov 7;480(1-3):75-88.

Molecular mechanisms underlying midbrain dopamine neuron development and
function.

Smidt MP(1), Smits SM, Burbach JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Anatomy, Rudolf Magnus Institute of
Neuroscience, University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. m.p.smidt@med.uu.nl

The mesencephalic dopaminergic system is involved in the control of multiple
brain functions including movement control and emotion and is of clinical
importance because it is implicated in several psychiatric disorders, of which
many are considered to have a neurodevelopmental origin. Studies into the
developmental pathways of these neurons have led to the identification of the
transcription factors En1, Pitx3, Nurr1 and Lmx1b, all shown to be important for 
the development of the mesencephalic dopaminergic system. In this paper, we
discuss the consequences of genetic ablation of essential developmental genes.
Furthermore, we discuss the consequences of changes in dopamine homeostasis for
the function of the mesencephalic dopaminergic system. Finally, we analyse the
potential of the mesencephalic dopaminergic system to adapt to gene dysfunction.

PMID: 14623352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Dev Biol. 2003 Dec 1;264(1):166-78.

Fate map of mouse ventral limb ectoderm and the apical ectodermal ridge.

Guo Q(1), Loomis C, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 540
First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The apical ectodermal ridge (AER) is a critical signaling center at the tip of
the limb that promotes outgrowth. In mouse, formation of the AER involves a
gradual restriction of AER gene expression from a broad ventral preAER domain to 
the tip of the limb, as well as progressive thickening of cells to form a
multilayered epithelium. The AER is visible from embryonic day 10.5 to 13.5
(E10.5-E13.5) in the mouse forelimb. Previous short-term fate mapping studies
indicated that, once a cell is incorporated into the AER, its descendents remain 
within the AER. In addition, some preAER cells appear to become incorporated into
the ventral ectoderm. In the present study, we used an inducible CreER/loxP fate 
mapping approach in mouse to examine the long-term contribution of preAER cells
to limb ventral ectoderm, as well as the ultimate fate of the mature AER cells.
We used a CreER transgene that contains Msx2 regulatory sequences specific to the
developing AER, and demonstrate by marking preAER cells that, at stage 2 of mouse
limb bud development, the majority of the ventral ectoderm that protrudes from
the body wall later covers only the paw. Furthermore, when Msx2-CreER-expressing 
preAER cells are marked after the onset of preAER gene expression, a similar
domain of paw ventral ectoderm is marked at E16.5, in addition to the AER.
Strikingly, mapping the long-term fate of cells that form the mature AER showed
that, although this structure is indeed a distinct compartment, AER-derived cells
are gradually lost after E12.5 and no cells remain by birth. A distinct
dorsal/ventral border nevertheless is maintained in the ectoderm of the paw, with
the distal-most border being located at the edge of the nail bed. These studies
have uncovered new aspects of the cellular mechanisms involved in AER formation
and in partitioning the ventral ectoderm in mouse limb.

PMID: 14623239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Dec 15;123A(3):267-78.

Idiopathic congenital central hypoventilation syndrome: analysis of genes
pertinent to early autonomic nervous system embryologic development and
identification of mutations in PHOX2b.

Weese-Mayer DE(1), Berry-Kravis EM, Zhou L, Maher BS, Silvestri JM, Curran ME,
Marazita ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Rush Children's Hospital at Rush-Presbyterian-St.
Luke's Medical Center, Rush University, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.
dweese@rush.edu

Idiopathic congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) has been linked to 
autonomic nervous system dysregulation and/or dysfunction (ANSD) since it was
first described in 1970. A genetic basis of CCHS has been proposed because of the
reports of four families with two affected children, because of mother-child
transmission, and because of a recent report of a polyalanine expansion mutation 
in PHOX2b in a subset of CCHS subjects. We, therefore, studied genes pertinent to
early embryologic development of the ANS including mammalian achaete-scute
homolog-1 (MASH1), bone morphogenic protein-2 (BMP2), engrailed-1 (EN1), TLX3,
endothelin converting enzyme-1 (ECE1), endothelin-1 (EDN1), PHOX2a, and PHOX2b in
67 probands with CCHS, and gender- and ethnicity-matched controls. No
disease-defining mutations were identified in MASH1, BMP2, EN1, TLX3, ECE1, EDN1,
or PHOX2a. The 65/67 CCHS probands (97%) were found to be heterozygous for the
exon 3 polyalanine expansion mutation identified previously in PHOX2b. Further,
there was an association between repeat mutation length and severity of the
CCHS/ANSD phenotype. Of the two probands who did not carry the expansion
mutation, one had a nonsense mutation in exon 3 which truncated the protein and
the other had no mutation in PHOX2b but had a previously reported EDN3 frameshift
point mutation. The polyalanine expansion mutation was not found in any of 67
matched controls. Of 54 available families (including 97 unaffected parents),
whose child carried the PHOX2b mutation, 4 parents demonstrated mosaicism for an 
expansion mutation identical to that seen in the CCHS cases, suggesting that not 
all mutations in affected probands with unaffected parents are de novo. We also
studied four women with CCHS who were heterozygous for the PHOX2b mutation, each 
with one child. Three of the four children were also affected and had the same
mutation, demonstrating autosomal dominant inheritance of the mutation. Assay of 
the PHOX2b polyalanine repeat mutation represents a highly sensitive and specific
technique for confirming the diagnosis of CCHS. Identification of the CCHS
mutation will lead to clarification of the phenotype, allow for prenatal
diagnosis for parents of CCHS probands and adults with CCHS in future
pregnancies, and potentially direct intervention strategies for the treatment of 
CCHS.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14608649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Science. 2003 Nov 7;302(5647):1044-6.

Mammalian brain morphogenesis and midline axon guidance require heparan sulfate.

Inatani M(1), Irie F, Plump AS, Tessier-Lavigne M, Yamaguchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Heparan sulfate (HS) is required for morphogen signaling during Drosophila
pattern formation, but little is known about its physiological importance in
mammalian development. To define the developmental role of HS in mammalian
species, we conditionally disrupted the HS-polymerizing enzyme EXT1 in the
embryonic mouse brain. The EXT1-null brain exhibited patterning defects that are 
composites of those caused by mutations of multiple HS-binding morphogens.
Furthermore, the EXT1-null brain displayed severe guidance errors in major
commissural tracts, revealing a pivotal role of HS in midline axon guidance.
These findings demonstrate that HS is essential for mammalian brain development.

PMID: 14605369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Development. 2003 Nov;130(22):5471-9. Epub 2003 Sep 24.

Novel roles of Fgfr2 in AER differentiation and positioning of the dorsoventral
limb interface.

Gorivodsky M(1), Lonai P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.

The epithelial b variant of Fgfr2 is active in the entire surface ectoderm of the
early embryo, and later in the limb ectoderm and AER, where it is required for
limb outgrowth. As limb buds do not form in the absence of Fgfr2, we used chimera
analysis to investigate the mechanism of action of this receptor in limb
development. ES cells homozygous for a loss-of-function mutation of Fgfr2 that
carry a beta-galactosidase reporter were aggregated with normal pre-implantation 
embryos. Chimeras with a high proportion of mutant cells did not form limbs,
whereas those with a moderate proportion formed limb buds with a lobular
structure and a discontinuous AER. Where present, the AER did not contain mutant 
cells, although mutant cells did localize to the adjacent surface ectoderm and
limb mesenchyme. In the underlying mesenchyme of AER-free areas, cell
proliferation was reduced, and transcription of Shh and Msx1 was diminished. En1 
expression in the ventral ectoderm was discontinuous and exhibited ectopic dorsal
localization, whereas Wnt7a expression was diminished in the dorsal ectoderm but 
remained confined to that site. En1 and Wnt7a were not expressed in non-chimeric 
Fgfr2-null mutant embryos, revealing that they are downstream of Fgfr2. In late
gestation chimeras, defects presented in all three limb segments as bone
duplications, bone loss or ectopic outgrowths. We suggest that Fgfr2 is required 
for AER differentiation, as well as for En1 and Wnt7a expression. This receptor
also mediates signals from the limb mesenchyme to the limb ectoderm throughout
limb development, affecting the position and morphogenesis of precursor cells in 
the dorsal and ventral limb ectoderm, and AER.

PMID: 14507786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Development. 2003 Nov;130(22):5319-30. Epub 2003 Sep 24.

The isthmic neuroepithelium is essential for cerebellar midline fusion.

Louvi A(1), Alexandre P, Métin C, Wurst W, Wassef M.

Author information: 
(1)Régionalisation Nerveuse CNRS/ENS UMR 8542, Ecole normale supérieure, 46 rue
d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France.

The cerebellum comprises a medial domain, called the vermis, flanked by two
lateral subdivisions, the cerebellar hemispheres. Normal development of the
vermis involves fusion of two lateral primordia on the dorsal midline. We
investigated how the cerebellum fuses on the midline by combining a study of
mid/hindbrain cell movements in avian embryos with the analysis of cerebellar
fusion in normal and mutant mouse embryos. We found that, in avian embryos,
divergent cell movements originating from a restricted medial domain located at
the mid/hindbrain boundary produce the roof plate of the mid/hindbrain domain.
Cells migrating anteriorly from this region populate the caudal midbrain roof
plate whereas cells migrating posteriorly populate the cerebellar roof plate. In 
addition, the adjacent paramedial isthmic neuroepithelium also migrates
caudalward and participates in the formation of the cerebellar midline region. We
also found that the paramedial isthmic territory produces two distinct
structures. First, the late developing velum medullaris that intervenes between
the vermis and the midbrain, and second, a midline domain upon which the
cerebellum fuses. Elimination or overgrowth of this isthmic domain in Wnt1(sw/sw)
and En1(+/Otx2lacZ) mutant mice, respectively, impair cerebellar midline fusion. 
Because the isthmus-derived midline cerebellar domain displays a distinct
expression pattern of genes involved in BMP signaling, we propose that the
isthmus-derived cells provide both a substratum and signals that are essential
for cerebellar fusion.

PMID: 14507778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Dev Growth Differ. 2003 Aug;45(4):361-7.

Gene silencing in chick embryos with a vector-based small interfering RNA system.

Katahira T(1), Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer (IDAC), Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575,
Japan.

In this paper, the use of vector-based RNA interference (RNAi) to specifically
interfere with gene expression in chick embryos is reported. In ovo
electroporation was carried out to transfer a small interfering RNA (siRNA)
expression vector into chick embryos. En2 was chosen for the target gene because 
the family gene, En1, is expressed in a similar pattern. Four sets of 19-mer
sequences were designed with the En2 open reading frame region connected to a
sequence of short hairpin RNA (shRNA), which exerts siRNA effects after being
transcribed, and inserted into pSilencer U6-1.0 vector. En2 and En1 expression
were suppressed by the siRNA whose sequence completely matched En2 and En1.
Suppression occurred when the siRNA sequence differed by up to two nucleotides
from the target sequence. The sequence that differed by four nucleotides from the
target gene did not show siRNA effects. One set that completely matched the En2
target did not show siRNA effects, which may be due to location of the siRNA in
the target gene. Thus, multiple sets of shRNA must be prepared if we are to
consider. This system will greatly contribute to the analysis of function of
genes of interest, because the target gene can be silenced in a locally and
temporally desired manner.

PMID: 12950277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Neurosci. 2003 Aug 27;23(21):7854-62.

Differential roles of engrailed paralogs in determining sensory axon guidance and
synaptic target recognition.

Marie B(1), Blagburn JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurobiology, University of Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico
00901, USA.

The transcription factor Engrailed (En) controls axon pathfinding and synaptic
target choice in an identified neuron (6m) of the cockroach cercal sensory
system. Knock-out of En using double-stranded RNA interference (dsRNAi)
transforms 6m so that it resembles a neighboring neuron that normally does not
express the en gene, has a different arbor anatomy, and makes different
connections. Like many animals, the cockroach has two En paralogs, Pa-En1 and
Pa-En2. In this study we tested the hypothesis that the paralogs have different
effects on axon guidance and synaptic target recognition, using RNAi to knock out
each one individually. Using dye injections into 6m and intracellular recordings 
from target interneurons, we obtained evidence that both Pa-En1 and Pa-En2
determine the axonal arborization, but only Pa-En1 controls synaptic connections.
However, because immunocytochemical quantification of En protein in 6m after RNAi
showed that Pa-En1 represents 65% of the total En activity and Pa-En2 only 35%,
our results could be caused by dosage effects. We measured the effects of
diluting the mixture of both dsRNAs on the amounts of En protein. From this
dose-response curve, we calculated the appropriate dilutions of the dsRNA mixture
that would titrate total En protein to levels equivalent to knock-out of either
paralog. RNAi using these dilutions showed that Pa-En1 and Pa-En2 both contribute
toward the control of axonal guidance and confirmed that Pa-En1 has the
paralog-specific function of controlling synaptic target recognition.

PMID: 12944515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 Jun;991:48-60.

Transcriptional control of dopamine neuron development.

Wallén A(1), Perlmann T.

Author information: 
(1)The Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden. asa.wallen@astrazeneca.com

Recent studies have identified several factors that influence the development of 
midbrain dopamine (DA) neurons. The identity of early proliferating DA progenitor
cells are specified by the secreted factors sonic hedgehog and fibroblast growth 
factor 8, derived from the floor plate of the ventral midline and the
mid/hindbrain border, respectively. While transcription factors specifically
expressed in the proliferating DA progenitor cells remain to be identified,
several transcription factors important for postmitotic DA cell development have 
been characterized. These include Nurr1, Lmx1b, Pitx3, and En1/En2. The studies
of these transcription factors have not only increased the understanding of how
DA neurons are generated in vivo, but also allowed the development of new
strategies using stem cells for engineering DA neurons in vitro, results that may
have significance in future therapies of patients with Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 12846973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Neurosci. 2003 Jun 15;23(12):5105-12.

Factors in the genetic background suppress the engrailed-1 cerebellar phenotype.

Bilovocky NA(1), Romito-DiGiacomo RR, Murcia CL, Maricich SM, Herrup K.

Author information: 
(1)Alzheimer Research Laboratory, University Hospitals Research Institute,
Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve University, School of Medicine,
Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

The mouse homeodomain protein, Engrailed-1, is generally viewed as an essential
player in the early establishment and maintenance of the midbrain/hindbrain
region that gives rise to the cerebellum and midbrain. In keeping with this,
engineered null mutations at this locus have been reported to lead to perinatal
lethality accompanied by near-total absence of cerebellar and caudal midbrain
structures. We report here that these cerebellar phenotypes are nearly completely
suppressed on a C57BL/6J genetic background. All cell types are present and
arranged properly in both the cortex and the deep nuclei, and cell counts reveal 
no significant absence of cerebellar Purkinje cells. Folial patterns are nearly
normal, although an apparent fusion of lobules IV and V is consistently noted.
Significantly, no change in the Engrailed-2 mutant phenotype occurs after a
similar background switch, and whole-mount in situ hybridization reveals
identical En2 expression patterns in wild-type C57BL/6J and 129/Sv mice. One
likely mechanism for the En1-/- phenotype suppression is a temporal and/or
spatial change in the pattern of Engrailed-2 expression apparent only in the
absence of Engrailed-1. In support of this, C57BL/6-En1-/- embryos that are also 
En2+/- lack a cerebellum and caudal midbrain: a phenotype identical to
129/Sv-En1-/- mice.

PMID: 12832534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mech Dev. 2003 May;120(5):597-605.

Asymmetric limb malformations in a new transgene insertional mutant, footless.

Bell SM(1), Schreiner CM, Hess KA, Anderson KP, Scott WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. sheila.bell@cchmc.org

Six to eight copies of a transgene integrated into mouse chromosome 15 resulting 
in a new transgene insertional mutant, Footless, presenting with malformations of
the limbs, kidney, and soft palate. Homozygotes possess a unique asymmetric
pattern of limb truncations. Posterior structures from the autopod and zeugopod
of the hindlimbs are missing with left usually more severely affected than right.
In contrast, anterior structures are missing from the right forelimbs. The left
forelimb is usually normal except for the absence of the distal telephalanges and
nails. These structures are absent on all formed digits. In situ hybridization
assays examined the expression of Shh, dHand, Msx2, Fgf8, En1, and Lmx1b in
mutant limb buds and indicated normal establishment of the anterior/posterior and
dorsal/ventral axes of the developing limbs. However, dysmorphology of the apical
ectodermal ridge was observed in the mutant limb buds.

PMID: 12782276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Development. 2003 Jun;130(12):2633-44.

The isthmic organizer signal FGF8 is required for cell survival in the
prospective midbrain and cerebellum.

Chi CL(1), Martinez S, Wurst W, Martin GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Program in Developmental Biology, School of
Medicine, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143-0452, USA.

Numerous studies have demonstrated that the midbrain and cerebellum develop from 
a region of the early neural tube comprising two distinct territories known as
the mesencephalon (mes) and rostral metencephalon (met; rhombomere 1),
respectively. Development of the mes and met is thought to be regulated by
molecules produced by a signaling center, termed the isthmic organizer (IsO),
which is localized at the boundary between them. FGF8 and WNT1 have been
implicated as key components of IsO signaling activity, and previous studies have
shown that in Wnt1(-/-) embryos, the mes/met is deleted by the 30 somite stage ( 
approximately E10) (McMahon, A. P. and Bradley, A. (1990) Cell 62, 1073-1085). We
have studied the function of FGF8 in mouse mes/met development using a
conditional gene inactivation approach. In our mutant embryos, Fgf8 expression
was transiently detected, but then was eliminated in the mes/met by the 10 somite
stage ( approximately E8.75). This resulted in a failure to maintain expression
of Wnt1 as well as Fgf17, Fgf18, and Gbx2 in the mes/met at early somite stages, 
and in the absence of the midbrain and cerebellum at E17.5. We show that a major 
cause of the deletion of these structures is ectopic cell death in the mes/met
between the 7 and 30 somite stages. Interestingly, we found that the prospective 
midbrain was deleted at an earlier stage than the prospective cerebellum. We
observed a remarkably similar pattern of cell death in Wnt1 null homozygotes, and
also detected ectopic mes/met cell death in En1 null homozygotes. Our data show
that Fgf8 is part of a complex gene regulatory network that is essential for cell
survival in the mes/met.

PMID: 12736208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. EMBO J. 2003 Apr 15;22(8):1811-23.

FGFR1 is independently required in both developing mid- and hindbrain for
sustained response to isthmic signals.

Trokovic R(1), Trokovic N, Hernesniemi S, Pirvola U, Vogt Weisenhorn DM, Rossant 
J, McMahon AP, Wurst W, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Viikki Biocenter, PO Box 56, 00014 University of
Helsinki, Finland.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are signaling molecules of the isthmic
organizer, which regulates development of the midbrain and cerebellum.
Tissue-specific inactivation of one of the FGF receptor (FGFR) genes, Fgfr1, in
the midbrain and rhombomere 1 of the hindbrain of mouse embryos results in
deletion of the inferior colliculi in the posterior midbrain and vermis of the
cerebellum. Analyses of both midbrain-hindbrain and midbrain-specific Fgfr1
mutants suggest that after establishment of the isthmic organizer, FGFR1 is
needed for continued response to the isthmic signals, and that it has direct
functions on both sides of the organizer. In addition, FGFR1 appears to modify
cell adhesion properties critical for maintaining a coherent organizing center.
This may be achieved by regulating expression of specific cell-adhesion molecules
at the midbrain-hindbrain border.

PMCID: PMC154461
PMID: 12682014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Dev Biol. 2003 Mar 15;255(2):350-62.

Doubleridge, a mouse mutant with defective compaction of the apical ectodermal
ridge and normal dorsal-ventral patterning of the limb.

Adamska M(1), MacDonald BT, Meisler MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-0618, USA.

doubleridge is a transgene-induced mutation characterized by polydactyly and
syndactyly of the forelimbs. The transgene insertion maps to the proximal region 
of chromosome 19. During embryonic development of the mutant forelimb, delayed
elevation and compaction of the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) produces a ridge
that is abnormally broad and flat. Fgf8 expression persists in the ventral
forelimb ectoderm of the mutant until E10.5. Strong expression of Fgf8 and other 
markers at the borders of the AER at E11.5 gives the appearance of a double
ridge. At E11.5, apoptotic cells are distributed across the broadened ridge, but 
at E13.5, there is reduced apoptosis in the interdigital regions. The Shh
expression domain is widely spaced at the posterior margin of the AER. The
doubleridge AER is morphologically similar to that of En1 null mice, but the
expression of En1 and Wnt7a is properly restricted in doubleridge, and the dorsal
and ventral structures are correctly determined. doubleridge thus exhibits an
unusual limb phenotype combining abnormal compaction of the AER with normal
dorsal/ventral patterning.

PMID: 12648495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Development. 2003 Apr;130(7):1327-37.

A role for the mesenchymal T-box gene Brachyury in AER formation during limb
development.

Liu C(1), Nakamura E, Knezevic V, Hunter S, Thompson K, Mackem S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

During limb development, several signaling centers organize limb pattern. One of 
these, the apical ectodermal ridge (AER), is critical for proximodistal limb
outgrowth mediated by FGFs. Signals from the underlying mesoderm, including WNTs 
and FGFs, regulate early steps of AER induction. Ectodermal factors, particularly
En1, play a critical role in regulating morphogenesis of a mature, compact AER
along the distal limb apex, from a broad ventral ectodermal precursor domain.
Contribution of mesodermal factors to the morphogenesis of a mature AER is less
clear. We previously noted that the chick T gene (Brachyury), the prototypical
T-box transcription factor, is expressed in the limb bud as well as axial
mesoderm and primitive streak. Here we show that T is expressed in lateral plate 
mesoderm at the onset of limb bud formation and subsequently in the subridge
mesoderm beneath the AER. Retroviral misexpression of T in chick results in
anterior extension of the AER and subsequent limb phenotypes consistent with
augmented AER extent and function. Analysis of markers for functional AER in
mouse T(-/-) null mutant limb buds reveals disrupted AER morphogenesis. Our data 
also suggest that FGF and WNT signals may operate both upstream and downstream of
T. Taken together, the results show that T plays a role in the regulation of AER 
formation, particularly maturation, and suggest that T may also be a component of
the epithelialmesenchymal regulatory loop involved in maintenance of a mature
functioning AER.

PMID: 12588849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Int J Dev Biol. 2002;46(7):937-41.

Interactions between dorsal-ventral patterning genes lmx1b, engrailed-1 and
wnt-7a in the vertebrate limb.

Chen H(1), Johnson RL.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genes and Development, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

The vertebrate limb has characteristic morphological features that distinguish
dorsal and ventral regions. For example, humans and most other mammals have nails
on the dorsal surface of their digits, while the ventral surface is covered by
skin or footpads. Internally, there is a high degree of organization along the
dorsal-ventral axis. Extensor muscles are generally located dorsally while flexor
muscles are generally located ventrally. The skeleton has subtle differences that
allow for attachment of these muscles and distinct pools of motor neurons
innervate either dorsal or ventral muscles. How is this complex arrangement of
tissues generated? Recent studies have identified a molecular cascade of three
factors that govern early events in dorsal-ventral limb patterning. Two of these 
factors, engrailed-1 and wnt-7a are expressed in the dorsal and ventral ectoderm 
respectively. The function of engrailed-1 is to repress the expression of wnt-7a 
in the ventral limb bud ectoderm. The third factor, a LIM-homeodomain
transcription factor, Imx1b is induced in dorsal mesenchyme by wnt-7a and it is
both necessary and sufficient to specify dorsal limb pattern. In this report, we 
examine genetic interactions between wnt-7a, engrailed-1, and Imx1b by analyzing 
the phenotypes of mice that are double mutants for Imx1b and either wnt-7a or
engrailed-1. These studies indicate that Imx1b is the only target of wnt-7a and
engrailed-1 that is of consequence for dorsal-ventral patterning. Moreover, this 
genetic analysis suggests that Imx1b plays additional roles in anterior-posterior
patterning and growth that were not previously appreciated.

PMID: 12455631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Planta. 2002 Nov;216(1):187-92. Epub 2002 Nov 12.

The Arabidopsis male-sterile mutant dde2-2 is defective in the ALLENE OXIDE
SYNTHASE gene encoding one of the key enzymes of the jasmonic acid biosynthesis
pathway.

von Malek B(1), van der Graaff E, Schneitz K, Keller B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Biology, University of Zurich, Zollikerstr. 107, 8008
Zurich, Switzerland.

The Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. mutant delayed-dehiscence2-2 (dde2-2) was
identified in an En1/Spm1 transposon-induced mutant population screened for
plants showing defects in fertility. The dde2-2 mutant allele is defective in the
anther dehiscence process and filament elongation and thus exhibits a
male-sterile phenotype. The dde2-2 phenotype can be rescued by application of
methyl jasmonate, indicating that the mutant is affected in jasmonic acid
biosynthesis. The combination of genetic mapping and a candidate-gene approach
identified a frameshift mutation in the ALLENE OXIDE SYNTHASE (AOS) gene,
encoding one of the key enzymes of jasmonic acid biosynthesis. Expression
analysis and genetic complementation of the dde2-2 phenotype by overexpression of
the AOS coding sequence confirmed that the male-sterile phenotype is indeed
caused by the mutation in the AOS gene.

PMID: 12430030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Development. 2002 Oct;129(20):4763-72.

Differential regulation of the chick dorsal thoracic dermal progenitors from the 
medial dermomyotome.

Olivera-Martinez I(1), Missier S, Fraboulet S, Thélu J, Dhouailly D.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Biologie de la Différenciation Epithéliale, UMR CNRS 5538, LEDAC,
Institut Albert Bonniot, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France.

The chick dorsal feather-forming dermis originates from the dorsomedial somite
and its formation depends primarily on Wnt1 from the dorsal neural tube. We
investigate further the origin and specification of dermal progenitors from the
medial dermomyotome. This comprises two distinct domains: the dorsomedial lip and
a more central region (or intervening zone) that derives from it. We confirm that
Wnt1 induces Wnt11 expression in the dorsomedial lip as previously shown, and
show using DiI injections that some of these cells, which continue to express
Wnt11 migrate under the ectoderm, towards the midline, to form most of the dorsal
dermis. Transplantation of left somites to the right side to reverse the
mediolateral axis confirms this finding and moreover suggests the presence of an 
attractive or permissive environment produced by the midline tissues or/and a
repellent or inadequate environment by the lateral tissues. By contrast, the
dorsolateral dermal cells just delaminate from the surface of the intervening
space, which expresses En1. Excision of the axial organs or the ectoderm, and
grafting of Wnt1-secreting cells, shows that, although the two populations of
dermal progenitors both requires Wnt1 for their survival, the signalling required
for their specification differs. Indeed Wnt11 expression relies on dorsal neural 
tube-derived Wnt1, while En1 expression depends on the presence of the ectoderm. 
The dorsal feather-forming dermal progenitors thus appear to be differentially
regulated by dorsal signals from the neural tube and the ectoderm, and derive
directly and indirectly from the dorsomedial lip. As these two dermomyotomal
populations are well known to also give rise to epaxial muscles, an isolated
domain of the dermomyotome that contains only dermal precursors does not exist
and none of the dermomyotomal domains can be considered uniquely as a dermatome.

PMID: 12361968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Mech Dev. 2002 Jun;114(1-2):37-50.

A highly conserved novel family of mammalian developmental transcription factors 
related to Drosophila grainyhead.

Wilanowski T(1), Tuckfield A, Cerruti L, O'Connell S, Saint R, Parekh V, Tao J,
Cunningham JM, Jane SM.

Author information: 
(1)Rotary Bone Marrow Research Laboratory, Royal Melbourne Hospital Research
Foundation, c/o Royal Melbourne Hospital Post Office, Grattan Street, Parkville, 
Victoria 3050, Australia.

The Drosophila transcription factor Grainyhead regulates several key
developmental processes. Three mammalian genes, CP2, LBP-1a and LBP-9 have been
previously identified as homologues of grainyhead. We now report the cloning of
two new mammalian genes (Mammalian grainyhead (MGR) and Brother-of-MGR (BOM)) and
one new Drosophila gene (dCP2) that rewrite the phylogeny of this family. We
demonstrate that MGR and BOM are more closely related to grh, whereas CP2, LBP-1a
and LBP-9 are descendants of the dCP2 gene. MGR shares the greatest sequence
homology with grh, is expressed in tissue-restricted patterns more comparable to 
grh and binds to and transactivates the promoter of the human Engrailed-1 gene,
the mammalian homologue of the key grainyhead target gene, engrailed. This
sequence and functional conservation indicates that the new mammalian members of 
this family play important developmental roles.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12175488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Mech Dev. 2002 Aug;116(1-2):19-27.

Initiation of dorso-ventral axis during chick limb development.

Altabef M(1), Tickle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Medawar Building, Malet Place, UK. muriel.altabef@snv.jussieu.fr

We analysed spatio-temporal expression of dorso-ventral genes - Wnt-7a, En-1,
Lmx-1 and Fgf-8 - during both normal and ectopic limb formation following
fibroblast growth factor (FGF) application to the flank. We confirm that Wnt-7a
is the first of these genes to be expressed in dorsal ectoderm in limb-forming
regions. We also noticed patterns and kinetics of gene expression specific to
chick that could account for differences observed in ridge formation between
chick and mouse. We find that Wnt-7a expression, in dorsal ectoderm, is rapidly
and locally induced by FGF application. In contrast, ectopic induction of Lmx-1
expression, in dorsal mesoderm, is much slower, occurs first at a distance from
the FGF-2 bead and seems initially independent of direct Wnt-7a signalling during
FGF-2 limb induction. Finally, we show that there is no contribution to
extra-limb mesoderm from normal limb mesoderm and confirm that flank cells give
rise to the extra limb. Furthermore, we suggest that an inhibitor present in the 
flank normally prevents Lmx-1 expression in this region and restricts its
expression to limb-forming regions.

PMID: 12128202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2002 Jun;97(4):547-52.

An adenovirus vector containing the suicide gene thymidine kinase for a broad
application in cancer gene therapy.

Magalhaes GS(1), Muotri AR, Marchetto MC, Menck CF, Ventura AM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade 
de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, 05508-900, Brasil.

Treatment of cancer using gene therapy is based on adding a property to the cell 
leading to its elimination. One possibility is the use of suicide genes that code
for enzymes that transform a pro-drug into a cytotoxic product. The most
extensively used is the herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (TK) gene, followed
by administration of the antiviral drug ganciclovir (GCV). The choice of the
promoter to drive the transcription of a transgene is one of the determinants of 
a given transfer vector usefulness, as different promoters show different
efficiencies depending on the target cell type. In the experiments presented
here, we report the construction of a recombinant adenovirus carrying TK gene
(Ad-TK) driven by three strong promoters (P CMV IE, SV40 and EN1) and its
effectiveness in two cell types. Human HeLa and mouse CCR2 tumor cells were
transduced with Ad-TK and efficiently killed after addition of GCV. We could
detect two sizes of transcripts of TK gene, one derived from the close together P
CMV IE/SV40 promoters and the other from the 1.5 Kb downstream EN1 promoter. The 
relative amounts of these transcripts were different in each cell type thus
indicating a higher flexibility of this system.

PMID: 12118289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Development. 2002 Mar;129(6):1327-38.

Pax6 regulates specification of ventral neurone subtypes in the hindbrain by
establishing progenitor domains.

Takahashi M(1), Osumi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-1, Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Recent studies have shown that generation of different kinds of neurones is
controlled by combinatorial actions of homeodomain (HD) proteins expressed in the
neuronal progenitors. Pax6 is a HD protein that has previously been shown to be
involved in the differentiation of the hindbrain somatic (SM) motoneurones and V1
interneurones in the hindbrain and/or spinal cord. To investigate in greater
depth the role of Pax6 in generation of the ventral neurones, we first examined
the expression patterns of HD protein genes and subtype-specific neuronal markers
in the hindbrain of the Pax6 homozygous mutant rat. We found that Islet2 (SM
neurone marker) and En1 (V1 interneurone marker) were transiently expressed in a 
small number of cells, indicating that Pax6 is not directly required for
specification of these neurones. We also observed that domains of all other HD
protein genes (Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, Irx3, Dbx2 and Dbx1) were shifted and their
boundaries became blurred. Thus, Pax6 is required for establishment of the
progenitor domains of the ventral neurones. Next, we performed Pax6
overexpression experiments by electroporating rat embryos in whole embryo
culture. Pax6 overexpression in the wild type decreased expression of Nkx2.2, but
ectopically increased expression of Irx3, Dbx1 and Dbx2. Moreover,
electroporation of Pax6 into the Pax6 mutant hindbrain rescued the development of
Islet2-positive and En1-positive neurones. To know reasons for perturbed
progenitor domain formation in Pax6 mutant, we examined expression patterns of
Shh signalling molecules and states of cell death and cell proliferation. Shh was
similarly expressed in the floor plate of the mutant hindbrain, while the
expressions of Ptc1, Gli1 and Gli2 were altered only in the progenitor domains
for the motoneurones. The position and number of TUNEL-positive cells were
unchanged in the Pax6 mutant. Although the proportion of cells that were
BrdU-positive slightly increased in the mutant, there was no relationship with
specific progenitor domains. Taken together, we conclude that Pax6 regulates
specification of the ventral neurone subtypes by establishing the correct
progenitor domains.

PMID: 11880342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. BMJ. 2002 Mar 2;324(7336):511-6.

Ethnic differences in invasive management of coronary disease: prospective cohort
study of patients undergoing angiography.

Feder G(1), Crook AM, Magee P, Banerjee S, Timmis AD, Hemingway H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Practice and Primary Care, Barts and the London, Queen
Mary's School of Medicine and Dentistry, London EN1 4NS. g.s.feder@qmul.ac.uk

Comment in
    BMJ. 2002 Oct 19;325(7369):903.
    BMJ. 2002 Jun 15;324(7351):1454.

OBJECTIVES: To compare rates of revascularisation in south Asian and white
patients undergoing coronary angiography in relation to the appropriateness of
revascularisation and clinical outcome.
DESIGN: Prospective cohort study of patients with two and a half years' follow
up; appropriateness of revascularisation rated by nine experts with no knowledge 
of ethnicity of patient.
SETTING: Tertiary cardiac centre in London with referral from five contiguous
health authorities.
PARTICIPANTS: Consecutive patients (502 south Asian, 2974 white) undergoing
coronary angiography in the appropriateness of coronary revascularisation study
(ACRE).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Coronary revascularisation, non-fatal myocardial
infarction, mortality.
RESULTS: There was no difference between south Asian and white patients in the
proportions deemed appropriate for revascularisation (72% (361) v 68% (2022)) or 
in the proportions for whom the physician's intended management was
revascularisation (39% (196) v 41% (1218)). Among patients appropriate for
revascularisation, age adjusted rates of coronary angioplasty (hazard ratio 0.69,
95% confidence interval 0.47 to 1.00, P=0.058) and coronary artery bypass
grafting (0.74, 0.58 to 0.91, P=0.007) were lower in south Asian than in white
patients. These differences were smaller but still present after adjustment for
socioeconomic status and after restriction of analysis to those patients for whom
the intended management was revascularisation. There were no differences in
mortality and non-fatal myocardial infarction between south Asian and white
patients (1.07, 0.78 to 1.47).
CONCLUSION: Among patients deemed appropriate for coronary artery bypass
grafting, south Asian patients are less likely than white patients to receive it.
This difference is not explained by physician bias.

PMCID: PMC67765
PMID: 11872548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2002 Jan-Feb;5(1):54-68.

Agenesis of the mesencephalon and metencephalon with cerebellar hypoplasia:
putative mutation in the EN2 gene--report of 2 cases in early infancy.

Sarnat HB(1), Benjamin DR, Siebert JR, Kletter GB, Cheyette SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine and
Children's Hospital and Regional Medical Center, Pathology CH-37, 4800 Sand Point
Way NE, Seattle, WA 98105, USA.

Congenital absence of the midbrain and upper pons is a rare human malformation.
We describe two unrelated infants with this anomaly and cerebellar hypoplasia who
were born at term but died in early infancy from lack of central respiratory
drive. MRI in both cases disclosed the lesions during life. Neuropathological
examination, performed in one, included immunocytochemical studies of NeuN,
synaptophysin, vimentin, and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). Autopsy
revealed a thin midline cord passing through the clivus, in place of the
midbrain; it corresponded to hypoplastic and fused corticospinal tracts with
ectopic neural tissue in the surrounding leptomeninges. Some ectopia were
immunoreactive for synaptophysin and NeuN and others were nonreactive. The neural
surfaces facing the subarachnoid fluid-filled space left by the absent midbrain
and upper pons were lined by an abnormal villous ependyma. The architecture of
the cerebellar cortex was imperfect but generally normal, and Bergmann glial
cells had normal radial processes shown by vimentin and GFAP. Structures of the
telencephalon, diencephalon, lower brainstem, and spinal cord were generally well
formed, but inferior olivary and dentate nuclei were rudimentary and the spinal
central canal was dilated at lumbar levels. The cerebral cortex was normally
laminated, but pyramidal neurons of layer 5 were sparse in the frontal lobes. The
hippocampus, olfactory system, and corpus callosum were formed. An ectopic
lingual thyroid was found and had been associated with hypothyroidism during
life. A murine model resembling this dysgenesis is demonstrated by homozygous
mutations of the organizer genes Wnt1 or En1, also resulting in cerebellar
aplasia, and En2, associated with cerebellar hypoplasia. These genes are
essential to the formation of the mesencephalic neuromere and rhombomere 1
(metencephalon or upper pons and cerebellum). Pax8 has binding sites in the
promoter for En2 and is essential for thyroid development. We speculate that in
the human, the failure to form a mesencephalon and metencephalon, with cerebellar
hypoplasia, results from a mutation or deletion in the EN2 (Engrailed-2) gene.

PMID: 11815869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Jan 22;107(3):190-6.

Search for genes involved in Joubert syndrome: evidence that one or more major
loci are yet to be identified and exclusion of candidate genes EN1, EN2, FGF8,
and BARHL1.

Blair IP(1), Gibson RR, Bennett CL, Chance PF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics and Development, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

Joubert syndrome (JS) is a rare autosomal recessive malformation syndrome
involving agenesis or dysgenesis of the cerebellar vermis with accompanying
brainstem malformations. JS is further characterized by hypotonia, developmental 
delay, intermittent hyperpnea, and abnormal eye movements. The biochemical and
molecular basis of JS remains unknown, although several genes that are crucial in
the development of the cerebellum have been proposed as attractive candidate
genes. JS is clinically heterogeneous; this, together with previous linkage
analyses, suggests that there may also be genetic heterogeneity. A locus for JS
was previously identified on chromosome 9q34 by linkage analysis in a
consanguineous family of Arabian origin. A putative second JS locus was recently 
suggested when a deletion on chromosome 17p11.2 was observed in a patient with
Smith-Magenis syndrome and JS phenotype. We have investigated a cohort of
apparently unrelated North American JS pedigrees for association with the loci on
chromosomes 9q34 and 17p11.2 and excluded them in all cases where data were
informative. Analysis of an additional 21 unrelated JS patients showed no
evidence of homozygosity at the 9q34 and 17p11.2 loci that would suggest
inheritance of founder JS mutation(s) or unreported consanguinity. Together,
these data suggest that one or more major loci for JS remain to be identified.
Consequently, we undertook mutation analysis of several functional candidate
genes, EN1, EN2, and FGF8, in a total of 26 unrelated JS patients. Our data
suggest that all of these genes may be excluded from a direct pathogenic role in 
JS. The BARHL1 gene, which localizes to chromosome 9q34 and has previously been
proposed as a strong positional candidate gene for JS, was also investigated and 
excluded from involvement in JS that is linked to chromosome 9q34.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11807898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Development. 2001 Dec;128(23):4789-800.

Regionalisation of anterior neuroectoderm and its competence in responding to
forebrain and midbrain inducing activities depend on mutual antagonism between
OTX2 and GBX2.

Martinez-Barbera JP(1), Signore M, Boyl PP, Puelles E, Acampora D, Gogoi R,
Schubert F, Lumsden A, Simeone A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, Guy's
Campus, New Hunt's House, London SE1 1UL, UK.

The anterior neural ridge (ANR), and the isthmic organiser (IsO) represent two
signalling centres possessing organising properties necessary for forebrain (ANR)
as well as midbrain and rostral hindbrain (IsO) development. An important
mediator of ANR and IsO organising property is the signalling molecule FGF8.
Previous work has indicated that correct positioning of the IsO and Fgf8
expression in this domain is controlled by the transcription factors Otx2 and
Gbx2. In order to provide novel insights into the roles of Otx2 and Gbx2, we have
studied mutant embryos carrying different dosages of Otx2, Otx1 and Gbx2. Embryos
deficient for both OTX2 and GBX2 proteins (hOtx1(2)/hOtx1(2); Gbx2(-/-)) show
abnormal patterning of the anterior neural tissue, which is evident at the
presomite-early somite stage prior to the onset of Fgf8 neuroectodermal
expression. Indeed, hOtx1(2)/hOtx1(2); Gbx2(-/-) embryos exhibit broad
co-expression of early forebrain, midbrain and rostral hindbrain markers such as 
hOtx1, Gbx2, Pax2, En1 and Wnt1 and subsequently fail to activate forebrain and
midbrain-specific gene expression. In this genetic context, Fgf8 is expressed
throughout the entire anterior neural plate, thus indicating that its activation 
is independent of both OTX2 and GBX2 function. Analysis of hOtx1(2)/hOtx1(2);
Gbx2(-/-) and Otx1(+/-); Otx2(+/-) mutant embryos also suggests that FGF8 cannot 
repress Otx2 without the participation of GBX2. Finally, we report that embryos
carrying a single strong hypomorphic Otx2 allele (Otx2(lambda)) in an Otx2 and
Gbx2 null background (Otx2(lambda)/-; Gbx2(-/-)) recover both the headless
phenotype exhibited by Otx2(lambda)/- embryos and forebrain- and
midbrain-specific gene expression that is not observed in hOtx1(2)/hOtx1(2);
Gbx2(-/-) mutants. Together, these data provide novel genetic evidence indicating
that OTX2 and GBX2 are required for proper segregation of early regional
identities anterior and posterior to the mid-hindbrain boundary (MHB) and for
conferring competence to the anterior neuroectoderm in responding to forebrain-, 
midbrain- and rostral hindbrain-inducing activities.

PMID: 11731459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Development. 2001 Nov;128(22):4463-74.

BMP controls proximodistal outgrowth, via induction of the apical ectodermal
ridge, and dorsoventral patterning in the vertebrate limb.

Pizette S(1), Abate-Shen C, Niswander L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Dorsoventral (DV) patterning of the vertebrate limb requires the function of the 
transcription factor Engrailed 1 (EN1) in the ventral ectoderm. EN1 restricts, to
the dorsal half of the limb, the expression of the two genes known to specify
dorsal pattern. Limb growth along the proximodistal (PD) axis is controlled by
the apical ectodermal ridge (AER), a specialized epithelium that forms at the
distal junction between dorsal and ventral ectoderm. Using retroviral-mediated
misexpression of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) antagonist Noggin or an
activated form of the BMP receptor in the chick limb, we demonstrate that BMP
plays a key role in both DV patterning and AER induction. Thus, the DV and PD
axes are linked by a common signal. Loss and gain of BMP function experiments
show that BMP signaling is both necessary and sufficient to regulate EN1
expression, and consequently DV patterning. Our results also indicate that BMPs
are required during induction of the AER. Manipulation of BMP signaling results
in either disruptions in the endogenous AER, leading to absent or severely
truncated limbs or the formation of ectopic AERs that can direct outgrowth.
Moreover, BMP controls the expression of the MSX transcription factors, and our
results suggest that MSX acts downstream of BMP in AER induction. We propose that
the BMP signal bifurcates at the level of EN1 and MSX to mediate differentially
DV patterning and AER induction, respectively.

PMID: 11714672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Development. 2001 Nov;128(22):4449-61.

BMPR-IA signaling is required for the formation of the apical ectodermal ridge
and dorsal-ventral patterning of the limb.

Ahn K(1), Mishina Y, Hanks MC, Behringer RR, Crenshaw EB 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania Medical School,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

We demonstrate that signaling via the bone morphogenetic protein receptor IA
(BMPR-IA) is required to establish two of the three cardinal axes of the limb:
the proximal-distal axis and the dorsal-ventral axis. We generated a conditional 
knockout of the gene encoding BMPR-IA (Bmpr) that disrupted BMP signaling in the 
limb ectoderm. In the most severely affected embryos, this conditional mutation
resulted in gross malformations of the limbs with complete agenesis of the
hindlimbs. The proximal-distal axis is specified by the apical ectodermal ridge
(AER), which forms from limb ectoderm at the distal tip of the embryonic limb
bud. Analyses of the expression of molecular markers, such as Fgf8, demonstrate
that formation of the AER was disrupted in the Bmpr mutants. Along the
dorsal/ventral axis, loss of engrailed 1 (En1) expression in the non-ridge
ectoderm of the mutants resulted in a dorsal transformation of the ventral limb
structures. The expression pattern of Bmp4 and Bmp7 suggest that these growth
factors play an instructive role in specifying dorsoventral pattern in the limb. 
This study demonstrates that BMPR-IA signaling plays a crucial role in AER
formation and in the establishment of the dorsal/ventral patterning during limb
development.

PMID: 11714671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Nat Neurosci. 2001 Dec;4(12):1175-81.

Distinct regulators control the expression of the mid-hindbrain organizer signal 
FGF8.

Ye W(1), Bouchard M, Stone D, Liu X, Vella F, Lee J, Nakamura H, Ang SL,
Busslinger M, Rosenthal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco,
California 94080, USA.

Local expression of FGF8 at the mid/hindbrain boundary (MHB) governs the
development of multiple neurons and support cells. Here we show that the
paired-domain protein Pax2 is necessary and sufficient for the induction of FGF8 
in part by regulating the expression of Pax5&8. A network of transcription and
secreted factors, including En1, Otx2, Gbx2, Grg4 and Wnt1&4, that is established
independently of Pax2, further refines the expression domain and level of FGF8 at
the MHB through opposing effects on Pax2 activity. Our results indicate that the 
expression of local organizing factors is controlled by combinatorial interaction
between inductive and modulatory factors.

PMID: 11704761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Prog Neurobiol. 2001 Dec;65(5):473-88.

Regionalisation and acquisition of polarity in the optic tectum.

Nakamura H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, 980-8575, Sendai, Japan.
makamura@idac.tohoku.ac.jp

The optic tectum differentiates from the alar plate of the mesencephalon and
receives retinal fibres in a precise retinotopic manner. Here, mechanisms of
tectum polarisation and regionalisation are reviewed. Misexpression of Pax2, Pax5
or En can change the fate of the presumptive diencephalon to that of the tectum. 
Ephrin A2 and A5 are expressed in a gradient in the tectum, caudal high and
rostral low, and may play important roles in the formation of a precise
retinotectal projection map. Retinal fibres that express receptors for these
ligands, and which come from the temporal retina, are repulsed by the ligands and
do not invade the caudal tectum. Both En1 and En2 can regulate posterior
characteristics in the tectum by inducing ephrin A2 and A5. Transplantation
experiments in chick have indicated that the mes/metencephalic boundary works as 
an organiser for the tectum and the cerebellum. Fgf8 is a candidate signalling
molecule in the organiser. Pax2/5, En, and Fgf8 are in a positive feedback loop
for their expression such that misexpression of one of these genes in the
diencephalon turns on the feedback loop and can result in induction of an optic
tectum. Otx2 and Gbx2 appear to repress each other's expression and contribute to
defining the posterior border of the tectum. Misexpression of Otx2 in the
metencephalon can change the fate of its alar plate to a tectum, and
misexpression of Gbx2 in the mesencephalon can cause anterior shifting of the
caudal limit of the tectum. The anterior border of the tectum may be determined
as a result of repressive interactions between Pax6 and En1/Pax2. Along the
dorsoventral axis of the mesencephalon, Shh contributes to ventralize the tissue;
that is, Shh can change the fate of the presumptive tectum to that of the
tegmentum that is the ventral structure. It is proposed that the brain vesicle
that expresses Otx2, Pax2, and En1 may differentiate into the tectum.

PMID: 11689282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Genomics. 2001 Sep;77(1-2):2-4.

STK25 is a candidate gene for pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism.

Davids MS(1), Crawford E, Weremowicz S, Morton CC, Copeland NG, Gilbert DJ,
Jenkins NA, Phelan MC, Comb MJ, Melnick MB.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, Massachusetts 01915, USA.

We determined the chromosomal location of the mouse gene Stk25, encoding a member
of the Ste20/PAK family of serine/threonine kinases, by interspecific backcross
analysis. We mapped Stk25 to the central region of mouse chromosome 1 linked to
Chrng (formerly Acrg) and En1. This central region of mouse chromosome 1 shares a
region of homology with the long arm of human chromosome 2, suggesting that the
human homologue of Stk25 would also map to 2q. We proved this prediction of
syntenic homology correct by mapping human STK25 to 2q37. Deletion of the 2q37
region has been implicated in the expression of pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism
(PPHP), a disease which shares features of the Albright hereditary osteodystrophy
(AHO) phenotype. To investigate a pathogenetic relationship between STK25 and
PPHP, we carried out fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using an STK25
gene probe and chromosomes from PPHP patients characterized as having small
deletions near the distal end of 2q. PPHP patient DNA showed no hybridization to 
STK25 genomic DNA, indicating that STK25 is contained within the deleted
chromosomal region. This finding, in conjunction with previous studies
demonstrating the role of Ste20/PAK kinases in heterotrimeric G protein
signaling, suggests that STK25 is a positional candidate gene for PPHP.

PMID: 11543625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mech Dev. 2001 Jul;105(1-2):93-104.

Differentiation of embryonic stem cell-derived dopaminergic neurons is enhanced
by survival-promoting factors.

Rolletschek A(1), Chang H, Guan K, Czyz J, Meyer M, Wobus AM.

Author information: 
(1)'In vitro Differentiation' Group, Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant
Research, Corrensstrasse 3, D-06466, Gatersleben, Germany.

Here, we describe the generation of viable and dopamine-producing neurons derived
from pluripotent mouse embryonic stem cells. Neurotrophic factors in combination 
with survival-promoting factors, such as interleukin-1beta, glial cell
line-derived neurotrophic factor, neurturin, transforming growth factor-beta(3)
and dibutyryl-cyclic AMP, significantly enhanced Nurr1 and tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH) mRNA levels, whereas En-1, mash-1 and dopamine-2-receptor mRNA levels were
not upregulated. In parallel, mRNA levels of the anti-apoptotic gene bcl-2 were
found to be upregulated at terminal stages. Double immunofluorescence analysis
revealed increased numbers of TH- and dopamine transporter-, but not
gamma-aminobutyric acid- and serotonin-positive neurons in relation to
synaptophysin-labeled cells by survival-promoting factors. Moreover,
high-performance liquid chromatography analysis showed detectable levels of
intracellular dopamine. We conclude that survival-promoting factors enhance
differentiation, survival and maintenance of dopaminergic neurons derived from
embryonic stem cells.

PMID: 11429285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Dev Biol. 2001 May 15;233(2):291-304.

Identification and characterization of Lbh, a novel conserved nuclear protein
expressed during early limb and heart development.

Briegel KJ(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, New York 10016, USA.

We report the cloning, protein characterization, and expression of a novel
vertebrate gene, termed Lbh (Limb-bud-and-heart), with a spatiotemporal
expression pattern that marks embryologically significant domains in the
developing limbs and heart. Lbh encodes a highly conserved nuclear protein, which
in tissue culture cells possesses a transcriptional activator function. During
limb development, expression of Lbh initiates in the ectoderm of the presumptive 
limb territory in the lateral body wall. As the limb buds appear, Lbh expression 
is restricted primarily to the distal ventral limb ectoderm and the apical
ectodermal ridge, and overlaps in these ectodermal compartments with En1 and Fgf8
expression. During heart formation, Lbh is expressed as early as Nkx2.5 and dHand
in the bilateral heart primordia, with the highest levels in the anterior
promyocardium. After heart tube fusion and looping, Lbh expression is confined to
the ventricular myocardium, with the highest intensity in the right ventricle and
atrioventricular canal, as well as in the sinus venosus. Based on the molecular
characteristics and the domain-specific expression pattern, it is possible that
Lbh functions in synergy with other genes known to be required for heart and limb
development.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11336496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Neurosci. 2001 May 1;21(9):3126-34.

Fate of midbrain dopaminergic neurons controlled by the engrailed genes.

Simon HH(1), Saueressig H, Wurst W, Goulding MD, O'Leary DD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Deficiencies in neurotransmitter-specific cell groups in the midbrain result in
prominent neural disorders, including Parkinson's disease, which is caused by the
loss of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra. We have investigated in
mice the role of the engrailed homeodomain transcription factors, En-1 and En-2, 
in controlling the developmental fate of midbrain dopaminergic neurons. En-1 is
highly expressed by essentially all dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra 
and ventral tegmentum, whereas En-2 is highly expressed by a subset of them.
These neurons are generated and differentiate their dopaminergic phenotype in
En-1/En-2 double null mutants, but disappear soon thereafter. Use of an
En-1/tau-LacZ knock-in mouse as an autonomous marker for these neurons indicates 
that they are lost, rather than that they change their neurotransmitter
phenotype. A single allele of En-1 on an En-2 null background is sufficient to
produce a wild type-like substantia nigra and ventral tegmentum, whereas in
contrast a single allele of En-2 on an En-1 null background results in the
survival of only a small proportion of these dopaminergic neurons, a finding that
relates to the differential expression of En-1 and En-2. Additional findings
indicate that En-1 and En-2 regulate expression of alpha-synuclein, a gene that
is genetically linked to Parkinson's disease. These findings show that the
engrailed genes are expressed by midbrain dopaminergic neurons from their
generation to adulthood but are not required for their specification. However,
the engrailed genes control the survival of midbrain dopaminergic neurons in a
gene dose-dependent manner. Our findings also suggest a link between engrailed
and Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 11312297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. BMC Dev Biol. 2001;1:4. Epub 2001 Mar 27.

Cre reporter strains produced by targeted insertion of EYFP and ECFP into the
ROSA26 locus.

Srinivas S(1), Watanabe T, Lin CS, William CM, Tanabe Y, Jessell TM, Costantini
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, USA.
shankar@srinivas.org

BACKGROUND: Several Cre reporter strains of mice have been described, in which a 
lacZ gene is turned on in cells expressing Cre recombinase, as well as their
daughter cells, following Cre-mediated excision of a loxP-flanked transcriptional
"stop" sequence. These mice are useful for cell lineage tracing experiments as
well as for monitoring the expression of Cre transgenes. The green fluorescent
protein (GFP) and variants such as EYFP and ECFP offer an advantage over lacZ as 
a reporter, in that they can be easily visualized without recourse to the vital
substrates required to visualize beta-gal in living tissue.
RESULTS: In view of the general utility of targeting the ubiquitously expressed
ROSA26 locus, we constructed a generic ROSA26 targeting vector. We then generated
two reporter lines of mice by inserting EYFP or ECFP cDNAs into the ROSA26 locus,
preceded by a loxP-flanked stop sequence. These strains were tested by crossing
them with transgenic strains expressing Cre in a ubiquitous (beta-actin-Cre) or a
cell-specific (Isl1-Cre and En1-Cre) pattern. The resulting EYFP or ECFP
expression patterns indicated that the reporter strains function as faithful
monitors of Cre activity.
CONCLUSIONS: In contrast to existing lacZ reporter lines, where lacZ expression
cannot easily be detected in living tissue, the EYFP and ECFP reporter strains
are useful for monitoring the expression of Cre and tracing the lineage of these 
cells and their descendants in cultured embryos or organs. The non-overlapping
emission spectra of EYFP and ECFP make them ideal for double labeling studies in 
living tissues.

PMCID: PMC31338
PMID: 11299042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 May;68(5):1270-6. Epub 2001 Apr 4.

Localization of the gene for distal hereditary motor neuronopathy VII (dHMN-VII) 
to chromosome 2q14.

McEntagart M(1), Norton N, Williams H, Teare MD, Dunstan M, Baker P, Houlden H,
Reilly M, Wood N, Harper PS, Futreal PA, Williams N, Rahman N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff CF4 4XW, 
United Kingdom.

Distal hereditary motor neuronopathy type VII (dHMN-VII) is an autosomal dominant
disorder characterized by distal muscular atrophy and vocal cord paralysis. We
performed a genomewide linkage search in a large Welsh pedigree with dHMN-VII and
established linkage to chromosome 2q14. Analyses of a second family with dHMN-VII
confirmed the location of the gene and provided evidence for a founder mutation
segregating in both pedigrees. The maximum three-point LOD score in the combined 
pedigree was 7.49 at D2S274. Expansion of a polyalanine tract in Engrailed-1, a
transcription factor strongly expressed in the spinal cord, was excluded as the
cause of dHMN-VII.

PMCID: PMC1226107
PMID: 11294660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Int J Dev Biol. 2001;45(1):367-71.

The isthmic organizer and brain regionalization.

Martínez S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias, Universidad Miguel Hernandez, Alicante, Spain.
smartinez@mussol.umh.es

Distinct neural identities are acquired through progressive restriction of
developmental potential under the influence of local environmental signals.
Evidence for the localization of such morphogenetic signals at specific locations
of the developing neural primordium has suggested the concept of "secondary
organizer regions", which regulate the identity and regional polarity of
neighboring neuroepithelial areas one step further. In recent years, the most
studied secondary organizer has been the isthmic organizer, which is localized at
the hind-midbrain transition and controls anterior hindbrain and midbrain
regionalization. Otx2 and Gbx2 expression is fundamental for positioning the
organizer and for the establishment of molecular interactions that induce Fgf8
expression and then, stabilize the autoregulative loop of En1, Wnt1 and Pax2
expression. Temporospatial patterns of such gene expressions are necessary for
the correct development of the organizer which, by a planar mechanism of
induction, controls the normal development of the rostral hindbrain from r2 to
the midbrain-diencephalic boundary. Fgf8 appears as the active diffusible
molecule for isthmic morphogenetic activity and has been suggested to be the
morphogenetic effector in other inductive activities revealed in other
neuroepithelial regions.

PMID: 11291867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Neuron. 2001 Feb;29(2):385-99.

Evx1 is a postmitotic determinant of v0 interneuron identity in the spinal cord.

Moran-Rivard L(1), Kagawa T, Saueressig H, Gross MK, Burrill J, Goulding M.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Graduate Program University of California, San Diego 9500 Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Interneurons in the ventral spinal cord are essential for coordinated locomotion 
in vertebrates. During embryogenesis, the V0 and V1 classes of ventral
interneurons are defined by expression of the homeodomain transcription factors
Evx1/2 and En1, respectively. In this study, we show that Evx1 V0 interneurons
are locally projecting intersegmental commissural neurons. In Evx1 mutant
embryos, the majority of V0 interneurons fail to extend commissural axons.
Instead, they adopt an En1-like ipsilateral axonal projection and ectopically
express En1, indicating that V0 interneurons are transfated to a V1 identity.
Conversely, misexpression of Evx1 represses En1, suggesting that Evx1 may
suppress the V1 interneuron differentiation program. Our findings demonstrate
that Evx1 is a postmitotic determinant of V0 interneuron identity and reveal a
critical postmitotic phase for neuronal determination in the developing spinal
cord.

PMID: 11239430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Mech Dev. 2001 Mar;101(1-2):111-8.

Neuroepithelial co-expression of Gbx2 and Otx2 precedes Fgf8 expression in the
isthmic organizer.

Garda AL(1), Echevarría D, Martínez S.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias, Fac. de Medicina, Campus de San Juan (UMH),
E-03550 -, Alicante, Spain.

The most studied secondary neural organizer is the isthmic organizer, which is
localized at the mid-hindbrain transition of the neural tube and controls the
anterior hindbrain and midbrain regionalization. Otx2 and Gbx2 expressions are
fundamental for positioning the organizer and the establishment of molecular
interactions that induce Fgf8. We present here evidences demonstrating that Otx2 
and Gbx2 have an overlapping expression in the isthmic region. This area is the
transversal domain where expression of Fgf8 is induced. The Fgf8 protein produced
in the isthmus stabilizes and up-regulates Gbx2 expression, which, in turn,
down-regulates Otx2 expression. The inductive effect of the Gbx2/Otx2 limit keeps
Fgf8 expression stable and thus maintains its positive role in the expression of 
Pax2, En1,2 and Wnt1.

PMID: 11231064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Dev Genes Evol. 2000 Sep;210(8-9):436-48.

Two engrailed-related genes in the cockroach: cloning, phylogenetic analysis,
expression and isolation of splice variants.

Marie B(1), Bacon JP.

Author information: 
(1)Sussex Centre for Neuroscience, School of Biological Sciences, University of
Sussex, Brighton, BN1 9QG, UK.

engrailed-related genes have been isolated in numerous taxa. Within the insects, 
some species have a single engrailed-related gene whilst others have two copies, 
raising the question of when and how often gene duplications have occurred. Here 
we report the cloning, in the cockroach Periplaneta americana, of two
engrailed-related genes Pa-en1 and Pa-en2. By comparing conserved domains and by 
carrying out a phylogenetic analysis, we conclude that these two genes are likely
to be the product of a recent duplication in the cockroach lineage. Pa-en1 and
Pa-en2 are co-expressed during early embryogenesis and their segmental pattern of
expression appears in an anterior-posterior progression. We have also isolated
potential splice variants of Pa-en2 which lack some regulatory domains. The roles
these splice variants may play in regulating developmental processes are
discussed.

PMID: 11180849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Dev Genes Evol. 2000 Oct;210(10):493-506.

Evolution of distinct expression patterns for engrailed paralogues in higher
crustaceans (Malacostraca).

Ahzhanov A(1), Kaufman TC.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biology, Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.

The segment-polarity gene engrailed of Drosophila melanogaster and its homologues
in other arthropods possess a highly conserved expression domain in the posterior
portion of each segment. We report here that the two pan-specific antibodies,
Mab4D9 and Mab4F11, reveal strikingly different accumulation patterns in both of 
the malacostracan crustaceans Porcellio scaber (Isopoda) and Procambarus clarkii 
(Decapoda), compared with insects. The signal detected with Mab4D9 resides in the
posterior part of each segment, including the appendages, the ventral and lateral
sides of the trunk and the CNS. However, Mab4F11 reveals a signal only in small
groups of neurons in the CNS and PNS, primarily localized in the pereon. We
observe similar Mab4D9 and Mab4F11 patterns in the crayfish P. clarkii, except
that no Mab4F11 signal is detected in the pleon. To address the possibility of
multiple engrailed paralogues, we cloned partial cDNAs of two engrailed genes,
Ps-en1 and Ps-en2, from P. scaber, and studied their expression patterns using
whole-mount in situ hybridization. Although the Ps-en1 and Ps-en2 patterns are
comparable in early development, they become distinct in late embryogenesis.
Ps-en1 is expressed in the CNS, where Mab4F11 stains, but also accumulates in the
epidermis. In contrast, Ps-en2 is expressed in the lateral aspect and limbs of
all segments. Phylogenetic analysis of en sequences from crustaceans and insects 
suggests that the two en genes from the apterygote insect Thermobia domestica
(Thysanura) may be related to en1 and en2 of higher crustaceans.

PMID: 11180798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Trends Neurosci. 2001 Jan;24(1):32-9.

Regionalization of the optic tectum: combinations of gene expression that define 
the tectum.

Nakamura H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer,
Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, 980-8575, Sendai, Japan.
nakamura@idac.tohoku.ac.jp

The optic tectum differentiates from the alar plate of the mesencephalon. Here,
the molecular mechanisms for differentiation of the tectum are reviewed.
Mis-expression of Pax2, Pax5 or En can change the fate of the presumptive
diencephalon to become the tectum. En, Fgf8, Pax2 and Pax5, exist in a positive
feedback loop for their expression so that mis-expression of any of these genes
acts on the feedback loop resulting in induction of the optic tectum in the
diencephalon. Otx2 and Gbx2 can repress the expression of each other and
contribute to the formation of the posterior border of the tectum. Mis-expression
of Otx2 in the metencephalon changed the fate of its alar plate to the tectum.
The anterior border of the tectum might be determined as a result of repressive
interaction of Pax6 with En1 and Pax2. Along the dorsoventral axis of the
mesencephalon, Shh contributes to the ventralization of the tissue, that is, the 
area affected by Shh differentiates into the tegmentum. It is proposed that the
brain vesicle that expresses Otx2, Pax2 and En1 might differentiate into the
tectum.

PMID: 11163885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Development. 2001 Jan;128(2):181-91.

EN and GBX2 play essential roles downstream of FGF8 in patterning the mouse
mid/hindbrain region.

Liu A(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, Department of Cell Biology, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Fgf8, which is expressed at the embryonic mid/hindbrain junction, is required for
and sufficient to induce the formation of midbrain and cerebellar structures. To 
address through what genetic pathways FGF8 acts, we examined the epistatic
relationships of mid/hindbrain genes that respond to FGF8, using a novel mouse
brain explant culture system. We found that En2 and Gbx2 are the first genes to
be induced by FGF8 in wild-type E9.5 diencephalic and midbrain explants treated
with FGF8-soaked beads. By examining gene expression in En1/2 double mutant mouse
embryos, we found that Fgf8, Wnt1 and Pax5 do not require the En genes for
initiation of expression, but do for their maintenance, and Pax6 expression is
expanded caudally into the midbrain in the absence of EN function. Since E9.5
En1/2 double mutants lack the mid/hindbrain region, forebrain mutant explants
were treated with FGF8 and, significantly, the EN transcription factors were
found to be required for induction of Pax5. Thus, FGF8-regulated expression of
Pax5 is dependent on EN proteins, and a factor other than FGF8 could be involved 
in initiating normal Pax5 expression in the mesencephalon/metencephalon. The En
genes also play an important, but not absolute, role in repression of Pax6 in
forebrain explants by FGF8. Previous Gbx2 gain-of-function studies have shown
that misexpression of Gbx2 in the midbrain can lead to repression of Otx2.
However, in the absence of Gbx2, FGF8 can nevertheless repress Otx2 expression in
midbrain explants. In contrast, Wnt1 is initially broadly induced in Gbx2 mutant 
explants, as in wild-type explants, but not subsequently repressed in cells near 
FGF8 that normally express Gbx2. Thus GBX2 acts upstream of, or parallel to, FGF8
in repressing Otx2, and acts downstream of FGF8 in repression of Wnt1. This is
the first such epistatic study performed in mouse that combines gain-of-function 
and loss-of-function approaches to reveal aspects of mouse gene regulation in the
mesencephalon/metencephalon that have been difficult to address using either
approach alone.

PMID: 11124114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Biochem Cell Biol. 2000;78(5):577-84.

Regulation and function of FGF8 in patterning of midbrain and anterior hindbrain.

Mason I(1), Chambers D, Shamim H, Walshe J, Irving C.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, UK.
ivor.mason@kcl.ac.uk

In this article, an adjunct to a platform presentation at the Winternational 2000
Symposium, we summarize the recent findings of this group concerning the
regulation and functions of FGF8 expressed at the isthmus of the developing
brain. We show that several different FGF8 isoforms, ectopically expressed in
midbrain or posterior forebrain, are able to mimic the proliferative and
patterning functions previously attributed to the isthmus in tissue grafting
studies. Moreover, we also show that FGF8 protein is sufficient to induce an
ectopic isthmic organiser (Fgf-8+, Gbx2+) in anterior midbrain. We also provide
evidence that isthmic FGF8 patterns anterior hindbrain, repressing Hox-a2
expression and setting aside a territory of the brain that includes the
cerebellar anlage. We show that these effects of FGF8 are likely to be mediated
via FGFR1 and be modulated by the putative FGF antagonist, Sprouty2, identified
using a differential display screen. Finally, we provide evidence that the onset 
of Fgf8 expression is regulated by En1 and that its expression at the isthmus is 
subsequently maintained by a specific and direct interaction between rhombomere 1
and midbrain.

PMID: 11103948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Neurophysiol. 2000 Nov;84(5):2651-7.

Topographical and physiological characterization of interneurons that express
engrailed-1 in the embryonic chick spinal cord.

Wenner P(1), O'Donovan MJ, Matise MP.

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke, Lab of Neural Control, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4455, USA.

A number of homeodomain transcription factors have been implicated in controlling
the differentiation of various types of neurons including spinal motoneurons.
Some of these proteins are also expressed in spinal interneurons, but their
function is unknown. Progress in understanding the role of transcription factors 
in interneuronal development has been slow because the synaptic connections of
interneurons, which in part define their identity, are difficult to establish.
Using whole cell recording in the isolated spinal cord of chick embryos, we
assessed the synaptic connections of lumbosacral interneurons expressing the
Engrailed-1 (En1) transcription factor. Specifically we established whether
En1-expressing interneurons made direct connections with motoneurons and whether 
they constitute a single interneuron class. Cells were labeled with biocytin and 
subsequently processed for En1 immunoreactivity. Our findings indicate that the
connections of En1-expressing cells with motoneurons and with sensory afferents
were diverse, suggesting that the population was heterogeneous. In addition, the 
synaptic connections we tested were similar in interneurons that expressed the
En1 protein and in many that did not. The majority of sampled En1 cells did,
however, exhibit a direct synaptic connection to motoneurons that is likely to be
GABAergic. Because our physiological methods underestimate the number of direct
connections with motoneurons, it is possible that the great majority, perhaps
all, En1-expressing cells make direct synaptic connections with motoneurons. Our 
results raise the possibility that En1 could be involved in
interneuron-motoneuron connectivity but that its expression is not restricted to 
a distinct functional subclass of ventral interneuron. These findings constrain
hypotheses about the role of En-1 in interneuron development and function.

PMID: 11068006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Morphologie. 2000 Jun;84(265):17-23.

[Control of the positioning of the vertebrate limb axes during development].

[Article in French]

Catala M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Histologie, Embryologie et Cytogénétique, Groupe Hospitalier
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

Limbs are formed after a series of complex interactions between tissues derived
from the embryonic layers (surface ectoderm and somatopleural mesoderm). Data at 
both cellular and molecular levels are numerous. The developing limb becomes thus
one of the best known system in the field of developmental biology. The limb bud 
derives from numerous embryonic tissues (surface ectoderm, somatopleural
mesoderm, neural crest cells, somites, hematopoietic cells deriving from the
splanchnopleura that gives rise to the aortic buds). Multiple interactions take
place between these tissues. So, the definitive shape of a structure could depend
on only one of its component. For example, the muscular shape is not dependent on
the origin of muscle fibers but on the origin of somatopleural cells. Superior
(or anterior) and inferior (or posterior) limbs differ by their shape. Some genes
expressed by only one of the limb are known but genes specifying the identity of 
the limbs are still totally unknown. Three axes develop during the formation of
the limb buds: proximo-distal, antero-posterior and ventro-dorsal. The formation 
of the proximo-distal axis is due to the induction of the apical ectodermal
ridge, a specialized region of the surface ectoderm in which cells are prismatic 
and associated by gap junctions. The family of secreted FGF and their receptors
play a major role in the regulation of the development of this axis. Furthermore,
some genes from Hox complexes a and d participate into the regulation of the
positional identity along this axis. The antero-posterior axis is determined by
the zone of polarizing activity that secretes Sonic hedgehog. This molecules
fashions a gradient of concentration that differentiates the future
antero-posterior derivatives. At last, the ventro-dorsal axis depends on the
surface ectoderm that have received first positional informations from the
mesoderm. The dorsal region is specified by Wnt7a and Lmx1 whereas Engrailed 1
gene plays a role in ventral specification.

PMID: 11048294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Development. 2000 Oct;127(19):4169-78.

dackel acts in the ectoderm of the zebrafish pectoral fin bud to maintain AER
signaling.

Grandel H(1), Draper BW, Schulte-Merker S.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, Abt. 3, Spemannstr. 35, Germany.
heiner.grandel@urz.uni-heidelberg.de

Classical embryological studies have implied the existence of an apical
ectodermal maintenance factor (AEMF) that sustains signaling from the apical
ectodermal ridge (AER) during vertebrate limb development. Recent evidence
suggests that AEMF activity is composed of different signals involving both a
sonic hedgehog (Shh) signal and a fibroblast growth factor 10 (Fgf10) signal from
the mesenchyme. In this study we show that the product of the dackel (dak) gene
is one of the components that acts in the epidermis of the zebrafish pectoral fin
bud to maintain signaling from the apical fold, which is homologous to the AER of
tetrapods. dak acts synergistically with Shh to induce fgf4 and fgf8 expression
but independently of Shh in promoting apical fold morphogenesis. The failure of
dak mutant fin buds to progress from the initial fin induction phase to the
autonomous outgrowth phase causes loss of both AER and Shh activity, and
subsequently results in a proximodistal truncation of the fin, similar to the
result obtained by ridge ablation experiments in the chicken. Further analysis of
the dak mutant phenotype indicates that the activity of the transcription factor 
engrailed 1 (En1) in the ventral non-ridge ectoderm also depends on a maintenance
signal probably provided by the ridge. This result uncovers a new interaction
between the AER and the dorsoventral organizer in the zebrafish pectoral fin bud.

PMID: 10976049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Development. 2000 Sep;127(18):4061-71.

Ectopic engrailed 1 expression in the dorsal midline causes cell death, abnormal 
differentiation of circumventricular organs and errors in axonal pathfinding.

Louvi A(1), Wassef M.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UMR 8542, Equipe Régionalisation nerveuse, Ecole Normale Supérieure,
75230 Paris cedex 05, France.

A series of gain- or loss-of-function experiments performed in different
vertebrate species have demonstrated that the Engrailed genes play multiple roles
during brain development. In particular, they have been implicated in the
determination of the mid/hindbrain domain, in cell proliferation and survival, in
neurite formation, tissue polarization and axonal pathfinding. We have analyzed
the consequences of a local gain of En function within or adjacent to the
endogenous expression domain in mouse and chick embryos. In WEXPZ.En1 transgenic 
mice (Danielian, P. S. and McMahon, A. P. (1996) Nature 383, 332-334) several
genes are induced as a consequence of ectopic expression of En1 in the
diencephalic roof (but in a pattern inconsistent with a local di- to
mes-encephalon fate change). The development of several structures with secretory
function, generated from the dorsal neuroepithelium, is severely compromised. The
choroid plexus, subcommissural organ and pineal gland either fail to form or are 
atrophic. These defects are preceded by an increase in cell death at the dorsal
midline. Comparison with the phenotype of Wnt1(sw/sw) (swaying) mutants suggests 
that subcommissural organ failure is the main cause of prenatal hydrocephalus
observed in both strains. The formation of the posterior commissure is also
delayed, and errors in axonal pathfinding are frequent. In chick, ectopic
expression of En by in ovo electroporation, affects growth and differentiation of
the choroid plexus.

PMID: 10952903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Dev Neurosci. 2000;22(3):207-16.

Sonic hedgehog-mediated ventralization disrupts formation of the
midbrain-hindbrain junction in the chick embryo.

Zhang XM(1), Lin E, Yang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Department of Ophthalmology and Jules Stein Eye
Institute, University of California at Los Angeles, 90095, USA.
yang@jsei.ucla.edu

The secreted signaling molecule Sonic hedgehog (Shh) plays critical roles in
pattern formation of the vertebrate central nervous system. During neurulation,
Shh is produced by the ventral midline mesoderm as well as by the ventral neural 
tube, and its activity is required for the determination of ventral
characteristics along the anterior-posterior neuraxis. The morphological boundary
between midbrain and hindbrain, the isthmus, is an important tissue organizer
that regulates the development of both the midbrain and the anterior hindbrain.
In this study, we report that retrovirus-mediated misexpression of Shh in the
early chick neural tube disrupts formation of the boundary between the midbrain
and the hindbrain, and causes a fusion of the bilateral cerebellum primordia.
Dorsally expressed Shh signals induce ectopic transcription of its receptor Ptc1 
in the midbrain and the hindbrain. The expression of several genes (Noggin, Lmx1,
BMP7) along the dorsal midline of the midbrain is abolished, and ventral or
lateral markers (HNF3 beta, Ptc1, ELF1) are induced in the dorsal brain.
Furthermore, the normally restricted expression of two genes (En1 and Pax2) in
the mid/hindbrain junction region are expanded, reflecting the morphological
defects. These results suggest that maintaining proper dorsal-ventral patterns of
the neural tube is essential for normal development of the mid/hindbrain region.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 10894984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Genes Dev. 2000 Jun 1;14(11):1377-89.

Two lineage boundaries coordinate vertebrate apical ectodermal ridge formation.

Kimmel RA(1), Turnbull DH, Blanquet V, Wurst W, Loomis CA, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York 10016 USA.

Proximal-distal outgrowth of the vertebrate limb bud is regulated by the apical
ectodermal ridge (AER), which forms at an invariant position along the
dorsal-ventral (D/V) axis of the embryo. We have studied the genetic and cellular
events that regulate AER formation in the mouse. In contrast to implications from
previous studies in chick, we identified two distinct lineage boundaries in mouse
ectoderm prior to limb bud outgrowth using a Cre/loxP-based fate-mapping approach
and a novel retroviral cell-labeling technique. One border is transient and at
the limit of expression of the ventral gene En1, which corresponds to the D/V
midline of the AER, and the second border corresponds to the dorsal AER margin.
Labeling of AER precursors using an inducible Cre showed that not all cells that 
initially express AER genes form the AER, indicating that signaling is required
to maintain an AER phenotype. Misexpression of En1 at moderate levels
specifically in the dorsal AER of transgenic mice was found to produce dorsally
shifted AER fragments, whereas high levels of En1 abolished AER formation. In
both cases, the dorsal gene Wnt7a was repressed in cells adjacent to the
En1-expressing cells, demonstrating that signaling regulated by EN1 occurs across
the D/V border. Finally, fate mapping of AER domains in these mutants showed that
En1 plays a part in positioning and maintaining the two lineage borders.

PMCID: PMC316660
PMID: 10837030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Development. 2000 Jun;127(11):2357-65.

Pax6 defines the di-mesencephalic boundary by repressing En1 and Pax2.

Matsunaga E(1), Araki I, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Transcriptional factors and signaling molecules are responsible for
regionalization of the central nervous system. In the early stage of neural
development, Pax6 is expressed in the prosencephalon, while En1 and Pax2 are
expressed in the mesencephalon. Here, we misexpressed Pax6 in the mesencephalon
to elucidate the mechanism of the di-mesencephalic boundary formation.
Histological analysis, expression patterns of diencephalic marker genes, and
fiber trajectory of the posterior commissure indicated that Pax6 misexpression
caused a caudal shift of the di-mesencephalic boundary. Pax6 repressed En1, Pax2 
and other tectum (mesencephalon)-related genes such as En2, Pax5, Pax7, but
induced Tcf4, a diencephalon marker gene. To know how Pax6 represses En1 and
Pax2, we ectopically expressed a dominant-active or negative form of Pax6. The
dominant-active form of Pax6 showed a similar but more severe phenotype than
Pax6, while the dominant-negative form showed an opposite phenotype, suggesting
that Pax6 acts as a transcriptional activator. Thus Pax6 may repress
tectum-related genes by activating an intervening repressor. The results of
misexpression experiments, together with normal expression patterns of Pax6, En1 
and Pax2, suggest that repressive interaction between Pax6 and En1/Pax2 defines
the di-mesencephalic boundary.

PMID: 10804178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Dev Growth Differ. 1999 Dec;41(6):665-73.

FGF10 can induce Fgf8 expression concomitantly with En1 and R-fng expression in
chick limb ectoderm, independent of its dorsoventral specification.

Ohuchi H(1), Nakagawa T, Itoh N, Noji S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Biochemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto City, Japan.

The limb bud has a thickened epithelium at the dorsal-ventral boundary, the
apical ectodermal ridge (AER), which sustains limb outgrowth and patterning. A
secreted molecule fibroblast growth factor (FGF)10 is involved in inducing Fgf8
expression in the prospective AER and mutual interaction between mesenchymal
FGF10 and FGF8 in the AER is essential for limb outgrowth. A secreted factor
Wnt7a and a homeobox protein Lmx1 are involved in the dorsal patterning of the
limb, whereas a homeobox protein Engrailed 1 (En1) is involved in the
dorsal-ventral patterning as well as AER formation. Radical fringe (R-fng), a
vertebrate homolog of Drosophila fringe was also found to elaborate AER formation
in chicks. However, little is known about the molecular interactions between
these factors during AER formation. The present study clarified the relationship 
between FGF10, Wnt7a, Lmx1, R-fng and En1 during limb development using a
foil-barrier insertion experiment. It was found that a foil-barrier inserted into
the chick prospective wing mesenchyme lateral to the mesonephric duct blocks AER 
induction. This experiment was expanded by implanting Fgf10-expressing cells
lateral to the barrier and examined whether FGF10 could rescue the expression of 
the limb-patterning genes reported in AER formation. It was found that FGF10 is
sufficient to induce Fgf8 expression in the ectoderm of the foil-inserted limb
bud, concomitantly with R-fng and En1 expression. However, FGF10 could not rescue
the expression of the dorsal marker genes, Wnt7a or Lmx1. Thus, it is suggested
that epithelial factors of En1 and R-fng can induce Fgf8 expression in the limb
ectoderm in cooperation with a mesenchymal factor FGF10. Some factor(s) other
than FGF10, possibly from the paraxial structures medial to the limb mesoderm, is
responsible for the initial dorsal-ventral specification of the limb bud.

PMID: 10646796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Mech Dev. 2000 Feb;90(2):167-79.

Pattern formation and regulation of gene expressions in chick recombinant limbs.

Elisa Piedra M(1), Borja Rivero1 F, Fernandez-Teran M, Ros MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad
de Cantabria, 39011, Santander, Spain.

Recombinant limbs were performed by ensembling dissociated-reaggregated wing bud 
mesoderm inside an ectodermal hull. The zone of polarizing activity was excluded 
from the mesoderm used to perform the recombinant limbs (non-polarized
recombinants), and grafted when desired (polarized recombinants). Reorganization 
of patterning progressively occurred in the newly formed progress zone under the 
influence of the apical ectodermal ridge (AER), explaining the proximo-distal
gradient of morphogenesis observed in developed recombinant limbs. The AER,
without the influence of the polarizing region (ZPA), was sufficient to direct
outgrowth and appropriate proximo-distal patterning, as observed in the
expression of the Hoxa-11 and Hoxa-13 genes. The development of the recombinant
limbs coursed with symmetric AER and downregulation of Bmp expression in the
mesoderm supporting a negative effect of Bmp signaling upon the apical ridge. The
recombinant ectoderm maintained previously established compartments of gene
expressions and organized a correct dorso-ventral patterning in the recombinant
progress zone. Finally, the ZPA effect was only detected on Bmp expression and
pattern formation along the antero-posterior axis.

PMID: 10640702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Development. 1999 Nov;126(22):5171-9.

Anterior patterning by synergistic activity of the early gastrula organizer and
the anterior germ layer tissues of the mouse embryo.

Tam PP(1), Steiner KA.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Locked Bag 23,
Wentworthville, NSW 2145, Australia. ptam@cmri.usyd.edu.au.

Fragments of the germ layer tissues isolated from the early-primitive-streak
(early-streak) stage mouse embryos were tested for axis induction activity by
transplantation to late-gastrula (late-streak to early-bud) stage host embryos.
The posterior epiblast fragment that contains the early gastrula organizer was
able to recruit the host tissues to form an ectopic axis. However, the most
anterior neural gene that was expressed in the ectopic axis was Krox20 that marks
parts of the hindbrain, but markers of the mid- and forebrain (Otx2 and En1) were
not expressed. Anterior visceral endoderm or the anterior epiblast alone did not 
induce any ectopic neural tissue. However, when these two anterior germ layer
tissues were transplanted together, they can induce the formation of ectopic
host-derived neural tissues but these tissues rarely expressed anterior neural
genes and did not show any organization of an ectopic axis. Therefore, although
the anterior endoderm and epiblast together may display some inductive activity, 
they do not act like a classical organizer. Induction of the anterior neural
genes in the ectopic axis was achieved only when a combination of the posterior
epiblast fragment, anterior visceral endoderm and the anterior epiblast was
transplanted to the host embryo. The formation of anterior neural structures
therefore requires the synergistic interaction of the early gastrula organizer
and anterior germ layer tissues.

PMID: 10529433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Development. 1999 Nov;126(21):4827-38.

FGF8 can activate Gbx2 and transform regions of the rostral mouse brain into a
hindbrain fate.

Liu A(1), Losos K, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, Department of Cell Biology, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. joyner@saturn.med.nyu.edu

The mid/hindbrain junction region, which expresses Fgf8, can act as an organizer 
to transform caudal forebrain or hindbrain tissue into midbrain or cerebellar
structures, respectively. FGF8-soaked beads placed in the chick forebrain can
similarly induce ectopic expression of mid/hindbrain genes and development of
midbrain structures (Crossley, P. H., Martinez, S. and Martin, G. R. (1996)
Nature 380, 66-68). In contrast, ectopic expression of Fgf8a in the mouse
midbrain and caudal forebrain using a Wnt1 regulatory element produced no
apparent patterning defects in the embryos examined (Lee, S. M., Danielian, P.
S., Fritzsch, B. and McMahon, A. P. (1997) Development 124, 959-969). We show
here that FGF8b-soaked beads can not only induce expression of the mid/hindbrain 
genes En1, En2 and Pax5 in mouse embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5) caudal forebrain
explants, but also can induce the hindbrain gene Gbx2 and alter the expression of
Wnt1 in both midbrain and caudal forebrain explants. We also show that
FGF8b-soaked beads can repress Otx2 in midbrain explants. Furthermore, Wnt1-Fgf8b
transgenic embryos in which the same Wnt1 regulatory element is used to express
Fgf8b, have ectopic expression of En1, En2, Pax5 and Gbx2 in the dorsal hindbrain
and spinal cord at E10.5, as well as exencephaly and abnormal spinal cord
morphology. More strikingly, Fgf8b expression in more rostral brain regions
appears to transform the midbrain and caudal forebrain into an anterior hindbrain
fate through expansion of the Gbx2 domain and repression of Otx2 as early as the 
7-somite stage. These findings suggest that normal Fgf8 expression in the
anterior hindbrain not only functions to maintain development of the entire
mid/hindbrain by regulating genes like En1, En2 and Pax5, but also might function
to maintain a metencephalic identity by regulating Gbx2 and Otx2 expression.

PMID: 10518499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Invest Dermatol. 1999 Oct;113(4):643-50.

Regulation of epidermal bullous pemphigoid antigen 1 (BPAG1) synthesis by
homeoprotein transcription factors.

Mainguy G(1), Ernø H, Montesinos ML, Lesaffre B, Wurst W, Volovitch M, Prochiantz
A.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UMR 8542, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Pans, France.

In a recent gene-trap screen, we identified the gene coding for Epidermal Bullous
Pemphigoid Antigen 1 (BPAG1) as a putative transcriptional target of Engrailed
and of other homeoproteins with a glutamine in position 50 of their homeodomain. 
We now show that the nuclear addressing of the homeodomains of Engrailed (EnHD)
and Antennapedia (AntpHD) upregulates BPAG1e transcription in immortalized human 
keratinocytes (GMA24FIA) expressing En1. This upregulation is not observed with
AntpHD-Q50A, a variant of AntpHD in which a single mutation abolishes its
high-affinity binding to target DNA, thus strongly suggesting that BPAG1e
upregulation homeodomains reflects their specific recognition of
homeoprotein-binding sites in the BPAG1e locus. This is further confirmed by
DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift assays that reveal,
within the cloned BPAG1e promoter, several sites of direct interaction with EnHD 
and Engrailed. Co-transfection experiments in GMA24FIA human keratinocytes, COS-7
simian fibroblasts, and CHP-100 human neuroepithelial cells show that Engrailed, 
Hoxa-5, and Hoxc-8 regulate BPAG1e promoter activity and that this regulation is 
context-dependent. Finally, using a mouse line with LacZ inserted within the En1 
locus, we identify the keratinocytes of the ventral paws, including the
epithelial cells of the eccrine tubules, as a strong site of En1 expression
throughout adulthood. We therefore propose that BPAG1e, a 230 kDa keratin-binding
protein expressed in keratinocytes and participating in the maintenance of
hemidesmosomes at the dermis-epidermis border, is directly regulated by
homeoprotein transcription factors.

PMID: 10504454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Nature. 1999 Sep 9;401(6749):164-8.

The caudal limit of Otx2 expression positions the isthmic organizer.

Broccoli V(1), Boncinelli E, Wurst W.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-Research Centre for Environment and Health, Institute of Mammalian
Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany.

The homeobox gene Otx2 is expressed in the anterior neural tube with a sharp
limit at the midbrain/hindbrain junction (the isthmic organizer). Otx2
inactivation experiments have shown that this gene is essential for the
development of its expression domain. Here we investigate whether the caudal
limit of Otx2 expression is instrumental in positioning the isthmic organizer and
in specifying midbrain versus hindbrain fate, by ectopically expressing Otx2 in
the presumptive anterior hindbrain using a knock-in strategy into the En1 locus. 
Transgenic offspring display a cerebellar ataxia. Morphological and histological 
studies of adult transgenic brains reveal that most of the anterior cerebellar
vermis is missing, whereas the inferior colliculus is complementarily enlarged.
During early neural pattern formation expression of the midbrain markers Wnt1 and
Ephrin-A5, the isthmic organizer markers Pax2 and Fgf-8 and the hindbrain marker 
Gbx2 are shifted caudally in the presumptive hindbrain territory. These findings 
show that the caudal limit of Otx2 expression is sufficient for positioning the
isthmic organizer and encoding caudal midbrain fate within the mid/hindbrain
domain.

PMID: 10490025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Development. 1999 Oct;126(19):4247-55.

Transplacental delivery of the Wnt antagonist Frzb1 inhibits development of
caudal paraxial mesoderm and skeletal myogenesis in mouse embryos.

Borello U(1), Coletta M, Tajbakhsh S, Leyns L, De Robertis EM, Buckingham M,
Cossu G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur-Cenci Bolognetti, Dipartimento di Istologia ed Embriologia
Medica, Università di Roma 'La Sapienza', Via A. Scarpa 14, Italy.

Axial structures (neural tube/notochord) and surface ectoderm activate myogenesis
in the mouse embryo; their action can be reproduced, at least in part, by several
molecules such as Sonic hedgehog and Wnts. Recently, soluble Wnt antagonists have
been identified. Among those examined only Frzb1 was found to be expressed in the
presomitic mesoderm and newly formed somites and thus its possible role in
regulating myogenesis was investigated in detail. When presomitic mesoderm or
newly formed somites were cultured with axial structures and surface ectoderm on 
a feeder layer of C3H10T1/2 cells expressing Frzb1, myogenesis was abolished or
severely reduced in presomitic mesoderm and the three most recently formed
somites. In contrast, no effect was observed on more mature somites. Inhibition
of myogenesis did not appear to be associated with increased cell death since the
final number of cells in the explants grown in the presence of Frzb1 was only
slightly reduced in comparison with controls. In order to examine the possible
function of Frzb1 in vivo, we developed a method based on the overexpression of
the soluble antagonist by transient transfection of WOP cells with a Frzb1
expression vector and injection of transfected cells into the placenta of
pregnant females before the onset of maternofoetal circulation. Frzb1, secreted
by WOP cells, accumulated in the embryo and caused a marked reduction in size of 
caudal structures. Myogenesis was strongly reduced and, in the most severe cases,
abolished. This was not due to a generalized toxic effect since only several
genes downstream of the Wnt signaling pathway such as En1, Noggin and Myf5 were
downregulated; in contrast, Pax3 and Mox1 expression levels were not affected
even in embryos exhibiting the most severe phenotypes. Taken together, these
results suggest that Wnt signals may act by regulating both myogenic commitment
and expansion of committed cells in the mouse mesoderm.

PMID: 10477293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Development. 1999 Oct;126(19):4201-12.

Engrailed-1 and netrin-1 regulate axon pathfinding by association interneurons
that project to motor neurons.

Saueressig H(1), Burrill J, Goulding M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA.

During early development, multiple classes of interneurons are generated in the
spinal cord including association interneurons that synapse with motor neurons
and regulate their activity. Very little is known about the molecular mechanisms 
that generate these interneuron cell types, nor is it known how axons from
association interneurons are guided toward somatic motor neurons. By targeting
the axonal reporter gene &tgr;-lacZ to the En1 locus, we show the
cell-type-specific transcription factor Engrailed-1 (EN1) defines a population of
association neurons that project locally to somatic motor neurons. These EN1
interneurons are born early and their axons pioneer an ipsilateral longitudinal
projection in the ventral spinal cord. The EN1 interneurons extend axons in a
stereotypic manner, first ventrally, then rostrally for one to two segments where
their axons terminate close to motor neurons. We show that the growth of EN1
axons along a ventrolateral pathway toward motor neurons is dependent on netrin-1
signaling. In addition, we demonstrate that En1 regulates pathfinding and
fasciculation during the second phase of EN1 axon growth in the ventrolateral
funiculus (VLF); however, En1 is not required for the early specification of
ventral interneuron cell types in the embryonic spinal cord.

PMID: 10477289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Teratology. 1999 Jul;60(1):22-8.

Cystic malformation of the posterior cerebellar vermis in transgenic mice that
ectopically express Engrailed-1, a homeodomain transcription factor.

Rowitch DH(1), Danielian PS, McMahon AP, Zec N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA. david_rowitch@dfci.harvard.edu

In WEXPZ-En-1 transgenic mice, Engrailed-1, a homeodomain-containing
transcription factor, is ectopically expressed in the developing brain under
control of the Wnt-1 enhancer. En-1 is a developmental regulatory control gene
which has an essential role in the formation of the midbrain and cerebellum.
Approximately 28% of WEXPZ-En-1 + mice develop cystic malformations of the
posterior lobe of the cerebellar vermis, fourth ventricular dilatation, and
postnatal hydrocephalus. These anatomic features are also found among the
spectrum of posterior fossa malformations in humans. Expression characteristics
of the WEXP transgene suggest that the neuropathology observed in WEXPZ-En-1+
mice stems from overexpression of En-1 during fetal and neonatal phases of
cerebellar development. These observations raise the possibility that abnormal
regulation of Engrailed genes, or targets of Engrailed, may be involved in the
pathogenesis of cystic central nervous system malformations of the posterior
fossa in humans.

PMID: 10413335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Cell. 1999 Jun 25;97(7):903-15.

A sonic hedgehog-independent, retinoid-activated pathway of neurogenesis in the
ventral spinal cord.

Pierani A(1), Brenner-Morton S, Chiang C, Jessell TM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is thought to control the generation of motor neurons and
interneurons in the ventral CNS. We show here that a Shh-independent pathway of
interneuron generation also operates in the ventral spinal cord. Evidence for
this parallel pathway emerged from an analysis of the induction of ventral
progenitors that express the Dbx homeodomain proteins and of Evx1/2 (V0) and En1 
(V1) neurons. Shh signaling is sufficient to induce Dbx cells and V0 and V1
neurons but is not required for their generation in vitro or in vivo. Retinoids
appear to mediate this parallel pathway. These findings reveal an unanticipated
Shh-independent signaling pathway that controls progenitor cell identity and
interneuron diversity in the ventral spinal cord.

PMID: 10399918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mech Dev. 1998 Dec;79(1-2):185-97.

Neurons derived in vitro from ES cells express homeoproteins characteristic of
motoneurons and interneurons.

Renoncourt Y(1), Carroll P, Filippi P, Arce V, Alonso S.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U382, Developmental Biology Institute of Marseille (IBDM),
CNRS/INSERM/Université de la Méditerranée/AP de Marseille, France.
renoncou@ibdm.univ-mrs

We have characterized different neuronal subpopulations derived from in vitro
differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells using as markers the expression of
several homeodomain transcription factors. Following treatment of embryo-like
aggregates with retinoic acid (RA), Pax-6, a protein expressed by ventral central
nervous system (CNS) progenitors is induced. In contrast, Pax-7 expressed in vivo
by dorsal CNS progenitors, and erbB3, a gene expressed by neural crest cells and 
its derivatives, are almost undetectable. CNS neuronal subpopulations generated
expressed combinations of markers characteristic of somatic motoneurons
(Islet-1/2, Lim-3, and HB-9), cranial motoneurons (Islet-1/2 and Phox2b) and
interneurons (Lim-1/2 or EN1). Molecular characterization of neuron subtypes
generated from ES cells should considerably facilitate the identification of new 
genes expressed by restricted neuronal cell lineages.

PMID: 10349632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mech Dev. 1999 Mar;81(1-2):115-25.

Abnormal anteroposterior and dorsoventral patterning of the limb bud in the
absence of retinoids.

Stratford T(1), Logan C, Zile M, Maden M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, Biomedical Sciences Division, King's
College London, London, UK.

We describe here how the early limb bud of the quail embryo develops in the
absence of retinoids, including retinoic acid. Retinoid-deficient embryos develop
to about stage 20/21, thus allowing patterns of early gene activity in the limb
bud to be readily examined. Genes representing different aspects of limb polarity
were analysed. Concerning the anteroposterior axis, Hoxb-8 was up-regulated and
its border was shifted anteriorly whereas shh and the mesodermal expression of
bmp-2 were down-regulated in the absence of retinoids. Concerning the apical
ectodermal genes, fgf-4 was down-regulated whereas fgf-8 and the ectodermal
domain of bmp-2 were unaffected. Genes involved in dorsoventral polarity were all
disrupted. Wnt-7a, normally confined to the dorsal ectoderm, was ectopically
expressed in the ventral ectoderm and the corresponding dorsal mesodermal gene
Lmx-1 spread into the ventral mesoderm. En-1 was partially or completely absent
from the ventral ectoderm. These dorsoventral patterns of expression resemble
those seen in En-1 knockout mouse limb buds. Overall, the patterns of gene
expression are also similar to the Japanese limbless mutant. These experiments
demonstrate that the retinoid-deficient embryo is a valuable tool for dissecting 
pathways of gene activity in the limb bud and reveal for the first time a role
for retinoic acid in the organisation of the dorsoventral axis.

PMID: 10330489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Development. 1999 Mar;126(6):1189-200.

FGF8 induces formation of an ectopic isthmic organizer and isthmocerebellar
development via a repressive effect on Otx2 expression.

Martinez S(1), Crossley PH, Cobos I, Rubenstein JL, Martin GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Murcia, Murcia, Spain.

Beads containing recombinant FGF8 (FGF8-beads) were implanted in the prospective 
caudal diencephalon or midbrain of chick embryos at stages 9-12. This induced the
neuroepithelium rostral and caudal to the FGF8-bead to form two ectopic,
mirror-image midbrains. Furthermore, cells in direct contact with the bead formed
an outgrowth that protruded laterally from the neural tube. Tissue within such
lateral outgrowths developed proximally into isthmic nuclei and distally into a
cerebellum-like structure. These morphogenetic effects were apparently due to
FGF8-mediated changes in gene expression in the vicinity of the bead, including a
repressive effect on Otx2 and an inductive effect on En1, Fgf8 and Wnt1
expression. The ectopic Fgf8 and Wnt1 expression domains formed nearly complete
concentric rings around the FGF8-bead, with the Wnt1 ring outermost. These
observations suggest that FGF8 induces the formation of a ring-like ectopic
signaling center (organizer) in the lateral wall of the brain, similar to the one
that normally encircles the neural tube at the isthmic constriction, which is
located at the boundary between the prospective midbrain and hindbrain. This
ectopic isthmic organizer apparently sends long-range patterning signals both
rostrally and caudally, resulting in the development of the two ectopic
midbrains. Interestingly, our data suggest that these inductive signals spread
readily in a caudal direction, but are inhibited from spreading rostrally across 
diencephalic neuromere boundaries. These results provide insights into the
mechanism by which FGF8 induces an ectopic organizer and suggest that a negative 
feedback loop between Fgf8 and Otx2 plays a key role in patterning the midbrain
and anterior hindbrain.

PMID: 10021338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Kaibogaku Zasshi. 1998 Dec;73(6):699-708.

[Dorso-ventral patterning of the vertebrate limb and dermatoglyphs with special
reference to the pad pattern of mice].

[Article in Japanese]

Tsugane MH(1), Yasuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Sapporo Medical University.

The proximo-distal (P-D), antero-posterior (A-P) and dorso-ventral (D-V) axes are
important for normal limb development in vertebrates. It has been reported that
D-V axis is decided by Wnt-7a, Lmx-1 and Engrailed-1 (En-1) which are expressed
in the limb bud along D-V axis. These factors are thought to be required for
formation of the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) which is necessary for outgrowth
of the limb. The results from spontaneous mutant mice meromelia (mem), which
exhibits double-dorsality of the distal limb, suggested that other factors, not
only En-1 and Wnt-7a are required for decision of AER, and mem was probed to be
novel gene regulating En-1 and Wnt-7a directly or indirectly. The dorsalized
ventral structures in meromelia were found by observation of the pad pattern. Pad
pattern is always constant in normal mice, and each pad indicates particular part
of the limb. So pad pattern is useful to detect and describe anomalies even in
the limbs without skeletal defects. The process of pad development is associated 
with the limb patterning, and abnormal pad pattern may indicate pathogenesis of
abnormal limb development. The mouse pad pattern is usable as the model for human
dermatoglyphs, and it is also important to investigate mechanisms of human
diseases.

PMID: 9990207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Development. 1999 Feb;126(5):945-59.

Sequential roles for Fgf4, En1 and Fgf8 in specification and regionalisation of
the midbrain.

Shamim H(1), Mahmood R, Logan C, Doherty P, Lumsden A, Mason I.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Brain Development Programme, Department of Developmental Neurobiology,
Medical School's of Guy's, King's and St. Thomas's Hospitals, King's College
London, London SE1 9RT, UK.

Experiments involving tissue recombinations have implicated both early vertical
and later planar signals in the specification and polarisation of the midbrain.
Here we investigate the role of fibroblast growth factors in regulating these
processes in the avian embryo. We show that Fgf4 is expressed in the notochord
anterior to Hensen's node before transcripts for the earliest molecular marker of
midbrain tissue in the avian embryo, En1, are detected. The presence of notochord
is required for the expression of En1 in neural plate explants in vitro and FGF4 
mimics this effect of notochord tissue. Subsequently, a second member of the
fibroblast growth factor family, Fgf8, is expressed in the isthmus in a manner
consistent with it providing a polarising signal for the developing midbrain.
Using a retroviral vector to express En1 ectopically, we show that En1 can induce
Fgf8 expression in midbrain and posterior diencephalon. Results of the
introduction of FGF8 protein into the anterior midbrain or posterior diencephalon
are consistent with it being at least part of the isthmic activity which can
repolarise the former tissue and respecify the latter to a midbrain fate.
However, the ability of FGF8 to induce expression of genes which have earlier
onsets of expression than Fgf8 itself, namely En1 and Pax2, strongly suggests
that the normal function of FGF8 is in maintaining patterns of gene expression in
posterior midbrain. Finally, we provide evidence that FGF8 also provides
mitogenic stimulation during avian midbrain development.

PMID: 9927596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;83(1-2):35-8.

Comparative gene mapping: cytogenetic localization of PROC, EN1, ALPI, TNP1, and 
IL1B in cattle and sheep reveals a conserved rearrangement relative to the human 
genome.

Lòpez-Corrales NL(1), Sonstegard TS, Smith TP.

Author information: 
(1)Roslin Institute (Edinburgh), Roslin, Midlothian, Edinburgh (UK).

The cytogenetic locations of the genes for protein C (PROC), transition protein 1
(TNP1), intestinal alkaline phosphatase (ALPI), engrailed (EN1), and human
protointerleukin beta (IL1B) have been compared between cattle (Bos taurus, BTA) 
and sheep (Ovis aries, OAR). Bovine YAC and cosmid clones were used as FISH
probes to determine the order (centromere to telomere) of four of these genes on 
OAR 2q, as well as the location of IL1B on OAR 3p. In cattle, IL1B and EN1 were
assigned to BTA 11 and BTA 2, respectively. Alignment of the ovine, bovine, and
human physical maps based on these data shows that segments of conserved synteny 
and chromosomal rearrangements detected between cattle and human are also found
in sheep, where the order in cattle is conserved.

PMID: 9925918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mech Dev. 1998 Nov;78(1-2):171-8.

Pax3 and Pax7 are expressed in commissural neurons and restrict ventral neuronal 
identity in the spinal cord.

Mansouri A(1), Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Am Fassberg 11, 37077, Göttingen, Germany.

Pax3 and Pax7 are transcription factors sharing high sequence identity and
overlapping patterns of expression in particular in the dorsal spinal cord.
Analysis of Pax3 and Pax7 double mutant mice demonstrates that both genes share
redundant functions to restrict ventral neuronal identity in the spinal cord. In 
their absence, the En1 expression domain is expanded dorsally but that of Evx1 is
not affected. In addition, Pax3 and Pax7 are expressed in commissural neurons and
double mutant embryos exhibit highly reduced ventral commissure. Our findings
reveal two distinct regulatory pathways for spinal cord neurogenesis, only one of
which is dependent on Pax3/7 and 6.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All Rights Reserved

PMID: 9858722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Anim Genet. 1998 Oct;29(5):341-7.

Refinement of bovine chromosome 2 linkage map near the mh locus reveals
rearrangements between the bovine and human genomes.

Sonstegard TS(1), Kappes SM, Keele JW, Smith TP.

Author information: 
(1)Beltsville Agricultural Research Center (BARC), MD 20705, USA.

The locus responsible for the appearance of muscular hypertrophy (mh) in double
muscled cattle breeds has recently been shown to encode a secreted growth factor 
designated myostatin (MSTN). This conclusion was based in part on the placement
of MSTN in the interval to which mh had been mapped on bovine chromosome 2
(BTA2). During the mapping phase of the study, numerous yeast artificial
chromosome (YAC) clones were isolated that contained genetic markers closely
linked to mh. Other YACs and cosmids were identified that contained genes
selected from human chromosome 2q (HSA2q), with the goal of defining the position
of breakpoints in conserved synteny between the bovine and human comparative
maps, thereby permitting accurate selection of positional candidate genes. An
efficient subcloning procedure was developed to obtain microsatellites (ms) from 
YAC clones, to increase the number of informative meioses in herds segregating
for mh. The same procedure was used to place the human orthologues of engrailed-1
(EN1), interleukin 1 beta (IL1B), and paired-box-containing 8 (PAX8) genes on the
cattle map to further define the positions of breakpoints in conserved synteny
and gene order. Twenty-three of 28 ms identified from YAC subclone libraries were
informative in the mapping families. Seven mapped to the centromeric end of BTA2,
which contains the mh locus, improving marker density and informativeness. The
two MSTN and four EN1 gene-associated ms markers developed from YACs, map to
positions 1.5 and 61.6 CM in the BTA2 linkage group, respectively. In addition,
ms markers developed from cosmids containing either IL1B or PAX8, map to
positions 56.6 and 56.9 CM in the BTA11 linkage group, respectively. These
linkage data confirm the location and orientation of orthologous segments of
HSA2q that were previously indistinguishable on the bovine map, and demonstrates 
the presence of microrearrangements of gene order (segments < 10 CM) and
conserved synteny between the human and bovine genomes.

PMID: 9800322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Development. 1998 Nov;125(22):4521-30.

Drosophila engrailed can substitute for mouse Engrailed1 function in
mid-hindbrain, but not limb development.

Hanks MC(1), Loomis CA, Harris E, Tong CX, Anson-Cartwright L, Auerbach A, Joyner
A.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine and Departments of Cell Biology and Physiology
and Neuroscience, NYU Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The Engrailed-1 gene, En1, a murine homologue of the Drosophila homeobox gene
engrailed (en), is required for midbrain and cerebellum development and
dorsal/ventral patterning of the limbs. In Drosophila, en is involved in
regulating a number of key patterning processes including segmentation of the
epidermis. An important question is whether, during evolution, the biochemical
properties of En proteins have been conserved, revealing a common underlying
molecular mechanism to their diverse developmental activities. To address this
question, we have replaced the coding sequences of En1 with Drosophila en. Mice
expressing Drosophila en in place of En1 have a near complete rescue of the
lethal En1 mutant brain defect and most skeletal abnormalities. In contrast,
expression of Drosophila en in the embryonic limbs of En1 mutants does not lead
to repression of Wnt7a in the embryonic ventral ectoderm or full rescue of the
embryonic dorsal/ventral patterning defects. Furthermore, neither En2 nor en
rescue the postnatal limb abnormalities that develop in rare En1 null mutants
that survive. These studies demonstrate that the biochemical activity utilized in
mouse to mediate brain development has been retained by Engrailed proteins across
the phyla, and indicate that during evolution vertebrate En proteins have
acquired two unique functions during embryonic and postnatal limb development and
that only En1 can function postnatally.

PMID: 9778510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Development. 1998 Mar;125(6):1137-48.

Analysis of the genetic pathway leading to formation of ectopic apical ectodermal
ridges in mouse Engrailed-1 mutant limbs.

Loomis CA(1), Kimmel RA, Tong CX, Michaud J, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, NYU Medical School, New York, NY
10016, USA. loomic01@mcrcr.med.nyu.edu

The apical ectodermal ridge (AER), a rim of thickened ectodermal cells at the
interface between the dorsal and ventral domains of the limb bud, is required for
limb outgrowth and patterning. We have previously shown that the limbs of En1
mutant mice display dorsal-ventral and proximal-distal abnormalities, the latter 
being reflected in the appearance of a broadened AER and formation of ectopic
ventral digits. A detailed genetic analysis of wild-type, En1 and Wnt7a mutant
limb buds during AER development has delineated a role for En1 in normal AER
formation. Our studies support previous suggestions that AER maturation involves 
the compression of an early broad ventral domain of limb ectoderm into a narrow
rim at the tip and further show that En1 plays a critical role in the compaction 
phase. Loss of En1 leads to a delay in the distal shift and stratification of
cells in the ventral half of the AER. At later stages, this often leads to
development of a secondary ventral AER, which can promote formation of an ectopic
digit. The second AER forms at the juxtaposition of the ventral border of the
broadened mutant AER and the distal border of an ectopic Lmx1b expression domain.
Analysis of En1/Wnt7a double mutants demonstrates that the dorsalizing gene Wnt7a
is required for the formation of the ectopic AERs in En1 mutants and for ectopic 
expression of Lmx1b in the ventral mesenchyme. We suggest a model whereby, in En1
mutants, ectopic ventral Wnt7a and/or Lmx1b expression leads to the
transformation of ventral cells in the broadened AER to a more dorsal phenotype. 
This leads to induction of a second zone of compaction ventrally, which in some
cases goes on to form an autonomous secondary AER.

PMID: 9463360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Genomics. 1997 Dec 1;46(2):223-33.

The mouse homeobox gene, Gbx2: genomic organization and expression in pluripotent
cells in vitro and in vivo.

Chapman G(1), Remiszewski JL, Webb GC, Schulz TC, Bottema CD, Rathjen PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia.

The Gbx2 homeodomain is widely conserved in metazoans. We investigated the mouse 
Gbx2 locus by isolation and characterization of genomic clones and by physical
localization to the genome. The Gbx2 gene contained a single intron that
separated the proposed functional protein domains. This organization was
conserved with human GBX2. Physical localization of Gbx2 to Chromosome 1C5-E1
indicated that the genomic relationship between the linked Gbx2 and En1 genes
differs between mouse and human, making it unlikely to be of functional
significance. We also extended the known expression pattern of Gbx2 beyond the
gastrulation stage embryo and the developing CNS to pluripotent cells in vitro
and in vivo. Gbx2 expression was demonstrated in undifferentiated embryonic stem 
cells but was downregulated in differentiated cell populations. In the embryo,
Gbx2 expression was detected before primitive streak formation, in the inner cell
mass of the preimplantation embryo. Gbx2 is therefore a candidate control gene
for cell pluripotency and differentiation in the embryo.

PMID: 9417909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Development. 1997 Nov;124(22):4493-503.

PAX2 is expressed in multiple spinal cord interneurons, including a population of
EN1+ interneurons that require PAX6 for their development.

Burrill JD(1), Moran L, Goulding MD, Saueressig H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA.

Members of the PAX family of transcription factors are candidates for controlling
cell identity in the spinal cord. We have morphologically analyzed cells that
express one of these transcription factors, PAX2, demonstrating multiple
interneuron cell types express PAX2. Two ventral populations of PAX2-expressing
interneurons in the spinal cord are marked by coexpression of the transcription
factors, EN1 and EVX1. Interestingly, the expression domains of PAX2, EN1 and
EVX1 in postmitotic neurons correlate closely with those of Pax6 and Pax7 in the 
ventricular zone, implicating these patterning genes in the regulation of PAX2,
EN1 and EVX1. We show that one of these patterning genes, Pax6, is required for
the correct specification of ventral PAX2+ interneurons that coexpress EN1. These
results demonstrate that the early activity of patterning genes in the
ventricular zone determines interneuron identity in the spinal cord.

PMID: 9409667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997 Nov;37(5 Pt 1):774-5.

American Academy of Dermatology 1997 Awards for Young Investigators in
Dermatology. The role of Engrailed-1 in limb development and skin patterning.

Loomis C(1).

Author information: 
(1)New York University Medical Center, NY 10016, USA.

PMID: 9366827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Development. 1997 Dec;124(24):5021-32.

Novel regulatory interactions revealed by studies of murine limb pattern in
Wnt-7a and En-1 mutants.

Cygan JA(1), Johnson RL, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, The Biolabs, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Classical embryological experiments have demonstrated that dorsal-ventral
patterning of the vertebrate limb is dependent upon ectodermal signals. One such 
factor is Wnt-7a, a member of the Wnt family of secreted proteins, which is
expressed in the dorsal ectoderm. Loss of Wnt-7a results in the appearance of
ventral characteristics in the dorsal half of the distal limb. Conversely, En-1, 
a homeodomain transcription factor, is expressed exclusively in the ventral
ectoderm, where it represses Wnt-7a. En-1 mutants have dorsal characteristics in 
the ventral half of the distal limb. Experiments in the chick suggest that the
dorsalizing activity of Wnt-7a in the mesenchyme is mediated through the
regulation of the LIM-homeodomain transcription factor Lmx-1. Here we have
examined the relationship between Wnt-7a, En-1 and Lmx-1b, a mouse homolog of
chick Lmx-1, in patterning the mammalian limb. We find that Wnt-7a is required
for Lmx-1b expression in distal limb mesenchyme, and that Lmx-1b activation in
the ventral mesenchyme of En-1 mutants requires Wnt-7a. Consistent with Lmx-1b
playing a primary role in dorsalization of the limb, we find a direct correlation
between regions of the anterior distal limb in which Lmx-lb is misregulated
during limb development and the localization of dorsal-ventral patterning defects
in Wnt-7a and En-1 mutant adults. Thus, ectopic Wnt-7a expression and Lmx-1b
activation underlie the dorsalized En-1 phenotype, although our analysis also
reveals a Wnt-7a-independent activity for En-1 in the repression of pigmentation 
in the ventral epidermis. Finally, we demonstrate that ectopic expression of
Wnt-7a in the ventral limb ectoderm of En-1 mutants results in the formation of a
second, ventral apical ectodermal ridge (AER) at the junction between
Wnt-7a-expressing and nonexpressing ectoderm. Unlike the normal AER, ectopic AER 
formation is dependent upon Wnt-7a activity, indicating that distinct genetic
mechanisms may be involved in primary and secondary AER formation.

PMID: 9362463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Neurosci. 1997 Oct 15;17(20):7805-16.

Expression patterns of developmental control genes in normal and Engrailed-1
mutant mouse spinal cord reveal early diversity in developing interneurons.

Matise MP(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)New York University Medical School, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular
Medicine, Developmental Genetics Program, New York, New York 10016, USA.

The vertebrate spinal cord has long served as a useful system for studying the
pattern of cell differentiation along the dorsoventral (d/v) axis. In this paper,
we have defined the expression of several classes of genes expressed in
restricted d/v domains in the intermediate region (IR) of the mouse spinal cord, 
in which most interneurons are generated. From this analysis, we have found that 
spinal cord interneurons and their precursors express unique combinations of
transcription factors and Notch ligands at the onset of their differentiation.
The domains of expression of a number of different classes of genes share similar
boundaries, indicating that there could be a basic subdivision of the ventral IR 
into four distinct regions. This differential gene expression suggests that
spinal cord interneurons acquire unique identities early in their development and
that Notch signaling mechanisms may participate in the determination of cell fate
along the d/v axis. Gene expression studies in Engrailed-1 (En-1) mutants showed 
that En-1-expressing and other closely positioned classes of neurons do not
require the homeodomain protein En-1 for their early pattern of differentiation. 
Rather, it is suggested that En-1 may function to distinguish a subset of
interneurons during the later maturation of the spinal cord.

PMID: 9315901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Development. 1997 May;124(10):1865-75.

Association of Engrailed homeoproteins with vesicles presenting caveolae-like
properties.

Joliot A(1), Trembleau A, Raposo G, Calvet S, Volovitch M, Prochiantz A.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1414, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.

We report here that the homeoproteins Engrailed-1 and Engrailed-2 are present in 
specific non-nuclear subcellular compartments. Using electron microscopy, we
observed that chick-Engrailed-2 expressed in COS-7 cells associates with membrane
fractions that are characterized as caveolae. This characterization is based on
morphological, biochemical and immunological criteria such as, in particular, the
absence of clathrin coat and the presence of caveolin and cholera toxin-binding
sites. These data are fully confirmed by subcellular fractionation experiments,
which demonstrate that transfected chick-Engrailed-2 is present in low density
membrane fractions that are resistant to Triton X-100, enriched in caveolin and
solubilized by the addition of a cholesterol-binding detergent, a set of
properties highly characteristic of caveolae. The association of Engrailed-2 with
specific membrane fractions observed after transfection in COS-7 cells is also
observed for endogenous Engrailed-1 and Engrailed-2 expressed at late embryonic
stages in the cerebellum and posterior mesencephalon of the rodent. Indeed, the
two proteins are present in membrane fractions that bear all the characteristics 
of microdomains or caveolae-like domains, i.e. Triton X-100 resistance, saponin
solubilization, low density on sucrose gradients, enrichment in glycosphingolipid
GM1, absence of transmembrane Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule, presence of the
glypiated (GPI-anchored) glycoprotein F3/F11 and of the acylated
growth-associated protein GAP-43. Finally we demonstrate that part of the
membrane-associated Engrailed, either expressed in COS-7 cells or endogenously
present in neural tissues, is not accessible to proteolytic enzymes unless the
membranes have been permeabilized with detergent. This study suggests that, in
addition to their well-known presence in the nucleus, Engrailed proteins are also
associated with caveolae-like vesicles that are primarily transported
anterogradely into the axon, and that they can get access to a compartment
compatible with secretion.

PMID: 9169834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Nature. 1997 Mar 27;386(6623):360-6.

Radical fringe positions the apical ectodermal ridge at the dorsoventral boundary
of the vertebrate limb.

Rodriguez-Esteban C(1), Schwabe JW, De La Peña J, Foys B, Eshelman B, Izpisúa
Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, California 92037,
USA.

Erratum in
    Nature 1997 Aug 28;388(6645):906.

Comment in
    Nature. 1997 Mar 27;386(6623):324-5.

Vertebrate limb outgrowth requires a structure called the apical ectodermal
ridge, formation of which follows the previous establishment of the dorsoventral 
limb axis. Radical fringe is expressed in the dorsal ectoderm before the ridge
appears, and is repressed by Engrailed-1, which is expressed in the ventral
ectoderm. Misexpression of these genes indicates that a ridge is formed wherever 
there is a boundary between cells expressing and not expressing Radical fringe.
Thus, as in Drosophila, Radical fringe positions the ridge at the dorsoventral
limb boundary.

PMID: 9121551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Mech Dev. 1997 Mar;62(2):227-37.

Expression of the helix-loop-helix factor, Hes3, during embryo development
suggests a role in early midbrain-hindbrain patterning.

Lobe CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, LSB 425, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON,
Canada. lobe@mcmail.cis.mcmaster.ca

The Hes gene family members are mammalian homologues of the Drosophila hairy and 
Enhancer of split genes. hairy and Enhancer of split function in both
segmentation and in the Notch neurogenic pathway during Drosophila embryo
development. Previous expression data suggested a conserved role for the Hes
genes in the Notch signalling pathway, but not in segmentation. Here, Hes3
expression during mouse embryogenesis is described. During early development of
the central nervous system, Hes3 is expressed specifically in the region of the
midbrain/hindbrain boundary, and in rhombomeres 2, 4, 6 and 7. This pattern
suggests that Hes3 may have a conserved role as a segmentation gene. Later in
development, Hes3 is co-expressed with other neurogenic gene homologues in the
developing central nervous system and epithelial cells undergoing mesenchyme
induction.

PMID: 9152013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Development. 1997 Mar;124(5):959-69.

Evidence that FGF8 signalling from the midbrain-hindbrain junction regulates
growth and polarity in the developing midbrain.

Lee SM(1), Danielian PS, Fritzsch B, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, The Biolabs, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

The developing vertebrate mesencephalon shows a rostrocaudal gradient in the
expression of a number of molecular markers and in the cytoarchitectonic
differentiation of the tectum, where cells cease proliferating and differentiate 
in a rostral to caudal progression. Tissue grafting experiments have implicated
cell signalling by the mesencephalic-metencephalic (mid-hindbrain) junction (or
isthmus) in orchestrating these events. We have explored the role of Wnt-1 and
FGF8 signalling in the regulation of mesencephalic polarity. Wnt-1 is expressed
in the caudal mesencephalon and Fgf8 in the most rostral metencephalon. Wnt-1
regulates Fgf8 expression in the adjacent metencephalon, most likely via a
secondary mesencephalic signal. Ectopic expression of Fgf8 in the mesencephalon
is sufficient to activate expression of Engrailed-2 (En-2) and ELF-1, two genes
normally expressed in a decreasing caudal to rostral gradient in the posterior
mesencephalon. Ectopic expression of Engrailed-1 (En-1), a functionally
equivalent homologue of En-2 is sufficient to activate ELF-1 expression by
itself. These results indicate the existence of a molecular hierarchy in which
FGF8 signalling establishes the graded expression of En-2 within the tectum. This
in turn may act to specify other aspects of A-P polarity such as graded ELF-1
expression. Our studies also reveal that FGF8 is a potent mitogen within the
mesencephalon: when ectopically expressed, neural precursors continue to
proliferate and neurogenesis is prevented. Taken together our results suggest
that FGF8 signalling from the isthmus has a key role in coordinately regulating
growth and polarity in the developing mesencephalon.

PMID: 9056772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1997 Mar;56(3):236-42.

Expression of the homeobox-containing genes EN1 and EN2 in human fetal
midgestational medulla and cerebellum.

Zec N(1), Rowitch DH, Bitgood MJ, Kinney HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Homeobox-containing genes En-1 and En-2 have been implicated in the control of
pattern formation during development of the central nervous system in
experimental animals. In order to determine whether the expression of homologous 
human EN genes can be used as a developmental genetic marker of the arcuate
nucleus of the medulla (a putative precerebellar nucleus that shows developmental
deficiency in a subset of sudden infant death syndrome [SIDS]), we performed in
situ hybridization with human EN1 and EN2 RNA probes in human fetal
midgestational medulla and cerebellum (18-21 weeks gestational age, n=4).
Expression of EN genes was demonstrated in all neuronal groups of the medulla and
throughout the cerebellum. The RNA signal for both EN1 and EN2 was strongest in
the cerebellar granule cell layers, white matter of the vermis and flocculus,
inferior olive, arcuate nucleus, caudal raphe nuclei, corpus pontobulbare and
nucleus ambiguus. Most of the structures that showed the strongest EN signal
originate in the rhombic lip. Some of these structures are functionally
interconnected, and show pathologic changes in the syndrome of infantile
olivopontocerebellar hypoplasia/atrophy. Strong expression of EN signal in the
arcuate nucleus could be used as a genetic marker of this nucleus in further
developmental studies of the arcuate nucleus in SIDS. Although EN expression is
not specific to the arcuate nucleus or to the rhombic lip derivatives, our
results suggest that rhombic lip derivatives have the highest levels of EN RNA
message among the medullary structures at midgestation.

PMID: 9056537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1997;62:535-44.

Cell interactions in patterning the mammalian midbrain.

Rowitch DH(1), Danielian PS, Lee SM, Echelard Y, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Program in Neonatology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

PMID: 9598387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Development. 1996 Dec;122(12):3851-61.

The chick limbless mutation causes abnormalities in limb bud dorsal-ventral
patterning: implications for the mechanism of apical ridge formation.

Grieshammer U(1), Minowada G, Pisenti JM, Abbott UK, Martin GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Program in Developmental Biology, School of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco 94143-0452, USA.

In chick embryos homozygous for the limbless mutation, limb bud outgrowth is
initiated, but a morphologically distinct apical ridge does not develop and limbs
do not form. Here we report the results of an analysis of gene expression in
limbless mutant limb buds. Fgf4, Fgf8, Bmp2 and Msx2, genes that are expressed in
the apical ridge of normal limb buds, are not expressed in the mutant limb bud
ectoderm, providing molecular support for the hypothesis that limb development
fails in the limbless embryo because of the inability of the ectoderm to form a
functional ridge. Moreover, Fgf8 expression is not detected in the ectoderm of
the prospective limb territory or the early limb bud of limbless embryos. Since
the early stages of limb bud outgrowth occur normally in the mutant embryos, this
indicates that FGF8 is not required to promote initial limb bud outgrowth. In the
absence of FGF8, Shh is also not expressed in the mutant limb buds, although its 
expression can be induced by application of FGF8-soaked beads. These observations
support the hypothesis that Fgf8 is required for the induction of Shh expression 
during normal limb development. Bmp2 expression was also not detected in mutant
limb mesoderm, consistent with the hypothesis that SHH induces its expression. In
contrast, SHH is not required for the induction of Hoxd11 or Hoxd13 expression,
since expression of both these genes was detected in the mutant limb buds. Thus, 
some aspects of mesoderm A-P patterning can occur in the absence of SHH and
factors normally expressed in the apical ridge. Intriguingly, mutant limbs
rescued by local application of FGF displayed a dorsalized feather pattern.
Furthermore, the expression of Wnt7a, Lmx1 and En1, genes involved in limb D-V
patterning, was found to be abnormal in mutant limb buds. These data suggest that
D-V patterning and apical ridge formation are linked, since they show that the
limbless mutation affects both processes. We present a model that explains the
potential link between D-V positional information and apical ridge formation, and
discuss the possible function of the limbless gene in terms of this model.

PMID: 9012506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Neurophysiol. 1996 Dec;76(6):3983-93.

Different mechanisms regulate IPSC kinetics in early postnatal and juvenile
hippocampal granule cells.

Draguhn A(1), Heinemann U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologie der Charité, Abt. Neurophysiologie, Berlin, Germany.

1. Monosynaptic inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs) were recorded from early
postnatal and juvenile dentate granule cells in rat brain slices at room
temperature. The focally evoked currents were mediated by gamma-aminobutyric
acid-A (GABAA) receptors. 2. IPSCs were characterized by a steep rising phase and
a slower, monoexponential decay time course. The decay time constant was
potential dependent and average values ranged from 33 ms at a holding potential
of -60 mV to 58 ms at a holding potential of +40 mV. 3. IPSCs were studied in
tissue from animals between postnatal day (p) 3 and p25. All kinetic parameters
as well as the mean current amplitude were unchanged during this ontogenetic
period. 4. In juvenile granule cells from animals aged 13-16 days, addition of
the GABA uptake blocker (R)-N-[4,4-bis (3-methyl-2-thienyl) but-3-en1-yl]
nipecotic acid (tiagabine) (10 microM) prolonged the decaying phase of the IPSCs.
The current decay remained monoexponential but the time constant increased to
250% of control values. Mean current amplitudes remained largely unchanged. 5. In
contrast, tiagabine had no effect on IPSCs in early postnatal tissue. The decay
time constant remained unchanged in cells recorded from animals aged p4-p6. Other
uptake blockers were also ineffective during the first postnatal week, whereas
beta-alanine, NNC-711, and L-2,3-diaminoproprionic acid enhanced the decay time
constant in the older tissue (p13-p16). 6. Hypoosmolaric extracellular solution
was applied to restrict the extracellular space. In juvenile tissue (p13-p16),
IPSCs were not affected by this treatment, whereas early postnatal granule cells 
(p4-p6) displayed clearly prolonged IPSC decay time constants (165% of control). 
7. We conclude that the mechanism governing the kinetics of evoked IPSCs in
granule cells changes during ontogenesis. Whereas in early postnatal tissue the
transmitter leaves the postsynaptic site by diffusion, GABA uptake becomes time
limiting after 2 wk of postnatal development.

PMID: 8985894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Nov 26;93(24):13870-5.

The mouse Pax2(1Neu) mutation is identical to a human PAX2 mutation in a family
with renal-coloboma syndrome and results in developmental defects of the brain,
ear, eye, and kidney.

Favor J(1), Sandulache R, Neuhäuser-Klaus A, Pretsch W, Chatterjee B, Senft E,
Wurst W, Blanquet V, Grimes P, Spörle R, Schughart K.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of
Mammalian Genetics, Oberschleissheim, Germany.

We describe a new mouse frameshift mutation (Pax2(1Neu)) with a 1-bp insertion in
the Pax2 gene. This mutation is identical to a previously described mutation in a
human family with renal-coloboma syndrome [Sanyanusin, P., McNoe, L. A.,
Sullivan, M. J., Weaver, R. G. & Eccles, M. R. (1995) Hum. Mol. Genet. 4,
2183-2184]. Heterozygous mutant mice exhibit defects in the kidney, the optic
nerve, and retinal layer of the eye, and in homozygous mutant embryos,
development of the optic nerve, metanephric kidney, and ventral regions of the
inner ear is severely affected. In addition, we observe a deletion of the
cerebellum and the posterior mesencephalon in homozygous mutant embryos
demonstrating that, in contrast to mutations in Pax5, which is also expressed
early in the mid-hindbrain region, loss of Pax2 gene function alone results in
the early loss of the mid-hindbrain region. The mid-hindbrain phenotype is
similar to Wnt1 and En1 mutant phenotypes, suggesting the conservation of gene
regulatory networks between vertebrates and Drosophila.

PMCID: PMC19453
PMID: 8943028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Neurobiol. 1996 Nov;31(3):275-82.

Cell death in the CNS of the Wnt-1 mutant mouse.

Serbedzija GN(1), Dickinson M, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA. serbedzija@wru.mgh.harvard.edu

Using the benzothiazolium-4-quinolium dye, TO-PRO-1, to detect cell death in live
embryos, we labeled a developmental series of Wnt-1 null mutant and wild type
embryos to determine if cell death contributed to the absence of the midbrain and
rostral metencephalon observed in Wnt-1 mutant embryos. We found that there is no
detectable cell death at early somite stages in Wnt-1 mutant embryos. However, we
detected a significant, but transient, population of dying cells within the
anterior dorsal metencephalon in 20-29 somite stage embryos. These cells located 
in the anterior dorsal metencephalon also stain positive using the TUNEL
technique that utilizes terminal transferase to label DNA fragments that are
typical in the nuclei of apoptotic cells. Thus, programmed cell death plays a
role in the loss of the metencephalon, but apparently does not contribute to the 
earliest aspect of the mutant phenotype, namely the loss of the midbrain.

PMID: 8910786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Nature. 1996 Sep 26;383(6598):332-4.

Engrailed-1 as a target of the Wnt-1 signalling pathway in vertebrate midbrain
development.

Danielian PS(1), McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

A secreted signalling molecule encoded by the Wnt-1 gene is required for
development of the central nervous system. In mouse embryos homozygous for a
Wnt-1-null allele, the midbrain and anterior hindbrain fail to develop. This
corresponds to the region where two transcription factors encoded by the mouse
engrailed genes (En-1 and En-2) are normally expressed. Studies of the Drosophila
orthologue of Wnt-1, wingless, indicate that Wingless signal is required to
maintain engrailed expression in neighbouring cells of the developing epidermis. 
Here we report that expression of En-1 in the developing midbrain of Wnt-1-null
embryos is sufficient to rescue early midbrain and anterior hindbrain
development. This suggests that a key role of Wnt-1 signalling is to maintain En 
expression and that this aspect of the Wnt-1/engrailed interaction has been
conserved from flies to mice.

PMID: 8848044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Curr Biol. 1996 Aug 1;6(8):1006-14.

Rostral optic tectum acquires caudal characteristics following ectopic engrailed 
expression.

Logan C(1), Wizenmann A, Drescher U, Monschau B, Bonhoeffer F, Lumsden A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, UMDS, Guy's Hospital, London SE1
9RT, UK.

BACKGROUND: Expression of the homeobox-containing gene Engrailed (En) in an
increasing rostral-to-caudal gradient in the dorsal mesencephalon is the earliest
known marker for polarity of the chick optic tectum. In heterotopic
transplantation experiments, En protein expression correlates well with the
subsequent gradient of cytoarchitecture as well as the pattern of retinotectal
projections. The En gradient also correlates with the expression of two putative 
retinal axon-guidance molecules, RAGS and ELF-1, which are Eph-like receptor
tyrosine kinase ligands that may function in the establishment of retinotopic
projections by excluding temporal axons from the caudal tectum.
RESULTS: To examine the function of En in determining tectal polarity, we used
the replication-competent retroviral vector RCAS to misexpress mouse En-1
throughout the chick tectal primordium. Our results show that the rostral portion
of the tectum adopts a caudal phenotype: the gradient of cytoarchitectonic
differentiation is abolished, and the molecular markers RAGS and ELF-1 are
strongly expressed rostrally. In addition, cell membranes from rostral tectum of 
RCAS En-1-infected embryos preferentially repel temporal axons in in vitro
membrane stripe assays.
CONCLUSIONS: These results are consistent with a role for En in determining
rostrocaudal polarity of the developing tectum. The demonstration that both RAGS 
and ELF-1 are upregulated following En misexpression provides a molecular basis
for understanding the previous observation, also based on retrovirus-mediated En 
misexpression, that nasal axons form ectopic connections in rostral tectum, from 
which temporal axons are excluded.

PMID: 8805331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Nature. 1996 Jul 25;382(6589):360-3.

The mouse Engrailed-1 gene and ventral limb patterning.

Loomis CA(1), Harris E, Michaud J, Wurst W, Hanks M, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Ronald O. Perelman Deparment of Dermatology, New York University Medical
School 10016, USA.

During vertebrate limb development, positional information must be specified
along three distinct axes. Although much progress has been made in our
understanding of the molecular interactions involved in anterior-posterior and
proximal-distal limb patterning, less is known about dorsal-ventral patterning.
The genes Wnt-7a and Lmx-1, which are expressed in dorsal limb ectoderm and
mesoderm, respectively, are thought to be important regulators of dorsal limb
differentiation. Whether a complementary set of molecules controls ventral limb
development has not been clear. Here we report that Engrailed-1, a
homeodomain-containing transcription factor expressed in embryonic ventral limb
ectoderm, is essential for ventral limb patterning. Loss of Engrailed-1 function 
in mice results in dorsal transformations of ventral paw structures, and in
subtle alterations along the proximal-distal limb axis. Engrailed-1 seems to act 
in part by repressing dorsal differentiation induced by Wnt-7a, and is essential 
for proper formation of the apical ectodermal ridge.

PMID: 8684466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Cell. 1996 Jan 26;84(2):309-20.

Requirement for LIM homeobox gene Isl1 in motor neuron generation reveals a motor
neuron-dependent step in interneuron differentiation.

Pfaff SL(1), Mendelsohn M, Stewart CL, Edlund T, Jessell TM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecule
Biophysics, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Motor neuron differentiation is accompanied by the expression of a LIM
homeodomain transcription factor, Islet1 (ISL1). To assess the involvement of
ISL1 in the generation of motor neurons, we analyzed cell differentiation in the 
neural tube of embryos in which ISL1 expression has been eliminated by gene
targeting. Motor neurons are not generated without ISL1, although many other
aspects of cell differentiation in the neural tube occur normally. A population
of interneurons that express Engrailed1 (EN1), however, also fails to
differentiate in Isl1 mutant embryos. The differentiation of EN1+ interneurons
can be induced in both wild-type and mutant neural tissue by regions of the
neural tube that contain motor neurons. These results show that ISL1 is required 
for the generation of motor neurons and suggest that motor neuron generation is
required for the subsequent differentiation of certain interneurons.

PMID: 8565076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Science. 1995 Aug 4;269(5224):679-82.

Rescue of the En-1 mutant phenotype by replacement of En-1 with En-2.

Hanks M(1), Wurst W, Anson-Cartwright L, Auerbach AB, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Mt. Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada.

Comment in
    Science. 1995 Aug 4;269(5224):636.

The related mouse Engrailed genes En-1 and En-2 are expressed from the one- and
approximately five-somite stages, respectively, in a similar presumptive
mid-hindbrain domain. However, mutations in En-1 and En-2 produce different
phenotypes. En-1 mutant mice die at birth with a large mid-hindbrain deletion,
whereas En-2 mutants are viable, with cerebellar defects. To determine whether
these contrasting phenotypes reflect differences in temporal expression or
biochemical activity of the En proteins, En-1 coding sequences were replaced with
En-2 sequences by gene targeting. This rescued all En-1 mutant defects,
demonstrating that the difference between En-1 and En-2 stems from their
divergent expression patterns.

PMID: 7624797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Science. 1995 Aug 4;269(5224):636.

Knocking genes in instead of out.

Marx J.

Comment on
    Science. 1995 Aug 4;269(5224):679-82.

PMID: 7624790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mech Dev. 1995 Jul;52(1):3-8.

Pax-2 expression in the murine neural plate precedes and encompasses the
expression domains of Wnt-1 and En-1.

Rowitch DH(1), McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

In the Drosophila embryo, activation of wingless and engrailed in the parasegment
requires paired, a member of the Pax family of transcription factors. We have
explored the possible conservation of this regulatory hierarchy in the developing
mouse brain. We find that Pax-2 is expressed prior to somite formation in the
presumptive mid/hindbrain region. Shortly thereafter, Wnt-1 (the wingless
orthologue) and Engrailed-1 are expressed in overlapping regions within the Pax-2
domain. Pax-5 expression commences later, at the 3-somite stage. Thus, the
spatial and temporal expression of Pax-2 is consistent with a possible regulatory
role in the activation of Wnt-1 and En-1.

PMID: 7577673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jun 6;92(12):5709-13.

Deregulated expression of PAX5 in medulloblastoma.

Kozmik Z(1), Sure U, Rüedi D, Busslinger M, Aguzzi A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.

Medulloblatoma is a pediatric brain tumor originating in the human cerebellum. A 
collection of 23 medulloblastomas was analyzed for expression of the
developmental control genes of the PAX and EN gene families by RNase protection
and in situ hybridization. Of all nine PAX genes investigated, only PAX5 and PAX6
were consistently expressed in most medulloblastomas (70 and 78% of all cases,
respectively), as were the genes EN1 (57%) and EN2 (78%). EN1, EN2, and PAX6
genes were also expressed in normal cerebellar tissue, and their expression in
medulloblastoma is consistent with the hypothesis that this tumor originates in
the external granular layer of the developing cerebellum. PAX5 transcripts were, 
however, not detected in the neonatal cerebellum, indicating that this gene is
deregulated in medulloblastoma. In the desmoplastic variant of medulloblastoma,
PAX5 expression was restricted to the reticulin-producing proliferating tumor
areas containing undifferentiated cells; PAX5 was not expressed in the
reticulin-free nonproliferating islands undergoing neuronal differentiation.
These data suggest that deregulated expression of PAX5 correlates positively with
cell proliferation and inversely with neuronal differentiation in desmoplastic
medulloblastoma.

PMCID: PMC41766
PMID: 7777574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Teratology. 1995 May;51(5):300-10.

Antisense inhibition of engrailed genes in mouse embryos reveals roles for these 
genes in craniofacial and neural tube development.

Augustine KA(1), Liu ET, Sadler TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill 27599, USA.

The roles of engrailed-1 (En-1) and engrailed-2 (En-2) have been investigated
during gastrulation and neurulation in mouse embryos. Using antisense
oligonucleotides and murine whole embryo culture, early somite embryos were
injected with antisense phosphorothioated oligonucleotides directed against En-1 
or En-2 transcripts and then grown in vitro for 48 hr. Inhibition of En-1 by
antisense targeting during this period resulted in embryos with craniofacial
abnormalities, specifically loss of mid- and hindbrain tissue and hypoplasia in
associated neural crest derived areas such as the face and first and second
pharyngeal arches. In addition, En-1 appeared to be essential in early patterning
of the neural tube. Embryos removed from culture as early as 8 hr following
injection exhibited undulations in the presumptive spinal cord. Histological
analysis of the affected neural tubes at 48 hr showed disrupted cytoarchitecture 
and in some cases, apparent dorsal-ventral duplication of the neural tube and
underlying notochord. Using S100 beta as a notochord marker, embryos removed from
culture at 8 or 12 hr following injection exhibited loss of S100 beta expression 
in the notochord region subjacent to affected neural tube segments, suggesting
that S100 beta, or other notochordal genes, may be downstream components of the
En-1 regulatory cascade. Furthermore, antisense inhibition of En-1 induced caudal
dysgenesis, suggesting disruption in primitive streak function. Antisense
targeting of En-2 expression of early somite stages produced few alterations in
development, although approximately one third of the embryos exhibited a series
of lateral folds in the spinal cord at the level of the forelimb-bud.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7482351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Teratology. 1995 May;51(5):292-9.

Antisense targeting of engrailed-1 causes abnormal axis formation in mouse
embryos.

Sadler TW(1), Liu ET, Augustine KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill 27599, USA.

Antisense oligonucleotide targeting of engrailed-1 (En-1) in early somite mouse
embryos resulted in reduced En protein levels and produced abnormalities of the
brain, face, and heart and shortening of the embryonic axis (caudal dysgenesis). 
Defects of the brain and limbs were consistent with abnormalities observed in
null mutant mice described by other investigators. Abnormalities of the face and 
heart may be related to alterations in neural crest cells. Caudal dysgenesis
suggested a role for En-1 in axis formation and this hypothesis was supported by 
results showing that En-1 protein and mRNA are present in the primitive streak.
Thus, in addition to participating in the signaling pathway for brain and limb
development, En-1 appears to play a role in patterning the embryonic axis.

PMID: 7482350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Development. 1994 Jul;120(7):2065-75.

Multiple developmental defects in Engrailed-1 mutant mice: an early mid-hindbrain
deletion and patterning defects in forelimbs and sternum.

Wurst W(1), Auerbach AB, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Mt. Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada.

During mouse development, the homeobox-containing gene En-1 is specifically
expressed across the mid-hindbrain junction, the ventral ectoderm of the limb
buds, and in regions of the hindbrain, spinal cord, somites and somite-derived
tissues. To address the function of En-1 during embryogenesis, we have generated 
mice homozygous for a targeted deletion of the En-1 homeobox. En-1 mutant mice
died shortly after birth and exhibited multiple developmental defects. In the
brains of newborn mutants, most of the colliculi and cerebellum were missing and 
the third and fourth cranial nerves were absent. A deletion of midhindbrain
tissue was observed as early as 9.5 days of embryonic development and the
phenotype resembles that previously reported for Wnt-1 mutant mice. In addition, 
patterning of the forelimb paws and sternum was disrupted, and the 13th ribs were
truncated. The results of these studies suggest a cell autonomous role for En-1
in generation and/or survival of mid-hindbrain precursor cells and also a
non-cell autonomous role in signalling normal development of the limbs and
possibly sternum.

PMID: 7925010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. FEBS Lett. 1993 Dec 20;336(1):107-10.

The HOX complex neighbored by the EVX gene, as well as two other
homeobox-containing genes, the GBX-class and the EN-class, are located on the
same chromosomes 2 and 7 in humans.

Matsui T(1), Hirai M, Hirano M, Kurosawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita Health University, Aichi, 
Japan.

Two newly identified human homeobox-containing genes, GBX1 and GBX2, are closely 
related genes, as are members of the other homeobox genes, EN-1 and EN-2. GBX1
and EN-2 have been mapped to chromosome 7q36. The present study shows that GBX2
was mapped to chromosome 2q37. EN-1 was mapped to chromosome 2q14. Moreover, two 
HOX complexes neighbored by the EVX gene, HOXA and HOXD, are located at
chromosome 7p15-p14 and 2q31-q37, respectively. Thus, it is possible that these
homeobox genes were linked to each other on an ancestral genome and that the
ancestral chromosome segment was duplicated during evolution.

PMID: 7903253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;13(4):2354-65.

Nucleotides flanking a conserved TAAT core dictate the DNA binding specificity of
three murine homeodomain proteins.

Catron KM(1), Iler N, Abate C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, New Jersey.

Murine homeobox genes play a fundamental role in directing embryogenesis by
controlling gene expression during development. The homeobox encodes a DNA
binding domain (the homeodomain) which presumably mediates interactions of
homeodomain proteins with specific DNA sites in the control regions of target
genes. However, the bases for these selective DNA-protein interactions are not
well defined. In this report, we have characterized the DNA binding specificities
of three murine homeodomain proteins, Hox 7.1, Hox 1.5, and En-1. We have
identified optimal DNA binding sites for each of these proteins by using a random
oligonucleotide selection strategy. Comparison of the sequences of the selected
binding sites predicted a common consensus site that contained the motif
(C/G)TAATTG. The TAAT core was essential for DNA binding activity, and the
nucleotides flanking this core directed binding specificity. Whereas variations
in the nucleotides flanking the 5' side of the TAAT core produced modest
alterations in binding activity for all three proteins, perturbations of the
nucleotides directly 3' of the core distinguished the binding specificity of Hox 
1.5 from those of Hox 7.1 and En-1. These differences in binding activity
reflected differences in the dissociation rates rather than the equilibrium
constants of the protein-DNA complexes. Differences in DNA binding specificities 
observed in vitro may contribute to selective interactions of homeodomain
proteins with potential binding sites in the control regions of target genes.

PMCID: PMC359556
PMID: 8096059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mol Gen Genet. 1993 Feb;237(1-2):105-12.

Genetic and molecular analysis of a three-component transposable-element system
in maize.

Muszynski MG(1), Gierl A, Peterson PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agronomy, Iowa State University, Ames 50011.

Two different factors control the mutability of an unstable allele (c2-m881058Y) 
of the C2 gene of maize. Both an autonomous En/Spm element and an unrelated
independent factor, named Mediator, are coordinately required for the excision of
the insert in c2-m881058Y. According to genetic analysis, Mediator does not have 
the suppressor (S) function or mutator (M) function of En/Spm. Mediator has no
effect on the timing or frequency of excision of En1, En-low, or various I/dSpm
elements. Hence, Mediator only mediates a specific interaction between En and the
insert at c2-m881058Y. Molecular analysis of c2-m881058Y has revealed a 3.3 kb,
complex, En-related receptor element inserted into the second exon of the C2
gene. The ends of this element are homologous to the ends of En/Spm, but an
internal 1.7 kb region shows no En/Spm homology. A great degree (11-14%) of
nucleotide changes, relative to En1, occur within and between the 12 bp TNPA
binding motifs. Alterations of these critical cis-determinants may account for
the need for a "helper" factor for excision. This element is named Irma, for
Inhibitor that requires Mediator also, and represents a unique, low copy number
class of receptor element.

PMID: 8384288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Anim Sci. 1993 Jan;71(1):57-65.

Animal model estimation of additive and dominance variances in egg production
traits of poultry.

Wei M(1), van der Werf JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Breeding, Wageningen Agricultural University, The
Netherlands.

An animal model analysis was used to estimate simultaneously additive (sigma 2a) 
and dominance (sigma 2d) variances for egg production traits within three White
Leghorn lines. The data consisted of information for three generations on egg
number (EN) produced at 18 to 25 (EN1), 26 to 65 (EN2), and 18 to 65 wk of age
(EN3); egg weight (EW) measured at 30 to 35 (EW1) and 40 to 45 wk (EW2); and egg 
specific gravity (ESG) measured at 30 to 35 (ESG1) and 40 to 45 wk (ESG2). A
transformation was used for EN2 and EN3 because of a skewed distribution. In
total, 813 sires, 2,575 dams, and 28,649 daughters were involved in the analyses.
Three genetic models (sire-dam, additive, and dominance) were compared in
estimating heritability (h2). The sire-dam model underestimated h2 because it
ignored animal relationships. The h2 estimates from the additive model were
approximately 9 to 52% higher for EN and 2 to 18% higher for EW and ESG than
those from the dominance model. The differences between the h2 estimates from the
additive and dominance models were increased for larger dominance variance sigma 
2d. Ratios of sigma 2d to total variance were high for EN (10 to 20%) and low for
EW and ESG (1 to 13%). Ratios of sigma 2d to total genetic variance for EN1, EN2,
EN3, EW1, EW2, ESG1, and ESG2 were 18 to 36, 29 to 43, 29 to 56, 1 to 26, 3 to 8,
20 to 27, and 2 to 14%, respectively.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8454553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Genomics. 1993 Jan;15(1):233-5.

Regional assignment of the human homeobox-containing gene EN1 to chromosome
2q13-q21.

Köhler A(1), Logan C, Joyner AL, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104.

The human homeobox-containing genes EN1 and EN2 are closely related to the
Drosophila pattern formation gene engrailed (en), which may be important in brain
development, as shown by gene expression studies during mouse embryogenesis.
Here, we have refined the localization of EN1 to human chromosome 2q13-q21 using 
a mapping panel of rodent/human cell hybrids containing different regions of
chromosome 2 and a lymphoblastoid cell line with an interstitial deletion,
del(2)(q21-q23.2). This regional assignment of EN1 increases to 22 the number of 
currently known genes on human chromosome 2q that have homologs on the proximal
region of mouse chromosome 1.

PMID: 8094370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Perspect Dev Neurobiol. 1993;1(3):127-32.

Regional specification during cerebellar development.

Wassef M(1), Bally-Cuif L, Alvarado-Mallart RM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U106, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

At early phases of development (stage HH12 of chick and quail embryos) the
rostral part of the cerebellar anlage extends into the caudal third of the
mesencephalic vesicle. This region is characterized by its high level of
expression of the Wnt-1 and engrailed genes, which encode, respectively, for a
secreted molecule and for a homeodomain protein. In order to analyze the
potentialities of various parts of the cerebellar anlage, pieces of quail or
mouse embryonic neural tubes have been transplanted heterotopically in the
prosencephalon of HH12 chick embryos. These experiments indicated that signals
operating in the plane of the neural tube are still operating in the donor avian 
and murine embryos. The met- mes- and prosencephalic territories of HH12 chick
embryos are still competent to change their fates under the influence of these
signals. It was also found that the Wnt-1 expression domain, the caudal
mesencephalic vesicle, has striking organizing properties until late stages of
development in avian and rodent embryos. The exact role of Wnt-1 in these
inductive interactions is still unknown. Wnt-1 influence on cell fate could be
mediated by the engrailed genes. Observations suggesting a later role of en-2 in 
the regionalization of the cerebellar cortex are also reported.

PMID: 8087538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Dev Biol. 1989 Sep;135(1):31-42.

Allelic interactions at the engrailed locus of Drosophila: engrailed protein
expression in imaginal discs.

Condie JM(1), Brower DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson
85721.

Many embryonic lethal engrailed (enlethal) mutations are known to partially
complement the cuticular defects of the original engrailed mutation, en1. To
explore the nature of this complementation, the adult phenotypes of several
different en1/enlethal transheterozygotes were compared with the corresponding
patterns of engrailed protein expression in third larval instar imaginal discs
(determined by immunofluorescence). Transheterozygotes of en1 and deletions of
the locus (enDf) typically show slight complementation in the adult cuticle. The 
pattern of engrailed protein expression in some en1/enDf wing discs is
indistinguishable from en1 homozygotes, but in others the pattern is nearly
normal. en1/enDf leg discs appear to express engrailed protein normally.
Transheterozygotes of en1 and EMS-induced, cytologically normal enlethal alleles 
have almost normal adult cuticle phenotypes and also exhibit normal patterns of
engrailed protein expression in all of the thoracic imaginal discs. Surprisingly,
the intensity of anti-engrailed staining in these discs is elevated relative to
that in wild type. en2 is an unusual lethal allele in that it does not complement
either the en1 adult cuticle phenotype or the protein expression pattern in
imaginal discs. Moreover, the cytologically normal enlethal alleles also
complement en2, at least partially. Both wing and leg imaginal discs from
en2/enlethal transheterozygotes show abnormal patterns of engrailed protein
expression. These results are discussed in the context of an autoregulatory model
for engrailed regulation.

PMID: 2504633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Nucleic Acids Res. 1989 Apr 11;17(7):2877.

An HaeIII RFLP for the human homeo box-containing gene EN1.

Logan C(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai Hospital Research Institute, Department of Medical Genetics,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

PMCID: PMC317685
PMID: 2566152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Genomics. 1989 Feb;4(2):206-9.

Chromosomal localization of the human homeo box-containing genes, EN1 and EN2.

Logan C(1), Willard HF, Rommens JM, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Mount Sinai Hospital Research
Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The human homologs of the mouse homeo box-containing genes, En-1 and En-2, which 
show homology to the Drosophila engrailed gene, have been isolated. The human EN1
gene was mapped to chromosome 2 by analysis of mouse-human somatic cell hybrids. 
The human EN2 gene was localized to chromosome 7, 7q32-7qter, by analysis of
rodent-human somatic cell hybrids and cell lines carrying portions of chromosome 
7.

PMID: 2567700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. FEBS Lett. 1988 Aug 1;235(1-2):129-32.

Tyrosine sulfation is not the last modification of entactin before its secretion 
from 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Aratani Y(1), Kitagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biochemical Regulation, School of Agriculture, Nagoya
University, Japan.

Tyrosine sulfation of entactin was studied by labeling of 3T3-L1 adipocytes with 
[35S]methionine or H2 35SO4 in the presence or absence of tunicamycin or
monensin. Four precursors (EN1-4) at different steps of modification were
detected in addition to mature entactin. Under normal conditions, EN2 and mature 
entactin were intracellular species, and the latter was sulfated and secreted.
Inhibition of co-translational transfer of N-linked oligosaccharides by
tunicamycin produced EN1 and EN3 as intracellular species, and EN3 was sulfated
and secreted. Interruption of protein transport from medial to trans (distal)
Golgi cisternae by monensin, and consequent blockage of terminal glycosylation
caused intracellular accumulation of EN4. EN4 was sulfated and of different size 
compared to mature entactin. These facts suggested that tyrosine sulfation of
entactin occurs in medial Golgi cisternae and is not the last modification before
its secretion. Our results appeared inconsistent with recent observations by
Baeuerle and Huttner [(1987) J. Cell Biol. 105, 2655-2664] that tyrosine
sulfation of IgM occurred within the trans (distal) Golgi cisternae as the last
modification before its exit from the Golgi complex.

PMID: 3042455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. EMBO J. 1986 Oct;5(10):2649-56.

Engrailed gene expression in Drosophila imaginal discs.

Brower DL.

Genetic and molecular analyses indicate that the Drosophila engrailed gene is
required to distinguish posterior from anterior compartments in each segment of
the developing animal. Here, the patterns of engrailed expression in the imaginal
discs and ventral ganglion of Drosophila larvae are examined, using an antiserum 
against the engrailed protein and a novel image processing method to reduce
non-specific background. As expected, engrailed expression generally is
restricted to cells in the posterior compartment of the discs, and the patterns
of expression allow refinements in the fate maps of the discs to be made. More
significant is the finding that expression of the gene is highly variable in
different regions of posterior compartments, suggesting that engrailed may do
more than simply specify 'posteriorness'. In the ventral ganglion engrailed
appears to be expressed by a subset of cells, primarily in the posterior regions 
of each segment. In wing discs from animals that are homozygous for the en1
mutation, the pattern of expression of the gene is altered, as opposed to being
simply reduced uniformly in the posterior cells.

PMCID: PMC1167165
PMID: 3536480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. EMBO J. 1986 May;5(5):829-33.

Molecular cloning of the c locus of Zea mays: a locus regulating the anthocyanin 
pathway.

Paz-Ares J(1), Wienand U, Peterson PA, Saedler H.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institut für Züchtungsforschung, Egelspfad, D-5000 Köln 30, FRG.

The c locus of Zea mays, involved in the regulation of anthocyanin biosynthesis, 
has been cloned by transposon tagging. A clone (# 18En) containing a full size
En1 element was initially isolated from the En element-induced mutable allele
c-m668655. Sequences of clone # 18En flanking the En1 element were used to clone 
other c mutants, whose structure was predicted genetically. Clone #23En (isolated
from c-m668613) contained a full size En1 element, clone #3Ds (isolated from
c-m2) a Ds element and clone # 5 (isolated from c+) had no element on the cloned 
fragment. From these data we conclude that the clones obtained contain at least
part of the c locus. Preliminary data on transcript analysis using a 1-kb DNA
fragment from wild-type clone # 5 showed that at least three transcripts are
encoded by that part of the locus, indicating that c is a complex locus.

PMCID: PMC1166870
PMID: 15957214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. EMBO J. 1985 Apr;4(4):877-82.

Molecular cloning of the a1 locus of Zea mays using the transposable elements En 
and Mu1.

O'Reilly C(1), Shepherd NS, Pereira A, Schwarz-Sommer Z, Bertram I, Robertson DS,
Peterson PA, Saedler H.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Züchtungsforschung, 5000 Köln 30, FRG.

The a1 locus of Zea mays has been cloned using transposable elements as gene
tags. The strategy was to make genomic libraries from maize stocks with a1
mutations induced either by En(Spm) or by Robertson's Mutator-system. These
libraries were then screened with either Spm-I8 and En1, for the En-containing
mutant, or with Mu1 for the Mu-induced mutation. There are many En and Mu1
hybridizing sequences present in the maize genome, however, by a process of
cross-screening of the positives from the two libraries and by molecular analysis
of the En-positive clones it was possible to identify clones in both libraries
carrying all or part of the a1 gene.

PMCID: PMC554274
PMID: 15938046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Dev Biol. 1983 Nov;100(1):227-37.

Effects of deficiencies in the engrailed region of Drosophila melanogaster.

Eberlein S, Russell MA.

The engrailed gene of Drosophila melanogaster is believed to be involved in
control of determination and differentiation of posterior compartments. en1/en1
causes a partial transformation of the posterior compartment of wing and first
leg to mirror-image anterior, which prompted the hypothesis that engrailed + is a
"selector gene" required for the posterior pathway decision. The incomplete
transformation was thought due to residual en+ activity in en1; a deletion of
engrailed (en28) was constructed to determine if a complete transformation can
occur. en28 is homozygous lethal and cell lethal. en28/en1 survives to adult
stage, but causes a weaker transformation than en1/en1, indicating that en1 is
not a simple hypomorph. A more distal deletion, en30, survives over en-lethal
alleles. Both en30/en1 and en28/en30 survive to adult stage, but do not cause a
stronger posterior to anterior transformation than en1/en1; thus this effect may 
be allele specific. New abnormalities included (1) transformation of the
posterior wing blade to haltere, an effect dependent on the bx+ (but not pbx+)
pseudoallele of the bithorax complex; (2) abnormal bristle pattern, tarsal
fusion, and degenerate posterior claws of all legs. Although these abnormalities 
are posterior compartment specific, they are not expected of a "selector gene."
Thus the function of engrailed may be more complex than originally believed.

PMID: 6413273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Dev Biol. 1983 Sep;99(1):27-33.

The phenotype of engrailed mutations in the antenna of Drosophila.

Morata G, Kornberg T, Lawrence PA.

The eye-antenna imaginal disc of Drosophila is subdivided into anterior and
posterior compartments and it is expected therefore that the engrailed gene would
be locally required in the posterior compartment. Here we describe the phenotype 
of engrailed mutations in the antenna. Clones of cells which were mutant for
en1/enC2 were produced in wild-type antennae by mitotic recombination. The clones
showed the typical syndrome of cells mutant for engrailed, being normal in the
anterior compartment and showing partial posterior-to-anterior transformation in 
the posterior compartment.

PMID: 6413277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


