
1. Neuroscience. 2016 Mar 14;324:252-261. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.03.023.
[Epub ahead of print]

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor signaling is altered in the forebrain of
Engrailed-2 knockout mice.

Zunino G(1), Messina A(2), Sgadò P(1), Baj G(3), Casarosa S(4), Bozzi Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropathology, Centre for Integrative Biology,
University of Trento, Italy. (2)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Centre 
for Integrative Biology, University of Trento, Italy. (3)Laboratory of Cellular
and Developmental Neurobiology, Department of Life Sciences, University of
Trieste, Italy. (4)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Centre for
Integrative Biology, University of Trento, Italy; CNR Institute of Neuroscience, 
CNR, Pisa, Italy. (5)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropathology, Centre for
Integrative Biology, University of Trento, Italy; CNR Institute of Neuroscience, 
CNR, Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: yuri.bozzi@unitn.it.

Engrailed-2 (En2), a homeodomain transcription factor involved in regionalization
and patterning of the midbrain and hindbrain regions has been associated to
autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). En2 knockout (En2(-/-)) mice show ASD-like
features accompanied by a significant loss of GABAergic subpopulations in the
hippocampus and neocortex. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a crucial 
factor for the postnatal development of forebrain GABAergic neurons, and altered 
GABA signaling has been hypothesized to underlie the symptoms of ASD. Here we
sought to determine whether interneuron loss in the En2(-/-) forebrain might be
related to altered expression of BDNF and its signaling receptors. We first
evaluated the expression of different BDNF mRNA isoforms in the neocortex and
hippocampus of wild-type (WT) and En2(-/-) mice. Quantitative RT-PCR showed a
marked down-regulation of several splicing variants of BDNF mRNA in the neocortex
but not hippocampus of adult En2(-/-) mice, as compared to WT controls.
Accordingly, levels of mature BDNF protein were lower in the neocortex but not
hippocampus of En2(-/-) mice, as compared to WT. Increased levels of
phosphorylated TrkB and decreased levels of p75 receptor were also detected in
the neocortex of mutant mice. Accordingly, the expression of low density
lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and RhoA, two genes regulated via p75 was
significantly altered in forebrain areas of mutant mice. These data indicate that
BDNF signaling alterations might be involved in the anatomical changes observed
in the En2(-/-) forebrain and suggest a pathogenic role of altered BDNF signaling
in this mouse model of ASD.

Copyright © 2016 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26987954  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Mol Histol. 2016 Mar 7. [Epub ahead of print]

Engrailed-2 might play an anti-oncogenic role in clear-cell renal cell carcinoma.

Lai CY(1,)(2), Xu Y(3), Yu GS(1), Wu X(1), Li YF(1), Pan B(1), Heng BL(1), Xue
YJ(2), Su ZX(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, No. 
613 Huang Pu Rd, Guangzhou, 510630, China. (2)Department of Urology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Gannan Medical College, Ganzhou, 341000, China.
(3)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, No. 
613 Huang Pu Rd, Guangzhou, 510630, China. 122564057@qq.com. (4)Department of
Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, No. 613 Huang Pu Rd, 
Guangzhou, 510630, China. 541162750@qq.com.

Our preliminary study indicated that Engrailed-2 (EN2) is downregulated but also 
ectopically expressed in clear-cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC), and the absence
of EN2 expression was associated with poor histological grade. However, the
specific roles of EN2 in CCRCC have yet to be elucidated. In the present study,
we examined the effects of inhibiting EN2 expression by human renal tubular
epithelial cells (HK-2) and overexpressing EN2 by human clear-cell renal cells
(786-O). Results showed that EN2 inhibition accelerated HK-2 cell proliferation, 
shortened the cell cycle, reduced apoptosis, and acted more invasively. By
contrast, EN2 overexpression in 786-O cells decelerated the proliferative ability
of 786-O, increased the percentage of cell apoptosis, and weakened the invasive
ability. Overall, the results demonstrated that EN2 might play an anti-oncogenic 
role in oncogenesis and development of CCRCC, thereby maintaining the normal
growth of human renal tubular epithelial cells.

PMID: 26948025  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Vet Rec. 2015 Nov 21;177(20):525-6. doi: 10.1136/vr.h6208.

Use of antibiotics in people and animals.

Murphy D(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Office of Animal Health (NOAH), 3 Crossfield Chambers, Gladbeck Way, 
Enfield EN2 7HF e-mail: d.murphy@noah.co.uk.

Comment on
    Vet Rec. 2015 Nov 7;177(18):468-70.

PMID: 26589988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2015 Nov 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Immunohistochemistry Biomarkers in Nonmuscle Invasive Bladder Cancer.

Ranzi AD(1), da Silva JN, Graziottin TM, Annels N, Bica CG.

Author information: 
(1)*Research Laboratory of Pathology, Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde
de Porto Alegre (UFCSPA), Porto Alegre, Brazil †Departament of Urology, Hospital 
Santa Rita, Hospital system of the Santa Casa de Misericórdia de Porto Alegre,
Porto Alegre, Brazil ‡Department of Microbial & Cellular Sciences, Faculty of
Health & Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK.

Bladder cancer (BCa) is the most frequent urinary tract neoplasm. BCa results in 
significant mortality when the disease presents as muscle invasive. Around 75% to
80% of patients present with nonmuscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC), but
recurrence and progression are significant issues, compelling current guidelines 
to recommend long-term surveillance. There is therefore an urgent and unmet need 
to identify and validate accurate biomarkers for the detection of disease
recurrence to improve quality of life for the patients and reduce costs for
health care providers, while maintaining or improving current outcomes. In this
review, 38 publications on immunohistochemistry prognostic biomarkers, that were 
studied may be related in nonmuscle invasive bladder cancer, have been analyzed. 
The studies were organized according to the evaluated marker and their findings. 
It was demonstrated that the combination of independent complementary biomarkers 
could allow a more accurate prognosis than an isolated marker. Biomarkers,
including p53, Ki-67, and CK20, with classic and prognostic factors with
recurrence and novel markers such as EN2 may provide a more accurate prediction
of outcome compared with any single marker, improving risk stratification and
clinical management of patients with BCa.

PMID: 26574637  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Neuroreport. 2015 Dec 16;26(18):1101-5. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000000477.

Hippocampal dysregulation of FMRP/mGluR5 signaling in engrailed-2 knockout mice: 
a model of autism spectrum disorders.

Provenzano G(1), Sgadò P, Genovesi S, Zunino G, Casarosa S, Bozzi Y.

Author information: 
(1)aLaboratory of Molecular Neuropathology bLaboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of Trento,
Trento cC.N.R. Neuroscience Institute, Pisa, Italy.

Many evidences indicate that mice lacking the homeobox transcription factor
engrailed-2 (En2(-/-) mice) represent a reliable model to investigate
neurodevelopmental basis and gene expression changes relevant to autism spectrum 
disorders. Dysfunctions in fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP),
metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5), and GABAergic signaling pathways have
been proposed as a possible pathogenic mechanism of autism spectrum disorders.
Here, we exploited En2(-/-) mice to investigate hippocampal expression of FMRP,
mGluR5, and GABA(A) receptor ß3 subunit (GABRB3). Quantitative
reverse-transcription PCR showed that all these mRNAs were significantly
downregulated in En2(-/-) mice compared with wild-type littermates. Western blot 
and immunohistochemistry confirmed the downregulation of FMRP and GABRB3
proteins, while showing a significant increase of mGluR5 protein in the En2(-/-) 
hippocampus. Our results suggest that the dysregulation of FMRP-mGluR5 signaling 
pathway, accompanied with a downregulation of GABRB3 expression, may contribute
to the 'autistic-like' features observed in En2 mice, providing possible
molecular targets for future pharmacological studies.

PMID: 26559723  [PubMed - in process]


6. Adv Clin Chem. 2015;71:47-76. doi: 10.1016/bs.acc.2015.06.002. Epub 2015 Jul 21.

EN2 in Prostate Cancer.

McGrath SE(1), Michael A(1), Morgan R(1), Pandha H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey,
United Kingdom. (2)Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences, University of Surrey,
Guildford, Surrey, United Kingdom. Electronic address: h.pandha@surrey.ac.uk.

Despite extensive efforts to identify a clinically useful diagnostic biomarker in
prostate cancer, no new test has been approved by regulatory authorities. As a
result, this unmet need has shifted to biomarkers that additionally indicate
presence or absence of "significant" disease. EN2 is a homeodomain-containing
transcription factor secreted by prostate cancer into the urine and can be
detected by enzyme-linked immunoassay. EN2 may be an ideal biomarker because
normal prostate tissue and benign prostatic hypertrophic cells do not secrete
EN2. This review discusses the enormous potential of EN2 to address this unmet
need and provide the urologist with a simple, inexpensive, and reliable prostate 
cancer biomarker.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26411411  [PubMed - in process]


7. Int J Law Psychiatry. 2016 Jan-Feb;44:15-23. doi: 10.1016/j.ijlp.2015.08.027.
Epub 2015 Sep 19.

Examining professionals' perspectives on sexuality for service users of a
forensic psychiatry unit.

Dein KE(1), Williams PS(2), Volkonskaia I(3), Kanyeredzi A(4), Reavey P(5),
Leavey G(6).

Author information: 
(1)North London Forensic Service, Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield,
Middlesex, EN2 8JL, United Kngdom. (2)North London Forensic Service, Chase Farm
Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield, Middlesex, EN2 8JL, United Kingdom.
(3)Brockfield Regional Secure Unit, Basildon, Essex, SS11 7XX, United Kingdom.
(4)Child and Woman Abuse Studies Unit, London Metropolitan University, Ladbroke
House, 62-66 Highbury Grove, London, N5 2AD, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
a.kanyeredzi@londonmet.ac.uk. (5)Department of Psychology, London South Bank
University, 103 Borough Road, London, SE1 OAA, United Kingdom. Electronic
address: reaveyp@lsbu.ac.uk. (6)Compass Centre for Mental Health Research and
Policy, Northern Ireland Association for Mental Health, 80 University Street,
Belfast, BT7 1HE, United Kingdom.

Very little is known about the sexual activities of psychiatric patients during
their stay in hospital and beyond. In this article, we have explored how mental
health professionals working within a forensic psychiatric unit construct the
issue of patient sexuality in order to ascertain the range of sexual
possibilities open to patients. Drawing on interviews with twenty four
participants - psychiatrists and clinical psychologists (clinical staff), we
examined how participants made sense of patient sexuality and their clinical
judgments in relation to them. Using a thematic analysis, we were able to
identify a number of relevant themes emerging, including a) what the limits of
acceptable sexual behaviour were judged to be, b) discrimination against
transgender and same sex relationships, c) vulnerability among female patients
and therapeutic efficacy, and d) an abject fear of patient pregnancy.
Furthermore, a general concern throughout was the putative professional conflict 
between the clinical and ward staff. Further discussion regarding the potential
for clearer policy on patient sexuality and further training for professionals is
developed in the final section.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26387770  [PubMed - in process]


8. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2015 Dec;53(10):913-21. doi:
10.1016/j.bjoms.2015.08.261. Epub 2015 Sep 11.

Recent advances in the management of oral and maxillofacial trauma.

O'Connor RC(1), Shakib K(2), Brennan PA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Specialist Registrar in Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nottingham University 
Hospitals NHS Trust, Queen's Medical Centre, Derby Road, Nottingham, NG7 2UH.
Electronic address: roaroconnor@gmail.com. (2)Consultant Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgeon, The Ridgeway, Enfield, Middlesex, EN2 8JL. Electronic address:
k.shakib@shakib.org. (3)Consultant Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon, Portsmouth
Hospitals NHS Trust, Queen Alexandra Hospital, Southwick Hill Road, Cosham, PO6
3LY. Electronic address: peter.brennan@porthosp.nhs.uk.

This review summarises recently published papers on maxillofacial trauma in 2
widely read journals: the British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
(BJOMS) and the International Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery (IJOMS). 
Since a large proportion of the injuries seen in oral and maxillofacial surgery
(OMFS) departments are fractures of the facial skeleton, we primarily focus on
their assessment and treatment, but also cover problems that affect the
temporomandibular joint (TMJ) (including ankylosis), military injuries,
polytrauma, and the use of perioperative drugs. Between 2012 and 2013, 121
articles were published in the 2 journals. Most of the research concerned
mandibular fractures, particularly those involving the condyle, but
epidemiological studies and midfacial fractures were also well represented. Even 
though the incidence of facial injury is high, it is difficult to collect data
particularly when long-term evaluation is required, as rates of compliance and
attendance at follow up tend to be low. The number of large-scale studies was
therefore small. A concerted effort to collaborate nationally and across
specialties to undertake larger studies will help to improve outcomes.

Copyright © 2015 The British Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26365272  [PubMed - in process]


9. Biomarkers. 2015;20(5):328-37. doi: 10.3109/1354750X.2015.1068867. Epub 2015 Jul 
31.

Disease map-based biomarker selection and pre-validation for bladder cancer
diagnostic.

De Paoli M(1), Perco P, Mühlberger I, Lukas A, Pandha H, Morgan R, Feng GJ,
Marquette C.

Author information: 
(1)a AXO Science SAS , Lyon , France .

CONTEXT: Urinary biomarkers are promising as simple alternatives to cystoscopy
for the diagnosis of de novo and recurrent bladder cancer.
OBJECTIVE: To identify a highly sensitive and specific biomarker candidate set
with potential clinical utility in bladder cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Urinary biomarker concentrations were determined by ELISA.
The performance of individual markers and marker combinations was assessed using 
ROC analysis.
RESULTS: A five-biomarker panel (IL8, MMP9, VEGFA, PTGS2 and EN2) was defined
from the candidate set.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: This panel showed a better overall performance than
the best individual marker. Further validation studies are needed to evaluate its
clinical utility in bladder cancer.

PMID: 26329530  [PubMed - in process]


10. Biomarkers. 2015 Jul 31:1-10. [Epub ahead of print]

Disease map-based biomarker selection and pre-validation for bladder cancer
diagnostic.

De Paoli M(1), Perco P, Mühlberger I, Lukas A, Pandha H, Morgan R, Feng GJ,
Marquette C.

Author information: 
(1)AXO Science SAS , Lyon , France .

CONTEXT: Urinary biomarkers are promising as simple alternatives to cystoscopy
for the diagnosis of de novo and recurrent bladder cancer.
OBJECTIVE: To identify a highly sensitive and specific biomarker candidate set
with potential clinical utility in bladder cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Urinary biomarker concentrations were determined by ELISA.
The performance of individual markers and marker combinations was assessed using 
ROC analysis.
RESULTS: A five-biomarker panel (IL8, MMP9, VEGFA, PTGS2 and EN2) was defined
from the candidate set.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: This panel showed a better overall performance than
the best individual marker. Further validation studies are needed to evaluate its
clinical utility in bladder cancer.

PMID: 26227542  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Oct 15;24(20):5805-27. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv301. Epub 2015 Jul
28.

Engrailed-2 (En2) deletion produces multiple neurodevelopmental defects in
monoamine systems, forebrain structures and neurogenesis and behavior.

Genestine M(1), Lin L(2), Durens M(2), Yan Y(2), Jiang Y(1), Prem S(1), Bailoor
K(3), Kelly B(3), Sonsalla PK(4), Matteson PG(5), Silverman J(6), Crawley JN(6), 
Millonig JH(7), DiCicco-Bloom E(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson
Medical School, Rutgers. (2)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Rutgers 
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers, Graduate School of Biological
Sciences, Rutgers. (3)Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway,
NJ, USA. (4)Department of Neurology, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 
Rutgers. (5)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Robert Wood Johnson
Medical School, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
(6)MIND Institute, University of California Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento,
CA, USA. (7)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Rutgers Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, Rutgers, Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, 
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 
Piscataway, NJ, USA. (8)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Rutgers
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers, Graduate School of Biological
Sciences, Rutgers, Department of Pediatrics, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ, USA and
diciccem@rwjms.rutgers.edu.

Many genes involved in brain development have been associated with human
neurodevelopmental disorders, but underlying pathophysiological mechanisms remain
undefined. Human genetic and mouse behavioral analyses suggest that ENGRAILED-2
(EN2) contributes to neurodevelopmental disorders, especially autism spectrum
disorder. In mouse, En2 exhibits dynamic spatiotemporal expression in embryonic
mid-hindbrain regions where monoamine neurons emerge. Considering their
importance in neuropsychiatric disorders, we characterized monoamine systems in
relation to forebrain neurogenesis in En2-knockout (En2-KO) mice. Transmitter
levels of serotonin, dopamine and norepinephrine (NE) were dysregulated from
Postnatal day 7 (P7) to P21 in En2-KO, though NE exhibited the greatest
abnormalities. While NE levels were reduced ~35% in forebrain, they were
increased 40 -: 75% in hindbrain and cerebellum, and these patterns paralleled
changes in locus coeruleus (LC) fiber innervation, respectively. Although En2
promoter was active in Embryonic day 14.5 -: 15.5 LC neurons, expression
diminished thereafter and gene deletion did not alter brainstem NE neuron
numbers. Significantly, in parallel with reduced NE levels, En2-KO forebrain
regions exhibited reduced growth, particularly hippocampus, where P21 dentate
gyrus granule neurons were decreased 16%, suggesting abnormal neurogenesis.
Indeed, hippocampal neurogenic regions showed increased cell death (+77%) and
unexpectedly, increased proliferation. Excess proliferation was restricted to
early Sox2/Tbr2 progenitors whereas increased apoptosis occurred in
differentiating (Dcx) neuroblasts, accompanied by reduced newborn neuron
survival. Abnormal neurogenesis may reflect NE deficits because intra-hippocampal
injections of ß-adrenergic agonists reversed cell death. These studies suggest
that disruption of hindbrain patterning genes can alter monoamine system
development and thereby produce forebrain defects that are relevant to human
neurodevelopmental disorders.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4581606 [Available on 2016-10-15]
PMID: 26220976  [PubMed - in process]


12. Bioimpacts. 2015;5(2):97-102. doi: 10.15171/bi.2015.07. Epub 2015 Apr 6.

The role of dopaminergic and serotonergic systems in neurodevelopmental
disorders: a focus on epilepsy and seizure susceptibility.

Tripathi PP(1), Bozzi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropathology, Center for Integrative Biology
(CIBIO), University of Trento, Trento, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: The embryonic development of the vertebrate Central Nervous System 
(CNS) requires the induction of transcription factors regulating the expression
of specific subsets of genes in restricted CNS regions. Among these transcription
factors, homeobox-containing proteins play a crucial role, and altered expression
of these factors can impact the embryonic as well as adult CNS functions.
Importantly, the homeobox-containing genes Otx2, Engrailed-1 (En1), and
Engrailed-2 (En2) have been described to crucially regulate differentiation of
dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons during vertebrate CNS development.
Dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons, located in midbrain and hindbrain regions 
respectively, diffusely innervate several forebrain areas including limbic
system, contributing in regulating several physiological functions. Understanding
the embryonic development of these neuronal populations is crucial to elucidate
their physiological function including brain excitability in the adult brain. New
evidence is emerging about the impact of an altered embryonic development of
dopamine and serotonin neurons onto seizure susceptibility in the adult life.
METHODS: In this mini-review, we summarized our kainic acid (KA) induced seizure 
susceptibility in adult mutant mouse lines with targeted manipulation of Otx2,
En1, and En2 genes.
RESULTS: Our results demonstrated that altered development of dopamine (DA)
neurons does not interfere with KA seizure susceptibility, while increased
serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) hyperinnervation leads to resistance to
KA-induced seizure.
CONCLUSION: We propose that developmental alterations of serotonergic but not
dopaminergic circuits play a crucial role in controlling seizure susceptibility
in the adult life.

PMCID: PMC4492191
PMID: 26191504  [PubMed]


13. Neurochem Int. 2015 Aug;87:34-42. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2015.05.004. Epub 2015
May 19.

Serotonin abnormalities in Engrailed-2 knockout mice: New insight relevant for a 
model of Autism Spectrum Disorder.

Viaggi C(1), Gerace C(1), Pardini C(1), Corsini GU(1), Vaglini F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Research New Technologies in Medicine and Surgery,
University of Pisa, Italy. (2)Department of Translational Research New
Technologies in Medicine and Surgery, University of Pisa, Italy. Electronic
address: francesca.vaglini@med.unipi.it.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a congenital neurodevelopmental behavioral
disorder that appears in early childhood. Recent human genetic studies identified
the homeobox transcription factor, Engrailed 2 (EN2), as a possible ASD
susceptibility gene. En2 knockout mice (En2-/-) display subtle cerebellar
neuropathological changes and reduced levels of tyrosine hydroxylase,
noradrenaline and serotonin in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex similar to
those ones which have been observed in the ASD brain. Furthermore other
similarities link En2 knockout mice to ASD patients. Several lines of evidence
suggest that serotonin may play an important role in the pathophysiology of the
disease. In the present study we measured, by using an HPLC, the 5-HT levels in
different brain areas and at different ages in En2-/- mice. In the frontal and
occipital cortex, the content of 5HT was reduced in En2-/- 1 and 3 months old
mice; in 6 month old mice, the difference was still present, but it was not
statistically significant. The 5-HT content of cerebellar cortex was
significantly reduced at 1 month old but significantly high when the KO mice
reached 3 months of age. The increase was present even at 6 months of age. A
similar trend was highlighted by SERT immunolabeling in En2-/- mice compared to
control in the same areas and age analyzed. Our findings, in agreement with the
current knowledge on the 5-HT system alterations in ASD, confirm the early
neurotransmitter deficit with a late compensatory recovery in En2 KO-mice further
suggesting that this experimental animal may be considered a good predictive
model for the human disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26002543  [PubMed - in process]


14. J Vis Exp. 2015 May 12;(99):e52919. doi: 10.3791/52919.

Immunohistochemical visualization of hippocampal neuron activity after spatial
learning in a mouse model of neurodevelopmental disorders.

Provenzano G(1), Pangrazzi L(1), Poli A(2), Berardi N(2), Bozzi Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of Trento. (2)CNR
Neuroscience Institute, Pisa, Italy. (3)Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO),
University of Trento; CNR Neuroscience Institute, Pisa, Italy;
yuri.bozzi@unitn.it.

Induction of phosphorylated extracellular-regulated kinase (pERK) is a reliable
molecular readout of learning-dependent neuronal activation. Here, we describe a 
pERK immunohistochemistry protocol to study the profile of hippocampal neuron
activation following exposure to a spatial learning task in a mouse model
characterized by cognitive deficits of neurodevelopmental origin. Specifically,
we used pERK immunostaining to study neuronal activation following Morris water
maze (MWM, a classical hippocampal-dependent learning task) in Engrailed-2
knockout (En2(-/-)) mice, a model of autism spectrum disorders (ASD). As compared
to wild-type (WT) controls, En2(-/-) mice showed significant spatial learning
deficits in the MWM. After MWM, significant differences in the number of
pERK-positive neurons were detected in specific hippocampal subfields of En2(-/-)
mice, as compared to WT animals. Thus, our protocol can robustly detect
differences in pERK-positive neurons associated to hippocampal-dependent learning
impairment in a mouse model of ASD. More generally, our protocol can be applied
to investigate the profile of hippocampal neuron activation in both genetic or
pharmacological mouse models characterized by cognitive deficits.

PMID: 25992917  [PubMed - in process]


15. Oncol Rep. 2015 May;33(5):2319-30. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3858. Epub 2015 Mar 17.

Repression of engrailed 2 inhibits the proliferation and invasion of human
bladder cancer in vitro and in vivo.

Li Y(1), Liu H(2), Lai C(1), Su Z(1), Heng B(1), Gao S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510630, P.R. China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Guangdong Women and Children's Hospital, Guangzhou, Guangdong 511400,
P.R. China. (3)Department of Pathology, Yuebei People's Hospital, Shaoguan,
Guangdong 512026, P.R. China.

Engrailed 2 (EN2) is a member of the homeobox gene family. Many studies suggest
that overexpression of EN2 protein may be associated with tumor development,
including bladder cancer (BC). However, to date, the mechanisms of how EN2
functions to promote BC progression remain elusive. The present study introduced 
RNAi to silence the expression of EN2 in BC cell lines. In vitro invasion and
migration assays and in vivo experiments were carried out to examine the
functions of EN2 in BC invasion and metastasis. The results of the present study 
indicated that EN2 was significantly expressed in BC cells. Ectopic expression of
EN2 in normal urothelial cells significantly enhanced cellular proliferation and 
invasion, but inhibited cellular apoptosis. EN2 knockdown significantly promoted 
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis of BC cells with inhibition of proliferation and 
invasion in vitro as well as EN2 knockdown decreased the tumor growth of BC. The 
tumor growth was decreased by regulation of the cell cycle, apoptosis and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related proteins, with inhibition of metastasis
to the liver and lung in vivo. Furthermore, EN2 knockdown significantly decreased
the levels of pAkt-473, pAkt-308 and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K),
whereas EN2 knockdown increased the expression of PTEN in vitro. Taken together, 
EN2 may be a candidate oncogene in BC by activating the PI3K/Akt pathway and
inhibiting PTEN, and may be a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of
BC.

PMID: 25812440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 24;10(2):e0118505. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118505.
eCollection 2015.

Engrailed 1 mediates correct formation of limb innervation through two distinct
mechanisms.

Huettl RE(1), Luxenhofer G(1), Bianchi E(1), Haupt C(2), Joshi R(3), Prochiantz
A(3), Huber AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München (GmbH)-German
Research Center for Environmental Health, Munich, Germany. (2)Institute of
Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München (GmbH)-German Research Center
for Environmental Health, Munich, Germany; Institute of Physiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany. (3)Collège de France,
Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology, Paris, France.

Engrailed-1 (En1) is expressed in the ventral ectoderm of the developing limb
where it plays an instructive role in the dorsal-ventral patterning of the
forelimb. Besides its well-described role as a transcription factor in regulating
gene expression through its DNA-binding domain, En1 may also be secreted to form 
an extracellular gradient, and directly impact on the formation of the
retinotectal map. We show here that absence of En1 causes mispatterning of the
forelimb and thus defects in the dorsal-ventral pathfinding choice of motor axons
in vivo. In addition, En1 but not En2 also has a direct and specific repulsive
effect on motor axons of the lateral aspect of the lateral motor column (LMC) but
not on medial LMC projections. Moreover, an ectopic dorsal source of En1 pushes
lateral LMC axons to the ventral limb in vivo. Thus, En1 controls the
establishment of limb innervation through two distinct molecular mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4340014
PMID: 25710467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2015 Apr;212(4):533.e1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2015.02.011.
Epub 2015 Feb 14.

Fetal DNA methylation of autism spectrum disorders candidate genes: association
with spontaneous preterm birth.

Behnia F(1), Parets SE(2), Kechichian T(1), Yin H(1), Dutta EH(1), Saade GR(1),
Smith AK(3), Menon R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine and Perinatal Research, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX.
(2)Genetics and Molecular Biology Program, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA. (3)Genetics and Molecular Biology Program, Emory University School
of Medicine, Atlanta, GA; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA. (4)Division of Maternal-Fetal
Medicine and Perinatal Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX. Electronic address:
ra2menon@utmb.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is associated with preterm birth (PTB),
although the reason underlying this relationship is still unclear. Our objective 
was to examine DNA methylation patterns of 4 ASD candidate genes in human fetal
membranes from spontaneous PTB and uncomplicated term birth.
STUDY DESIGN: A literature search for genes that have been implicated in ASD
yielded 14 candidate genes (OXTR, SHANK3, BCL2, RORA, EN2, RELN, MECP2, AUTS2,
NLGN3, NRXN1, SLC6A4, UBE3A, GABA, AFF2) that were epigenetically modified in
relation to ASD. DNA methylation in fetal leukocyte DNA in 4 of these genes
(OXTR, SHANK3, BCL2, and RORA) was associated with PTB in a previous study. This 
study evaluated DNA methylation, transcription (reverse transcription polymerase 
chain reaction), and translation patterns (immunostaining and Western blot) in
fetal membrane from term labor (n = 14), term not in labor (TNIL; n = 29), and
spontaneous preterm birth (PTB; n = 27). Statistical analysis was performed with 
analysis of variance; a probability value of < .05 was significant.
RESULTS: Higher methylation of the OXTR promoter was seen in fetal membranes from
PTB, compared with term labor or TNIL. No other gene showed any methylation
differences among groups. Expression of OXTR was not different among groups, but 
the 70 kDa OXTR protein was seen only in PTB, and immunostaining was more intense
in PTB amniocytes than term labor or TNIL.
CONCLUSION: Among the 4 genes that were studied, fetal membranes from PTB
demonstrate differences in OXTR methylation and regulation and expression, which 
suggest that epigenetic alteration of this gene in fetal membrane may likely be
indicating an in utero programing of this gene and serve as a surrogate in a
subset of PTB. The usefulness of OXTR hypermethylation as a surrogate for a link 
to ASD should be further evaluated in longitudinal and in vitro studies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25687563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Mar;53(3):247-55. doi: 10.5414/CP202236.

Effects of advanced age and renal dysfunction on the single- and repeated-dose
pharmacokinetics of modified-release flupirtine.

de Mey C, Gatchev E, Deliyska B, Terhaag B.

BACKGROUND: Flupirtine is a nonopioid, central analgesic without antipyretic or
antiphlogistic properties. Flupirtine-MR is an oral modified-release formulation 
with a 100 mg fast-input and a 300 mg portion with slow protracted release.
METHODS: Single- (D01) and repeated-dose (D03-D09) pharmacokinetics of 400 mg
flupirtine-MR were investigated in patients with severe renal dysfunction (REN:
N: 12; 21 50 years of age; creatinine clearance (CLCr)=30 mL/min per 1.73 m2 body
surface area (BSA)) and healthy older subjects (EN1: N: 8; 60-69 years; CLCr=80
mL/min and EN2: N: 8; =70 years, CLCr=60 mL/min) vs. young healthy control
subjects (YN: N: 12; 21-40 years; CLCr=90 mL/min).
RESULTS: Renal dysfunction led to a relatively small average increase in systemic
exposure to flupirtine: on D09, the REN : YN-ratios were 1.37 (95% confidence
interval (CI): 1.03-1.82), 1.21 (CI: 1.01-1.45), and 1.34 (CI: 1.09-1.64) for
Css,0, Css,max, and Css,av, respectively. A similar increase in exposure was
observed in older subjects: the respective EN1:YN-ratios were 1.30 (CI:
0.95-1.79), 1.23 (CI: 1.01-1.49), and 1.23 (CI: 0.98-1.54); the EN2:YN-ratios
were 1.50 (CI: 1.10-2.04), 1.16 (CI: 0.85-1.41), and 1.41 (CI: 1.12-1.79),
respectively. Neither age nor renal function was a predominant factor of
pharmacokinetic variability. Single and repeated doses of flupirtine-MR were very
well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: The average renal and age effects were small, but the use of a lower
starting dose (1/2 tablet) is recommended since some of these subjects might have
relatively high exposure levels.

PMID: 25613539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Meta Gene. 2013 Dec 4;2:16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.mgene.2013.10.005. eCollection
2014.

Dental developmental abnormalities in a patient with subtelomeric 7q36 deletion
syndrome may confirm a novel role for the SHH gene.

Linhares ND(1), Svartman M(2), Salgado MI(3), Rodrigues TC(4), da Costa SS(4),
Rosenberg C(4), Valadares ER(5).

Author information: 
(1)Setor de Citogenética/Laboratório Central do Hospital das Clínicas da
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. (2)Departamento de 
Biologia Geral, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Brazil. (3)Departamento de Cirurgia, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade 
Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil. (4)Departamento de Genética e Biologia
Evolutiva, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil. (5)Departamento de Propedêutica Complementar, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Studies in mice demonstrated that the Shh gene is crucial for normal development 
of both incisors and molars, causing a severe retardation in tooth growth, which 
leads to abnormal placement of the tooth in the jaw and disrupted tooth
morphogenesis. In humans the SHH gene is located on chromosome 7q36. Defects in
its protein or signaling pathway may cause holoprosencephaly spectrum, a disorder
in which the developing forebrain fails to correctly separate into right and left
hemispheres and that can be manifested in microforms such as single maxillary
central incisor. A novel role for this gene in the developing human primary
dentition was recently demonstrated. We report a 12-year old boy with a de novo
7q36.1-qter deletion characterized by high-resolution karyotyping,
oligonucleotide aCGH and FISH. His phenotype includes intellectual disability,
non-verbal communication, hypospadia, partial sacral agenesis and absence of
coccyx, which are distinctive features of the syndrome and mainly correlated with
the MNX1, HTR5A and EN2 genes. No microforms of holoprosencephaly spectrum were
observed; but the patient had diastema and dental developmental abnormalities,
such as conical, asymmetric and tapered inferior central incisors. The dental
anomalies are reported herein for the first time in subtelomeric 7q36 deletion
syndrome and may confirm clinically a novel role for the SHH gene in dental
development.

PMCID: PMC4287791
PMID: 25606385  [PubMed]


20. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2015 Jan-Feb;47:102-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ntt.2014.11.010.
Epub 2014 Dec 10.

Methylmercury exposure during early Xenopus laevis development affects cell
proliferation and death but not neural progenitor specification.

Huyck RW(1), Nagarkar M(2), Olsen N(2), Clamons SE(2), Saha MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Science, College of William and Mary, McGlothlin-Street 
Hall, 251 Jamestown Road, Williamsburg, VA 23185, United States. (2)Department of
Biology, College of William and Mary, Integrated Science Center, 540 Landrum
Drive, Williamsburg, VA 23185, United States. (3)Department of Biology, College
of William and Mary, Integrated Science Center, 540 Landrum Drive, Williamsburg, 
VA 23185, United States. Electronic address: mssaha@wm.edu.

Methylmercury (MeHg) is a widespread environmental toxin that preferentially and 
adversely affects developing organisms. To investigate the impact of MeHg
toxicity on the formation of the vertebrate nervous system at physiologically
relevant concentrations, we designed a graded phenotype scale for evaluating
Xenopus laevis embryos exposed to MeHg in solution. Embryos displayed a range of 
abnormalities in response to MeHg, particularly in brain development, which is
influenced by both MeHg concentration and the number of embryos per ml of
exposure solution. A TC50 of ~50µg/l and LC50 of ~100µg/l were found when
maintaining embryos at a density of one per ml, and both increased with
increasing embryo density. In situ hybridization and microarray analysis showed
no significant change in expression of early neural patterning genes including
sox2, en2, or delta; however a noticeable decrease was observed in the terminal
neural differentiation genes GAD and xGAT, but not xVGlut. PCNA, a marker for
proliferating cells, was negatively correlated with MeHg dose, with a significant
reduction in cell number in the forebrain and spinal cord of exposed embryos by
tadpole stages. Conversely, the number of apoptotic cells in neural regions
detected by a TUNEL (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end
labeling) assay was significantly increased. These results provide evidence that 
disruption of embryonic neural development by MeHg may not be directly due to a
loss of neural progenitor specification and gene transcription, but to a more
general decrease in cell proliferation and increase in cell death throughout the 
developing nervous system.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4302163
PMID: 25496965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Neuroscience. 2015 Feb 12;286:122-30. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.11.041.
Epub 2014 Nov 26.

Reduced phosphorylation of synapsin I in the hippocampus of Engrailed-2 knockout 
mice, a model for autism spectrum disorders.

Provenzano G(1), Pangrazzi L(1), Poli A(1), Sgadò P(1), Berardi N(2), Bozzi Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropathology, Centre for Integrative Biology,
University of Trento, Italy. (2)Institute of Neuroscience, CNR, Pisa, Italy;
NEUROFARBA Department, University of Florence, Italy. (3)Laboratory of Molecular 
Neuropathology, Centre for Integrative Biology, University of Trento, Italy;
Institute of Neuroscience, CNR, Pisa, Italy. Electronic address:
bozzi@science.unitn.it.

Mice lacking the homeodomain transcription factor Engrailed-2 (En2(-/-) mice) are
a well-characterized model for autism spectrum disorders (ASD). En2(-/-) mice
present molecular, neuropathological and behavioral deficits related to ASD,
including down-regulation of ASD-associated genes, cerebellar hypoplasia,
interneuron loss, enhanced seizure susceptibility, decreased sociability and
impaired cognition. Specifically, impaired spatial learning in the Morris water
maze (MWM) is associated with reduced expression of neurofibromin and increased
phosphorylation of extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK) in the hippocampus of
En2(-/-) adult mice. In the attempt to better understand the molecular cascades
underlying neurofibromin-dependent cognitive deficits in En2 mutant mice, we
investigated the expression and phosphorylation of synapsin I (SynI; a major
target of neurofibromin-dependent signaling) in the hippocampus of wild-type (WT)
and En2(-/-) mice before and after MWM. Here we show that SynI mRNA and protein
levels are down-regulated in the hippocampus of naïve and MWM-treated En2(-/-)
mice, as compared to WT controls. This down-regulation is paralleled by reduced
levels of SynI phosphorylation at Ser549 and Ser553 residues in the hilus of
mutant mice, before and after MWM. These data indicate that in En2(-/-)
hippocampus, neurofibromin-dependent pathways converging on SynI phosphorylation 
might underlie hippocampal-dependent learning deficits observed in En2(-/-) mice.

Copyright © 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biosens Bioelectron. 2015 Apr 15;66:32-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2014.11.003. Epub
2014 Nov 6.

Ultrasensitive electrochemical detection of engrailed-2 based on
homeodomain-specific DNA probe recognition for the diagnosis of prostate cancer.

Lee S(1), Jo H(2), Her J(3), Lee HY(4), Ban C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 77
Cheongam-Ro, Nam-Gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk 790-784, South Korea. Electronic address: 
s.lee@postech.ac.kr. (2)Department of Chemistry, Pohang University of Science and
Technology, 77 Cheongam-Ro, Nam-Gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk 790-784, South Korea.
Electronic address: jhhsst@postech.ac.kr. (3)Department of Chemistry, Pohang
University of Science and Technology, 77 Cheongam-Ro, Nam-Gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk
790-784, South Korea. Electronic address: jinh0902@postech.ac.kr. (4)Department
of Chemistry, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 77 Cheongam-Ro,
Nam-Gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk 790-784, South Korea. Electronic address:
kolhy123@postech.ac.kr. (5)Department of Chemistry, Pohang University of Science 
and Technology, 77 Cheongam-Ro, Nam-Gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk 790-784, South Korea.
Electronic address: ciban@postech.ac.kr.

It is well known that the engrailed-2 (EN2) protein, a biomarker for prostate
cancer, strongly binds to a specific DNA sequence (5'-TAATTA-3') to regulate
transcription. Based on this intrinsic property, DNA probes with additional
flanked sequences were designed and optimized. Various measurements, such as
electrophoresis mobility shift assay, surface plasmon resonance, and quantitative
fluorescence assay were performed to investigate the feasibility of the DNA
probes. Then, the affinities of the DNA probes to the target protein were
quantitatively determined using FAM-modified DNA probes and magnetic beads,
resulting in dissociation constants ranging from 61.03 to 98.84nM. To develop an 
early diagnosis platform for prostate cancer, an ultrasensitive electrochemical
biosensor based on the electrodeposition of gold nanoparticles was designed. The 
EN2 protein was quantitatively detected using the electrochemical biosensor, and 
the calculated detection limit was found to be 5.62fM. Finally, the specificity
and applicability of the biosensor were verified using several proteins and an
artificial urine medium. The impedance signals increased in the cases of EN2,
suggesting that the system exhibited high selectivity to only EN2.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25460878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Feb 15;24(4):1036-44. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu518. Epub 2014 Oct 
9.

Mitochondrial m.1584A 12S m62A rRNA methylation in families with m.1555A>G
associated hearing loss.

O'Sullivan M(1), Rutland P(1), Lucas D(2), Ashton E(3), Hendricks S(4), Rahman
S(5), Bitner-Glindzicz M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Genomic Medicine, UCL Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH,
UK. (2)Nuffield Hearing and Speech Centre, Royal National Throat Nose and Ear
Hospital, London WC1X 8DA, UK. (3)NE Thames Regional Genetics Service. (4)Barnet 
and Chase Farm Hospitals NHS Trust, Enfield, Middlesex EN2 8JL, UK and.
(5)Genetics and Genomic Medicine, UCL Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH,
UK, Metabolic Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust,
London WC1N 3JH, UK. (6)Genetics and Genomic Medicine, UCL Institute of Child
Health, London WC1N 1EH, UK, Centre for Auditory Research, UCL Ear Institute,
London WC1X 8EE, UK maria.bitner@ucl.ac.uk.

The mitochondrial DNA mutation m.1555A>G predisposes to hearing loss following
aminoglycoside antibiotic exposure in an idiosyncratic dose-independent manner.
However, it may also cause maternally inherited hearing loss in the absence of
aminoglycoside exposure or any other clinical features (non-syndromic hearing
loss). Although m.1555A>G was identified as a cause of deafness more than twenty 
years ago, the pathogenic mechanism of this mutation of ribosomal RNA remains
controversial. Different mechanistic concepts have been proposed. Most recently, 
evidence from cell lines and animal models suggested that patients with m.1555A>G
may have more 12S rRNA N6, N6-dimethyladenosine (m(6) 2A) methylation than
controls, so-called 'hypermethylation'. This has been implicated as a pathogenic 
mechanism of mitochondrial dysfunction but has yet to be validated in patients.
12S m(6) 2A rRNA methylation, by the mitochondrial transcription factor 1 (TFB1M)
enzyme, occurs at two successive nucleotides (m.1584A and m.1583A) in close
proximity to m.1555A>G. We examined m(6) 2A methylation in 14 patients with
m.1555A>G, and controls, and found all detectable 12S rRNA transcripts to be
methylated in both groups. Moreover, different RNA samples derived from the same 
patient (lymphocyte, fibroblast and lymphoblast) revealed that only transformed
cells contained some unmethylated 12S rRNA transcripts, with all detectable 12S
rRNA transcripts derived from primary samples m(6) 2A-methylated. Our data
indicate that TFB1M 12S m(6) 2A rRNA hypermethylation is unlikely to be a
pathogenic mechanism and may be an artefact of previous experimental models
studied. We propose that RNA methylation studies in experimental models should be
validated in primary clinical samples to ensure that they are applicable to the
human situation.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMID: 25305075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Neurosci. 2014 Oct 1;34(40):13281-8. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2894-13.2014.

Hippocampal dysregulation of neurofibromin-dependent pathways is associated with 
impaired spatial learning in engrailed 2 knock-out mice.

Provenzano G(1), Pangrazzi L(1), Poli A(2), Pernigo M(1), Sgadò P(1), Genovesi
S(1), Zunino G(1), Berardi N(3), Casarosa S(4), Bozzi Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropathology and. (2)C.N.R. Neuroscience Institute, 56124 Pisa,
Italy, and. (3)C.N.R. Neuroscience Institute, 56124 Pisa, Italy, and Department
of Neuroscience and Psychology, University of Florence, 50121 Florence, Italy.
(4)Developmental Neurobiology Laboratory, Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO),
University of Trento, Trento 38100, Italy, C.N.R. Neuroscience Institute, 56124
Pisa, Italy, and. (5)Molecular Neuropathology and C.N.R. Neuroscience Institute, 
56124 Pisa, Italy, and bozzi@science.unitn.it.

Genome-wide association studies indicated the homeobox-containing transcription
factor Engrailed-2 (En2) as a candidate gene for autism spectrum disorders (ASD).
Accordingly, En2 knock-out (En2(-/-)) mice show anatomical and behavioral
"ASD-like" features, including decreased sociability and learning deficits. The
molecular pathways underlying these deficits in En2(-/-) mice are not known.
Deficits in signaling pathways involving neurofibromin and
extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK) have been associated with impaired learning.
Here we investigated the neurofibromin-ERK cascade in the hippocampus of
wild-type (WT) and En2(-/-) mice before and after spatial learning testing. When 
compared with WT littermates, En2(-/-) mice showed impaired performance in the
Morris water maze (MWM), which was accompanied by lower expression of the
activity-dependent gene Arc. Quantitative RT-PCR, immunoblotting, and
immunohistochemistry experiments showed a marked downregulation of neurofibromin 
expression in the dentate gyrus of both naive and MWM-treated En2(-/-) mice. ERK 
phosphorylation, known to be induced in the presence of neurofibromin deficiency,
was increased in the dentate gyrus of En2(-/-) mice after MWM. Treatment of
En2(-/-) mice with lovastatin, an indirect inhibitor of ERK phosphorylation,
markedly reduced ERK phosphorylation in the dentate gyrus, but was unable to
rescue learning deficits in MWM-trained mutant mice. Further investigation is
needed to unravel the complex molecular mechanisms linking dysregulation of
neurofibromin-dependent pathways to spatial learning deficits in the En2 mouse
model of ASD.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3413281-08$15.00/0.

PMID: 25274808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Front Pediatr. 2014 Sep 1;2:92. doi: 10.3389/fped.2014.00092. eCollection 2014.

GH Dysfunction in Engrailed-2 Knockout Mice, a Model for Autism Spectrum
Disorders.

Provenzano G(1), Clementi E(1), Genovesi S(1), Scali M(2), Tripathi PP(2), Sgadò 
P(1), Bozzi Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropathology, Centre for Integrative Biology
(CIBIO), University of Trento , Trento , Italy. (2)Neuroscience Institute,
National Research Council (CNR) , Pisa , Italy ; Laboratory of Neurobiology,
Scuola Normale Superiore , Pisa , Italy. (3)Laboratory of Molecular
Neuropathology, Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of Trento ,
Trento , Italy ; Neuroscience Institute, National Research Council (CNR) , Pisa ,
Italy.

Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) signaling promotes brain development and
plasticity. Altered IGF-1 expression has been associated to autism spectrum
disorders (ASD). IGF-1 levels were found increased in the blood and decreased in 
the cerebrospinal fluid of ASD children. Accordingly, IGF-1 treatment can rescue 
behavioral deficits in mouse models of ASD, and IGF-1 trials have been proposed
for ASD children. IGF-1 is mainly synthesized in the liver, and its synthesis is 
dependent on growth hormone (GH) produced in the pituitary gland. GH also
modulates cognitive functions, and altered levels of GH have been detected in ASD
patients. Here, we analyzed the expression of GH, IGF-1, their receptors, and
regulatory hormones in the neuroendocrine system of adult male mice lacking the
homeobox transcription factor Engrailed-2 (En2 (-/-) mice). En2 (-/-) mice
display ASD-like behaviors (social interactions, defective spatial learning,
increased seizure susceptibility) accompanied by relevant neuropathological
changes (loss of cerebellar and forebrain inhibitory neurons). Recent studies
showed that En2 modulates IGF-1 activity during postnatal cerebellar development.
We found that GH mRNA expression was markedly deregulated throughout the
neuroendocrine axis in En2 (-/-) mice, as compared to wild-type controls. In
mutant mice, GH mRNA levels were significantly increased in the pituitary gland, 
blood, and liver, whereas decreased levels were detected in the hippocampus.
These changes were paralleled by decreased levels of GH protein in the
hippocampus but not other tissues of En2 (-/-) mice. IGF-1 mRNA was significantly
up-regulated in the liver and down-regulated in the En2 (-/-) hippocampus, but no
differences were detected in the levels of IGF-1 protein between the two
genotypes. Our data strengthen the notion that altered GH levels in the
hippocampus may be involved in learning disabilities associated to ASD.

PMCID: PMC4150208
PMID: 25225635  [PubMed]


26. Mol Psychiatry. 2015 Feb;20(1):118-25. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.98. Epub 2014 Sep 9.

Clustering autism: using neuroanatomical differences in 26 mouse models to gain
insight into the heterogeneity.

Ellegood J(1), Anagnostou E(2), Babineau BA(3), Crawley JN(4), Lin L(5),
Genestine M(5), DiCicco-Bloom E(5), Lai JK(6), Foster JA(6), Peñagarikano O(7),
Geschwind DH(7), Pacey LK(8), Hampson DR(8), Laliberté CL(1), Mills AA(9), Tam
E(10), Osborne LR(10), Kouser M(11), Espinosa-Becerra F(11), Xuan Z(11), Powell
CM(11), Raznahan A(12), Robins DM(13), Nakai N(14), Nakatani J(14), Takumi T(14),
van Eede MC(1), Kerr TM(15), Muller C(15), Blakely RD(15), Veenstra-VanderWeele
J(15), Henkelman RM(16), Lerch JP(16).

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Imaging Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Laboratory of Behavioral Neurosciences, National Institute of Mental Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA. (4)1] Laboratory of Behavioral Neurosciences, National
Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, USA [2] Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, MIND Institute, University of California Davis School of
Medicine, Sacramento, CA, USA. (5)Department of Neurosciences and Cell Biology,
UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, NJ, USA. (6)The Brain-Body 
Institute, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada. (7)Semel Institute for
Neuroscience and Human Behavior, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. (8)Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada. (9)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New
York, USA. (10)Departments of Medicine and Molecular Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (11)Departments of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics,
Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(12)Child Psychiatry Branch, National Institutes of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA. (13)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA. (14)Department of Mental Biology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 
Wako, Japan. (15)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt Kennedy Center,
Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Nashville, TN, USA. (16)1] Mouse Imaging Centre,
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada [2] Department of Medical
Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Autism is a heritable disorder, with over 250 associated genes identified to
date, yet no single gene accounts for >1-2% of cases. The clinical presentation, 
behavioural symptoms, imaging and histopathology findings are strikingly
heterogeneous. A more complete understanding of autism can be obtained by
examining multiple genetic or behavioural mouse models of autism using magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)-based neuroanatomical phenotyping. Twenty-six different
mouse models were examined and the consistently found abnormal brain regions
across models were parieto-temporal lobe, cerebellar cortex, frontal lobe,
hypothalamus and striatum. These models separated into three distinct clusters,
two of which can be linked to the under and over-connectivity found in autism.
These clusters also identified previously unknown connections between Nrxn1a, En2
and Fmr1; Nlgn3, BTBR and Slc6A4; and also between X monosomy and Mecp2. With no 
single treatment for autism found, clustering autism using neuroanatomy and
identifying these strong connections may prove to be a crucial step in predicting
treatment response.

PMCID: PMC4426202
PMID: 25199916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Eur J Cancer Prev. 2015 Jan;24(1):51-6. doi: 10.1097/CEJ.0000000000000046.

Engrailed-2 protein as a potential urinary prostate cancer biomarker: a
comparison study before and after digital rectal examination.

Marszall MP(1), Sroka W, Adamowski M, Slupski P, Jarzemski P, Siódmiak J,
Odrowaz-Sypniewska G.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of aMedicinal Chemistry bLaboratory Medicine, Collegium Medicum in
Bydgoszcz cDepartment of Urology, J. Biziel Hospital, Nicolaus Copernicus
University, Bydgoszcz, Poland.

This study was designed to compare and evaluate the presence of engrailed-2 (EN2)
protein in urine collected before and after prostate massage as a diagnostic
marker for prostate cancer (PCa). We analysed and compared 76 urine samples (38
before and 38 after prostate massage) from the benign group (BPH) and 66 urine
samples (33 before and 33 after prostate massage) from patients with PCa
confirmed by prostate biopsy. EN2 levels from the PCa and men with BPH (age range
50-82) were related to the tumour stage, Gleason score and prostate-specific
antigen. EN2 levels were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in
urine. The median EN2 levels in urine after prostate massage were significantly
different from those determined in urine before prostate massage (1.25 ng/ml in
the PCa group and 0.34 ng/ml in the BPH). The mean EN2 levels in PCa patients
were 3.76-fold higher than those in non-PCa patients after prostate massage. The 
distinct influence of prostate massage on EN2 levels was found to be related to
the Gleason score and tumour stage. EN2 may be considered a marker of PCa with
certain limitations, such as those related to tumour staging. The specificity and
sensitivity of the protocol are highly dependent on prostate massage.

PMID: 25003607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Jul 3;7:CD009532. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD009532.pub2.

Oral or parenteral iron supplementation to reduce deferral, iron deficiency
and/or anaemia in blood donors.

Smith GA(1), Fisher SA, Doree C, Di Angelantonio E, Roberts DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Barnet and Chase Farm NHS Hospitals Trust, The
Ridgeway, Enfield, UK, EN2 8JL.

BACKGROUND: Iron deficiency is a significant cause of deferral in people wishing 
to donate blood. If iron removed from the body through blood donation is not
replaced, then donors may become iron deficient. All donors are screened at each 
visit for low haemoglobin (Hb) levels. However, some deferred blood donors do not
return to donate. Deferred first-time donors are even less likely to return.
Interventions that reduce the risk of provoking iron deficiency and anaemia in
blood donors will therefore increase the number of blood donations. Currently,
iron supplementation for blood donors is not a standard of care in many blood
services. A systematic review is required to answer specific questions regarding 
the efficacy and safety of iron supplementation in blood donors.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of iron supplementation to reduce
deferral, iron deficiency and/or anaemia in blood donors.
SEARCH METHODS: We ran the search on 18 November 2013. We searched Cochrane
Injuries Group Specialised Register, CENTRAL, PubMed, MEDLINE (OvidSP), EMBASE
(OvidSP), CINAHL (EBSCO Host) and six other databases. We also searched clinical 
trials registers and screened guidelines reference lists.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) comparing iron
supplementation versus placebo or control, oral versus parenteral iron
supplementation, iron supplementation versus iron-rich food supplements, and
different doses, treatment durations and preparations of iron supplementation in 
healthy blood donors. Autologous blood donors were excluded.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We combined data using random-effects
meta-analyses. We evaluated heterogeneity using the I(2) statistic; we explored
considerable heterogeneity (I(2) > 75%) in subgroup analyses. We carried out
sensitivity analyses to assess the impact of trial quality on the results.
MAIN RESULTS: Thirty RCTs (4704 participants) met the eligibility criteria,
including 19 comparisons of iron supplementation and placebo or control; one
comparison of oral and parenteral iron supplementation; four comparisons of
different doses of iron supplementation; one comparison of different treatment
durations of iron supplementation; and 12 comparisons of different iron
supplementation preparations.Many studies were of low or uncertain methodological
quality and therefore at high or uncertain risk of bias. We therefore rated the
quality of the evidence for our outcomes as moderate. There was a statistically
significant reduction in deferral due to low haemoglobin in donors who received
iron supplementation compared with donors who received no iron supplementation,
both at the first donation visit after commencement of iron supplementation (risk
ratio (RR) 0.34; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.21 to 0.55; four studies; 1194
participants; P value < 0.0001) and at subsequent donations (RR 0.25; 95% CI 0.15
to 0.41; three studies; 793 participants; P value < 0.00001). Supplementation
also resulted in significantly higher haemoglobin levels (mean difference (MD)
2.36 g/L; 95% CI 0.06 to 4.66; eight studies; 847 participants, P value =0.04),
and iron stores, including serum ferritin (MD 13.98 ng/mL; 95% CI 8.92 to 19.03; 
five studies; 640 participants; P value < 0.00001) and transferrin saturation (MD
3.91%; 95% CI 2.02 to 5.80; four studies; 344 participants; P value < 0.0001)
prior to further donation. The differences were maintained after subsequent
donation(s).Adverse effects were widely reported and were more frequent in donors
who received iron supplementation (RR 1.60; 95% CI 1.23 to 2.07; four studies;
1748 participants; P value = 0.0005). Adverse effects included constipation,
diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting and taste disturbances, and some participants stopped
treatment due to side effects.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There is moderate quality evidence that rates of donor
deferral due to low haemoglobin are considerably less in those taking iron
supplements compared with those without iron supplementation, both at the first
donation visit and at subsequent donation. Iron-supplemented donors also show
elevated haemoglobin and iron stores. These beneficial effects are balanced by
more frequent adverse events in donors who receive iron supplementation than in
those who do not; this is likely to limit acceptability and compliance. The
long-term effects of iron supplementation without measurement of iron stores are 
unknown. These considerations are likely to preclude widespread use of iron
supplementation by tablets. Blood services may consider targeted use of
supplementation in those at greatest risk of iron deficiency, personalised
donation intervals and providing dietary advice.

PMID: 24990381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014 Jun 17;8:163. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00163.
eCollection 2014.

Altered GABAergic markers, increased binocularity and reduced plasticity in the
visual cortex of Engrailed-2 knockout mice.

Allegra M(1), Genovesi S(2), Maggia M(2), Cenni MC(3), Zunino G(2), Sgadò P(2),
Caleo M(3), Bozzi Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Institute, National Research Council (CNR) Pisa, Italy ;
Laboratory of Neurobiology, Scuola Normale Superiore Pisa, Italy. (2)Laboratory
of Molecular Neuropathology, Centre for Integrative Biology, University of Trento
Mattarello, Trento, Italy. (3)Neuroscience Institute, National Research Council
(CNR) Pisa, Italy. (4)Neuroscience Institute, National Research Council (CNR)
Pisa, Italy ; Laboratory of Molecular Neuropathology, Centre for Integrative
Biology, University of Trento Mattarello, Trento, Italy.

The maturation of the GABAergic system is a crucial determinant of cortical
development during early postnatal life, when sensory circuits undergo a process 
of activity-dependent refinement. An altered excitatory/inhibitory balance has
been proposed as a possible pathogenic mechanism of autism spectrum disorders
(ASD). The homeobox-containing transcription factor Engrailed-2 (En2) has been
associated to ASD, and En2 knockout (En2 (-/-)) mice show ASD-like features
accompanied by a partial loss of cortical GABAergic interneurons. Here we studied
GABAergic markers and cortical function in En2 (-/-) mice, by exploiting the
well-known anatomical and functional features of the mouse visual system. En2 is 
expressed in the visual cortex at postnatal day 30 and during adulthood. When
compared to age-matched En2 (+/+) controls, En2 (-/-) mice showed an increased
number of parvalbumin (PV(+)), somatostatin (SOM(+)), and neuropeptide Y (NPY(+))
positive interneurons in the visual cortex at P30, and a decreased number of
SOM(+) and NPY(+) interneurons in the adult. At both ages, the differences in
distinct interneuron populations observed between En2 (+/+) and En2 (-/-) mice
were layer-specific. Adult En2 (-/-) mice displayed a normal eye-specific
segregation in the retino-geniculate pathway, and in vivo electrophysiological
recordings showed a normal development of basic functional properties (acuity,
response latency, receptive field size) of the En2 (-/-) primary visual cortex.
However, a significant increase of binocularity was found in P30 and adult En2
(-/-) mice, as compared to age-matched controls. Differently from what observed
in En2 (+/+) mice, the En2 (-/-) primary visual cortex did not respond to a brief
monocular deprivation performed between P26 and P29, during the so-called
"critical period." These data suggest that altered GABAergic circuits impact
baseline binocularity and plasticity in En2 (-/-) mice, while leaving other
visual functional properties unaffected.

PMCID: PMC4060086
PMID: 24987331  [PubMed]


30. Development. 2014 May;141(10):2131-8. doi: 10.1242/dev.102905.

Role of En2 in the tectal laminar formation of chick embryos.

Omi M(1), Harada H, Watanabe Y, Funahashi J, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku
University, 4-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

The chick optic tectum consists of 16 laminae. Here, we report contribution of
En2 to laminar formation in chick optic tecta. En2 is specifically expressed in
laminae g-j of stratum griseum et fibrosum superficiale (SGFS). Misexpression of 
En2 resulted in disappearance of En2-expressing cells from the superficial layers
(laminae a-f of SGFS), where endogenous En2 is not expressed. Misexpression of
En2 before postmitotic cells had left the ventricular layer indicated that
En2-misexpressing cells stopped at the laminae of endogenous En2 expression and
that they did not migrate into the superficial layers. Induction of En2
misexpression using a tetracycline-inducible system after the postmitotic cells
had reached superficial layers also resulted in disappearance of En2-expressing
cells from the superficial layers. Time-lapse analysis showed that
En2-misexpressing cells migrated back from the superficial layers towards the
middle layers, where En2 is strongly expressed endogenously. Our results suggest 
a potential role of En2 in regulating cell migration and positioning in the
tectal laminar formation.

PMID: 24803658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Apr 29;15(5):7398-408. doi: 10.3390/ijms15057398.

A novel protein is lower expressed in renal cell carcinoma.

Guan R(1), Xu Y(2), Lei H(3), Gao Z(4), Xin Z(5), Guo Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Andrology Center, Peking University First Hospital, Peking University, Beijing
100034, China. guanruili@gmail.com. (2)Andrology Center, Peking University First 
Hospital, Peking University, Beijing 100034, China. xyongde@gmail.com.
(3)Andrology Center, Peking University First Hospital, Peking University, Beijing
100034, China. hongenlei@foxmail.com. (4)Andrology Center, Peking University
First Hospital, Peking University, Beijing 100034, China. gaozhezhu@gmail.com.
(5)Andrology Center, Peking University First Hospital, Peking University, Beijing
100034, China. xinzc@bjmu.edu.cn. (6)Department of Urology, Peking University
First Hospital and the Institute of Urology, Peking University, Beijing 100034,
China. guoyinglu07@gmail.com.

Engrailed-2 (EN2) has been identified as a candidate oncogene in breast cancer
and prostate cancer. It is usually recognized as a mainly nuclear staining in the
cells. However, recent studies showed a cytoplasmic staining occurred in prostate
cancer, bladder cancer and clear cell renal cell carcinoma. The inconsistency
makes us confused. To clarify the localization and expression of EN2 in renal
cell carcinoma, anti-EN2 antibody (ab28731) and anti-EN2 antibody (MAB2600) were 
used for immunohistochemistry (IHC) respectively. Interestingly, we found that
EN2 detected by ab28731 was mainly presented in cytoplasm while EN2 detected by
MAB2600 was mainly presented in nucleus. To further investigate the different
patterns observed above, lysates from full-length EN2 over expression in HEK293T 
cells were used to identify which antibody the EN2 molecule bound by western
blot. Results showed ab28731 did not react with the lysates. For this reason, the
novel specific protein detected by ab28731 was not the EN2 molecule and was named
nonEN2. Then using the renal carcinoma tissue microarray and renal tissues, we
found that the protein expression levels of nonEN2 in kidney tumor tissues was
significantly lower than that in kidney normal tissues (p < 0.05), so was in
renal cell lines. Taken together, nonEN2 is lower expressed and may play an
important role in renal cell carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4057679
PMID: 24786097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Genes Brain Behav. 2014 Mar;13(3):286-298.

Chronic desipramine treatment rescues depression-related, social and cognitive
deficits in Engrailed-2 knockout mice.

Brielmaier J, Senerth JM, Silverman JL, Matteson PG, Millonig JH, DiCicco-Bloom
E, Crawley JN.

Engrailed-2 (En2) is a homeobox transcription factor that regulates
neurodevelopmental processes including neuronal connectivity and elaboration of
monoaminergic neurons in the ventral hindbrain. We previously reported
abnormalities in brain noradrenergic concentrations in En2 null mutant mice that 
were accompanied by increased immobility in the forced swim test, relevant to
depression. An EN2 genetic polymorphism has been associated with autism spectrum 
disorders, and mice with a deletion in En2 display social abnormalities and
cognitive deficits that may be relevant to multiple neuropsychiatric conditions. 
This study evaluated the ability of chronic treatment with desipramine (DMI), a
selective norepinephrine (NE) reuptake inhibitor and classical antidepressant, to
reverse behavioral abnormalities in En2-/- mice. Desipramine treatment
significantly reduced immobility in the tail suspension and forced swim tests,
restored sociability in the three-chambered social approach task and reversed
impairments in contextual fear conditioning in En2-/- mice. Our findings indicate
that modulation of brain noradrenergic systems rescues the depression-related
phenotype in En2-/- mice and suggest new roles for NE in the pathophysiology of
the social and cognitive deficits seen in neuropsychiatric disorders such as
autism or schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC4004968
PMID: 24730055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(11):1717-26. doi: 10.4161/cc.28629. Epub 2014 Mar 25.

Lineage-specific function of Engrailed-2 in the progression of chronic
myelogenous leukemia to T-cell blast crisis.

Abollo-Jiménez F(1), Campos-Sánchez E(2), Toboso-Navasa A(3), Vicente-Dueñas
C(1), González-Herrero I(1), Alonso-Escudero E(1), González M(4), Segura V(5),
Blanco O(6), Martínez-Climent JA(7), Sánchez-García I(1), Cobaleda C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Therapeutics and Translational Oncology Program, Instituto de
Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer; CSIC/ Universidad de Salamanca; Campus
M. de Unamuno; Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL); Salamanca, 
Spain. (2)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa; CSIC/Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid; Campus de Cantoblanco; Madrid, Spain. (3)Centro de Biología Molecular
Severo Ochoa; CSIC/Universidad Autónoma de Madrid; Campus de Cantoblanco; Madrid,
Spain; Current affiliation: Immunity and Cancer Laboratory; London Research
Institute; Cancer Research UK; London, UK. (4)Department of Hematology,
University Hospital of Salamanca; Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca; 
Salamanca, Spain. (5)Bioinformatics Unit; Center for Applied Medical Research;
University of Navarra; Pamplona, Spain. (6)Departamento de Anatomía Patológica;
Universidad de Salamanca; Salamanca, Spain. (7)Division of Oncology; Center for
Applied Medical Research (CIMA); University of Navarra; Pamplona, Spain.

In hematopoietic malignancies, oncogenic alterations interfere with cellular
differentiation and lead to tumoral development. Identification of the proteins
regulating differentiation is essential to understand how they are altered in
malignancies. Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a biphasic disease initiated 
by an alteration taking place in hematopoietic stem cells. CML progresses to a
blast crisis (BC) due to a secondary differentiation block in any of the
hematopoietic lineages. However, the molecular mechanisms of CML evolution to
T-cell BC remain unclear. Here, we have profiled the changes in DNA methylation
patterns in human samples from BC-CML, in order to identify genes whose
expression is epigenetically silenced during progression to T-cell
lineage-specific BC. We have found that the CpG-island of the ENGRAILED-2 (EN2)
gene becomes methylated in this progression. Afterwards, we demonstrate that En2 
is expressed during T-cell development in mice and humans. Finally, we further
show that genetic deletion of En2 in a CML transgenic mouse model induces a
T-cell lineage BC that recapitulates human disease. These results identify En2 as
a new regulator of T-cell differentiation whose disruption induces a malignant
T-cell fate in CML progression, and validate the strategy used to identify new
developmental regulators of hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC4111718
PMID: 24675889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Clin Exp Immunol. 2014 Aug;177(2):428-38. doi: 10.1111/cei.12332.

Spontaneous antibodies against Engrailed-2 (EN2) protein in patients with
prostate cancer.

Annels NE(1), Simpson GR, Denyer M, McGrath SE, Falgari G, Killick E, Eeles R,
Stebbing J, Pchejetski D, Cutress R, Murray N, Michael A, Pandha H.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey,
Guildford, Surrey, UK.

We reported the expression of the homeodomain-containing transcription factor
Engrailed-2 (EN2) in prostate cancer and showed that the presence of EN2 protein 
in the urine was highly predictive of prostate cancer. This study aimed to
determine whether patients with prostate cancer have EN2 autoantibodies, what the
prevalence of these antibodies is and whether they are associated with disease
stage. The spontaneous immunoglobulin (Ig)G immune response against EN2 and for
comparison the tumour antigen New York Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma 1
(NY-ESO-1), were tested by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in three
different cohorts of prostate cancer patients as well as a group of men
genetically predisposed to prostate cancer. Thirty-two of 353 (9·1%) of the SUN
cohort representing all stages of prostate cancer demonstrated EN2 IgG responses,
12 of 107 patients (11·2%) in the advanced prostate cancer patients showed
responses, while only four of 121 patients (3·3%) with castrate-resistant
prostate cancer showed EN2 autoantibodies. No significant responses were found in
the predisposed group. Anti-EN2 IgG responses were significantly higher in
patients with prostate cancer compared to healthy control males and similarly
prevalent to anti-NY-ESO-1 responses. While EN2 autoantibodies are not a useful
diagnostic or monitoring tool, EN2 immunogenicity provides the rationale to
pursue studies using EN2 as an immunotherapeutic target.

© 2014 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC4226594
PMID: 24654775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2014 Apr;52(4):382-3. doi:
10.1016/j.bjoms.2014.01.020. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Tetracycline: a cure all?

Kennedy R(1), Alibhai M(2), Shakib K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Barnet & Chase Farm Hospital, Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, The 
Ridgeway, Enfield Middlesex, EN2 8JL, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
robertkennedy@nhs.net. (2)Barnet & Chase Farm Hospital, Department of Oral &
Maxillofacial Surgery, The Ridgeway, Enfield Middlesex, EN2 8JL, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: mustansir.alibhai@nhs.net. (3)Barnet & Chase Farm Hospital,
Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, The Ridgeway, Enfield Middlesex, EN2 
8JL, United Kingdom. Electronic address: k.shakib@nhs.net.

Comment in
    Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2014 Sep;52(7):674.

Tetracyclines are used to treat a range of oral conditions. Their efficacy in the
treatment of periodontitis is well established, and they are authoritatively
recommended in the management of avulsed teeth. There is a growing evidence base 
to support the use of tetracycline to treat recurrent aphthous stomatitis, but
its use in white spongy naevus is limited to a handful of case reports. The
mechanism of action in these conditions is either unknown or indicated to be
through the inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP). The use of a single
agent to treat diverse oral conditions has important implications for oral
medicine.

Copyright © 2014 The British Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24613100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Jun;41(6):3651-7. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3229-z. Epub 2014
Feb 16.

Engrailed-2 is down-regulated but also ectopically expressed in clear cell renal 
cell carcinoma.

Lai CY(1), Pan B, Luo Y, Liang WB, Chen J, Ye DM, Guo JN, Li L, Su ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, No. 
613 Huang Pu Rd, Guangzhou, 510630, China.

Engrailed-2 (EN2), a member of the homeobox family of genes, encodes a
homeodomain-containing transcription factor that is thought to be a potential
oncogene in a number of cancers. Because the role of EN2 in clear cell renal cell
carcinoma (CCRCC) has not been determined, we investigated its expression in
CCRCC tissues and cell lines. Using immunohistochemical (IHC) staining, we found 
that EN2 protein was expressed in normal renal cells and tubules, but was
frequently down-regulated in tissues from patients with CCRCC and in CCRCC cell
lines. In addition, we found that EN2, which functions in the nucleus, was
completely localized to the cytoplasm of CCRCC cells as detected by IHC and
immunofluorescence staining. Furthermore, expression of EN2 protein was
negatively correlated with increasing histological grade of CCRCC tumors (P =
0.003). The exact role of EN2 expression in renal carcinoma carcinogenesis
requires further investigation.

PMID: 24532139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 10;9(2):e87208. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087208. eCollection
2014.

Autism associated gene, engrailed2, and flanking gene levels are altered in
post-mortem cerebellum.

Choi J(1), Ababon MR(1), Soliman M(1), Lin Y(2), Brzustowicz LM(3), Matteson
PG(1), Millonig JH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Piscataway, New Jersey, United
States of America. (2)Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey,
United States of America. (3)Department of Genetics, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, New Jersey, United States of America. (4)Center for Advanced
Biotechnology and Medicine, Piscataway, New Jersey, United States of America ;
Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 
Piscataway, New Jersey, United States of America ; Department of Genetics,
Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Previous genetic studies demonstrated association between the
transcription factor engrailed2 (EN2) and Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD).
Subsequent molecular analysis determined that the EN2 ASD-associated haplotype
(rs1861972-rs1861973 A-C) functions as a transcriptional activator to increase
gene expression. EN2 is flanked by 5 genes, serotonin receptor5a (HTR5A), insulin
induced gene1 (INSIG1), canopy1 homolog (CNPY1), RNA binding motif protein33
(RBM33), and sonic hedgehog (SHH). These flanking genes are co-expressed with EN2
during development and coordinate similar developmental processes. To investigate
if mRNA levels for these genes are altered in individuals with autism,
post-mortem analysis was performed.
METHODS: qRT-PCR quantified mRNA levels for EN2 and the 5 flanking genes in 78
post-mortem cerebellar samples. mRNA levels were correlated with both affection
status and rs1861972-rs1861973 genotype. Molecular analysis investigated whether 
EN2 regulates flanking gene expression.
RESULTS: EN2 levels are increased in affected A-C/G-T individuals (p =<U+200A>.0077).
Affected individuals also display a significant increase in SHH and a decrease in
INSIG1 levels. Rs1861972-rs1861973 genotype is correlated with significant
increases for SHH (A-C/G-T) and CNPY1 (G-T/G-T) levels. Human cell line
over-expression and knock-down as well as mouse knock-out analysis are consistent
with EN2 and SHH being co-regulated, which provides a possible mechanism for
increased SHH post-mortem levels.
CONCLUSIONS: EN2 levels are increased in affected individuals with an A-C/G-T
genotype, supporting EN2 as an ASD susceptibility gene. SHH, CNPY1, and INSIG1
levels are also significantly altered depending upon affection status or
rs1861972-rs1861973 genotype. Increased EN2 levels likely contribute to elevated 
SHH expression observed in the post-mortem samples.

PMCID: PMC3919719
PMID: 24520327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Autism. 2014 Feb 7;5(1):9. doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-5-9.

Engrailed2 modulates cerebellar granule neuron precursor proliferation,
differentiation and insulin-like growth factor 1 signaling during postnatal
development.

Rossman IT, Lin L, Morgan KM, Digiovine M, Van Buskirk EK, Kamdar S, Millonig JH,
Dicicco-Bloom E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience & Cell Biology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 675 Hoes, Lane, Piscataway, NJ
08854, USA. diciccem@rwjms.rutgers.edu.

BACKGROUND: The homeobox transcription factor Engrailed2 (En2) has been studied
extensively in neurodevelopment, particularly in the midbrain/hindbrain region
and cerebellum, where it exhibits dynamic patterns of expression and regulates
cell patterning and morphogenesis. Because of its roles in regulating cerebellar 
development and evidence of cerebellar pathology in autism spectrum disorder
(ASD), we previously examined an ENGRAILED2 association and found evidence to
support EN2 as a susceptibility gene, a finding replicated by several other
investigators. However, its functions at the cell biological level remain
undefined. In the mouse, En2 gene is expressed in granule neuron precursors
(GNPs) just as they exit the cell cycle and begin to differentiate, raising the
possibility that En2 may modulate these developmental processes.
METHODS: To define En2 functions, we examined proliferation, differentiation and 
signaling pathway activation in En2 knockout (KO) and wild-type (WT) GNPs in
response to a variety of extracellular growth factors and following En2 cDNA
overexpression in cell culture. In vivo analyses of cerebellar GNP proliferation 
as well as responses to insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF1) treatment were also
conducted.
RESULTS: Proliferation markers were increased in KO GNPs in vivo and in 24-h
cultures, suggesting En2 normally serves to promote cell cycle exit.
Significantly, IGF1 stimulated greater DNA synthesis in KO than WT cells in
culture, a finding associated with markedly increased phospho-S6 kinase
activation. Similarly, there was three-fold greater DNA synthesis in the KO
cerebellum in response to IGF1 in vivo. On the other hand, KO GNPs exhibited
reduced neurite outgrowth and differentiation. Conversely, En2 overexpression
increased cell cycle exit and promoted neuronal differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: In aggregate, our observations suggest that the ASD-associated gene 
En2 promotes GNP cell cycle exit and differentiation, and modulates IGF1 activity
during postnatal cerebellar development. Thus, genetic/epigenetic alterations of 
EN2 expression may impact proliferation, differentiation and IGF1 signaling as
possible mechanisms that may contribute to ASD pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3932947
PMID: 24507165  [PubMed]


39. Development. 2014 Feb;141(4):940-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.104901.

An essential role for LPA signalling in telencephalon development.

Geach TJ(1), Faas L, Devader C, Gonzalez-Cordero A, Tabler JM, Brunsdon H, Isaacs
HV, Dale L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Anatomy Building, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK.

Erratum in
    Development. 2014 Jun;141(11):2360.

Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) has wide-ranging effects on many different cell
types, acting through G-protein-coupled receptors such as LPAR6. We show that
Xenopus lpar6 is expressed from late blastulae and is enriched in the mesoderm
and dorsal ectoderm of early gastrulae. Expression in gastrulae is an early
response to FGF signalling. Transcripts for lpar6 are enriched in the neural
plate of Xenopus neurulae and loss of function caused forebrain defects, with
reduced expression of telencephalic markers (foxg1, emx1 and nkx2-1). Midbrain
(en2) and hindbrain (egr2) markers were unaffected. Foxg1 expression requires
LPAR6 within ectoderm and not mesoderm. Head defects caused by LPAR6 loss of
function were enhanced by co-inhibiting FGF signalling, with defects extending
into the hindbrain (en2 and egr2 expression reduced). This is more severe than
expected from simple summation of individual defects, suggesting that LPAR6 and
FGF have overlapping or partially redundant functions in the anterior neural
plate. We observed similar defects in forebrain development in loss-of-function
experiments for ENPP2, an enzyme involved in the synthesis of extracellular LPA. 
Our study demonstrates a role for LPA in early forebrain development.

PMID: 24496630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. JRSM Short Rep. 2013 Nov 21;4(12):2042533313505510. doi:
10.1177/2042533313505510. eCollection 2013.

Severe inflammatory response and vasculitis leading to quadruple limb
amputations.

Brinkler R(1), Zhang X(2), Ratnasingam S(3), Dawson J(4), Palamaras I(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthetics, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Harlow CM20 1QX, UK. 
(2)Department of Anaesthetics, Northwick Park Hospital, HA1 3UJ. (3)Department of
Anaesthetics, Chase Farm Hospital, Enfield EN2 8JL, UK. (4)Department of
Intensive Care, Chase Farm Hospital, Enfield EN2 8JL, UK. (5)Department of
Dermatology, Chase Farm Hospital, Enfield EN2 8JL, UK.

Erratum in
    JRSM Short Rep. 2013 Nov;4(12):doi/10.1177/2054270414527396.

A systemic inflammatory response causing multi-organ failure and requiring
multiple amputations was refractory to all treatments except Anakinra, and the
cause remains unclear.

PMCID: PMC3899732
PMID: 24475343  [PubMed]


41. Hand (N Y). 2013 Jun;8(2):191-4. doi: 10.1007/s11552-012-9472-7.

A radiological sign in chronic collateral ligament injuries of the thumb
metacarpophalangeal joint.

Hunter AR(1), Tansey RJ(2), Muir LT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Upper Limb Unit, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Salford Royal NHS
Foundation Trust, Stott Lane, Salford, M6 8HD UK ; Department of Orthopedics,
Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield, Middlesex, EN2 8JL UK. (2)Upper Limb 
Unit, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Stott
Lane, Salford, M6 8HD UK.

BACKGROUND: Differentiating chronic from acute injuries of the collateral
ligament of the metacarpophalangeal joint (MCPJ) of the thumb can be difficult in
the absence of a conclusive history and examination. We aimed to establish the
presence of a radiological sign in patients with a chronic injury and the
reliability of the sign in differentiating chronic from acute ligament injury.
METHODS: Consecutive patients undergoing surgical treatment for chronic (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>14) 
or acute (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>8) ligament injury of the MCPJ of the thumb were identified
retrospectively. Six upper limb orthopedic surgeons and four musculoskeletal
radiologists were recruited from three regional centers. Observers judged the
presence or absence of the sign, an exostosis at the level of the neck of the
thumb metacarpal, on radiographs presented on a computer program. The radiographs
were then observed in a different random order. The sensitivity, specificity,
positive predictive value (PPV), and negative predictive values (NPV) of the
radiological sign were evaluated for each observer and the intra- and
interobserver error was calculated.
RESULTS: The mean observer specificity and sensitivity for the sign were 84 and
54 %, respectively. The PPV and NPV were 89 and 52 %, respectively. The kappa
statistic for intraobserver error was 0.69 and interobserver error 0.34.
CONCLUSIONS: A radiological sign associated with chronic collateral ligament
injuries of the MCPJ of the thumb is established. The presence of the sign can
increase the confidence of the clinician in differentiating chronic from acute
collateral ligament injuries, when history and examination are inconclusive in
this respect.

PMCID: PMC3652994
PMID: 24426917  [PubMed]


42. Mol Autism. 2013 Dec 19;4(1):51. doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-4-51.

Transcriptome profiling in engrailed-2 mutant mice reveals common molecular
pathways associated with autism spectrum disorders.

Sgadò P(1), Provenzano G, Dassi E, Adami V, Zunino G, Genovesi S, Casarosa S,
Bozzi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropathology, Centre for Integrative Biology
(CIBIO), University of Trento, Via delle Regole 101, 38123 Trento, Italy.
sgado@science.unitn.it.

BACKGROUND: Transcriptome analysis has been used in autism spectrum disorder
(ASD) to unravel common pathogenic pathways based on the assumption that distinct
rare genetic variants or epigenetic modifications affect common biological
pathways. To unravel recurrent ASD-related neuropathological mechanisms, we took 
advantage of the En2-/- mouse model and performed transcriptome profiling on
cerebellar and hippocampal adult tissues.
METHODS: Cerebellar and hippocampal tissue samples from three En2-/- and wild
type (WT) littermate mice were assessed for differential gene expression using
microarray hybridization followed by RankProd analysis. To identify functional
categories overrepresented in the differentially expressed genes, we used
integrated gene-network analysis, gene ontology enrichment and mouse phenotype
ontology analysis. Furthermore, we performed direct enrichment analysis of
ASD-associated genes from the SFARI repository in our differentially expressed
genes.
RESULTS: Given the limited number of animals used in the study, we used
permissive criteria and identified 842 differentially expressed genes in En2-/-
cerebellum and 862 in the En2-/- hippocampus. Our functional analysis revealed
that the molecular signature of En2-/- cerebellum and hippocampus shares
convergent pathological pathways with ASD, including abnormal synaptic
transmission, altered developmental processes and increased immune response.
Furthermore, when directly compared to the repository of the SFARI database, our 
differentially expressed genes in the hippocampus showed enrichment of
ASD-associated genes significantly higher than previously reported. qPCR was
performed for representative genes to confirm relative transcript levels compared
to those detected in microarrays.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the limited number of animals used in the study, our
bioinformatic analysis indicates the En2-/- mouse is a valuable tool for
investigating molecular alterations related to ASD.

PMCID: PMC3896729
PMID: 24355397  [PubMed]


43. Pediatr Res. 2014 Mar;75(3):443-7. doi: 10.1038/pr.2013.234. Epub 2013 Dec 6.

Exome sequencing and diffusion tensor imaging in developmental disabilities.

Sundaram S(1), Huq AH(2), Hsia T(2), Chugani H(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pediatrics, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan [2]
Department of Neurology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan [3] PET
Center, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit Medical Center, Detroit,
Michigan. (2)1] Department of Pediatrics, Wayne State University, Detroit,
Michigan [2] Department of Neurology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan.

BACKGROUND: We had previously shown that arcuate fasciculus is poorly developed
in patients with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD) using
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). In the present study, we used exome sequencing to
identify the candidate variants in IDD patients with and without DTI
abnormalities.
METHODS: Eighteen children with IDD (age: 67 ± 36 mo, 9 females) were included in
the present study. The DTI was used to determine the integrity of arcuate
fasciculus. The next-generation sequencing was performed on the Solid 4 platform.
A novel, analytical strategy was developed to identify a set of candidate genes
of interest. We then searched for novel, nonsynonymous variants in the patients
within this subset of genes and in known IDD genes.
RESULTS: Seven novel, nonsynonymous (all of them were heterozygous, missense)
variants belonged to ultraconserved genes that are known to cause abnormal brain 
morphology in mutant mice. Similarly, three novel, nonsynonymous (all of them
were heterozygous, missense) variants belonged to known IDD genes. Two patients
with underdeveloped arcuate fasciculus had novel, nonsynonymous variants in genes
(MID1 and EN2) regulating axon guidance pathway.
CONCLUSION: Exome sequencing identified several new genetic causes of IDD.

PMCID: PMC3943710
PMID: 24321989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2013 Dec 1;13:108. doi: 10.1186/1471-2261-13-108.

Patient perspective on the management of atrial fibrillation in five European
countries.

Bakhai A(1), Sandberg A, Mittendorf T, Greiner W, Oberdiek AM, Berto P, Franczok 
E, Lobban T, Zamorano JL.

Author information: 
(1)Barnet and Chase Farm Hospitals NHS Trust, The Ridgeway, Enfield, EN2 8JL
Middlesex, UK. abakhai@nhs.net.

BACKGROUND: Long-term management of chronic conditions, such as atrial
fibrillation (AF), require frequent interactions with the healthcare systems. The
multinational EUropean Patient Survey in Atrial Fibrillation (EUPS-AF) was
conducted to investigate patient satisfaction with AF management in different of 
five European healthcare systems at a time of changing treatment paradigms for
stroke prophylaxis, prior to the advent of newer oral anticoagulants.
METHODS: Adults (>18 years) were recruited at random from the total populations
of France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the UK using a randomized telephone dialling
system. At least 300 respondents per country reporting to have a diagnosis of AF 
or receiving oral anticoagulation therapy for suspected AF or to have a heart
rhythm disturbance completed a structured telephone interview.
RESULTS: Most respondents were satisfied with their treatment for AF over the
previous 12 months, with 85.5% (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1289) rating their care as good or better.
Suboptimal clinical practices, however, were identified in several key areas.
Coordination of primary and secondary care and a lack of patient engagement and
support were particular issues, especially for those patients likely to have
extensive contact with their healthcare system.
CONCLUSIONS: In the context of Europe-wide guidelines for management of AF, most 
patients with AF were satisfied with their care, but for a greater proportion of 
patients, some aspects are unsatisfactory. Patient-centred surveys, such as the
EUPS-AF, are crucial for understanding the factors that contribute to patient
satisfaction and compliance with long-term treatment for chronic conditions.

PMCID: PMC4219387
PMID: 24289181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Int J Law Psychiatry. 2014 Mar-Apr;37(2):135-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ijlp.2013.11.008.
Epub 2013 Nov 22.

Mental health and fitness to plead proposals in England and Wales.

Mudathikundan F(1), Chao O(2), Forrester A(3).

Author information: 
(1)South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, HM Prison Belmarsh, Western
Way, Thamesmead, London SE28 0EB, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
m.faisal@nhs.net. (2)Barnet, Enfield and Haringey NHS Foundation Trust, North
London Forensic Service, Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield, Middlesex
EN2 8JL, United Kingdom. Electronic address: oriana.chao@nhs.net. (3)South London
and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, Maudsley Hospital, Denmark Hill, London, SE5
8AZ, United Kingdom; Department of Forensic and Neurodevelopmental Science,
Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, De Crespigny Park, London SE5
8AF, United Kingdom. Electronic address: andrew.forrester1@nhs.net.

Proposals to reform fitness to plead legislation have been published by the Law
Commission in England and Wales; they include a new test of decision making
capacity and a new psychiatric test that has yet to be fully developed. Although 
proposals have met with some support, there have also been detractors. The
history of fitness to plead is reviewed and current case law (including the 1836 
Pritchard criteria) is examined. Although existing arrangements have been
criticised, this may be attributable to inconsistent practical application,
rather than inherent conceptual flaws. The Pritchard test has largely stood the
test of time and has emerged relatively unscathed. Fitness to plead is not a
medical construct, but rather a legal entity and any new test would be likely to 
introduce its own difficulties. A capacity based assessment could enhance debate 
and disagreement and increase court time in many cases, presenting new resource
implications with questionable benefit. As the existing Pritchard criteria,
amended by case law, already include a five limb test that closely resembles a
capacity assessment (ability to plead to the indictment, to understand the course
of the proceedings, to instruct a lawyer, to challenge a juror and to understand 
the evidence) and given the difficulties in introducing a functional test format 
in other jurisdictions, the Law Commission's proposals should now be set aside,
perhaps for another day: reconsideration may be possible some decades hence,
pending enhanced scientific developments within psychiatry and better
understanding of the mind.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24268448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Biomark Med. 2013 Dec;7(6):893-901. doi: 10.2217/bmm.13.115.

EN2: a novel prostate cancer biomarker.

McGrath SE(1), Michael A, Morgan R, Pandha H.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, GU2
7WG, UK.

Extensive efforts to identify a clinically useful biomarker for the diagnosis of 
prostate cancer have resulted in important insights into the biology of the
disease, but no new test has been approved by regulatory authorities. The unmet
need has also shifted to identifying biomarkers that not only diagnose prostate
cancer but also indicate whether the patient has 'significant' disease. EN2 is a 
homeobox-containing transcription factor secreted specifically by prostate
cancers into urine, where it can be detected by a simple ELISA assay. A number of
studies have demonstrated the enormous potential of EN2 to address this unmet
need and provide the urologist with a simple, cheap and efficient prostate cancer
biomarker.

PMID: 24266821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2013 Sep;33(9):1372-6.

[Expression of Engrailed-2 and ß-catenin in bladder urothelial carcinoma and
their significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y(1), Liu H, DU X, Lai C, Su Z, Gao S.

Author information: 
(1)Post-graduate School of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515,
China.E-mail: 6649212@qq.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expressions of Engrailed-2 (EN2) and ß-catenin in
bladder urothelial carcinoma and explore their significance.
METHODS: Sixty bladder urothelial carcinoma samples of different grades and
stages and 10 normal bladder mucosal tissues were examined for expressions of EN2
and ß-catenin proteins and mRNA using immunochemistry, Western blotting and
RT-PCR. RESULTS Compared to normal bladder mucosa, bladder urothelial carcinoma
tissues showed significantly increased expressions of EN2 and ß-catenin proteins 
(P<0.05), and the high-grade carcinoma tissues exhibited significantly stronger
expressions than the low-grade ones (P<0.05); the expressions of the proteins
increased also significantly with advanced pathological stages of bladder
urothelial carcinoma (P<0.05). The expressions of EN2 and ß-catenin mRNAs showed 
a consistent pattern of changes with their protein expressions.
CONCLUSION: The expressions of EN2 and ß-catenin are significantly increased in
bladder urothelial carcinoma. EN2 may contribute to the development and
progression of bladder urothelial carcinoma by activating Wnt/ß-catenin signal
pathway.

PMID: 24067223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nepal Med Coll J. 2012 Sep;14(3):227-8.

Virtual panendoscopy--a new tool to help evaluating oral cancer.

Thiruchelvam JK(1), Sah S.

Author information: 
(1)Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield, Middlesex EN2 8JL, UK.

Virtual panendoscopy (VP) is a new, non-invasive diagnostic technique available
to assess luminal structures. It involves the use of the data obtained from
scanning of patients using multidetector CT scanners. The data is manipulated
using a software programme to generate 3D models with fly through capability to
examine various anatomical tubes. Its use has been studied in colonoscopy and
bronchoscopy. However its use in head and neck cancer assessment has not been
extensively studied. Therefore this diagnostic tool was used to stage 10
consecutive head and neck cancer patients. The ability of this tool in staging
and identification of synchronous primary was assessed. The findings from the VP 
were also compared with the findings of nasendoscopy. In our pilot study, the
virtual panendoscopy has been a useful tool in the assessment of the upper aero
digestive tract. Although it has not picked up synchronous primaries, good
quality assessment of lumen and the mucosal wall was done in areas not accessed
by nasendoscope. It is most useful in areas not accessed by nasendoscope i.e.
trachea, bronchus etc. The outcome, its usefulness and shortcomings are
discussed.

PMID: 24047022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. BJU Int. 2014 Apr;113(4):535-40. doi: 10.1111/bju.12269. Epub 2013 Aug 13.

Importance of HOX genes in normal prostate gland formation, prostate cancer
development and its early detection.

Javed S(1), Langley SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Royal Surrey County Hospital, Guildford, UK.

The aims of this paper were to review the published literature on the role of HOX
genes in the development of the normal prostate gland and in prostate cancer and 
to discuss the potential role of the HOX family member, Engrailed-2 (EN2), as a
diagnostic test of PCa. Hox genes were first described in the fruit fly Drosphila
melanogaster, where they specify the body plan and control the formation of body 
segments. They belong to a family of homeodomain-containing transcription factors
that determine cell and tissue identity during normal embryonic development. They
have been shown to be re-expressed by several different types of cancers. Studies
have shown that different Hox genes are responsible for the development of the
separate lobes of the prostate gland, the seminal vesicles and the epididymis.
All HOX13 paralogues are expressed in the adult human prostate, suggesting the
possibility of similarities between the function and expression of HOX genes
within urological structures at similar anterior-posterior positions. The
oncogenic and tumour suppressor signalling pathways associated with PCa converge 
on the HOX gene network, which ultimately controls gene expression, affecting
tumour formation and metastatic progression. The Engrailed genes (EN1 and EN2)
from the HOX gene family show a very high degree of functional conservation
during embryonic development. Urinary EN2 is being investigated as a potential
diagnostic marker of early PCa. It is secreted into the urine by PCa cells but
not by normal prostatic tissue. A recent study has shown an association between
urinary EN2 levels and cancer volume in radical prostatectomy specimens. The
ability to predict tumour volume could inform the treatment decision-making
process for patients with localized PCa choosing between active surveillance and 
radical treatment options.

© 2013 The Authors. BJU International © 2013 BJU International.

PMID: 23937390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. JRSM Short Rep. 2013 May 10;4(6):2042533313482458. doi: 10.1177/2042533313482458.
Print 2013 Jun.

Foreign body airway obstruction causing a ball valve effect.

Kenth J(1), Ng C.

Author information: 
(1)Chase Farm Hospital, Enfield, Middlesex EN2 8JL, UK.

PMCID: PMC3697858
PMID: 23885292  [PubMed]


51. Mol Syndromol. 2013 Jun;4(5):213-26. doi: 10.1159/000350041. Epub 2013 Apr 4.

Towards identification of individual etiologies by resolving genomic and
biological conundrums in patients with autism spectrum disorders.

Poot M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Recent genomic research into autism spectrum disorders (ASD) has revealed a
remarkably complex genetic architecture. Large numbers of common variants, copy
number variations and single nucleotide variants have been identified, yet each
of them individually afforded only a small phenotypic impact. A polygenic model
in which multiple genes interact either in an additive or a synergistic way
appears the most plausible for the majority of ASD patients. Based on recently
identified ASD candidate genes, transgenic mouse models for
neuroligins/neurorexins and genes such as Cntnap2, Cntn5, Tsc1, Tsc2, Akt3,
Cyfip1, Scn1a, En2, Slc6a4, and Bckdk have been generated and studied with
respect to behavioral and neuroanatomical phenotypes and sensitivity to drug
treatments. From these models, a few clues for potential pharmacologic
intervention emerged. The Fmr1, Shank2 and Cntn5 knockout mice exhibited
alterations of glutamate receptors, which may become a target for pharmacologic
modulation. Some of the phenotypes of Mecp2 knockout mice can be ameliorated by
administering IGF1. In the near future, comprehensive genotyping of individual
patients and siblings combined with the novel insights generated from the
transgenic animal studies may provide us with personalized treatment options.
Eventually, autism may indeed turn out to be a phenotypically heterogeneous group
of disorders ('autisms') caused by combinations of changes in multiple possible
candidate genes, being different in each patient and requiring for each
combination of mutations a distinct, individually tailored treatment.

PMCID: PMC3711481
PMID: 23885228  [PubMed]


52. Acta Crystallogr Sect E Struct Rep Online. 2013 May 11;69(Pt 6):m307-8. doi:
10.1107/S1600536813012075. Print 2013 Jun 1.

Sodium bis-(ethyl-enedi-amine)-copper(II) tetra-cyanido-cuprate(I).

Corfield PW(1), Dobbs RK, Bell B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Fordham University, 441 East Fordham Road, Bronx, NY 
10458, USA.

The title compound, Na[Cu(en)2][Cu(CN)4], where en represents ethyl-enedi-amine, 
NH2CH2CH2NH2, crystallizes as a salt with two distinct cations, Na(+) and
[Cu(II)en2](2+), and discrete [Cu(I)(CN)4](3-) anions. The anion geometry is
tetra-hedral, with angles at the copper atom ranging from 105.0 (1) to
115.4 (1)°. The Cu-C distances are in the range 1.976 (3) to 1.993 (3) Å. The
divalent copper atom is coordinated by four N atoms of the two bidentate en
ligands in a slightly distorted square-planar geometry. In the crystal, each
sodium ion inter-acts with cyanide N atoms of four different anions, with Na-N
distances lying in the narrow range of 2.344 (3) to 2.367 (3) Å, and an
approximately tetra-hedral arrangement around the sodium ions. The inter-acting
sodium ions and [Cu(I)(CN)4](3-) anions form a three-dimensional network with
channels which contain the [Cu(en)2](2+) cations. One of the chelate rings in the
cation shows partial disorder between two different conformations and the C atoms
were refined with occupancies in the ratio 0.817 (15):0.183 (15).

PMCID: PMC3684874
PMID: 23794976  [PubMed]


53. Sci Rep. 2013;3:2059. doi: 10.1038/srep02059.

Role of Engrailed-2 (EN2) as a prostate cancer detection biomarker in genetically
high risk men.

Killick E(1), Morgan R, Launchbury F, Bancroft E, Page E, Castro E, Kote-Jarai Z,
Aprikian A, Blanco I, Clowes V, Domchek S, Douglas F, Eccles D, Evans DG, Harris 
M, Kirk J, Lam J, Lindeman G, Mitchell G, Pachter N, Selkirk C, Tucker K, Zgajnar
J, Eeles R, Pandha H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, UK. emma.killick@icr.ac.uk

Controversy surrounds the use of PSA as a biomarker for prostate cancer
detection, leaving an unmet need for a novel biomarker in this setting; urinary
EN2 may identify individuals with clinically relevant prostate cancer. Male BRCA1
and BRCA2 mutation carriers are at increased risk of clinically significant
prostate cancer and may benefit from screening. Urine samples from 413 BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 mutation carriers and controls were evaluated. Subjects underwent annual
PSA screening with diagnostic biopsy triggered by PSA > 3.0 ng/ml; 21 men were
diagnosed with prostate cancer. Urinary EN2 levels were measured by ELISA and had
a sensitivity of 66.7% and specificity of 89.3% for cancer detection. There was
no statistically significant difference in EN2 levels according to genetic status
or Gleason score. Urinary EN2 may be useful as a non-invasive early biomarker for
prostate cancer detection in genetically high-risk individuals.

PMCID: PMC3690389
PMID: 23792811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Acta Neuropathol. 2013 Aug;126(2):291-301. doi: 10.1007/s00401-013-1124-7. Epub
2013 May 10.

Differential expression and methylation of brain developmental genes define
location-specific subsets of pilocytic astrocytoma.

Lambert SR(1), Witt H, Hovestadt V, Zucknick M, Kool M, Pearson DM, Korshunov A, 
Ryzhova M, Ichimura K, Jabado N, Fontebasso AM, Lichter P, Pfister SM, Collins
VP, Jones DT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Histopathology, Department of Pathology, University of
Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK. sl575@cam.ac.uk

Pilocytic astrocytomas (PAs) are the most common brain tumors in pediatric
patients and can cause significant morbidity, including chronic neurological
deficiencies. They are characterized by activating alterations in the
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, but little else is known about their
development. To map the global DNA methylation profiles of these tumors, we
analyzed 62 PAs and 7 normal cerebellum samples using Illumina 450K microarrays. 
These data revealed two subgroups of PA that separate according to tumor location
(infratentorial versus supratentorial), and identified key neural developmental
genes that are differentially methylated between the two groups, including NR2E1 
and EN2. Integration with transcriptome microarray data highlighted significant
expression differences, which were unexpectedly associated with a strong positive
correlation between methylation and expression. Differentially methylated probes 
were often identified within the gene body and/or regions up- or downstream of
the gene, rather than at the transcription start site. We also identified a large
number of differentially methylated genes between cerebellar PAs and normal
cerebellum, which were again enriched for developmental genes. In addition, we
found a significant association between differentially methylated genes and SUZ12
binding sites, indicating potential disruption of the polycomb repressor complex 
2 (PRC2). Taken together, these data suggest that PA from different locations in 
the brain may arise from region-specific cells of origin, and highlight the
potential disruption of key developmental regulators during tumorigenesis. These 
findings have implications for future basic research and clinical trials, as
therapeutic targets and drug sensitivity may differ according to tumor location.

PMID: 23660940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Arch Dis Child. 2013 Sep;98(9):697. doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2013-304097. Epub
2013 May 4.

Challenges in recognising significant back pain in a child with learning
difficulties.

Mohd Daud K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield,
Middlesex EN2 8JL, UK. karinadaud@hotmail.com

PMID: 23645813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Brain Struct Funct. 2014 May;219(3):777-92. doi: 10.1007/s00429-013-0534-6. Epub 
2013 Mar 14.

Role of Shh in the development of molecularly characterized tegmental nuclei in
mouse rhombomere 1.

Moreno-Bravo JA(1), Perez-Balaguer A, Martinez-Lopez JE, Aroca P, Puelles L,
Martinez S, Puelles E.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias, UMH-CSIC, Campus de San Juan, Av. Ramón y Cajal
S/N, Sant Joan d'Alacant, 03550, Alicante, Spain.

Hindbrain rhombomeres in general are differentially specified molecularly by
unique combinations of Hox genes with other developmental genes. Rhombomere 1
displays special features, including absence of Hox gene expression. It lies
within the hindbrain range of the Engrailed genes (En1, En2), controlled by the
isthmic organizer via diffusion of FGF8. It is limited rostrally by the isthmus
territory, and caudally by rhombomere 2. It is double the normal size of any
other rhombomere. Its dorsal part generates the cerebellar hemispheres and its
ventral part gives rise to several populations, such as some raphe nuclei, the
interpeduncular nucleus, the rhabdoid nucleus, anterior, dorsal, ventral and
posterodorsal tegmental nuclei, the cholinergic pedunculopontine and laterodorsal
tegmental nuclei, rostral parts of the hindbrain reticular formation, the locus
coeruleus, and part of the lateral lemniscal and paralemniscal nuclei, among
other formations. Some of these populations migrate tangentially before reaching 
their final positions. The morphogen Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is normally released
from the local floor plate and underlying notochord. In the present report we
explore, first, whether Shh is required in the specification of these r1
populations, and, second, its possible role in the guidance of tangentially
migrating neurons that approach the midline. Our results indicate that when Shh
function is altered selectively in a conditional mutant mouse strain, most
populations normally generated in the medial basal plate of r1 are completely
absent. Moreover, the relocation of some neurons that normally originate in the
alar plate and migrate tangentially into the medial basal plate is variously
altered. In contrast, neurons that migrate radially (or first tangentially and
then radially) into the lateral basal plate were not significantly affected.

PMID: 23494735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Eur J Cancer. 2013 Jun;49(9):2214-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2013.01.019. Epub 2013 
Feb 21.

Expression of Engrailed-2 (EN2) protein in bladder cancer and its potential
utility as a urinary diagnostic biomarker.

Morgan R(1), Bryan RT(2), Javed S(3), Launchbury F(3), Zeegers MP(4), Cheng
KK(4), James ND(2), Wallace DM(2), Hurst CD(5), Ward DG(2), Knowles MA(5), Pandha
H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Leggett Building, University
of Surrey, Surrey GU2 7WG, UK. Electronic address: r.morgan@surrey.ac.uk.
(2)School of Cancer Sciences, University of Birmingham, West Midlands B15 2TT,
UK. (3)Oncology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Leggett Building,
University of Surrey, Surrey GU2 7WG, UK. (4)Department of Public Health,
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Birmingham, West Midlands B15 2TT, 
UK. (5)Cancer Research UK Centre, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, St
James's University Hospital, Leeds, West Yorkshire LS9 7TF, UK.

Despite significant advances in our understanding of the molecular pathology of
bladder cancer, it remains a significant health problem with high morbidity and
mortality associated with muscle-invasive bladder cancer (stages T2+), and high
costs associated with the surveillance of non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer
(NMIBC, stages Ta/T1/Tis). Moreover, current diagnostic biomarkers are suboptimal
and of poor utility for low grade disease and surveillance. In this study, we
show that the Engrailed-2 (EN2) transcription factor is expressed in, and
secreted by, bladder cancer cell lines and patient tumour specimens, justifying
an evaluation of urinary EN2 as a diagnostic biomarker in bladder cancer using
archived samples from an established biospecimen collection. In patients with
NMIBC, urinary EN2 was detected in most cases with an overall sensitivity of 82% 
and specificity of 75%. The sensitivity for stage Ta and T1 tumours was 71% and
76%, respectively, and 94% for stage T2+ tumours. This compares favourably with
existing markers. The sensitivity for tumour grades 1, 2 and 3 was 69%, 78% and
87%, respectively. Thus urinary EN2 has the potential to be a more sensitive and 
specific protein biomarker for NMIBC than currently available tests.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23434148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Epigenetics. 2013 Mar;8(3):252-67. doi: 10.4161/epi.23817. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

DNA methylation profiling distinguishes histological subtypes of renal cell
carcinoma.

Slater AA(1), Alokail M, Gentle D, Yao M, Kovacs G, Maher ER, Latif F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Rare Diseases and Personalised Medicine, Department of Medical &
Molecular Genetics, School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of
Birmingham College of Medical and Dental Sciences, Birmingham, UK.

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) accounts for around 3% of cancers in the UK, and both 
incidence and mortality are increasing with the aging population. RCC can be
divided into several subtypes: conventional RCC (the most common, comprising 75% 
of all cases), papillary RCC (15%) and chromophobe RCC (5%). Renal oncocytoma is 
a benign tumor and accounts for 5% of RCC. Cancer and epigenetics are closely
associated, with DNA hypermethylation being widely accepted as a feature of many 
cancers. In this study the DNA methylation profiles of chromophobe RCC and renal 
oncocytomas were investigated by utilizing the Infinium HumanMethylation450
BeadChips. Cancer-specific hypermethylation was identified in 9.4% and 5.2% of
loci in chromophobe RCC and renal oncocytoma samples, respectively, while the
majority of the genome was hypomethylated. Thirty (hypermethylated) and 41
(hypomethylated) genes were identified as differentially methylated between
chromophobe RCC and renal oncocytomas (p < 0.05). Pathway analysis identified
some of the differentially hypermethylated genes to be involved in Wnt (EN2),
MAPK (CACNG7) and TGFß (AMH) signaling, Hippo pathway (NPHP4), and cell death and
apoptosis (SPG20, NKX6-2, PAX3 and BAG2). In addition, we analyzed ccRCC and
papillary RCC data available from The Cancer Genome Atlas portal to identify
differentially methylated loci in chromophobe RCC and renal oncocytoma in
relation to the other histological subtypes, providing insight into the pathology
of RCC subtypes and classification of renal tumors.

PMCID: PMC3669118
PMID: 23428843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Dev Genes Evol. 2013 Jul;223(4):253-9. doi: 10.1007/s00427-013-0437-9. Epub 2013 
Feb 20.

Xenopus Nkx6.1 and Nkx6.2 are required for mid-hindbrain boundary development.

Ma P(1), Xia Y, Ma L, Zhao S, Mao B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, 650223, People's Republic of
China.

The mid-hindbrain boundary (MHB) organizer is among the best studied local
organizers that patterns the midbrain and cerebellum in vertebrates and is
established by a regulatory network of several transcription factors and signals,
including Wnt signaling. In the present study, we found that Xenopus Nkx6.1 and
Nkx6.2, two transcription factors of the Nkx homeobox family, are required for
MHB formation. In Xenopus embryos, nkx6.1 and nkx6.2 are expressed in the MHB,
and knockdown of either nkx6.1 or nkx6.2 by specific morpholinos disrupts the MHB
expression of en2 as well as wnt1, a key regulator for vertebrate MHB formation. 
In the nkx6.1/nkx6.2 morphants, co-injection of wnt1 or dngsk3ß mRNA, which
activates Wnt signaling, rescues the expression of en2. Nkx6.1 and Nkx6.2
activate canonical Wnt signaling in reporter assays in both cultured mammalian
cells and Xenopus embryos. An Nkx6.2 deletion construct, which inhibits the
ability of wild type Nkx6.2 to activate Wnt signaling, also reduces the MHB
expression of en2 in Xenopus embryos. These results suggest that Nkx6.1 and
Nkx6.2 are involved in MHB formation in Xenopus embryos, likely by modulating
wnt1 expression.

PMID: 23423436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Exp Neurol. 2013 Sep;247:496-505. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2013.01.021. Epub 2013
Jan 27.

Loss of GABAergic neurons in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex of Engrailed-2
null mutant mice: implications for autism spectrum disorders.

Sgadò P(1), Genovesi S, Kalinovsky A, Zunino G, Macchi F, Allegra M, Murenu E,
Provenzano G, Tripathi PP, Casarosa S, Joyner AL, Bozzi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropathology, Centre for Integrative Biology,
University of Trento, Italy.

The homeobox-containing transcription factor Engrailed-2 (En2) is involved in
patterning and neuronal differentiation of the midbrain/hindbrain region, where
it is prominently expressed. En2 mRNA is also expressed in the adult mouse
hippocampus and cerebral cortex, indicating that it might also function in these 
brain areas. Genome-wide association studies revealed that En2 is a candidate
gene for autism spectrum disorders (ASD), and mice devoid of its expression
(En2(-/-) mice) display anatomical, behavioral and clinical "autistic-like"
features. Since reduced GABAergic inhibition has been proposed as a possible
pathogenic mechanism of ASD, we hypothesized that the phenotype of En2(-/-) mice 
might include defective GABAergic innervation in the forebrain. Here we show that
the Engrailed proteins are present in postnatal GABAergic neurons of the mouse
hippocampus and cerebral cortex, and adult En2(-/-) mice show reduced expression 
of GABAergic marker mRNAs in these areas. In addition, reduction in parvalbumin
(PV), somatostatin (SOM) and neuropeptide Y (NPY) expressing interneurons is
detected in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex of adult En2(-/-) mice. Our
results raise the possibility of a link between altered function of En2,
anatomical deficits of GABAergic forebrain neurons and the pathogenesis of ASD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3657304
PMID: 23360806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2013 Jan;287(1):59-63. doi: 10.1007/s00404-012-2518-9. Epub 
2012 Aug 17.

Consent for gynaecological procedure: what do women understand and remember?

Pathak S(1), Odumosu M, Peja S, McIntyre K, Selo-Ojeme D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Women's Health Division, Barnet and 
Chase Farm Hospitals NHS Trust, The Ridgeway, Enfield EN2 8JL, UK.

PURPOSE: To determine patients' understanding and recall of consent information
and risks associated with their procedure following gynaecological surgery.
METHOD: Patients planned for routine gynaecological surgery were invited to
participate in the study by completing a self-administered questionnaire 4-6 h
after day-surgery and 24 h after in-patient surgery. Collated data were analysed 
using standard statistical methods.
RESULT: 544 women participated in the study. 321 (57.9 %) were day-cases and 233 
(42.1 %) were in-patients. 33 % and 30.8 % of in-patients and day-cases,
respectively did not recall any risk associated with their procedure. Among
in-patients, women who did not recall any risk were less likely to have post
primary education (84.2 vs. 96.2 %, P = 0.008), understood an information leaflet
(79.5 vs. 95.1 %, P = 0.002), understood the consent counselling (85.5 vs. 98 %, 
P = 0.001), or remember the explanation of procedure and risks (85.5 vs. 98 %, P 
= 0.001). Among women who did not recall any risk, the day-case women were less
likely to have read the information leaflet (86.4 vs. 96.2 %, P = 0.002),
understood the information leaflet (79.5 vs. 98.9 %, P = 0.007), or understood
the consent counselling (85.5 vs. 98.9 %, P < 0.001) when compared to
in-patients.
CONCLUSION: A third of women who had planned gynaecology procedure do not recall 
any risk associated with the procedure. Provision of information leaflet did not 
make any consistent difference.

PMID: 22899307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Open Orthop J. 2012;6:295-300. doi: 10.2174/1874325001206010295. Epub 2012 Jul
27.

Anterior cruciate ligament rupture and osteoarthritis progression.

Wong JM(1), Khan T, Jayadev CS, Khan W, Johnstone D.

Author information: 
(1)Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield, Middlesex, EN2 8JL, UK.

Anterior Cruciate Ligament (ACL) rupture is a common sporting injury that
frequently affects young, athletic patients. Apart from the functional problems
of instability, patients with ACL deficient knees also develop osteoarthritis.
Although this is frequently cited as an indication for ACL reconstruction, the
relationship between ACL rupture, reconstruction and the instigation and
progression of articular cartilage degenerative change is controversial.The
purpose of this paper is to review the published literature with regards ACL
rupture and the multifactorial causes for osteoarthritis progression, and whether
or not this is slowed or stopped by ACL reconstruction.There is no evidence in
the published literature to support the view that ACL reconstruction prevents
osteoarthritis, although it may prevent further meniscal damage. It must be
recognised that this conclusion is based on the current literature which has
substantial methodological limitations.

PMCID: PMC3415702
PMID: 22896777  [PubMed]


63. Med Hypotheses. 2012 Oct;79(4):535-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2012.07.013. Epub 2012 
Jul 31.

Critical sequences of phenomena in the progression of atherosclerotic lesions,
with reference to the role of microvessels.

Michael Munro J(1), Path FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Pathology, Chase Farm Hospital, Enfield, Middlesex EN2 
8JL, United Kingdom. munrojm1@yahoo.co.uk

Atherosclerosis affects the inner layers of human arteries, and causes major
problems by blocking, directly or indirectly, the flow of blood. This paper
concerns the growth of atherosclerotic lesions (atherogenesis), in particular
potential factors that may allow a form of 'positive feedback' that drives the
development of lesions, and considers the role of microvessels. The lesions of
atherosclerosis have previously been compared to, or thought of as, sites of
inflammation, and involve the accumulation of cells, including large
lipid-containing macrophages, and extracellular elements. In tissues other than
arteries inflammation may involve, amongst other phenomena, a resolution stage
with the removal or departure of macrophages via lymphatics. However, the inner
aspects of large arteries do not normally demonstrate lymphatics or other
microvessels, and there is evidence from animal work that the lack of vessels
effectively contributes to the development of atherosclerosis, as this limits the
egress of macrophages and other elements. Conversely, in humans microvessels have
been suggested to play a key role in the progress of atherosclerotic lesions. The
importance of microvessels is herein considered, in particular the potentially
paradoxical situation where as stated the lack of microvessels can be considered 
to allow atherosclerosis, but on the other hand these structures are involved in 
lesion development - the explanation can be seen to relate to the relatively
short length of time which is assessable in animal models, compared to the
lengthy period over which lesions appear to develop in humans. In addition,
consideration is given to other factors, including haemodynamic factors related
to the physical presence of lesions, which could lead to phenomena that can be
regarded as a vicious cycle of events that lead to growth of the lesion.
Specifically initial inflammation may lead to scarring and anatomical distortion,
which through haemodynamic and physical factors leads to more damage, more
inflammation and scarring, and so on.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22850666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40914. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040914. Epub 2012 Jul 19.

Autism-relevant social abnormalities and cognitive deficits in engrailed-2
knockout mice.

Brielmaier J(1), Matteson PG, Silverman JL, Senerth JM, Kelly S, Genestine M,
Millonig JH, DiCicco-Bloom E, Crawley JN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Behavioral Neuroscience, National Institute of Mental Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA. brielmaierjm@mail.nih.gov

ENGRAILED 2 (En2), a homeobox transcription factor, functions as a patterning
gene in the early development and connectivity of rodent hindbrain and
cerebellum, and regulates neurogenesis and development of monoaminergic pathways.
To further understand the neurobiological functions of En2, we conducted
neuroanatomical expression profiling of En2 wildtype mice. RTQPCR assays
demonstrated that En2 is expressed in adult brain structures including the
somatosensory cortex, hippocampus, striatum, thalamus, hypothalamus and
brainstem. Human genetic studies indicate that EN2 is associated with autism. To 
determine the consequences of En2 mutations on mouse behaviors, including
outcomes potentially relevant to autism, we conducted comprehensive phenotyping
of social, communication, repetitive, and cognitive behaviors. En2 null mutants
exhibited robust deficits in reciprocal social interactions as juveniles and
adults, and absence of sociability in adults, replicated in two independent
cohorts. Fear conditioning and water maze learning were impaired in En2 null
mutants. High immobility in the forced swim test, reduced prepulse inhibition,
mild motor coordination impairments and reduced grip strength were detected in
En2 null mutants. No genotype differences were found on measures of ultrasonic
vocalizations in social contexts, and no stereotyped or repetitive behaviors were
observed. Developmental milestones, general health, olfactory abilities,
exploratory locomotor activity, anxiety-like behaviors and pain responses did not
differ across genotypes, indicating that the behavioral abnormalities detected in
En2 null mutants were not attributable to physical or procedural confounds. Our
findings provide new insight into the role of En2 in complex behaviors and
suggest that disturbances in En2 signaling may contribute to neuropsychiatric
disorders marked by social and cognitive deficits, including autism spectrum
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3400671
PMID: 22829897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Psychiatr Genet. 2012 Aug;22(4):177-81. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e32835185c9.

The association of rs4307059 and rs35678 markers with autism spectrum disorders
is replicated in Italian families.

Prandini P(1), Pasquali A, Malerba G, Marostica A, Zusi C, Xumerle L, Muglia P,
Da Ros L, Ratti E, Trabetti E, Pignatti PF; Italian Autism Network (ITAN).

Collaborators: Allibrio G, Amato MC, Anchisi L, Andruccioli M, Battistella PA,
Benedetti S, Benvenuto A, Boscaini F, Canetta E, Cangini A, Conti S, Curatolo P, 
Dalla Bernardina B, De Giacomo A, Distefano G, Di Stefano ML, Di Vita G, Elia M, 
Gitti F, Grittani S, Lafortezza M, Lamanna AL, Mani E, Manzi B, Margari L, Marino
M, Masi G, Molteni M, Nardocci F, Parmeggiani A, Pascotto A, Patrini M, Pias P,
Piroddi T, Poledri S, Polizzi M, Porfirio MC, Posar A, Riccio MP, Russo S,
Santocchi E, Santucci M, Scifo R, Tancredi R, Tedde MR, Tiberti A, Valli A,
Vianello Dri V, Zanni R, Zoccante L, Zuddas A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Reproduction Sciences, University of Verona, Verona,
Italy. paola.prandini@univr.it

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to replicate an association study on a
newly collected Italian autism spectrum disorder (ASD) cohort by studying the
genetic markers associated with ASDs from recent genome-wide and candidate gene
association studies.
METHODS: We have genotyped 746 individuals from 227 families of the Italian
Autism Network using allelic discrimination TaqMan assays for seven common
single-nucleotide polymorphisms: rs2292813 (SLC25A12 gene), rs35678 (ATP2B2
gene), rs4307059 (between CDH9 and CDH10 genes), rs10513025 (between SEMA5A and
TAS2R1 genes), rs6872664 (PITX1 gene), rs1861972 (EN2 gene), and rs4141463
(MACROD2 gene). A family-based association study was conducted.
RESULTS: A significant association was found for two of seven markers: rs4307059 
T allele (odds ratio: 1.758, SE=0.236; P-value=0.017) and rs35678 TC genotype
(odds ratio: 0.528, SE=0.199; P-value=0.0013).
CONCLUSION: A preferential allele transmission of two markers located at loci
previously associated with social and verbal communication skill has been
confirmed in patients of a new ASD family sample.

PMID: 22739633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Neurosci. 2012 Jun 6;32(23):7832-42. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5829-11.2012.

Engrailed is required in maturing serotonin neurons to regulate the
cytoarchitecture and survival of the dorsal raphe nucleus.

Fox SR(1), Deneris ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

Analysis of constitutive Engrailed (En) null mice previously implicated the two
En homeobox paralogs in the development of serotonin (5-HT) neurons. An
unresolved question is whether En plays intrinsic roles in these neurons. Here,
we show that En1 and En2 are expressed in maturing 5-HT neurons that will form
the dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) and part of the median raphe nucleus. Although En1
expression in 5-HT neurons persists postnatally, En2 expression is extinguished
by embryonic day 17.5. To investigate intrinsic serotonergic functions for En1/2,
we generated compound conditional En mutants with floxed alleles and a cre
recombinase line that becomes active in postmitotic fetal 5-HT neurons. We
present evidence in support of a requirement for En1/2 in the maturation of DRN
cytoarchitecture. The disruption of DRN cytoarchitecture appears to result from a
defect in secondary migration of serotonergic cell bodies toward the midline
rather than disruption of their primary ventral migration away from the
ventricular zone. Furthermore, En1/2 are required for perinatal maintenance of
serotonergic identity and postnatal forebrain 5-HT levels. Increased numbers of
caspase-3-expressing cells and loss of significant numbers of 5-HT neuron cell
bodies, indicative of apoptosis, occurred after loss of serotonergic identity.
Analysis of an allelic series of conditional mutants showed that En1 is the
predominant functional En paralog in maturing 5-HT neurons, although a small
contribution from En2 was reproducibly detected. Together, our findings reveal
complex intrinsic functions for En in maturing 5-HT neurons, hence necessitating 
a reinterpretation of their roles in 5-HT system development.

PMCID: PMC3521159
PMID: 22674259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. BJU Int. 2012 Sep;110(6 Pt B):E287-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2012.11208.x.
Epub 2012 May 15.

Urinary engrailed-2 (EN2) levels predict tumour volume in men undergoing radical 
prostatectomy for prostate cancer.

Pandha H(1), Sorensen KD, Orntoft TF, Langley S, Hoyer S, Borre M, Morgan R.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology, Postgraduate Medical School, Guildford, UK. h.pandha@surrey.ac.uk

What's known on the subject? and What does the study add? There are a lot of
potential prostate cancer biomarkers being evaluated. All aim to improve on the
sensitivity and specificity of PSA. EN2 was recently shown by our group to have
better sensitivity and specificity than PSA. EN2 is a simple ELISA test and is
not dependent on other parameters, even PSA, unlike all the other current
biomarkers under evaluation. To date, no marker correlates with the amount of
cancer present - the present study shows this positive correlation with EN2 in
men undergoing prostatectomy. The potential utility of this work is that by
knowing that the level of EN2 corresponds to the amount of cancer present,
irrelevant of tumour grade and number of cancer foci, we can define an EN2 level 
corresponding to small cancers, which can then undergo surveillance. We are
conducting a further study that is aimed at determining whether the levels of EN2
in urine can indicate 'significant' vs 'non-significant cancer' using the
threshold of 0.5 mL cancer (after Epstein's work).OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the
relationship between levels of a recently described prostate cancer biomarker
engrailed-2 (EN2) in urine and cancer volume in men who had undergone radical
prostatectomy (RP) for prostate cancer. To date, prostate-specific antigen (PSA) 
levels have not reliably predicted prostate cancer volume. Reliable volume
indicator biomarker(s) may aid management decisions, e.g. active treatment vs
active surveillance.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Archived patient samples from the Aarhus Prostate Cancer
Project, Denmark, were assessed. Pre-treatment mid-stream urines, without
preceding prostatic massage, were collected and stored at -80 °C. Urinary EN2
levels were measured by a recently published enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: In all, 88 of the whole cohort of 125 men (70%) were positive for EN2 in
their urine (>42.5 µg/L); 38/58 (65%) men where cancer volume data was available.
There was no statistical relationship between urinary EN2 levels and serum PSA
levels. PSA levels did not correlate with tumour stage, combined Gleason grade,
total prostatic weight or cancer volume. There was a strong statistical
relationship between urinary EN2 and prostate cancer volume by linear regression 
(P = 0.006). Higher EN2 levels correlated with tumour stage T1 vs T2 (P = 0.027).
CONCLUSIONS: Pre-surgical urinary EN2 levels were associated with increasing
tumour stage and closely reflected the volume of cancer in RP specimens. Given
the ease of collection (no prostatic massage required) and the simplicity, low
cost and robustness of the assay, EN2 may become a useful biomarker in not only
identifying which patients have prostate cancer but may also facilitate risk
stratification by indicating the burden of tumour volume.

© 2012 THE AUTHORS. BJU INTERNATIONAL © 2012 BJU INTERNATIONAL.

PMID: 22583908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Dev Biol. 2012 Jul 1;367(1):25-39. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.04.018. Epub 2012
Apr 28.

The engrailed homeobox genes are required in multiple cell lineages to coordinate
sequential formation of fissures and growth of the cerebellum.

Orvis GD(1), Hartzell AL, Smith JB, Barraza LH, Wilson SL, Szulc KU, Turnbull DH,
Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue,
New York, NY 10065, USA.

The layered cortex of the cerebellum is folded along the anterior-posterior axis 
into lobules separated by fissures, allowing the large number of cells needed for
advanced cerebellar functions to be packed into a small volume. During
development, the cerebellum begins as a smooth ovoid structure with two
progenitor zones, the ventricular zone and upper rhombic lip, which give rise to 
distinct cell types in the mature cerebellum. Initially, the cerebellar
primordium is divided into five cardinal lobes, which are subsequently further
subdivided by fissures. The cellular processes and genes that regulate the
formation of a normal pattern of fissures are poorly understood. The engrailed
genes (En1 and En2) are expressed in all cerebellar cell types and are critical
for regulating formation of specific fissures. However, the cerebellar cell types
that En1 and En2 act in to control growth and/or patterning of fissures has not
been determined. We conditionally eliminated En2 or En1 and En2 either in both
progenitor zones and their descendents or in the two complementary sets of cells 
derived from each progenitor zone. En2 was found to be required only transiently 
in the progenitor zones and their immediate descendents to regulate formation of 
three fissures and for general growth of the cerebellum. In contrast, En1 and En2
have overlapping functions in the cells derived from each progenitor zone in
regulating formation of additional fissures and for extensive cerebellar growth. 
Furthermore, En1/2 function in ventricular zone-derived cells plays a more
significant role in determining the timing of initiation and positioning of
fissures, whereas in upper rhombic lip-derived cells the genes are more important
in regulating cerebellar growth. Our studies reveal the complex manner in which
the En genes control cerebellar growth and foliation in distinct cell types.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4038292
PMID: 22564796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Res Dev Disabil. 2012 Sep-Oct;33(5):1533-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ridd.2012.03.004.
Epub 2012 Apr 21.

The WNT2 gene polymorphism associated with speech delay inherent to autism.

Lin PI(1), Chien YL, Wu YY, Chen CH, Gau SS, Huang YS, Liu SK, Tsai WC, Chiu YN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
pingi.lin@gmail.com

Previous evidence suggests that language function is modulated by genetic
variants on chromosome 7q31-36. However, it is unclear whether this region
harbors loci that contribute to speech delay in autism. We previously reported
that the WNT2 gene located on 7q31 was associated with the risk of autism.
Additionally, two other genes on 7q31-36, FOXP2 and the EN2 genes are also found 
to play a role in language impairment. Therefore, we hypothesize that the WNT2
gene, FOXP2 gene, and EN2 gene, may act in concert to influence language
development in the same population. A total of 373 individuals diagnosed with
autistic disorder were recruited in the current study. We selected 6 tag single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the WNT2 gene, 3 tag SNPs in the FOXP2,
and 3 tag SNPs in the EN2 genes, to study the effect of these genes on language
development. Age of first phrase was treated as a quantitative trait. We used
general linear model to assess the association between speech delay and these
variants. The results show that rs2896218 in the WNT2 gene was moderately
significantly associated with age of first phrase (permutation p = 0.0045). A
three-locus haplotype in the WNT2 gene was significantly associated with age of
first phrase (permutation p = 2 × 10(-4)). Furthermore, we detected an
interaction effect on age of first phrase between a SNP rs2228946 in the WNT2
gene and another SNP rs6460013 in the EN2 gene (p = 0.0012). Therefore, the WNT2 
gene may play a suggestive role in language development in autistic disorder.
Additionally, the WNT2 gene and EN2 gene may act in concert to influence the
language development in autism.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22522212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Apr 24;53(4):2046-61. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-8646.

Hydrocortisone stimulates neurite outgrowth from mouse retinal explants by
modulating macroglial activity.

Toops KA(1), Berlinicke C, Zack DJ, Nickells RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

PURPOSE: There is mounting evidence that retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) require a 
complex milieu of trophic factors to enhance cell survival and axon regeneration 
after optic nerve injury. The authors' goal was to examine the contribution of
components of a combination of hormones, growth factors, steroids, and small
molecules to creating a regenerative environment and to determine if any of these
components modulated macroglial behavior to aid in regeneration.
METHODS: Postnatal day 7 mouse retinal explants embedded in collagen were used as
an in vitro model of neurite regeneration. Explants were treated with the culture
supplements fetal bovine serum, N2, and G5 and a mixture of G5 and N2 components,
designated enhanced N2 (EN2). Explants were evaluated for neurite outgrowth over 
7 days in culture. The effects of each treatment were also evaluated on cultured 
RGCs purified by Thy1 immunopanning. Immunohistochemistry and qPCR analysis were 
used to evaluate differences in gene expression in the explants due to different 
treatments.
RESULTS: EN2 stimulated significant neurite outgrowth from explants but not from 
purified RGCs. Elimination of hydrocortisone (HC) from EN2 reduced the mean
neurites per explant by 37%. EN2-treated explants demonstrated increased
expression of Gfap, Glul, Glt1, Cntf, Pedf, and VegfA compared with explants
treated with EN2 without HC. Subsequent experiments showed that increased
expression of Cntf and Glul was critical to the trophic effect of HC.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the HC in EN2 indirectly contributed to
neurite outgrowth by activating macroglia to produce neurotrophic and
neuroprotective molecules.

PMCID: PMC3704200
PMID: 22395888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Altern Complement Med. 2012 Mar;18(3):262-9. doi: 10.1089/acm.2010.0764. Epub
2012 Mar 6.

Genome-wide association analysis of Sasang constitution in the Korean population.

Kim BY(1), Jin HJ, Kim JY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Constitutional Medicine Research, Korea Institute of Oriental
Medicine, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Sasang constitutional medicine is a traditional Korean medicine in
which an individual is classified into one of four types of constitution: Taeum
(TE), Soeum (SE) Soyang (SY), and Taeyang (TY). These constitution types are
determined with biologic and physiologic characteristics, so it has been assumed 
that genetic factors are associated with each constitution type. Identifying the 
genetic elements underlying each constitution is necessary for the elucidation of
the molecular mechanism of Sasang constitutional medicine.
DESIGN: A total of 341,998 genetic loci across the whole genome were genotyped
for 1222 subjects of defined constitution type. The genetic loci associated with 
each constitution type were identified and the functional connectivity of genes
within these loci was analyzed using statistical text mining.
RESULTS: From the difference in allele frequencies between constitution types,
significant genetic loci associated with each type were identified. Chromosomes
3q27.3 (rs10937331, p=2.71×10(-6)), 15q22.2 (rs7180547, p=1.58×10(-6)), and
14q22.3 (rs12431592, p=1.31×10(-6)) were most significantly associated with TE,
SE, and SY constitution types, respectively. From the functional relationship
analysis using all loci with a p-value=10(-4), genes associated with each
constitution type were identified. Fifteen (15) genes, including GPM6A, SYT4, and
GRIK1, were significantly associated with the TE constitution type (p<0.05); 12
genes, including DRGX and AKAP11, were significantly associated with the SE
constitution type (p<0.05); and 17 genes, including ZFP42, CDH22, ALDH1A2, OTX2, 
and EN2, were significantly associated with the SY constitution type (p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic loci and genes associated with Sasang constitution types
were systematically identified from a genome-wide association study using a large
number of subjects.

PMCID: PMC3306582
PMID: 22394158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Tech Coloproctol. 2012 Apr;16(2):119-26. doi: 10.1007/s10151-012-0807-8. Epub
2012 Feb 14.

Colovaginal and colovesical fistulae: the diagnostic paradigm.

Holroyd DJ(1), Banerjee S, Beavan M, Prentice R, Vijay V, Warren SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Barnet and Chase Farm NHS Trust, Enfield, Middlesex EN2
8JL, UK. david.holroyd@nhs.net

BACKGROUND: Colovaginal and colovesical fistulae (CVF) are relatively uncommon
conditions, most frequently resulting from diverticular disease or colorectal
cancer. A high suspicion of a CVF can usually be obtained from an accurate
clinical history. Demonstrating CVF radiologically is often challenging, and
patients frequently undergo a multitude of investigations prior to definitive
management. The aim of this study was to develop an algorithm for the
investigation of suspected CVF in order to improve diagnosis and subsequent
management.
METHODS: Thirty-seven patients from a single NHS Trust with a diagnosis of
colovaginal or colovesical fistula were included in the study. Clinical records
and imaging were reviewed retrospectively, and data on demographics, symptoms,
investigations, management and outcome were collated.
RESULTS: A total of 87.5% patients with a colovesical fistula presented with
pathognomic symptoms of faecaluria or pneumaturia. The commonest aetiologies were
diverticular disease (72.9%), colonic and gynaecological neoplasia (10.8% each). 
Computerised tomography (CT) was the most frequently performed investigation
(91.9%) and was most sensitive in detecting the fistula (76.5%) and underlying
aetiology (94.1%). Colonoscopy was most sensitive in detecting an underlying
colonic malignancy (100%). Resectional surgery was performed in 62.1% of cases,
although morbidity and 1-year mortality was significant, with rates of 21.7 and
17.4%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of CVF is predominately a clinical one, and patients
with a suspected CVF are over-investigated. Investigations should be focused on
determining aetiology rather than demonstrating the fistulous tract itself. We
propose that, in the majority of cases, CT and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy
should suffice.

© Springer-Verlag 2012

PMID: 22350172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2012 Mar;159B(2):236-42. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32020. Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Clinical improvement of the aggressive neurobehavioral phenotype in a patient
with a deletion of PITX3 and the absence of L-DOPA in the cerebrospinal fluid.

Derwinska K(1), Mierzewska H, Goszczanska A, Szczepanik E, Xia Z, Kusmierska K,
Tryfon J, Kutkowska-Kazmierczak A, Bocian E, Mazurczak T, Obersztyn E,
Stankiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.

The development of midbrain dopamine (DA) neurons is regulated by several
transcription factors, including Nurr1, Wnt1, Lmx1a/1b, En1, En2, Foxa1, Foxa2,
and Pitx3. PITX3 is an upstream co-activator of the TH (tyrosine hydroxylase)
promoter. Pitx3(-/-) mice have a selective loss of dopaminergic neurons in the
substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area, leading to the significantly reduced
DA levels in the nigrostriatal pathway and in the dorsal striatum and manifest
anomalous striatum-dependent cognitive impairment and neurobehavioral activity.
Treatment with L-DOPA, dopamine, or dopamine receptor agonists in these mice
reversed several of their sensorimotor impairments. Heterozygous missense
mutations in PITX3 have been reported in patients with autosomal dominant
congenital cataract and anterior segment (ocular) mesenchymal dysgenesis (ASMD)
whereas homozygous missense mutations have been found in patients with
microphthalmia and neurological impairment. Using a clinical oligonucleotide
array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), we have identified an ~317 kb
hemizygous deletion in 10q24.32, involving PITX3 in a 17-year-old male with a
Smith-Magenis syndrome-like phenotype, including mild intellectual impairment,
sleep disturbance, hyperactivity, and aggressive and self-destructive behavior.
Interestingly, no eye anomalies were found in our patient. Analysis of
neurotransmitters in his cerebrospinal fluid revealed an absence of L-DOPA and
significantly decreased levels of catecholamine metabolites. Importantly, L-DOPA 
treatment of our patient has led to mild mitigation of his aggressive behavior
and mild improvement of his attention span, extended time periods of
concentration, and better sleep.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22223473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Apr 1;21(7):1566-80. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr594. Epub 2011 Dec
16.

Cut-like homeobox 1 and nuclear factor I/B mediate ENGRAILED2 autism spectrum
disorder-associated haplotype function.

Choi J(1), Ababon MR, Matteson PG, Millonig JH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Both common and rare variants contribute to autism spectrum disorder (ASD) risk, 
but few variants have been established as functional. Previously we demonstrated 
that an intronic haplotype (rs1861972-rs1861973 A-C) in the homeobox
transcription factor ENGRAILED2 (EN2) is significantly associated with ASD.
Positive association has also been reported in six additional data sets,
suggesting EN2 is an ASD susceptibility gene. Additional support for this
possibility requires identification of functional variants that affect EN2
regulation or activity. In this study, we demonstrate that the A-C haplotype is a
transcriptional activator. Luciferase (luc) assays in mouse neuronal cultures
determined that the A-C haplotype increases expression levels (50%, P < 0.01, 24 
h; 250%, P < 0.0001, 72 h). Mutational analysis indicates that the A-C haplotype 
activator function requires both associated A and C alleles. A minimal 202-bp
element is sufficient for function and also specifically binds a protein complex.
Mass spectrometry identified these proteins as the transcription factors,
Cut-like homeobox 1 (Cux1) and nuclear factor I/B (Nfib). Subsequent antibody
supershifts and chromatin immunoprecipitations demonstrated that human CUX1 and
NFIB bind the A-C haplotype. Co-transfection and knock-down experiments
determined that both CUX1 and NFIB are required for the A-C haplotype activator
function. These data demonstrate that the ASD-associated A-C haplotype is a
transcriptional activator, and both CUX1 and NFIB mediate this activity. These
results provide biochemical evidence that the ASD-associated A-C haplotype is
functional, further supporting EN2 as an ASD susceptibility gene.

PMCID: PMC3298280
PMID: 22180456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Mar 20;21(5):814-28. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0551. Epub 2012
Jan 17.

Positional identity of murine mesenchymal stem cells resident in different organs
is determined in the postsegmentation mesoderm.

Sági B(1), Maraghechi P, Urbán VS, Hegyi B, Szigeti A, Fajka-Boja R, Kudlik G,
Német K, Monostori E, Gócza E, Uher F.

Author information: 
(1)National Blood Service, Stem Cell Biology Unit, Budapest, Hungary.

Although mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) of distinct tissue origin have a large
number of similarities and differences, it has not been determined so far whether
tissue-resident MSCs are the progenies of one ancestor cell lineage or the
results of parallel cell developmental events. Here we compared the expression
levels of 177 genes in murine MSCs derived from adult and juvenile bone marrow
and adult adipose tissue, as well as juvenile spleen, thymus, and aorta wall by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and the results were partially
validated at protein level. All MSC lines uniformly expressed a large set of
genes including well-known mesenchymal markers, such as a-smooth muscle actin,
collagen type I a-chain, GATA6, Mohawk, and vimentin. In contrast, pluripotency
genes and the early mesodermal marker T-gene were not expressed. On the other
hand, different MSC lines consistently expressed distinct patterns of Hox genes
determining the positional identity of a given cell population. Moreover, MSCs of
different origin expressed a few other transcription factors also reflecting
their topological identity and so the body segment or organ to which they
normally contributed in vivo: (1) thymus-derived cells specifically expressed
Tbx5 and Pitx2; (2) spleen-derived MSCs were characterized with Tlx1 and Nkx2.5; 
(3) Pitx1 designated femoral bone marrow cells and (4) En2 appeared in aorta
wall-derived MSCs. Thus, MSCs exhibited topographic identity and memory even
after long-term cultivation in vitro. On the basis of these results, we suggest
that postnatal MSCs isolated from different anatomical sites descend from
precursor cells developing in the postsegmentation mesoderm.

PMID: 22149974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2011;2(5):74-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2011.01.008. Epub 2011 
Mar 2.

An unusual groin exploration: De Garengeot's hernia.

Caygill P(1), Nair R, Sajjanshetty M, Francis D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Barnet and Chase Farm Hospitals NHS Trust, The
Ridgeway, Enfield, Middlesex, EN2 8JL, United Kingdom.

De Garengeot's hernia is a rare surgical phenomenon and describes the presence of
the vermiform appendix within a femoral hernia. We describe a case of acute
appendicitis mimicking an irreducible femoral hernia and reiterate key operative 
techniques necessary to prevent post-operative morbidity associated with this
pathology.

PMCID: PMC3199633
PMID: 22096687  [PubMed]


77. Development. 2011 Dec;138(23):5213-22. doi: 10.1242/dev.071704.

Retinoic acid-dependent and -independent gene-regulatory pathways of Pitx3 in
meso-diencephalic dopaminergic neurons.

Jacobs FM(1), Veenvliet JV, Almirza WH, Hoekstra EJ, von Oerthel L, van der
Linden AJ, Neijts R, Koerkamp MG, van Leenen D, Holstege FC, Burbach JP, Smidt
MP.

Author information: 
(1)Rudolf Magnus Institute, Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, UMC
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Development of meso-diencephalic dopamine (mdDA) neurons requires the combined
actions of the orphan nuclear receptor Nurr1 and the paired-like homeobox
transcription factor Pitx3. Whereas all mdDA neurons require Nurr1 for expression
of Th and survival, dependence on Pitx3 is displayed only by the mdDA
subpopulation that will form the substantia nigra (SNc). Previously, we have
demonstrated that Pitx3(-/-) embryos lack the expression of the retinoic acid
(RA)-generating enzyme Ahd2, which is normally selectively expressed in the
Pitx3-dependent DA neurons of the SNc. Restoring RA signaling in Pitx3(-/-)
embryos revealed a selective dependence of SNc neurons on the presence of RA for 
differentiation into Th-positive neurons and maintenance throughout embryonic
development. Whereas these data are suggestive of an important developmental role
for RA in neurons of the SNc, it remained unclear whether other Nurr1 and Pitx3
target genes depend on RA signaling in a manner similar to Th. In the search for 
genes that were affected in Pitx3-deficient mdDA neurons and restored upon
embryonic RA treatment, we provide evidence that Delta-like 1, D2R (Drd2) and Th 
are regulated by Pitx3 and RA signaling, which influences the mdDA terminal
differentiated phenotype. Furthermore, we show that regulation of Ahd2-mediated
RA signaling represents only one aspect of the Pitx3 downstream cascade, as
Vmat2, Dat, Ahd2 (Aldh1a1), En1, En2 and Cck were unaffected by RA treatment and 
are (subset) specifically modulated by Pitx3. In conclusion, our data reveal
several RA-dependent and -independent aspects of the Pitx3-regulated gene
cascade, suggesting that Pitx3 acts on multiple levels in the molecular
subset-specification of mdDA neurons.

PMID: 22069189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Feb 1;21(3):609-22. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr495. Epub 2011 Oct
31.

MicroRNA-mediated dysregulation of neural developmental genes in HPRT deficiency:
clues for Lesch-Nyhan disease?

Guibinga GH(1), Hrustanovic G, Bouic K, Jinnah HA, Friedmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Neural Circuits and Behavior and Rady
Children's Hospital, School of Medicine, University of California San Diego, San 
Diego, CA 92093-0634, USA.

Mutations in the gene encoding the purine biosynthetic enzyme
hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) cause the intractable
neurodevelopmental Lesch-Nyhan disease (LND) associated with aberrant development
of brain dopamine pathways. In the current study, we have identified an increased
expression of the microRNA miR181a in HPRT-deficient human dopaminergic SH-SY5Y
neuroblastoma cells. Among the genes potentially regulated by miR181a are several
known to be required for neural development, including Engrailed1 (En1),
Engrailed2 (En2), Lmx1a and Brn2. We demonstrate that these genes are
down-regulated in HPRT-deficient SH-SY5Y cells and that over-expression of
miR181a significantly reduces endogenous expression of these genes and inhibits
translation of luciferase plasmids bearing the En1/2 or Lmx1a 3'UTR miRNA-binding
elements. Conversely, inhibition of miR181a increases the expression of these
genes and enhances translation of luciferase constructs bearing the En1/2 and
Lmx1a 3'UTR miRNA-binding sequences. We also demonstrate that key
neurodevelopmental genes (e.g. Nurr1, Pitx3, Wnt1 and Mash1) known to be
functional partners of Lmx1a and Brn2 are also markedly down-regulated in SH-SY5Y
cells over-expressing miR181a and in HPRT-deficient cells. Our findings in
SH-SY5Y cells demonstrate that HPRT deficiency is accompanied by dysregulation of
some of the important pathways that regulate the development of dopaminergic
neurons and dopamine pathways and that this defect is associated with and
possibly due at least partly to aberrant expression of miR181a. Because aberrant 
expression of miR181a is not as apparent in HPRT-deficient LND fibroblasts, the
relevance of the SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells to human disease remains to be
proven. Nevertheless, we propose that these pleiotropic neurodevelopment effects 
of miR181a may play a role in the pathogenesis of LND.

PMCID: PMC3259014
PMID: 22042773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Surg Endosc. 2012 Mar;26(3):843-6. doi: 10.1007/s00464-011-1963-z. Epub 2011 Oct 
13.

Radially expanding laparoscopic trocar ports significantly reduce postoperative
pain in all age groups.

Mordecai SC(1), Warren OW, Warren SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laparoscopic Surgery, Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway,
Enfield, Middlesex, EN2 8JL, UK. simon_mordecai@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Trocar entry points have been identified as a significant source of
pain after laparoscopic surgery. This is particularly true of the larger 12-mm
ports that require deep fascial closure to avoid port-site herniation. We
investigated whether using radially expanding trocars not requiring fascial
closure compared to conventional cutting trocars for the 12-mm port in
transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) hernia repairs had any effect on
postoperative analgesic requirements and return to work or normal activity.
METHODS: The number of days analgesia was required postoperatively and the number
of days taken to return to normal activity was recorded for 143 consecutive
patients who underwent TAPP hernia repair by a single experienced laparoscopic
surgeon. Exactly the same operative technique was used in these patients with the
exception of the 12-mm port site entry. In group 1 (104 patients), a conventional
cutting trocar was used requiring deep fascial closure. In group 2 (39 patients),
a radially expanding trocar was used and the fascial defect was not closed.
RESULTS: Analgesia was required for an average of 10.5 days in group 1 and 2.4
days in group 2 (P < 0.001). The average time to return to work or to normal
activity was 23.4 days in group 1 and 15.6 days in group 2 (P = 0.004). There was
no significant difference between the two groups with respect to the patients'
age, sex, or operating time.
CONCLUSION: Using the laparoscopic TAPP hernia repair as a standardised
operation, changing from 12-mm fascial port closure to a technique that uses port
dilation (not requiring a potentially "tight" deeper fascial closure) in a
similar group of patients shows that there is a significant reduction in
postoperative analgesic requirement and an earlier return to productive work or
normal lifestyle. Perhaps dilating ports should replace those larger 10-, 12-,
and 15-mm ports that require deeper sutures in all laparoscopic surgical
operations.

PMID: 21993944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Br J Hosp Med (Lond). 2011 Jul;72(7):388-90.

Measurement and implications of postural changes in blood pressure.

Banerjee A(1), Weerasinghe A, Mbamalu D, Weerasinghe C.

Author information: 
(1)Chase Farm Hospital, Enfield EN2 8JL.

Postural changes in blood pressure are a commonly elicited vital sign. It is
important that the measurements are reproducible in order to be clinically
meaningful. This article makes recommendations about how and what to document as 
part of the technique of recording, on the basis of the literature.

PMID: 21841611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. BMJ. 2011 Jul 26;343:d4466. doi: 10.1136/bmj.d4466.

Breathlessness and plethora.

Dua J(1), Cheung WH, Russell S, Dabbagh Z.

Author information: 
(1)Chase Farm Hospital, London EN2 8JL, UK. janetdua3000@yahoo.co.uk

PMID: 21791493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Eur Respir J. 2012 Jan;39(1):187-96. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00049111. Epub 2011
Jul 7.

Is community-acquired pneumonia an independent risk factor for cardiovascular
disease?

Singanayagam A(1), Singanayagam A, Elder DH, Chalmers JD.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Respiratory Medicine, Postgraduate Centre, Chase Farm Hospital,
Enfield, EN2 8JL, UK. anika.singa@gmail.com

Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) is the most frequent infectious cause of death
in western countries. The high mortality rate in CAP is commonly related to
comorbid conditions such as cardiovascular disease. Clinical studies in both
primary and secondary care settings have identified an increase in short- and
long-term risk of cardiovascular events and death from vascular events following 
acute respiratory infections. The mechanism remains to be fully established, but 
it has been suggested that the inflammatory state in patients affected by CAP
acts to promote platelet activation and thrombosis, and to narrow coronary
arteries through vasoconstriction. Acute infections destabilise vascular
endothelium and create an imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and demand, 
leading to an increased risk of cardiovascular events. Acute infections have been
shown to have both systemic effects and local effects on coronary vessels. These 
effects are mediated through both the host response to infection and, in some
cases, direct effects of bacterial infection or bacterial products. In this
review, we discuss the link between CAP and increased risk of cardiovascular
events, drawing on existing evidence from clinical and mechanistic studies.
Further studies into and increased awareness of this association is warranted to 
promote novel ways of protecting high-risk patients.

PMID: 21737556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. BMJ. 2011 Jun 8;342:d2984. doi: 10.1136/bmj.d2984.

An unusual cause of fever of unknown origin.

Dua J(1), Cheung WH, Russell S.

Author information: 
(1)Chase Farm Hospital, London EN2 8JL, UK. janetdua3000@yahoo.co.uk

PMID: 21659365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2011 Aug 1;35(6):1512-7. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2011.04.010. Epub 2011 May 5.

Association study of the CNS patterning genes and autism in Han Chinese in
Taiwan.

Chien YL(1), Wu YY, Chiu YN, Liu SK, Tsai WC, Lin PI, Chen CH, Gau SS, Chien WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Autism is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder with high heritability. Despite
different approaches worldwide to identify susceptibility loci or genes for
autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), no consistent result has been reported. CNS
patterning genes have been recognized as candidate genes for autism based on
neuroimage and neuropathology evidence. This study investigated four candidate
genes (WNT2, EN2, SHANK3, and FOXP2) by a tag SNP approach in a family-based
association study. The trio samples include 1164 subjects from 393 families,
including 393 probands (aged 9.1±4.0years; male, 88.6%) diagnosed with autistic
disorder (n=373) or Asperger's disorder (n=20) according to the DSM-IV diagnostic
criteria and confirmed by the Chinese ADI-R interview. Three tag SNPs of EN2
(7q36), 6 SNPs of WNT2 (7q31-33), 5 SNPs of SHANK3 (22q13.3), 3 SNPs of FOXP2
(7q31) were genotyped. TDT analysis was done to test the association of each tag 
SNP and haplotype. There was no association with autism for 17 tag SNPs of WNT2, 
EN2, SHANK3, and FOXP2 based on SNP analyses. Haplotype analyses did not reveal
significant association except for the 6 tag SNPs of WNT2 gene showing a
significant association on one haplotype composed of rs2896218 and rs6950765
(G-G) (p=0.0095). Other haplotypes composed of rs2896218 and rs6950765 (G-G) were
also significantly associated with autism. The present study indicates that
SHANK3 may not be a critical gene for the etiology of ASDs in Han Chinese
population. Inconsistent findings in EN2 and FOXP2 in the Han Chinese population 
need further clarification. A haplotype of WNT2 (rs2896218-rs6950765: G-G) is
significantly associated with ASDs in our trios samples, this finding warrants
further validation by different sample and confirmation by functional study.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21575668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cerebellum. 2011 Sep;10(3):356-72. doi: 10.1007/s12311-011-0254-5.

Spatially restricted and developmentally dynamic expression of engrailed genes in
multiple cerebellar cell types.

Wilson SL(1), Kalinovsky A, Orvis GD, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10065, USA.

The cerebellum is a highly organized structure partitioned into lobules along the
anterior-posterior (A-P) axis and into striped molecular domains along the
medial-lateral (M-L) axis. The Engrailed (En) homeobox genes are required for
patterning the morphological and molecular domains along both axes, as well as
for the establishment of the normal afferent topography required to generate a
fully functional cerebellum. As a means to understand how the En genes regulate
multiple levels of cerebellum construction, we characterized En1 and En2
expression around birth and at postnatal day (P) 21 during the period when the
cerebellum undergoes a remarkable transformation from a smooth ovoid structure to
a highly foliated structure. We show that both En1 and En2 are expressed in many 
neuronal cell types in the cerebellum, and expression persists until at least
P21. En1 and En2 expression, however, undergoes profound changes in their
cellular and spatial distributions between embryonic stages and P21, and their
expression domains become largely distinct. Comparison of the distribution of
En-expressing Purkinje cells relative to early- and late-onset Purkinje cell M-L 
stripe proteins revealed that although En1- and En2-expressing Purkinje cell
domains do not strictly align with those of ZEBRINII at P21, a clear pattern
exists that is most evident at E17.5 by an inverse correlation between the level 
of En2 expression and PLCß4 and EPHA4.

PMCID: PMC3170510
PMID: 21431469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Apr;155A(4):885-91. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33918. Epub 2011
Mar 17.

Discordant phenotypes in a mother and daughter with mosaic supernumerary ring
chromosome 19 explained by a de novo 7q36.2 deletion and 7p22.1 duplication.

Argiropoulos B(1), Carter M, Brierley K, Hare H, Bouchard A, Al-Hertani W, Ryan
SR, Reid J, Basik M, McGowan-Jordan J, Graham GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada. bargiropoulos@cheo.on.ca

We report on a patient with severe intellectual disability, microcephaly, short
stature, and dysmorphic features who, based on standard karyotyping, has two
cytogenetic abnormalities: an apparently balanced paracentric inversion of
chromosome 7, inv(7)(q31.2q36), and a small supernumerary ring chromosome derived
entirely of material from chromosome 19. While the inversion was detected in all 
cells, mosaicism was observed for the ring chromosome. Interestingly, apparently 
identical cytogenetic abnormalities were detected in the patient's mother, who
presented with normal stature, few dysmorphic features, and normal cognition
without microcephaly. While the level of mosaicism could not adequately explain
the phenotypic discordance, comparative genome hybridization revealed a de novo
terminal deletion of chromosome 7, del(7)(q36.2), and a terminal duplication of
chromosome 7, dup(7)(p22.1) in the patient. Additional cytogenetic investigation 
revealed that the patient inherited a recombinant chromosome derived from a
cryptic maternal pericentric inversion: inv(7)(p22q36). The patient's distinctive
features are consistent with the wide phenotypic spectrum reported in 7p
duplication and 7q terminal deletion syndromes. These chromosomal regions contain
several candidate genes of clinical significance, including SHH, EN2, and FAM20C.
Our findings strongly suggest that our patient's phenotype is largely
attributable to partial 7pter trisomy and partial 7qter monosomy rather than
mosaic supernumerary ring chromosome 19.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21416596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Mar 1;17(5):1090-8. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2410.
Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Engrailed-2 (EN2): a tumor specific urinary biomarker for the early diagnosis of 
prostate cancer.

Morgan R(1), Boxall A, Bhatt A, Bailey M, Hindley R, Langley S, Whitaker HC, Neal
DE, Ismail M, Whitaker H, Annels N, Michael A, Pandha H.

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Medical School, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences,
University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom. r.morgan@surrey.ac.uk

Comment in
    Biomark Med. 2011 Aug;5(4):423-5.

PURPOSE: Prostate cancer (PC) is the second most common cause of cancer related
death in men. A number of key limitations with prostate specific antigen (PSA),
currently the standard detection test, has justified evaluation of new
biomarkers. We have assessed the diagnostic potential of Engrailed-2 (EN2)
protein, a homeodomain-containing transcription factor expressed in PC cell lines
and secreted into the urine by PC in men.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: EN2 expression in PC cell lines and prostate cancer tissue
was determined by semi-quantative RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. First pass
urine [without prior digital rectal examination (DRE)] was collected from men
presenting with urinary symptoms (referred to exclude/confirm the presence of
prostate cancer) and from controls. EN2 protein was measured by ELISA in urine
from men with PC (n = 82) and controls (n = 102).
RESULTS: EN2 was expressed and secreted by PC cell lines and PC tissue but not by
normal prostate tissue or stroma. The presence of EN2 in urine was highly
predictive of PC, with a sensitivity of 66% and a specificity of 88.2%, without
requirement for DRE. There was no correlation with PSA levels. These results were
confirmed independently by a second academic center.
CONCLUSIONS: Urinary EN2 is a highly specific and sensitive candidate biomarker
of prostate cancer. A larger multicenter study to further evaluate the diagnostic
potential of EN2 is justified.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21364037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Dev Growth Differ. 2011 Jan;53(1):69-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2010.01229.x.

Conditional knockdown of target gene expression by tetracycline regulated
transcription of double strand RNA.

Hou X(1), Omi M, Harada H, Ishii S, Takahashi Y, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

In vivo electroporation has served as an effective tool for the study of
developmental biology. Here we report tetracycline inducible gene knockdown by
electroporation. Our system consists of genome integration of a cassette encoding
long double strand RNA (dsRNA) of a gene of interest by electroporation,
transcription of which is assured by RNA polymerase II, and induction of
transcription of dsRNA by tetracyclin. Long dsRNA decapped by ribozyme in the
cassette and without poly A tail is processed into siRNA within nuclei. We could 
successfully induce knockdown of En2 and Coactosin by Dox administration.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2011 Japanese Society of Developmental 
Biologists.

PMID: 21261612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Clin Chim Acta. 2011 Mar 18;412(7-8):499-501. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2010.12.010.
Epub 2010 Dec 11.

What does the future hold for pathology? An educational approach.

Panagiotou N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chase Farm Hospital, Haematology Department, The Ridgeway, Enfield, EN2 8JL
London, United Kingdom. n.panagiotou@yahoo.co.uk

This article offers a review of the current status quo for biomedical science,
from an educational and professional perspective. The author provides suggestions
as to how we can create a new training program for biomedical science, in line
with the recently published consultation paper Modernising Scientific Careers.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21147084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Neurotox Res. 2011 Aug;20(2):170-81. doi: 10.1007/s12640-010-9232-9. Epub 2010
Nov 23.

Behavioral, neurochemical, and electrophysiological changes in an early
spontaneous mouse model of nigrostriatal degeneration.

Sgadò P(1), Viaggi C, Pinna A, Marrone C, Vaglini F, Pontis S, Mercuri NB,
Morelli M, Corsini GU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Section of Pharmacology, University of Pisa, Pisa,
Italy. sgado@science.unitn.it

In idiopathic Parkinson's disease, clinical symptoms do not emerge until
consistent neurodegeneration has occurred. The late appearance of symptoms
implies the existence of a relatively long preclinical period during which
several disease-induced neurochemical changes take place to mask the existence of
the disease and delay its clinical manifestations. The aim of this study was to
examine the neurochemical, neurophysiological, and behavioral changes induced by 
the loss of nigrostriatal innervation in the En1+/-;En2-/- mouse, in the
10 months following degeneration, compared to En2 null mutant mice. Behavioral
analysis (Pole-test, Beam-walking test, and Inverted grid test) and field
potential recordings in the striatum indicated that loss of ~70% of nigrostriatal
neurons produced no significant functional effects until 8 months of age, when
En1+/-;En2-/- animals started to show frank motor deficits and
electrophysiological alterations in corticostriatal plasticity. Similarly,
alterations in dopamine homeostasis, dopamine turnover, and dopamine innervation 
were observed in aged animals compared to young En1+/-;En2-/- mice. These data
suggests that in En1+/-;En2-/- mice nigrostriatal degeneration in the substantia 
nigra is functionally compensated.

PMID: 21104462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Int J Emerg Med. 2010 Jul 22;3(3):187-91. doi: 10.1007/s12245-010-0180-1.

The role of prophylactic anticonvulsants in moderate to severe head injury.

Khan AA(1), Banerjee A.

Author information: 
(1)Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield, EN2 8JL UK.

BACKGROUND: Post-traumatic seizures cause secondary brain injury, contributing to
morbidity and mortality after traumatic brain injury. Seizure activity may be
undetectable if the patient is paralysed and ventilated.
AIMS: The effect of prophylactic anticonvulsant therapy on the prevention of
seizures after moderate to severe traumatic brain injury was studied.
METHODS: A structured systematic literature review was performed.
RESULTS: There may be a place for prophylactic anticonvulsants in the prophylaxis
of early post-traumatic seizures.
CONCLUSION: Further randomised controlled trials are needed to firmly establish
the benefits of prophylactic anticonvulsants.

PMCID: PMC2926870
PMID: 21031044  [PubMed]


92. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(8-9):1375-82. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.103080cf.

Vestigial like gene family expression in Xenopus: common and divergent features
with other vertebrates.

Faucheux C(1), Naye F, Tréguer K, Fédou S, Thiébaud P, Théze N.

Author information: 
(1)UMR CNRS 5164, Université Bordeaux 2, 146 rue Léo Saignat, Bordeaux, France.

The Drosophila Vestigial and Scalloped proteins form heterodimers that control
wing development and are involved in muscle differentiation. Four vestigial like 
genes have been described in mammals. Similar to the Drosophila vestigial gene,
they encode a short conserved domain (TONDU) required for interaction with the
mammalian paralogues of Drosophila Scalloped (i.e., TEAD proteins). We previously
identified two TEAD genes in Xenopus laevis and we report here the expression of 
four distinct vestigial like genes in Xenopus (vgll1-4) that represent amphibian 
orthologs of the mammalian vestigial like genes. Vgll1 has a unique expression
pattern which is restricted to epidermal cells, both in the embryo and in the
adult. Vgll2 is expressed in the skeletal muscle lineage downstream of myogenic
factors and in the embryonic brain similar to the avian and mammalian
orthologues. Vgll3 expression is transient, identifies embryonic hindbrain
rhombomere 2, and is negatively regulated by en2, but not by egr2. Vgll4 is
mainly expressed in anterior neural structures. In summary, the four Xenopus vgll
genes have unique/complex expression profiles and they are differently expressed 
during embryogenesis. Moreover, these amphibian vestigial like genes display
distinct responses to the major signaling pathways (i.e., activin, FGF or BMP)
that orchestrate pattern-formation during early development.

PMID: 20712000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2010 Sep;152(1):96-102. doi:
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2010.05.012. Epub 2010 Jul 3.

The burden of uterine fibroids in five European countries.

Downes E(1), Sikirica V, Gilabert-Estelles J, Bolge SC, Dodd SL, Maroulis C,
Subramanian D.

Author information: 
(1)Barnet and Chase Farm Hospitals NHS Trust, The Ridgeway, Enfield EN2 8JL,
United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: To quantify the burden of uterine fibroids (UF) on health-related
quality of life (HRQOL) and work productivity in a general population of women.
STUDY DESIGN: Women diagnosed with or experiencing UF-related symptoms living in 
five Western European countries (France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United
Kingdom) were identified through a cross-sectional Internet-based survey. The
following parameters and outcomes of interest were captured and analysed: patient
history and demographics, treatment and diagnosis patterns, symptom severity and 
HRQOL, work productivity and activity impairment, and disease or symptom-related 
health care resource use for the past year (e.g., provider visits,
hospitalisation).
RESULTS: This analysis included 1756 women (France, 358; Germany, 345; Italy,
351; Spain, 352; United Kingdom, 350). Prevalence of a diagnosis of UF ranged
from 11.7% to 23.6%, and that of undiagnosed bleeding symptoms from 14.7% to
24.6% across the five countries. Between 9.0% and 32.5% of women waited > or =5
years before seeking treatment for UF. Mean UFS-QOL symptom severity scores
ranged from 24.7 (95% confidence interval [CI], 21.1-28.3) to 37.6 (95% CI,
32.2-43.0; P<0.001), suggesting mild to moderate severity. Mean UFS-QOL scores
ranged from 59.2 (95% CI, 54.2-64.2) to 69.7 (95% CI, 66.5-73.0; P=0.002),
suggesting moderate impairment. In pooled analyses, absenteeism was reported by
32.7% of employed women with a diagnosis of UF. Overall worker productivity was
reduced by 36.1% and general activity was impaired by 37.9%.
CONCLUSIONS: UF are common in women residing in Western Europe. They are
associated with impairment of HRQOL and productivity. A substantial number of
women delay seeking medical help. Encouraging symptomatic women to seek help and 
treatment earlier may benefit women by improving their HRQOL and may also benefit
society through enhanced worker productivity.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20598796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2010 Jun;90(2):155-62. doi: 10.1002/bdrc.20181.

The Hemimelic extra toes mouse mutant: Historical perspective on unraveling
mechanisms of dysmorphogenesis.

Knudsen TB(1), Kochhar DM.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Computational Toxicology, Office of Research and
Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, North 
Carolina 27711, USA. knudsen.thomas@epa.gov

Hemimelic extra toes (Hx) arose spontaneously as a dominant mutation in
B10.D2/nSnJ mice in 1967. It specifically affects the appendicular skeleton,
causing variable foreshortening of the tibia (radius) and preaxial polydactylism.
Early anatomical studies revealed anterior overgrowth of the autopod, with
decreased apoptosis and increased mitosis in the anterior apical ectodermal ridge
and underlying mesenchyme; overextension of apoptosis in the central zeugopod
accounted for hemimelia. The Hx mutant phenotype was coarsely mapped to mouse
chromosome (Chr) 5 and closely linked to engrailed-2 (En2) and Sonic hedgehog
(Shh). This region is syntenic to human Chr 7q36 that harbors several dominant
mutations affecting the hand. High-resolution genome mapping identified the Hx
mutation as a G --> A base pair transition within Intron 5 of the murine Lmbr1
locus. The critical effect is on a multifunctional conserved regulatory element
that acts as a limb-specific, long-distance cis-acting enhancer of Shh
expression. As such, the Hx mutant phenotype results from ectopic Shh signals at 
the anterior margin of the limb bud that directly or indirectly alter FGF4
signaling from the apical ectodermal ridge. Given significant advances in
understanding of embryonic development in general and limb development in
particular, this review article reveals how research that once attracted interest
of teratologists has advanced across the decades to pinpoint a critical molecular
lesion and reveal a potential mechanism of a specific malformation that is found 
commonly in experimental teratology.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20544697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Neuropsychobiology. 2010;62(2):104-15. doi: 10.1159/000315441. Epub 2010 Jun 3.

Intronic single nucleotide polymorphisms of engrailed homeobox 2 modulate the
disease vulnerability of autism in a han chinese population.

Yang P(1), Shu BC, Hallmayer JF, Lung FW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan,
ROC.

BACKGROUND: Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder with a strong genetic
background that has been suggested to be associated with a susceptibility gene,
engrailed homeobox 2(EN2), which maps to chromosome 7q36. Our study was aimed to 
explore the association between EN2 intronic single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) with autism in an ethnic Han Chinese population.
METHODS: A total of 193 autism cases and 309 controls were recruited. Five SNPs
including rs3824068, rs3824067, rs1861972, rs1861973 and rs3830031 in the intron 
1 region were genotyped by using the TaqMan SNP assay.
RESULTS: Both the allelic frequencies and genotype distribution of the EN2
intronic SNPs were found to have statistically significant differences between
cases and controls, except rs1861972, rs3024067 and rs3824068. According to the
constructed linkage disequilibrium plot using genotype data, it was suggested
that further haplotypic analyses can be performed on rs3824068, rs1861972 and
rs1861973. After completed analyses by the Unphased and Phase programs and
logistic regression analysis, one 2-marker haplotype A-C (beta = -2.897; p =
0.013; OR = 0.055) and one 3-marker haplotype G-A-C (beta = -0.491; p = 0.015; OR
= 0.612) were identified that were plausibly associated with autism in the ethnic
Chinese population.
CONCLUSIONS: The haplotype A-C of rs1861972 and rs1861973 is the core element of 
the observed haplotype association in this study, which plays a role as a
protective factor against autism; in addition, the haplotype G-A-C is less
frequent in male cases compared to controls (38.64 vs. 52.51%), which plausibly
modulate disease vulnerability to autism. However, further evidence of the
haplotype association of EN2 intronic SNPs and uncertain transcription factor
interaction is warranted for further clarification.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20523082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Endoscopy. 2010;42 Suppl 2:E128. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1243985. Epub 2010 Apr 19.

A reaction to silicone spray.

Grimes C(1), Aughwane P, Klein M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Chase Farm Hospital, Enfield, Middlesex EN2 8JL, UK.
carisgrimes@doctors.org.uk

PMID: 20405377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. BMJ. 2010 Apr 7;340:c1001. doi: 10.1136/bmj.c1001.

A pain in the neck.

Finegold JA(1), Belcher R, Noor S, Mort D.

Author information: 
(1)Chase Farm Hospital, London EN2 8JL. judyfinegold@doctors.org.uk

PMID: 20375085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Hered. 2010 Jul-Aug;101(4):469-75. doi: 10.1093/jhered/esq037. Epub 2010 Mar
22.

Polydactyl inheritance in the pig.

Gorbach D(1), Mote B, Totir L, Fernando R, Rothschild M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Center for Integrated Animal Genomics, Iowa
State University, 2255 Kildee Hall, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

Two pigs were identified having "extra feet" (preaxial polydactyly) within a
purebred population of Yorkshire pigs. Polydactyly is an inherited disorder in
many species that may be controlled by either recessive or dominant genes.
Experimental matings were conducted using pigs that had produced affected
offspring with the result of 12 polydactyl offspring out of 95 piglets. One
polydactyl-producing boar was also mated to 4 Duroc sows and 8 distantly related 
Yorkshire sows to produce 129 unaffected offspring. Together, these results
suggest a recessive mode of inheritance, possibly with incomplete penetrance.
Candidate genes, LMBR1, EN2, HOXA10-13, GLI3, WNT2, WNT16, and SHH, were
identified based on association with similar phenotypes in other species.
Homologues for these genes are all found on SSC18. Sequencing and linkage studies
showed no evidence for association with HOXA10-13, WNT2, and WNT16. Results for
the regions including GLI3, LMBR1, and SHH, however, were inconclusive. A whole
genome scan was conducted on DNA samples from 10 affected pigs and 12 close
relatives using the Illumina PorcineSNP60 BeadChip and compared with 69 more
distantly related animals in the same population. No evidence was found for a
major gene causing polydactyly. However, a 25-Mb stretch of homozygosity on SSC8 
was identified as fairly unique to the family segregating for this trait.
Therefore, this chromosome segment may play a role in development of polydactyly 
in concert with other genes.

PMID: 20308080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Dev Biol. 2010 Apr 15;340(2):318-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.02.011. Epub 2010 
Feb 18.

En2, Pax2/5 and Tcf-4 transcription factors cooperate in patterning the Xenopus
brain.

Koenig SF(1), Brentle S, Hamdi K, Fichtner D, Wedlich D, Gradl D.

Author information: 
(1)Zoological Institute, Cell and Developmental Biology, Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology, Kaiserstrasse 12, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany.

Among Xenopus Lef/Tcfs, XTcf-4 has an outstanding role. In early development it
is located exclusively in the midbrain where it is essential for midbrain and
isthmus development. In order to identify transcription factors responsible for
the restriction of XTcf-4 expression we isolated a 3.8kb fragment of the XTcf-4
promoter. We found that this promoter fragment is sufficient to mimic endogenous 
XTcf-4 expression in the midbrain. Characterization of putative binding sites for
en2 and pax2/5 revealed that en2, but not pax2/5 directly represses XTcf-4
promoter activity. Gain-of-function experiments in Xenopus embryos confirmed this
en2-mediated repression. Loss-of-function experiments demonstrate that both en2
and pax2/5 are essential for endogenous XTcf-4 expression. The primary effect of 
pax2/5 depletion thereby appears to be a reduced en2 expression at neurula
stages. Because en2 can compensate for the depletion of pax2/5, we assume a
hierarchical regulation of gene expression in the midbrain/isthmus region with
pax2/5 acting upstream of en2. Furthermore, since the XTcf-4 expression domain
does not overlap with the expression domains of the isthmus marker genes en2 and 
pax2/5, we conclude that the knock-down of en2 and pax2/5 results in a
downregulation of a paracrine growth factor regulating XTcf-4 expression. We
found that the growth factor for this non-cell-autonomous effect of en2 and
pax2/5 is wnt-1 acting on the -1437 Lef/Tcf binding site on the XTcf-4 promoter. 
We provide evidence that the main nuclear wnt transducer for the autoregulation
of XTcf-4 is XTcf-1.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20171202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2010 Nov;282(5):535-8. doi: 10.1007/s00404-010-1364-x. Epub 
2010 Jan 21.

Clinico-pathological study of cervical polyps.

Tirlapur SA(1), Adeyemo A, O'Gorman N, Selo-Ojeme D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Barnet and Chase Farm Hospitals NHS 
Trust, Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield EN2 8JL, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the incidence of malignancy in cervical polyps and
determine the effect of age and parity on clinical presentation.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of histological diagnosis and demographic
information relating to 294 polyps was undertaken. Comparison was made between
premenopausal and postmenopausal women as well as women with and without
recurrent polyps.
RESULTS: There was no case of malignancy. Majority of the women were parous
(71.8%), asymptomatic (65.9%) and had their polyps removed in the outpatient
setting (69.9%). The recurrence rate was 12.6%. The predominant symptom was
IMB/PCB. Women with recurrent polyps were 10 times more likely to be parous
(OR = 10.1, 95% CI 1.4-74.8), 7.9 times more likely to have symptoms (OR = 7.9,
95% CI 3.5-17.1) and 4.8 times more likely to have polyps removed under general
anaesthesia (OR = 4.8, 95% CI 2.4-9.9). Postmenopausal women were 2.2 times more 
likely to have symptoms (OR = 2.2, 95% CI 1.6-4.7) and 1.7 times more likely to
have general anaesthesia (OR = 1.7, 95% CI 1.0-3.1).
CONCLUSION: Cervical polyps are mainly benign, asymptomatic lesions and recur in 
about 12.6% of women. They are more likely to be symptomatic in postmenopausal
women.

PMID: 20091045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Development. 2010 Feb;137(3):519-29. doi: 10.1242/dev.027045.

The Engrailed homeobox genes determine the different foliation patterns in the
vermis and hemispheres of the mammalian cerebellum.

Cheng Y(1), Sudarov A, Szulc KU, Sgaier SK, Stephen D, Turnbull DH, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, 
USA.

Little is known about the genetic pathways and cellular processes responsible for
regional differences in cerebellum foliation, which interestingly are accompanied
by regionally distinct afferent circuitry. We have identified the Engrailed (En) 
homeobox genes as being crucial to producing the distinct medial vermis and
lateral hemisphere foliation patterns in mammalian cerebella. By producing a
series of temporal conditional mutants in En1 and/or En2, we demonstrate that
both En genes are required to ensure that folia exclusive to the vermis or
hemispheres form in the appropriate mediolateral position. Furthermore, En1/En2
continue to regulate foliation after embryonic day 14, at which time Fgf8 isthmic
organizer activity is complete and the major output cells of the cerebellar
cortex have been specified. Changes in spatially restricted gene expression occur
prior to foliation in mutants, and foliation is altered from the onset and is
accompanied by changes in the thickness of the layer of proliferating granule
cell precursors. In addition, the positioning and timing of fissure formation are
altered. Thus, the En genes represent a new class of genes that are fundamental
to patterning cerebellum foliation throughout the mediolateral axis and that act 
late in development.

PMCID: PMC2858911
PMID: 20081196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Genes Brain Behav. 2010 Mar 1;9(2):248-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2009.00556.x.
Epub 2009 Nov 24.

Family-based studies indicate association of Engrailed 2 gene with autism in an
Indian population.

Sen B(1), Singh AS, Sinha S, Chatterjee A, Ahmed S, Ghosh S, Usha R.

Author information: 
(1)Manovikas Biomedical Research & Diagnostic Centre, Kolkata, India.

Engrailed 2 (EN2) is a homeobox transcription factor involved in the patterning
of cerebellum during brain development. Linkage analysis and studies on knockout 
mice support EN2, located on chromosome 7q36.3, as a potential risk locus for
autism. Candidate gene approach also suggested association of EN2 with autism
spectrum disorder (ASD) in various populations. Here, we have investigated the
association of five markers [rs3735653 (C/T) in exon 1; rs34808376 (GC/-) and
rs6150410 (CGCATCCCC/-) in promoter region; rs1861972 (A/G) and rs1861973 (C/T)
in the intron] of the gene with autism and ASD in Indian population using
family-based approach. Probands have been recruited using Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fourth Edition (DSM-IV) diagnostic
criteria. Genotypic distributions conform to Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.
Genotyping analysis showed that the intronic single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) are in complete linkage disequilibrium showing A-C and corresponding G-T
allelic association. We observed significant preferential transmission of C
allele of rs1861973 from the parents to affected offspring [transmission
disequilibrium test (TDT): narrow diagnosis likelihood ratio statistics (LRS) =
6.63, P = 0.006; broad diagnosis LRS = 4.47, P = 0.05]. Interestingly,
gender-based investigations showed significant transmission of C allele to the
affected females [TDT: LRS = 7.36, P = 0.0025; haplotype-based haplotype relative
risk (HHRR): LRS = 7.16, P = 0.02]. A maternal overtransmission for these alleles
was also noted (TDT: LRS = 3.65, P = 0.036; HHRR: LRS = 2.81, P = 0.036).
Bioinformatic analysis using TFSearch showed generation of Sp1 binding site in
the presence of C allele. While Del-T haplotype formed from rs34808376-rs1861973 
markers showed increased non-transmission, the Ins-C showed significant
transmission suggesting protective effect and risk, respectively, conferred by
these haplotypes in autism etiology. These results suggest positive genetic
correlation of EN2 with autism in the Indian population.

PMID: 20050924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Nov;149A(11):2479-83. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33044.

Brainstem disconnection associated with nodular heterotopia and proatlantal
arteries.

Okumura A(1), Lee T, Shimojima K, Hisata K, Shoji H, Takanashi J, Yamamoto T,
Shimizu T, Barkovich AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Juntendo University, School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan. okumura@juntendo.ac.jp

We report on a patient with brainstem disconnection associated with
periventricular nodular heterotopia and bilateral proatlantal intersegmental
arteries. The patient was a girl born after 37 weeks of gestation with birth
weight of 1,938 g. Polyhydroamnios and lack of swallowing movement were noted on 
fetal ultrasonography. No spontaneous body movement or respiration was observed
after birth, whereas facial movement was preserved. She had marked generalized
weakness and absent deep tendon reflexes. She remains alive and hospitalized at 4
years of age but requires mechanical ventilation and feeding through a
gastrostomy tube. MRI showed absence of the lower pons and the medulla oblongata 
associated with hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis and hemispheres. In addition,
ventriculomegaly and periventricular nodular heterotopia were observed in the
cerebrum. MR angiography demonstrated the absence of vertebral arteries and
presence of bilateral proatlantal intersegmental arteries arising from the
external carotid arteries. Array-comparative genomic hybridization analysis did
not show any genomic copy number aberrations. No mutation was found in the FLNA
gene or the EN2 gene. The constellation of the malformations of our patient
suggested that genes related to the development of the central nervous and
vascular system may be involved in the pathogenesis of brainstem disconnection.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19842192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Int J STD AIDS. 2009 Nov;20(11):797-8. doi: 10.1258/ijsa.2009.009186. Epub 2009
Oct 15.

Microscopy detection of rectal gonorrhoea in asymptomatic men.

Forni J(1), Miles K, Hamill M.

Author information: 
(1)Barnet and Chase Farm NHS Trust, Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield
EN2 8JL, UK. j.forni@doctors.org.uk

This audit aimed to determine the usefulness of microscopy to detect presumptive 
rectal gonorrhoea (GC) infection in asymptomatic men. We retrospectively audited 
more than 400 male patients attending a London genitourinary medicine clinic from
January 2005 to March 2007 who tested rectal culture positive for Neisseria
gonorrhoeae and compared this with the microscopy detection rate. In total,
123/423 (29%) of culture positive samples were microscopy positive. Of those that
tested microscopy negative (300/423), 64 (21%) were symptomatic and 236 (79%)
asymptomatic. In addition, a time and motion study examined 81 rectal slides over
a two-week period to identify microscopy reading time required to make a
presumptive diagnosis of GC. Three slides were positive, resulting in six hours
and 45 minutes to detect one positive sample. Given the low sensitivity for
rectal microscopy coupled with the length of time required to obtain a
presumptive positive rectal GC result, we believe rectal microscopy is no longer 
a cost-effective tool screening for asymptomatic men, and this report supports
the BASHH guideline that it is not recommended in the management of asymptomatic 
rectal infection.

PMID: 19833693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Dev Growth Differ. 2009 Oct;51(8):699-706. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2009.01129.x.
Epub 2009 Sep 8.

Interaction of ZFPIP with PBX1 is crucial for proper expression of neural genetic
markers during Xenopus development.

Laurent A(1), Masse J, Deschamps S, Burel A, Omilli F, Richard-Parpaillon L,
Pellerin I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et Développement, UMR CNRS 6061, IFR 140, 35043 Rennes, 
France.

ZFPIP/Zfp462 has been recently identified as a new vertebrate zinc finger
encoding gene whose product interacts with Pbx1. Previous work indicates that
ZFPIP is maternally expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes and plays a key role
during the cleavage phase of embryogenesis. This early expression is followed by 
a zygotic expression which overlaps with the neural Pbx1 expression pattern,
suggesting an interaction between these two partners during Xenopus neurogenesis.
In order to test the physiological interaction between ZFPIP and Pbx1, we carried
out a dominant negative assay in which the Pbx1 interacting domain of ZFPIP
(ZFPIPp) was overexpressed in Xenopus laevis embryos. We observed that ZFPIPp
ectopic expression led to abnormal en2 and N-cam expression patterns, whereas
krox-20 expression was not affected. Furthermore, we showed that while ZFPIPp
alone was localized in the nucleus of Cos-7 cells, additional expression of Pbx1 
induced a location of ZFPIPp at the perinuclear region of the cells. These
overall data suggest that ZFPIP and Pbx1 could be partners and cooperate in the
regulation of essential neural genes during Xenopus development.

PMID: 19737294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Br J Radiol. 2009 Aug;82(981):786-8. doi: 10.1259/bjr/21807179.

Case of the month: Gastric wall thickening in association with hypereosinophilic 
syndrome.

Shah V(1), Mandumula S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Barnet and Chase Farm Hospitals NHS Trust, The
Ridgeway, Enfield, Middlesex EN2 8JL, USA. vikasshah@yahoo.com

PMID: 19729551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Biol Psychiatry. 2009 Nov 15;66(10):911-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.05.027.
Epub 2009 Jul 17.

Autism-associated haplotype affects the regulation of the homeobox gene,
ENGRAILED 2.

Benayed R(1), Choi J, Matteson PG, Gharani N, Kamdar S, Brzustowicz LM, Millonig 
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, New
Jersey 08854-5638, USA.

BACKGROUND: Association analysis identified the homeobox transcription factor,
ENGRAILED 2 (EN2), as a possible autism spectrum disorder (ASD) susceptibility
gene (ASD [MIM 608636]; EN2 [MIM 131310]). The common alleles (underlined) of two
intronic single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs1861972 (A/G) and rs1861973
(C/T), are over-transmitted to affected individuals both singly and as a
haplotype in three separate datasets (518 families total, haplotype p =
.00000035).
METHODS: Further support that EN2 is a possible ASD susceptibility gene requires 
the identification of a risk allele, a DNA variant that is consistently
associated with ASD but is also functional. To identify possible risk alleles,
additional association analysis and linkage disequilibrium (LD) mapping were
performed. Candidate polymorphisms were then tested for functional differences by
luciferase (Luc) reporter transfections and electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSAs).
RESULTS: Association analysis of additional EN2 polymorphisms and LD mapping with
Hapmap SNPs identified the rs1861972-rs1861973 haplotype as the most appropriate 
candidate to test for functional differences. Luciferase reporters for the two
common rs1861972-rs1861973 haplotypes (A-C and G-T) were then transfected into
human and rat cell lines as well as primary mouse neuronal cultures. In all cases
the A-C haplotype resulted in a significant increase in Luc levels (p < .005).
The EMSAs were then performed, and nuclear factors were bound specifically to the
A and C alleles of both SNPs.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that the A-C haplotype is functional and,
together with the association and LD mapping results, supports EN2 as a likely
ASD susceptibility gene and the A-C haplotype as a possible risk allele.

PMCID: PMC2783416
PMID: 19615670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Dev Biol. 2009 Sep 15;333(2):337-47. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.07.005. Epub 2009 
Jul 14.

The C. elegans engrailed homolog ceh-16 regulates the self-renewal expansion
division of stem cell-like seam cells.

Huang X(1), Tian E, Xu Y, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, PR
China.

Stem cells undergo symmetric and asymmetric division to maintain the dynamic
equilibrium of the stem cell pool and also to generate a variety of
differentiated cells. The homeostatic mechanism controlling the choice between
self-renewal and differentiation of stem cells is poorly understood. We show here
that ceh-16, encoding the C. elegans ortholog of the transcription factor
Engrailed, controls symmetric and asymmetric division of stem cell-like seam
cells. Loss of function of ceh-16 causes certain seam cells, which normally
undergo symmetric self-renewal expansion division with both daughters adopting
the seam cell fate, to divide asymmetrically with only one daughter retaining the
seam cell fate. The human engrailed homolog En2 functionally substitutes the role
of ceh-16 in promoting self-renewal expansion division of seam cells. Loss of
function of apr-1, encoding the C. elegans homolog of the Wnt signaling component
APC, results in transformation of self-renewal maintenance seam cell division to 
self-renewal expansion division, leading to seam cell hyperplasia. The apr-1
mutation suppresses the seam cell division defect in ceh-16 mutants. Our study
reveals that ceh-16 interacts with the Wnt signaling pathway to control the
choice between self-renewal expansion and maintenance division and also
demonstrates an evolutionarily conserved function of engrailed in promoting cell 
proliferation.

PMID: 19607822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. BMJ. 2009 Jul 3;339:b2275. doi: 10.1136/bmj.b2275.

Cow's milk allergy in children.

Apps JR(1), Beattie RM.

Author information: 
(1)North Central Thames Foundation School Barnet and Chase Farm NHS Trust,
Enfield, London EN2 8JL.

Comment in
    BMJ. 2009;339:b3622.

PMID: 19578085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2009 Sep;48(9):828-41. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20687.

DNA hypermethylation accompanied by transcriptional repression in follicular
lymphoma.

Bennett LB(1), Schnabel JL, Kelchen JM, Taylor KH, Guo J, Arthur GL, Papageorgio 
CN, Shi H, Caldwell CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, University of
Missouri-Columbia School of Medicine, Columbia, MO 65212, USA.
bennettlb@health.missouri.edu

High-throughput microarray technologies were used to study DNA methylation
accompanied by transcriptional changes in follicular lymphoma (FL). Using
Methylated CpG Island Amplification with Microarrays to study CpG Island DNA
methylation in FL, we discovered widespread hypermethylation of homeobox genes
and previously identified targets of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) in cell
lines and primary tumors, but not in benign follicular hyperplasia (BFH). DNA
methylation for HOXA11, HOXD10, HOXB7, HOXC12, PAX6, LHX9, SFMBT2, EN2, and PAX7 
was independently validated in the RL cell line and HOXA11, HOXD10, PAX6, and EN2
in primary tumors. Combined Bisulfite Restriction Analysis (COBRA) also
established DNA methylation for the previously identified PRC2 targets DCC, DES, 
GAD2, AQP5, GPR61, GRIA4, GJD2, and AMPH in FL but not in BFH. Gene expression
analyses revealed 411 genes that were hypermethylated and transcriptionally
repressed in RL, 74% of which were reactivated by the demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azaD) plus or minus the histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A (TSA). Forty genes were also downregulated in primary FL. Our
results suggest that extensive hypermethylation in promoters of polycomb target
genes is a characteristic of FL and that loss of expression of certain SUZ12
target genes could be functionally relevant for lymphomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC2738630
PMID: 19530241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Eur Heart J. 2009 Jun;30(11):1321. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehp058. Epub 2009 Mar
19.

Coronary artery embolism from native mitral valve thrombus.

Choudry FA(1), Opel A, Coghlan JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Barnet and Chase Farm NHS Trust, The Ridgeway,
Enfield, Middlesex, EN2 8JL, UK. ch_fizzahaziz@hotmail.com

PMID: 19299429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Neural Dev. 2009 Mar 16;4:11. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-4-11.

Elevated P75NTR expression causes death of engrailed-deficient midbrain
dopaminergic neurons by Erk1/2 suppression.

Alavian KN(1), Sgadò P, Alberi L, Subramaniam S, Simon HH.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Centre for Neuroscience, Department of Neuroanatomy,
Ruprecht-Karls-Universität, Heidelberg, Germany. kambiz.alavian@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The homeodomain transcription factors Engrailed-1 and Engrailed-2 are
required for the survival of mesencephalic dopaminergic (mesDA) neurons in a
cell-autonomous and gene-dose-dependent manner. Homozygote mutant mice, deficient
of both genes (En1-/-;En2-/-), die at birth and exhibit a loss of all mesDA
neurons by mid-gestation. In heterozygote animals (En1+/-;En2-/-), which are
viable and fertile, postnatal maintenance of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic
system is afflicted, leading to a progressive degeneration specific to this
subpopulation and Parkinson's disease-like molecular and behavioral deficits.
RESULTS: In this work, we show that the dose of Engrailed is inversely correlated
to the expression level of the pan-neurotrophin receptor gene P75NTR (Ngfr). Loss
of mesDA neurons in the Engrailed-null mutant embryos is caused by elevated
expression of this neurotrophin receptor: Unusually, in this case, the cell death
signal of P75NTR is mediated by suppression of Erk1/2
(extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 1/2) activity. The reduction in expression
of Engrailed, possibly related to the higher levels of P75NTR, also decreases
mitochondrial stability. In particular, the dose of Engrailed determines the
sensitivity to cell death induced by the classic Parkinson-model toxin MPTP and
to inhibition of the anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family of proteins.
CONCLUSION: Our study links the survival function of the Engrailed genes in
developing mesDA neurons to the regulation of P75NTR and the sensitivity of these
neurons to mitochondrial insult. The similarities to the disease etiology in
combination with the nigral phenotype of En1+/-;En2-/- mice suggests that
haplotype variations in the Engrailed genes and/or P75NTR that alter their
expression levels could, in part, determine susceptibility to Parkinson's
disease.

PMCID: PMC2667502
PMID: 19291307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Neuroscience. 2009 Mar 17;159(2):842-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.01.007. 
Epub 2009 Jan 10.

Increased susceptibility to kainic acid-induced seizures in Engrailed-2 knockout 
mice.

Tripathi PP(1), Sgadò P, Scali M, Viaggi C, Casarosa S, Simon HH, Vaglini F,
Corsini GU, Bozzi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, C.N.R., Pisa, Italy; Laboratory of Neurobiology,
Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy.

The En2 gene, coding for the homeobox-containing transcription factor Engrailed-2
(EN2), has been associated to autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Due to
neuroanatomical and behavioral abnormalities, which partly resemble those
observed in ASD patients, En2 knockout (En2(-/-)) mice have been proposed as a
model for ASD. In the mouse embryo, En2 is involved in the specification of
midbrain/hindbrain regions, being predominantly expressed in the developing
cerebellum and ventral midbrain, and its expression is maintained in these
structures until adulthood. Here we show that in the adult mouse brain, En2 mRNA 
is expressed also in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex. Hippocampal En2 mRNA
content decreased after seizures induced by kainic acid (KA). This suggests that 
En2 might also influence the functioning of forebrain areas during adulthood and 
in response to seizures. Indeed, a reduced expression of parvalbumin and
somatostatin was detected in the hippocampus of En2(-/-) mice as compared to
wild-type (WT) mice, indicating an altered GABAergic innervation of limbic
circuits in En2(-/-) mice. In keeping with these results, En2(-/-) mice displayed
an increased susceptibility to KA-induced seizures. KA (20 mg/kg) determined more
severe and prolonged generalized seizures in En2(-/-) mice, when compared to WT
animals. Seizures were accompanied by a widespread c-fos and c-jun mRNA induction
in the brain of En2(-/-) but not WT mice. Long-term histopathological changes
(CA1 cell loss, upregulation of neuropeptide Y) also occurred in the hippocampus 
of KA-treated En2(-/-) but not WT mice. These findings suggest that En2(-/-) mice
might be used as a novel tool to study the link between epilepsy and ASD.

PMID: 19186208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Neurosci. 2008 Nov 19;28(47):12150-62. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2059-08.2008.

Engrailed homeobox genes determine the organization of Purkinje cell sagittal
stripe gene expression in the adult cerebellum.

Sillitoe RV(1), Stephen D, Lao Z, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York
10021, USA.

Underlying the seemingly uniform cellular composition of the adult mammalian
cerebellum (Cb) are striking parasagittal stripes of gene expression along the
medial-lateral (ML) axis that are organized with respect to the lobules that
divide the Cb along the anterior-posterior (AP) axis. Although there is a clear
correlation between the organization of gene expression stripes and Cb activity
patterns, little is known about the genetic pathways that determine the intrinsic
stripe molecular code. Here we establish that ML molecular code patterning is
highly dependent on two homeobox transcription factors, Engrailed1 (En1) and En2,
both of which are also required for patterning the lobules. Gene expression
analysis of an allelic series of En1/2 mutant mice that have an intact Purkinje
cell layer revealed severe patterning defects using three known components of the
ML molecular code and a new marker of Hsp25 negative stripes (Neurofilament heavy
chain, Nfh). Importantly, the complementary expression of ZebrinII/PhospholipaseC
beta4 and Hsp25/Nfh changes in unison in each mutant. Furthermore, each En gene
has unique as well as overlapping functions in patterning the ML molecular code
and each En protein has dominant functions in different AP domains (subsets of
lobules). Remarkably, in En1/2 mutants with almost normal foliation, ML molecular
code patterning is severely disrupted. Thus, independent mechanisms that use
En1/2 must pattern foliation and spatial gene expression separately. Our studies 
reveal that En1/2 are fundamental components of the genetic pathways that pattern
the two intersecting coordinate systems of the Cb, morphological divisions and
the molecular code.

PMCID: PMC2864318
PMID: 19020009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Psychiatr Genet. 2008 Dec;18(6):295-301. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e3283060fa5.

Polymorphisms of coding trinucleotide repeats of homeogenes in neurodevelopmental
psychiatric disorders.

Laroche F(1), Ramoz N, Leroy S, Fortin C, Rousselot-Paillet B, Philippe A,
Colleaux L, Bresson JL, Mogenet A, Golse B, Mouren-Simeoni MC, Gorwood P, Galli
T, Simonneau M, Krebs MO, Robel L.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM AVENIR, Institut Jacques Monod UMR7592, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVES: Autism (MIM#209850) and schizophrenia (MIM#181500) are both
neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders characterized by a highly genetic
component. Homeogenes and forkhead genes encode transcription factors, which have
been involved in brain development and cell differentiation. Thus, they are
relevant candidate genes for psychiatric disorders. Genetic studies have reported
an association between autism and DLX2, HOXA1, EN2, ARX, and FOXP2 genes whereas 
only three studies of EN2, OTX2, and FOXP2 were performed on schizophrenia.
Interestingly, most of these candidate genes contain trinucleotide repeats coding
for polyamino acid stretch in which instability can be the cause of
neurodevelopmental disorders. Our goal was to identify variations of coding
trinucleotide repeats in schizophrenia, autism, and idiopathic mental
retardation.
METHODS: We screened the coding trinucleotide repeats of OTX1, EN1, DLX2, HOXA1, 
and FOXP2 genes in populations suffering from schizophrenia (247 patients),
autism (98 patients), and idiopathic mental retardation (56 patients), and
compared them with control populations (112 super controls and 202 healthy
controls).
RESULTS: Novel deletions and insertions of coding trinucleotide repeats were
found in the DLX2, HOXA1, and FOXP2 genes. Most of these variations were detected
in controls and no difference in their distribution was observed between patient 
and control groups. Two different polymorphisms in FOXP2 were, however, found
only in autistic patients and the functional consequences of these variations of 
repeats have to be characterized and correlated to particular clinical features.
CONCLUSION: This study did not identify specific disease risk variants of
trinucleotide repeats in OTX1, EN1, DLX2, HOXA1, and FOXP2 candidate genes in
neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders.

PMID: 19018235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Genes Brain Behav. 2009 Mar;8(2):129-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2008.00452.x.
Epub 2008 Nov 11.

Social approach in genetically engineered mouse lines relevant to autism.

Moy SS(1), Nadler JJ, Young NB, Nonneman RJ, Grossman AW, Murphy DL, D'Ercole AJ,
Crawley JN, Magnuson TR, Lauder JM.

Author information: 
(1)Neurodevelopmental Disorders Research Center, University of North Carolina
School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. ssmoy@med.unc.edu

Profound impairment in social interaction is a core symptom of autism, a severe
neurodevelopmental disorder. Deficits can include a lack of interest in social
contact and low levels of approach and proximity to other children. In this
study, a three-chambered choice task was used to evaluate sociability and social 
novelty preference in five lines of mice with mutations in genes implicated in
autism spectrum disorders. Fmr1(tm1Cgr/Y)(Fmr1(-/y)) mice represent a model for
fragile X, a mental retardation syndrome that is partially comorbid with autism. 
We tested Fmr1(-/y)mice on two genetic backgrounds, C57BL/6J and FVB/N-129/OlaHsd
(FVB/129). Targeted disruption of Fmr1 resulted in low sociability on one
measure, but only when the mutation was expressed on FVB/129. Autism has been
associated with altered serotonin levels and polymorphisms in SLC6A4 (SERT), the 
serotonin transporter gene. Male mice with targeted disruption of Slc6a4
displayed significantly less sociability than wild-type controls. Mice with
conditional overexpression of Igf-1 (insulin-like growth factor-1) offered a
model for brain overgrowth associated with autism. Igf-1 transgenic mice engaged 
in levels of social approach similar to wild-type controls. Targeted disruption
in other genes of interest, En2 (engrailed-2) and Dhcr7, was carried on genetic
backgrounds that showed low levels of exploration in the choice task, precluding 
meaningful interpretations of social behavior scores. Overall, results show that 
loss of Fmr1 or Slc6a4 gene function can lead to deficits in sociability.
Findings from the fragile X model suggest that the FVB/129 background confers
enhanced susceptibility to consequences of Fmr1 mutation on social approach.

PMCID: PMC2659808
PMID: 19016890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Toxicol Sci. 2009 Jan;107(1):206-19. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfn221. Epub 2008 Oct
29.

Cadmium-induced differential toxicogenomic response in resistant and sensitive
mouse strains undergoing neurulation.

Robinson JF(1), Yu X, Hong S, Griffith WC, Beyer R, Kim E, Faustman EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

Common inbred mouse strains, such as the C57BL/6 (C57) and the SWV, display
differences in sensitivity to environmental teratogens during gestation. For
example, the C57 is more sensitive than the SWV to cadmium (Cd) exposure during
neurulation, inducing a higher incidence of neural tube defects (NTDs). Here, we 
report, using Cd as a model teratogen, the first large scale toxicogenomic study 
to compare teratogen-induced gene expression alterations in C57 and SWV embryos
undergoing neurulation, identifying toxicogenomic responses that associate with
developmental toxicity and differential sensitivity. Using a systems-based
toxicogenomic approach, comparing Cd-exposed and control C57 and SWV embryos (12-
and 24-h postinjection [p.i.] [gestational day 8.0, ip]), we examined
differentially expressed genes at multiple levels (biological process, pathway,
gene) using Gene Ontology (GO) analysis, pathway mapping and cross-scatter plots.
In both C57 and SWV embryos, we observed several gene expression alterations
linked with cell cycle-related classifications, however, only in the C57 we
observed upregulation of p53-dependent mediators Ccng1 and Pmaip1, previously
associated with cell cycle arrest, apoptosis and NTD formation. In addition, we
also identified a greater reduction in expression of nervous system
development-related genes (e.g., Zic1, En2, Neurog1, Elavl4, Metrn, Nr2f1, Nr2f2)
in the C57 compared to the SWV (12-h p.i.). In summary, our results indicate that
differences in Cd-induced gene expression profiles between NTD resistant and
sensitive strains within enriched biological processes (including developmental
and cell cycle-related categories) associate with increased sensitivity to
developmental toxicity as determined by observations of increased NTD formation, 
mortality (resorptions) and reduced fetal growth. Such observations may provide
more detailed and useful mechanistic clues for identification of differences in
life-stage specific teratogenic response.

PMCID: PMC2768398
PMID: 18974090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2008;14 Suppl 2:S103-6. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2008.04.011. Epub 2008 Jun 27.

Characterization of the Engrailed mutant mice as experimental models for
Parkinson's disease.

Sgadò P(1), Viaggi C, Fantacci C, Corsini GU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pisa School of Medicine, Via Roma
55, Pisa, Italy. p.sgado@meyer.it

Engrailed genes are homeodomain-containing transcription factors necessary for
the development and maintenance of mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons. Deletion
in the Engrailed genes has been shown to affect the survival of mesencephalic
dopaminergic neurons both during development and in the adult. Here we describe
for the first time a significant reduction in striatal dopamine levels in
En1+/-;En2+/- mice compared with their En2+/- littermates, accompanied by a
modest reduction in the number of nigral DA neurons. Our results strengthen
previous evidence indicating Engrailed genes as survival factors for mature
dopaminergic neurons. Furthermore, our data suggest a role for these
transcription factors in the maintenance of synaptic dopaminergic
neurotransmission in adult neurons.

PMID: 18585948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Emerg Med J. 2008 Jul;25(7):428-30. doi: 10.1136/emj.2007.054155.

Feasibility of screening for Chlamydia trachomatis in young men attending an
emergency department.

Sood T(1), Sally D, Spencer N, Banerjee A, Hinchley G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield
EN2 8JL, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the feasibility of screening asymptomatic young men for
genital Chlamydia trachomatis infection in a suburban emergency department
setting.
DESIGN: Prospective observational study.
SETTING: Chase Farm Hospital Emergency Department in Enfield, North London.
PARTICIPANTS: Asymptomatic sexually active men aged 16-24 years.
METHODS: A convenience sample of men aged 16-24 years attending the emergency
department was offered urine-based screening for Chlamydia at triage. Verbal
consent was obtained and first pass urine specimens were tested using the strand 
displacement amplification technique. Participants were traced by their preferred
method of contact in order to be offered treatment within 2 weeks of attendance
at the emergency department.
RESULTS: 67 men participated, 64 of whom were tested, 3 returning positive tests.
The prevalence of Chlamydia in asymptomatic men attending the emergency
department was 4.7%.
CONCLUSION: Urine testing for genital C trachomatis in the emergency department
can identify asymptomatic men in the community who may otherwise remain
undetected. It is suggested that this is a worthwhile screening test to offer in 
the emergency department, providing follow-up for treatment can be arranged
locally. There is no requirement for increased emergency department input into
these patients over and above introducing them to the screening programme.

PMID: 18573958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Neuropsychobiology. 2008;57(1-2):3-8. doi: 10.1159/000123115. Epub 2008 Apr 18.

Association of the homeobox transcription factor gene ENGRAILED 2 with autistic
disorder in Chinese children.

Yang P(1), Lung FW, Jong YJ, Hsieh HY, Liang CL, Juo SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan
(ROC).

BACKGROUND: Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder with a strong genetic
component. Previous studies have mapped the disease to chromosome 7q, where the
homeobox transcription factor ENGRAILED 2 (EN2) gene is located. EN2 is
specifically involved in patterning the region that gives rise to the cerebellum.
In the present work, we carried out a case-control study to determine whether 2
intronic single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of EN2 are a susceptibility to
autism in a Han Chinese population.
METHOD: We enrolled 184 cases of DSM-IV-TR diagnosed autistic disorder, 225
controls of unrelated healthy volunteers and 409 randomly selected controls from 
the community who lives in the adjacent geographical regions for this study. Two 
SNPs (rs1861972, rs1861973) at the EN2 gene that have been reported to be
associated with autism underwent analysis among our studied cohorts. Both the
UNPHASE and PHASE statistical programs were utilized for evaluating the
association of EN2 SNPs with autism based on allelic and genotypic frequencies
and haplotype compositions accompanied with the goodness-of-fit method of the
chi(2) test. The gender difference was also investigated by using 2-side Fisher's
exact test treated as a covariate in logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Both the allelic and genotypic distributions of the 2
polymorphisms were concordant with Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Significant
differences were found for cases versus community and overall controls. By using 
the UNPHASE and PHASE programs, the 2-marker haplotype A-C of EN2 was identified 
to have a protective effect for autism, indicating that the ethnic difference
might confound the EN2 association with autism. Therefore, more EN2 gene
association studies of Han Chinese populations are warranted to confirm this
finding.

2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18424904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2008 Jun 15;310(4):355-69. doi: 10.1002/jez.b.21215.

Mandibular arch muscle identity is regulated by a conserved molecular process
during vertebrate development.

Knight RD(1), Mebus K, Roehl HH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, Kings College London, London, UK.
robert.knight@kcl.ac.uk

Vertebrate head muscles exhibit a highly conserved pattern of innervation and
skeletal connectivity and yet it is unclear whether the molecular basis of their 
development is likewise conserved. Using the highly conserved expression of
Engrailed 2 (En2) as a marker of identity in the dorsal mandibular muscles of
zebrafish, we have investigated the molecular signals and tissues required for
patterning these muscles. We show that muscle En2 expression is not dependent on 
signals from the adjacent neural tube, pharyngeal endoderm or axial mesoderm and 
that early identity of head muscles does not require bone morphogenetic pathway, 
Notch or Hedgehog (Hh) signalling. However, constrictor dorsalis En2 expression
is completely lost after a loss of fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) signalling and 
we show that is true throughout head muscle development. These results suggest
that head muscle identity is dependent on Fgf signalling. Data from experiments
performed in chick suggest a similar regulation of En2 genes by Fgf signalling
revealing a conserved mechanism for specifying head muscle identity. We present
evidence that another key gene important in the development of mouse head
muscles, Tbx1, is also critical for specification of mandibular arch muscle
identity and that this is independent of Fgf signalling. These data imply that
dorsal mandibular arch muscle identity in fish, chick and mouse is specified by a
highly conserved molecular process despite differing functions of these muscles
in different lineages.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18338789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Dev Growth Differ. 2008 Mar;50(3):169-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2008.01014.x.

VegT, eFGF and Xbra cause overall posteriorization while Xwnt8 causes eye-level
restricted posteriorization in synergy with chordin in early Xenopus development.

Fujii H(1), Sakai M, Nishimatsu S, Nohno T, Mochii M, Orii H, Watanabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life Science, University of Hyogo, 3-2-1 Kouto, Kamigori
Akou, Hyogo 678-1297, Japan. msbhfj88@gmail.com

We examined several candidate posterior/mesodermal inducing molecules using
permanent blastula-type embryos (PBEs) as an assay system. Candidate molecules
were injected individually or in combination with the organizer factor chordin
mRNA. Injection of chordin alone resulted in a white hemispherical neural tissue 
surrounded by a large circular cement gland, together with anterior neural gene
expression and thus the development of the anterior-most parts of the embryo,
without mesodermal tissues. When VegT, eFGF or Xbra mRNAs were injected into a
different blastomere of the chordin-injected PBEs, the embryos elongated and
formed eye, muscle and pigment cells, and expressed mesodermal and posterior
neural genes. These embryos formed the full spectrum of the anteroposterior
embryonic axis. In contrast, injection of CSKA-Xwnt8 DNA into PBEs injected with 
chordin resulted in eye formation and expression of En2, a midbrain/hindbrain
marker, and Xnot, a notochord marker, but neither elongation, muscle formation
nor more posterior gene expression. Injection of chordin and posteriorizing
molecules into the same cell did not result in elongation of the embryo. Thus, by
using PBEs as the host test system we show that (i) overall anteroposterior
neural development, mesoderm (muscle) formation, together with embryo elongation 
can occur through the synergistic effect(s) of the organizer molecule chordin,
and each of the 'verall posteriorizing molecules'eFGF, VegT and Xbra; (ii)
Xwnt8-mediated posteriorization is restricted to the eye level and is independent
of mesoderm formation; and (iii) proper anteroposterior patterning requires a
separation of the dorsalizing and posteriorizing gene expression domains.

PMID: 18318733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Shanghai Kou Qiang Yi Xue. 2007 Dec;16(6):640-3.

[Comparison of translucency between enamel, dentin and Vita veneer porcelain].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiong F(1), Chao YL, Zhu ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Technology, West China College of Stomatology, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041, Sichuan Province, China.

PURPOSE: To compare the translucency between enamel, dentin and dental porcelain.
METHODS: 32 newly extracted vital human central incisors were collected and cut
into 0.8mm enamel slices and 1.0 mm dentin slices. 1.0 mm dental porcelain
specimen were made with different Vita veneer porcelain, EN1, EN2, T4, Window,
A1, A2, A3, A3.5, A4, B2, C2, D2, 3 samples for each kind. The transmittance and 
reflectance of tooth slices and porcelain specimen were measured by PR-650
spectra scan spectrocolorimeter. The transmittance coefficients were also
calculated. The 95% confidence interval was obtained by SPSS 12.0 software
package. SNK method was used to compare the transmittance coefficients of
different dentin porcelains.
RESULTS: The transmittance coefficient of tooth enamel ranged from 0.0817 mm(-1) 
to 0.1009 mm(-1), which was higher than that of two kinds of enamel porcelain
(0.0507 mm(-1) for EN1 and 0.0408 mm(-1) for EN2). The transmittance coefficient 
of dentin (0.0418-0.0482 mm(-1)) was also higher than that of dentin porcelain
(0.016-0.027 mm(-1)). The transmittance coefficient of dentin porcelain decreased
with the increasing of chroma (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Prominent difference exists between translucency of tooth tissue and
dental porcelain, especially between enamel and enamel porcelain.

PMID: 18278420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2008 Sep;278(3):245-9. doi: 10.1007/s00404-007-0548-5. Epub 
2008 Jan 12.

Caesarean delivery at full cervical dilatation versus caesarean delivery in the
first stage of labour: comparison of maternal and perinatal morbidity.

Selo-Ojeme D(1), Sathiyathasan S, Fayyaz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Women and Children's Directorate,
Barnet and Chase Farm Hospitals NHS Trust, Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway,
Enfield, EN2 8JL, UK. Dseloojeme@aol.com

OBJECTIVE: To compare perinatal and maternal morbidity associated with caesarean 
sections performed in the first with that performed in the second stages of
labour.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Comparative analyses between nulliparous women with
singleton term pregnancies who had a caesarean section in the first stage of
labour and those who had a second stage caesarean section were completed using
standard statistical methods. A subgroup analysis, according to indication for
caesarean section, was also performed.
RESULTS: Of 627 women, 81% had caesarean delivery in the first stage and 19% had 
caesarean delivery in the second stage of labour. Women undergoing caesarean
delivery at full cervical dilatation were 1.9 times more likely to have an
augmented labour (95% CI 1.2-3.4, P < 0.001) and 2.8 times more likely to have
epidural anaesthesia in labour (95% CI 1.5-5.2, P < 0.001) than those in the
first stage. Compared with caesarean delivery in the first stage of labour, women
undergoing caesarean delivery at full cervical dilatation were 4.6 times more
likely to have composite intraoperative complications (95% CI 2.7-7.9, P <
0.001), 3.1 times more likely to have blood loss greater than 1,000 ml (95% CI
1.3-7.4, P = 0.01), and 2.9 times more likely to have a blood transfusion (95% CI
1.5-5.6, P < 0.001). The risk of neonatal morbidity was higher in first stage
caesareans when they were performed for presumed fetal compromise (66.3 vs.
26.3%, P = 0.002), and lower when they were performed for failure to progress
(18.4 vs. 42%, P = 0.02).
CONCLUSION: Caesarean section in the second stage of labour is associated with a 
higher risk of maternal but not perinatal morbidity.

PMID: 18189142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Acute Med. 2008;7(2):87-8.

Unrecognised late post-partum eclampsia presenting as posterior reversible
encephalopathy syndrome.

Joshi V(1), Mort DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Registrar, Integrated Medicine, Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield,
Middlesex, EN2 8JL.

We present a lady in whom late post-partum eclampsia (LPE) was overlooked. The
diagnosis was delayed and only made when MRI brain demonstrated posterior
reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES(. There is a need for greater awareness 
of both LPE and PRES. We summarise the recent literature and emphasise the
importance of recognising the conditions on clinical grounds so that treatment
can be started without delay.

PMID: 21611575  [PubMed]


126. Transl Oncogenomics. 2008 Mar 3;3:37-43.

Oncogenic role of engrailed-2 (en-2) in prostate cancer cell growth and survival.

Bose SK(1), Bullard RS, Donald CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South
Carolina (MUSC), 165 Ashley Avenue, PO Box 250620, Charleston, SC-29425, U.S.A.

Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death among men in the
United States of America. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the
disease remain largely unknown. Therefore, the identification of tumor specific
molecules that serve as targets for the development of new cancer drugs is
considered to be a major goal in cancer research. The mouse Engrailed-2 (En-2)
gene, which is a homeobox-containing transcription factor was recently identified
as a candidate oncogene in breast cancer. Here, we demonstrate that En-2 is
over-expressed in human prostate cancer cells as compared to normal prostate
epithelial cells. In addition, our data suggests that EN2 expression may be
positively modulated by PAX2 transcription factor. Furthermore, down-regulation
of EN2 expression by siRNA resulted in a decrease in PAX2 expression. We also
provide evidence that down-regulation of EN2 expression causes a dramatic
decrease in prostate cancer cell proliferation. Therefore, from our studies we
conclude that En-2 is a candidate oncogene in prostate cancer and its
PAX2-regulated expression contributes to prostate cancer cell growth.

PMCID: PMC3022358
PMID: 21566742  [PubMed]


127. BMJ. 2007 Dec 8;335(7631):1180.

Is infant male circumcision an abuse of the rights of the child? Yes.

Hinchley G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Barnet and Chase Farm NHS Trust, Enfield, Middlesex EN2 8JL.
geoff.hinchley@bcf.nhs.uk

Comment in
    BMJ. 2007 Dec 8;335(7631):1181.

PMCID: PMC2128663
PMID: 18063640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Emerg Med J. 2007 Nov;24(11):802.

Acute dysphagia: an unusual treatable cause.

Mathers J(1), Banerjee A, Mbamalu D.

Author information: 
(1)Emergency Department, Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield, Middlesex
EN2 8JL, UK.

Bariatric surgery is a rapidly expanding surgical sub-speciality, with a large
proportion of the relevant surgical procedures being performed in the private
sector. Acute complications of newer surgical procedures can lead to emergency
department presentation, with which the staff may be unfamiliar. A 34-year-old
woman was seen in the emergency department with acute total dysphagia following
laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding, which was treated successfully by a
simple bedside procedure.

PMCID: PMC2658340
PMID: 17954850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Jun 5;147B(4):434-8.

Association of the ENGRAILED 2 (EN2) gene with autism in Chinese Han population.

Wang L(1), Jia M, Yue W, Tang F, Qu M, Ruan Y, Lu T, Zhang H, Yan H, Liu J, Guo
Y, Zhang J, Yang X, Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)Key laboratory for Mental Health, Ministry of Health, PR China.

Human ENGRAILED 2 (EN2) gene is localized to 7q36, an autism susceptibility
locus. En2 knockout mice display hypoplasia of cerebellum and a decrease in the
number of Purkinje cell, which are similar to those reported for individuals with
autism. Furthermore, deficits in social behavior were detected in En2(-/-) mice. 
Two recent studies have demonstrated that two intronic SNPs (rs1861972,
rs1861973) in the EN2 gene are significantly associated with autism. To
investigate whether this finding could be replicated in Chinese Han population,
we performed the association study between eight single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) of the EN2 gene and autism in 210 Chinese Han trios, using the
family-based association test (FBAT). The present study demonstrated that a
preferential transmission of the rs3824068 A-allele to affected offspring (A > G:
Z = 2.399, P = 0.0165). After the Bonferroni correction, this statistical
significance of preferential transmission did not remain. However, when
haplotypes were constructed with multiple markers, a number of haplotypes
including three two-marker haplotypes, nine three-marker haplotypes, one
four-marker haplotype, and one six-marker haplotype, all of which contain the
major allele A of rs3824068, displayed significantly associated with autism.
These results were still significant after using the permutation method to obtain
empirical P values. Thus, our data provide evidence that the EN2 gene may be
implicated in the predisposition to autism in the Chinese Han population.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17948901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Mar 5;147B(2):187-93.

Heterogeneous association between engrailed-2 and autism in the CPEA network.

Brune CW(1), Korvatska E, Allen-Brady K, Cook EH Jr, Dawson G, Devlin B, Estes A,
Hennelly M, Hyman SL, McMahon WM, Munson J, Rodier PM, Schellenberg GD, Stodgell 
CJ, Coon H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Institute for Juvenile Research, University of
Illinois-Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by an early onset of
abnormal social, communicative, and repetitive behavior. Engrailed-2 (EN2) was
identified as an autism candidate gene because its influence on cerebellar
development in mice parallels neurodevelopmental abnormalities seen in
individuals with autism. Studies investigating association between markers at EN2
(chr7q36), a location associated with language disorders, and autism reveal mixed
findings. Two positive reports revealed association with two intronic SNPs. Since
the associated SNPs were in high linkage disequilibrium and shared similar minor 
allele frequencies, we chose to test whether one of the SNPs (rs1861972) was
associated with autism in three recruiting sites from the NIH Collaborative
Programs of Excellence in Autism (CPEA) network. A recessive model revealed
significant association with broad autism spectrum disorder. Site specific
analyses indicated differential allele transmission by site, despite similar
ethnicity, and parental genotypes, suggesting the SNP may contribute to various
risk haplotypes. No significant association with autism was found under an
additive model for either a broad (autism spectrum disorder) or a narrow
(autistic disorder) diagnostic group. Although our findings were not as robust as
the previous studies, they suggest that rs1861972 may influence the risk for
autism spectrum disorders. Future studies investigating EN2 should consider how
the association of variants in this gene with autism could be influenced by
differences in phenotype and possible interactions with genotypes at other autism
candidate genes.

PMID: 17948868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2008 Jan;149(1):191-201. Epub 2007 Sep
16.

Ethanol teratogenesis in Japanese medaka: effects at the cellular level.

Wu M(1), Chaudhary A, Khan IA, Dasmahapatra AK.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Natural Product Research, Environmental Toxicology
Research Program, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, MS 38677, USA.

The adverse effects of alcohol on the developing humans represent a spectrum of
structural and neurobehavioral abnormalities, most appropriately termed as fetal 
alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD). The mechanism by which ethanol induces FASD is 
unknown. Human studies of FASD are very limited due to ethical constraints;
however, several animal models from nematodes to mammals are utilized to
understand the molecular mechanism of this disorder. We have used Japanese medaka
(Oryzias latipes) embryo-larval development as a unique non-mammalian model to
study the molecular mechanism of FASD. Fertilized medaka eggs were exposed to
ethanol (0-400 mM) for 48 h post fertilization (hpf) and then maintained in
regular embryo rearing medium without ethanol. Viable embryos were harvested on
0, 2, 4 and 6 day post fertilization (dpf) and analyzed for DNA, RNA and protein 
contents of the embryos. By applying semi-quantitative RT-PCR (rRT-PCR) and
quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR), RNA samples were further analyzed for
seven transcription factors, emx2, en2, iro3, otx2, shh, wnt1 and zic5 which are 
expressed in the neural tube of medaka embryo during early phase of development. 
RNA and protein contents of the embryos were significantly reduced by ethanol at 
400 mM dose on 4 and 6 dpf compared to the control (no ethanol), and 100 mM
ethanol treated embryos. However, significant reduction of DNA was observed only 
in 4 dpf embryos. Total protein contents of yolk remained unaltered after ethanol
treatment. Expression pattern of emx2, en2, iro3, otx2, shh, wnt1, and zic5 mRNAs
were found to be developmentally regulated, however, remained unaltered after
ethanol treatment. It is therefore concluded that alteration of nucleic acid and 
protein contents of medaka embryo by ethanol could be used as an indicator of
embryonic growth retardation which might be the result of disruption of specific 
gene function during development.

PMCID: PMC2220156
PMID: 17913529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Neurochem Int. 2008 Mar-Apr;52(4-5):688-700. Epub 2007 Sep 4.

9-Methyl-beta-carboline up-regulates the appearance of differentiated
dopaminergic neurones in primary mesencephalic culture.

Hamann J(1), Wernicke C, Lehmann J, Reichmann H, Rommelspacher H, Gille G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Technical University of Dresden, Fetscherstr. 74,
01307 Dresden, Germany.

beta-Carbolines (BCs) derive from tryptophan and its derivatives. They are formed
endogenously in humans and mammals and occur inter alia in cooked meat and
tobacco smoke. They have been detected in human brain, cerebrospinal fluid, and
plasma. Up to now they were predominantly identified as compounds exhibiting
neurotoxic actions. Since significantly higher amounts are present in
parkinsonian patients, they are regarded as potential pathogenetic factors in
Parkinson's disease. We identified for the first time a BC (9-methyl-BC; 9-me-BC)
exerting neuroprotective and neuron-differentiating effects. Treatment of primary
mesencephalic dopaminergic cultures with 9-me-BC inhibited the basal release of
lactate dehydrogenase and reduced the number of cells stained with propidium
iodide. Caspase-3 activity was decreased, the total protein content was unchanged
and ATP content was increased. Furthermore, the expression of
inflammation-related genes was reduced. The number of differentiated dopaminergic
neurones was significantly increased and a wide array of
neurotrophic/transcription factors (Shh, Wnt1, Wnt5a, En1, En2, Nurr1, Pitx3) and
marker genes (Th, Dat, Aldh1a1) decisive for dopaminergic differentiation was
stimulated. Consistently, the dopamine content was slightly, although
non-significantly, increased and the dopamine uptake capacity was elevated. An
anti-proliferative effect was observed in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells which
is consistent with a reduced incorporation of bromodesoxyuridine into the DNA of 
primary mesencephalic cells. Whether the additional dopaminergic neurones in
primary culture derive from dopaminergic precursor cells, previously tyrosine
hydroxylase negative dopaminergic neurones or are the result of a
transdifferentiation process remains to be established.

PMID: 17913302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Development. 2007 Jun;134(12):2325-35.

Genetic subdivision of the tectum and cerebellum into functionally related
regions based on differential sensitivity to engrailed proteins.

Sgaier SK(1), Lao Z, Villanueva MP, Berenshteyn F, Stephen D, Turnbull RK, Joyner
AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine,
New York University School of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016,
USA.

The genetic pathways that partition the developing nervous system into functional
systems are largely unknown. The engrailed (En) homeobox transcription factors
are candidate regulators of this process in the dorsal midbrain (tectum) and
anterior hindbrain (cerebellum). En1 mutants lack most of the tectum and
cerebellum and die at birth, whereas En2 mutants are viable with a smaller
cerebellum and foliation defects. Our previous studies indicated that the
difference in phenotypes is due to the earlier expression of En1 as compared with
En2, rather than differences in protein function, since knock-in mice expressing 
En2 in place of En1 have a normal brain. Here, we uncovered a wider spectrum of
functions for the En genes by generating a series of En mutant mice. First, using
a conditional allele we demonstrate that En1 is required for cerebellum
development only before embryonic day 9, but plays a sustained role in forming
the tectum. Second, by removing the endogenous En2 gene in the background of En1 
knock-in alleles, we show that Drosophila en is not sufficient to sustain
midbrain and cerebellum development in the absence of En2, whereas En2 is more
potent than En1 in cerebellum development. Third, based on a differential
sensitivity to the dose of En1/2, our studies reveal a genetic subdivision of the
tectum into its two functional systems and the medial cerebellum into four
regions that have distinct circuitry and molecular coding. Our study suggests
that an ;engrailed code' is integral to partitioning the tectum and cerebellum
into functional domains.

PMCID: PMC2840613
PMID: 17537797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2008 Jan;46(1):68-9. Epub 2007 May 24.

A modified technique of radial forearm free flap anastomosis.

Halfpenny W(1), Prabhu K, Balaraman K, Thiruchelvam J, McGurk M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Barnet & Chase Farm Hospitals
NHS Trust, The Ridgeway, Enfield, Middx EN2 8JL, UK. wayne.halfpenny@bcf.nhs.uk

PMID: 17531361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Virchows Arch. 2007 Jan;450(1):31-40. Epub 2006 Nov 25.

Ontogenesis of human cerebellar cortex and biopathological characterization in
sudden unexplained fetal and infant death.

Lavezzi AM(1), Ottaviani G, Matturri L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Lino Rossi Research Center, University of Milan, Via
della Commenda, 19, Milan, 20122, Italy. anna.lavezzi@unimi.it

The aims of this study were to investigate in the human cerebellar cortex the
structural and biological ontogenetic features, the possible presence of
alterations in cases of sudden unexplained fetal and infant death, and the
involvement of the maternal cigarette smoking in developmental abnormalities. We 
analyzed 52 brains of fetal and infant death victims, aged from the second
gestational trimester to 12th postnatal month. In the cerebellar cortex we
evaluated, besides the morphological aspects, the expression of several
biomarkers implicated in proliferative processes (c-fos, proliferating cell
nuclear antigen, and apoptosis) as well as the presence of the neurotransmitter
somatostatin, which is strongly implicated in central nervous system
differentiation, and of EN2 gene. The observed features of the cerebellar cortex,
mainly confined to the transient external granular layer, were high proliferative
activity and high expression of both somatostatin and EN2 gene in prenatal life
and high apoptotic index after birth. In 41% of the sudden unexplained death
victims, in the greater part with smoking mothers, we observed different
biopathological alterations of the cerebellar cortex. Maternal smoking is
increasingly being demonstrated to be one of the main contributors to
developmental neurological alterations in the offspring.

PMID: 17334803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2008 Mar;46(2):144-5. Epub 2007 Feb 23.

Simultaneous lymphoma and squamous cell carcinoma presenting as a neck lump.

Millwaters M(1), Khan N, Halfpenny W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Barnet and Chase Farm Hospital
Middlesex, London EN2 8JL, UK.

We describe the unusual presentation of a patient with simultaneous follicular
lymphoma and metastatic head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. He was initially
treated for his lymphoma and then, following no regression in his cervical
lymphadenopathy was referred for further assessment. This revealed squamous cell 
carcinoma arising from the left tongue base with metastatic disease in the left
neck.

PMID: 17321646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Differentiation. 2007 Jun;75(5):393-403. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

Early molecular effects of ethanol during vertebrate embryogenesis.

Yelin R(1), Kot H, Yelin D, Fainsod A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,
Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) is the combination of developmental,
morphological, and neurological defects that result from exposing human embryos
to ethanol (EtOH). Numerous embryonic structures are affected, leading to a
complex viable phenotype affecting among others, the anterior/posterior axis,
head, and eye formation. Recent studies have provided evidence suggesting that
EtOH teratogenesis is mediated in part through a reduction in retinoic acid (RA) 
levels, targeting mainly the embryonic organizer (Spemann's organizer) and its
subsequent functions. EtOH-treated Xenopus embryos were subjected to an analysis 
of gene expression patterns. Analysis of organizer-specific genes revealed a
transient delay in the invagination of gsc- and chordin-positive cells that
eventually reach their normal rostro-caudal position. Dorsal midline genes show
defects along the rostro-caudal axis, lacking either their rostral (Xbra and
Xnot2) or caudal (FoxA4b and Shh) expression domains. Head-specific markers like 
Otx2, en2, and Shh show abnormal expression patterns. Otx2 exhibits a reduction
in expression levels, while en2 becomes restricted along the dorsal/ventral axis.
During neurula stages, Shh becomes up-regulated in the rostral region and it is
expressed in an abnormal pattern. These results and histological analysis suggest
the existence of malformations in the brain region including a lack of the normal
fore brain ventricle. An increase in the size of both the prechordal plate and
the notochord was observed, while the spinal cord is narrower. The reduction in
head and eye size was accompanied by changes in the eye markers, Pax6 and Tbx3.
Our results provide evidence for the early molecular changes induced by EtOH
exposure during embryogenesis, and may explain some of the structural changes
that are part of the EtOH teratogenic phenotype also in FASD individuals.

PMID: 17286601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Neurosci. 2007 Jan 31;27(5):1063-71.

Progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the ventral midbrain of adult mice
heterozygote for Engrailed1.

Sonnier L(1), Le Pen G, Hartmann A, Bizot JC, Trovero F, Krebs MO, Prochiantz A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 8542,
Development and Evolution of the Nervous System, Group Development and
Neuropharmacology, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Engrailed1 and Engrailed2 (En1 and En2) are two developmental genes of the
homeogene family expressed in the developing midbrain. En1 and, to a lesser
degree, En2 also are expressed in the adult substantia nigra (SN) and ventral
tegmental area (VTA), two dopaminergic (DA) nuclei of the ventral midbrain. In an
effort to study En1/2 adult functions, we have analyzed the phenotype of mice
lacking one En1 allele in an En2 wild-type context. We show that in this mutant
the number of DA neurons decreases slowly between 8 and 24 weeks after birth to
reach a stable 38 and 23% reduction in the SN and VTA, respectively, and that
neuronal loss can be antagonized by En2 recombinant protein infusions in the
midbrain. These loss and gain of function experiments firmly establish that En1/2
is a true survival factor for DA neurons in vivo. Neuronal death in the mutant is
paralleled by a 37% decrease in striatal DA, with no change in serotonin content.
Using established protocols, we show that, compared with their wild-type
littermates, En1+/- mice have impaired motor skills, an anhedonic-like behavior, 
and an enhanced resignation phenotype; they perform poorly in social
interactions. However, these mice do not differ from their wild-type littermates 
in anxiety-measuring tests. Together, these results demonstrate that En1/2 genes 
have important adult physiological functions. They also suggest that mice lacking
only one En1 allele could provide a novel model for the study of diseases
associated with progressive DA cell death.

PMID: 17267560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Prog Neurobiol. 2007 Jan;81(1):45-60. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Brain regions and genes affecting postural control.

Lalonde R(1), Strazielle C.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Rouen, Faculté de Médecine et de Pharmacie, INSERM U614, IFRMP, 
76183 Rouen Cedex, France.robert.lalonde@univ-rouen.fr

Postural control is integrated in all facets of motor commands. The role of
cortico-subcortical pathways underlying postural control, including cerebellum
and its afferents (climbing, mossy, and noradrenergic fibers), basal ganglia,
motor thalamus, and parieto-frontal neocortex has been identified in animal
models, notably through the brain lesion technique in rats and in mice with
spontaneous and induced mutations. These studies are complemented by analyses of 
the factors underlying postural deficiencies in patients with cerebellar atrophy.
With the gene deletion technique in mice, specific genes expressed in cerebellum 
encoding glutamate receptors (Grid2 and Grm1) and other molecules (Prkcc, Cntn6, 
Klf9, Syt4, and En2) have also been shown to affect postural control. In
addition, transgenic mouse models of the synucleinopathies and of Huntington's
disease cause deficiencies of motor coordination resembling those of patients
with basal ganglia damage.

PMID: 17222959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Cell Biol Int. 2007 Mar;31(3):299-303. Epub 2006 Nov 19.

In vitro differentiation of cord blood unrestricted somatic stem cells expressing
dopamine-associated genes into neuron-like cells.

Fallahi-Sichani M(1), Soleimani M, Najafi SM, Kiani J, Arefian E, Atashi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University College of Science, University of
Tehran, Tehran 14155-6455, Iran.

An intensive study is underway to evaluate different potential candidates for
cell therapy of neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's disease (PD).
Availability and lower immunogenicity compared to other sources for stem cell
therapy such as bone marrow have made human umbilical cord blood stem cells a
considerable source for cell therapy. The present study aimed to investigate
differentiation of recently introduced pluripotent cord blood stem cells, known
as unrestricted somatic stem cells (USSCs), into cells with neural features in
serum-withdrawal medium. Using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
and immunocytochemistry assays, we have shown the expression of neuron-specific
genes following a 2week treatment of USSCs in serum-withdrawal induction medium. 
In addition, we have found that USSCs and USSC-derived neuron-like cells express 
transcripts of genes associated with development and/or survival of dopaminergic 
mesencephalic neurons including En1, En2, Nurr1, Ptx3, Pax2, Wnt1 and Wnt3a. The 
expression of dopamine-associated genes suggests that these cells may be
potential candidates to be used for cell therapy of PD.

PMID: 17196845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Dev Neurosci. 2007;29(6):468-79. Epub 2006 Nov 20.

The role of XBtg2 in Xenopus neural development.

Sugimoto K(1), Okabayashi K, Sedohara A, Hayata T, Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

In early neural development, active cell proliferation and apoptosis take place
concurrent with cell differentiation, but how these processes are coordinated
remains unclear. In this study, we characterized the role of XBtg2 in Xenopus
neural development. XBtg2 transcripts were detected at the edge of the
anterolateral neural plate and the neural crest region at the midneurula stage,
and in eyes and in part of the neural tube at the tailbud stage. Translational
inhibition of XBtg2 affected anterior neural development and impaired eye
formation. XBtg2 depletion altered the expression patterns of the early neural
genes, Zic3 and SoxD, at the midneurula stage, but not at the early neurula
stage. At the midneurula stage, XBtg2-depleted embryos exhibited a marked
decrease in the expression of anterior neural genes, En2, Otx2, and Rx1, without 
any changes in neural crest genes, Slug and Snail, or an epidermal gene, XK81.
These results suggest that XBtg2 is required for the differentiation of the
anterior neural plate from the midneurula stage, but not for the specification of
the fate and patterning of the neural plate. XBtg2-depleted embryos also
exhibited an increase in both proliferation and apoptosis in the anterior neural 
plate; however, the altered expression patterns of neural markers were not
reversed by inhibition of either the cell cycle or apoptosis. Based on these
data, we propose that XBtg2 plays an essential role in the anterior neural
development, by regulating neural cell differentiation, and, independently, cell 
proliferation and survival.

Copyright 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17119321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2007 Dec;45(8):670-2. Epub 2006 Nov 20.

Rare presentation of Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare infection.

Alagarswamy RK(1), Halfpenny W, Thiruchelvam JK, Mohamid W.

Author information: 
(1)Barnet and Chase Farm Hospital NHS Trust, The Ridgeway, Enfield, Middlesex EN2
8JL, United Kingdom.

Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare causes clinical disease mainly in
immunocompromised patients with long-standing pulmonary disease, the symptoms of 
which are identical to those of pulmonary tuberculosis. In patients with AIDS the
infection is typically disseminated. Extrapulmonary infection by M.
avium-intracellulare is seen in children aged 1-5 years as cervicofacial
lymphadenitis. Other extrapulmonary sites are less common and include
musculoskeletal, maxillary sinus, mastoid, breast, small bowel, genitourinary
tract and cornea. Such infection of the hard palate is rare. We present an
unusual case of infection of the palate by M. avium-intracellulare in a
53-year-old diabetic man. To our knowledge, this infection presenting as a
palatal lump in a patient without HIV or pre-existing lung disease has not been
previously reported.

PMID: 17113692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Exp Neurol. 2007 Feb;203(2):472-80. Epub 2006 Oct 27.

Chronic cocaine administration modulates the expression of transcription factors 
involved in midbrain dopaminergic neuron function.

Leo D(1), di Porzio U, Racagni G, Riva MA, Fumagalli F, Perrone-Capano C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A. Buzzati Traverso, CNR, Via Pietro
Castellino, 111, 80131-Naples, Italy.

Chronic cocaine use leads to pronounced alterations in neuronal functions in
brain circuits associated with reward. In the present study, we examined in the
rat midbrain the effects of acute, subchronic (5 days) and chronic cocaine
treatments (14 days) on the gene expression of transcription factors involved in 
the development and maintenance of dopaminergic neurons. We show that chronic,
but not acute or subchronic, cocaine administration downregulates Nurr1 and Pitx3
transcripts whereas En1 transcripts are upregulated. Conversely, Lmx1b and En2
transcripts are not affected by the drug treatment, indicating that the
modulation of the midbrain transcription factors analyzed is highly selective.
Interestingly, modification of the gene expression for these transcription
factors persists in midbrain as long as two weeks after the last drug
administration, suggesting that it may account for some of the enduring
alterations in midbrain dopaminergic circuits associated with chronic cocaine
use.

PMID: 17070804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Behav Brain Res. 2007 Jan 10;176(1):121-32. Epub 2006 Oct 20.

The mouse Engrailed genes: a window into autism.

Kuemerle B(1), Gulden F, Cherosky N, Williams E, Herrup K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Case Western Reserve School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

The complex behavioral symptoms and neuroanatomical abnormalities observed in
autistic individuals strongly suggest a multi-factorial basis for this perplexing
disease. Although not the perfect model, we believe the Engrailed genes provide
an invaluable "window" into the elusive etiology of autism spectrum disorder. The
Engrailed-2 gene has been associated with autism in genetic linkage studies. The 
En2 knock-out mouse harbors cerebellar abnormalities that are similar to those
found in autistic individuals and, as we report here, has a distinct anterior
shift in the position of the amygdala in the cerebral cortex. Our initial
analysis of background effects in the En1 mouse knock-out provides insight as to 
possible molecular mechanisms and gender differences associated with autism.
These findings further the connection between Engrailed and autism and provide
new avenues to explore in the ongoing study of the biological basis of this
multifaceted disease.

PMCID: PMC2791532
PMID: 17055592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Neural Transm Suppl. 2006;(70):57-60.

The role of Pitx3 in survival of midbrain dopaminergic neurons.

Smits SM(1), Smidt MP.

Author information: 
(1)Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, Department of Pharmacology and
Anatomy, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Dopamine belongs to the most intensively studied neurotransmitters of the brain, 
because of its implications in psychiatric and neurological disorders. Although, 
clinical relevance of midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons is well recognized and 
dopaminergic dysfunction may have a genetic component, the genetic cascades
underlying developmental processes are still largely unknown. With the advances
in molecular biology, mDA neurons and their involvement in psychiatric and
neurological disorders are now subject of studies that aim to delineate the
fundamental neurobiology of these neurons. These studies are concerned with
developmental processes, cell-specific gene expression and regulation, molecular 
pharmacology, and genetic association of dopamine-related genes and
mDA-associated disorders. Several transcription factors implicated in the
post-mitotic mDA development, including Nurr1, Lmx1b, Pitx3, and En1/En2 have
contributed to the understanding of how mDA neurons are generated in vivo.
Furthermore, these studies provide insights into new strategies for future
therapies of Parkinson's Disease (PD) using stem cells for engineering DA neurons
in vitro. Here, we will discuss the role of Pitx3 in molecular mechanisms
involved in the regional specification, neuronal specification and
differentiation of mDA neurons.

PMID: 17017509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Oct 10;103(41):15242-7. Epub 2006 Oct 2.

Slow progressive degeneration of nigral dopaminergic neurons in postnatal
Engrailed mutant mice.

Sgadò P(1), Albéri L, Gherbassi D, Galasso SL, Ramakers GM, Alavian KN, Smidt MP,
Dyck RH, Simon HH.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Center for Neuroscience, Department of Neuroanatomy,
Ruprecht-Karls Universität Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The homeobox transcription factors Engrailed-1 and Engrailed-2 are required for
the survival of mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons in a cell-autonomous and
gene-dose-dependent manner. Because of this requirement, the cells die by
apoptosis when all four alleles of the Engrailed genes are genetically ablated
(En1-/-;En2-/-). In the present study, we show that viable and fertile mice,
heterozygous null for Engrailed-1 and homozygous null for Engrailed-2
(En1+/-;En2-/-), have an adult phenotype that resembles key pathological features
of Parkinson's disease. Specifically, postnatal mutant mice exhibit a progressive
degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra during the first 3
mo of their lives, leading to diminished storage and release of dopamine in the
caudate putamen, motor deficits similar to akinesia and bradykinesia, and a lower
body weight. This genetic model may provide access to the molecular etiology for 
Parkinson's disease and could assist in the development of novel treatments for
this neurodegenerative disorder.

PMCID: PMC1622807
PMID: 17015829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Br Dent J. 2006 Sep 23;201(6):349-50.

Metastatic breast carcinoma discovered in a dentigerous cyst - a case report.

Chatterjee M(1), Balaraman K, McDermott P.

Author information: 
(1)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Barnet and Chase Farm NHS Trust, The Ridgeway,
Enfield, Middlesex EN2 8JL, UK. mahua77@tiscali.co.uk

This paper reports a patient with a history of breast cancer, who presented with 
altered sensation to the right lower lip and chin. An orthopantomogram showed a
probable dentigerous cyst associated with an unerupted lower wisdom tooth, which 
was closely related to the inferior dental canal. The tooth and cyst were
enucleated under general anaesthesia. The subsequent histopathology report
concluded that the cyst contained metastatic adenocarcinoma from a primary breast
tumour.

PMID: 16990884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Brain Res. 2006 Oct 20;1116(1):166-76. Epub 2006 Aug 28.

En2 knockout mice display neurobehavioral and neurochemical alterations relevant 
to autism spectrum disorder.

Cheh MA(1), Millonig JH, Roselli LM, Ming X, Jacobsen E, Kamdar S, Wagner GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a prevalent and inheritable neurodevelopmental 
disorder. Recent human genetic studies are consistent with the homeobox
transcription factor, ENGRAILED 2 (EN2), being an ASD susceptibility gene. En2
knockout mice (En2(-/-)) display subtle cerebellar neuropathological changes
similar to what has been observed in the ASD brain. To investigate whether
En2(-/-) mice displayed abnormal behavior relevant to ASD, they were monitored in
tasks designed to assess social maturation as well as learning and memory.
Deficits in social behavior were detected in En2(-/-) mice across maturation that
included decreased play, reduced social sniffing and allogrooming, and less
aggressive behavior. Deficits in two spatial learning and memory tasks were also 
observed. Because locomotor activity was a component of many of the behavioral
tasks, this was measured at various stages of development. Locomotor activity was
not compromised in the knockout. However, a more thorough analysis of motor
behavior in En2(-/-) mice revealed deficits in specific motor tasks. To determine
whether neurochemical changes were associated with these behavioral phenotypes,
monoamine levels in specific brain regions were assessed. A cerebellar-specific
increase in serotonin and its metabolite was observed. Interestingly, several
reports have suggested that the serotonin pathway is affected in ASD. We conclude
that En2(-/-) mice display behavioral and neurochemical changes, in addition to
genetic and neuropathological changes, relevant to ASD. Therefore, these mice may
be useful as an animal model of autism.

PMID: 16935268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Curr Mol Med. 2006 Jun;6(4):429-35.

Alterations of biological features of the cerebellum in sudden perinatal and
infant death.

Lavezzi AM(1), Ottaviani G, Mauri M, Matturri L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Lino Rossi Research Center for the study and
prevention of unexpected perinatal death and SIDS, University of Milan, Italy.
anna.lavezzi@unimi.it

This article intends to show how the cerebellum, a structure ordinarily not
considered in mediating breathing or cardiovascular control, may play a critical 
role in compensatory responses particularly to hypoxic insults occurring pre
and/or postnatally and thus may be involved in the sudden unexplained perinatal
and infant death. Besides the ontogenesis of the cerebellar cortex in man, we
reported alterations of biopathological features (neuronal immaturity, altered
apoptotic programs, negative expression of somatostatin and EN2 gene, intense
c-fos expression positivity, astrogliosis) in the cortex and in the dentate
nucleus of the 63% of sudden deaths, and only in 10% of the controls. The
correlation of these results with the mother's smoking habit was highly
significant. Therefore, we support the hypothesis, already expressed in previous 
studies on brainstem, of a close relation between maternal cigarette smoking and 
a wide range of morpho-physiological defects of the brain, leading to unexplained
sudden death in stillbirths, newborns, and Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS)
victims.

PMID: 16900666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Brain Res. 2007 Apr 6;1140:170-8. Epub 2006 Aug 1.

A genetic study of the suppressors of the Engrailed-1 cerebellar phenotype.

Murcia CL(1), Gulden FO, Cherosky NA, Herrup K.

Author information: 
(1)Alzheimer Research Laboratory, Department of Neuroscience, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

The mouse Engrailed genes, En1 and En2, play an important role in the development
of the cerebellum from its inception at the mid/hindbrain boundary in early
embryonic development through cell type specification events and beyond. In the
absence of En1, the cerebellum and caudal midbrain fail to develop normally--a
phenotype that we have previously reported to be strain dependent. On the 129/S1 
strain background, En1 null alleles lead to mid/hindbrain failure, whereas on the
C57BL/6 background, En1 deficiency is compatible with near normal cerebellar
development. We have pursued this dramatic effect of genetic background by
performing a genetic modifier screen through F1 backcross and F1 intercross
matings. The backcross has yielded two strong candidate intervals with suggestive
linkage to a third region. Moreover, variations in rescue frequency among
subgroups within the backcross indicate gender and parent of origin influences on
rescue penetrance. The intercross data reveal locus heterogeneity of the En1
modifiers, with more than one compliment of C57BL/6 and 129/S1 alleles capable of
mediating the rescue phenotype. These findings highlight the complexity and
plasticity of gene networks involved in brain development.

PMID: 16884697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Development. 2006 Aug;133(15):2845-54. Epub 2006 Jun 21.

Metastasis-associated kinase modulates Wnt signaling to regulate brain patterning
and morphogenesis.

Kibardin A(1), Ossipova O, Sokol SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Wnt signaling is a major pathway regulating cell fate determination, cell
proliferation and cell movements in vertebrate embryos. Distinct branches of this
pathway activate beta-catenin/TCF target genes and modulate morphogenetic
movements in embryonic tissues by reorganizing the cytoskeleton. The selection of
different molecular targets in the pathway is driven by multiple phosphorylation 
events. Here, we report that metastasis-associated kinase (MAK) is a novel
regulator of Wnt signaling during morphogenetic movements, and eye and brain
development in Xenopus embryos. Injected MAK RNA suppressed Wnt transcriptional
reporters and activated Jun N-terminal kinase. Furthermore, MAK was recruited to 
the cell membrane by Frizzled 3, formed a complex with Dishevelled and
phosphorylated Dsh in vitro. The regional brain markers Otx2, En2 and Gbx2 were
affected in embryos with modulated MAK activity in a manner consistent with a
role for MAK in midbrain-hindbrain boundary formation. Confirming the inhibitory 
role for this kinase in Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, the midbrain patterning
defects in embryos depleted of MAK were rescued by the simultaneous depletion of 
beta-catenin. These findings indicate that MAK may function in different
developmental processes as a switch between the canonical and non-canonical
branches of Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC4428341
PMID: 16790480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Prosthet Dent. 2006 Jun;95(6):437-43.

Changes in optical properties of enamel porcelain after repeated external
staining.

Cho MS(1), Lee YK, Lim BS, Lim YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Biomaterial Science, Dental Research Institute, College
of Dentistry, Seoul National University, Korea.

STATEMENT OF PROBLEM: After staining a porcelain restoration, increasing the
lightness (value) and decreasing the chroma of a restoration is not practically
easy to accomplish.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to determine the color change of enamel
porcelain after repeated external staining procedures over the enamel porcelain
surface. Changes in translucency and differences in surface roughness were also
measured.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Enamel porcelain (VITA OMEGA 900 Metal Ceramics) disks (1 x
12 mm) of 1 shade (EN2) were prepared, and 1 of 4 types of external stains (VITA 
Akzent stains) was applied over the specimens and fired. Firing was repeated 3
times after application of the same stains. Color of the specimens before and
after stainings was measured with a reflection spectrophotometer. Two-factor
repeated-measures analysis of variance with the fixed factors of the stain type
and number of staining cycles for the changes in CIE L(*), CIE a(*), CIE b(*),
color (DeltaE(*)(ab)), and chroma (DeltaC(*)(ab)) after repeated staining was
performed (alpha=.05). Chroma change was calculated as DeltaC(*)(a)=(Deltaa *(2) 
+Deltab *(2))(1/2). Changes in translucency (translucency parameter and masking
effect) and difference in surface roughness (Ra) after the third staining cycle
were also determined.
RESULTS: Color change after the first staining cycle was perceptible
(DeltaE(*)(ab) >2) for 2 of 4 types of stains and was perceptible for all 4 types
of stains investigated after the third staining cycle (DeltaE(*)(ab) =
2.36-11.04). Lightness generally increased, and chroma also increased after
staining but varied by the type of stains and number of staining cycles.
Translucency generally decreased after repeated staining. Surface roughness
varied by the type of stain (P < .001).
CONCLUSION: Color difference and lightness increased significantly after repeated
staining cycles, but chroma change was small after repeated staining cycles.
Therefore, repeated staining may be a method to increase the lightness of enamel 
porcelain.

PMID: 16765156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Gene. 2006 Jun 7;374:10-8. Epub 2006 May 2.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the chicken Lmbr1 gene are associated with
chicken polydactyly.

Huang YQ(1), Deng XM, Du ZQ, Qiu X, Du X, Chen W, Morisson M, Leroux S, Ponce de 
Léon FA, Da Y, Li N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing,
1000094 China.

Polydactyly is a common malformation of vertebrate limbs. Preaxial polydactyly
(PPD) has been mapped in human, mouse and chicken to the syntenic region of human
7q36. Lmbr1 was thought as the critical candidate gene for human and mouse PPD.
To understand the molecular mechanism underlying chicken polydactyly, we have
cloned the open reading frame (ORF) of chicken Lmbr1, which contains 1467
nucleotides. Within this ORF, we found one short and one long splice forms. The
short splice form has a complete deletion of exon 4. Six cSNPs were found in the 
chicken ORF, and two of these cSNPs, G797A and G1255A, lead to amino acid
substitutions. However, G797A substitution had no significant association with
polydactyly and the G1255A substitution had very low frequency in the population.
The T1254C polymorphism in exon 13 was found to be strongly associated with
polydactyly. Radiation hybrid mapping of a DNA fragment containing intron 13 of
the chicken Lmbr1 assigned the gene to chromosome 2 between MCW071 (a marker
within the EN2 gene) and ADL0270, a syntenic region to human 7q36.

PMID: 16650944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Eur J Oncol Nurs. 2006 Sep;10(4):283-93. Epub 2006 Apr 4.

Involving users in service planning: a focus group approach.

Kelly L(1), Caldwell K, Henshaw L.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Unit, Barnet and Chase Farm NHS Trust, Chase Farm Site, The Ridgeway,
Enfield, Middx EN2 8JL, UK. lorraine.kelly@bcf.nhs.uk

This paper outlines the way in which a focus group approach was used to involve
service users in the possible reconfiguration of follow-up services for breast
cancer patients at a North London hospital. The focus group was used to identify 
the priority issues for users and the development of an objective questionnaire, 
to survey all current service users. Within the National Health Service (NHS) the
concept of user involvement has been embodied in contemporary health policy, and 
has become an important constituent of current policy direction. This study was
the first stage of a larger stakeholder project that aimed to involve service
users and clinicians in developing a new model of breast cancer follow-up
service. From the focus group emerged five key themes around breast cancer follow
up. They were: The need for reassurance after the diagnosis of cancer. Continuity
of care. Privacy and dignity and other elements of the examination technique.
Information and the detection of new symptoms. The opportunity to discuss
feelings and worries. In this paper, the nature of breast cancer follow-up
services is outlined, and the difficulties associated with such services are
discussed. The background to user involvement within the United Kingdom is
explored, and the strategies that have previously been used are considered. The
practical issues involved in using the focus group approach are examined, and the
experience of using such an approach is outlined in this study. The involvement
of service users as a key stakeholder in the process of planning change, through 
a participatory research strategy, ensured that their voices were heard alongside
those of both hospital and primary care staff.

PMID: 16600685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Eur J Hum Genet. 2006 Jun;14(6):739-43.

Deletions of 2q14 that include the homeobox engrailed 1 (EN1) transcription
factor are compatible with a normal phenotype.

Barber JC(1), Maloney VK, Bewes B, Wakeling E.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury Health Care NHS Trust,
Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, UK. john.barber@salisbury.nhs.uk

A novel transmitted 2-3 Mb deletion of 2q14.1-q14.2 was found in an affected boy 
from a consanguineous family with a possible diagnosis of PEHO syndrome (OMIM
260565). BAC FISH showed that the deletion included a minimum of 20 genes
including the homeobox engrailed 1 gene (EN1). However, the same deletion was
also found in his phenotypically normal father and brother (family 1). The
phenotype of the proband may, therefore, have been coincidental to the deletion, 
a result of a recessive condition within or outside the deleted segment or
possibly due to variable dosage compensation of EN1 by the paralogous EN2 gene at
7q36. BAC FISH also showed that this deletion overlapped with a previously
reported transmitted deletion of 2q13-q14.1 that had no phenotypic consequences
(family 2). The deleted regions contained a total of 32 genes and comprise the
final 5.25 Mb of the ancestral chromosome 2B from which chromosome 2 was formed
in man. These families provide further evidence that heterozygous deletions of
regions of low gene density are compatible with a normal phenotype.

PMID: 16552425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Anim Breed Genet. 2006 Apr;123(2):136-40.

Cytogenetic mapping of 11 functional genes to chicken chromosomes by fluorescence
in situ hybridization.

Yuan J(1), Zhao Y, Zhang L, Li N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, State Key Laboratory for
Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Science, China Agricultural University, 
Beijing.

With chicken bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) DNA as probes, 11 non-assigned
functional genes were localized to chicken chromosomes 1 or 2 by fluorescence in 
situ hybridization (FISH). The 11 genes and their chromosomal positions are as
follows: ALVEB5, 1p26-24; ACO2, 1p16-14; HSP108, 1p14-13; CD4, 1q11; HSD3B; 1q11;
SOD1, 1q14-21; LAMP1, 1q24-31; P2Y5, 1q35-36; EN2, 2p31-24; NPY, 2p14-13 and CA2,
2q31-32. Metaphase chromosome spreads used for hybridization were prepared from
embryonic chicken fibroblast cultures. The gene position was identified according
to the international standardized G-banded karyotype of chicken by measuring the 
relative fractional length from the telomere of the p-arm to the hybridization
signal (FLpter). The 11 genes mapped newly will enrich the cytogenetic map and
serve as additional anchor markers for integrating the cytogenetic map with the
genetic map of chicken.

PMID: 16533368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Med Hypotheses. 2006;66(4):796-800. Epub 2005 Dec 15.

Anxiety and depression may have an evolutionary role as negative reinforcers,
encouraging socialisation.

Dickinson MJ(1), Eva FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cumbria Villa, Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield, Middlesex EN2 8JL, 
United Kingdom. mark.dickinson@enfield.nhs.uk

Anxiety and depression are both very common mental states and both are quite
unpleasant. Their high prevalence and preservation make it likely they have
considerable evolutionary significance and in some way improve the chances of an 
individual's survival. The following article proposes that much of the anxiety
and depression we experience is primarily acting as a negative reinforcer,
encouraging socialisation. These feelings are experienced most intensely when we 
are isolated and have evolved to discourage this highly maladaptive behaviour,
there being major advantages for being with other people. Particular problems are
considered, including aspects of autism and alcohol and tranquilliser abuse. How 
the presence of other people may alter the expression of anxiety and depression
is considered, in addition to implications for psychiatry.

PMID: 16359828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Nov;77(5):851-68. Epub 2005 Oct 5.

Support for the homeobox transcription factor gene ENGRAILED 2 as an autism
spectrum disorder susceptibility locus.

Benayed R(1), Gharani N, Rossman I, Mancuso V, Lazar G, Kamdar S, Bruse SE,
Tischfield S, Smith BJ, Zimmerman RA, Dicicco-Bloom E, Brzustowicz LM, Millonig
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Piscataway, NJ, 08854-5638,
USA.

Our previous research involving 167 nuclear families from the Autism Genetic
Resource Exchange (AGRE) demonstrated that two intronic SNPs, rs1861972 and
rs1861973, in the homeodomain transcription factor gene ENGRAILED 2 (EN2) are
significantly associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). In this study,
significant replication of association for rs1861972 and rs1861973 is reported
for two additional data sets: an independent set of 222 AGRE families
(rs1861972-rs1861973 haplotype, P=.0016) and a separate sample of 129 National
Institutes of Mental Health families (rs1861972-rs1861973 haplotype, P=.0431).
Association analysis of the haplotype in the combined sample of both AGRE data
sets (389 families) produced a P value of .0000033, whereas combining all three
data sets (518 families) produced a P value of .00000035. Population-attributable
risk calculations for the associated haplotype, performed using the entire sample
of 518 families, determined that the risk allele contributes to as many as 40% of
ASD cases in the general population. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) mapping with the
use of polymorphisms distributed throughout the gene has shown that only intronic
SNPs are in strong LD with rs1861972 and rs1861973. Resequencing and association 
analysis of all intronic SNPs have identified alleles associated with ASD, which 
makes them candidates for future functional analysis. Finally, to begin defining 
the function of EN2 during development, mouse En2 was ectopically expressed in
cortical precursors. Fewer En2-transfected cells than controls displayed a
differentiated phenotype. Together, these data provide further genetic evidence
that EN2 might act as an ASD susceptibility locus, and they suggest that a risk
allele that perturbs the spatial/temporal expression of EN2 could significantly
alter normal brain development.

PMCID: PMC1271392
PMID: 16252243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 2005 Aug;19(5):647-61. Epub 2005 Sep 19.

Ambulatory gynaecology: what can we do?

Mikos T(1), Downes E.

Author information: 
(1)Barnet and Chase Farm Hospitals NHS Trust, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Chase Farm Hospital, Enfield EN2 SD, Middlesex, UK.

The aim of ambulatory gynaecology is to admit, treat and discharge the patient on
the same day in an outpatient setting. Traditional inpatient operations are being
rapidly replaced by office, outpatient or day surgery procedures. In this review,
a brief assessment of current ambulatory gynaecological practice is attempted,
followed by a discussion of audit and quality assessment methods. Epidemiological
studies, clinical trials, socio-economic studies and meta-analyses offer research
opportunities in the ambulatory setting. There is a need to review the training
of junior gynaecologists and nurses in this field. At present, only a few
gynaecology residency programmes offer experience in outpatient procedures and
ambulatory care. Specific issues that need to be addressed include training,
patient selection, consenting issues, decisions to cancel/transfer as inpatients,
and the management of common gynaecological problems.

PMID: 16172021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J R Soc Promot Health. 2005 Jul;125(4):176-9.

Overactive bladder.

Kavia R(1), Mumtaz F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield EN2 8JL,
England.

Overactive bladder (OAB) is defined as urgency, with or without urge
incontinence, usually with frequency and nocturia, in the absence of local
pathological or hormonal factors. It is a common complaint of men and women
alike, with estimates of 22 million sufferers. ApproximateLy 70% of men with
bladder outflow obstruction will have some symptoms of OAB. The exact
pathophysiology of OAB in bladder outflow obstruction is yet to be elucidated;
evidence to date points to changes in both the efferent and afferent innervation 
and the detrusor. Management of OAB can be is generally with pharmacological
agents such as anticholinergics or operative measures such as the 'Clam'
cystoplasty. More recent treatment modalities include intravesicaL oxybutynin,
intradetrusor botulinum toxin and neuromodulation. More specific treatment
options for OAB in bladder outflow obstruction include relief of the obstruction 
with surgical (e.g. transurethraL resection of prostate) or pharmaceutical (e.g. 
a blockers) methods.

PMID: 16094929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Hosp Med. 2005 Jul;66(7):426-7.

Pitfalls in recurrent varicose vein surgery.

Cheng KS(1), Khan SM, How P, Hamilton HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield, Middlesex, 
EN2 8JL.

PMID: 16025805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Oncogene. 2005 Oct 20;24(46):6890-901.

EN2 is a candidate oncogene in human breast cancer.

Martin NL(1), Saba-El-Leil MK, Sadekova S, Meloche S, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Hematopoietic Stem Cells, Institut de
Recherche en Immunologie et Cancérologie, CP 6128, succursale Centre-Ville,
Montréal, Québec, Canada H3C 3J7.

Only a few critical oncogenes have been identified in the more commonly occurring
cases of sporadic breast cancer. We provide evidence that EN2 is ectopically
expressed in a subset of human breast cancer and may have a causal role in
mammary tumorigenesis. Nontumorigenic mammary cell lines engineered to
ectopically express En-2 have a marked reduction in their cycling time, lose cell
contact inhibition, become sensitive to 17-AAG treatment, fail to differentiate
when exposed to lactogenic hormones and induce mammary tumors when transplanted
into cleared mammary glands of syngeneic hosts. RNA interference studies suggest 
that EN2 expression is required for the maintenance of the transformed phenotype 
of a human breast tumor cell line.

PMID: 16007149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2005 Aug;23(5):465-74.

Postnatal cerebellar defects in mice deficient in methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase.

Chen Z(1), Schwahn BC, Wu Q, He X, Rozen R.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Human Genetics, Pediatrics and Biology, McGill University and
Montreal Children's Hospital Research Institute, 4060 Ste. Catherine West, Room
200, Montreal, Que., Canada H3Z 2Z3.

Patients with severe deficiency of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR)
suffer from a wide variety of neurological problems, which can begin in the
neonatal period. MTHFR is a critical enzyme in folate metabolism; the product of 
the MTHFR reaction, 5-methyltetrahydrofolate, is required for homocysteine
remethylation to methionine and synthesis of S-adenosylmethionine (SAM). To
understand the mechanisms by which MTHFR deficiency leads to significant
neuropathology, we examined early postnatal brain development in mice with a
homozygous knockout of the Mthfr gene. These mice displayed a dramatically
reduced size of the cerebellum and cerebral cortex, with enlarged lateral
ventricles. Mthfr deficiency affected granule cell maturation, but not
neurogenesis. Depletion of external granule cells and disorganization of Purkinje
cells were mainly confined to the anterior lobules of mutant cerebella. Decreased
cellular proliferation and increased cell death contributed to the granule cell
loss. Reduced expression of Engrailed-2 (En2), Reelin (Reln) and inositol
1,4,5-triphosphate receptor type 1 (Itpr1) genes was observed in the cerebellum. 
Supplementation of Mthfr(+/-) dams with an alternate methyl donor, betaine,
reduced cerebellar abnormalities in the Mthfr(-/-) pups. Our findings suggest
that MTHFR plays a role in cerebellar patterning, possibly through effects on
proliferation or apoptosis.

PMID: 15979267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Jul 15;136(2):198-200.

Cerebellar vermis aplasia: patient report and exclusion of the candidate genes
EN2 and ZIC1.

Titomanlio L(1), Pierri NB, Romano A, Imperati F, Borrelli M, Barletta V, Diano
AA, Castaldo I, Santoro L, Del Giudice E.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Unit, Hôpital Robert Debré, University Paris VII, France.

Cerebellar vermis aplasia (ACV, OMIM 117360) is a rare malformation of the
cerebellum, with only few familial patients reported so far. Main clinical
features of this rare disorder include floppiness and delayed milestones in early
infancy, preceding mild cerebellar ataxia, non-progressive clinical course,
normal or slightly delayed intelligence, and occasional nystagmus. Neuroimaging
reveals selective involvement of the cerebellum, which is prominent in the
vermis. Because of the large preponderance of female patients, X-linked dominant 
transmission was suggested by [Fenichel and Phillips (1989); Arch Neurol
46:582-583], and subsequent reports only concern female patients. Only one family
with male-to-male transmission presenting with a generalized atrophy of the
cerebellum rather than a more localized vermis aplasia has been reported so far. 
We report on a family in which father and son are affected by a mild form of ACV,
thus confirming an autosomal mode of inheritance of the disease. Our patients
showed a progressive improvement of their motor abilities, neurological
examination of the father being actually normal except for a mild mental
retardation. We also evaluated the potential role of two candidate genes, EN2 and
ZIC1, responsible for abnormal cerebellar development in murine knock-out models.
However, molecular analysis failed to reveal any causative mutation in the coding
sequence of the two genes in our patients. The understanding of the genetic basis
of autosomal dominant ACV would allow a better classification of isolate
cerebellar malformations and might permit to understand cell differentiation and 
migration in the developing central nervous system.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15940696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Neurobiol Dis. 2005 Nov;20(2):601-7. Epub 2005 May 31.

Adverse effects of prenatal tobacco smoke exposure on biological parameters of
the developing brainstem.

Lavezzi AM(1), Ottaviani G, Matturri L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Lino Rossi Research Center for the Study and
Prevention of Unexpected Perinatal Death and Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS),
University of Milan, Via della Commenda, 19, 20122 Milan, Italy.
anna.lavezzi@unimi.it

We aimed to study the consequences of chronic exposure to tobacco smoke in utero 
on the morphological and functional maturation of the brainstem by comparing
stillbirths of smoker mothers versus nonsmoker mothers. A total of 42
stillbirths, aged 25-40 gestational weeks, underwent autopsy according to our
guidelines (). The brainstem was studied on serial sections and by
immunohistochemistry to assay the expression of the EN2 gene, somatostatin (SS)
and the tyrosine hydroxylase enzyme (TH). We observed a significant correlation
between maternal smoking and sudden intrauterine unexplained death (SIUD),
hypoplasia of the ArcN, no immunostaining of the EN2 in the arcuate nucleus
(ArcN), and of TH in the locus coeruleus (LC) (P < 0.05). An increased incidence 
of maternal smoking was also observed in fetuses with SS negativity in the
hypoglossus nucleus (HypoglN). Exposure in utero to maternal smoking may strongly
interfere with brain biological parameters, giving rise not only to structural
developmental abnormalities of the arcuate nucleus, but also to a decrease of
noradrenergic activity in the LC, of EN2 gene expression in the ArcN and of SS in
the HypoglN.

PMID: 15925516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Development. 2005 Jun;132(11):2633-43. Epub 2005 May 4.

Identification of Pax2-regulated genes by expression profiling of the
mid-hindbrain organizer region.

Bouchard M(1), Grote D, Craven SE, Sun Q, Steinlein P, Busslinger M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, Dr Bohr-Gasse 7, 
1030 Vienna, Austria. maxime.bouchard@mcgill.ca

The paired domain transcription factor Pax2 is required for the formation of the 
isthmic organizer (IsO) at the midbrain-hindbrain boundary, where it initiates
expression of the IsO signal Fgf8. To gain further insight into the role of Pax2 
in mid-hindbrain patterning, we searched for novel Pax2-regulated genes by cDNA
microarray analysis of FACS-sorted GFP+ mid-hindbrain cells from wild-type and
Pax2-/- embryos carrying a Pax2(GFP) BAC transgene. Here, we report the
identification of five genes that depend on Pax2 function for their expression in
the mid-hindbrain boundary region. These genes code for the transcription factors
En2 and Brn1 (Pou3f3), the intracellular signaling modifiers Sef and Tapp1, and
the non-coding RNA Ncrms. The Brn1 gene was further identified as a direct target
of Pax2, as two functional Pax2-binding sites in the promoter and in an upstream 
regulatory element of Brn1 were essential for lacZ transgene expression at the
mid-hindbrain boundary. Moreover, ectopic expression of a dominant-negative Brn1 
protein in chick embryos implicated Brn1 in Fgf8 gene regulation. Together, these
data defined novel functions of Pax2 in the establishment of distinct
transcriptional programs and in the control of intracellular signaling during
mid-hindbrain development.

PMID: 15872005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2005 Apr-May;23(2-3):221-34.

Three autism candidate genes: a synthesis of human genetic analysis with other
disciplines.

Bartlett CW(1), Gharani N, Millonig JH, Brzustowicz LM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Statistical Genetics Research, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA,
USA.

Autism is a particularly complex disorder when considered from virtually any
methodological framework, including the perspective of human genetics. We first
present a review of the genetic analysis principles relevant for discussing
autism genetics research. From this body of work we highlight results from three 
candidate genes, REELIN (RELN), SEROTONIN TRANSPORTER (5HTT), and ENGRAILED 2
(EN2) and discuss the relevant neuroscience, molecular genetics, and statistical 
results that suggest involvement of these genes in autism susceptibility. As will
be shown, the statistical results from genetic analysis, when considered alone,
are in apparent conflict across research groups. We use these three candidate
genes to illustrate different problems in synthesizing results from
non-overlapping research groups examining the same problem. However, when basic
genetic principles and results from other scientific disciplines are incorporated
into a unified theoretical framework, at least some of the difficulties with
interpreting results can be understood and potentially overcome as more data
becomes available to the field of autism research. Integrating results from
several scientific frameworks provides new hypotheses and alternative data
collection strategies for future work.

PMID: 15749247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids. 2004;23(12):1865-74.

Phosphorylation of isocarbostyril- and difluorophenyl-nucleoside thymidine mimics
by the human deoxynucleoside kinases.

Al-Madhoun AS(1), Eriksson S, Wang ZX, Naimi E, Knaus EE, Wiebe LI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Vascular Biology Laboratory, University of Ottawa
Heart Institute, Ottawa, Canada.

The thymidine mimics isocarbostyril nucleosides and difluorophenyl nucleosides
were tested as deoxynucleoside kinase substrates using recombinant human
cytosolic thymidine kinase (TK1) and deoxycytidine kinase (dCK), and
mitochondrial thymidine kinase (TK2) and deoxyguanosine kinase (dGK). The
isocarbostyril nucleoside compound
1-(2-deoxy-beta-D-ribofuranosyl)-isocarbostyril (EN1) was a poor substrate with
all the enzymes. The phosphorylation rates of EN1 with TK1 and TK2 were <1%
relative to Thd, where as the phosphorylation rates for EN1 were 1.4% and 1.1%
with dCK and dGK relative to dCyd and dGuo, respectively. The analogue
1-(2-deoxy-beta-D-ribofuranosyl)-7-iodoisocarbostyril (EN2) showed poor
relative-phosphorylation efficiencies (kcat/Km) with both TK1 and dGK, but not
with TK2. The kcat/Km value for EN2 with TK2 was 12.6% relative to that for Thd. 
Of the difluorophenyl nucleosides,
5-(1'-(2'-deoxy-beta-D-ribofuranosyl))-2,4-difluorotoluene (JW1) and
1-(1'-(2'-deoxy-beta-D-ribofuranosyl))-2,4-difluoro-5-iodobenzene (JW2) were
substrates for TK1 with phosphorylation efficiencies of about 5% relative to that
for Thd. Both analogues were considerably more efficient substrates for TK2, with
kcat/Km values of 45% relative to that for Thd.
2,5-Difluoro-4-[1-(2-deoxy-beta-L-ribofuranosyl)]-aniline (JW5), a L-nucleoside
mimic, was phosphorylated up to 15% as efficiently as deoxycytidine by dCK. These
data provide a possible explanation for the previously reported lack of
cytotoxicity of the isocarbostyril- and difluorophenyl nucleosides, but potential
mitochondrial effects of EN2, JW1 and JW2 should be further investigated.

PMID: 15628745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Feb;42(2):170-8.

Activation of HLXB9 by juxtaposition with MYB via formation of t(6;7)(q23;q36) in
an AML-M4 cell line (GDM-1).

Nagel S(1), Kaufmann M, Scherr M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Department of
Human and Animal Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.

Mutation or dysregulation of related homeobox genes occurs in leukemia. Using
RT-PCR, we screened members of the EHG family of homeobox genes, comprising EN1
(at 2q14), GBX2 (at 2q36), and EN2, GBX1, and HLXB9 (at 7q36), for dysregulation 
in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines indicated by chromosomal breakpoints
at these sites. Only one EHG-family gene was expressed, HLXB9, in cell line GDM-1
(AML-M4). Karyotypic analysis of GDM-1 revealed a unique t(6;7)(q23;q35), also
present in the patient. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis showed
chromosomal breakpoints close to the region upstream of HLXB9, at 7q36, a region 
rearranged in certain AML patients, and at 6q23 upstream of MYB, a gene activated
in leukemia. Detailed expression analysis suggested ectopic activation of HLXB9
occurred via juxtaposition with regions upstream of MYB, which was highly
expressed in GDM-1. Our data identified a cell line model for a novel leukemic
translocation involving MYB with HLXB9, further implicating HLXB9 in
leukemogenesis.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15540222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2004 Nov;70(11):6407-13.

Effect of microbial inoculants on the indigenous actinobacterial endophyte
population in the roots of wheat as determined by terminal restriction fragment
length polymorphism.

Conn VM(1), Franco CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, School of Medicine, Flinders University, 
Bedford Park, South Australia, Australia.

The effect of single actinobacterial endophyte seed inoculants and a mixed
microbial soil inoculant on the indigenous endophytic actinobacterial population 
in wheat roots was investigated by using the molecular technique terminal
restriction fragment length polymorphism (T-RFLP). Wheat was cultivated either
from seeds coated with the spores of single pure actinobacterial endophytes of
Microbispora sp. strain EN2, Streptomyces sp. strain EN27, and Nocardioides albus
EN46 or from untreated seeds sown in soil with and without a commercial mixed
microbial soil inoculant. The endophytic actinobacterial population within the
roots of 6-week-old wheat plants was assessed by T-RFLP. Colonization of the
wheat roots by the inoculated actinobacterial endophytes was detected by T-RFLP, 
as were 28 to 42 indigenous actinobacterial genera present in the inoculated and 
uninoculated plants. The presence of the commercial mixed inoculant in the soil
reduced the endophytic actinobacterial diversity from 40 genera to 21 genera and 
reduced the detectable root colonization by approximately half. The results
indicate that the addition of a nonadapted microbial inoculum to the soil
disrupted the natural actinobacterial endophyte population, reducing diversity
and colonization levels. This was in contrast to the addition of a single
actinobacterial endophyte to the wheat plant, where the increase in colonization 
level could be confirmed even though the indigenous endophyte population was not 
adversely affected.

PMCID: PMC525157
PMID: 15528499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J R Soc Promot Health. 2004 Sep;124(5):228-9.

Cancers of the bladder.

Sengupta N(1), Siddiqui E, Mumtaz FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield EN2 8JL,
England.

Bladder cancer is the fifth most common malignancy in Europe and the fourth most 
common malignancy in the United States. It affects one in 4000 people and
accounts for 5% of all diagnosed cancers. The peak incidence is in the fifth and 
seventh decade. There is a strong association between smoking and bladder cancer.
Smokers have a fourfold higher incidence of developing bladder cancer than the
general population. The disease has a spectrum of clinical severity varying from 
superficial bladder cancer to muscle invasive or metastatic disease which carries
a poor prognosis. Currently the superficial form of the disease is managed by
endoscopic resection of the tumour, often followed by the instillation into the
bladder of cytotoxic agents. Due to the tendency of bladder cancer to recur
repeated cystoscopies and resections are often required. Because of this, one of 
the main thrusts of research is to find a way of preventing the progression from 
superficial disease to muscle invasive and metastatic bladder cancer.

PMID: 15493783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cell Tissue Res. 2004 Oct;318(1):53-61. Epub 2004 Sep 1.

Midbrain dopaminergic neurons: control of their cell fate by the engrailed
transcription factors.

Simon HH(1), Thuret S, Alberi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Interdisciplinary Center of Neuroscience,
University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 307, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
horst.simon@urz.uni-heidelberg.de

As for any other cell population, the development, cell fate, and properties of
mesencephalic dopaminergic (mesDA) neurons are ultimately controlled at the
transcriptional level. The genes for two transcription factors Engrailed-1 ( En1)
and Engrailed-2 ( En2) play an essential role in the development and maintenance 
of these cells. They belong to a family of genes that have been investigated in
Drosophila for more than half a century. The products of these genes are all
characterized by homeotic tissue transformation and a highly conserved protein
sequence, the homeobox. En1 and En2 act upon at least two steps of the
differentiation of mesDA neurons. They take part in the regionalization event,
which gives rise to the neuroepithelium that provides the precursor cells in the 
ventral midbrain with the fibroblast growth factor 8 signal necessary for their
induction. Additionally, these genes are required in postmitotic mesDA neurons in
which they are expressed from embryonic day 12 continuously into adulthood. In
mutant mice homozygous null for En1 and En2, the neurons are generated in the
ventral midbrain, become postmitotic, and begin to express their neurotransmitter
phenotype. However, thereafter, they rapidly die by apoptosis. Cell mixing
experiments in vitro and in vivo have demonstrated that the engrailed requirement
for the survival of mesDA neurons is cell-autonomous. The inactivation of
engrailed by RNA interference induces apoptosis in less than 24 h. These data
suggest that the engrailed genes control an essential mechanism for the survival 
of mesDA neurons.

PMID: 15340832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Lancet. 2004 Jul 17-23;364(9430):302.

The double duct sign.

Dearden JC(1), Ayaru L, Wong V, van Someren N.

Author information: 
(1)Chase Farm Hospital, Middlesex, EN2 8JL, UK. janet.dearden@doctors.org.uk

PMID: 15262111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Dev Growth Differ. 2004 Jun;46(3):219-27.

Possible role of Hes5 for the rostrocaudal polarity formation of the tectum.

Kimura J(1), Katahira T, Araki I, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Vertebrate Body Plan, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN
Kobe, 2-2-3 Minatojima, Minami-machi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

The alar plate of the mesencephalon differentiates into the optic tectum. Retinal
fibers project to the tectum topographically in a retinotopic manner. Engrailed
(En) is responsible for the tectum polarity formation and regionalization. Former
study indicated the presence of the molecule whose expression is repressed by En 
and that represses the isthmus-related gene expression. To isolate such
molecules, we constructed a subtracted library between cDNA population of the
normal rostral mesencephalon and of the rostral mesencephalon that misexpresses
En2. From the library, we isolated cHes5, a chicken homolog of Drosophila
hairy/Enhancer of split. cHes5 begins to be expressed in the rostral part of the 
E2 mesencephalon, and spreads to caudal mesencephalon by E3. To our expectation, 
cHes5 expression was repressed by En2. Furthermore, misexpression of cHes5 in the
mesencephalon inhibited expression of ephrinA2, a marker of caudal mesencephalon.
An active repressor form of Hes5, which is a chimeric molecule of Hes5 and
repressor domain of En2, showed a similar but more severe phenotype. The results 
indicate that Hes5 is regulated by En and is responsible for rostral identity of 
mesencephalon by repressing ephrinA2.

PMID: 15206953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Psychiatry Res. 2004 Apr 30;126(2):93-8.

Cerebellum development and schizophrenia: an association study of the human
homeogene Engrailed 2.

Gourion D(1), Leroy S, Bourdel MC, Goldberger C, Poirier MF, Olié JP, Krebs MO.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM E117, SHU Sainte-Anne, 7 rue Cabanis, Paris, France.
gourion@chsa.broca.inserm.fr

Epidemiological data and family studies in schizophrenia show that genetic
factors contribute to the vulnerability to this disorder. The homeogene Engrailed
2 (EN2) is specifically involved in patterning the region that gives rise to the 
cerebellum and controls the plasticity of midbrain dopaminergic neurons. We
carried out an association study for a CA repeat polymorphism located in the 3'
region of the homeogene EN2. The subjects consisted of 165 patients with
schizophrenia and 97 controls matched for age and ethnicity from a French
Caucasian population. We found no significant association of schizophrenia with
this bi-nucleotide repeat polymorphism of the EN2 gene.

PMID: 15123388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2004 Jan;33(1):45-8.

[Effect of gastrodia elata on learning and memory impairment induced by aluminum 
in rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Niu Q(1), Niu P, He S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan 030001, China.

OBJECTIVE: In order to investigate the mechanism of the improvement of Gastrodia 
elata (G.E.) on learning and memory impairment of rats exposed to aluminum.
METHODS: 36 SD rats, adult and healthy, were divided into 6 groups at random: 1. 
normal saline, 2. Al3+ 5 mg/kg, 3. Al3+ 10 mg/kg, 4. normal saline +G.E., 5. Al3+
5 mg/kg +G.E. and 6. Al3+ 10 mg/kg +G.E. Then, they were exposed to AlCl3 by
intraperitioneal injection at a dose of 0.2 ml/d, 60 d. G.E. was administered by 
drinking water at a dose of 0.4 g/kg body weight.
RESULTS: The results of learning and memory were recorded by Step-Down Test. It
was showed that compared with the normal saline group, in the group of Al3+ 5
mg/kg, the content of brain cortex aluminum and EN1 increased significantly; the 
latency (LT) was shortened obviously(P < 0.01); the activity of AChE decreased
and the activity of MAO increased (P < 0.01). In the group of Al3+ 10 mg/kg, the 
content of brain cortex aluminum, EN1 and EN2 increased significantly(P < 0.01), 
the LT is shortened obviously (P < 0.01), the activity of AChE decreased and the 
activity of MAO increased (P < 0.01). Compared with the group of Al3+ 5 mg/kg, in
the group of Al3+ 5 mg/kg +G.E., EN1 decreased significantly (P < 0.05); the LT
is prolonged obviously(P < 0.01), the activity of AChE increased(P < 0.05) and
the activity of MAO decreased (P < 0.01). Compared with the group of Al3+ 10
mg/kg, in the group of Al3+ 10 mg/kg +G.E., both EN1 and EN2 decreased
significantly(P < 0.01); the LT is prolonged obviously(P < 0.01), the activity of
AChE increased (P < 0.01) and the activity of MAO decreased (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: It is suggested that G.E. might decrease the content of brain cortex 
aluminum of rats. However it might improve the learning and memory ability
possibly through regulating the cholinergic system and the monoaminergic system.

PMID: 15098477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2004 Aug;310(2):563-70. Epub 2004 Apr 9.

Characterization of two novel N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonists: EAA-090
(2-[8,9-dioxo-2,6-diazabicyclo [5.2.0]non-1(7)-en2-yl]ethylphosphonic acid) and
EAB-318 (R-alpha-amino-5-chloro-1-(phosphonomethyl)-1H-benzimidazole-2-propanoic 
acid hydrochloride).

Sun L(1), Chiu D, Kowal D, Simon R, Smeyne M, Zukin RS, Olney J, Baudy R, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Neuroscience, Wyeth Research, CN8000, Princeton, NJ 08543, USA.

Two novel N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) antagonists with unique chemical
structures, EAA-090 (2-[8,9-dioxo-2,
6-diazabicyclo[5.2.0]non-1(7)-en2-yl]ethylphosphonic acid) and EAB-318
(R-alpha-amino-5-chloro-1-(phosphonomethyl)-1H-benzimidazole-2-propanoic acid
hydrochloride), were compared with CGS-19755 (Selfotel) in ligand binding,
electrophysiology, and neuroprotection assays. CGS-19755, EAA-090 and EAB-318
inhibited [(3)H]3-(2-carboxypiperazin-4-yl)propyl-1-phosphonic acid binding to
NMDA receptors with IC(50) values of 55, 28, and 7.9 nM, respectively. All three 
compounds decreased the duration of spontaneous synaptic currents and inhibited
NMDA-activated currents in rat hippocampal neurons. IC(50) values for inhibition 
of current induced by 10 microM NMDA were 795, 477, and 69 nM for CGS-19755,
EAA-090, and EAB-318, respectively. The NMDA antagonists protected chick embryo
retina slices and cultured rat hippocampal and cortical neurons from glutamate-
and NMDA-induced neurotoxicity. In experiments in which different NMDA receptor
splice variants and subtypes were expressed in Xenopus oocytes, all three
antagonists preferentially blocked NMDA-elicited currents mediated by
N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (NR)1 splice variants containing the N-terminal
insertion. They also favored NR2A-versus NR2B- or NR2C-containing NMDA receptors,
with EAA-090 showing the greatest selectivity. EAA-090 was 10 times more potent
at blocking NR2A-versus NR2B- or NR2C-containing NMDA receptors. In addition to
being the most potent NMDA antagonist, EAB-318 inhibited
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and kainate
receptors. The combination of NMDA and AMPA/kainate block enabled EAB-318 to
protect neurons against ischemia induced cell death.

PMID: 15075380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Psychiatry. 2004 May;9(5):474-84.

Association of the homeobox transcription factor, ENGRAILED 2, 3, with autism
spectrum disorder.

Gharani N(1), Benayed R, Mancuso V, Brzustowicz LM, Millonig JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Psychiatry. 2004 May;9(5):427.

Mouse mutants of the homeobox transcription factor Engrailed2 (En2) and autistic 
individuals display similar cerebellar morphological abnormalities, which include
hypoplasia and a decrease in the number of Purkinje cells. Human EN2 maps to
7q36, a chromosomal region that has demonstrated suggestive linkage to autism
spectrum disorder (ASD). To investigate EN2 for evidence of association with ASD,
four single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs3735653, rs1861972, rs1861973,
rs2361689) that span the majority of the 8.0 kb gene were assessed by the
transmission/disequilibrium test. Initially, 138 triads of autistic individuals
and their parents were tested. Two intronic SNPs (rs1861972 and rs1861973)
demonstrated significant association with autism (rs1861972, P=0.0018; rs1861973,
P=0.0003; haplotype, P=0.000005). Flanking exonic SNPs (rs3735653 and rs2361689) 
did not display association. This analysis was then extended to include 167 small
nuclear ASD pedigrees and significant association was again only observed for
rs1861972 and rs1861973 under both the narrow and broad diagnostic criteria
(narrow: rs1861972 P=0.0290, rs1861973 P=0.0073, haplotype P=0.0009; broad:
rs1861972 P=0.0175, rs1861973 P=0.0107, haplotype P=0.0024). These data
demonstrate association between a cerebellar patterning gene and ASD, suggesting 
a role for EN2 as a susceptibility locus and supporting a neurodevelopmental
defect hypothesis in the etiology of autism.

PMID: 15024396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Neurobiol. 2004 Apr;59(1):48-56.

Polarity and laminar formation of the optic tectum in relation to retinal
projection.

Nakamura H(1), Sugiyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Graduate School of Life Sciences and
Institute of Development Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1,
Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. nakamura@idac.tohoku.ac.jp

The mes-metencephalic boundary (isthmus) works as an organizer for the tectum,
and the organizing molecule may be Fgf8. The region where Otx2, En1, and Pax2 are
expressed overlappingly may differentiate into the mesencephalon. The
di-mesencephalic and mes-metencephalic boundaries are determined by repressive
interaction of Pax6 and En1/Pax2 and of Otx2 and Gbx2, respectively. The optic
tectum is a visual center in lower vertebrates. The tectum and the retina should 
be regionalized and be positionally specialized for the proper retinotopic
projection. Gradient of En2 plays a crucial role in rostrocaudal polarity
formation of the tectum. En2 confers caudal characteristics of the retina by
inducing ephrinA2 and A5, which are the repellant molecules for the growth cones 
of temporal retinal ganglion cells. Grg4 antagonizes the isthmus-related genes,
and is involved in the formation of di-mesencephalic boundary and tectal polarity
formation at an early phase of development. Then, Grg4 plays a role in tectal
laminar formation by controlling the migration pathway. Migration pathway of
tectal postmitotic cells changes after E5. The late migratory cells split the
early migratory neurons to form laminae h-j of SGFS. Grg4 is expressed in the
ventricular layer after E5, and forces postmitotic cells to follow the late
migratory pathway, though retinal fibers terminate at laminae a-f of SGFS.
Misexpression of Grg4 disrupts the lamina g, and in such tecta retinal arbors
invade deep into the tectal layer, indicating that lamina g is a nonpermissive
lamina for the retinal arbors.

Copyright 2004 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Neurobiol 59: 48-56, 2004

PMID: 15007826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Med Sci Law. 2004 Jan;44(1):19-26.

Detecting the dangerous, violent or criminal patient: an analysis of referrals to
maximum security psychiatric care.

Pimm J(1), Stewart ME, Lawrie SM, Thomson LD.

Author information: 
(1)Chase Farm Hospital, The Ridgeway, Enfield EN2 8JL.

Britain's high security hospitals provide care for mentally disordered patients
who have dangerous, violent or criminal propensities. The State Hospital,
Carstairs, takes referrals from the population of Scotland and Northern Ireland. 
This retrospective case-control study describes the sociodemographic and clinical
characteristics of referrals (n=149) to the State Hospital during a 12-month
period, and delineates differences between admitted (n=57) and rejected (n=92)
patients. The referrals had an average age of 31.1 years, and were mostly male
(86.6%), single (64.4%) and unemployed (90.6%). Admitted patients were more
likely to have a criminal history, to be psychotic, to have a family history of
mental disorder and to be viewed by the assessor as having psychotic beliefs
which contributed to the behaviour or alleged offence leading to the referral.
Rejected patients were more likely to have been remanded to prison or assessed by
specialist registrars. Patients admitted to high security psychiatric care are
more likely to show dangerous behaviour secondary to psychosis. These findings
are in keeping with the requirements of mental health legislation and the
admissions policy.

PMID: 14984211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Curr Med Res Opin. 2004 Jan;20(1):1-6.

Down-regulation of nitric oxide synthase in the diabetic rabbit kidney: potential
relevance to the early pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy.

Mumtaz FH(1), Dashwood MR, Khan MA, Thompson CS, Mikhailidis DP, Morgan RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Barnet and Chase Farm Hospitals NHS Trust, The Ridgeway, Enfield, Middlesex
EN2 0SH, UK. mumtaz@ukgateway.net

OBJECTIVES: Nephropathy is a well-recognised complication of diabetes mellitus
(DM). The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of DM on the density
and distribution of nitric oxide (NO) synthase (NOS) in the rabbit kidney.
Quantification of the NOS radioligand on slide-mounted sections was compared with
the nitroblue tetrazolium reaction, where the intensity of the reaction varies
with the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide diaphorase (NADPH-d) activity of NOS.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: DM was induced with alloxan in six New Zealand White (NZW)
rabbits. Plasma creatinine, urea and electrolytes were monitored at monthly
intervals. The kidneys were removed following 6 months of DM. Transverse serial
sections were cut and low-resolution autoradiography was performed using a
radioligand for NOS ([(3)H]-NOARG). Histochemical localisation of NADPH-d
activity was also performed. Densitometric analysis was performed on the
autoradiographs and the results compared with those obtained from six age-matched
control rabbits.
RESULTS: There was a significant (p < 0.01) rise in plasma creatinine levels in
the diabetic rabbits, although the mean values remained within the reference
range. There was a significant (p < 0.0001) down-regulation of NOS binding sites 
in both the cortex and medulla of the DM kidney when compared with the controls. 
A similar decrease in NADPH-d activity was seen in the diabetic renal cortex and 
medulla. In addition, NADPH-d activity also appeared to be reduced in the
diabetic glomeruli when compared with controls.
CONCLUSIONS: NOS binding sites and NADPH-d activity are significantly decreased
in the DM renal cortex and medulla. These changes are associated with a mild
deterioration in renal function and may be an early event that could subsequently
play a role in the progression of DM nephropathy. Manipulating the NO pathway
during the early stages of DM nephropathy may be beneficial.

PMID: 14741064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Genet Sel Evol. 2000 Jan-Feb;32(1):73-86.

Mapping the naked neck (NA) and polydactyly (PO) mutants of the chicken with
microsatellite molecular markers.

Pitel F(1), Bergé R, Coquerelle G, Crooijmans RP, Groenen MA, Vignal A,
Tixier-Boichard M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de génétique cellulaire, Département de génétique animale,
Institut national de la recherche agronomique, 31326 Castanet-Tolosan Cedex,
France.

The bulked segregant analysis methodology has been used to map, with
microsatellite markers, two morphological mutations in the chicken: polydactyly
(PO) and naked neck (NA). These autosomal mutations show partial dominance for
NA, and dominance with incomplete penetrance for PO. They were mapped previously 
to different linkage groups of the classical map, PO to the linkage group IV and 
NA being linked to the erythrocyte antigen CPPP. An informative family of 70
offspring was produced by mating a sire, heterozygous for each of the mutations, 
to 7 dams homozygous recessive for each locus. Three DNA pools were prepared,
pool PO included 20 chicks exhibiting at least one extra-toe, pool NA included 20
non-polydactyly chicks showing the typical phenotype associated with
heterozygosity for the naked neck mutation, and pool NP included 20 chicks
exhibiting neither of the mutant phenotypes. Typings were done on an ABI-373
automatic sequencer with 147 microsatellite markers covering most of the genome. 
An unbalanced distribution of sire marker alleles were detected between pool PO, 
and pools NA and NP, for two markers of chromosome 2p, MCW0082 and MCW0247. A
linkage analysis taking into account the incomplete penetrance of polydactyly
(80% ) was performed with additional markers of this region and showed that the
closest marker to the PO locus was MCW0071 (5 cM, lod score = 9). MCW0071 lies
within the engrailed gene EN2 in the chicken. In the mouse, the homologous gene
maps on chromosome 5, close to the hemimelic extra-toes mutation Hx. In the case 
of the NA locus, markers of chromosome 3 were selected because CPPP was mapped on
this chromosome. Analysis of individual typings showed a linkage of 5.7 cM (lod
score = 13) between the NA locus and ADL0237 in the distal region of chromosome
3q. These results contribute to connecting the former classical map to the
molecular genetic map of the chicken, and open the way to the identification of
the molecular nature of two developmental mutations of the chicken that are known
to occur in many breeds of chickens.

PMCID: PMC2706862
PMID: 14736408  [PubMed]


183. Injury. 2004 Jan;35(1):76-9.

Traumatic patella tendon rupture: early mobilisation following surgical repair.

Bhargava SP(1), Hynes MC, Dowell JK.

Author information: 
(1)6 Frobisher Mews, Raleigh Road, Enfield, Middx EN2 6UN, UK.

This study aims to demonstrate that postoperative immobilisation in a cast is
unnecessary following suture repair of the patella tendon and retinacula
protected by a cerlage wire. We present 11 patients mean age 42 years evaluated
at a mean of 26 months (range 14-38 months). The mean Lysholm knee score at
review was 97 (range 92-100). The mean Insall Salvati measurement (length
patella/length tendon (LP/LT)) was 1 (range 0.95-1.1). No patients had fixed
flexion deformities or demonstrated an extensor lag and the average range of
motion was 0-137 degrees. The difference between the operated and control knee at
the time of assessment was: a mean loss of power of 6% (range 2-11) when
measuring concentric extension and a mean loss of 7% power (range 13 to an
increase of 12) in concentric flexion. We conclude that primary repair protected 
with a cerlage wire and early mobilisation gives excellent results in the
treatment of isolated traumatic patella tendon ruptures and cast immobilisation
postoperatively is not required.

PMID: 14728959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Learn Mem. 2003 Nov-Dec;10(6):478-94.

In vitro analog of classical conditioning of feeding behavior in aplysia.

Mozzachiodi R(1), Lechner HA, Baxter DA, Byrne JH.

Author information: 
(1)W.M. Keck Center for Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, Department of
Neurobiology and Anatomy, The University of Texas-Houston Medical School,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The feeding behavior of Aplysia californica can be classically conditioned using 
tactile stimulation of the lips as a conditioned stimulus (CS) and food as an
unconditioned stimulus (US). Moreover, several neural correlates of classical
conditioning have been identified. The present study extended previous work by
developing an in vitro analog of classical conditioning and by investigating
pairing-specific changes in neuronal and synaptic properties. The preparation
consisted of the isolated cerebral and buccal ganglia. Electrical stimulation of 
a lip nerve (AT4) and a branch of the esophageal nerve (En2) served as the CS and
US, respectively. Three protocols were used: paired, unpaired, and US alone. Only
the paired protocol produced a significant increase in CS-evoked fictive feeding.
At the cellular level, classical conditioning enhanced the magnitude of the
CS-evoked synaptic input to pattern-initiating neuron B31/32. In addition, paired
training enhanced both the magnitude of the CS-evoked synaptic input and the
CS-evoked spike activity in command-like neuron CBI-2. The in vitro analog of
classical conditioning reproduced all of the cellular changes that previously
were identified following behavioral conditioning and has led to the
identification of several new learning-related neural changes. In addition, the
pairing-specific enhancement of the CS response in CBI-2 indicates that some
aspects of associative plasticity may occur at the level of the cerebral sensory 
neurons.

PMCID: PMC305463
PMID: 14657259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Eur J Neurosci. 2003 Sep;18(5):1073-84.

The in vivo positional identity gene expression code is not preserved in neural
stem cells grown in culture.

Santa-Olalla J(1), Baizabal JM, Fregoso M, del Carmen Cárdenas M, Covarrubias L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics and Molecular Physiology, Instituto de
Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, AP 510-3, Cuernavaca, Mor
62250, México.

Neural stem cell specification depends on antero-posterior (AP) and dorso-ventral
(DV) information provided during development. In the present study we identified 
similar neural stem cell (NSC) populations along the AP axis of the mouse central
nervous system: the 'early' NSCs responsive to fibroblast growth factor-2 and the
'late' NSCs responsive to epidermal growth factor (EGF). Gene expression analysis
shows that AP and DV transcription factor code is not preserved in NSCs in
culture. Neurospheres generated with EGF from different regions showed Emx2, En2 
and Krox20 expression beyond their corresponding AP restricted areas
(telencephalon, mesencephalon and rhomboencephalon, respectively). Hox genes were
rarely expressed. DV markers such as Pax7 and Dbx1 were not expressed in
neurosphere cells, whereas Pax6 and Nkx2.1 were highly expressed independently of
the NSC source region. In general, this pattern was found under different culture
conditions. We propose that signals surrounding NSCs determine their positional
identity gene expression code, which may be relevant to establish their
definitive fate.

PMID: 12956707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Dev Growth Differ. 2003 Aug;45(4):361-7.

Gene silencing in chick embryos with a vector-based small interfering RNA system.

Katahira T(1), Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer (IDAC), Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575,
Japan.

In this paper, the use of vector-based RNA interference (RNAi) to specifically
interfere with gene expression in chick embryos is reported. In ovo
electroporation was carried out to transfer a small interfering RNA (siRNA)
expression vector into chick embryos. En2 was chosen for the target gene because 
the family gene, En1, is expressed in a similar pattern. Four sets of 19-mer
sequences were designed with the En2 open reading frame region connected to a
sequence of short hairpin RNA (shRNA), which exerts siRNA effects after being
transcribed, and inserted into pSilencer U6-1.0 vector. En2 and En1 expression
were suppressed by the siRNA whose sequence completely matched En2 and En1.
Suppression occurred when the siRNA sequence differed by up to two nucleotides
from the target sequence. The sequence that differed by four nucleotides from the
target gene did not show siRNA effects. One set that completely matched the En2
target did not show siRNA effects, which may be due to location of the siRNA in
the target gene. Thus, multiple sets of shRNA must be prepared if we are to
consider. This system will greatly contribute to the analysis of function of
genes of interest, because the target gene can be silenced in a locally and
temporally desired manner.

PMID: 12950277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Neurosci. 2003 Aug 27;23(21):7854-62.

Differential roles of engrailed paralogs in determining sensory axon guidance and
synaptic target recognition.

Marie B(1), Blagburn JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurobiology, University of Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico
00901, USA.

The transcription factor Engrailed (En) controls axon pathfinding and synaptic
target choice in an identified neuron (6m) of the cockroach cercal sensory
system. Knock-out of En using double-stranded RNA interference (dsRNAi)
transforms 6m so that it resembles a neighboring neuron that normally does not
express the en gene, has a different arbor anatomy, and makes different
connections. Like many animals, the cockroach has two En paralogs, Pa-En1 and
Pa-En2. In this study we tested the hypothesis that the paralogs have different
effects on axon guidance and synaptic target recognition, using RNAi to knock out
each one individually. Using dye injections into 6m and intracellular recordings 
from target interneurons, we obtained evidence that both Pa-En1 and Pa-En2
determine the axonal arborization, but only Pa-En1 controls synaptic connections.
However, because immunocytochemical quantification of En protein in 6m after RNAi
showed that Pa-En1 represents 65% of the total En activity and Pa-En2 only 35%,
our results could be caused by dosage effects. We measured the effects of
diluting the mixture of both dsRNAs on the amounts of En protein. From this
dose-response curve, we calculated the appropriate dilutions of the dsRNA mixture
that would titrate total En protein to levels equivalent to knock-out of either
paralog. RNAi using these dilutions showed that Pa-En1 and Pa-En2 both contribute
toward the control of axonal guidance and confirmed that Pa-En1 has the
paralog-specific function of controlling synaptic target recognition.

PMID: 12944515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 Jun;991:48-60.

Transcriptional control of dopamine neuron development.

Wallén A(1), Perlmann T.

Author information: 
(1)The Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden. asa.wallen@astrazeneca.com

Recent studies have identified several factors that influence the development of 
midbrain dopamine (DA) neurons. The identity of early proliferating DA progenitor
cells are specified by the secreted factors sonic hedgehog and fibroblast growth 
factor 8, derived from the floor plate of the ventral midline and the
mid/hindbrain border, respectively. While transcription factors specifically
expressed in the proliferating DA progenitor cells remain to be identified,
several transcription factors important for postmitotic DA cell development have 
been characterized. These include Nurr1, Lmx1b, Pitx3, and En1/En2. The studies
of these transcription factors have not only increased the understanding of how
DA neurons are generated in vivo, but also allowed the development of new
strategies using stem cells for engineering DA neurons in vitro, results that may
have significance in future therapies of patients with Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 12846973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Neurosci. 2003 Jun 15;23(12):5105-12.

Factors in the genetic background suppress the engrailed-1 cerebellar phenotype.

Bilovocky NA(1), Romito-DiGiacomo RR, Murcia CL, Maricich SM, Herrup K.

Author information: 
(1)Alzheimer Research Laboratory, University Hospitals Research Institute,
Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve University, School of Medicine,
Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

The mouse homeodomain protein, Engrailed-1, is generally viewed as an essential
player in the early establishment and maintenance of the midbrain/hindbrain
region that gives rise to the cerebellum and midbrain. In keeping with this,
engineered null mutations at this locus have been reported to lead to perinatal
lethality accompanied by near-total absence of cerebellar and caudal midbrain
structures. We report here that these cerebellar phenotypes are nearly completely
suppressed on a C57BL/6J genetic background. All cell types are present and
arranged properly in both the cortex and the deep nuclei, and cell counts reveal 
no significant absence of cerebellar Purkinje cells. Folial patterns are nearly
normal, although an apparent fusion of lobules IV and V is consistently noted.
Significantly, no change in the Engrailed-2 mutant phenotype occurs after a
similar background switch, and whole-mount in situ hybridization reveals
identical En2 expression patterns in wild-type C57BL/6J and 129/Sv mice. One
likely mechanism for the En1-/- phenotype suppression is a temporal and/or
spatial change in the pattern of Engrailed-2 expression apparent only in the
absence of Engrailed-1. In support of this, C57BL/6-En1-/- embryos that are also 
En2+/- lack a cerebellum and caudal midbrain: a phenotype identical to
129/Sv-En1-/- mice.

PMID: 12832534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jul 11;306(4):1008-13.

Yin Yang 1, a vertebrate polycomb group gene, regulates antero-posterior neural
patterning.

Kwon HJ(1), Chung HM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, San 56-1,
Shillim-dong, Kwanak-gu, Seoul 151-747, Republic of Korea.

Polycomb group (PcG) genes are required for the stable repression of the homeotic
genes and other developmentally regulated genes. Yin Yang 1 (YY1), a vertebrate
homolog of the Drosophila PcG pleiohomeotic (Pho), is a multifunctional protein
that can act as a repressor or activator of transcription. Xenopus YY1 (XYY1)
protein was localized in the central nervous system (CNS), particularly anterior 
neural tube of tailbud stage embryos. To elucidate the role of endogenous XYY1,
loss-of-function studies were performed using XYY1 antisense morpholino
oligonucleotide (XYY1 MO). Inhibition of XYY1 function resulted in embryos with
antero-posterior axial patterning defects and reduction of head structures. XYY1 
MO also reduced the expression of En2, a midbrain/hindbrain junction marker,
which was rescued by co-injection of XYY1 mRNA. However, XYY1 MO-injection did
not affect the expression of HoxB9, a spinal cord marker. These results suggest
that YY1 controls antero-posterior patterning of the CNS during Xenopus embryonic
development.

PMID: 12821143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Dev Biol. 2003 Feb 15;254(2):172-87.

Wnt1 and wnt10b function redundantly at the zebrafish midbrain-hindbrain
boundary.

Lekven AC(1), Buckles GR, Kostakis N, Moon RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, 3258 TAMU, College Station, TX
77843-3258, USA. alekven@mail.bio.tamu.edu

Wnt signals have been shown to be involved in multiple steps of vertebrate neural
patterning, yet the relative contributions of individual Wnts to the process of
brain regionalization is poorly understood. Wnt1 has been shown in the mouse to
be required for the formation of the midbrain and the anterior hindbrain, but
this function of wnt1 has not been explored in other model systems. Further, wnt1
is part of a Wnt cluster conserved in all vertebrates comprising wnt1 and wnt10b,
yet the function of wnt10b during embryogenesis has not been explored. Here, we
report that in zebrafish wnt10b is expressed in a pattern overlapping extensively
with that of wnt1. We have generated a deficiency allele for these closely linked
loci and performed morpholino antisense oligo knockdown to show that wnt1 and
wnt10b provide partially redundant functions in the formation of the
midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB). When both loci are deleted, the expression of 
pax2.1, en2, and her5 is lost in the ventral portion of the MHB beginning at the 
8-somite stage. However, wnt1 and wnt10b are not required for the maintenance of 
fgf8, en3, wnt8b, or wnt3a expression. Embryos homozygous for the wnt1-wnt10b
deficiency display a mild MHB phenotype, but are sensitized to reductions in
either Pax2.1 or Fgf8; that is, in combination with mutant alleles of either of
these loci, the morphological MHB is lost. Thus, wnt1 and wnt10b are required to 
maintain threshold levels of Pax2.1 and Fgf8 at the MHB.

Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science (USA)

PMID: 12591239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Med Genet. 2003 Jan;40(1):e4.

No association between the EN2 gene and autistic disorder.

Zhong H, Serajee FJ, Nabi R, Huq AH.

PMCID: PMC1735256
PMID: 12525552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Development. 2002 Apr;129(7):1609-21.

The homeoprotein Xiro1 is required for midbrain-hindbrain boundary formation.

Glavic A(1), Gómez-Skarmeta JL, Mayor R.

Author information: 
(1)Millennium Nucleus in Developmental Biology, Laboratory of Developmental
Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Chile, Casilla 653, Santiago, Chile.

The isthmic organizer, which patterns the anterior hindbrain and midbrain, is one
of the most studied secondary organizers. In recent years, new insights have been
reported on the molecular nature of its morphogenetic activity. Studies in chick,
mouse and zebrafish have converged to show that mutually repressive interactions 
between the homeoproteins encoded by Otx and Gbx genes position this organizer in
the neural primordia. We present evidence that equivalent, in addition to novel, 
interactions between these and other genes operate in Xenopus embryos to position
the isthmic organizer. We made use of fusion proteins in which we combined Otx2
or Gbx2 homeodomains with the E1A activation domain or the EnR repressor element 
which were then injected into embryos. Our results show that Otx2 and Gbx2 are
likely to be transcriptional repressors, and that these two proteins repress each
other transcription. Our experiments show that the interaction between these two 
proteins is required for the positioning of the isthmic organizer genes Fgf8,
Pax2 and En2. In this study we also developed a novel in vitro assay for the
study of the formation of this organizer. We show that conjugating animal caps
previously injected with Otx2 and Gbx2 mRNAs recreate the interactions required
for the induction of the isthmic organizer. We have used this assay to determine 
which cells produce and which cells receive the Fgf signal. Finally, we have
added a novel genetic element to this process, Xiro1, which encode another
homeoprotein. We show that the Xiro1 expression domain overlaps with territories 
expressing Otx2, Gbx2 and Fgf8. By expressing wild-type or dominant negative
forms of Xiro1, we show that this gene activates the expression of Gbx2 in the
hindbrain. In addition, Xiro1 is required in the Otx2 territory to allow cells
within this region to respond to the signals produced by adjacent Gbx2 cells.
Moreover, Xiro1 is absolutely required for Fgf8 expression at the isthmic
organizer. We discuss a model where Xiro1 plays different roles in regulating the
genetic cascade of interactions between Otx2 and Gbx2 that are necessary for the 
specification of the isthmic organizer.

PMID: 11923198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Genomics. 2002 Mar;79(3):278-84.

Identification of target genes regulated by PAX3 and PAX3-FKHR in embryogenesis
and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma.

Barber TD(1), Barber MC, Tomescu O, Barr FG, Ruben S, Friedman TB.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, National
Institutes of Health, 5 Research Court, Rockville, Maryland 20850, USA.

PAX3 is a transcription factor important for neural, muscle, and facial
development in vertebrates. To identify genes regulated by PAX3, we used a cyclic
amplification and selection of targets (CASTing) strategy to isolate
cis-regulatory elements bound by PAX3. CASTing libraries were constructed with
mouse DNA fragments bound by mouse PAX3, and human genomic DNA fragments bound by
human PAX3 and the fusion protein PAX3-FKHR. Approximately 1000 clones were
sequenced from each of these three libraries. Numerous putative targets of PAX3
and PAX3-FKHR were identified and six genes, Itm2A, Fath, FLT1, TGFA, BVES, and
EN2, were examined closely. The genomic DNA fragments near these genes contain
PAX3 binding sites and confer PAX3-dependent regulation. The expression levels of
these genes correlate with the PAX3 expression levels in mouse embryos or with
PAX3-FKHR expression levels in rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines, and indicate they may
be part of the PAX3 regulatory circuitry during embryogenesis and tumor
formation.

PMID: 11863357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2002 Jan-Feb;5(1):54-68.

Agenesis of the mesencephalon and metencephalon with cerebellar hypoplasia:
putative mutation in the EN2 gene--report of 2 cases in early infancy.

Sarnat HB(1), Benjamin DR, Siebert JR, Kletter GB, Cheyette SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine and
Children's Hospital and Regional Medical Center, Pathology CH-37, 4800 Sand Point
Way NE, Seattle, WA 98105, USA.

Congenital absence of the midbrain and upper pons is a rare human malformation.
We describe two unrelated infants with this anomaly and cerebellar hypoplasia who
were born at term but died in early infancy from lack of central respiratory
drive. MRI in both cases disclosed the lesions during life. Neuropathological
examination, performed in one, included immunocytochemical studies of NeuN,
synaptophysin, vimentin, and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). Autopsy
revealed a thin midline cord passing through the clivus, in place of the
midbrain; it corresponded to hypoplastic and fused corticospinal tracts with
ectopic neural tissue in the surrounding leptomeninges. Some ectopia were
immunoreactive for synaptophysin and NeuN and others were nonreactive. The neural
surfaces facing the subarachnoid fluid-filled space left by the absent midbrain
and upper pons were lined by an abnormal villous ependyma. The architecture of
the cerebellar cortex was imperfect but generally normal, and Bergmann glial
cells had normal radial processes shown by vimentin and GFAP. Structures of the
telencephalon, diencephalon, lower brainstem, and spinal cord were generally well
formed, but inferior olivary and dentate nuclei were rudimentary and the spinal
central canal was dilated at lumbar levels. The cerebral cortex was normally
laminated, but pyramidal neurons of layer 5 were sparse in the frontal lobes. The
hippocampus, olfactory system, and corpus callosum were formed. An ectopic
lingual thyroid was found and had been associated with hypothyroidism during
life. A murine model resembling this dysgenesis is demonstrated by homozygous
mutations of the organizer genes Wnt1 or En1, also resulting in cerebellar
aplasia, and En2, associated with cerebellar hypoplasia. These genes are
essential to the formation of the mesencephalic neuromere and rhombomere 1
(metencephalon or upper pons and cerebellum). Pax8 has binding sites in the
promoter for En2 and is essential for thyroid development. We speculate that in
the human, the failure to form a mesencephalon and metencephalon, with cerebellar
hypoplasia, results from a mutation or deletion in the EN2 (Engrailed-2) gene.

PMID: 11815869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Gene. 2002 Jan 9;282(1-2):143-50.

Functional equivalency of amphioxus and vertebrate Pax258 transcription factors
suggests that the activation of mid-hindbrain specific genes in vertebrates
occurs via the recruitment of Pax regulatory elements.

Krelová J(1), Holland LZ, Schubert M, Burgtorf C, Benes V, Kozmik Z.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrated Genomics, Institute of Molecular Genetics, Flemingovo 2,
166 37 Praha 6, Czech Republic.

Pax genes encode transcription factors that control key developmental decisions
in various animal phyla. The Pax2/5/8 subfamily plays a key role in specification
and/or maintenance of vertebrate mid-hindbrain boundary (MHB) region by directly 
regulating expression of other genes, most notably En2. In the invertebrate
chordate amphioxus, expression of AmphiPax2/5/8 is found in many sites that are
homologous to the regions of the vertebrate embryo expressing orthologous genes
Pax2, Pax5 or Pax8. However, no co-expression of AmphiPax2/5/8 and AmphiEn is
detected in the region of the neural tube that might correspond to the vertebrate
MHB. Based on this observation and the absence of AmphiWnt expression in this
region it appears that amphioxus does not have a MHB. Here we investigated the
possibility that the AmphiPax2/5/8, as a key component of MHB development, has
lost some of the properties of its vertebrate counterparts. We have analyzed both
the DNA-binding and transactivation properties of AmphiPax2/5/8 as well as its
ability to interact with the groucho co-repressor. In all these assays
AmphiPax2/5/8 is indistinguishable from the human Pax5. In addition, we found two
alternatively spliced AmphiPax2/5/8 isoforms that function similarly to the
alternatively spliced isoforms of human Pax8. Analysis of the AmphiEn regulatory 
region provided no evidence for AmphiPax2/5/8 binding and transactivation.
Therefore, in amphioxus, AmphiPax2/5/8, although capable of performing all the
necessary functions has not been recruited for a developmental mechanism which
usually sets up MHB development in vertebrates.

PMID: 11814686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Jan 22;107(3):190-6.

Search for genes involved in Joubert syndrome: evidence that one or more major
loci are yet to be identified and exclusion of candidate genes EN1, EN2, FGF8,
and BARHL1.

Blair IP(1), Gibson RR, Bennett CL, Chance PF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics and Development, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

Joubert syndrome (JS) is a rare autosomal recessive malformation syndrome
involving agenesis or dysgenesis of the cerebellar vermis with accompanying
brainstem malformations. JS is further characterized by hypotonia, developmental 
delay, intermittent hyperpnea, and abnormal eye movements. The biochemical and
molecular basis of JS remains unknown, although several genes that are crucial in
the development of the cerebellum have been proposed as attractive candidate
genes. JS is clinically heterogeneous; this, together with previous linkage
analyses, suggests that there may also be genetic heterogeneity. A locus for JS
was previously identified on chromosome 9q34 by linkage analysis in a
consanguineous family of Arabian origin. A putative second JS locus was recently 
suggested when a deletion on chromosome 17p11.2 was observed in a patient with
Smith-Magenis syndrome and JS phenotype. We have investigated a cohort of
apparently unrelated North American JS pedigrees for association with the loci on
chromosomes 9q34 and 17p11.2 and excluded them in all cases where data were
informative. Analysis of an additional 21 unrelated JS patients showed no
evidence of homozygosity at the 9q34 and 17p11.2 loci that would suggest
inheritance of founder JS mutation(s) or unreported consanguinity. Together,
these data suggest that one or more major loci for JS remain to be identified.
Consequently, we undertook mutation analysis of several functional candidate
genes, EN1, EN2, and FGF8, in a total of 26 unrelated JS patients. Our data
suggest that all of these genes may be excluded from a direct pathogenic role in 
JS. The BARHL1 gene, which localizes to chromosome 9q34 and has previously been
proposed as a strong positional candidate gene for JS, was also investigated and 
excluded from involvement in JS that is linked to chromosome 9q34.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11807898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Dev Dyn. 2002 Jan;223(1):141-7.

Temporal sequence of gene expression leading caudal prosencephalon to develop a
midbrain/hindbrain phenotype.

Hidalgo-Sánchez M(1), Alvarado-Mallart RM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-106, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Pavillon Enfants et Adolescents,
Paris, France. mhildago@unex.es

Transplantation of prosomeres 1-2 into the cerebellar plate were used, by using
chick/quail chimeras, to analyse the temporal sequence of the genetic cascade
leading the graft to develop a midbrain/hindbrain phenotype. Our results show
that (1) at Hamburger and Hamilton (HH) stage 13, Pax2 and En2 are already
induced within the graft, before all other genes of the cascade, whereas
misexpression of Fgf8 is also observed within the contiguous host cerebellar
plate; (2) within the graft, Otx2 repression and Gbx2 induction (see
Hidalgo-Sánchez et al. [1999] Development 126:3191-3203) are secondary events
that affect, from stages HH14-15, the areas in contact with the host
Gbx2/Fgf8-expressing cerebellar plate; (3) at these stages, the repressed Otx2
territory extends beyond the areas induced to express Gbx2, with the two
territories not abutting before HH17-18; (4) Fgf8 expression becomes
progressively induced within the Otx2-repressed/Gbx2-induced territory, starting 
at HH15-16. Our results support the hypothesis that the host-Gbx2/graft-Otx2
interface could trigger the genetic cascade induced within the graft and that the
Gbx2-induced domain could play a key role during the establishment of the induced
intragraft midbrain/hindbrain boundary.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11803577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Development. 2002 Jan;129(1):83-93.

Early subdivisions in the neural plate define distinct competence for inductive
signals.

Kobayashi D(1), Kobayashi M, Matsumoto K, Ogura T, Nakafuku M, Shimamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Regionalization of the embryonic brain is achieved through multi-step processes
that operate sequentially and/or simultaneously. Localized sources of various
signaling molecules act as organizing centers that pattern neighboring fields to 
create molecularly distinct domains. We investigated the mechanisms underlying
the regionally distinct competence for two such organizing signals, Fibroblast
growth factor 8 (Fgf8) and Sonic hedgehog (Shh), using chick embryos. First, we
demonstrated that FGF receptor 1 (Fgfr1) and Fgfr3, expressed differentially in
the developing brain, possess an equivalent potential to induce the regionally
distinct Fgf8-responsive genes, depending on the anterior-posterior dimension of 
the brain. Next we found that homeodomain transcription factors Six3 and Irx3 can
alter the regional responses to both Fgf8 and Shh in the forebrain. Six3 confers 
the ability to express Bf1, a gene essential for the telencephalon and eye
development, and Nkx2.1, which is required for development of the hypothalamus.
In contrast, Irx3 confers the ability to express En2 and Nkx6.1 in response to
Fgf8 and Shh, respectively. Furthermore, an alteration in the region-specific
response to Fgf8 upon misexpression of Irx3 resulted in transformation of
diencephalic and possibly telencephalic tissues into the optic tectum. Finally,
we demonstrated that Six3 and Irx3 can mutually repress their expression, which
may contribute to the establishment of their complementary expression domains in 
the neural plate. These repressive interactions are specific, as Six3 did not
repress Gbx2, and Irx3 did not disturb Otx2 expression. These findings provide
evidence that the early embryonic forebrain is demarcated into two domains with
distinct genetic programs, which argues against the authentic telendiencephalic
subdivision.

PMID: 11782403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J R Soc Med. 2002 Jan;95(1):39-40.

Pica with learning disability.

Grewal P(1), Fitzgerald B.

Author information: 
(1)Learning Difficulties Services, Cumbria Villa, Chase Farm Hospital Site, The
Ridgway, Enfield EN2 8JL, UK.

Comment in
    J R Soc Med. 2003 Nov;96(11):571-2.

PMCID: PMC1279150
PMID: 11773354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mech Dev. 2002 Jan;110(1-2):3-13.

Otx2 can activate the isthmic organizer genetic network in the Xenopus embryo.

Tour E(1), Pillemer G, Gruenbaum Y, Fainsod A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical School, P.O. Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Development and differentiation of the vertebrate caudal midbrain and anterior
hindbrain are dependent on the isthmic organizer signals at the
midbrain/hindbrain boundary (MHB). The future MHB forms at the boundary between
the Otx2 and Gbx2 expression domains. Recent studies in mice and chick suggested 
that the apposition of Otx2- and Gbx2-expressing cells is instrumental for the
positioning and early induction of the MHB genetic cascade. We show that Otx2 and
Gbx2 perform different roles in this process. We find that ectopically expressed 
Otx2 on its own can induce a substantial part of the MHB genetic network, namely 
En2, Wnt1, Pax-2, Fgf8 and Gbx2, in a concentration-dependent manner. This
induction does not require protein synthesis and ends during neurulation. In
contrast, Gbx2 is a negative regulator of Otx2 and the MHB genes. Based on the
temporal patterns of expression of the genes involved, we propose that Otx2 might
be the early inducer of the isthmic organizer genetic network while Gbx2
restricts Otx2 expression along the anterior-posterior axis and establishes an
Otx2 gradient.

PMID: 11744364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Prog Neurobiol. 2001 Dec;65(5):473-88.

Regionalisation and acquisition of polarity in the optic tectum.

Nakamura H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, 980-8575, Sendai, Japan.
makamura@idac.tohoku.ac.jp

The optic tectum differentiates from the alar plate of the mesencephalon and
receives retinal fibres in a precise retinotopic manner. Here, mechanisms of
tectum polarisation and regionalisation are reviewed. Misexpression of Pax2, Pax5
or En can change the fate of the presumptive diencephalon to that of the tectum. 
Ephrin A2 and A5 are expressed in a gradient in the tectum, caudal high and
rostral low, and may play important roles in the formation of a precise
retinotectal projection map. Retinal fibres that express receptors for these
ligands, and which come from the temporal retina, are repulsed by the ligands and
do not invade the caudal tectum. Both En1 and En2 can regulate posterior
characteristics in the tectum by inducing ephrin A2 and A5. Transplantation
experiments in chick have indicated that the mes/metencephalic boundary works as 
an organiser for the tectum and the cerebellum. Fgf8 is a candidate signalling
molecule in the organiser. Pax2/5, En, and Fgf8 are in a positive feedback loop
for their expression such that misexpression of one of these genes in the
diencephalon turns on the feedback loop and can result in induction of an optic
tectum. Otx2 and Gbx2 appear to repress each other's expression and contribute to
defining the posterior border of the tectum. Misexpression of Otx2 in the
metencephalon can change the fate of its alar plate to a tectum, and
misexpression of Gbx2 in the mesencephalon can cause anterior shifting of the
caudal limit of the tectum. The anterior border of the tectum may be determined
as a result of repressive interactions between Pax6 and En1/Pax2. Along the
dorsoventral axis of the mesencephalon, Shh contributes to ventralize the tissue;
that is, Shh can change the fate of the presumptive tectum to that of the
tegmentum that is the ventral structure. It is proposed that the brain vesicle
that expresses Otx2, Pax2, and En1 may differentiate into the tectum.

PMID: 11689282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Development. 2001 Oct;128(20):4069-77.

Role of Pax3/7 in the tectum regionalization.

Matsunaga E(1), Araki I, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Pax3/7 is expressed in the alar plate of the mesencephalon. The optic tectum
differentiates from the alar plate of the mesencephalon, and expression of Pax3/7
is well correlated to the tectum development. To explore the function of Pax3 and
Pax7 in the tectum development, we misexpressed Pax3 and Pax7 in the diencephalon
and ventral mesencephalon. Morphological and molecular marker gene analysis
indicated that Pax3 and Pax7 misexpression caused fate change of the alar plate
of the presumptive diencephalon to that of the mesencephalon, that is, a tectum
and a torus semicircularis were formed ectopically. Ectopic tectum in the
diencephalon appeared to be generated through sequential induction of Fgf8, En2
and Pax3/7. In ventral mesencephalon, which expresses En but does not
differentiate to the tectum in normal development, Pax3 and Pax7 misexpression
induced ectopic tectum. In normal development, Pax3 and Pax7 expression in the
mesencephalon commences after Otx2, En and Pax2/5 expression. In addition,
expression domain of Pax3 and Pax7 is well consistent with presumptive tectum
region in a dorsoventral axis. Taken together with normal expression pattern of
Pax3 and Pax7, results of misexpression experiments suggest that Pax3 and Pax7
define the tectum region subsequent to the function of Otx2 and En.

PMID: 11641229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Development. 2001 Sep;128(18):3415-26.

XMeis3 protein activity is required for proper hindbrain patterning in Xenopus
laevis embryos.

Dibner C(1), Elias S, Frank D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel.

Meis-family homeobox proteins have been shown to regulate cell fate specification
in vertebrate and invertebrate embryos. Ectopic expression of RNA encoding the
Xenopus Meis3 (XMeis3) protein caused anterior neural truncations with a
concomitant expansion of hindbrain and spinal cord markers in Xenopus embryos. In
naïve animal cap explants, XMeis3 activated expression of posterior neural
markers in the absence of pan-neural markers. Supporting its role as a neural
caudalizer, XMeis3 is expressed in the hindbrain and spinal cord. We show that
XMeis3 acts like a transcriptional activator, and its caudalizing effects can be 
mimicked by injecting RNA encoding a VP16-XMeis3 fusion protein. To address the
role of endogenous XMeis3 protein in neural patterning, XMeis3 activity was
antagonized by injecting RNA encoding an Engrailed-XMeis3 antimorph fusion
protein or XMeis3 antisense morpholino oligonucleotides. In these embryos,
anterior neural structures were expanded and posterior neural tissues from the
midbrain-hindbrain junction through the hindbrain were perturbed. In neuralized
animal cap explants, XMeis3-antimorph protein modified caudalization by basic
fibroblast growth factor and Wnt3a. XMeis3-antimorph protein did not inhibit
caudalization per se, but re-directed posterior neural marker expression to more 
anterior levels; it reduced expression of spinal cord and hindbrain markers, yet 
increased expression of the more rostral En2 marker. These results provide
evidence that XMeis3 protein in the hindbrain is required to modify anterior
neural-inducing activity, thus, enabling the transformation of these cells to
posterior fates.

PMID: 11566848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Development. 2001 Jul;128(13):2461-9.

Inductive signal and tissue responsiveness defining the tectum and the
cerebellum.

Sato T(1), Araki I, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

The mes/metencephalic boundary (isthmus) has an organizing activity for
mesencephalon and metencephalon. The candidate signaling molecule is Fgf8 whose
mRNA is localized in the region where the cerebellum differentiates. Responding
to this signal, the cerebellum differentiates in the metencephalon and the tectum
differentiates in the mesencephalon. Based on the assumption that strong Fgf8
signal induces the cerebellum and that the Fgf8b signal is stronger than that of 
Fgf8a, we carried out experiments to misexpress Fgf8b and Fgf8a in chick embryos.
Fgf8a did not affect the expression pattern of Otx2, Gbx2 or Irx2. En2 expression
was upregulated in the mesencephalon and in the diencephalon by Fgf8a.
Consequently, Fgf8a misexpression resulted in the transformation of the
presumptive diencephalon to the fate of the mesencephalon. In contrast, Fgf8b
repressed Otx2 expression, but upregulated Gbx2 and Irx2 expression in the
mesencephalon. As a result, Fgf8b completely changed the fate of the
mesencephalic alar plate to cerebellum. Quantitative analysis showed that Fgf8b
signal is 100 times stronger than Fgf8a signal. Co-transfection of Fgf8b with
Otx2 indicates that Otx2 is a key molecule in mesencephalic generation. We have
shown by RT-PCR that both Fgf8a and Fgf8b are expressed, Fgf8b expression
prevailing in the isthmic region. The results all support our working hypothesis 
that the strong Fgf8 signal induces the neural tissue around the isthmus to
differentiate into the cerebellum.

PMID: 11493563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Dev Biol. 2001 Apr 15;232(2):439-57.

foxD5a, a Xenopus winged helix gene, maintains an immature neural ectoderm via
transcriptional repression that is dependent on the C-terminal domain.

Sullivan SA(1), Akers L, Moody SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, The George Washington University
Medical Center, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Xenopus foxD5a, the full-length fork head gene previously described as a PCR
fragment (XFLIP), is first detectable at stage II of oogenesis. Low-abundance
maternal transcripts are localized to the animal hemisphere of the cleavage
embryo, and protein can be translocated to the nucleus prior to the onset of
zygotic transcription. Zygotic expression is strongest in the presumptive neural 
ectoderm at gastrula and neural plate stages, but there is minor paraxial
mesodermal expression during primary gastrulation that becomes significant in the
tail bud during secondary gastrulation. Expression of foxD5a in animal cap
explants induces elongation and expression of mesodermal, neural-inducing, and
early neural-specifying genes, indicating a role in dorsal axis formation.
Zygotic foxD5a expression is induced strongly by siamois, moderately by cerberus,
weakly by Wnt8 and noggin, and not by chordin in animal cap explants. Expression 
of foxD5a in whole embryos has differential dorsal and ventral effects. Ventral
mRNA injection induces partial secondary axes composed of expanded mesodermal and
epidermal tissues, but does not induce ectopic neural tissues. Dorsal mRNA
injection causes hypertrophy of the neural plate and expansion of early neural
genes (sox3 and otx2), but this is not the result of increased proliferation or
expanded neural-inducing mesoderm. The neural plate appears to be maintained in
an immature state because otx2 expression is expanded and expression of en2,
Krox20, proneural genes (Xnrgn1, neuroD) and a neural differentiation gene
(n-tubulin) is repressed in foxD5a-expressing cells. These results indicate that 
foxD5a maintains an undifferentiated neural ectoderm after neural induction.
Expression of foxD5a constructs fused with the engrailed repressor domain or with
the VP16 activation domain demonstrates that FoxD5a acts as a transcriptional
repressor in axis formation and neural plate expansion. Deletion constructs
indicate that this activity requires the C-terminal domain of the protein.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11401404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Med Genet. 2001 May;38(5):304-9.

A novel acropectoral syndrome maps to chromosome 7q36.

Dundar M(1), Gordon TM, Ozyazgan I, Oguzkaya F, Ozkul Y, Cooke A, Wilkinson AG,
Holloway S, Goodman FR, Tolmie JL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical Genetics, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, and
Thoracic Surgery, Erciyes University Medical Faculty, 38039 Kayseri, Turkey.
mdundar@hotmail.com

F syndrome (acropectorovertebral syndrome) is a dominantly inherited skeletal
dysplasia affecting the hands, feet, sternum, and lumbosacral spine, which has
previously been described in only two families. Here we report a six generation
Turkish family with a related but distinct dominantly inherited acropectoral
syndrome. All 22 affected subjects have soft tissue syndactyly of all fingers and
all toes and 14 also have preaxial polydactyly of the hands and/or feet. In
addition, 14 have a prominent upper sternum and/or a blind ending, inverted U
shaped sinus in the anterior chest wall. Linkage studies and haplotype analysis
carried out in 16 affected and nine unaffected members of this family showed that
the underlying locus maps to a 6.4 cM interval on chromosome 7q36, between EN2
and D7S2423, a region to which a locus for preaxial polydactyly and triphalangeal
thumb-polysyndactyly has previously been mapped. Our findings expand the range of
phenotypes associated with this locus to include total soft tissue syndactyly and
sternal deformity, and suggest that F syndrome may be another manifestation of
the same genetic entity. In mice, ectopic expression of the gene Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) in limb buds and lateral plate mesoderm during development causes preaxial 
polydactyly and sternal defects respectively, suggesting that misregulation of
SHH may underlie the unusual combination of abnormalities in this family. A
recently proposed candidate gene for 7q36 linked preaxial polydactyly is LMBR1,
encoding a novel transmembrane receptor which may be an upstream regulator of
SHH.

PMCID: PMC1734869
PMID: 11333865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Soc Biol. 2000;194(3-4):113-8.

[Formation of the boundary between the midbrain and the hindbrain: involvement of
Otx2 and Gbx2 genes].

[Article in French]

Hidalgo-Sánchez M(1), Millet S, Bloch-Gallego E, Alvarado-Mallart RM.

Author information: 
(1)Depto. Biología Celular, Universidad de Extremadura, Avda. de Elvas s.n. 06071
Badajoz, Espagne.

We have studied the neuromeric organisation of the mesencephalic-metencephalic
(mes-met) territory of the avian neural tube using chick/quail transplantation
experiments and analysing the expression of various regulatory genes in chimeric 
and normal embryos. Homotopic grafts demonstrate the presence of an
interneuromeric boundary separating the mesencephalic and cerebellar territories 
(the mes-met or midbrain/hindbrain boundary). This boundary is characterised from
HH10 onwards by the confrontation of the Otx2-Wnt1 and Gbx2-Fgf8 expressing
domains, while En2 and Pax2 genes are expressed at both sides of the mes-met
boundary. The evolution of the position of the Otx2/Gbx2 boundary with respect to
the vesicles and constriction observed within the mes-met domain between stages
HH10 and HH20, allows us to redefine the fate map of this region and to propose a
new nomenclature for HH10. Transplantation between the prosencephalic
neuroepithelium and the mes-met domain shows the possibility of inducing a
mes-met phenotype within the two caudal-most prosomeres, preceded by its
characteristic genetic cascade. The induction selectively takes place along the
boundary between the graft (Otx2 positive) and the host cerebellar territory
(expressing high levels of Gbx2); this includes the induction inside the graft of
a new Otx2/Gbx2 boundary. Conversely, no induction is ever observed when the
graft is confronted to the host Otx2 expressing domain. Although Fgf8 may be
involved in the inductive events, our data strongly suggest that confrontation
between Otx2 and Gbx2 is essential as an organiser of the mes-met domain.

PMID: 11324311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Dev Genes Evol. 2000 Sep;210(8-9):436-48.

Two engrailed-related genes in the cockroach: cloning, phylogenetic analysis,
expression and isolation of splice variants.

Marie B(1), Bacon JP.

Author information: 
(1)Sussex Centre for Neuroscience, School of Biological Sciences, University of
Sussex, Brighton, BN1 9QG, UK.

engrailed-related genes have been isolated in numerous taxa. Within the insects, 
some species have a single engrailed-related gene whilst others have two copies, 
raising the question of when and how often gene duplications have occurred. Here 
we report the cloning, in the cockroach Periplaneta americana, of two
engrailed-related genes Pa-en1 and Pa-en2. By comparing conserved domains and by 
carrying out a phylogenetic analysis, we conclude that these two genes are likely
to be the product of a recent duplication in the cockroach lineage. Pa-en1 and
Pa-en2 are co-expressed during early embryogenesis and their segmental pattern of
expression appears in an anterior-posterior progression. We have also isolated
potential splice variants of Pa-en2 which lack some regulatory domains. The roles
these splice variants may play in regulating developmental processes are
discussed.

PMID: 11180849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Dev Genes Evol. 2000 Oct;210(10):493-506.

Evolution of distinct expression patterns for engrailed paralogues in higher
crustaceans (Malacostraca).

Ahzhanov A(1), Kaufman TC.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biology, Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.

The segment-polarity gene engrailed of Drosophila melanogaster and its homologues
in other arthropods possess a highly conserved expression domain in the posterior
portion of each segment. We report here that the two pan-specific antibodies,
Mab4D9 and Mab4F11, reveal strikingly different accumulation patterns in both of 
the malacostracan crustaceans Porcellio scaber (Isopoda) and Procambarus clarkii 
(Decapoda), compared with insects. The signal detected with Mab4D9 resides in the
posterior part of each segment, including the appendages, the ventral and lateral
sides of the trunk and the CNS. However, Mab4F11 reveals a signal only in small
groups of neurons in the CNS and PNS, primarily localized in the pereon. We
observe similar Mab4D9 and Mab4F11 patterns in the crayfish P. clarkii, except
that no Mab4F11 signal is detected in the pleon. To address the possibility of
multiple engrailed paralogues, we cloned partial cDNAs of two engrailed genes,
Ps-en1 and Ps-en2, from P. scaber, and studied their expression patterns using
whole-mount in situ hybridization. Although the Ps-en1 and Ps-en2 patterns are
comparable in early development, they become distinct in late embryogenesis.
Ps-en1 is expressed in the CNS, where Mab4F11 stains, but also accumulates in the
epidermis. In contrast, Ps-en2 is expressed in the lateral aspect and limbs of
all segments. Phylogenetic analysis of en sequences from crustaceans and insects 
suggests that the two en genes from the apterygote insect Thermobia domestica
(Thysanura) may be related to en1 and en2 of higher crustaceans.

PMID: 11180798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Development. 2001 Jan;128(2):181-91.

EN and GBX2 play essential roles downstream of FGF8 in patterning the mouse
mid/hindbrain region.

Liu A(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, Department of Cell Biology, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Fgf8, which is expressed at the embryonic mid/hindbrain junction, is required for
and sufficient to induce the formation of midbrain and cerebellar structures. To 
address through what genetic pathways FGF8 acts, we examined the epistatic
relationships of mid/hindbrain genes that respond to FGF8, using a novel mouse
brain explant culture system. We found that En2 and Gbx2 are the first genes to
be induced by FGF8 in wild-type E9.5 diencephalic and midbrain explants treated
with FGF8-soaked beads. By examining gene expression in En1/2 double mutant mouse
embryos, we found that Fgf8, Wnt1 and Pax5 do not require the En genes for
initiation of expression, but do for their maintenance, and Pax6 expression is
expanded caudally into the midbrain in the absence of EN function. Since E9.5
En1/2 double mutants lack the mid/hindbrain region, forebrain mutant explants
were treated with FGF8 and, significantly, the EN transcription factors were
found to be required for induction of Pax5. Thus, FGF8-regulated expression of
Pax5 is dependent on EN proteins, and a factor other than FGF8 could be involved 
in initiating normal Pax5 expression in the mesencephalon/metencephalon. The En
genes also play an important, but not absolute, role in repression of Pax6 in
forebrain explants by FGF8. Previous Gbx2 gain-of-function studies have shown
that misexpression of Gbx2 in the midbrain can lead to repression of Otx2.
However, in the absence of Gbx2, FGF8 can nevertheless repress Otx2 expression in
midbrain explants. In contrast, Wnt1 is initially broadly induced in Gbx2 mutant 
explants, as in wild-type explants, but not subsequently repressed in cells near 
FGF8 that normally express Gbx2. Thus GBX2 acts upstream of, or parallel to, FGF8
in repressing Otx2, and acts downstream of FGF8 in repression of Wnt1. This is
the first such epistatic study performed in mouse that combines gain-of-function 
and loss-of-function approaches to reveal aspects of mouse gene regulation in the
mesencephalon/metencephalon that have been difficult to address using either
approach alone.

PMID: 11124114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Anaesthesia. 2000 Dec;55(12):1215.

Another case of anaesthetic machine failure.

MacArtney NJ(1), Cohen J.

Author information: 
(1)Barnet and Chase Farm Hospitals, Enfield EN2 8JA, UK.

PMID: 11121938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Development. 2000 Jun;127(11):2357-65.

Pax6 defines the di-mesencephalic boundary by repressing En1 and Pax2.

Matsunaga E(1), Araki I, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Transcriptional factors and signaling molecules are responsible for
regionalization of the central nervous system. In the early stage of neural
development, Pax6 is expressed in the prosencephalon, while En1 and Pax2 are
expressed in the mesencephalon. Here, we misexpressed Pax6 in the mesencephalon
to elucidate the mechanism of the di-mesencephalic boundary formation.
Histological analysis, expression patterns of diencephalic marker genes, and
fiber trajectory of the posterior commissure indicated that Pax6 misexpression
caused a caudal shift of the di-mesencephalic boundary. Pax6 repressed En1, Pax2 
and other tectum (mesencephalon)-related genes such as En2, Pax5, Pax7, but
induced Tcf4, a diencephalon marker gene. To know how Pax6 represses En1 and
Pax2, we ectopically expressed a dominant-active or negative form of Pax6. The
dominant-active form of Pax6 showed a similar but more severe phenotype than
Pax6, while the dominant-negative form showed an opposite phenotype, suggesting
that Pax6 acts as a transcriptional activator. Thus Pax6 may repress
tectum-related genes by activating an intervening repressor. The results of
misexpression experiments, together with normal expression patterns of Pax6, En1 
and Pax2, suggest that repressive interaction between Pax6 and En1/Pax2 defines
the di-mesencephalic boundary.

PMID: 10804178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Development. 2000 May;127(9):1833-43.

Temporal and spatial gradients of Fgf8 and Fgf17 regulate proliferation and
differentiation of midline cerebellar structures.

Xu J(1), Liu Z, Ornitz DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The midbrain-hindbrain (MHB) junction has the properties of an organizer that
patterns the MHB region early in vertebrate development. Fgf8 is thought to
mediate this organizer function. In addition to Fgf8, Fgf17 and Fgf18 are also
expressed in the MHB junction. Fgf17 is expressed later and broader than either
Fgf8 or Fgf18. Disrupting the Fgf17 gene in the mouse decreased precursor cell
proliferation in the medial cerebellar (vermis) anlage after E11.5. Loss of an
additional copy of Fgf8 enhanced the phenotype and accelerated its onset,
demonstrating that both molecules cooperate to regulate the size of the precursor
pool of cells that develop into the cerebellar vermis. However, expression
patterns of Wnt1, En2, Pax5 and Otx2 were not altered suggesting that
specification and patterning of MHB tissue was not perturbed and that these FGFs 
are not required to pattern the vermis at this stage of development. The
consequence of this developmental defect is a progressive, dose-dependent loss of
the most anterior lobe of the vermis in mice lacking Fgf17 and in mice lacking
Fgf17 and one copy of Fgf8. Significantly, the differentiation of anterior vermis
neuroepithelium was shifted rostrally and medially demonstrating that FGF also
regulates the polarized progression of differentiation in the vermis anlage.
Finally, this developmental defect results in an ataxic gait in some mice.

PMID: 10751172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mech Dev. 2000 Feb;90(2):155-65.

Two Pax2/5/8-binding sites in Engrailed2 are required for proper initiation of
endogenous mid-hindbrain expression.

Li Song D(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Canada.

During early brain development mouse Engrailed2 (En2) is expressed in a broad
band across most of the mid-hindbrain region. Evidence from gene expression data,
promoter analysis in transgenic mice and mutant phenotype analysis in mice and
zebrafish has suggested that Pax2, 5 and 8 play a critical role in regulating En2
mid-hindbrain expression. Previously, we identified two Pax2/5/8-binding sites in
a 1.0 kb En2 enhancer fragment that is sufficient to directed reporter gene
expression to the early mid-hindbrain region and showed that the two
Pax2/5/8-binding sites are essential for the mid-hindbrain expression in
transgenic mice. In the present study we have examined the functional
requirements of these two Pax2/5/8-binding sites in the context of the endogenous
En2 gene for directing mid-hindbrain expression. The two Pax2/5/8-binding sites
were deleted from the En2 locus and replaced with the bacterial neo gene by
homologous recombination in mouse embryonic stem cells. After transmitting the
mutation into mice, the neo gene was removed by breeding with transgenic mice
expressing cre from a CMV promoter. Embryos homozygous for this En2
Pax2/5/8-binding site deletion mutation had a mild reduction in En2 expression in
the presumptive mid-hindbrain region at the 5-7 somite stage, when En2 expression
is normally initiated. However, from embryonic day 9.0 onwards, the mutant
embryos showed En2 expression indistinguishable from that seen in wild type
embryos. Furthermore, the mutants did not show the cerebellar defect seen in mice
with a null mutation in En2. This result demonstrates that the two
Pax2/5/8-binding sites that were deleted, while being required for mid-hindbrain 
expression in the context of a 1.0 kb En2 enhancer, are only required for proper 
initiation of expression of the endogenous En2 gene. Interestingly, a comparison 
of the lacZ RNA and protein expression patterns directed by the 1.0 kb enhancer
fragment revealed that lacZ protein was acting as a lineage marker in the
mid-hindbrain region by persisting longer than the mRNA. The transgene expression
directed by the 1.0 kb enhancer fragment therefore does not mimic the entire
broad domain of En2 expression. Taken together, these two studies demonstrate
that DNA binding sites in addition to the two Pax2/5/8-binding sites must be
necessary for En2 mid-hindbrain expression.

PMID: 10640701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Development. 1999 Nov;126(21):4827-38.

FGF8 can activate Gbx2 and transform regions of the rostral mouse brain into a
hindbrain fate.

Liu A(1), Losos K, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, Department of Cell Biology, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. joyner@saturn.med.nyu.edu

The mid/hindbrain junction region, which expresses Fgf8, can act as an organizer 
to transform caudal forebrain or hindbrain tissue into midbrain or cerebellar
structures, respectively. FGF8-soaked beads placed in the chick forebrain can
similarly induce ectopic expression of mid/hindbrain genes and development of
midbrain structures (Crossley, P. H., Martinez, S. and Martin, G. R. (1996)
Nature 380, 66-68). In contrast, ectopic expression of Fgf8a in the mouse
midbrain and caudal forebrain using a Wnt1 regulatory element produced no
apparent patterning defects in the embryos examined (Lee, S. M., Danielian, P.
S., Fritzsch, B. and McMahon, A. P. (1997) Development 124, 959-969). We show
here that FGF8b-soaked beads can not only induce expression of the mid/hindbrain 
genes En1, En2 and Pax5 in mouse embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5) caudal forebrain
explants, but also can induce the hindbrain gene Gbx2 and alter the expression of
Wnt1 in both midbrain and caudal forebrain explants. We also show that
FGF8b-soaked beads can repress Otx2 in midbrain explants. Furthermore, Wnt1-Fgf8b
transgenic embryos in which the same Wnt1 regulatory element is used to express
Fgf8b, have ectopic expression of En1, En2, Pax5 and Gbx2 in the dorsal hindbrain
and spinal cord at E10.5, as well as exencephaly and abnormal spinal cord
morphology. More strikingly, Fgf8b expression in more rostral brain regions
appears to transform the midbrain and caudal forebrain into an anterior hindbrain
fate through expansion of the Gbx2 domain and repression of Otx2 as early as the 
7-somite stage. These findings suggest that normal Fgf8 expression in the
anterior hindbrain not only functions to maintain development of the entire
mid/hindbrain by regulating genes like En1, En2 and Pax5, but also might function
to maintain a metencephalic identity by regulating Gbx2 and Otx2 expression.

PMID: 10518499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Development. 1999 Oct;126(19):4295-304.

Cell autonomous and non-cell autonomous functions of Otx2 in patterning the
rostral brain.

Rhinn M(1), Dierich A, Le Meur M, Ang S.

Author information: 
(1)IGBMC, CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur, B.P. 163, C.U. de Strasbourg,
France.

Previous studies have shown that the homeobox gene Otx2 is required first in the 
visceral endoderm for induction of forebrain and midbrain, and subsequently in
the neurectoderm for its regional specification. Here, we demonstrate that Otx2
functions both cell autonomously and non-cell autonomously in neurectoderm cells 
of the forebrain and midbrain to regulate expression of region-specific homeobox 
and cell adhesion genes. Using chimeras containing both Otx2 mutant and wild-type
cells in the brain, we observe a reduction or loss of expression of Rpx/Hesx1,
Wnt1, R-cadherin and ephrin-A2 in mutant cells, whereas expression of En2 and
Six3 is rescued by surrounding wild-type cells. Forebrain Otx2 mutant cells
subsequently undergo apoptosis. Altogether, this study demonstrates that Otx2 is 
an important regulator of brain patterning and morphogenesis, through its
regulation of candidate target genes such as Rpx/Hesx1, Wnt1, R-cadherin and
ephrin-A2.

PMID: 10477297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Development. 1999 Jun;126(14):3191-203.

Fgf8 and Gbx2 induction concomitant with Otx2 repression is correlated with
midbrain-hindbrain fate of caudal prosencephalon.

Hidalgo-Sánchez M(1), Simeone A, Alvarado-Mallart RM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 106, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Bld. de l'Hôpital, France.

Chick/quail transplantation experiments were performed to analyse possible
factors involved in the regionalisation of the midbrain-hindbrain domain. The
caudal prosomeres, expressing Otx2, were transplanted at stage HH10 into
rostrocaudal levels of the midbrain-hindbrain domain, either straddling the
intra-metencephalic constriction (type 1 grafts), or at rostral and medial levels
of pro-rhombomere A1 (type 2 and 3 grafts, respectively); thus, in all
situations, one border of the graft was in contact with the host Gbx2- and
Fgf8-expressing domains. The area containing the graft, recognised by QCPN
immunohistochemistry, was first analysed 48 hours after transplantation for Otx2,
Gbx2, En2 and Fgf8. Although in all three situations, a large part of the graft
maintained Otx2 expression, another part became Otx2 negative and was induced to 
express Gbx2 and Fgf8. These inductive events occurred exclusively at the
interface between the Otx2-positive transplanted domain and the ipsilateral host 
Gbx2-positive rhombomere 1, creating a new Otx2-Gbx2 boundary within the grafted 
territory. In type 1 and 2 grafts, the induced Fgf8 domain is in continuity with 
the host Fgf8 isthmic domain, whereas for type 3 grafts, these two domains are
separate. High levels of En2 expression were also induced in the area expressing 
Gbx2 and Fgf8, and Wnt1 and Pax2 expressions, analysed in type 3 grafts, were
induced at the intragraft Otx2-Gbx2 new boundary. Moreover, at later embryonic
stages, the graft developed meso-isthmo-cerebellar structures. Thus, gene
expressions induced in the grafted prosencephalon not only mimicked the pattern
observed in the normal midbrain-hindbrain domain, but is followed by
midbrain-hindbrain cytodifferentiation, indicating that not only Fgf8 but also
confrontation of Otx2 and Gbx2 may play an essential role during
midbrian-hindbrain regionalisation.

PMID: 10375509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 1999 Mar;24(2):103-15.

Etiology of infantile autism: a review of recent advances in genetic and
neurobiological research.

Trottier G(1), Srivastava L, Walker CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Douglas Hospital Research Centre, McGill University,
Montreal, Que.

Comment in
    J Psychiatry Neurosci. 1999 Mar;24(2):95-6.

The etiology of autism is complex, and in most cases the underlying pathologic
mechanisms are unknown. Autism is a hetereogeneous disorder, diagnosed
subjectively on the basis of a large number of criteria. Recent research has
investigated genetics, in utero insults and brain function as well as
neurochemical and immunological factors. On the basis of family and twin studies,
there appears to be a genetic basis for a wide "autistic syndrome." About a
quarter of cases of autism are associated with genetic disorders such as fragile 
X syndrome or with infectious diseases such as congenital rubella. Genetic
studies have shown an association between autism markers of brain development
such as 3 markers of the c-Harvey-ros oncogene and the homeobox gene EN2. In some
cases, autism is associated with insults early in gestation, including
thalidomide embryopathy. Autism may arise from abnormal central nervous system
functioning, since most autistic patients have indications of brain dysfunction, 
and about half of them have abnormal electroencephalograms. Similarly, the
pattern of evoked response potentials and conduction time is altered in autistic 
children. There is substantial evidence from neuroimaging studies that
dysfunctions in the cerebellum and possibly the temporal lobe and association
cortex occur in autistic symptoms. Neurochemical studies have investigated the
role of serotonin, epinephrine and norepinephrine, since levels of these
neurotransmitters are altered in autism, although other hypotheses implicate
overactive brain opioid systems and changes in oxytocin neurotransmission.
Autoimmunity may also play a role; antibodies against myelin basic protein are
often found in children with autism, who also have increased eosinophil and
basophil response to IgE-mediated reactions. In summary, the prevailing view is
that autism is caused by a pathophysiologic process arising from the interaction 
of an early environmental insult and a genetic predisposition.

PMCID: PMC1188990
PMID: 10212552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Solid State Nucl Magn Reson. 1998 Oct;12(4):227-42.

Triple quantum MQMAS spectroscopy of 59Co(I = 7/2) in Na3Co(NO2)6 and
trans-Co[(en2)(NO2)2]NO3 interplay between the quadrupole coupling and
anisotropic shielding tensors.

Charpentier T(1), Virlet J.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Physique de l'Etat Condensé, CEA Saclay, Gif sur Yvette, France.
charpent@spec.saclay.cea.fr

Erratum in
    Solid State Nucl Magn Reson 1998 Dec;13(3):201. Charpeutier T [corrected to
Charpentier T].

The purpose of this paper is to investigate the interplay between the chemical
shielding anisotropy and quadrupole interaction in MQMAS spectra. 59Co in the
compounds Na3Co(NO2)6 and trans-Co[(en2)(NO2)2]NO3 provides model systems for
such an investigation. Furthermore, only few results have been reported on the
application of the MQMAS method to a spin I = 7/2. The possibilities of the MQMAS
spectroscopy for determining the relative orientation of the two tensors and its 
advantage over previous techniques are discussed. Reported experimental spectra
at different spinning speeds of Na3Co(NO2)6 are accurately reproduced by our
theoretical simulations. The calculations are based on a recent approach,
summarized in the present paper, which allows one to perform efficient
simulations of MQMAS spectra including all interactions and their time-dependence
throughout the experiment. This is necessary for calculating accurate MQMAS
spectra including the spinning sideband pattern. In the case of
trans-Co[(en2)(NO2)2]NO3 where the quadrupolar interaction and chemical shielding
are stronger and their axes are non-coincident, the MQMAS spectrum is strongly
distorted due to the unsufficient spinning speed and RF power. In this case, MAS 
at different spinning speeds is shown to provide valuable information.

PMID: 9800268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Development. 1998 Nov;125(22):4521-30.

Drosophila engrailed can substitute for mouse Engrailed1 function in
mid-hindbrain, but not limb development.

Hanks MC(1), Loomis CA, Harris E, Tong CX, Anson-Cartwright L, Auerbach A, Joyner
A.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine and Departments of Cell Biology and Physiology
and Neuroscience, NYU Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The Engrailed-1 gene, En1, a murine homologue of the Drosophila homeobox gene
engrailed (en), is required for midbrain and cerebellum development and
dorsal/ventral patterning of the limbs. In Drosophila, en is involved in
regulating a number of key patterning processes including segmentation of the
epidermis. An important question is whether, during evolution, the biochemical
properties of En proteins have been conserved, revealing a common underlying
molecular mechanism to their diverse developmental activities. To address this
question, we have replaced the coding sequences of En1 with Drosophila en. Mice
expressing Drosophila en in place of En1 have a near complete rescue of the
lethal En1 mutant brain defect and most skeletal abnormalities. In contrast,
expression of Drosophila en in the embryonic limbs of En1 mutants does not lead
to repression of Wnt7a in the embryonic ventral ectoderm or full rescue of the
embryonic dorsal/ventral patterning defects. Furthermore, neither En2 nor en
rescue the postnatal limb abnormalities that develop in rare En1 null mutants
that survive. These studies demonstrate that the biochemical activity utilized in
mouse to mediate brain development has been retained by Engrailed proteins across
the phyla, and indicate that during evolution vertebrate En proteins have
acquired two unique functions during embryonic and postnatal limb development and
that only En1 can function postnatally.

PMID: 9778510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Genet Couns. 1998;9(1):5-14.

Strong variable clinical presentation in 3 patients with 7q terminal deletion.

Frints SG(1), Schrander-Stumpel CT, Schoenmakers EF, Engelen JJ, Reekers AB, Van 
den Neucker AM, Smeets E, Devlieger H, Fryns JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cell Biology/Genetics, Maastricht University, The
Netherlands.

We report 3 patients with a 7q terminal deletion. The first, a 7 weeks old
female, with a de novo 7q36-->qter deletion, was microcephalic and had a partial 
hypoplasia of the corpus callosum on the MRI-scan of the brain. The second, a 3
months old male, showed microcephaly, disproportionate growth retardation,
truncal obesity and facial dysmorfism giving the clinical impression of a
"microcephalic primordial dwarfism (osteodysplastic type)". At the age of 6
months he had developed a single maxillary central incisor suggesting a minimal
form of holoprosencephaly (HPE). Additional FISH-studies showed a 7q36.1-->qter
deletion, as the unbalanced product of a t(5;7)(q35.2;q36.1)pat. The de novo
7q36-->qter deletion in the third patient, a 5 years old female, was associated
with borderline intelligence, mild microcephaly, small midface, choanal narrowing
and a single maxillary central incisor as a minimal form of HPE. CT- and MRI-scan
of the brain were normal. In these 3 patients extensive FISH analysis was
performed to investigate the possible involvement of the HPE gene region on
chromosome 7q36. The target gene for HPE, the Sonic hedgehog gene (SHH) as well
as several other genes important for normal brain development (En2;HOX1,HTR5A)
were found to be deleted in all three patients. Our findings stress the
importance of 7q36 microdeletion studies in patients with even minimal signs of
HPE, as relative microcephaly with small midface (choanal narrowing),
agenesis/hypoplasia of the corpus callosum/septum pellucidum, thalamic fusion or 
a single maxillary central incisor.

PMID: 9555580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Am J Med Genet. 1998 Jan 13;75(2):153-8.

De novo 7q36 deletion: breakpoint analysis and types of holoprosencephaly.

Frints SG(1), Schoenmakers EF, Smeets E, Petit P, Fryns JP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, Belgium.

We report on a de novo 7q36 deletion in a 3-month-old girl with manifestations of
the 7q terminal deletion syndrome. Only minimal findings of holoprosencephaly
(HPE) were present since only a partial corpus callosum hypoplasia was seen on a 
magnetic resonance imaging scan of the brain. Extensive fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis showed that the HPE3 critical gene region, inclusive Sonic
hedgehog (SHH), En2 (HOX1), and HTR5A, was deleted. A review of 33 other patients
with a de novo terminal 7q deletion and the different types of HPE manifestations
within these patients will be presented.

PMID: 9450876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Yi Chuan Xue Bao. 1997 Jun;24(3):195-205.

[Molecular evolution of MHC DQA genes. I. The maintenance of interallelic
divergence and the influence of GC content on gene structure].

[Article in Chinese]

Pan X(1), Fu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Second Military Medical University Shanghai.

The analyses of the proportion of synonymous and missense nucleotide substitution
(PS and PN) in different exons, antigen recognition sites (ARS) and non-ARS of
EN2 (NAEN2) of 23 alleles at MHC DQA loci in 7 mammal species gave rise to the
following findings. (1) PN was about twice as much as PS in ARS among the alleles
at DQA1 of any given species, i.e. 7 alleles at HLA-DQA1 or 8 alleles at IaAa
this accords with overdominant selection; (2) PS showed more or less the same as 
PN in ARS among different loci (DQA1 or DQA2 in different species, or DQA1 and
DQA2 in one species) or NAEN2 of all comparative pairs, this conforms the
expectation of neutral selection; (3) In exon4 and exon3, not only was the
substitution proportion extremely low, but also PS was much higher than PN (the
ratio PS over PN is 19.5 in alleles at IaAa of mouse and 4 among alleles at
different loci), this coincides obviously with purification selection. The
analysis of GC content of MHC DQA showed that its peaks were in the regions
corresponding to the middle bulks of some domains, that the highest and constant 
level was in exon4 and that GC content in the third codon position (GC III
content) associates inversely with PS. These results indicate that the specified 
maintenance mechanisms of interallelic diversity relevant to their functions
exist in given exons corresponding to some domains of the same MHC DQA locus and 
GC III content is an important factor in keeping the structure and function of
gene under selection constraint. The method for estimating nucleotide
substitution proportion was modified.

PMID: 9361451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Nat Prod. 1997 Apr;60(4):325-30.

Stereochemistry-dependent cytotoxicity of some artemisinin derivatives.

Beekman AC(1), Barentsen AR, Woerdenbag HJ, Van Uden W, Pras N, Konings AW,
el-Feraly FS, Galal AM, Wikström HV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, University Centre for Pharmacy,
Groningen Institute for Drug Studies, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

We determined the cytotoxicity of some artemisinin derivatives against EN2 tumor 
cells using the MTT assay. Artemisinin (1) was clearly more cytotoxic than
deoxyartemisinin (2), which lacks the endoperoxide bridge. Ether-linked dimers of
dihydroartemisinin with defined stereochemistry were found to differ in the
extent of cytotoxic effect on EN2 cells. The nonsymmetrical dimer (3) was more
cytotoxic than the symmetrical dimer (4). The nonsymmetrical dimer of
dihydrodeoxyartemisinin (5) lacking the endoperoxide bridges was also effective
in the MTT assay, although less cytotoxic than 3 and 4. Similarly, the
symmetrical dimer (6) was less effective than 5. Epoxides of artemisitene also
showed that stereochemistry was an important factor for cytotoxicity. The results
suggested that the endoperoxide bridge was not crucial for cytotoxicity to the
tumor cells, but contributed to the cytotoxic effect apparently exerted by the
ether linkage of the dimers. Flow cytometry data indicated that the dimers 3 and 
4 caused an accumulation of the cells in the G1-phase of the cell cycle. In
contrast, artemisinin (1) caused a slight increase of S-phase cells.

PMID: 9134741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Nat Prod. 1997 Mar;60(3):252-7.

Structure-cytotoxicity relationships of some helenanolide-type sesquiterpene
lactones.

Beekman AC(1), Woerdenbag HJ, van Uden W, Pras N, Konings AW, Wikström HV,
Schmidt TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, University Centre for Pharmacy,
Groningen Institute for Drug Studies, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

This study deals with the cytotoxicity of helenanolide-type (10
alpha-methylpseudoguaianolide) sesquiterpene lactones. We determined the
influence of substitution patterns on the toxicity of 21 helenanolides to a
cloned Ehrlich ascites tumor cell line, EN2. Within a series of helenalin esters,
the acetate (2) and isobutyrate (3) were more toxic than helenalin itself (1).
Esters with larger acyl groups (tiglate 4 and isovalerate 5) exhibited a
decreased toxicity compared with the parent alcohol (1). Similar relationships
were observed between the 6,8-diastereomer of helenalin, mexicanin I (6) and its 
acetate (7) and isovalerate (8). In contrast, cytotoxicity within a series of 11 
alpha, 13-dihydrohelenalin esters (9-12) was shown to be directly related to the 
size and lipophilicity of the ester side chain, dihydrohelenalin (9) being the
least toxic compound in this group. Investigation of several 2,3-dihydrohelenalin
derivatives (13-21) with 2 alpha-hydroxy-4-oxo- and 2 alpha,4 alpha-dihydroxy- or
-O-acyl-substituted cyclopentane rings (arnifolins and chamissonolides,
respectively), for which no pharmacological data have been reported so far,
revealed further interesting influences of the substitution pattern on
cytotoxicity. The results may be interpreted in terms of lipophilicity and steric
effects on the accessibility of the reactive sites considered responsible for
biological activity.

PMID: 9090867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1997 Mar;56(3):236-42.

Expression of the homeobox-containing genes EN1 and EN2 in human fetal
midgestational medulla and cerebellum.

Zec N(1), Rowitch DH, Bitgood MJ, Kinney HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Homeobox-containing genes En-1 and En-2 have been implicated in the control of
pattern formation during development of the central nervous system in
experimental animals. In order to determine whether the expression of homologous 
human EN genes can be used as a developmental genetic marker of the arcuate
nucleus of the medulla (a putative precerebellar nucleus that shows developmental
deficiency in a subset of sudden infant death syndrome [SIDS]), we performed in
situ hybridization with human EN1 and EN2 RNA probes in human fetal
midgestational medulla and cerebellum (18-21 weeks gestational age, n=4).
Expression of EN genes was demonstrated in all neuronal groups of the medulla and
throughout the cerebellum. The RNA signal for both EN1 and EN2 was strongest in
the cerebellar granule cell layers, white matter of the vermis and flocculus,
inferior olive, arcuate nucleus, caudal raphe nuclei, corpus pontobulbare and
nucleus ambiguus. Most of the structures that showed the strongest EN signal
originate in the rhombic lip. Some of these structures are functionally
interconnected, and show pathologic changes in the syndrome of infantile
olivopontocerebellar hypoplasia/atrophy. Strong expression of EN signal in the
arcuate nucleus could be used as a genetic marker of this nucleus in further
developmental studies of the arcuate nucleus in SIDS. Although EN expression is
not specific to the arcuate nucleus or to the rhombic lip derivatives, our
results suggest that rhombic lip derivatives have the highest levels of EN RNA
message among the medullary structures at midgestation.

PMID: 9056537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Mech Dev. 1997 Jan;61(1-2):113-25.

Graded amounts of Xenopus dishevelled specify discrete anteroposterior cell fates
in prospective ectoderm.

Itoh K(1), Sokol SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.

Signals emitted from the prospective dorsal marginal zone (the organizer) are
thought to specify neuroectodermal cell fates along the anteroposterior (AP)
axis, but the mechanisms underlying this signaling event remain to be elucidated.
To assess the effect of Xenopus Dishevelled (Xdsh), a proposed component of the
Wnt, Notch and Frizzled signal transduction pathways, on AP axis determination,
it was supplied in varying doses to presumptive ectodermal cells. Two-fold
increments in levels of microinjected Xdsh mRNA revealed a gradual shift in cell 
fates along the AP axis. Lower doses of Xdsh mRNA activated anterior
neuroectodermal markers, XAG1 and Xotx2, whereas the higher doses induced more
posterior neural tissue markers such as En2, Krox20 and HoxB9. At the highest
dose of Xdsh mRNA, explants contained maximal amount of HoxB9 transcripts and
developed notochord and somites. When compared with Xdsh, Xwnt8 mRNA also
activated anterior neuroectodermal markers, but failed to elicit mesoderm
formation. Analysis of explants overexpressing Xdsh at the gastrula stage
revealed activation of several organizer-specific genes which have been
implicated in determination of neural tissue (Xotx2, noggin, chordin and
follistatin). Whereas Goosecoid, Xlim1 and Xwnt8 were not induced in these
explants, another early marginal zone marker, Xbra, was activated at the highest 
level of Xdsh mRNA. These observations suggest that the effects of Xdsh on AP
axis specification may be mediated by combinatorial action of several early
patterning genes. Increasing levels of Xdsh mRNA activate posterior markers,
whereas increasing amounts of the organizer stimulate the extent of anterior
development (Stewart, R.M. and Gerhart, J.C. (1990) Development 109, 363-372).
These findings argue against induction of the entire organizer by Xdsh in
ectodermal cells and implicate signal transduction pathways involving Xdsh in AP 
axis determination. Thus, different levels of a single molecule, Xdsh, can
specify distinct cell states along the AP axis.

PMID: 9076682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Genetics. 1995 Nov;141(3):1135-45.

Genetic analysis of the functions of the transposable element En in Zea mays:
limited transposase elicits a differential response on reporter alleles.

Peterson PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agronomy and Zoology, Iowa State University, Ames 50011-1010,
USA.

The En/Spm transposable element has 13 exons. Eleven of the exons contribute to
the 2.5-kb transcript (tnpA) that encodes the TNPA protein. The other two large
exons contribute to a 6-kb transcript (tnpD) that encodes the TNPD protein. The
TNPA protein conditions the genetically determined suppressor function (S) and
the TNPD protein along with the TNPA protein provides the mutator (M) function.
The limits of the DNA En/Spm element sequences responsible for the two functions 
(S and M) have previously been tested by studies with transgenic systems and two 
mutant derivatives of En/Spm. Experiments reported here expand on the conclusions
derived from studies with the two mutant derivatives En2 and Spm-w 8011. By using
an appropriate reporter allele, the mutator function of En2, though impaired,
shows a perceptible mutator expression. A less impaired (partially deleted vs.
complete subterminal motifs) reporter allele will elicit expression from a
limited amount of transposase. This demonstrates that the carboxy terminus is not
essential for M function. The suppressor function of En2 is limited when various 
doses of both transposase-contributing alleles, as well as reporter alleles, are 
tested. The basis of the differences between suppressible and nonsuppressible
alleles is also discussed.

PMCID: PMC1206836
PMID: 8582619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Genomics. 1995 Jul 1;28(1):44-51.

Cloning, expression, and chromosomal location of SHH and IHH: two human
homologues of the Drosophila segment polarity gene hedgehog.

Marigo V(1), Roberts DJ, Lee SM, Tsukurov O, Levi T, Gastier JM, Epstein DJ,
Gilbert DJ, Copeland NG, Seidman CE, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA.

The hedgehog genes encode signaling molecules that play a role in regulating
embryonic morphogenesis. We have cloned and sequenced human cDNA copies of two of
these genes, SHH and IHH. The SHH clone includes the full coding sequence and
encodes a protein 92.4% identical to its murine homologue. The IHH clone is 89%
complete and encodes a protein 94.6% identical to its murine homologue. IHH is
expressed in adult kidney and liver. SHH expression was not detected in adult
tissues examined; however, it is expressed in fetal intestine, liver, lung, and
kidney. SHH mapped to chromosome 7q and IHH to chromosome 2 by PCR with DNA from 
a panel of rodent-human somatic cell hybrids. To identify the chromosomal
location of SHH more precisely, a P1 genomic clone of SHH was isolated. This
phage contained a CA repeat sequence tagged site that was used to map SHH
relative to a polysyndactyly disease locus, using DNA prepared from affected and 
unaffected members of a large pedigree. SHH is closely linked, but distinct from 
the polysyndactyly disease locus at 7q36 (maximum lod score = 4.82, theta = 0.05)
tightly linked to the EN2 locus. The murine homologues Shh, Ihh, and Dhh were
mapped using (C57BL/6J x Mus spretus)F1 x C57BL/6J interspecific backcross. Shh
mapped to a position 0.6 cM distal to En2 and 1.9 cM proximal to Il6 on mouse
chromosome 5. This location is closely linked but distinct from the murine limb
mutation Hx and syntenic to human chromosome 7q36.

PMID: 7590746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jun 6;92(12):5709-13.

Deregulated expression of PAX5 in medulloblastoma.

Kozmik Z(1), Sure U, Rüedi D, Busslinger M, Aguzzi A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.

Medulloblatoma is a pediatric brain tumor originating in the human cerebellum. A 
collection of 23 medulloblastomas was analyzed for expression of the
developmental control genes of the PAX and EN gene families by RNase protection
and in situ hybridization. Of all nine PAX genes investigated, only PAX5 and PAX6
were consistently expressed in most medulloblastomas (70 and 78% of all cases,
respectively), as were the genes EN1 (57%) and EN2 (78%). EN1, EN2, and PAX6
genes were also expressed in normal cerebellar tissue, and their expression in
medulloblastoma is consistent with the hypothesis that this tumor originates in
the external granular layer of the developing cerebellum. PAX5 transcripts were, 
however, not detected in the neonatal cerebellum, indicating that this gene is
deregulated in medulloblastoma. In the desmoplastic variant of medulloblastoma,
PAX5 expression was restricted to the reticulin-producing proliferating tumor
areas containing undifferentiated cells; PAX5 was not expressed in the
reticulin-free nonproliferating islands undergoing neuronal differentiation.
These data suggest that deregulated expression of PAX5 correlates positively with
cell proliferation and inversely with neuronal differentiation in desmoplastic
medulloblastoma.

PMCID: PMC41766
PMID: 7777574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Med Genet. 1995 Apr;32(4):269-74.

Association study with two markers of a human homeogene in infantile autism.

Petit E(1), Hérault J, Martineau J, Perrot A, Barthélémy C, Hameury L, Sauvage D,
Lelord G, Müh JP.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U316, CHU Bretonneau, Tours, France.

Epidemiological data and family studies in autism show that there is a genetic
susceptibility factor in the aetiology of this syndrome. We carried out an
association study in infantile autism. Two markers of the homeogene EN2 involved 
in cerebellar development were tested in a population of 100 autistic children
and in a population of 100 control children. With the MP4 probe showing a PvuII
polymorphism, significant differences in the allele frequencies between the two
populations were found (chi 2 = 7.99, df = 1, p < 0.01). With the MP5 probe
showing an SstI polymorphism, no difference appeared (chi 2 = 1.17, not
significant). Several clinical examinations allowed us to characterise the
autistic children. Most of them had high scores for autistic behaviour and
language disorders but low scores for neurological syndromes. Two children had a 
significant family history and six children had confirmed syndromes or diseases
of genetic origin. Discriminant analysis between clinical and molecular data did 
not give significant results. These preliminary results must be supported by
further analyses of this gene and by studies of its potential involvement in the 
pathophysiology of the autistic syndrome.

PMCID: PMC1050373
PMID: 7643354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Blood. 1994 Oct 15;84(8):2711-20.

Identification and culture of Kaposi's sarcoma-like spindle cells from the
peripheral blood of human immunodeficiency virus-1-infected individuals and
normal controls.

Browning PJ(1), Sechler JM, Kaplan M, Washington RH, Gendelman R, Yarchoan R,
Ensoli B, Gallo RC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Comment in
    Blood. 1996 Mar 15;87(6):2605.

We examined 26 patients with human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1)-associated
Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), and 76 HIV-1-infected (HIV-1+) people without KS or
uninfected (HIV-1-) controls for the presence of circulating KS-like spindle
cells. Adherent cells that had spindle morphology and several characteristics of 
spindle cells of KS lesions (KS cells) were identified in the peripheral blood
mononuclear cell fraction only after culture in the presence of conditioned
medium (CM) from activated lymphocytes. The peripheral blood-derived spindle
cells (PBsc) expressed a variety of endothelial cell markers, such as Ulex
europaeus I lectin, EN4, EN2/3, EN7/44, CD13, CD34, CD36, CD54, ELAM-1, and
HLA-DR. However, they were negative for CD2, CD19, PaIE, and factor VIII-related 
antigen. The PBsc produced angiogenic factors as evidenced by the ability of CM
from these cells to promote growth of normal vascular endothelial cells. In
addition, subcutaneously injected PBsc stimulated angiogenesis in vivo in athymic
nude mice. We determined that the number of PBsc grown from the peripheral blood 
of HIV-1+ patients with KS or at high risk to develop KS were increased by
78-fold (P = .0001) and 18-fold (P = .005), respectively, when compared with
HIV-1- controls. The number of spindle cells cultured from the HIV-1+ patients at
low risk for developing KS, eg, HIV-1+ injection drug users, showed no
statistical increase when compared with HIV-1- controls. The presence of
increased PBsc with characteristics of KS cells in HIV-1+ KS patients or patients
at high risk for developing KS gives insights into the origin of KS cells and may
explain the multifocal nature of the disease. In addition, this may be useful in 
predicting the risk of KS development.

PMID: 7522639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mamm Genome. 1994 Jul;5(7):446-9.

Msx1 is close but not allelic to either Hm or Hx on mouse chromosome 5.

Robert B(1), Montagutelli X, Houzelstein D, Ferland L, Cohen A, Buckingham M,
Guénet JL.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique Moléculaire du Développement et ERS CNRS 67, Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France.

The Msx1 homeobox locus has been mapped in relation to the mutations hammer-toe
(Hm) and hemimelic extra toes (Hx). Msx1 is expressed in the developing limb,
while limb development is affected by the Hm and Hx mutations. Hm and Hx are very
tightly linked loci. In interspecific crosses, the segregation of either mutation
was followed in relation to polymorphic alleles of Msx1, Il6, and En2, to give a 
fine map around the mutant loci. Our results show that Msx1 is not allelic to
either of the mutations, but is located about 3 cM from them. Il6 did not
recombine with either Hm or Hx and, therefore, provides a point of access for the
analysis of these mutations at the molecular level.

PMID: 7919658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mamm Genome. 1994 Jul;5(7):424-8.

Synteny conservation of the Huntington's disease gene and surrounding loci on
mouse Chromosome 5.

Grosson CL(1), MacDonald ME, Duyao MP, Ambrose CM, Roffler-Tarlov S, Gusella JF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown
02129.

The mouse homologs of the Huntington's disease (HD) gene and 17 other human
Chromosome (Chr) 4 loci (including six previously unmapped) were localized by use
of an interspecific cross. All loci mapped in a continuous linkage group on mouse
Chr 5, distal to En2 and I16, whose human counterparts are located on Chr 7. The 
relative order of the loci on human Chr 4 and mouse Chr 5 was maintained, except 
for a break between D5H4S115E and Idua/rd, with relocation of the latter to the
opposite end of the map. The mouse HD homolog (Hdh) mapped within a cluster of
seven genes that were completely linked in our data set. In human these loci span
a approximately 1.8 Mb stretch of human 4p16.3 that has been entirely cloned. To 
date, there is no phenotypic correspondence between human and mouse mutations
mapping to this region of synteny conservation.

PMID: 7919654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Mamm Genome. 1994 Jun;5(6):342-8.

Mouse rump-white mutation associated with an inversion of chromosome 5.

Stephenson DA(1), Lee KH, Nagle DL, Yen CH, Morrow A, Miller D, Chapman VM, Bucan
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263.

The rump-white (Rw) mutation in the mouse was previously mapped as part of a
cluster of spotting genes on Chromosome (Chr) 5 that includes the dominant
spotting (W) and patch (Ph) loci. Recent studies have shown that the W locus
encodes the KIT tyrosine kinase cell surface receptor and that Ph is a deletional
mutation encompassing the platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha subunit
(Pdgfra) gene. However, the molecular basis of the Rw mutation remains to be
established. We have analyzed an interspecific Mus spretus backcross segregating 
Rw and several loci proximal and distal to the W/Ph/Rw region to study the basis 
of this mutation. These studies indicated that loci within the En2 to Kit region 
of the chromosome do not recombine with one another even though they have been
separated in other mapping studies presented here and elsewhere. We conducted a
series of fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) studies with genomic probes to
En2, Msx1, D5Buc1, and Kit to compare the physical order of these loci on the Rw 
and wild-type chromosomes. The Kit locus mapped to approximately the same region 
on both chromosomes of the Rw heterozygotes, while the positions of En2, Msx1,
and D5Buc1 were reversed on the two chromosomes. Taken together, both the genetic
and physical mapping data establish that the Rw mutation is associated with an
inversion involving loci in the proximal region of Chromosome 5.

PMID: 8043948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Anim Sci. 1993 Jan;71(1):57-65.

Animal model estimation of additive and dominance variances in egg production
traits of poultry.

Wei M(1), van der Werf JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Breeding, Wageningen Agricultural University, The
Netherlands.

An animal model analysis was used to estimate simultaneously additive (sigma 2a) 
and dominance (sigma 2d) variances for egg production traits within three White
Leghorn lines. The data consisted of information for three generations on egg
number (EN) produced at 18 to 25 (EN1), 26 to 65 (EN2), and 18 to 65 wk of age
(EN3); egg weight (EW) measured at 30 to 35 (EW1) and 40 to 45 wk (EW2); and egg 
specific gravity (ESG) measured at 30 to 35 (ESG1) and 40 to 45 wk (ESG2). A
transformation was used for EN2 and EN3 because of a skewed distribution. In
total, 813 sires, 2,575 dams, and 28,649 daughters were involved in the analyses.
Three genetic models (sire-dam, additive, and dominance) were compared in
estimating heritability (h2). The sire-dam model underestimated h2 because it
ignored animal relationships. The h2 estimates from the additive model were
approximately 9 to 52% higher for EN and 2 to 18% higher for EW and ESG than
those from the dominance model. The differences between the h2 estimates from the
additive and dominance models were increased for larger dominance variance sigma 
2d. Ratios of sigma 2d to total variance were high for EN (10 to 20%) and low for
EW and ESG (1 to 13%). Ratios of sigma 2d to total genetic variance for EN1, EN2,
EN3, EW1, EW2, ESG1, and ESG2 were 18 to 36, 29 to 43, 29 to 56, 1 to 26, 3 to 8,
20 to 27, and 2 to 14%, respectively.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8454553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Genomics. 1993 Jan;15(1):233-5.

Regional assignment of the human homeobox-containing gene EN1 to chromosome
2q13-q21.

Köhler A(1), Logan C, Joyner AL, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104.

The human homeobox-containing genes EN1 and EN2 are closely related to the
Drosophila pattern formation gene engrailed (en), which may be important in brain
development, as shown by gene expression studies during mouse embryogenesis.
Here, we have refined the localization of EN1 to human chromosome 2q13-q21 using 
a mapping panel of rodent/human cell hybrids containing different regions of
chromosome 2 and a lymphoblastoid cell line with an interstitial deletion,
del(2)(q21-q23.2). This regional assignment of EN1 increases to 22 the number of 
currently known genes on human chromosome 2q that have homologs on the proximal
region of mouse chromosome 1.

PMID: 8094370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Am J Hum Genet. 1992 Dec;51(6):1377-85.

Cleft lip with or without cleft palate: associations with transforming growth
factor alpha and retinoic acid receptor loci.

Chenevix-Trench G(1), Jones K, Green AC, Duffy DL, Martin NG.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Cancer Fund Research Unit, Queensland Institute of Medical
Research, Australia.

Comment in
    Am J Hum Genet. 1993 Nov;53(5):1156-7.

The first association study of cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL/P),
with candidate genes, found an association with the transforming growth-factor
alpha (TGFA) locus. This finding has since been replicated, in whole or in part, 
in three independent studies. Here we extend our original analysis of the TGFA
TaqI RFLP to two other TGFA RFLPs and seven other RFLPs at five candidate genes
in 117 nonsyndromic cases of CL/P and 113 controls. The other candidate genes
were the retinoic acid receptor (RARA), the bcl-2 oncogene, and the homeobox
genes 2F, 2G, and EN2. Significant associations with the TGFA TaqI and BamHI
RFLPs were confirmed, although associations of clefting with previously reported 
haplotypes did not reach significance. Of particular interest, in view of the
known teratogenic role of retinoic acid, was a significant association with the
RARA PstI RFLP (P = .016; not corrected for multiple testing). The effect on risk
of the A2 allele appears to be additive, and although the A2A2 homozygote only
has an odds ratio of about 2 and recurrence risk to first-degree relatives
(lambda 1) of 1.06, because it is so common it may account for as much as a third
of the attributable risk of clefting. There is no evidence of interaction between
the TGFA and RARA polymorphisms on risk, and jointly they appear to account for
almost half the attributable risk of clefting.

PMCID: PMC1682912
PMID: 1361101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Dev Biol. 1989 Sep;135(1):31-42.

Allelic interactions at the engrailed locus of Drosophila: engrailed protein
expression in imaginal discs.

Condie JM(1), Brower DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson
85721.

Many embryonic lethal engrailed (enlethal) mutations are known to partially
complement the cuticular defects of the original engrailed mutation, en1. To
explore the nature of this complementation, the adult phenotypes of several
different en1/enlethal transheterozygotes were compared with the corresponding
patterns of engrailed protein expression in third larval instar imaginal discs
(determined by immunofluorescence). Transheterozygotes of en1 and deletions of
the locus (enDf) typically show slight complementation in the adult cuticle. The 
pattern of engrailed protein expression in some en1/enDf wing discs is
indistinguishable from en1 homozygotes, but in others the pattern is nearly
normal. en1/enDf leg discs appear to express engrailed protein normally.
Transheterozygotes of en1 and EMS-induced, cytologically normal enlethal alleles 
have almost normal adult cuticle phenotypes and also exhibit normal patterns of
engrailed protein expression in all of the thoracic imaginal discs. Surprisingly,
the intensity of anti-engrailed staining in these discs is elevated relative to
that in wild type. en2 is an unusual lethal allele in that it does not complement
either the en1 adult cuticle phenotype or the protein expression pattern in
imaginal discs. Moreover, the cytologically normal enlethal alleles also
complement en2, at least partially. Both wing and leg imaginal discs from
en2/enlethal transheterozygotes show abnormal patterns of engrailed protein
expression. These results are discussed in the context of an autoregulatory model
for engrailed regulation.

PMID: 2504633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Nucleic Acids Res. 1989 Apr 11;17(7):2879.

PvuII and RsaI RFLPs for the human homeo box-containing gene EN2.

Logan C(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai Hospital Research Institute, Department of Medical Genetics,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

PMCID: PMC317687
PMID: 2566154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Nucleic Acids Res. 1989 Apr 11;17(7):2878.

An SstI RFLP for the human homeo box-containing gene EN2.

Logan C(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai Hospital Research Institute, Department of Medical Genetics,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

PMCID: PMC317686
PMID: 2566153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Genomics. 1989 Feb;4(2):206-9.

Chromosomal localization of the human homeo box-containing genes, EN1 and EN2.

Logan C(1), Willard HF, Rommens JM, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Mount Sinai Hospital Research
Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The human homologs of the mouse homeo box-containing genes, En-1 and En-2, which 
show homology to the Drosophila engrailed gene, have been isolated. The human EN1
gene was mapped to chromosome 2 by analysis of mouse-human somatic cell hybrids. 
The human EN2 gene was localized to chromosome 7, 7q32-7qter, by analysis of
rodent-human somatic cell hybrids and cell lines carrying portions of chromosome 
7.

PMID: 2567700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. FEBS Lett. 1988 Aug 1;235(1-2):129-32.

Tyrosine sulfation is not the last modification of entactin before its secretion 
from 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Aratani Y(1), Kitagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biochemical Regulation, School of Agriculture, Nagoya
University, Japan.

Tyrosine sulfation of entactin was studied by labeling of 3T3-L1 adipocytes with 
[35S]methionine or H2 35SO4 in the presence or absence of tunicamycin or
monensin. Four precursors (EN1-4) at different steps of modification were
detected in addition to mature entactin. Under normal conditions, EN2 and mature 
entactin were intracellular species, and the latter was sulfated and secreted.
Inhibition of co-translational transfer of N-linked oligosaccharides by
tunicamycin produced EN1 and EN3 as intracellular species, and EN3 was sulfated
and secreted. Interruption of protein transport from medial to trans (distal)
Golgi cisternae by monensin, and consequent blockage of terminal glycosylation
caused intracellular accumulation of EN4. EN4 was sulfated and of different size 
compared to mature entactin. These facts suggested that tyrosine sulfation of
entactin occurs in medial Golgi cisternae and is not the last modification before
its secretion. Our results appeared inconsistent with recent observations by
Baeuerle and Huttner [(1987) J. Cell Biol. 105, 2655-2664] that tyrosine
sulfation of IgM occurred within the trans (distal) Golgi cisternae as the last
modification before its exit from the Golgi complex.

PMID: 3042455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Dev Biol. 1983 Dec;100(2):387-98.

Effects of engrailed in the genital disc of Drosophila melanogaster.

Epper F, Sánchez L.

engrailed has been postulated to be the "selector gene" involved in the
establishment of the anterior-posterior compartment border in several imaginal
discs and in at least the first two abdominal segments of Drosophila
melanogaster. Our study of the effects of different mutant engrailed genotypes on
genital disc development provided the following major results: All three terminal
primordia (female and male genitalia, and analia) were affected. Different
heteroallelic combinations showed different expressivities, and three terminal
primordia were differently affected by the same mutant genotype. The engrailed
genotypes deleted specific elements of the adult terminalia without causing
associated pattern duplications. The reduced morphology of the male engrailed
genital disc was analogous to the pattern deletions observed in the adult
terminalia. That the engrailed phenotype is stable was demonstrated by culturing 
in vivo intact and fragmented engrailed genital discs. Cell death was found in a 
significant number of mature male en2/en3 genital discs. The results are
discussed in terms of the segmental organization of the genital disc and in terms
of the "selector gene" function postulated for the engrailed locus. The
interpretation that each terminal primordium has an anterior and a posterior
compartment is presented and it is assumed that in the genital disc engrailed
transforms posterior cells into anterior cells that do not develop, thereby
causing the deficiency pattern of the engrailed phenotype.

PMID: 6418586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


